

■: ■ mm
MP ■ liSSI i i wMsSst lap
_


*
'
.
-
'
THE NEW HORIZON IN
LOVE AND LIFE


AGENTS
AMERICA
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
64 & 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
205 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE
AUSTRALASIA
CANADA
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, LTD.
ST. MARTIN'S HOUSE, 70 BOND STREBT, TORONTO
MACMILLAN & COMPANY, LTD.
INDIA .
MACMILLAN BUILDING, BOMBAY
309 Bow BAZAAR STREET, CALCUTTA


THE NEW HORIZON
IN LOVE AND LIFE
MRS. HAVELOCK ELLIS
WITH A PREFACE BY
EDWARD CARPENTER
AND AN INTRODUCTION BY
MARGUERITE TRACY
A. fc? C. BLACK LTD.
4, 5 AND 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. i




PAGE"
vii
xv
, . xxxix
1
. 11
. 23
. 32
. 38
. 55
70
. 80
PREFACE, BY EDWARD CARPENTER . . . vii
INTRODUCTION, BY MARGUERITE TRACY . . . xv
NOTE, BY HAVELOCK ELLIS. . . .xxxix
LOVE AND MARRIAGE
THE LOYE OF TO-MORROW ..... 1
A NOVICIATE FOR MARRIAGE . . . .11
SEMI-DETACHED MARRIAGE . . . .23
MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE . . . . .32
EUGENICS AND THE MYSTICAL OUTLOOK . . .38
EUGENICS AND SPIRITUAL PARENTHOOD . . .55
BLOSSOMING-TIME . . . . . .70
LOVE AS A FINE ART . . . . .80
THE NEW CIVILISATION
DEMOCRACY IN THE KITCHEN . . .87
THE MASSES AND THE CLASSES . . . .103
THE MATERNAL IN DOMESTIC AND POLITICAL LIFE . 121
POLITICAL MILITANCY : ITS CAUSE AND CURE . .140
WAR: AN ANCIENT VIRTUE AND A MODERN VICE . 158
THE NEW CIVILISATION . . . . .171
THE PHILOSOPHY OF HAPPINESS . . . .183
BIBLIOGRAPHY . . . . . .197
INDEX ....... 199


Fearless in death as life her soul fares forth
Into the dark, and lights the way ahead.
We may not think of her as with the dead
Whose shining purpose lives, to mark her worth;
Whose prescient vision looked to happier years ;
Whose lucid mind and thought for freedom spoke,
Seeking to lift the suffocating yoke
Of superstition and ignoble fears.
Unwomanly 1 The poet heart of her
Revealed its sweetness in that final test—
"Let the warm breezes find my sepulchre,"
She whispered, smiling. "Let my ashes rest
Where they are fain to fall, on sacred sod,
Along the road that Keats and Shelley trod!"
VINCENT STARRETT,


PREFACE
I FIRST became acquainted with Mrs. Havelock Ellis
—then Edith M. 0. Lees—about thirty years ago at
the meetings of a little society called " The Fellowship
of the New Life." Miss Lees (born in 1861) was one
of the most energetic members, and the society itself
was full of enthusiasms and enterprise. There was
a general urge towards Socialism—though more from
the ethical and humanitarian than from the political
side ; there was a great determination to simplify life
as much as possible ; servants were to be dispensed
with or adopted as friends ; manual work to be
cultivated side by side with intellectual; education
to be greatly reformed. There were schemes for
settlement on the land ; and schemes for co-operation
or community in household life. And always these
schemes and reforms were to be carried out as far as
possible personally and by the personal effort of the
members. They were not to be merely philosophical
propaganda applicable in a distant and general way
to society at large. All which was in accordance with
the Fellowship's Kantian principle that no one was
to be made merely the means to another person's


ends, and with its Goethean motto that every indi-
vidual must himself be " resolute to live in the Whole,
the Good, and the Beautiful."
I think I am right in saying that it was on this
point of personal effort that in the quite early days
(in 1884) a split occurred in the society, which led
to a certain group breaking away and becoming the
founders of the Fabian Society. These latter con-
centrated their energies on general socialist and
economic propaganda, apart from the question of
individual and personal reform. 1
The primal founder (in 1883) of the whole move-
ment was Thomas Davidson (brother of Morrison
Davidson); 2 and the earliest members were Percival
Chubb, Maurice Adams, W. J. Jupp, Havelock Ellis,
J. F. Oakeshott, and Rowland Estcourt. They were
soon more or less formally joined by others, Herbert
Rix, Edward R. Pease, Ramsay Macdonald, Olive
Schreiner, Bessie and Isabella Ford of Leeds, Ernest
Rhys, and so forth. Edith Lees, who joined after
the split, became, as I have said, one of the
most vigorous and active members. At an early
period she undertook some of the secretarial work,
and later on she largely helped to organise and carry
on a joint dwelling or co-operative boarding-house
in Doughty Street, near Mecklenburgh Square, where
1 For further details about the beginnings of the two societies see
The History of the Fabian Society, by E. E. Pease, ch. xi.
2 For an account of Thomas Davidson, see Professor William
Knight's biography.


some eight or ten members of the Fellowship made
their home, and were to illustrate the advantages of
the community life. Naturally the arrangements
gave rise to some amusing, and some rather exciting,
episodes ; and at a later time Edith Ellis made use
of these (with a novelist's freedom) in a story entitled
Attainment.
After her marriage with Havelock Ellis, and
when the missionary activity of the New Fellowship
had to some degree subsided, Mrs. Ellis concentrated
her mind more and more on the task of writing and
lecturing, from her own individual standpoint, on
the various subjects in which she was interested.
Having, however, also a very practical turn of mind
she did not confine herself to literary work, but over
a period of several years carried on, besides, a small
farm in Cornwall, near St. Ives. Here she became
quite accomplished in dairy work and the breeding
of animals ; and there is little doubt that this very
practical side of her activities contributed much to
give concreteness and an effective edge to her speak-
ing and writing.
As to the varied nature of her social interests, that
may easily be gathered from the list of the chapters
in the volume to which this is an introduction.
Questions of Marriage and Divorce, of Sex-Variation
and Eugenics, of the Art of Love in the past and in
the future, of the Education of Children, of Women
in Political Life, of the Ethics of War, of the real
meaning of Democracy, all come up for consideration.


Besides this, I have before me as I write a printed
programme of some forty lectures and readings,
which were actually being given by Edith Ellis
shortly before her death. Some of these cover, of
course, the same ground as the chapters in the present
volume, but others deal with related subjects, and
not a few also with the life-work of well-known
personalities like Swedenborg, James Hinton,
Ellen Key, Frederik van Eeden, Olive Schreiner,
Oscar Wilde, and so forth.
Naturally, with such a large and varied pro-
gramme, it was hardly to be expected that each
address should prove to be a profound and exhaustive
treatment of its subject. On the other hand, it
would be a great mistake—as any one may see who
studies the present volume—to conclude that the
results of this wide survey of human life were super-
ficial and negligible. There was a capacity of swift
and penetrating intuition in Edith Ellis's mind which,
conjoined to a singularly direct habit of expression,
resulted in an original and luminous treatment of
almost any subject. It was the same with her novels
and her plays and shorter stories ; and here—as in
Kit's Woman, ox Love-Acre, or The Imperishable Wing
—her intimate knowledge of the life and lingo of the
people enabled her to put the discussion of some of
the great problems of life and death into the racy
speech of ordinary working folk with very telling
effect.
It was indeed a temperament of varied composi-


tion, including great contrasts democratic yet
dominating, combative yet sympathetic, hasty yet
tenacious ; practical and imaginative, logical and
intuitive, feminine and masculine all in one. The
Woman and the Man (and indeed also the Child)
were closely united in her ; and this it was perhaps
which gave her such prophetic insight, as she often
seemed to have, in human affairs.
Yet naturally such various elements could not
always be held in touch together without strain and
discord. I knew nothing of her parents, and she
herself never knew her mother, who died shortly
after her birth, but she used to tell me that she de-
rived from them strongly conflicting heredities, which
were a source of .suffering and illness to her both
mentally and physically. And it was pretty evident
that this was by no means mere imagination. Her
bouts of serious illness puzzled the doctors ; her
sudden changes of feeling and disposition puzzled,
and sometimes offended, her friends. Yet again,
through it all, her friends clung to her —and some in
a quite devoted way.
We all, I imagine, have somewhat the same pro-
blem to face in our lives, in different degrees. Even
those whose ancestral elements are of the most
harmonious character are not without difficulties—
while others find that they are condemned to drive
through life a chariot whose steeds seem hopelessly
unruly and contradictory ! It is no doubt largely
in the effort to effect control and harmony that the


greatness and the success of life lie. And, no doubt
also, it is just by harmonising these unlikely elements
that the best results are sometimes produced.
Edith Ellis's temperamental energy was amazing.
In the autumn of 1914 she went to the United States
to carry out a course of lectures there. She worked
hard at this during the winter, and was well and
cordially received. Indeed, she made a deep impres-
sion, and aroused enthusiasm both by her lectures
and her personality. The Americans were delighted
with her outspoken candour and directness, qualities
so unusual in the British ! There was also a deep
and resonant attraction in the timbre of her voice.
But an American lecturing tour is an exhausting
thing, and in the early year she fell quite ill there with
tonsillitis and septicaemia, which led to an alarming
state of exhaustion. Finally she returned to Eng-
land, in May 1915, in an American ship which —as it
happened—left New York only a few hours after
the news of the ill-fated Lusitania arrived. The
overcrowding and discomfort on the said ship (con-
sequent on the receipt of the tragic news), combined
with the perpetual apprehensions of nervous pas-
sengers, constituted a very unfortunate atmosphere
for one in her enfeebled health, and for some time
after reaching home she was in a quite broken-down
state. Her energy, however, returned —though it
took on a more feverish character; and actually
during the last twelve months of her life she prepared
and in part delivered the course of lectures and


readings of which I have spoken. Naturally, such
activity and strain could not last, and after another
more serious break-down in the spring, from which
she only partially recovered, the end came in the
autumn of 1916.
One can see how the very diversity of Edith
Ellis's interests in life —the plentiful subjects for
books and lectures, the numerous and devoted per-
sonal friendships—were almost too much for one
lifetime. One could not but notice, as the threat
of ill-health materialised more and more and as the
limitation of the years became more evident, how
the tendency to hurry, which had appeared to some
extent in her earlier work, became more marked.
There was a certain tragedy to her in the pressure
of her multitudinous literary projects, combined
with the fatal brevity of the time likely to be at
command for their fulfilment; nor must we forget
that economic needs (made all the greater by her
habitual generosity) frequently increased this pres-
sure. If we think that less speed and more delibera-
tion would have contributed to a finer result in her
work, that need not blind us to the quite gem-like
brilliancy of some portions, nor can it diminish our
gratitude for the real services rendered—often in the
face of illness, opposition, and other disabilities.
Edith Ellis died on the 14th September 1916, at
the comparatively early age of fifty-five. The im-
mediate cause of death was pneumonia, following
a chill when watching the first Zeppelin brought


down in flames, but her system had long been under-
mined by the advance of diabetes. In accordance
with her wish, the remains were cremated at Golder's
Green, without religious service, to the strains of her
best-loved piece of music, Handel's Largo. Two
days later, in the presence of a few special friends,
the ashes were scattered over the garden of the
Crematorium.
EDWARD CARPENTER.


INTRODUCTION
IN this collection of essays Edith Ellis jputs forward
the personal record of her faith. Few women who have
achieved definitely beautiful expression in an art have
left, as a corollary of their imaginative work, so arti-
culate, so comprehensive, and so fearless a statement of
a personal philosophy, or so struggled to live it out
consistently in practice throughout an overflowingly full
life.
Written originally as essays and lectures, and
without the author's final revisions, these papers have
the informality and colloquialism of the spoken rather
than the written word, and are left with much of the
spontaneous character of the spoken exposition on their
heads. Presenting her as they do at widely different
periods of her intensely active and practical life, they
form a singularly valuable manual for any thinking
man or woman of less experience, less stimulating
environment, or less intuitive faculty for probing to
the quick of things, who may nevertheless feel within
himself or herself the imperative need of some new
envisagement of life, now that the western world has
been obliged to take down its sign, " Higher Civilisa-


tion," and write up in its place, " Liquidation because
of Bankruptcy."
The world which Edith Ellis grew up in, and in
which she, at least, actually lived her vision of human
brotherhood, went down in an inconceivable holocaust
of blood and flame, the women throwing themselves into
it almost as collectively as the men. Her faith in and
her hope for mankind may possibly have been shaken,
but the foundations stood. Speaking on the (at that
moment) burning question, " Shall Women train their
Sons for War " she expressed the agony of articulate
consciences all over the world, suddenly roused from
sleep. " One is almost apologetic that one is not either
mad or dead," she cried out. "Itis a mess of appar-
ently useless slaughter from the contemplation of which
one has to turn away at intervals to escape madness."
Yet she believed that international co-operation was not
impossible, and it was her hope that women would
help to bring it about. " That day," she wrote, <e when
woman takes her place beside man in the governance and
arrangement of the external affairs of her race, will also
be the day that heralds the death of war as a means of
arranging human differences. No tinsel of trumpets
and waving of flags will ultimately seduce women into
the insanity of recklessly destroying life, or gild the
wilful taking of life with any other name than that of
murder, whether it be the slaughter of millions or of
one."
She was never among those who thought that the
guilt of the war must be put down to one particular


nation. " None of us are guiltless in this devastation
of Europe," she wrote in a paper on " Women and War,"
not included in this volume. " Who dare deny that
England may not now he paying some of the price of
the Boer War ? And may not Germany, looming at
the moment as the cruel servant of Pride and Power,
he getting her wages of death partly because of her gross
conception of woman ? And may not France, because
of her very hatred of Germany, and may not Russia
because of her internal tyranny, her infidelity to Persia,
her injustice and cruelty towards Poland and Finland,
be learning something of the dignity and the worth of
all human life ? While we are paying the price—as
we are doing in this war —we blame any one and every
one for what is only our fault. Every thrust at an
enemy alien, every cry over a bloody triumph, every
shout for more armaments and wider war, imply a
destructive clog in the great civilised machine. It is
for women to declare to their children that it may,
from a civilised standpoint, be better to become extinct
as nations than to survive only as oppressors and
destroyers." While she recognised that war might
under some circumstances be inevitable, she was not
disposed even then to glorify it. " Women's intuition,"
she wrote, " grasps the truth that war is equally defiling
to the conquered and to the conquerors, for the simple
reason that the motive behind the outbreak is rarely a
fine one. It is nearly always in the first instance for
national aggrandisement or commercial profit. It is
at its best an intensification of brutality under the name


of courage, or a diminution of human characteristics
under the name of stoicism. It is well known that
many men engaged in it are unfit for civilised daily
life for a long time after a protracted fight."
While the madness and the horror of it all were at
their darkest she died. She died suddenly, of a chill
caught while standing to watch a Zeppelin brought
down in flames, having characteristically and impul-
sively taken off her cloak to put it round some one who
seemed less protected. Mercifully, she died before the
war ended. She was spared the disillusions of peace.
She died still hoping that the Great War would end in a
magnanimous Peace —an end which, she insisted, would
be the only mitigation of the evil of the war, —and that
women who had sent their husbands and sons to fight
other women's husbands and sons would be saving
the women of the future from such tortures of human
sacrifice.
But she left, none the less, an injunction to all women
who ardently desire that lasting peace shall be the reward
of so much useless sacrifice, a solemn injunction to
ascertain their true attitude, to revalue their values, and
to give, in the eyes of those who come after them, a spiritual
significance to what must otherwise ever appear the most
shameful page of human history up to date recorded.
" It is good," she said, in the same address and in
conclusion, " to consider and to carry out so sane an
international programme as the one suggested by Mrs.
Pethick Lawrence " (substantially that of the Union of
Democratic Control), on the basis of democracy, inter-


national agreement, and the acceptance of arbitration for
all disputes. "It is, however," she adds, " still a com-
promise, as is any scheme which does not strike, through
father and mother, at the root of the matter" I refer
to her endorsement of this programme because it shows
how closely Edith Ellis always linked theory and practice;
with her some form of action must always follow hard
upon the heels of thought.
It is clear that she could never be one of the militant
forces in feminist movements. She disapproved of
militancy as she disapproved of militarism, and on
much the same grounds. " All militancy," she wrote,
" creates the evil it sets out to destroy. The propaganda
of militancy in any form by women is a blot on civilisa-
tion. The whole hope of the woman movement to-day is
that women shall follow their own best ideals, and not
follow blindly and weakly those of men. Love, courage,
and even drudgery, can serve better than any form of
destruction." She quotes Mrs. Pethick Lawrence —
this time with regard to Edith Ellis's own attitude
towards politics and militancy—as telling her that she
was not " sound" on the woman question (p. 140).
Genially she adds: "I am quite willing to agree with
Mrs. Lawrence. ... I have worked at these questions
for more than thirty years, but I know that does
not imply that I am what Mrs. Lawrence would call
' sound' on them."
No, she was not, in a narrow political sense,
" sound "on these questions. She was something much
deeper and bigger than that. Her husband, Havelock


Ellis, said to me once, respecting her especial place
among the feminists and other advanced Englishwomen
of the twentieth century : "If it's the niche that belongs
to her you're hunting, you won't find it, for it does
not exist. She never devoted herself to working at any
single confined spot —the ' New Fellowship,' at which
in early years she worked hard as secretary, had very
wide aims—in the ' Woman Movement' or in any
other movement, so she has no place assigned to her.
That was indeed just her value, that she was broader and
saner and more independent and daring than the
women who confined themselves to working at some
single spot."
W. L. George referred to this same independence and
daring of her mind, when, last summer in London, we
talked together of Edith Ellis, and of this volume which
he had just been reading in the manuscript. He said,
with dry humour: "I think it not too much to say
that among the many thinkers who have been mis-
understood, Mrs. Havelock Ellis occupies a distinguished
place. I did not know her at all intimately, but I did
know her well enough to confirm the impression I
received from her works ; and when I consider that by
some she was considered a violent androphobe, by others
an apostle of unregulated unions, by some a pale idealist,
and by a few a dry mind, it is clear that they did not
understand her. Mrs. Havelock Ellis was a wholly
sincere and clear-headed woman. If she has been mis-
understood, it is for two reasons. The first is that she
had great respect for language; she used her words


carefully, and a careless, hurried generation found it
easy to make them convey more, or less, than Mrs. Ellis
intended. Thus, when she said that women cannot he
'physically free until they are economically free, she did
not mean that the State must he upset hy a single blow,
nor did she want to convert physical freedom into
physical anarchy. She meant only what she said."
" The second reason," he added, " is more peculiar.
Mrs. Ellis was often misunderstood because she was sane.
That is to say, she was impartial, and as people generally
choose to ignore the views which do not exactly embody
their own, the Feminist thought her reactionary, and
the anti-Feminist revolutionary. In my opinion, those
verdicts are evidence of Mrs. Ellis's lofty intelligence.
She harboured few prejudices, and committed herself
to no side except to that of truth as she saw it. Neither
harshness nor sentiment governed her ; only the desire
to secure for women and men a cleaner conception of
freedom ever had power to inform her spirit."
It was this rare mixture of fearlessness and sanity
which drew the intuitive Americans to Edith Ellis in
a quite special enthusiasm of admiration. The United
States of to-day is a very different country from the
<e New England " which in the nineteenth century was
its intellectual mouthpiece. Money-making, sport, and
society no longer occupy its upper classes to the exclusion
of all other interests, and without even appearing
eccentric, any individual who wishes to may practise
the humanities.
Inevitably, as may be read between the lines of her


essay in this volume entitled " The New Civilisation ,"
Edith Ellis saw the Americans in the dancing glow
of ih fires which her own enthusiasm kindled, for they
went wild about her. Their quick, responsive gaiety,
their delightful habit of receptiveness, their intuitive
understanding, made them seem a very garden of the
Hesperides in which the daughters of Atlas might sow
and reap quick harvests. Pleasure-loving, leisure-
cultivating, the Americans have nevertheless brought
under cultivation the wild country which they genuinely
adore, and have covered it with cities as full of eager
self-determination as any warring and haughty town
of the Italian Renaissance. These cities vie with one
another in the multiplicity of their progressive institu-
tions, and it sometimes seems, in the rush after perfection,
as if there were no backstairs of existence, no dirt or
disease or poverty ; and as if, in the words of Emily
Bronte, there was even no place for Death.
Into this halcyon, electric-fanned, vacuum-cleaned,
and expensively simple American life, Edith Ellis
sparkled like the Wine of Astonishment, a bitter and
cleansing draught, but which left a sweet taste in the
head. They came eagerly to her meetings. They stole
away, afraid, but charmed; amazed, but touched to
tears. Life, a new and wider and truer life, had so
suddenly opened its portals. For a moment their quick
pulses were beating with her rhythm. She could have
led them to almost any height of spiritual zeal. Her
sublime energy galvanised them. Her superb altruism
carried them clear out of themselves. Her capacity for


devotion at the altar of service wrapped round the
combustible fabric of their enthusiasm and devoured it,
leaving the site swept and garnished for the sinking
of less perishable foundations. Edith Ellis crossed
half the American continent, blazing a trail that was
one glorious bonfire: a wild string of beacons set in
the strong framework of her logic like the flares in
mediceval watch-towers.
She kindled speech, made it burn high and clear.
Her phrases were hers. No one else ever had just her
way of sending home whole truths. She tossed out
English which is obsolete where virility is obsolete,
direct, clear, idiomatic. Home truths in vivid language
came trippingly from her tongue. She made the hair of
her American audiences rise, possibly, with the naked
honesty of her admission of the condition of the back-
stairs of civilised existence. And then she touched
their imaginations with her visualisation of what life
could be, in a world where there really is Love and the
Service of Love.
I realised the influencejshe was exerting, at the
moment when the world in Europe was on fire and
America had not yet ignited. I had gone there to
deliver a series of lectures, and some of mine having
been scheduled to follow hers at the same clubs or halls,
1 hoped very eagerly to overtake her. I had the most
marvelling curiosity about both Edith and Havelock
Ellis, whom I had at that time never seen; and
there, just ahead of me on my mundane itinerary,
was Edith Ellis herself, who not only could, but


spontaneously would, tell me everything my heart
burned to know.
But she moved so fast, so like the wind, and 1 was
so bound by my itinerary, as she was bound probably
by hers, that I could never overtake her even by accident.
Once I missed her by three hours. And once, at a
Club, I believe, by three minutes. But I overtook her
sayings which lived behind her, flashes of wit and of
scandalous daring, thrusts of humour. I even almost
reconstructed one of her lectures from the waif words
I picked up after a Club dinner when the " girls "
were just among themselves.
Edith Ellis did not shed a slipper, like Cinderella,
for me to build her up by, but I caught these fragments
of her talk, and I saw her portrait everywhere: that
wonderful, sensitive, splendidly alive and strong young
face with its cropped head of beautiful thick curly brown
hair, tinged with grey. And I came to have the feeling
that it was not a woman I was pursuing, but an incarna-
tion of youth ; boyish in a way ; utterly free from the
trappings and trammellings of what she would herself
call "femininities"; escaped from our earthy im-
prisonment of the spirit, free and impish and
imperishable.
The women she addressed seemed quite ready for her
message, most of them. Indeed, they appeared to her,
as she passed among them, to have the "New Life "
at their very doors. But after she had passed, I heard
them marvelling among themselves ; turning over her
sayings; discussing, musing together more like a group


of little children than like souls with a personal responsi-
bility. They were recognising in her something which
they had felt obscurely but inarticulately in themselves,
a stirring from some clean strong wind of the future.
They were like the disciples who said to one another:
" Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked
with us by the way, and opened for us the scriptures ? "
Her very presence had had in it for them some beautiful
strangeness.
Women in England have told me that when Edith
Ellis entered a room the very air in the room seemed
to change, to expand suddenly, to be different and more
oxygenated. And if this was true of England, which
seems never to be without its galaxy of brilliant and
forceful women, what must it have been in America,
where for half a century no pre-eminently great woman
has appeared ? No woman, that is, of the genius type
such as founded, in that new world, its social movements
which are coming to fruition to-day: no Susan B.
Anthonys, but instead, Women's Suffrage, for which
she pioneered: no Mary A. Livermores, but, instead,
not only Temperance, but Prohibition: no Mary
Baker Eddys, but instead, Christian Science. Perhaps
the only one of those giant women whose dream has not
wholly come true is Harriet Beecher Stowe. And yet
Civil War ratified her message and Federal Law made
it constitutional before any of the other dreams I have
mentioned found any popular response. These pioneer
women have a definite blood-kinship to the pioneer in
Edith Ellis. But pioneer, idealist, mystic, and the


practical woman who could run a farm, all met in her,
and for her kindred in her own time one must cross
the ocean and return to the old world for an Olive
Schreiner, for a Rosika Schwimmer, a Helene Stocker,
or an Ellen Key; while the shambles of Poland and
Russia reveal bloody footprints of women whose rags
most of us in the impeccability of our linen would
not care to touch, but who would have understood her
well, and whom she would have dearly loved. Indeed,
I heard the story of an American founder of a
model Women's University who came away from one
of Edith Ellis's lectures in rueful admiration, asking
himself why all the money he has sunk on the higher
education of women had not brought him a single such
flower of energy; why his university can only produce
a certain standardised high type of mediocrity, like his
early experiments in HoTbeins and Fragonards which
turned out apocryphal. Over and over, one observes in
the younger generation of American women a curious
resignation, clear-eyed and unafraid, to this very high
level of mediocrity, if one can so call their skill in social
life, their extraordinary deftness with the gentler aspects
of success, their orderly and coquettish homes. They
are charmingly turned out in their half-tropical dresses,
and they take the stranger over their cottages or palaces
always with the same open-handed hospitality which is
a legacy in their blood from princely Spaniards and
cheery English squires. And then they show you their
children, if indeed it is not the children who have shown
themselves: one, two, generally three children, so tall


and so developed for their ages that it seems as if they
must have had different food. Perhaps the young
parents say little about these children, hut you see at
once that here is their real centre of significance ; it is
for these children that they have visions. "We don't
know what hind of a race it is going to he, hut we are
evolving a great race." They do not say this. It is
what you read in their eyes when they looh at these
amazing children.
The men in America admired Edith Ellis tre-
mendously; she addressed certain meetings that were
mainly composed of men, business men, doctors, philan-
thropists, and such as do the country's thinhing, as well
as poets. In fact, the sonnet which appears on a
flyleaf of this booh was written upon news of her death
by a poet who had not, I believe, even met her, but
who, in Chicago, had heard her speak. Her lectures
on social subjects were perhaps more fully grasped by
the men than the women. I saw, recently, an American
read her book on James Hinton, read it carefully and
ponderingly, as his ancestors read the Bible. I saw
him finally put the book down with a sigh, and, in a
peculiarly penetrating and wistful way, paraphrase—
almost word for word—the conclusion of a later and
serener student of morality than James Hinton, who
says, "We shall probably abolish prostitution. But
the state of society which sees the end of prostitution
will be a very different state of society from the one we
are living in to-day."
It was with her vision fixed on this coming society


that Edith Ellis championed practical precepts such as we
find in the teachings of great dreamers like Carpenter and
Whitman and Olive Schreiner and Havelock Ellis. She
saw with an internal and prophetic vision ; knew often
more by intuition than by material knowledge, and had at
moments a quite uncanny gift of divination. A mutual
friend has told me that she was once startled at Mrs.
Ellis's affirming of her sturdy little boy who had just
entered the room, and whom she had never seen before,
" This is a premature child, isn't it ? " and on being
with some surprise corroborated and asked how she had
guessed, " I was a seven months' child myself, and I can
feel them."
An incalculable number of men and women came to
her with their problems. She has somewhere referred
to the heavy burden of correspondence with which her
husband coped personally, and he made the same com-
ment on her. " She had," he said, " a very large
correspondence—nearly always the post brought more
letters for her than for me, but she always dealt with
them and destroyed them immediately— sometimes even
before she had remembered to note the address."
It was this prompt efficiency which she carried into
her experiments in co-operative life, in her later farming
in Cornwall, and in her own housekeeping. Her cottage
in Cornwall, which I visited, was charming with gay
cretonne, and she was full of admiration for the ingenious
labour-saving devices in America by which the house-
keeper had replaced drudgery and partially solved the
domestic problem. And the domestic problem, which in


England is still to be solved, was one to which she de-
voted just as much thought, and which she considered
humanly just as important, as the problem of eugenics
or woman's economic independence in the home. Her
own servants, as a consequence, adored her, and she had
them for years, though it seems doubtful that she ever
made converts of them, converts, that is, to her theories
about " Democracy in the Kitchen." Their attitude
probably remained much that of Ann in her novel,
Attainment. Life with her was to them an adventure.
Servants recognised and responded to her quick per-
ceptions and genuine human touch. " When Mrs.
Ellis entered a room," said the servant at a house she
visited, " there was not a person in that room, even a
servant or a child, whom she didn't ' take in ' and have
a word or a smile for." She was democratic in the
wide and rare sense which implies a genuine appre-
ciation of even opposed kinds of social life. She was
peculiarly sensitive, in consequence of her easily jarred
nervous system, to the smooth refinements of life, and
almost revelled in the luxurious homes of her friends in
the West End, but it was with equally eager zest that she
would drive a manure cart or cut up a pig or dig
potatoes, and she was only amused when fashionable
acquaintances failed to recognise her in these occu-
pations.
Intellectual people have often been drawn towards
experiment in community living after the fashion of
Fourier's Phalansterie, which had amusing analogies
with the experiment of the Fellowship described in


Attainment, but they usually outgrow it if they attempt
to carry it out, as speedily happened to Edith Ellis's
early effort in this direction, and in later days she would
sometimes say playfully: " Fellowship is Hell, and
the lack of Fellowship is Heaven." In France, Fourier's
experiment is all but forgotten, and the message of
Edith Ellis would be well-nigh incomprehensible to a
Frenchwoman who had not lived among Anglo-Saxons.
With most of the countries of the western world ratifying
Woman's Suffrage, France up to the present moment
struggles along without that political adjunct; trial
marriages, or the more spiritual " noviciate for mar-
riage " proposed by Edith Ellis, is apparently unthink-
able to an orthodox French mind; the question of
whether women shall train their sons for war is lifted
out of the theoretic plane by compulsory military service ;
the great majority of Frenchwomen are not only econo-
mically independent, but the thrifty comptrollers of their
husbands' salaries, while divorce in any but the strictest
Church circles is made as easy as marriage is made
difficult. The " Semi-Detached Marriage," which, as
Edith Ellis suggests, offers such refreshing breaks in the
routine of domesticity, would in France be looked upon
by any judge as a sufficient grievance for according a
divorce to the parties concerned. France in such
matters might be an antipodal nation as remote as
China instead of the country whose shore line can
almost be seen from across the English Channel on a
fine day.
Yet with a lovely delight in all things French, France


was perhaps the country which next to her own Edith
Ellis loved best, her admiration for Spain crowding in a
close second : France for her fine art of living, Spain for
her serene soul. Indeed, in both France and Spain
(as later in America), she seemed to find a gracious
spontaneity, a congenial care for beauty, which she often
sadly missed in her own country. Yet so far as I know
she never wrote about either of them. My Cornish
Neighbours, a collection of short stories, was begun
during a convalescence in France, at Aix-les-Bains,
where, having through the death of a dear friend been
quite numbed in brain for four months, she revived under
the sunny influence of that delightful spot. But My
Cornish Neighbours is a group of pure genre studies
untouched by the slightest foreign influence. Like the
French writers, however, she excelled in the art of the
short story. She had very little interest in the develop-
ing of plots, and seemed to need very little aid from
invention. The real life around her farm in Cornwall
furnished more tales than she had time to write. Some
of the short stories in My Cornish Neighbours are true ;
others were elaborated from small real incident, others
suggested by a chance dialectical phrase.
Possibly a uniform edition of her novels and short
stories will put these more easily within the reach of her
American public, which knows her almost exclusively
as a brilliant speaker and as a profound stimulator of
thought. English men of letters who know her stories
think very highly of them, her contemporaries, such as
G. K. Chesterton and Ford Madox Hueffer. It fell to


Chesterton to review My Cornish Neighbours when it
first was published in 1906. He said of the author's
technique: " Mrs. Havelock Ellis's unity is the unity
of one actual place. She studies her Cornish neighbours
with that quiet and patient pleasure which is necessary
for getting the truth out of any rooted and real people. . . .
Mrs. Haveloclc Ellis shows one way in which the short
sketch can be used with an eye to unity." He pro-
nounced her, in other words, what it seems to me that she
was more than all else, a finished artist. Mr. Ford
Madox Huejfer said, speaking of her literary work as a
whole: " I have always had a very vivid sense of the
gift of the author of Kit's Woman and My Cornish
Neighbours. Kit's Woman, at least, has always re-
mained in my mind as one of the outstanding books of
a period, and My Cornish Neighbours was a skilful
corollary of the novel. Attainment, too, was delightful.
But in its own way, The Imperishable Wing stands all
alone by itself in a wilderness of sham renderings of what
is called the Celtic temperament. She had a great gift
and a very authentic talent: her books don't ' date'
in the least because she had no touch of journalism about
her mind ; she looked at eternal things, if I may use the
term, and so her writing will always be ' interesting'
for its matter, which it wouldn't if it were more smart
or topical. Her art ivas very fine, restrained, and pene-
trating, so that it has a very lasting quality."
I had never read The Imperishable Wing when, one
winter day about a year ago, Havelock Ellis took it from
its place in her room which adjoins his study, and lent


it me to read. " The stories are all about Death," he said,
" and that is how I came to suggest to her the title from
Rossetti." And then he added with a smile of complete
detachment, " That's the only contribution I ever made
to her literary work." I may add, however, that she loved
talking of her work with him, and after an early morning's
work (her mornings sometimes began at four), she was
eager to read to him what she had written and hear his
criticism ; if the critical interruptions failed to occur at
sufficiently frequent intervals she would be hurt and
exclaim : "You are not listening ! "
I have heard their relationship described by friends
who knew them both well as one of those marriages
which are supposed to be arranged in heaven. But
it had to be lived on terra firma, like any other less
blessed union, and two people with a greater convergence
or a wider dissimilarity of tastes it would be difficult
to find. One was intensely social, the other almost a
recluse ; one of them loved to have a telephone at her
bedside, and at its summons to start out on an entirely
unpremeditated mission or outing, while the other held
the telephone in horror and liked to do things planned
out well beforehand, finding in the anticipation of any
given event more enjoyment than in its actual happening,
and living for the most part more in the future or in
the past than in the momentary present. One of them
was a scientist, and approached his work from the
patient uphill path of scientific research; the other
was an artist with no interest in scientific procedure,
but often with luminous intuition or divination dis-


covering the same truths. To counterbalance these
dissimilarities, they both often liJced the same people
and the same books, shared the same views on the
important things of life, adored travel, and to the same
countries, and both loved doing their writing out of doors.
He shared something of her joy in animals (there were
always any number of cats and dogs around her in the
country), and they both found rest and delight in music.
In a most charmingly direct and personal essay on
Havelock Ellis, published in the Bookman of New
York in July 1918, Edith Ellis describes their marriage
experiment. She refers to it again indirectly, if lam
not mistaken, in the essay on " Semi-Detached Marriage "
{p. 24), and to the agreement on which their union was
based. If this agreement sounds very simple and
elementary, let any reasonably happily married man
or woman search his or her conscience, and then read
her essay in this volume on " Love as a Fine Art," in
which she vividly paraphrases that promise, or the
concluding essay on " The Philosophy of Happiness,"
in which she sums up her experiences of life.
That she had an unhappy and misunderstood child-
hood may be read in her exquisite half-fairy tale entitled
Love-Acre. The humour which developed as she grew
older colours her reminiscences of the experiment in
community living which is recorded in the novel,
Attainment. The fact that it is written jestingly does
not at all impair its value as a document, for it is less
the history of a definite social effort which failed than
the personal record of high-spirited youth, which only


ends with the conventional goal of marriage because she
was too impatient to carry the booh on, as she had
originally planned, to further stages of development.
To me, indeed, her literary work—in which I
include her plays and playlets, some of them highly
successful on the stage —comes before her innumer-
able other outlets of energy, which seem to have
disciplined her for the comparative tedium of sitting
down to weave out of moonbeams and cobwebs and early
morning dewdrops the suitable vehicles for little stories
like " Dawn " or " The Idealist " or " The Pixy " or
the quiveringly beautiful revelations that are in Love-
Acre. For these tales are not only marvellous little
tours de force so deftly and invisibly contrived that
there is an exquisite pleasure to be got from studying
their fashioning, but they hold in their fragile envelopes
singularly luminous professions of faith in the mystical
beauty of life, in the sweet, safe transformation of death,
and they treat of transcendent love through the medium
of quaint Cornish genre studies which have of them-
selves a precious literary and folk-lore worth. Edward
Carpenter has referred to the " quite gem-like brilliancy "
of some portions of her work. To me, it is such a
gem-like brilliancy as one sees over the roses and black-
berry vines at sunrise, irridescent and quivering with
an other-world, an elf-world, loveliness.
That brilliancy, that vivid intuitiveness and out-
goingness that never learned to the last day of her life
to count the costs, those were the imperishable essences
of herself which she distilled into these little tales before


she vanished. Many great esoteric forerunners have
appeared and have disappeared again leaving even less
trace, and slowly and by waif-words the tales have grown
out of which loving followers have fashioned the master.
Perhaps she tried to bring the New Life into being
a little sooner than most of us think necessary. She
was more in a hurry than the rest of us. She came
into the world, even, before she was reasonably expected,
and she left the world with a suddenness tragically
consistent.
It was in February 1916, about eight months before
her death, and while she was ill with nervous break-down,
that, just arrived from France, I knocked at the door
of her little cottage in Carbis Bay, up on the height
overlooking the sea. It was here, in the surroundings
which she had made so vividly her own, that I was at
last to meet her face to face. It was she who came to
the door herself, throwing it wide open with a charming
welcoming warmth, and drawing me into the little
old-fashioned, low-ceilinged sitting-room where Havelock
Ellis was gently remonstrating with a fire which refused
to draw. There was a contagious energy about her
well-knit short figure, in her quick hand-clasp and
extraordinary blue eyes —almost nakedly truthful eyes,
capable of an infinite variety of expression, from reckless
fun to quivering tenderness or scorching anger ; eyes
that might shed tears of divine consolation and pity,
but that had never been tamed. I don't think that
any one who met her ever forgot her eyes. Photographs
were always inadequate to represent her; as Olive


Schreiner wrote of her: " The spring and love she
suggests, which is her great charm, is wanting in them ";
they usually give an impression of heaviness, she added,
and do not suggest her small size, slightly below jive feet
in height, like Olive Schreiner herself.
We sat together round the recalcitrant fire, and she
and I talked eagerly, and liavelock Ellis listened to
us like a benign but brooding spirit. When the time
came to leave them they both accompanied me to the
little cliff path, swept at that season by a strong sea
wind. They stood together, with intertwined arms,
watching me until at the curve of the path I turned
to wave to them, and they waved again with I know
not what poignant emotion in their gesture of farewell;
for I was going back to France, France was in her
darkest hour, and their hearts accompanied me.
I never saw Edith Ellis again.
MARGUERITE TRACY.
Cap d'Aniibes, A.M.,
January 1921.




NOTE
THE essays and lectures which form this volume constitute a
fairly well-connected whole, since they deal from a definite indi-
vidual standpoint with the essential personal and social problems
of our time. Yet the writing of them covered a long period of
years, from 1891 to 1915. Their publication in an organised and
completed form was projected by the author many years ago,
before, indeed, most of them were written. At first she intended
to call the volume The Domestic Horizon, but as its scope seemed to
enlarge she changed this to The New Horizon. She had proposed
to publish it after James Hinton: A Sketch, and so it now appears,
in accordance with her wish, though it cannot receive her final
revision. She had arranged the chapters in a certain order, but
had not worked over them from the point of view of book form nor
written any Preface. As placed by the author, the chapters on
Love and Marriage came at the end. It has been thought
desirable for publication purposes to alter this order. Miss
Marguerite Tracy is responsible for the re-arrangement and for the
division into two distinct Parts. She has also struck out numer-
ous passages which seemed to overlap. A certain inequality of
manner necessarily remains, since the component parts of the book,
notwithstanding their inner unity and coherence, were written at
different times, and for different purposes, and some of them
obviously intended to be spoken. Thus " The Masses and the
Classes "is clearly a lecture; " The New Civilisation," an impres-
sionistic sketch of American conditions; and " The Philosophy
of Happiness," the careful and weighty statement of mature
personal experience. The order in which the chapters stand is no


NOTE
indication of their date ; it is desirable to point this out because
the suggestions contained in the earlier papers have now ceased to
possess novelty and, indeed, been largely embodied in practice,
though it is still far from possible to say the same concerning many
of the more recent chapters. The earliest is " The Masses and the
Classes," delivered as a lecture in 1891 to the Ancoats (Man-
chester) Brotherhood, with whom her first successes as a lecturer
were achieved; this lecture was printed as a pamphlet, the proofs
of which she corrected on the eve of her wedding-day. " Democ-
racy in the Kitchen," again a lecture, belongs to the following
year, as also the substance of " A Noviciate for Marriage," first
issued as a pamphlet, but much later re-written and shortened
without change of substance. After this there was a long interval,
during which, though occasionally lecturing, she was seeking to
escape from ethics into art, engaged in the practical work of farm-
ing and in thinking out her novels and plays. " Love as a Fine
Art " was printed in 1901. The two papers on Eugenics in
relation to the Abnormal (a subject she also had in mind when
writing " The Idealist " in The Imperishable Wing) were originally
a paper read to the Eugenics Education Society in 1911, but later
changed and divided into two. " The Philosophy of Happiness "
was also written about 1911, and in the same year " The Maternal
in Domestic and Political Life," followed a year or two later by
" Political Militancy." All the remaining chapters date from 1914
or the early months of 1915, some of them written in America,
including " Semi-Detached Marriage," which was probably the
latest. The frontispiece—doubtless, as she herself also thought,
the most expressive portrait of her in later years—is from a photo-
graph taken by Mr. Arnold Genthe of New York in 1914.
fc. : . •:: : H. E.


THE NEW HORIZON IN
LOVE AND LIFE
PART I.—LOVE AND MARRIAGE
THE LOVE OF TO-MORROW
WHEN Edward Carpenter wrote Love's Coming of Age
some twenty years ago, few people realised that it
was a revolutionary book. It held, however, such
unconventional suggestions for experiment in new
sexual ethical living that one may almost classify
it with Karl Marx's Capital, which held similar
suggestions in the economic field.
Though there have been enormous changes in the
last ten years with regard to the discussion of sex
matters, the broader and deeper problems of modern
love and marriage have not yet been solved. Sex
questions, which include the economic independence
of woman, the new love combining independ-
ence and interdependence, and the finer marriage
implying comradeship and passion, stand com-
paratively little chance for an immediate solution,
because the nursery, the schoolroom, the political


arena, the pulpit, and the doctor's consulting-room
either ignore the question of love altogether or
quibble the matter away from the standpoint of
reason, virility, and clean-mindedness. The old
England and New England puritanism is still the
bitter foe of healthy sexuality. Hunger and love,
through the demands of Labour and Sex, have to
be faced from the standpoint of a new civilisation
which is not only concerned with these matters as
primary necessities of human, as well as brute, life,
but as complex manifestations of a new order of
living and loving. Hunger we have long been dis-
posed to countenance as a respectable necessity
which Labour's claim may demand to have satisfied
through the united efforts of the whole community.
We are preparing to face the matter of Labour's
demands and to see what can be done to meet Dame
Nature in her request that, given a mouth, a man
shall be able to earn the wherewithal to fill it.
Love, an equally imperative figure in normal
manhood and womanhood, still stands sniggering
or brazen in her plea for frank treatment. Con-
ventional marriage maxims form a code of world
ethics which has as its frontispiece the figure of a
sneering hag with her finger on her lips. Marriage
has become so entangled in commercialism, in tradi-
tion, in doll's-house convention, in slipshod senti-
mentalities and worldly wisdom, that it is almost
impossible to get a glimpse of the simple face of Love,
who stands wounded and forgotten behind the gaunt


prudes presiding over sexual ethics. Prostitution,
with no diploma from Love, hysteria, anaemia,
and insanity, with no hall-mark from Nature, are
the prices we pay for our conventional code of mor-
ality. The minimum of sexual decency and happi-
ness amongst us is obtained at a cost of mental
suffering and perverted natural instinct which no
amount of prudent veiling can hide from the eyes
of those who dig beneath the surface. Men and
women, exhausted by excess or stunted by repression,
are the living protests against the mock puritanism
and savage slavery to outworn superstitions which
defame the name of civilisation. A new morality
implies a more evolved love and a finer human
marriage.
The evolution of human love from brutish lust
will not come about in a day, nor will the emergence
of complex desire ostracise selfish, monopolising,
tyrannical, or jealous affection in a year. The sexual
renaissance will probably be a blending of healthy
temperate animalism with that rare mating when
soul lies by soul. In order to bring this about, many
experiments may have to be tried, and apparent
failure sometimes be an evidence of ultimate
victory.
The first necessity of the situation is surely to
have the courage and humour not only to realise
what is wrong with the relationship between a man
and a woman under the present legal form of marriage,
but to dare to acknowledge the root remedies.


Tyranny in men, and parasitism in women, are foes
to fine and clean sexuality. Love should never have
a money value. Some day, perhaps, prostitution
will appear as brutal as cannibalism, and marriage
bargains as uncivilised as slave contracts. If Love
is a mystical affinity, its outcome in children, art,
or fine conduct cannot be connected with the Market
or the Stock Exchange. It must own itself before it
can give itself. It must be free before it can be
bound. All the eugenic societies in the world and
all the scientific marriage regulations may possibly
only encourage materialism if the deeper matters to
do with new economics and old spiritualities are
not taken into account. In the new love-life divorce
will probably be regarded as a makeshift, and
hypocrisy a blasphemy. They are both concessions,
as paralysing to a clean code of sexual morality as
the outworn saying of a possibly epileptic ascetic
that" it is better to marry than to burn."
The vital question for moderns to answer is—
What are the new economics, and how can the great
spiritualities of all ages be applied to the new revela-
tions and consequent experiments ? If, as Pro-
fessor Michels states, " marriage is the tomb of lyric
love," it is time that evolved human beings should
cease to be conceders or hypocrites about the funda-
mental needs of human existence.
That the majority of people are falsely mated is
a matter of common observation. Divorce is, how-
ever, often only the substitution of one imperfect


person and condition for another. A timely know-
ledge of simple facts often prevents disaster. Intrigue
is more often an act of cowardice than merely of
lust.
It is more than probable that the evolved relation-
ship of the future will be monogamy—but a mono-
gamy as much wider and more beautiful than the
present caricature of it as the sea is wider and more
delicious than a frog-pond. The lifelong faithful
love of one man for one woman is the exception and
not the rule. The law of affinity being as subtle
and as indefinable as the law of gravitation, we may,
by and by, find it worth while to give it its complete
opportunity in those realms where it can manifest
most potently. We are on the wrong bridge if we
imagine that licence is the easiest way to freedom,
or laxity to beauty. The bridge which will bear us
must be strong enough to support us while experi-
ments are tried.
What is the gospel in this matter of sexual emanci-
pation for men and women in the new world when
Love has actually come of age ? It is surely the
complete economic independence of women. While
man is economically free and woman still a slave,
either physically, financially, or spiritually, man-
kind as a whole must act as if blindness, maimness,
and deafness constituted health. The complete
independence of husband and wife is the gospel of
the new era of marriage. This is the vital matter
which philosophers, parents, philanthropists, and


pioneers so often ignore when teaching the new ideals
of morality. While a woman is kept by a man, she
is not a free individuality either as child, wife, or
mistress. Imagine for a moment a man being kept
by a woman as women are kept by men, and a sense
of humour illuminates the absurdity of the situation
between any class of evolved human beings.
When sitting by the side of Judge Fry in the
Chicago Court of Domestic Relations, and listening
to the silly or tragic episodes which divide married
people, lovers, and parents, I noted that not one
case would have come before the judge during the
morning I sat in court, if economic freedom for
woman had been her civic right. Economic inde-
pendence would rid Love of most of her enemies at a
blow, the enemies outside her citadel as well as within
it. If women were economically free, they would
gradually become spiritually free. In spiritual free-
dom, no woman gives herself for money, for power,
for personal aims, or even for pity. She gives herself
because Nature, the great mother, whispers her force-
ful secrets in her ear, and the law of affinity binds up
the rest. It is only in this large freedom that real
giving and fine begetting can become aids to a civil-
isation new in the history of the world.
How this economic freedom is to come about
depends, of course, on how far politicians in the
group, and men in the home, face the situation.
The traditions of ages are not easily laid aside, and
tyranny and jealousy are atavistic in manifestation.


It is woman herself who will probably have to free
herself and make the present absurd conditions
of relationship as decadent as marriage by capture.
Every woman who submits to-day to economic
dependence on an individual is propping up parasit-
ism and encouraging prostitution.
The problem of sexual emancipation is, however,
extremely complex and will be difficult to solve even
if all men as fathers and husbands were agreed about
the necessity for the economic freedom of women.
Perhaps the best way to arrive at a solution is to
try and form an estimate as to the real value of
woman in the community, not only as a sex being
but as a human being. Her worth to the whole
community and to man in particular is possibly as
the worth of the sea, flowers, air, and sunlight, in
addition to the fact that, as a mother, she is the
mainstay of the nations. Her very potentialities
should be her economic security. Her misfortune
hitherto has lain in the fact that her maternal powers
have been the chief reason for her dependence. The
future civilisation will probably reverse this attitude.
Her magnitude as a maternal citizen should secure
her complete freedom to choose her mate significantly
and for the good of the whole community as well
as for herself. Her inner significance as a rest, a
sweetness, and a beautifier of life, should be recog-
nised as a time-saving and nerve-resting asset for
the whole commonwealth.
It is possible that an approach to a solution,


though not achieving at once the complete economic
independence of woman, may lie with the State to
organise, instead of being entirely left to the good
sense and generosity of individuals. A man physio-
logically is less hampered in the game of life than a
woman. On the other hand, a man is more dependent
on woman as mother, sweetheart, nurse, house-
keeper, and general home organiser than woman is
on man. Why should not a tax be levied on every
man over twenty-one in recognition of this, and so
provide a dowry for every woman-child when she
attains her majority ? Until every child attained
its majority it might be possible, in the light of a
newer aspect of the rights of women and children,
to insist by law on every man who becomes a father
paying to the mother of his child, whether a boy or
a girl, his debt of honour for bringing it into the
world. This would be his personal tribute to
motherhood added to his gift of the child to the
bearer of it. His contribution to woman as woman
might possibly be a small tax levied on all men to
be dispensed by the State to each individual woman
when she attains her majority, the State acting as
trustee for all her life. Added to this, legislation
could ensure the equal payments and equal time
limits for the work of both sexes in every sphere of
labour. This would enable every woman to have no
real necessity to be dependent on any man. No
individual man under this arrangement need keep
any individual woman, and in housekeeping they


would naturally share the expenses of the home,
and the one who took the least share of the work
would contribute the most to the household fund.
When life is simplified and the word " menial " taken
out of every civilised language this arrangement
may be realised as not being Utopian, but common
sense and fair play between the sexes, and an easy
solution of a difficult problem.
Diversity of work, independence and yet inter-
dependence, romance not sunk into boredom but
stimulated by diverse enterprises, comradeship and
friendship as component parts of passion, would
make the Love of To-morrow a continual personal
romance and a civic adventure. Domesticity, as
it exists to-day, is doomed. It fosters egotism,
dullness, and nerve strain, and is at the root of much
of the infidelity and ugliness distorting so many
lives. If the future of the relationship between men
and women is monogamy we must cleanse and widen
at the same time both the home life and the love life.
The one man for the one woman is the civilised
ideal. Hypocrisy, secret unions, prostitution, and
a disguised polygamy must disappear when we are
just enough, brave enough, and honest enough to
face the whole problem and try experiments as
evolved human beings. The training of the young
in knowledge of the beautiful and mystic place of
the senses in human life, the pioneering of youth
into fine fellowships and friendships leading to possible
noviciates for marriage, with the recognition of


marriage itself as a divine and lasting adventure
which not even death can destroy, will surely be
aids to the evolution of a sexual renaissance when
body and soul can be helpmates and playmates
together. That experiments must be tried before
marriage, and in marriage between the two who are
mated, so that love shall survive the ordinary wear
and tear of life, seems a necessity. The inner and
outer circle of love must thus be cleansed and widened
in order that a lover's desires and a citizen's ideals
may be merged in a new attitude towards freedom
and restraint.
When we try to deal largely with jealousy, tyranny,
absorption, the widening and enlarging of relation-
ships, the newer liberty of marriage because of the
same freedom in love, we seem to be on dangerous
ground. But the really dangerous ground is where
snakes are hidden in the grass. To-day marriage
is more often than not both a slavery and a licence,
and ofttimes also a bondage and a boredom to both
men and women. To-morrow it must be clean first
and then physically and spiritually beautiful.


A NOVICIATE FOR MARRIAGE
IN approaching the problem of the Love of To-
morrow it is not only necessary to realise that the
complete economic emancipation of woman is essen-
tial to any real solution of the sex problem, but also
to face the fact that rational experiments must be
attempted. Experiments in legal marriage and out-
side it are being tried by many clean-minded people,
but they are as fearful of disclosing their experiences
to the world as if they were to do with theft or murder.
To rid the world of prostitution, to have woman
economically free and man spiritually free, and yet
to realise passion as the flame of love, is no easy task
in the great emancipation of the world. It cannot
be carried through without personal suffering and
social upheaval. Experiments, with both successes
and failures in their train, must be tried.
The marriage question might possibly lose some
of its complexity if parents would accept, in place of
the stereotyped engagement, a noviciate for marriage.
In the future, sexual knowledge will form part of
every educational scheme, and the study of Eugenics
will be as important in a school curriculum as botany
or Euclid. To learn about Love as a botanist learns


about flowers may later save human beings mistakes
which a sentimental or chaotic view of passion incurs.
Physiological needs, romantic desires, and Nature's
imperative demands confuse the novice in the art of
Love and often make " sin " out of mere ignorance.
If monogamy is to be the form of evolved sexual
relationship it is time we tried every device to obtain
the substance and not be any longer content to
remain with the shadow.
A noviciate in relation to marriage is no more
terrifying to an evolved citizen than in relation to the
Church, the law, or the arts of music and painting.
Such a noviciate wculd be more coercive to the
socially trained conscience of intelligent men and
women than rash sensual episodes or haphazard
pre-marital relationships. The ethical conscience
of a community which countenances a man having
one or many mistresses who can be flung aside for a
" moral" relationship in legal marriage, must be
either asleep or devoid of the sense alike of humour
and of tragedy. The vulgarities of prostitution and
casual intimacies will surely be exchanged, sooner or
later, for rational and self-respecting experiments
in the arts of living and loving.
A noviciate for marriage, which would also be an
apprenticeship for fatherhood and motherhood, as
well as a training in household work and management,
is surely no more to be feared by right-minded men
and women than training for the army and navy.
Custom declares that an engagement shall be an-


nounced before even acquaintanceship, in its full
sense, is begun. Legal marriage is clamoured for
as a precautionary measure before mutual know-
ledge. That so many marriages are tolerably happy,
and that some few are unregretted, is surely due to
the fact that, in spite of our haphazard wooing, some
unknown spiritual law of affinity takes the side of
Love in the game of Life. A noviciate for marriage,
as open as an engagement, would surely minimise
the gambling element in modern unions, and pave
the way to a true monogamy, which to-day, with
prostitution and secret temporary unions accepted
as necessary evils, is simply a name Respectability
and Idealism accept, but Life too frequently denies.
If by monogamy we mean one man and one woman
cleaving to each other for sexual love, we all know,
if we are out of our teens, that the monogamic mar-
riage in modern civilisation is either extinct or has
never really evolved. The latter is surely the real
state of affairs, and if, as the tendency of modern
progress indicates, monogamy is the most complete
form of human sexual relationship, it is certain that,
in order to obtain it in reality, we must open the way,
not only to free discussion on sexual matters, but to
cautious experiment.
As a preliminary step we must educate boys and
girls in the art of love, and teach them how to ap-
proach cleanly and honestly the physical and psychi-
cal facts of sexual life in experiments which imply
neither laxity nor barter. Marriage, when it really


comes to evolved men and women, may, in this way,
stand a chance of being the sanest, deepest, and
purest incentive to a life of real citizenship. The
mere word of the clergyman or the registrar sanctions,
and even sanctifies in the eyes of convention, what
is in the majority of unions adultery on the man's
side and a plunge into animalism on the woman's
side. Repression and excess meet in the name of Love,
and the bread and wine which life rarely offers more
than once to a man and a woman as a veritable sacra-
ment are devoured gluttonously upon the altar
steps. To prevent unhappy marriages is surely a
saner method than to facilitate divorce after souls
and bodies may have become permanently injured
through the orthodox experiment which begins after
legal marriage.
A would-be nun, before she takes the white veil,
enters into a noviciate which is to acquaint her with
all the offices and responsibilities of a convent life,
without the formal declaration which merges the
experiment into a life-covenant. If, at the end of
the noviciate in the sisterhood, a woman finds that
her nature is unfitted for what she considers the most
sacred life on earth, she frankly says so, and, without
any reflection on her character from the lady superior
or her fellows, she goes back to the world and finds
her work there. " She has no vocation," is the
verdict of the religious community upon her action,
and her withdrawal from the convent is looked upon
as a wise step, a nun being born, and not made, they


argue. A noviciate for marriage, of only twelve
months' duration, the period of an ordinary engage-
ment, freed from conventional restraints, and backed
by a childhood and youth educated in the simple facts
of sexual life, so that no mystery other than the subtle
one of pure love could taint the experiment, would
surely lessen the grim divorce list we read of in the
papers, and the grimmer record we find in our private
circles, where divorce may, or may not, creep in to
undo our social blunders. A distinguished Roman
Catholic priest told Alexander Dumas that out of one
hundred women who married, eighty came to him
afterwards and said that they regretted it. Who can
tell how greatly this percentage might not have been
reduced by a rational noviciate ? With an honour-
able intention, there would also be an honourable
return path if temperaments were incompatible.
This is only one of the ways in which the Love of
To-morrow may become a finer human manifestation
than the average marriage of to-day can show. Six
months of probation, either in the home of one of the
parents or in a co-operative house combining social
work with the open experiment, would test the fitness
of those believing they were ready to embark on the
ocean of marriage.
By a noviciate for marriage I mean exactly what
a nun means when she takes the white veil. She
believes she has a vocation for a religious life. She
cannot be certain of this at first, for here, as in mar-
riage, a halo is round the heads of the initiated, and a


veritable religious spell is over the whole convent life,
towards which she yearns as she kneels in the chapel
with the incense, the flowers, and the singing, waken-
ing into life the romantic energies which claim heart,
head, and hand, when the feet stand for the first time
before the altar of the ideal. Life to the young girl
is a sweet, thrilling romance. Abandonment, re-
nunciation, and suffering become the only beautiful
things in the world. They are seen through the
flowers and incense, as she has read of them in her
books, heard of them from priests, and glorified
them in her enthusiastic longings. No rude coarse
hand draws aside the veil and proclaims the common-
place. For six months she is a mere probationer,
and lives, as it were, on the outside of the mystery
of religious life. During this time she probably feels
her vocation increasing, and when the period has
expired she readily takes the white veil, which makes
her a novice, to abide by the rules of the religious life
for two years before the black veil, the oath, the
parchment deed, and the ring are taken as signs of
her eternal chastity. As in the religious life there
is no pruriency to hide, no natural function to de-
preciate, the girl is led naturally from the dreams of
a probationer to the realities of a novice, and for two
years she faces the life of a nun as a practical woman.
For a religious to wish to draw back after two and a
half years of trial, with a full experience of convent
life, from which the spell has gone, and into which
the fret and jar of daily work have entered, to make


a stronger demand on ideals, would be looked upon
either as disease, or the deliberate enervation of the
moral nature, upon which the Devil could get a foot-
hold. As a proof of the security of the experiment,
it is well known that it is the rarest occurrence for
a nun who has taken the black veil to wish to with-
draw from her vow. The public oath is the mere
culmination to a multitude of social and personal
experiences which have tested the fitness of the
woman for a religious life. An ecclesiastic, appointed
to receive a large salary from his bishop in order to
divorce women from their vow of chastity and obedi-
ence, would probably have a very easy time of it, as
prevention in the religious life has taken the place of
cure, and weeded out at an early period of the experi-
ment the individuals who would throw discredit on
the religious life, either through remaining in it, or
wishing, later on, to be divorced from it. The gamb-
ling element is abolished. Commercial considerations
and hysterical restlessness have no place in such a
religious experiment. Deliberate choice, a lengthy
noviciate, and, above all, a full knowledge of the
offices and obligations attendant on the sacred life
precede the formal and public declaration.
Is there anything similar to this in the preparation
of a man and a woman for a state which, if not called
religious, has as its sequel the most vital consequences
to the community ? The answer can only be in the
negative. From the first sign on the man's part of
" intentions " to the hour of the Wedding March in


the crowded church, there is more of the atmosphere
of a comic opera than the feeling of a sacrament.
Dressmakers and sentimentalists make an atmosphere,
preparatory to the great ceremony, which Cupid as
either a lover or an artist could not breathe.
Sacrilege and sacrifice more often than not rob the
hours, preceding the finest expression of life, of their
sacredness.
In face of the fact that marriage differs from other
relationships only on its physical side, girls are taught
that it is unwomanly to discuss sexual questions
with their future husbands. It is a matter of every-
day knowledge that a large proportion of brides
marry still with no clear idea of the sexual function
which they promise to fulfil. They marry in the
stage of romance and girlish enthusiasm in which a
probationer first dons her lace cap, to enter realities
with the slender equipment for dreams. In the
unwedded girl's idealised love-world nothing is
even sanely virile. Brusqueness or brutality is not
imaginable in marriage, which only presupposes
romantic love. Her vision of self-sacrifice, of soul-
mating, of a love-life lifted for ever out of ruts and
vulgarities, is akin to the vision of the novice to
religion who kneels at the entrance of a convent
chapel, and forgets, amid incense and flowers, that
the world of religious fervour has often bare boards,
hair shirts, and narrow cells, which neither priest,
flowers, nor music can convert into a child's fairy
vision. Young girls who enter marriage with this


equipment, and without even a true theoretical
knowledge of sexual life, are often as much shocked
and unnerved by the virility of true manhood as if
they had been caught in their sleep by the coarse paws
of a satyr. When we add to this negative attitude
on the woman's part the positive one assumed by
men, through their previous experiences, we have
additional evidence that in the mooted question of
modern wedlock what we need as a first step is ab-
solute sincerity between a man and a woman before
a legal contract is signed. Society, under a mistaken
idea that in this matter prudery and silence may
cover a multitude of venial sins, gives no countenance
to an open noviciate for marriage. Convention
might possibly question the sanity of the woman
who frankly refused to enter into a contract of which
she did not know the full conditions. In face of an
open experiment to test these conditions, Fashion
would almost certainly close her doors upon what
would appear to her as an indecent precedent. Un-
like the Catholic Church in its dealings with novices,
Society demands the ring, the parchment, and the
vow as a preliminary to the knowledge and experi-
ence —hence adulteries, the divorce court, home
prisons, and the increase of cant and pruriency in
the community.
In a noviciate for marriage young people would
have ample time and opportunity to compare their
family histories and to learn the worst and best of
one another. In the future it will surely be as much


a sin to keep back the knowledge of family taints as
to forge or steal. Epilepsy, insanity, consumption,
and syphilis cannot be concealed by any one with a
social conscience who contemplates marriage with
a full knowledge of its possible and probable conse-
quences. In addition to the necessity for perfect
frankness with regard to private and family histories,
the need for full knowledge of the sex function and
the difficulties which arise from individual tempera-
ments will also have to be faced. Habits of many
years' standing, trivial egoisms, and small idiosyn-
cracies may play as much havoc with the chances
for conjugal happiness as vice itself. If two people
were to dwell in the same house for a few months,
it would be impossible to conceal peculiarities and
moods calling for the give-and-take process which
has such an educative and sobering effect even in
the most ideal marriages, and, in a pre-marital trial,
would soon either educate the novices for wedlock
into the beauty of true interdependence, or prove
to them beyond doubt that it is best for some men
to live alone, and for some women also. Such an
experiment, presupposing a prior training in know-
ledge and control, would diminish the effects of the
sex spell which so often hypnotises reason and drives
lovers impetuously to passion's ends.
Physical surrender should be the last expression
in mutual love and not the first. The criminality
of bringing a child into the world under conditions
which, later, may hamper its full value and signifi-


cance to the community, cannot be over-emphasised.
The noviciate experiment is not advocated in the
hope that " free love," as it is miscalled, should take
the place of monogamy in the community, but that
true freedom and sincerity shall be encouraged in
order that actual monogamy may have a chance to
try its fate among a people who worship it as an
ideal, but whose feet are far from its temple. Nothing
but open experiments and perfect sincerity as to
results can rid us of pruriency and cant in this matter.
Woman's economic freedom, her training in the full
knowledge of sex, her insistence on her value as a
human being first and a sex being afterwards, her
resolution not to sell herself in legal or illegal unions,
may lead her to risk experiments, but no longer to
countenance hypocrisy and uncleanness.
The objection, which will be raised at once, that a
noviciate for marriage will demand good men and
good women as experimentalists, and that their ex-
ample will be followed for the ends of lust and not
for the means of love, is answered by the fact that
the marriages of the moment do not, through their
legality, ostracise lust. No law and no experiment
can actually create pure men and honest women,
compel temperance, or evolve purity. All we can
do is to offer the chance for sincerity in place of
hypocrisy, and give an open field for the possible
evolution of monogamic marriage. In any real ex-
periment having this evolved form of relationship
in view, there can be no question of dragging love


into the region of the mechanical or commonplace.
It is, on the contrary, a plea for one of the many
rational experiments which will give love fnll scope,
so that vulgarity, commercialism, and trickery may
be divorced from wedlock, and public life may be
strengthened and broadened through influences
which have had their birth in a harmonious private
experience.


SEMI-DETACHED MARRIAGE
IT is not war alone which is calling our attention to
what is reality in modern civilisation and what is
veneer. Spiritual forces are producing moral earth-
quakes which, through their apparent devastations,
are helping us to revalue all our values. In no
sphere is this more evident than in the love sphere.
In sexual relationships the new order is at war with
the old and the transitional period is full of diffi-
culties. No one dare dogmatise in these matters.
Sincere suggestions are often met with terror and
dismay by those who harbour fear about the un-
known. Temperance in speech and action is indeed
essential in the struggle, yet courage and sincerity
are of equal importance.
After speaking frankly about the Love of To-
morrow, and suggesting a noviciate for marriage as
one of the practical aids to a true monogamy, it will
perhaps be as well to consider the question of this
relationship after it has been publicly announced.
The more complex the individuality the less chance
there is, as a rule, for domestic happiness. It will
take a long time to eradicate the superstitions and
conventions which surround the idea of ruler and


slave in the marriage relationship. How many of
ns are acquainted with marriages where the woman
is as free as the man, and where the man gladly
accepts the fact ? The traditions about " woman's
sphere " and " man's authority " survive still in the
most enlightened homes. The bondage of ordinary
marriage often bores, strains, or even destroys what
otherwise might be a beautiful love. It is well known
that sea captains and their wives often keep a
peculiar and romantic feeling for one another. The
reason is evident. It is rare that passion and romance
can survive a constant familiarity which breeds
the commonplace. Our subtlest hours are hours of
illusion and adventure. The artist in love must not
forget this, or loss and disillusion ensues. If marriage
could be made as great an adventure as wooing, many
of our novels would not be so unreal or our children
so average. Separation and silence are two of Love's
ministering angels. Chatter and undue familiarity
devastate in more ways than one, and at bed and
board more corpses are strewn on Love's battlefields
than could be put under statistics. The rigidity of
public opinion with regard to marriage customs
should surely give way to a consideration of tempera-
ments as well as to ways and means of livelihood.
Perhaps a reliable illustration, as an instance of a
sane experiment, may be given here, as theories
count for less than actual facts. Twenty-five years
ago two writers of unusually sensitive temperaments,
when entering that bond of matrimony which so


often ends in disaster, decided, like Godwin and Mary
Wollstonecraft, that they would not always dwell
together in the same house, in order to escape the
usual fate of boredom or indifference observed
amongst so many of their friends. In fact, they
resolved to ignore tradition and make only one vow
on their wedding day, the vow of the lovers of to-
morrow. They simply promised never to deceive
one another. The man and woman are economically
independent of one another, and in all external
matters have behaved as true comrades or business
partners would do. In their approaching old age
they contemplate living side by side as a natural
outcome of their experiment. The gossips, of
course, have been busy, and the experimentalists
have had their personal difficulties. No artist in
any path of life can arrange his pictures, his music,
or his books without smudges, discords, oblitera-
tions, and additions. It is only the amateur who is
content with a rough draft. If in the end, however,
some slight blow is given to the slavery of women
and the traditionalism of men, any struggle or suffer-
ing in experiments is not in vain.
As a matter of common observation it is good for
some women to live alone, and for some men also.
It may be better still for many men and women to
live in a domesticity which allows of little separa-
tion, and to blind themselves to possible episodes or
train themselves to stoically endure few or constant
moods, tempers, indifferences, or " naggings." It is


best, however, for complex or artistic temperaments
to face the fact that the wreckage in marriage is
more marked and more tragic amongst artists of all
kinds than in other classes of life. One reason for
this is the very fact that artists are more often at
home than business men and women. Their time is
often at their own disposal and their incomes more
fluctuating than that of the average professional
class. Money cares soon turn sensitive brains into
incapacity, irritability, or worse. The imperative
need of the artist to be able to dream and work in
solitude is often an affront to the same woman who
would cheerfully make her husband's toast on going
to business in the early morning and have his slippers
warm on his return at night.
The story is worth noting of the man who twice a
week remained at his office very late until at last
the jealousy of his wife was aroused to such an extent
that a tragic scene took place. Gossips had done their
deadly work, and the woman's heart was sore and her
health impaired. In a rush of tenderness at last,
the astonished husband explained the whole matter.
He confessed that the strain of domestic cares, the
sight and sound of the woman he loved in distraught
moods and dowdy clothes, had driven him to stay
quietly in his office, at times, in order to dream of her
as he had wooed her and won her. His apparent
faithlessness was a frantic attempt to keep his love
unhurt by living in thought with the woman of his
dreams. This story is of course a novelist's inven-


tion, but bow true it is to life. Either on the woman's
or the man's side memories alone often satisfy that
craving for romance and idealism which domestic
life may hurt or destroy. A husband and wife can
be economically free and quite independent with
regard to external conditions, and yet interdependent
as far as love is concerned. Romance in married
life can easily outvie any romance outside it if Love
is always looked upon as a great adventure, as beauti-
ful, mysterious, apd awful as Birth or Death. The
egoisme a deux, the slavery to pots and pans and old
bedsteads and knick-knacks, the insistence on making
children the excuse for the keeping up of a prison-
house or a reformatory under the name of home, the
cowardice which prefers the good opinion of outsiders
rather than the inner sweetness of an evolved relation-
ship, are the elements which tend to hurt or destroy
marital love-life. If monogamy is to be the rela-
tionship of the future it will have to widen its doors,
subjugate its jealousies, and accept many modern
devices for spiritualising physical passion. By this
is not meant that the senses are to be depleted, but,
rather, enlarged and transformed. The lust of the
flesh will give place to the passion of the flesh, and
two made utterly one will not imply either rape,
gluttony, or personal absorption, but the using of
personal devotion for larger than individual ends.
In a noviciate for marriage, and in experiments after
marriage which are within law and order, many
nerve-wearing and heart-rending experiences might


be saved. In the relationship referred to just now the
husband and wife have each their own little home,
and visit one another whenever possible. Outside
friendships, diversity of interests, interchange of
daily letters, and varieties of occupation keep their
love life on a saner plane than would be possible to
some temperaments in the stress of daily domestic
routine. A stranger meeting these two people in a
railway carriage and hearing scattered bits of their
conversation inquired who they were. When in-
formed, the significant remark was: " Oh, no !
They could not have been married. He was much
too interested and polite."
Property in persons is near its doom. We are
still, however, obsessed with the idea that love is a
question of barter and marriage a matter of slavery.
Individualities count for more than public opinion,
and in fine morals freedom is the great opportunity
for fine action. When the artificial characteristics
of male and female drop away, and human beings
of both sexes are allowed the full liberty of their
personalities, marriage will become a sacrament
and cease to be a sacrilege. It will, under fresher
ideals, become an enlarging and not a dwarfing
of the life-forces. No price is too great to pay in
order to rid the world of prostitution and profligacy.
The remedy is constructive and the end is in view.
When men emancipate women, and women, in their
turn, cease to exploit men, and, above all, when
women learn a new loyalty to one another, the new


love will have its way at last. The materialistic
idea which supposes that no marital relationship
can be truly beautiful unless dependent on constant
bodily presence must give way to a new conception.
Proximity is not necessarily a part of faithfulness,
nor is a villa residence a necessity either for love's
development or for educing the finest elements out
of little children.
The man's age has led up to the woman's age,
and from that the child's age will evolve. The
veterans in the battle for the new civilisation can only
watch and warn; the actual co-operative fighters,
as evolved men and women, can only build the scaf-
folding for the new ramparts, and teach and protect
the best in the older schemes in education, Eugenics,
and sanitary defences, so that children may develop
and expand under few limitations. It will be argued,
of course, that under noviciates for marriage or semi-
detached marriages the children of the future will
run terrible risks. In the first place, illegitimacy
will increase, cry the nervous; and in the second place,
home life will be undermined, argue the orthodox.
By the present haphazard arrangements illegitimacy
is more likely to be encouraged than in the experi-
ments expressly ordained to avoid it. As for semi-
detached marriages, it is surely better for children
to realise the beauty of marital affection and parental
care under the best conditions, whatever they may
be, than under the worst environment if the tempera-
ments of their parents are not controlled. A child


never forgets the bickering scenes and discourteous
behaviour which in many average marriages take
place from morning to night as a matter of habit in
so-called happy homes. I know a woman whose
whole life has been more or less prejudiced against
men because of the scenes she witnessed from a cot
by her parents' side.
People who are brave enough to face their in-
capacities and to forge bad inheritances or weak-
nesses into some semblance of strength or beauty,
give to their generation quite as much as the strong
or the conventional. Surrender is not always loss
in the end. Holding fast to anything because of
fashion or prejudice does not invariably imply virtue.
To have the evolved conscience and the good intention
are the main things, and also a courage large enough
to ignore gossip, jealousy, malice, and envy. " Free
marriage," which is a happier title than the much-
abused term of " free love," as differentiated from free
lust, is surely a factor in the evolution of the love of
the future. Self-love and vanity so easily pass for
the genuine thing. The sign of true love is suffering
gladly accepted. Its triumph is often its apparent
failure. Complexities of relationship, the mixture
of the sexual and the sensuous so evident in men,
and the mixture of the sexual and the maternal
equally evident in women, added to the muddle-
headed so-called spiritual theories of latter-day
puritans, who declare that the senses should be
dwarfed instead of expanded, make it almost a


superhuman task to educate ourselves truly in the
art of love.
The experiments put forward are not advocated
as laws, but as tentative suggestions. Those who
can live happily without these devices, and those who
love too little or too much to need them, may be the
rule and not the exception. What one wants to
make clear is that a man and a woman who deliber-
ately, for some good and beautiful reason, do not
choose to live the average citizens' home-life with
regard to marriage and parenthood, should not be
looked upon as aliens or eccentrics. Those who find
their affinities in this life, as well as those who miss
them, need all the legitimate devices possible to
shelter love in a world given over to so much that
is cruel, commonplace, and crude. To combine
common sense with uncommon sensibility, in these
matters, is to aid in the evolution of the Love of
To-morrow. We must not allow ourselves to be
discouraged. All sincere feeling and experiment
pave the way for greater efforts. The failures of
one lead to the victories of another, and Love, with
bandaged eyes, is surely indifferent which of her
servants unties the knot, so that she may at last see
clearly.


MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE
" You see, I got a divorce from my husband last
month/' an American woman writes to me. " The
divorce was very friendly and a great relief, as you
can guess. He fell in love with his secretary, a nice
little woman, and when I found out I suggested that
he and I get divorced, so he could marry her. So
we planned it all out, and the lady came to live with
us during the winter and grew very fond of me and
lof her. She had never had any time to read —or
any one to tell her what to read—and I found her
delightfully receptive and appreciative of the best
things. Then her son, a boy of eighteen, joined us,
and he and I took a great liking to each other, with
the result that I've more or less adopted him, and
he has been living with us ever since. He's more
like my son than his own mother's."
Perhaps we shall get nearer a solution of the
divorce problem if we candidly acknowledge that,
just as in dealing with race problems we want a new
idea of international relationships, so in facing the
problem of marriage and divorce we need a new
view of marital life. James Hinton, in one of his
manuscripts, described our present way of living as
somewhat like that of a man who, finding certain
32


arches too low to allow him to walk upright, was
content, like an animal, to creep under them on all
fours. Surely the thing to do is to rebuild the arches
to the height of the men and women who demand
to walk upright. The time has come to educate
sanely, to emancipate woman economically, to purify
and yet enlarge love from a mere sex function into
a humanised spiritual function, and to minimise the
jealousy of women towards women, while at the same
time transmuting licence and lust into human love
and into a new romance in marriage and not only
outside it. To realise that deceit in love is the sin
against the newer vision of affinity and desire is also
of great importance. In this attitude it is possible
that marriage in the future may become a fine
domestic experiment in lovely living rather than
what Professor Michels calls it, " the tomb of lyric
love." A rational working out of a new inter-
dependence might thus be within the home what
amongst the nations would be termed real inter-
nationalism. Puritans often forget that the expres-
sions of love are individual and diversified, so that
even what we call sensual hunger may be diverted
or satisfied in very subtle ways if narrow domesticity
or insane jealousy do not bar the way. The economic
dependence of woman and the sexual gluttony of
man, the traditional but false idea that possession
in persons is legitimate instead of being regarded
as what it is—a theft and even, on occasion, a spiritual
murder —may gradually open the way to a saner and


cleaner enterprise in what may be rationally termed
a " free marriage" rather than the much-abused
term of " free love." This vital and complex re-
lationship, founded on a new insight into comrade-
ship, and marriage implying romantic devotion to
causes as well as persons, may lead towards
marital experiments in which laxity, cruelty, crudity,
jealousy, and domination will be conspicuous by
their absence.
It must be acknowledged that while we have
prostitution, secret unions, and divorce as every-
day occurrences, monogamy is still in the making.
Divorce to-day is often the only way of escape for
those who, through the iron chain of legal marriage,
are driven to become potential enemies instead of
being allowed to remain incompatible friends. Too
hasty marriages, made on a money basis or for family
and not love considerations, are not grafted on laws
of either affinity or common sense, but fettered by
worldly reasons. We cannot gauge the worth of
any institution if the members of it are not true
exponents of its vital laws. The law-breakers,
dilettantes, and profligates in marriage to-day are
blinding our eyes to the intrinsic worth of monogamy
and its romantic possibilities. Olive Schreiner de-
clares that divorce is what the crutch is to the cripple,
and that monogamy represents the true love-health
of the future. This, of course, can only be proved
as we experiment and as we advance.
A new view of sexual desire and also a wider


conception of maternity will help to bring both love
and parentage out of bondage into a refreshing free-
dom of thought and action. To be neither a slave
of desire nor an ignoramus in the art of motherhood
will, in any case, be to save and not to destroy.
Purity of sex vision being the basis of sex reformation
it naturally follows that a sane education should be
accompanied by equality of opportunities for both
men and women in civic life. This will bring about
the complete manifestation of the psychical and
physical in a balanced relation to one another, and
will culminate naturally in marriage so free and
human that the confession of ignorance and weak-
ness which divorce so often is, need not be necessary.
The refusal of divorce in the future will be as
stupid as stringent legislation against drink or opium.
When once human beings have been trained into a
rational love-life and into habits of joyfulness and
temperance neither restraint nor excess will destroy
the poise of personal development. People who
really " belong " to each other in the great law of
affinity rarely go through the mire of the divorce
court even if their relationship has ceased to be sexual
in the physical sense of the word. The fact that it
is almost considered an indecency for two who have
been divorced to even meet socially shows how in-
expedient it was that they ever became " one."
It seems impossible to dogmatise about divorce
until we have made a new statement about love.
While we are still arbitrarily insisting that physical


love and parenthood must necessarily function as
one, and also forgetting that spiritual children and
spiritualised passion are becoming more and more
evident in evolved marriages, we are apt to insist
on easy divorce as a substitute for rarer matings
where souls and bodies are not so easily divided by
either Church or State; the newer aspects of love
and passion include so much forgotten or never
realised in the average commandments of the moralist
of the past. The attitude of women to each other
is gradually changing from the hat-pin frenzy of
wanting to kill what threatens their absorbing sexual
gluttony. Their new loyalty to one another is slowly
manifesting in a deeper and more beautiful realisa-
tion of the interdependence and beauty of friendship
and love between, not only men and women, but
women and women and men and men. The day is
surely coming when the evolved woman will no
longer be happy shut up like a broody hen in her
home, while her sisters lack opportunities for full
development. The laws of affinity make no conces-
sion to the side issues of divorce. The rules of ex-
pediency, in however advanced a civilisation, will
probably allow divorce until parents, educationists,
law-makers, and prophets have brought into homely
life the realisation of a new love needing neither
chains nor laws, divorce nor punishment, but only a
wider horizon wherein desire may use its wings m a
free sky.
The modern woman's attempt to rid love of


parasitism and sex obsession may be as holy a way
for the gaining of life's larger ends as is now the sacri-
fice of the average woman for her exclusive mate
and child. Perhaps one of the most pathetic facts
of modern life is that those of us who have found
out some of Love's newer meanings by daring to live
them, hide the beauties of the new expression and
experiment through fear of those who have not out-
lived the vulgar lusts of the flesh and the fierce desire
of absorbing possession.
Free marriage, in a clean and beautiful sense, is
giving even now the death-blow to irrational and
joyless prostitution as well as to torpid domesticity.
The domestic horizon is slowly widening and love is
tentatively reaching out to its own, and in that in-
timation is the certainty that in the future civilisation
divorce will be the acknowledgment that haste and
worldly considerations are, still, more in evidence in
those who seek its aid than educated emotions.


EUGENICS AND THE MYSTICAL OUTLOOK
MEN have accentuated for generations, almost as
dramatists accentuate passion, the masculinity of
healthy manhood, and women have minimised or
caricatured the sexual instinct which in normal
womanhood is neither a frigidity nor an obsession.
If sex relationships to-day are assuming different
manifestations, both in so-called normal and in
abnormal relationships, it is time we faced the matter
as scientists, humanitarians, and lovers. As Havelock
Ellis declares: "We must improve our knowledge if
we wish to improve our morals/' The mass of books
thrown upon the market to-day, which are supposed
to enlighten us on sex problems, more often than
not either confuse, through their sentimentality and
puritanism, or run to the opposite extreme in exagger-
ating physiological needs. The developed human
being demands a new gospel and a new epistle on this
great human fact of sexual life. According to in-
dividual inheritance or through the type of early
education, or by the restrictions or liberties of legis-
lative conditions, as well as through a finer balance
of health, mentally and physically evolved types of
human beings are appearing, hitherto rare in the
38


world's history even as saviours or seers. Masculinity
and femininity are emerging into a new humanity,
which as yet is not fully aware of its own immense
possibilities. When these evolving people have their
chances for fine loving and fine living,—partly through
new laws, eugenic or merely civic, and partly through
finer economic conditions as well as through the
interdependence of man and woman, —we shall be able
to estimate more accurately the true meaning of the
sex function. That function is still so often a farce,
a bargain, or a vulgarity rather than a great spiritual
enterprise, having results for the individual and the
State which are both educative and far-reaching.
Think for a moment of the ordinary sexual life of
to-day ! The paralysing commercialism of prostitu-
tion, the parasitism of women, and the sexual gluttony
of men and women alike, added to the no less stulti-
fying narrowness and jealousy which form so often
a part of virtuous homes, make legitimate mating an
enterprise almost as dangerous as war, and turn
illegitimate episodes into sly romances, with their
aftermath of terrible suffering. Vulgarity, deceit,
jealousy, and the disloyalty of women to women too
often make ugliness, sorrow, and despair the atmo-
sphere of a function which has in it both human and
divine far-reaching possibilities. We need courage,
sanity, and cleanliness within our hearts in order to
face this matter, and then to dare to live out what
we know as evolved humans. To-day we are content
to live under a code more fit for grinning satyrs than


civilised men and women. Realisation of joy and a
sense of humour, rather than an abject sense of sin
or a puny sense of virtue, will gradually restore our
common sense if we face facts as children of light
rather than imps of darkness.
Through a new education of sex, through scientific
knowledge and human understanding of the laws of
love, of life, and of affinity, and also through sane
experiments as a result of this knowledge, we may
gradually arrive at the point where we may dare to
pass eugenic laws, founded on an understanding of
spiritual laws. When love is not complicated with
property, slavery, or one-sided legislation, we may
reach a sane recognition of what sex really is, and
attack the evils surrounding it to-day at the root,
and not merely be content to snip at the leaves and
branches. First of all, we must surely cease to
regard sex as a mere animalism, a confusion, a
madness, or even as Nature's only way of manifesting
her new revelations of creation. She has as many still-
births on the mental plane, and as many cripples
on the moral plane, and as many fine children on the
spiritual plane as those with hands and feet. The
production of a beautiful work of art may be as fine
a manifestation of love as a fat crowing baby made
on eugenic laws, which laws are liable to become
rigid and material instead of fluid and spiritual.
To learn to understand the inner secrets of both
desire and restraint is to enter a new world of passion
and parenthood.


Our own ignorance of our natures often alarms
us, and so in a sort of wild apology for it we are in
danger of maintaining ancient and out-worn laws,
which, if literally carried out, might hinder the new
mystic outlook. The modern teachers help us to
combine physiological sexuality and spirituality in
a harmonious perspective. They will also enable us
to see that it is a lack of humour to imagine that
the dangerous people are all locked up in mad-houses,
or that the unusual and so-called criminal types
need only eugenic laws or prison handcuffs to render
them harmless to the community.
The whole attitude of the scientific educationist
to-day is towards eliminating the unfit and encourag-
ing the fit. To prevent some from propagating
and to encourage others, and, at the same time, to
approach questions of passion and maternity in
the light of cold science and without conventional
prejudice is no light matter. To weigh, by the
standard of our reason, and of our ideals, who shall
be born and who shall be deprived of the power of
reproduction is one of the most difficult problems
of modern times. The dangers of interfering with
Nature's purpose, which purpose may possibly
include eccentricities and designs beyond our finding
out, are many. Only the scientist of limited vision,
and the doctor who pins his faith on mere knife and
drug, dare approach such a vast problem undisturbed
and undismayed. Love and parenthood, hitherto,
have taken their lucky or unlucky chance in the


matter of breeding. The great laws of affinity and
the apparent accident of right environment have
often checked some of the deplorable results of reck-
less gambling with Nature's forces. If we introduce
large and sound ideas in the carrying out of eugenic
practices, the loveliness of love and the inner mean-
ing of parenthood may slowly evolve, and Dame
Nature get her chance to interpret herself through
all her children. Nature has not told us many of
her secrets yet, and probably Eugenics may be one
of the means she will employ to open our eyes a
little wider.
Our object surely is not only to limit the pro-
duction of the unfit, but to get the best results out of
those in the community who are a bewilderment to
the State and who seem unfitted from a eugenic
standpoint to propagate. Consider the neurotic and
the abnormal, for instance, and also the sane members
of insane families. How can we secure that there
shall be no waste or ruin for their special powers of
work for the race ? It is surely an accepted fact that
many of the most capable people are neurotic or ab-
normal. Not only modern life proves it, but history
accentuates it, and in the field of art, as in music
and the drama, we find the problem in various forms.
According to the severe code of some eugenists,
not only an Oscar Wilde, but a Michael Angelo, a
Nietzsche, a Chopin, a Tchaikovsky, a Blavatsky, a
Rosa Bonheur, a William Blake, and a Mrs. Eddy
stand in the same class of the neurotic or the abnormal,


to say nothing of a vast mass of less distinguished
people. Is it not a part of Eugenics and a part of
religion to indicate to these people how they can
directly aid the improvement of the race—in other
words, to turn them into allies instead of ostracising
them into rebels ? The best citizen is surely one
who produces, from personal emotion, the finest
results for the whole community. It is our duty as
advanced citizens to see to it that equality of oppor-
tunity for this end is given alike to the normal and
abnormal men and women in our midst. Often by
a stupid, vindictive, or conventional attitude towards
what we do not understand we waste or ruin powers
which could otherwise have helped the world, and
at the same time produce, through our materialistic
and bigoted attitude, much personal suffering.
As eugenists or as mystics it must be of vital
importance to us that we educe from every indi-
vidual, whether he be a Titian or a Sandow, or even
an apparent criminal, the best that is in him. We
must give him hope to live and enable him to forge
his passions into power here and now. Ignorance
and conventional theories, in and out of doctors'
consulting-rooms, paralyse more creative force than
we are prepared to admit. It is necessary that our
doctors and eugenists should not look upon people
only from the point of view of aptness or inaptness
for physical procreation, and praise or condemn them
accordingly.. To obtain the very best results accord-
ing to the hope of Eugenics, is surely to use, and not


to abuse, or debase, or hurt, or discourage, any impulse
or power in a human being which can be made into
use or serve the whole community. The mixture
of prudery and cant which so often assumes the
name of Purity, but is as far from it as stubble is
from grass, confuses the wise and ignorant alike in
this matter, and may even actually destroy what
we are trying to bring into the world.
The attitude of the average man of to-day towards
sex is still primitive, rank aggressive, dangerous, or
weak. He uses sex as he plays billiards, or as a bull
would approach desire in the cattle-pens. Sex has
degenerated so much into a mere pleasure function
that to-day it is not the great force which it might
be if it was subservient to the new conscience directed
towards wider than mere personal aims. Sex, under
a new vision of its intrinsic value, will in the future
be able to create, not only physical children, but even
Edisonian or other inventions for the amelioration
and the joy of the human race. Men, less than
women, have scarcely yet discovered that sex is as
much an affair of the soul as of the body.
To woman, under her habits of fear and tradition,
sex is too often associated with hypocrisy, humilia-
tion, and a necessity to use her body as a lure to
exploit men. She often tries to crush her fine in-
stincts in order to please man, or she becomes a prude
in order to please herself, and so flings the one she
thinks she loves, and herself she thinks she under-
stands, into debauches or episodes through sheer


boredom or self-righteousness. Yet the finer type
of modern woman —half mystic, half mother, with
her reverence for sex and her desire for life equally
balanced —is becoming more in evidence year by
year.
The tyranny of legislation often intensifies the
evil it is the wish of ardent law-makers to dispel.
A Church, on the other hand, founded, not on Christ's
human and tolerant attitude towards sex, but focused
on the bitter and one-sided statements of St. Paul
and of the ascetic Fathers, has all through the
centuries accentuated the crudities and the cruelties
taught in the name of God without reckoning with
God's ally, Mother Nature. The Christian disciples
have dogmatised on the flesh until they and their
followers have at last seen only corruption in it.
Those of us who know the flesh to be as good a
medium for manifesting the spirit as flowers for
conveying sweet odours, cry in anger and despair,
" To the pure all things are pure, and to the puritan
all things are impure."
It is the waste of time involved in wrestling with
the complexities brought about through our wrong
attitude towards sex which is so lamentable. To
approach sexual passion as a menace rather than as
a spiritual meaning brings upon all its manifesta-
tions the limitations of the police and the prison.
There is nothing we could not be or do if, instead of
degrading the sex function into dirt, we realised it
as divine fire. Laws to-day on these questions are


chiefly swaddling bands, and moral dogmas generally
work out as dull despotisms. We need to become
clean and clear and courageous. The little good we
know about these great matters we must radiate
from our personalities and live in our lives. It is
useless any longer to limit or to destroy. We must
widen and uplift through a fine passionateness and a
spiritual daredevilry. Sex is not a mania. It is a
mysticism. The saints evidently never found this
out and the sinners, if they know it, evade the in-
evitable logical conclusion in case they have to
associate with the frosted hypocrites who call them-
selves the virtuous. Even the mother-bird seems
more capable of realising the loveliness, of sex and its
mysticism than most of our moralists and our law-
givers. It is time our mothers, our school teachers,
our doctors, and our clergymen taught from morning
to night that function on the sex plane is no more
disgusting than function on the hunger or thirst
planes. If it is, for Heaven's sake let us stop be-
getting to-morrow. To the poet and the mystic,
love, in every one of its manifestations, has all the
possibilities of making earth into heaven here and
now. Why ? Because purity can never only be a
question of the flesh any more than the song of a
canary can only be a question of its cage. In the
near future the average sexual relationship of men
to women to-day will be looked upon with as great
an aversion as that for which Oscar Wilde was
crucified. For Oscar Wilde was a martyr to un-


scientific legislation. He was not responsible before
Heaven's tribunal as many normal men and women
are to-day for their consciously gross sins against
both Nature and Love. Wilde's mother had for nine
long months, before he was born, prayed continually
for a girl. Her imagination dwelt upon this during
nearly all her pregnancy. That her prayer was
partially granted in that perplexing mixture of
artist, man, woman, and egotist the world knows
as Oscar Wilde was perhaps one of Nature's satires in
order to show what we do when we force, through
our limited laws and barbaric persecutions, these
peculiar people into becoming menaces to the State
through lack of capacity either to understand them
or to educate them. After all, the universal scheme
may have ulterior ends to serve in producing, through
the primitive function of sex, giants or pygmies who
have possibly a sacred place in the human scheme.
Even in abnormality, in its congenital manifestations,
Nature may have a meaning as definite in her uni-
versal purpose as the discord is in music to the
musician.
We curse and kill the so-called abnormals when
they transgress what we are pleased to call the moral
law, but what of the normal and self-righteous
amongst us, who, within the law of wedlock, indulge
to excess or restrain to extinction ? Are we not
often uncaught criminals under the cloak of our
legalities and moralities ? Are there not as many
sexual burglaries done in the name of the Church


and the State, on the honeymoon, as in the kitchens
and boudoirs ? Are there not as many spiritual
murders accomplished under the name of virtue
and prudence as in the lonely lanes and alleys ?
Every man who takes a woman against her will, in
wedlock or out, or who seduces her for his own
pleasure whether the law allows him or not, while
she is ignorant of the conditions, is inverting the
uses of humanised sex functions. Every woman
who surrenders to physical passion for ulterior
reasons, such as being supported economically, or in
order to rival another woman, is also inverting the
lovely and spiritual uses of sexual desire. To-day
man scarcely stops to woo, and woman is often a
damaged article in the spiritual, if not in the physical
sense, before she has had the time to consider or to
choose her mate. As Goethe found out long ago,
the law of affinity is as subtle and as tremendous as
the law of gravitation, and it is time we reckoned
with it when daring to put under legality the inner
forces of love and desire. By the wider and cleaner
laws of morality it will surely come to pass that the
stereotyped actions of desire may be seen to be the
very denials of spiritual verities. Often what we
count as vicious, or even abnormal or insane, through
the very fact of unusual suffering involved in it, or
of some new courage born of a rare vision of love on
a specialised plane, may be an aid to purity, rather
than a degradation. Eugenics, if not too narrow
in expression, can be amplified in its work by the


very people a too stringent legislation may turn into
menaces to the whole State. It is what we are, and
not what we do, which gives the world the fruit by
which we must ultimately be judged. What we
really want indeed is not so much Eugenics by legis-
lation, as Eugenics by education. The real material-
ism of this world is setting a limit to redemption.
Eugenic laws, if passed by those who have become
dehumanised, or who are slaves to property or com-
mercial considerations, may do as much harm as
good. Legislation is only an aid to a solution of
physical problems, not a final solution in itself. A
principle is always more than a law. Vital and
spiritual educators, who combine uncommon sense
with a fine spirituality, are the urgent need of the
hour. Law-makers must always remember that
education on right lines is better than punishment
on wrong lines later on, and that to over-emphasise
either the sentimental virtue or the gross vice of
the past is to waste time in gaining the balanced
morality of the future. As Havelock Ellis says:
" There are no quick cuts to the millennium." The
rapid passing of eugenic laws or the over-emphasis
of legislation in any form, until our human and
scientific knowledge is more profound, may possibly
hinder what we want to bring about. The ostracism
of the so-called bad in favour of the so-called good,
and the digging and delving at prostitution as the
whole root of the social evil, instead of realising it as
one of the manifestations of the wrong view of sex,


and also a result of economic pressure, but above all,
as the signal of the social ignorance of the whole
community, is a sign that we need a new vision of sex
and an all-round education in the arts of both living
and loving. A new economic, civic, domestic, and
passionate expression of human life must give to
Mammon the things which belong to Mammon, take
from man the things which he has stolen from woman
and render to her the things which are clearly hers.
The eugenic measure which would dwarf legislation
into nothingness would be the universal refusal of
women to surrender their clean bodies to diseased
or unclean men, or, for any reason, economic or
emotional, which implies barter or sensuality. Passion
is a pure dynamic force and cannot any longer
be wasted on gluttons or gamblers. Lust is as dull
as gluttony. Woman in the future is to be the high
priestess of sense and not the victim of sensuality.
Her love in the near future will be the reward of those
who think finely, who love beautifully, and who live
joyfully.
When at last we realise that the uses of the flesh
are not for destruction and folly, but for the manifesta-
tion of a more splendid citizenship through the clean
and ardent love of those who are really mated in
body and soul, we shall be beginning to understand
sex in its finer sense. It is well to remember, during
our most practical occupations in the schools, in
the wards, and even in the kitchens, that there is no
kingdom in heaven which cannot prevail upon earth,


and that our bodies are not sewers but temples of
the Holy Ghost. Only a new view of sex and nature
through science and art can raise Christianity from
the death to which its mistaken followers have nearly
consigned it. Science and art alone to-day can
prove that bodies and souls are not enemies, but
mates of the road, and that a modern sin is to try
to function one without the other.
We must learn to trust new spiritual intuitions,
while organising a new love world. The thought
must rule the senses and not the senses the thought.
Laws must be widened to serve the spirit and not the
spirit dwarfed to an expression confined by mere
legislation. To hold on to the old rigidities of
tradition without changing, or to change one's moral
outlook without holding on to the eternal spiritualities,
is out of the order of the new ideal. If for fifty
years we could consider sex expression as a soul
expression, instead of a body expression as hitherto,
what wonderful children of soul and body we could
bring forth ! Once, we really believe that women's
souls cannot be sacrificed for the mere affair of men's
bodies, or spiritual purity be sacrificed for sexual
impurity, we shall at last arrive at a sane view of both
sex and Eugenics. We shall look at these things
from the innermost, rather than from only an external,
view of sex in its relation to human life.
Sex to men, hitherto, has so often been an episode,
a partial hunger of the body, appeased too easily or
too grossly and so treated lightly. To woman, even


in the courtesan and the prude, it has been, and is,
more or less a hunger of their soul as well as of their
body. " Women's souls more than their bodies want
to breed." Both conception and birth have their
mystic message in woman from her head to her feet.
She always craves an affinity as well as a father for
her child, and finds so often, in responding to a man's
physiological demand, only an intensification of her
real sex hunger. More often than not, through his
only partial comprehension of her nature, he dis-
organises the harmony of her being, and gives the
physicians she consults a problem to deal with which
neither Eugenics alone, or drugs alone, can solve.
Few men or women to-day realise what is the matter
with them, and so rush in terror and despair to make
new fetters through the law, as schoolmasters invent
new punishments for their pupils. The laws of love
are as little understood as the laws of music or painting
by the average person, and yet they are as tremendous
in their action and reaction as the laws of gravitation.
The technique of the body must be taught, and also
its interdependence with the soul. Not only are the
arteries and the nerves and the cells of the body to
be understood in their relation to one another, but
the mystic laws of repulsion and attraction and the
interplay of passion and desire, as well as of love
and fulfilment. The artist in love knows how to save
for great issues or to spend recklessly for joy and
restoration. In order to explain to a child or to a
generation the difference between the use and the


abuse of the body and the inner mysteries of con-
ception and birth one must have been reborn one-
self through both pleasure and pain—reborn into an
atmosphere where sex is both sanity and beauty, and
not a shameless intensification of savagery like the
newest gun is to-day in warfare. It is in a new
vision and in a sane education, combining the facts
and fancies concerning the new world and the old,
that the fuller and sweeter and deeper sex comrade-
ship is to emerge. We are so anxious to legislate
for the limited and savage appetite which we think
is a final manifestation, instead of an evolving sexual
force combining the physical and the spiritual mani-
festations of a new order of life—a life which is already
out of its childhood and in the stage of its first crude
youth. The development of virtue apparently having
vicious results and the practising of vices which often
seem to gather, through their apparently anti-social
manifestations, some of Nature's curious secrets, in
spite of her antagonisms to her Judas children,
bewilder priests, doctors, and law-makers. In frantic
terror, we make more laws and manufacture more
hypocrites. We punish where we ought to educate,
and restrain where we ought to unfetter. The
evolved human being lives ever beyond laws, as the
unevolved man and woman lives ever below them.
It is not out of new laws but out of new visions that
the fuller life will emerge.
James Hinton voiced a great truth when he de-
clared that the power of a woman's body is no more


bodily than the power of music is a power of atmo-
spheric vibrations. The first men and women who
really believe that and act on it in an esoteric appli-
cation to sexual problems of both normality and
abnormality will create a new heaven in this decadent
earth of ours. When pleasures are looked upon as
incidents and not ends, and love is seen as a mingling
of ardent desire and universal service, we shall have
no need of Eugenics; for then love will literally
be the fulfilling of law, combining in one balanced
expression the mystical and the physical, which are
not two but one.


EUGENICS AND SPIRITUAL PARENTHOOD
THE study of Eugenics, a comparatively modern
aspect of a great scientific problem, fascinates us,
because it seems to offer a promise of the improve-
ment and happiness of the human race. The mean-
ing of Eugenics, according to the definition accepted
by the Eugenics Education Society, is the study of
all agencies, under social control, that may improve
or impair the racial qualities of future generations.
In other words, it is the science of good physical
breeding. One of the chief points in the great circle
of women's progress is for women to realise that,
in them, lies the responsibility for the health and the
sanity of the nation through their refusal to add to
the misery of the world by bringing into it human
beings who are badly handicapped even before birth.
The consumptive, the epileptic, the feeble-minded,
and the insane, under the code of the eugenist, will
not propagate their kind. In order to attain this
object, not only religion, legislation, and Eugenics
must be brought to bear upon the problem, but a new
idealism, combining common sense and justice, must
be presented to abnormals themselves. This will
enable them to gain hope to live by forming under
55


wise guidance a rational standard of life which would
act finely through bringing joy to themselves and
react in willing service for others. It is as though
the emerald should say, in Marcus Aurelius's words,
" Whatever happens, I must be emerald." The
educationist of the future will help the legislator to
make the best use of what is congenitally character-
istic of a human being, and not insist upon the total
destruction of his natural characteristic abnormalities.
He will enable abnormals to use their peculiar forces
as a jeweller his emeralds, by encouraging society to
put them in a setting calculated to bring out a
splendour unlike diamonds, it is true, but with its
own definite radiancy.
What is to become of those, however, existing
to-day, who have been born and live outside the
cold laws of Eugenics, whose conduct and outlook
seem different from the codes of the educationist
and the religionist ? These people, who are a
danger to the State and a problem to themselves,
what word have they from the eugenist % lam
not speaking of the imbecile or the feeble-minded,
but of those whose mentality is often vigorous and
exceptional, and who have original powers of a high
order. These " peculiar people " are often ostracised
when recognised, and are often as much bewildered
about themselves as specialists are about them.
What has a eugenist to say to a class of people
definitely in our midst who are, from the point
of view of Eugenics, unfit to propagate and


who appear to the casual observer mere freaks of
nature ?
From a eugenist's point of view, persons unfitted
to have a child should be encouraged to devote their
energies to those ends which indirectly aid the higher
development, whether it be in the fields of art,
science, or religion. In this way, through the
understanding of their nature and their limitations,
and also through comprehension of the varied needs
of a complex society, from a eugenist's point of view
these persons might doubly bless what, otherwise,
they might curse, the future generation. In Dr.
Ewart's extremely interesting paper published in
the Eugenics Review some time ago, on " The In-
fluence of Parental Age on Offspring," he said that
there are two methods by which the ideals of the
eugenist may be attained, each of which has a
sphere of usefulness in our efforts for the common
weal. The first has for its object the improvement
of the breed, and the second has for its object the
making the best use of what we possess, under the
present conditions. It is not only as enlightened
eugenists that we should ask these people, or compel
them, to restrain from physical propagation, but we
should show them how to stimulate, through their
work, the ideals of those who are physically equipped
for race production, and so indirectly affect unborn
generations. The work of the eugenist is not only
to prevent the waste and ruin of lives, but to help
and to stimulate existing powers, however curiously


manifested, into channels of service and joy. It is
surely as necessary that doctors and eugenists should
understand something of the laws of attraction or of
inversion as that they should understand the virulence
of syphilis and the ravages of consumption. It is
not only the abnormal by any manner of means who
need guidance and warning about these subtle
dangers. As many sins against great underlying
laws of affinity are committed in legal marriage as
in the ranks of those we designate as abnormal.
Eugenists tell us that it is not good that epileptics
and consumptives breed, but do they also tell us
that it is not only not good but evil that people,
however normal and healthy, should breed if their
union is a cold sensuality or a mere legal bargain ?
When we consider these matters, we realise
that it is very necessary to combine ideals with
Eugenics, or we may stand face to face with the
fact that a child born outside the mere code of
Eugenics and in the realm of passionate love may
bid fair to improve the race, more than one born
true to the letter of rational breeding, and yet
outside that world of mutual love and psychic har-
mony which is the greatest hope, not only for
Eugenics, but for the perfection of the human race.
Good sinews and muscles do not always or necessarily
indicate that impulses are generous or hearts tuned
to bravery and purity. A perfect body is not
necessarily a perfect equipment for a divine essence,
unless mothers, doctors, and schoolmasters combine


to educe the more complex personality out of the mere
primitive savage. It is a well-recognised fact that
often cruelty and callousness co-exist with robust
health, and that sympathetic understanding and
tenderness are more often than not associated with
delicacy of constitution. Invalids, criminals, and
abnormals as well as the robust must be given the
chance to satisfy their hunger to create. There are
surely as many spiritual children in the world as
physical ones, and there are as many miscarriages
and still-births as in normal parenthood. Our prudish
cruelties, our lack of humour and imagination, our
fetish worship of crudities and mock moralities, our
terror of bogies, and our ignorance of our individual
natures make many of us blundering midwives who
actually destroy what we are trying to bring into the
world. The abnormal has such horror for us, and our
dread of being associated with it brings such odium
and fear in our minds, that we ignore again and again
a problem which is becoming more and more im-
portant to face, as it affects the health and the well-
being of the whole community. It is time we gave
not only a word of warning but also a word of help
to the class of people we designate as abnormal.
In the vast scheme of the world it may not greatly
matter whether the result of love be a healthy baby,
a fine score of music, a beautiful work of art, or
a scattering of vitality and joy amongst others.
Perhaps it is a somewhat daring statement to make
when I say that no true abnormality exists that


cannot be converted into power if conditions and
environment give it a chance. I say " true ab-
normality " advisedly, for mock abnormality is a
great danger to the [State, and it is a growing one.
By mock abnormality, I mean an attitude towards
passional experiments and episodes outside normal
lines merely of self-gratification. Indulgence for
the sake of indulgence, either in the ranks of the
normal or the abnormal, is, in the light of modern
ethics, a shame and a disgrace, and it is the nearest
approach to sensual sin we can imagine. All shams
not only block out realities but waste energies. Real
abnormality is neither a shame nor a disgrace, but a
problem to be reckoned with and tested by one fact
and one only—its result on the individual and on the
whole community. Here, at any rate, it is "by
their fruits ye shall know them/' for we do not gather
grapes from deadly nightshade, but from a pruned
vine.
Science and love have proved that there are, and
always have been, men who have the souls of women,
and women who have the souls of men. This is the
true abnormality. The thing is as much a fact as
that the purple hyacinth and the harebell occasion-
ally bear white flowers. However much learned or
ignorant people call abnormality a disgrace, or a
hideous disease, the matter faces us day by day.
The fear of it prevents us from understanding the
problem. We shirk the consideration of its good
or evil effects upon the community, and only close


our eyes and wring our hands in horror and con-
demnation. Condemnation is the attitude of the
ignorant or the cowardly. If abnormality is sheerly
evil, it is time that Religion and Eugenics took it
up and helped to ostracise it. If it is merely a
problem, and possibly an aid to Eugenics itself,
through its tendency to eliminate the unfit, this is
surely another reason for studying it, not only from
a eugenic point of view, but from an ethical point of
view. At the time of the Oscar Wilde trial I asked
a Cornish doctor what ought to be done with such
men. The answer was brief and virile. " Shoot
them at sight, or lock them up for life." " They
never asked to be born," I said; " they are what
they are—what can they do ? " He glared very
fiercely at me for forcing what he considered was the
only answer. "Do % Do ? " he said; " Good God !
Are there not women enough on our streets ? " His
answer went direct to the woman's heart in me.
That this man, a doctor and a healer, had no answer
for the invert except death, imprisonment, or the
ruination of us women, has left me pondering to this
moment. I wondered how many intelligent people
would give me some such startling reply, and I set
upon a voyage of discovery. I have rarely had an
approach to a rational facing in this matter. Doctors
attack abnormality, for the most part, with bromides,,
hypnotism, conventional advice, and platitudes. To
persons of this kind, perplexed and bewildered about
their own nature, it is no help and a great danger


to be told it is a " disgusting disease/' " incipient
insanity/' or " abhorrent and unpardonable." To
be induced to enter a loveless marriage as a cure,
which is so often the conventional advice, is to twice
curse—to curse the partner in the fraud, and their
offspring. The great immoralities of the race often
spring from following such so-called " moral " advice.
Such advice is against the aims of Eugenics, because
these people are, in most cases, entirely unfitted to
become the parents of future generations. The
advice given by doctors on these matters is often
only a sop to convention or a mask for ignorance. I
have known a rare nature turn from such advice,
coupled with stern platitudes about morality, and
go from the consulting-room to suicide as a better
solution; and I have known others, of tougher, coarser
fibre, " go to the dogs," as they expressed it, rather
than seek more help from prudery and convention.
The religious people are often great censors through
their traditionalised attitude. The first aid to a
cure is to understand and then to advise without
condemnation.
There is surely a place in the great scheme of
things even for the abnormal man and the abnormal
woman, but it is not an .easy place. Possibly it is
a very high place : the place of clean living and re-
nunciation. Under the highest laws of both Love
and Eugenics I feel its place is one of spiritual parent-
hood. Neither bromides, loveless marriages, nor
asylums will cure congenital inversion. The real


invert is an invert from his birth to his death. This
is the opinion of most competent scientific authorities.
The pretence of it, and here lies the great danger to
the State, can be cured by marriage, eased by bro-
mides, trained into control in asylums, and influenced
by all the arguments of Religion and Eugenics. The
test of the value of an abnormal relationship is
whether it cheapens love in any shape or encourages
any form of prostitution. Abnormality is, then,
productive of vice, as normal actions also are on
such lines, and legislation must do its best and its
worst with the offenders in each class. Hurried
drastic legislation, however, by the terrified about
what is not yet even classified as normal or abnormal
will only increase social evils. I am not at the
moment dealing with vicious pretenders, though even
these must be treated in the light of modern merciful-
ness and understanding. It is with a different order
of " peculiar people " we find the worst tragedy.
The true invert, though often not a criminal in any
real sense, is an alien amongst normal people. He
realises that he is the gipsy, the outcast, the sufferer,
and it lies with him whether he can also be one of
the redeemers of the race. Society does its best,
through its distaste for him, to thwart this greater
purpose for which he may possibly exist.
This is not a plea to glorify the invert, but to under-
stand him and to put him in his place in relation to
Religion, Eugenics, and Ideals. The normal, so far
as we know anything, is the true harmony in nature,


and the invert is the seeming discordant note. But
in music the discord has its place. Without it,
should we . get the perfect harmony ? It is pos-
sible that inversion and genius have some sort of
affinity. They certainly both tend to belong to the
neurotic group. Are we, then, to condemn both
genius and inversion at sight and make laws for their
crucifixion, or are we to find out the special laws
and meaning of these forces in the evolution of the
world ? Both genius and inversion are capable of
being forged into powers instead of remaining
menaces, if they are rightly approached and under-
stood. A tolerant and sane attitude towards the
question of inversion might make an abnormal person
a veritable Knight of the Grail, while ostracism and
intellectual brutality might turn him into a criminal,
and the punishment possibly revert to the instigators
of the offence. The laws of retribution are more
stringent than we dare or care to acknowledge. Our
work is first to learn tolerance about this matter,
then comprehension, then to face comprehended
facts in order to weigh results on personalities and
communities. Rage, fear, vindictiveness, and ig-
norant prudery, which is half prurience, will settle
nothing, except that conventional morality draws its
victims more from the ranks of the abnormal than
from those of the normal. Nature is sometimes
grimly humorous about this matter. I have a
friend whose fierceness against everything abnormal
was at one time so great that I believe she would


have refused her friendship to one so constituted.
She married, and Nature gave her the problem to
solve in a child of her own. We do not all get
answered so curtly when we refuse to meet this
problem tolerantly, but there is always the possi-
bility that the unexpected may happen, and facts
may push our theories into the background.
What has Eugenics, then, to say to the abnormal
person ? Surely this: Come and help us to solve
this vital question of the improvement of the race.
Add to our list of healthy physical children a list
of spiritual children. " I am what I am," should
be the true invert's motto ; but, added to this, he
should say, " And I refuse to pretend to be what
lam not." This is his challenge to Fate who made
him what he is, and to Nature who craves his help,
that he should refuse to be evil even if he is con-
sidered so. The congenital stamp on him must ensure
him living according to the highest he knows. So
that, even if he is only an apparent eunuch in the
courts of love, he may still shame those who have
merely learnt the crudities of desire.
The true invert, under Eugenics combined with
ideals, has to face either total renunciation of the
physical expression of love, or, if Fate send him a
true mate in the form of another alien, for in these
things affinity has its own laws and pure love can
be traced in strange hiding-places, then the bond
shall be as binding, as holy, and as set for splendid
social ends as the bond of normal marriage. There


is surely no other solution of this vexed question.
Any concession, any compromise with seduction, or
prostitution, or cheap physical expression, though
no worse in many ways in abnormals than normals,
but destructive in either, hinders the development
of true-love, and so the betterment of the human
race, which betterment should always be an outcome
of personal love. True love is the best thing in the
whole world, and if the invert is true to what ought
to be his ideals in this matter and refuses to cheapen
love on any side, he can thus join hands with the
eugenist, because their aims will be to diminish
unfitness and increase racial possibilities. There is,
in the meeting of the eugenist and the invert, an
apparently hard word for the latter. It is this:
Thou shalt not increase and multiply, nor shalt thou
concede in matters of desire to what is common,
average, or unclean. Spiritual parenthood must be
freed from deadly microbes and vicious tendencies,
even more than physical parenthood, for it is as
glorious a thing to give to the world as a child of
love, a work of art, as one with hands and feet.
As we do not understand abnormality as yet, and
as there is danger in its increase in a haphazard way,
the true invert must stand for the greatest ideal of
all. He must lay down his life for the world. The
true happiness of an evolved being is to do this.
To some it would be no effort, but before any one
has arrived at this stage of evolution, much suffering
has to be lived through. It falls to the lot of some


of us to know the secret lives and the struggles of
many who are in the temporary phases of either lust,
morbid asceticism, despair, or a vague longing to
be something other than they are. It is to these
hardly pressed students in the unravelling of personal
emotions that we must be ever ready to suggest
individual solutions on sound lines. To do this, one
must have left superstitions and trite condemnations.
This attitude does not imply laxity. On the con-
trary, there is no one so firm in good conduct as the
one who has ceased to condemn and can see all round
a given case. The sternness, if sternness there must
be, the truly tolerant person only keeps for personal
renunciation or self-control. The condemner is
nearly always nervous, envious, or secretly sinning.
The mystic is bent on sincerity and fine loving. Eear
and envy, with him, like lust and gluttony, have
been put by in the natural order as childish things.
Some of the best men and women I have ever known
belong to the " peculiar people," and to know their
intimate struggles and victories and even apparent
failures is a strange Pilgrim's Progress story which
would astound many who think they alone are the
Pure in Heart. We must always bear in mind that
the usual can be impure and the unusual pure. We
must remember that in the great roll-call, white will
not be called black or even grey, that all the Saviours
of the world have been aliens who would not have
been asked to sit even on the doorsteps of Respecta-
bility, that the best flowers spring from the best


manure, and that names destroy and spirits emerge,
while all lovely things are possible when Love leads
the way. We must give abnormal people a chance
to be their best—to live and to die for the race.
I have spoken especially of inverts because they
have been prominently before the public in latter
years, and because they form a very large class of
the abnormal. Exactly the same principles, however,
apply to other abnormal classes. There are many
forms of inborn perversion and abnormality, too
numerous to specify, of which this holds good. All
these classes are not fitted for carrying on directly
the ideals of Eugenics for race production, but they
can do so indirectly by moulding higher ideals and
by their own spiritual creations. It is surely im-
portant that none of us should hinder such a result
by a hardness of heart or a want of understanding.
Nature can revenge herself in subtle and terrible
ways for affronts to her children, and the maimed,
the halt, and the blind are as much her children as the
healthy romps, bullies, and other complacent dwellers
within her tents. Spiritual parenthood, then, must
suffice for these people, but they must remain true
to the laws of their own being and vision. This ideal
is by no means an easy thing, chiefly because, in a
great measure, we have put the whole question out
of any decent court. The eugenist must help this
matter by showing, as I have already indicated, that
the wise thing to do with the invert is to let him
follow his own best ideals, rather than force him to


follow normal ideals for which he not only is not
fitted but which would cripple his special powers of
work in the eugenic fields of spiritual parenthood.
When the day comes, as it is surely coming, when
no part of the body is held in contempt or forbidden
its own particular service for the world, we may then
without absurdity speak of it as the temple of the
Holy Ghost. As things are, this temple might be a
common sewer made to hide unnecessary and un-
sightly things, or, at best, a suburban villa built to
crowd in it or on it what is superficial and inartistic
to the exclusion of beautiful realities. Physical
parenthood having become one with spiritual parent-
hood, and spiritual parenthood being acknowledged
as a manifestation of Nature's finest vibrations of the
body, we may thus doubly welcome Eugenics as the
helper of Love, Life, and Art in all their manifestations.


BLOSSOMING-TIME
IN the new civilisation experiments in evolved forms
of relationships, both in love and friendship, will be
inevitable.
If love is one of the chief arts of life, it follows
that a different education with regard to its fuller
development will sooner or later take the place of
haphazard methods for teaching children the truth
about their origin. It is in the very earliest years
that indelible images are printed on the mind.
Blossoming-time is the most precarious to the fruit-
grower. On it depends the harvest. Hitherto
parents have scarcely realised how to instruct their
children in the mysteries of sex, for the simple reason
that for the most part they have not known their
own natures or the subject of sexual life in its
relation to evolved conditions.
We are surely growing to realise that sex is not
merely an animalism, a confusion, a madness, or even
Nature's snare for gaining her own ends. Ethics
and Science are slowly proving that this combination
of physical, psychical, and spiritual manifestations
has underlying ulterior uses in the universal scheme.
The law of gravitation is not more definite or binding
TO


than the law underlying affinity or the attraction of
one personality to another. To imagine, when crude
youths and maidens feel the necessity to mate, that
then is necessarily the greatest wonder hour in their
lives, is to realise little about the mysteries and
inner meaning of love and desire. The art of love
and the mysterious workings of the law of affinity in
the spiritual and physical manifestations of mature
development contain romances of more immense
meaning.
When an artist begins a picture about which he
has dreamed, or a musician finishes a score he has
worked towards for months, the result in each case
is a slow evolution through trained experiments.
So it is with love. The lover of the future will be
trained as the artist is trained. Technique must be
thoroughly grasped by the would-be artist. Drudgery
in learning the use of knife, palette, and brush, the
blending of colours, the balance between restraint
and freedom in order to fit the length and width of
the canvas, the differentiation between light and
shadow, the true understanding of values, the right
use of detail, as also its abandonment, if necessary,
to gain a perfect harmony, as well as a comprehension
of the laws of perspective and sequence, mean, to the
true artist, years of unemotional training. When
" inspiration " comes, it will follow spontaneously
along the lines of beauty and knowledge because of
the prior training and control.
The laws of love, affinity, desire, passion, aban-


donment, and renunciation are as little understood
by the majority of people as the laws of painting and
music. From the nursery onwards every child should
be prepared for the moment of inspiration when
the Greater Life has need to manifest definitely
through the Lesser Life. Mere excitement and joy
in these great matters are the happy moments of
children. The artist of love must know the technique
of the body and the meaning of arteries, cells, nerves,
and muscles, and their laws of dependence and inter-
dependence. He must realise the interplay of the
passive and dynamic in human desire, and also what
to eliminate in emotion, as well as what to use or
conserve to the uttermost. To be a finished crafts-
man he must realise how to control or save in order
to spend recklessly and yet spiritually during that
divine riot when bodies seek souls in order to fulfil
Nature's strongest need. The nursery, the school-
room, and the workshop are all training-grounds for
understanding the art of love. Blossoming-time,
however, is the crucial time. The child who has
developed in an atmosphere of both knowledge and
purity, in spontaneous joy and natural expression,
through being initiated by those who are born and
trained lovers, has a defence against vulgar school-
time episodes or when later, in the streets, garbage is
offered as a false value in passion.
In blossoming-time the wise parents will train
the human being first and let the differentiation of
male or female slowly follow in order of gradual


evolution. The mother of fertile imagination will
soon find out whether to divulge the mysteries of
love and birth to her little ones through fairy tales,
science, or mathematics. The evolved woman, how-
ever, realises in any case that she must interpret these
facts to her child in some form of truth, however
fantastic or trite the medium may be. The stork,
the doctor's box, and the parsley bed are not only
stupid but dangerous fabrications. It is better for
a child to look upon its mother as the temple wherein
little warriors are manufactured than that later on
the mother should have to realise that she is being
summed up as a simpleton who either does not know
the truth or is afraid of it. The naked truth about
sex is too beautiful to distort, and the parents of the
future, having become new lovers and new mates,
and so understanding the secrets of affinity and
rebirth, will have got rid of the old shames and base
fears about processes which are at one with beauty
and order.
A child, from its earliest years, should be trained
into the knowledge of love as it is trained into the
knowledge of health. The average schoolboy thinks
of love as " rot " and speaks of it as he would of the
toothache. His attitude to girls is the attitude of a
young savage towards wild duck on the wing. The
average attitude of the girl is one of emotional
sentimental romanticism and hero-worship. Even a
little teaching in the matter of the division of bricks
and the realisation of the give-and-take as equal


comrades in games would modify and intensify, in the
nursery, relationships which may help to make or mar
the development of the future youth and maiden.
When a mother sees a child she has borne in the
first stage of inquiry as to how he got upon this planet
she generally evades the questions he asks. She does
this for two reasons. Her own initiation into the
mysteries of motherhood and fatherhood makes her
hesitate before plunging her child into vague or
troubled wonder about its origin. She cheats her-
self into the idea that ignorance is safety, forgetting
that what she refuses to divulge her nursemaid may
vulgarise or misinterpret. For parents to deal truly
and beautifully with the question of how an entrance
into life is made, they must be able in imagination to
become little children once more, and in the second
place they must be able to live in imagination in
that future stage of our civilisation when the mysteries
of love and birth are accepted in the same spirit as a
glass of pure water is enjoyed or the glories of sunrises
or sunsets absorbed. To explain to a child the sim-
plicities and intricacies of birth one must be able to
dwell in fairyland and hold a magic wand. Common
sense to a child is often sheer nonsense and uncommon
nonsense reality. Interrogative fever is as inevitable
in the nursery as other childish symptoms. The
mother must be well trained, scientifically and
socially, in order that she can answer in rhymes and
pictures the questions she is asked. A symbol is the
child's epistle, and the truth in that symbol his little


gospel. The link between mother and child makes it
possible for her to bare her intimate experiences by
turning them into fairy lore. The love of the child for
its mother makes it possible for it to penetrate into
mysteries first unconsciously realised at her breast.
To a true mother natural facts cannot but be lovely.
Interpreted in this spirit to her child they spell love.
The father's task is more difficult. He is more
modest because possibly less pure. He deals with
facts rather than with fancies, and facts to the child
mean dull lessons. The father would feel himself
ridiculous, like praying aloud, if he tried to explain
bald bodily functions in the terms of the nursery. He
merely coughs, and answers for his spouse : " Some
day mother will tell you. Go and play now." In
this way it nearly always becomes the mother's task
to meet or evade the inevitable question of " Mammy,
wherever did I come from, and how did you get me ? "
If the mother is wise she will, in Irish fashion, ask a
question at this juncture in order to gain time. I
remember, when I was a young governess, telling my
four little pupils to try and find out the meaning of
any word they were puzzled over before coming to
their daily lessons. My astonishment was great when
a mite of seven exclaimed one morning: " I can't
find 'dultery anywhere. Whatever is it ? " I was
nonplussed. My prudish training was no help to me.
I found I had no definition ready for children about
these matters. I asked a question to save time:
"Do any of you know ? " The brother of eight


answered glibly: " Why, of course. It's just lying
to your neighbour's wife." He had saved the
situation, and my gratitude to the innocence and
insight of a child was unbounded.
It is well to remember that a " trailing cloud of
glory," suddenly born into this world of flesh and
blood, cannot grasp earthly conditions or secrets for
some time. These conditions and secrets must be
presented in the terms of a possible different dimen-
sion or as near to it as human imagination can attain.
The world of wings, fairies, dewdrops, and flowers
is possibly nearer the understanding of a little pilgrim
who is learning to adjust itself to a new world and
trying to use new weapons than one wherein a mature
man or woman has become naturalised. Botany is a
wonder-world of suggestion from which to teach a
child of human earthly matters ranging from birth to
class distinction and snobbery. To enable a child
to understand the secrets the bee whispers to the
harebell, or to tell it the dire truth that some flowers
shun daisies as some foolish people shun beggars, one
must use facts as apparent fancies and fancies as
unforgettable possibilities. There is no natural fact
told simply and sweetly to a little child which can
shock it. It is the unnatural emphasis on a natural
process which bewilders and destroys. To take a
child into the home garden and answer its questions
about insects and flowers is to give its emotional
nature a bias towards sweet scents and charm and
deliciousness. In order to teach it the secret of eat-


ing beautifully for strength and joy in life one would
not take it to a butcher's shop and show it the ghastly
entrails and indecent corpses hung in a row like a blot
on modern civilisation. One would show it simple
food spread out with flowers and glass and linen as
part of its enticement and as an aid to digestion. The
mother who understands purely the matters per-
taining to her sexual life and that of her mate teaches
her child from whence it came and how it arrived by
holding the child close to her breast in the telling.
Her breast being an image of a world containing milk
for babes, rest for men, and succour for women, she
can make it a symbol of the sacrament of sexual life.
It is the magic globe from whence love, like a winged
bee, after sipping at her lips, has passed to the gates
of Paradise. At those gates, mothers and fathers
alike long for little sons and daughters, and their
prayer is often answered. This may make the child
croon, and he kisses his mother's lips, and is kissed
again by them, in a delirium of kicking rapture. Her
breast he knows as birds know their nests and bees a
rose. She lays the little head once more on it as she
approaches the holy of holies with half closed eyes and
tender touch, in answer to the sleepy " How does God
send them ? " Could she not answer from some of her
own girlish thoughts ? "If God had willed, my
little one, He could have blown you, like a pretty
bubble, from Mother's mouth, or let her breast open
like a rose in summer-time so that you stepped out
ready to robe yourself in flesh as now you put on your


tiny pants; but He knew Mother loved secrets, and
so He told a few of his easiest ones to Daddy and
Mammy, and through Daddy's strong love for her
and her tender love for him, you were put in a soft
wee bag right in the centre of Mother's body. Just
as you see the bee putting precious drops into the
centre of a flower, so love finds a way to bring little
babies into the world. Even Mother scarcely knew
the great secret until she began to feel you slowly
growing and growing within her, as you nestled, as
small as a pea-pod at first, under her heart. For nine
months she lived in the light, loving you though you
were in the darkness like a snowdrop in the earth wait-
ing for blossoming-time. She made a temple of her
body for your use, as she knew you had been allowed
to leave a fairyland of play and joy and music in
order to rest and grow at the same time in this secret
place near her heart, so that you could put flesh and
blood and bones and muscle upon the little gossamer
thing of spirit the pixies and fairies loved and love
still. You had to grow ribs, lungs, legs, arms, and
eyes and ears so that you could understand the new
world in which you would slowly become a soldier."
" A soldier ! " the child might ask; " I had to wait
then until I was borned, I suppose ? and were you a
soldier too ? " The mother's answer should always
gather round the image the child has prepared, what-
ever it may be. She might reply : " There is always
pain and blood and scars and deep cries whenever
there are soldiers fighting a battle for a new thing,


whether it is for a baby or for a nation. Babies
nearly break their mothers to pieces, like a butterfly
breaks its cradle in trying to be born and forgetting
it was once a caterpillar. Every one helps when they
hear the cries, because to get a new soldier into the
world is even more wonderful than to watch a blue
butterfly on red poppies or baby sister in her big bath
before the soap gets into her eyes and makes her cry."
There is no age at which children may not suddenly
surprise their parents by questions which demand
immediate answers. To put them off is to run a risk
of never hearing others. Beserve and shyness or the
wrong and hasty answer has often sent the little
seekers within themselves into that desolate region
of doubt and fear which is the bogy-land of child-
hood. A child should always be taken seriously,
however fantastic the solution may be which is
offered. A laugh, a sneer, a reprimand, or an im-
patient answer may cost the parent more than can be
realised at the time. A child's longing to know is a
guarantee of its right to know. Blossoming-time is
the best hour for revelations. Mothers are not only
the houses of Life, but the Holy Ghosts within the
gates.


LOVE AS A FINE ART
REAL lovers are as rare as real artists. Modern life
is full of enigmas, and Love flies before analysis. The
lover is born, some think, not made ; hence the
rarity of the true species. No, the lover is marred
through the mischances of his wrong education, his
haphazard experiences in the heyday of his youth and
tender idealism, and through the concessions to the
commonplace in his maturity. Love as an art never
enters into the educational methods or moral calcula-
tions of the schoolmaster or the parent. The latter,
if an average man, looks upon it as a thing to be
gone through, like measles ; if he is a poet or idealist
he knows from his own experience that Love is a
demon with ten thousand serpents in its trail, and
though in his heart he believes that its wings are
burnished gold and its eyes pure flame, he has sorrow-
fully to declare that the fools, dreamers, and madmen
who follow it as the first good in life are more or less
crucified or disillusioned.
Those who know the undercurrents of many lives
know that love or affection is as imperative as hunger.
Spirit and body, twins, and not, as some would have
us believe, antagonists, clamour for sustenance so
80


that through their individual and united fulfilment
they may bring peace and joy to the whole nature
of a man or woman. Only a happy person makes
others happy ; fulfilment is happiness, and to expend
joy and love is as imperative as to breathe if the
whole man is to be physiologically healthy. Why,
then, are real lovers so rare ? They are rare, as every
married woman whose lover has sunk into her mere
husband will tell us. The reasons are many, the
cure simple to tell, but in this transitional time diffi-
cult to do.
Love is not, should not be at any rate, merely a
sentimentality, a frenzy, an episode, or a physio-
logical function. It may be all these, but to be a fine
art (and that surely is what both life and love should
have become to us moderns) it must be much more.
An artist cannot rush at his picture in an inspired
moment, his mood the outcome of a blue sea and a
blue sky, soft warbling birds and the scent of spring
in the air. All depends on his training as to whether
he can really express himself. His values must be
right, his drawings accurate, his perception of tone
and colour trained through his past studies, else his
work is the work of a madman or a baby.
Yet, in just such a nonsensical way, do men and
women, when the love mood possesses them, ap-
proach love and —fail. The world, if it knows any-
thing of the emotional daub of their lives, pities or
grins; the woman and the man writhe at their own
mistakes and often have not the clear-sightedness,


the courage, or even the humanity to see what has
gone wrong. Love, being the first and sweetest
thing in the whole world, needs more perception and
artistic treatment than any other art in the world.
It must be an absorbing and ever-present essence,
and yet it must never monopolise or satiate its
possessor. It must bind itself only through its
freedom : it must abandon itself only through its
temperance. It must dare all things in order that
it may accomplish all things, and yet it " must not
hurry " for it must " have faith." It must, to use
Edward Carpenter's phrase in a special sense, " win
its freedom afresh every morning," even if it has
to mount Calvary before evening through its own
deeds.
Its very intimacy must be its own warning against
a too great familiarity, which often breeds not only
contempt but boredom. It must never refuse the
body its legitimate claims, lest by so doing it wars
against the spirit. It must never shut the doors of
the body against the spirit, lest by its slavery to
sense it loses its own essence. The lover learns
little by little the big secrets of life and love, and he
learns in the only way knowledge is of any use, by
experience.
Men and women fail to become lovers, as would-
be painters fail to become artists, because concentra-
tion, the perception of beauty, daily drudgery for a
definite end, renunciation of shams, tricks, and the
slavish adherence to the methods of others, need a


strong, clear perception and a trained and resolute
courage. To dare to be a true lover or a true artist
is to bid defiance to many conventional rules and
straitlaced pruderies ; it is to dare to be oneself
and to risk experiments. Rules are for babes and
sucklings; laws are probationary statutes fixed upon
a mere crude conception of strong forces beyond
our present perception, but as irresistible as
gravitation. Eternal laws work out slowly and
surely, and to transgress these even unconsciously is
to sin against the spirit as well as the body, and to
bring about the retribution which is a sure effect
following a cause. No one can advise another how
to love or how to paint. Individual temperaments
follow out individual lines—hence the originality of
character and of pictures.
But every art teacher can, in fact must, lay down
some " shalt not" about details, or good results could
never be arrived at. Any student of the human
heart knows well that, at different eras in the history
of mankind, different commandments are graven on
the mount by the new prophet who sees the new
vision.
In this transitional time we are in a quandary
about the emotions. Makeshifts are the order of
the day for the majority, and the poet and the
scientist sing songs and collect facts around the
hurly-burly we call love and marriage. Love as a
fine art is far from being the cult of the moment,
but its day is bound to come. The question is—How


is it likely to arrive ? That it will be a slow and
almost imperceptible change of ideals on the emo-
tional plane goes without saying : all great reforma-
tions arrive as results of apparently insignificant
beginnings. The reformation in the love-world will
come chiefly through the mothers of to-day educating
their children in the real laws of true living and true
loving. Every child from its infancy will have to
become accustomed to the sight of nudity and the
sanity of the physiological laws of its own little body,
as it is now made familiar gradually with the actions
of feeding and speaking. Children are never shocked
at nakedness or at truth; it takes a long time to
teach a child our false notions of the unloveliness of
the body and its marvellous functions. A wee maid
I knew once, when scolded for running about her
nursery naked, took the covering her nurse held
towards her and wrapped it round her neck, saying,
'' Me quite good now, nursey."
There is but one way of educating, and that
is to ignore evil and teach good, and teach good by
finding all natural things clean and sweet if done
cleanly and sweetly. Evil, being a mere blundering
on the way to good, will die its own natural death
as beauty and temperance make their own headway.
The child brought up to deal naturally with natural
things will develop into a youth whose ignorance
cannot be made the servant of all work for lustful
imaginings and intemperate or hypocritical sensu-
alities. Courage to respect one's body by giving it


its own legitimate needs, but not at the expense of
the ignorance or poverty of another, will go far
towards ridding civilised life of its curses of prostitu-
tion and worldly marriages. To buy shoddy goods in
the range of the emotions will surely one day be
regarded as a vulgarity as great as buying second-
hand clothes, and yet no gentleman to-day would
go to a pawnbroker's for his top-coat, though he will
satisfy his emotions in a more distinctly vulgar
manner.
The lover of the future will shun bought love in
any form as the true artist will shun pot-boiling in
any shape. The lover cannot shun experiences :
those are inevitable in all lives not bound down to
the inanely commonplace, but he will shun all things
which threaten the corruption or disruption of the
vision of love which as a child and as a youth he has
seen. Love can never admit of lies in its passionate
relationships : it can never truckle for an instant to
the maxims of worldlings or the tests of mere saints ;
it must bud and flower and seed according to the
laws of its being, and guard, more jealously than even
a maid her virtue, the freedom of the one to whom
it surrenders itself. To bind is to lose. Jealousy,
still almost the worst and meanest sin of the old
and the new lover alike, must have no quarter in the
new code of love as a fine art. When through child-
hood and youth a man has at last come to what he
thinks is his own, and taken the woman of his choice
to his heart, let him know that his education has


only begun, for his courtesies must be doubled; his
attitude as lover, combined with that of husband,
must be a blending of friendship, comradeship, and
loveship, but never a tyranny. Absolute possession
in persons or purses is as out of date as feudalism.
For love, then, not only to be a fine art but itself,
it must take no thought, when its spring-time has
come, of the things it has learnt about its own nature.
The artist, in his moment of inspiration, works out
his ideas with no conscious thought of the stern rules
of his art; if he is a true dreamer or painter he lives
in the moment, is caught up in a perfect frenzy of
creation, 'and forgets all things else in the wonder
and beauty of the hour. So it is with the true lover.
Passion, when it mates with true love, is lost in its
own exquisiteness. To take thought about itself,
to stammer, blunder, and calculate, to look for the
spiritual or emotional wherewithal with which it can
express itself, is to fall short of its own inspiration.
It must forget all things by remembering only its
need to become itself through the equal need of
another. It must for the hour dwell in a world
given over to those things which are profoundly
deep, profoundly real, and profoundly simple. From
such hours youth is renewed, life is consecrated, and
the world gains through the joyfulness of two made
utterly one.


PART lI.—THE NEW CIVILISATION
DEMOCRACY IN THE KITCHEN
THE servant question is a test question which won't
easily get into politics, and so be solved in the ortho-
dox English way. Men vote it a women's concern
and laugh at it as an unimportant matter by the side
of the nationalisation of land or the fight of labour with
capital. No one likes the subject, simply because it
implies the disclosing of a domestic skeleton which is
in every one's cupboard to-day. Feudal economics
and cant ethics become powerless when servants are
faced without their caps and aprons, and recognised
as legitimate claimants for citizenship.
The nationalisation of land and the crying of
quits between capital and labour are so far away that
even a Parliamentary candidate, with his hands in two
pockets practically filled from both sources of pro-
duction, can get his seat through an eloquent speech
on the socialistic side. Justice for the people in the
abstract and land nationalisation, two centuries
ahead, leave him comfortable time to make his plans.
But when that Parliamentary candidate leaves the
platform, a subtler problem, in the shape of the waged
87


slave or flunkey who brings his brandy and soda,
stands at his elbow. The class and mass war, which
is gathering force daily in our midst, is epitomised in
every house which boasts of a parlour and a kitchen
where a sharp line is drawn between those who serve
and those who are served. Labour and capital, as
master and man, mistress and maid, show us daily
how far we have really advanced into the practical
region of equality. Capital, with its wants supplied,
its exactions met, its comforts provided, its insufficient
pay accepted, may be studied in the average middle-
class household in England. Labour, with its badge
of cap and apron, its painful drudgery or debasing
flunkeyism, tells its own tale of mass servility and
dependent slavery.
The servant question, then, is a test question;
it is as vital to the solution of the labour question as
the economic independence of woman is to the sex
question. Servitude in this domestic problem has got
service by the throat, and in order to conceal the
fight between the two, we, who are served, talk glibly
of the incapacity and ignorance of the servant class,
for whose stupidity and servility we are in a great
measure answerable.
Socialism —the word, I mean —rings in our ears.
We are on the verge of believing in it; some day, in
spite of the fact that many of us look upon it as a
mere bridge to a wider and broader view of a new
civilisation, we shall live it more and discuss it less.
To talk loudly and act sincerely is scarcely given as


yet to nations or to men. Christianity and Socialism
alike are theories for the most part, not practice.
This statement may be tested in every " lady's "
attitude towards " menial " work, and in the mental
attitude of every man who has a daughter or a son in
" service." Those " household drudges running from
the hearth to the slopstone and from the slopstone
to the hearth all their lives," as Edward Carpenter
has it, are satirical commentaries on our eloquent
lectures on equality and our tracts on self-sacrifice.
Mass and class, equality and servility, feudalism
and democracy, rights and mights, slavery and
emancipation, are in the face of the dirty little maid-
of-all-work, whom we have ever with us. If we have
a shadow of honesty, we know that to bring twentieth-
century Socialism or first-century Christianity to bear
on that problem is to shelve the matter at once, or to
face it like straightforward men and women. The
philanthropic sops thrown by fine ladies to hush the
importunity of the problem simply hinder the solution
of the matter, as 30 per cent, returned to the Duke of
Bedford's tenants hinders the land question. Charity
here, as in other walks of life, heals with one hand the
nasty wounds she makes with the other. What the
two million individuals on the servants' register need
is justice—plain and simple justice, and not bones
thrown to social dogs to keep them from biting. So
long as we touch the servant question from our easy-
chairs, and make the test of the matter our personal
convenience, and so long as we admit the indecent


word " menial " into our vocabulary, so long will the
servant question remain unsolved, and, being un-
solved, will cry shame on our quack social physics,
which, while stimulating the brain, leave the hands
and feet of England bound and paralysed.
The domestic servant question—dull as it may
appear to most men and to some women, who really
believe that not only the animals but servants were
made for their exclusive use —the servant question,
being a distinct demonstration of the effects of servi-
tude on the whole body politic, is at the very core of
our national democratic problem. It is, then, a
question which is of vital moment to both the masses
and the classes, as it runs like a tangled thread through
the whole of modern life. The army of menials —in the
shape of flunkeys, caretakers, ladies'-maids, kitchen-
maids, butlers, parlour-maids, general servants,
laundresses, lodging-house " slaveys," and the rest —
meet us on every hand either as our relatives or as
our machines. The problem is, then, not only an
individual but a national problem.
Let us criticise for a moment the position of the
average general servant, noting how the matter of
inferiority crops up at every point in the girl's life.
A general servant is engaged : all sorts of questions
are considered legitimate for us to put to the person
who is to do our dirty work for us. No really vital
questions are expected in return, such as, "Do you
nag all day, Madam % " "Do you give your servant
your underclothing to make or mend if she finishes


your work promptly and so makes ' free time' ? "
" Do you demand that your husband and sons treat
your servant as if she were a woman, and not as a
chattel ? " "Do you give good food ? " Inequality
is represented at the outset. The girl enters her new
home : she finds that as sharp a line is drawn between
the kitchen and the drawing-room as between heaven
and earth : she begins, if it is her first place, to learn
through this fact the " slavey " code of non-ethics.
She finds in a dull sort of way that her soul must be
different from that of her mistress, for though she sits
deferentially on a chair while her master reads a
chapter from the Bible and says a prayer for the con-
version of the heathen, she notices that in the church
she does not sit by the side of her mistress in the same
pew. Her body, she learns, cannot have the same
needs as that of her mistress : while spare rough food
may do for one, the hard worker and early riser, tit-
bits, and what appear to her dull eyes as two dinners a
day, barely suffice for the other. If she is ill, of if her
woman's nature craves a definite resting-time, she has
to learn that her rough servant fibre does not need
rest at such times, but that a couch and loving atten-
tions under similar conditions above stairs are often
necessities to tide " the lady " over a weary time.
She learns that she has no real sense of beauty : old
and ugly wedding gifts and yellow texts in gold frames
adorn her bedroom, furnished generally from the
" servants' list," which tells its own tale in every
furnisher's catalogue. She is often forbidden to have


her sweetheart in the house, and the area gate is
locked to enforce obedience. Love becomes a for-
bidden fruit looming in the distance as a secret vice
which she intends to indulge in the moment the area
steps are unwatched and her enemy from home.
The reaction from this unnatural bondage comes
sooner or later, and then we pious superior folk clasp
our hands in solemn horror over the hopelessly de-
moralised servant class.
The Rev. G. P. Merrick, formerly chaplain of
Millbank Prison, heads his list of 14,790 fallen women
with suggestive figures which represent the relation
of domestic service to prostitution. Out of his quoted
number of 14,790 inhabitants of Millbank we find
that 5823 are domestic servants, and if we include
domestic service in all its branches, the number
increases to 8000, or more than half the total number.
Now what do these facts demonstrate ? The
utter rottenness and vulgarity of our mass and class
traditions; the wickedness of our conventional
restrictions with regard to " followers " ; and the
inhumanity of the traditional attitude to domestics,
which allows women to treat them as slaves, and
which naturally leads men to regard them as chattels.
Mistresses who treat their servants as mere means to
their comfort and convenience are largely responsible
for the attitude of disrespect, contempt, and callous-
ness too often assumed by men towards those who,
being in a dependent position, should naturally
command protection and respect. Then follow


sudden dismissals without " character " ; too often
leading the bewildered " slavey " to begin a pitiable
career which ends often enough in the hospital or
the prison.
That the servant class, as a class, is loose in its
morals, dirty in its habits, untrustworthy, lying, and
stubborn, is perfectly true. From whom have they
learnt their chief lessons ? It is stupid and illogical
to expect servants as a class to ignore object-lessons
in flirtations, ill-temper, and white lying, and steer
straight in the midst of their demoralising drudgery
towards the robust qualities which are only found in
those who have escaped from servitude of mind and
body.
We are told that one of the most debasing char-
acteristics of the ordinary servant is petty pilfering.
Why is this ? Because locks and keys put the girl
at once into the position of an enemy, and human
nature soon learns to become what it is imagined to
be. Ido not for a moment believe that the average
mind of an ordinary " general " in the first instance
looks upon sharing the good things of life with her
master and mistress as stealing. Poor soul! she
may have a dim idea that she is only doing that
which is fair, straight, and according to the ideals
of Christianity, or, like the darkey when detected in
stealing his master's pork, may answer with a slavey's
logic, " I'se massa's, and the pig's massa's ; I eats
the pig, and we's both massa's still."
Those who have a sweetheart, a sister, or a child


in a situation as a general " slavey/' for tlie word is
apt, know that what I have said is the truth, and
know that the very conditions under which the girl
lives inevitably sap her love of truth, her openness,
and her thoroughness, and that she either degenerates
into a servile drudge or into a social rebel against
law and order, which latter is the more respectable
condition of the two. The sharp caste line which
separates one woman from another, one man from
another, and stamps one form of work as artistic
and the other as menial, cannot develop a true
personality, and must, through its subtle influence,
corrupt the best men and the best women. The
whole servant system is rotten and degrading, and
morally injures those who serve and those who are
served, and no sophistry which drawing-room eco-
nomics or ethics can bring to bear on the question
can defend the wage slavery in our midst or the class
distinction in our mansions. The prosperous con-
dition of the servant staff does not alter the question
at all. Large servants' halls, an over-abundant
supply of food, opportunities for imitating the worst
characteristics of employers, all the enervating
extreme of the " general slavey " position, lead us
to the contemplation of flunkeydom, than which
there is no more hopeless picture. Bad as is the
misery and monotony of the life of the ordinary
servant drudge, there is really more hope from it for
the servant cause in general than from any increase
of large establishments, with their staff of well-dressed


and leisured servants. To live in a fashionable
country village and watch closely the attitude of the
liveried manikins belonging to the wealth of England,
is to feel that the servant question is not only de-
pressing, but hopeless. Why ? Because one finds
that the overfed manikin does not seem to miss
his manhood; because hat-touching and the servile
attitude of one man to another has robbed him of
honest self-respect and made him a more desperate
enemy of real progress than the veriest barbarian.
So imbued are these fringes of the aristocracy with
the traditions of caste prejudice that in large servants'
halls it is no uncommon sight to find the servants
divided off at different tables —a veritable sitting
below the salt existing among themselves. A lady's-
maid won't demean herself by associating with the
parlour-maid; she, in her turn, patronises the kitchen-
maid, who, sorely at a loss to whom to rise superior,
makes the life of the gardener's boy a target for her
outraged dignity. To say that servants have more
caste feeling than their employers is simply to state
a well-known fact, and I think that no one will deny
that, taking them all in all, there is no more hopeless
or demoralised class in our community than ordinary
domestic servants. The problem curses those who
serve and those who are served. All the petty
revilings in the world will, however, not help either
the masses or the classes out of their false inter-
dependence in this matter.
What can help us ultimately ? Nothing but a


clean sweep of the whole system as it stands to-day.
Servitude is a stupid blunder, and costs us money
and nerve-strain, and the sooner we laugh it out of
our domestic concerns the better for individuals and
the better for the nation. In making a statement
like this I am not advocating anarchy, and I am not
what is vulgarly known as " gassing." There is
nothing easier than to fling one's arms about and
advocate the total upheaval of existing institutions.
It is the way of fiery souls who have never studied
either history or human nature. What lam advo-
cating is not a fanatic's air-bubble, but a practical
English threefold way out of a serious difficulty, a
way which could, to some extent, be cleared to-
morrow by the County Councils all over the kingdom,
and could be helped on municipally at every election.
If the methods I am advocating were adopted, we
should make great strides into the very centre of
socialistic legislation, and the present servant situa-
tion would go down like a house of cards. Energy,
plodding persistence, a dogged resistance to candi-
dates who cry for individualistic measures, a sincere
wish to stand level for opportunities all round, is all
that is needed to bring from the region of theory into
practice Democracy in the Kitchen.
The first step surely to be taken in order to get
rid of servitude and find our way back to common-
sense service, is to try and bring about the independ-
ence of the servant class. The first thing to do in
this direction is to put domestic service completely


on a trade basis ; to make the teaching of ho v r to
lay a fire, how to wash saucepans, how to cook a
dinner, and keep drains and traps flushed, not only
compulsory in our board and private schools for all
classes, but do enforce a short and sharp apprentice-
ship upon all those who intend to offer themselves as
domestic helpers. To put housework —an inevitable
feature of civilised communities —on the level of an
honourable trade or profession, where a guarantee
of efficiency would do away with any special contempt
attaching to pleasant and healthy work; to let
reason and thoroughness take the place of slipshod
uneducated drudgery, would surely minimise some
of the evils of domestic service. Make the work
artistic, and let it be done from an artist's standpoint,
and you will use a lever which will banish the word
" menial " from our dictionaries.
Imagine for a moment what a transfiguration life
would undergo if educated service took the place of
haphazard drudgery. Conceive of the domestic
worker with only one foul rag in her back recesses
instead of twelve ; think of her disliking a greasy
sink and general surface cleanliness as only the
Ruskinites or the sanitary enthusiasts do now;
imagine her having a reason for everything, and
thus sparing her heels through a minute effort of her
brain, and minimising her labour and doing her work
with half the expenditure of energy of the untrained
dabbler who is now ever with us. If domestic
service could be made into a trade, with its organised


demands, its limited hours, and its legal contract,
philanthropy on this subject would soon be eclipsed
by justice. Domestic workers as a class would be
defended against the traditional attitude of em-
ployers, and employers would have a right to demand
efficient work for an honest salary. The experiment
would naturally have its transitional evils, as did the
teaching of reading and writing to the manual worker,
as well as the passing of an Eight Hours Bill, but the
day is far spent wherein we can seriously demand
that the reform car shall be stopped because of the
temporary obstructions in the path.
The moment the servant class is organised into a
distinct army of responsible and efficient workers,
whose self-respect will kill servility, and whose im-
portance in the community will command equality,
the way is at once open for the next movement, which
will be a distinctly socialistic one, and which will
directly remove from daily life its weight of re-
sponsibility and nerve tension under our present
domestic hugger-mugger. I mean the formation of
municipal bakehouses, kitchens, and dining-halls.
A few of our churches could well be spared to give
a practical demonstration of the all-roundness of
Christ's gospel, which has in it the supplying of loaves
and fishes and the care of men's bodies more than
many of our parsons like to admit. If every woman
could have a minimum instead of a maximum of
domestic spider-threads tugging at her brain year
in and year out, through the municipalisation of


laundries, bakehouses, kitchens, and restaurants
worked under well-trained and methodical civil
servants, just imagine for one moment what a new
life would be on this earth. Woman's equality
would be established almost as much by this as by
her economic independence, as it would open up the
way in many cases for that very independence ; for
many women would find their real life-work in the
municipal domestic factory, and be paid their true
earnings as citizens. The class-feeling removed,
work swerved out of the drudgery element into the
artistic region, machines employed wherever prac-
ticable, short hours the rule, and leisure the result
of the short hours—what else do we want in order
to solve our problem ? What reason is there for not
at once beginning to bring this about through our
County Councils all over the kingdom ? As a
practical experiment alone it would surely be a
capital investment for the State, and would in ten or
twenty years be as remunerative as the General Post
Office, for our boots, knives, beds, and grates have
to be cleaned with the same regularity as the post-
man's knock is answered.
The argument which will be brought against the
matter by the average Britisher will be that every
Englishman's home is his castle, and this experiment
threatens to undermine the foundation. Every
Englishman's home may be his castle, but we know
well enough that the castle at present constituted
always has one or two feudal slaves in it, the wife or


the £< slavey," or both, and it is often difficult to tell
the one from the other. The curse of the English
middle class is snobbery and gentility. Manual work
the cure for much of the hysterical anaemia and
sexual effeminacy in our midst —is relegated to the
region of the kitchen, instead of being divided for the
general good of the ladies and the domestic slaves
alike. It may sound extravagant to many when I
say that if the municipal factory could be started
it would be a death-blow to woman s incapacity and
dolldom, and would probably have more effect in
bringing about equality of the sexes, and also equality
among the classes and masses, through obtaining true
citizenship for women, than anything else.
The average woman with a distinct capacity for
domestic work would cease to fret and worry her life
away in petty household details : she could join an
honourable army and work hard for the common
good and be paid out of the common funds. Up to
a few days even of childbirth it would be of service
to her to take some share in the general work, just as
in the Paris Duval Restaurants you see women in this
condition cheerfully working within a short time of
their delivery.
The professional woman, with special gifts and
special hereditary equipment, would also have a fair
chance under such a system. The full work of a Jane
Welsh Carlyle was practically lost to us because there
was no common kitchen for the wants of dyspeptics.
The private home, relieved from the kitchen


range, the frying-pan, the washtnb, and the shoe-
blacking and knife-cleaning, would demand so little
in the way of work and worry from the inhabitants
that any normal professional person would find the
manual exercise needed there good for his health.
This of course implies simplicity in one's private home
and an utter absence of ostentation or luxury. Life,
stripped of mere appearances, robbed of slavery to
conventions, despoiled of knick-knacks and sham
observances to fashion, weeded of its superfluous
clothes, rooms, and general etceteras, would become
beautiful and bearable to all. The municipal domestic
factory combined with a new ideal of what sincere
living is would simply rid civilisation of the vulgar
hag of Servitude. Private luxury would then make
way for public comfort. Nationalism would begin to
eclipse Individualism. Simplification of life, except
from the voices of ascetics and fanatics, does not
mean either sordidness, uncleanliness, bareness, or
ugliness. It simply means the reduction of life to
beauty instead of letting it be overloaded with
luxury.
Life to-day, in our cities at any rate, is a pinched
anaemic drudge, waiting upon a usurper who is
slowly pinioning the very thoughts and deeds of honest
men and women. Beauty, almost as vital a necessity
to a normal man or woman as air, or light, or food, or
love, has no chance. Vulgarity and the common-
place stride triumphant in the land.
To strip life, then, of its superfluities on one side,


to get artistic necessities for all on the other side, to
let appearances go for a single cipher in the sum of
living, to demand freedom, joy, and beauty for every
creature on this earth, here is a work for our Labour
Churches and Brotherhoods to do, and if they are in
earnest, they can set about it to-morrow.
Add to these things the importance of emphasising
the growing need amongst earnest men and women
to-day, the need to spell the first letter in the cant-
ridden word of brotherhood ; to find nothing and no
one common or unclean ; to dare to prove this outside
the self-righteousness of little coteries ; to dare the
taunt of inconsistency, luxury, niggardliness, and
" bad form "; to dare to live a life—not of a base
servitude to maxims, morality, or catchwords —but
of silent Service, which, like Love, rarely catches its
own reflection in the mirror of Life.


THE MASSES AND THE CLASSES
MY subject to-day is a double one ; it has to deal with
two sides of a very complicated matter : the struggle
between two portions of the social body which are
practically at war. At present the signs of rebellion
are not very marked, but they are significant, and
show that the burly Mass is taking form, and will have
to be reckoned with in a new way. The wakening of
Labour is like an epidemic : all over the world the
revolutionary germ is spreading, and Individualism,
which has become a disease in the Classes, is beginning
to assert itself as a healthy manifestation in the Masses.
Tennyson's farmer's dictum that " the poor in a
loomp is bad " is beginning to be discredited by the
poor themselves, and righteous demands are following
a sturdy reckoning of accounts.
I am not concerned now with the question as to
how there came to be Masses and Classes. lam here
to face the immediate moment which concerns both
the rich and the poor, and then to make my plea. It
is enough for us that we recognise the gulf which
separates the Capitalist from the Labourer; which
gives the monopoly of life to one, and scarcely the
oil to make the machine go to the other ; which gives
103


the inheritance of the earth to one, and a vague
promise of a secure resting-place in heaven to the
other.
The very word Mass describes the picture on one
side of the big social gulf : a huge, crowded, unshapen,
burly thing we call in fine language the proletariat,
in less fine language the British workman, in vulgar
speech ' f the lower orderslt takes little imagination
to call up this heaving mass of organised or unorgan-
ised workers, wfith their manhood and womanhood
sucked under, in the majority of cases, in the unequal
race for bread and life ; with their opportunities fined
down to a mere name, mostly an opportunity to revert
to an animal existence of drudgery year in and year
out, or to die in our hospitals or workhouses. On
one side stands the fierce dog Competition, ready to
tear limb from limb if muscle relaxes or demands in-
crease, and on the other hand sits the fiercer wolf of
Human Greed, which guards the sea where the sub-
merged tenth lie drowning. The record of this
incessant struggle against fierce odds may be calmly
and prosaically viewed in that excellent book, written
by Charles Booth, on Labour and Life of the People.
In column after column we get the brief unvarnished
record of how the Masses live, and one reads between
the lines how the chains of long hours of work, of ill-
ventilated and over-rented rooms, no margin to days
or months or years, no free chance to be a man or a
woman, only the opportunity to continue machines,
have dragged all joy and strenuous purpose from the


labouring folk, and made them a standing shame to
our vaunted civilisation.
In order to get an outline of the Class life, one
has only to turn to any Society paper of the hour
and read quite calmly the record of how the Classes
live.
Now let us look more closely into the lives of
Masses and Classes. The curious part of the matter
is that in the first instance equality exists : the Mass
baby comes into the world much in the same way as
the Class baby ; the surroundings, as we know, vary
somewhat. The Mass child is dragged up ; the Class
child is brought up : this is the first significant fact.
The Mass boy is taken from his school in order to
try and snatch a living somehow long before the
Class boy has begun that quaint process called
" finishing." The handicapping of the one and the
enervation of the other begin simultaneously. While
the Class youth is eating his dinners for the Bar, or
going through his degrees for teaching the doctrines
of the Mass Man of Nazareth, or learning how to heal
the Classes through experiments on the Masses, the
life of the Mass man or woman has begun. Some
of you know that life better than Ido the life of
weary toil from morn to eve, with scarce margin
enough wh,erein to drink and eat and rest, in order
that the machine may be ready for the next day's
drudgery. You know the meaning of the short wage
and tedious work ; the labour which has lost its joy
because it is hurried and competitive, and makes one


man strive against another man and push him to the
wall; the labour which sucks the manhood from one
man in order to make a manikin of another. You
know the endless details which constitute the weekly
lives of the workers : children quaintly asking from
the mother, who never sees her husband till nightfall,
" Who is the strange man as comes on a Sunday and
whacks us ? " Wives toiling and moiling and charing
and child-bearing under a stress which, but for its
commonness, would force tears from our eyes. Men
always living upon the verge of starvation, and
oftener than not getting submerged when the fever
comes, or a bad winter, or a dull season; silently
slipping into that black sea of failure, never to come
out; women looking dumbly at sixpences, and
wearing out nerve and brain to try and make them
do the work of half a crown ; beauty, joy, and fresh-
ness fading from the faces of men, women, and
children : men growing hard and bitter, and pitting
class against class, and drowning their despair in lust
and drink, and making the women curse the hour
they bore their children: thousands of men and
women passing days with scarcely enough to eat,
and living in herds in rooms not fit to be described
to polite ears, and for which they pay exorbitant
rents ; without proper air, with but a poor supply
of water, and in utter and pitiful ignorance of the
big world of beauty just outside their eyesight.
Women dying of foul and secret diseases, and selling
their bodies for a mere pittance to eke out the sweater's


wage : men becoming servile and unmanly because
bread comes that way. This is the unexaggerated
picture of the lives of the Masses, and it is this evil
which every honest man and woman, Christian or
Agnostic, has got to heal ere they can sit down in
peace.
If it were not that the two pictures, though so
widely different, have a relation of cause and effect
which makes it impossible to view one without the
other, the aspect of a real Class life would be irre-
sistibly funny. I want you to bear in mind that in
sketching these two pictures of social life I am fully
aware that I am dealing with extreme instances of
the two sides of my subject, but every word I say
can be proved by experience. The life of a Class
man begins when the " finishing " process has been
gone through and the profession is chosen. There
is a current belief in the Classes and in the little
circles which act as satellites to the aristocracy, and
would fain follow their lead, that a gentleman must
of necessity belong to a learned profession or live on
his estate, and that a lady must live on her means
or teach. Only the other day an old schoolfellow
of mine met me, and almost apologised for the fact
that she had become a good milliner instead of a bad
governess. A Class man is often as much tortured
and bored by the obligations which are upon him to
enter a profession as the Mass man is weighted with
his drudgery. I know a young fellow who this year
has refused the petitions of his mother and his brothers,


and left a very lucrative and " respectable " pro-
fession in London, to go to Mother Earth and learn
her simple secrets as a common farmer. The man
is happy, but his people are sad. Why ? Because
of the great Class bogy, which has taken the place
of old-world witches and ghosts.
The Class brings its own miseries ; which fact is
often ignored by the Mass onlooker, who only sees
the suits and trappings of well-dressed and well-fed
prosperity. The inevitable keeping-up of appear-
ances, the marrying in his sphere, the donning of a
coat and hat which prevent a rest on a friendly
doorstep or the carrying of a washer-woman's basket,
the obligation to sit in a certain way and eat according
to certain rules, the necessity to follow the expensive
and tedious habits which constitute " good form,"
the acquiring of learning which will make a man scorn
to dig the earth or use a blacksmith's hammer, the
amassing of wealth with the least effort and in the
most gentlemanly manner, —that is, chiefly by becom-
ing a Stock Exchange gambler, a director, a doctor,
a lawyer, or a clergyman,—the cultivation of caste
prejudices and habits, which keeps a man encircled
in a sectarian groove of fashionable clubs, with
impossible entrance fees except for the Classes ; the
crushing of quick, bracing, childlike, and joyous
impulses, because Society—like the prudent mother
I once knew, who wrote and told her daughter not
to smile much in winter, as it produced wrinkles —
Society demands that her children move with stately


nonchalance, varied with occasional fits of ennui, to
the music of her presiding genius, Madame Grundy.
Think of it pitifully for one moment: the nerve-
wearing toil of trying to make enough cut of the
labourers, the land, and the capital of a nation, to
furnish a doll's house, to keep a doll in it, and to be
wearied to death in the long process of turning a
man into a tailor's dummy. Of the woman's side of
the question I have little to say. The Class life, in
proportion to the extent it makes a woman into a Class
slave, is a breeder of prudes, of dull dollies, and of
hysterical patients for unconscientious doctors, who
find it more lucrative to prescribe bread pills and
coloured water than large waists and hard work. I
may seem to speak bitterly, but I do not feel bitter.
I always see the pathetic side of this picture, and
when I am in " good society " sometimes, amid the
whirl of drawing-room gossip, with its stereotyped
clothes for its men and its stereotyped manners for
both its men and its women, I sometimes pause a
moment, and then feel an inclination to cry out
suddenly, " Men and women, in Christ's name where
are we?" And then I feel a pity stronger and
deeper than when I hear a woman has been outraged
or a man murdered, for murder and outrage come of
quick passion, when madness suddenly sweeps into a
man's brain; but this murder of truth and whole-
someness, and this outrage on manhood and woman-
hood, have become habit and life, and the victims are
mostly ignorant of their position,


I have sketched these two pictures, not to inflame
class against class, man against man—there is far
too much of that growing up amongst us ; but I have
sketched them in order that I may face the position
definitely ere I make my plea.
If you look back upon the picture of the Masses,
you will find material there for any artist or poet in
the land. There is always a dramatic fighting against
odds, a fierce struggle from hand to mouth, which
knits the blind nearer together ere they fall into the
ditch. Painful, unjust, and uncivilised as the picture
is, it has its grand lights and shades, and is close to
the heart of the poet and artist, for its simple human
possibilities and interests are never apart from it.
The other picture is a dull one—too dull to linger
over. Groethe was right when he defined good society
as that which furnished no material for poetry.
Imagine our artist or poet lingering over the Bank,
the Stock Exchange, the fashionable drawing-room,
in which civility and social interest speak first, and
truth is left to convenient seasons ; the marriage of
the world (though tragedies enough are to be found
there), the Queen's Drawing-room, the modern villa
lfe, the taking of dividends, the amassing of hundreds
or thousands, the fanciful patient and the fashionable
doctor, and the hundred-and-one instances to be
found m a real Class life ! No wonder William Morris
has to travel back for the inspiration for his poems.
We are in a very tangle at this moment, of un-
brotherliness, of competition, of injustice, of con-


gested centres of industry, of jerry work and jerry
life, of Class and Mass strife, of strikes, societies,
debates, and remedies ; and it is almost impossible
to get even time to pause and look the situation full
in the face. But this is what we must do at intervals
ere we can tread safely in the path towards social
happiness. We must give ourselves time for social
stocktaking, and face the immediate prospect.
The Mass man has surely to pause ever and anon,
as he is working for a new labour world by organising
himself to get his rights, and squarely face a few
matters. The faults of his class threaten him seri-
ously at times like these, when the transitional
moment is almost over, and the new hour is at hand.
A new power, however necessary and right it may be,
is always dangerous in the hands of those who have
been enslaved : reading and writing made many
thick-skulled slaves into vain manikins till the
transitional time had passed. There is no tyrant so
great as the one who has been downtrodden and has
struggled to the fore ; there is no greater danger
than the vain fanaticism of a pygmy who stands after
a brief fight in the ranks of giants. It is no use
blinking facts : unless the Masses, in taking up their
absolutely right demand for equality of opportunity
and a just return for labour —unless the Masses keep
their heads and educate themselves into " grit"
citizens while they claim their demands as men and
strenuously fight the transitional dangers to character
and country, we shall have a very terrible time of it,


The child who has been starved at home by a tyran-
nous father, and bereft of necessaries by a niggard
stepmother, is liable later in life to become either
a reckless spendthrift or a tyrannical miser. The
Masses have been wronged, both consciously and
unconsciously ; their day of reckoning is at hand.
Let them face it like men, and while demanding
Rights let them guard against neglecting the old-
fashioned Duties, without which Rights will be of
very little use. There is a great tendency amongst
certain working classes, and these belong chiefly to
the over-worked and often, it must be confessed,
slipshod workers, to look upon all capitalists, land-
lords, and well-dressed " toffs " as blackguards and
thieves, and to threaten and sneer accordingly.
They are too ignorant to see that the system may
make the individual, but the individual is not the
system ; and, as a matter of fact, a capitalist and
a landlord to-day is often as much in ignorance of
economics and of ethics as a Mass man is of mathe-
matics and Latin. " Whatever is, is right/' growls
the ignorant possessor of land, capital, and labour;
and he does not think much of the equally foolish
reasoning of his brother, who yells back to him, No,
sir, whatever is, is wrong." Surely half of the
unworthy acts, aims, and ridiculous pretences of
Individualists are the results of ignorance more than
of wickedness. I know well many Class folk who
have never realised what a working man s life really
is, who have never thought of him as anything but


a mechanical contrivance between their wants and
their supplies, and whose study of Christ's doctrine
has brought them to the conclusive argument,
presented so often as a finale to silly theories of
equality, that Christ Himself had declared: " The
poor you have always with you." Ages of tradition
and years of habit and inheritance are behind these
fossil notions : we cannot rest till we have rooted
out such ignorant thoughts and deeds, but we shall
never do it if we merely go and shout in the rich man's
ears : "You thief ! you blackguard ! Let me change
places with you —it's my day now," —which is the
real substance of much of the revolutionary doctrine
of to-day. To threaten the Class man suddenly,
after centuries of submission, with stones and bullets ;
to curse him and to use uncouth words at him, only
makes him think how worse than low the " lower
orders " are, only fossilises him in his Class habits,
only makes him sneer openly and put his hands
deeper into his pockets and whistle a tune while he
rattles the coin. It is a sign of stupidity and ignor-
ance to bite a man's head off if you want to convince
him. This is the way of a schoolboy in a rage. If
you want to convince a man that you are in earnest,
and that his ways are anti-social and wrong, convince
him by your action that you know what you are
talking about. To condemn our ignorant social
worship of the great god Getting-On; to demand
rights and work for all; to condemn the enslaver
of labour and the banqueter on labour's produce,


and at the same time to work like a Trojan to get into
the very places, to build the very houses, and to
lead the same idle lives as the men we wish to de-
throne, is both illogical and ridiculous. You know
as well as I do that the worker, over-wrought and
stunted as he is to-day, often speaks and acts from
a kind of envy of the man he says is robbing him, as
if, forsooth, to be a robber and an idler were the great
things in life. A turning of social tables is not a
readjustment of social conditions: it is merely
jumping from the frying-pan into the fire. It is a
well-known fact that when a Mass man " gets on/'
as the world calls getting on, —that is, when he gets
his head and shoulders above water, keeps in work
and health, and is thrifty and close and sharp in
money matters, —that the first thing he does is not
to demonstrate to his new circle that his social ideal
is true for action as well as for theory, by living a
sane, simple, brotherly life, but to do exactly the
reverse. He goes and buys some starched cuffs, a
starched collar, an imitation gold watch and chain,
a tweed suit, and sets himself up in a villa, with its
best rooms elaborately vulgarised by knick-knacks
of no use to himself or to his neighbours, as they
are shut up on weekdays, and grudgingly and un-
comfortably used on Sundays to excite the envy or
admiration of his comrades. He begins to pick and
choose his acquaintances, and gradually climbs that
silly ladder of caste prejudice and social convention
which saps both manhood and womanhood, from the


Masses at the foot of it, and the Classes at the top of
it. The very man who as a Mass man was indignant
at the sweater's wage and the enslavery of the
labourer, now dogmatically tells us from his cosy
fireside and his hardly-won easy corner that it is a
man's own fault if he cannot get on, and that a loafer
is a loafer by predestination, and the survival of
the fittest is not only scientific but Christian. From
this standpoint the Mass master becomes a greater
tyrant than his Class predecessor. It is just this
pitfall that the Mass man has to guard against if he
dreads social retrogression. Let him stand firm to
a common-sense economic position: let bim combine
sturdily, and let the need of co-operation and com-
bination be as a religion to him: let no failures in
individuals and no self-pride or personal vanity
hinder him in the full acceptance of all methods
which can help to bring about, sanely and surely, a
new labour world. A fine theory about these matters
is not enough. Representation in the municipal
elections, demands for an eight-hour day, repre-
sentation in Parliament, unions and strikes, and all
the economic stepping-stones laid down in a pro-
gramme like that presented by the Fabian Society,
must be steadily demanded by every working man.
The fight of necessity will be very hard, but God
forbid it should be bitter. I speak quite seriously
when I say that I believe it is better for a man to
die of starvation or grind, than to become a mere
railer for rights without that brotherliness which


will make rights of any use to him. It is right to
hate oppression, robbery, and slavery ; but it can
never be right to hate the oppressor, the robber, and
the slave-owner. It is absolutely imperative that
men and women should demand scope to live their
lives in beauty and fulness ; but it is a mean thing
in Masses or Classes to struggle for conditions in
which they will have opportunities to live a jerry
life, and by a jerry life I mean a snobbish, unsimple,
and unbracing life. Don't give in one jot to the
oppressor, —not one jot, —not because you are afraid
of starvation and death and the rest, but because it is
not good that the oppressor shall oppress : it is good
that he shall be just. Be firm in your demands,
make them all without flinching, but get them all
in a spirit which will carry everlasting issues with it—
a spirit of sane brotherhood, which cares as much
that the battle shall end well for the old oppressor as
for the new victor. It is not a mere matter of
revolution for either Classes or Masses: it is a question
of education, and just because of this it will inevitably
be a slow growth ; but there is no excuse in this for
either Classes or Masses to rest for one instant in the
false position they are both in to-day. By education
I don't mean book learning : I mean the education
which will make the Mass man cease to be a mere
railer for rights ; which will enable him, while he is
working through experiments of every kind towards
a new social order, to retain his true manhood by
cleaving to a new ideal of fellowship and justice,


which must slowly but surely leaven the hard lump
of ignorant commercialism and effete individualism.
I don't wish to minimise in the slightest degree the
importance of so-called practical reforms, but I want
to lay stress on the fact that the true idealist is really
practical, because he must shape his ideas into action,
and dry rot cannot long keep company with a sane
enthusiasm which counts death little, but life for
every man and woman on earth much.
To the Classes my plea also is for education, and
here, again, I do not mean the education of colleges
or of books. I mean the education which will make
the Class man, after looking social matters in the
face, suddenly turn in upon himself and ask himself
questions :
Why are the few rich, and the many poor ?
Why should land not belong to the people as well
as air and sunshine ?
Why must one man work sixteen hours a day, and
I be allowed to go to my club, and smoke and live on
my means ?
Is Christianity a pretty myth, or a reality ignored
by nearly all the churchgoers ?
Is the prostitute, who is bought as a means to an
end in our public streets, of the same flesh and blood
as my guarded wife at home ?
Is it God's law or man's ignorance that a thousand
men go to the wall, while one man becomes a million-
aire ?
What I mean by education, is the capacity which


will enable the Class man to answer those questions
quite sincerely—that is, apart from all material and
personal considerations : the education which must
bring a new light in his eyes, which will give him a
warmer hand-clasp, which can but make a just liver
and worker of him, which will make him dig the social
question to its roots, and, in the face of what he sees
there, cry out with honest Walt Whitman, and mean
every syllable too—
"By God ! I will accept nothing which all cannot
have their counterpart of on the same terms."
This is the education the Class man needs, and he
is getting it, too : signs are all around us that men and
women are becoming ashamed of philanthropy in
mansions, of Christianity in luxury, of so-called
brotherhood in commercial competition. Surely one
of the simplest and yet most imperative things for the
classes who have faced these things to do, is this : to
go and live right in the very midst of the workers
themselves, not as patrons or philanthropists,—above
all, not as self-righteous Pharisees, which is still the
most glaring sin of the social reformer, —but as men
and women determined to join hands with all classes ;
vowed to live cleanly, beautiful, though unluxurious
lives right in the very midst of the humblest in the
land, so that very shame will prevent ostentation and
luxury, and very brotherliness will bring about
simplicity and equality. We must all dwell some-
where : let us leave at once, for Christ's sake, who was
a carpenter and a wanderer, our brass plates and our


Class surroundings, and live as the people should live
—lives of hard work and strong love, with beauty
welded as a religion in all that is useful, for beauty is
the greatest of educators if it is divorced from those
trappings which inevitably lead others into servitude.
We want the Classes to educate themselves into the
great social truth that there is no necessary work
which is either menial or dishonourable, and that it is
a mean thing for one human being to ask another
to do a service for which the receiver gives, in part
payment, contempt. No really educated man, of
whatever class, can be happy to take his development
or enjoyment at the expense of another man or
woman. To make any man or woman a mere means
to a private end is to do this, and we need not go
far away to see examples of this theory in practice.
Capital and labour, prostitution, sweating dens,
luxurious homes, servants in servitude —apply the
principle to these, that no one must be a mere means
to the enjoyment or profit of another, but an end in
themselves, and you will find your social problems
unravelling one by one.
The bridge must be spanned between the Masses
and the Classes, and the Masses, by force of events,
will inevitably do most of the work. Let them see to
it that, as they demand their rights, they educate
themselves into men and women capable of living
simple, wholesome, hard-working, and sincere lives,
whatever grand opportunities may occur to do other-
wise. Let all snobbishness and vulgarity, which


appertain to so-called getting-on and turning of tables,
go with other old-world barbarisms of oppression,
starvation, and drudgery. Let the Masses, above all,
keep through the inevitably fierce struggle that spirit
of comradeship which makes the joining of hands an
absolute necessity.
My plea to the Classes as I close fitly comes
from Alfred Hayes, who calls on the rich who have
faced social matters :
" To quit for one short breathing-space the roar
That drowns the single voice, join hands, and take
This simple oath, and teach it to their sons:
'Never through grief or joy to flinch or flag
Till right prevail, till all men justly share
The sweet and plenteous fruit of all men's toil;
Till knowledge, art, and gladness be as free
As sunlight, and the gulf 'twixt lord and slave,
The coarse and fine of manners, garb and speech,
Sunder our lives no more.' This oath to take,
Then back into the tumult and the wrong,
And mend it in God's name."


THE MATERNAL IN DOMESTIC AND
POLITICAL LIFE
" WOMEN are either willing parasites or unwilling
wage-earners/' That charge, levelled against us, is
not only an ungenerous criticism, but shows failure
to appreciate the causes of our dependence. To give
the community an equivalent in work for money
received, either from an individual or the State, is to
be a wage-earner. To receive money and food with-
out returning a just equivalent in work is to be, no
doubt, a parasite.
Women, however, find it very difficult to avoid the
dilemma of parasitism on the one hand, and under-
paid wage-earning on the other, because the system
of education has failed to offer them the opportunity to
develop fully their natural gifts either in the home or
out of it. The system and not the woman is at fault.
The question of education for women is momentous
when so much divergence of opinion exists as to
what is " womanly " and what is " advanced." The
over-cultivation of the merely feminine character-
istics tends often to eliminate those of the true all-
round woman. On the other hand, the attempt to
cultivate masculinity produces merely the weakest
characteristics of men, while forcing a woman's
181


own nature into the background. The adjustment
will perhaps come when the fact is once faced that
men and women never have been, are not now, and
never can be, equals in the physiological or psychical
sense, but are, nevertheless, equally necessary and
equally important halves of humanity. There is no
inferiority in either sex, but there is a difference, and
it is vain to deny difference in mental and physical
make-up.
To acknowledge this, however, implies that there
is a need for reformed methods of education. If we
recognise that woman, as we know her, is not an
undeveloped man but an undeveloped woman, and
therefore should be so trained that her whole nature
may evolve to its ultimate perfection, we are on the
way to the solution of many difficult problems.
Given a rational education, and equality of oppor-
tunity to make a citizen's use of that education,
women will cease to be dull drudges and mere imitators
of the worst characteristics of man. They will be
trained to develop their real natures, and not suppress
them.
The President of Harvard has said that the best
type of liberal education in our complex modern world
aims at producing men who know a little of every-
thing and something well. The " something" a
woman should know well is her own nature with its
complex needs. Otherwise, she is unable to fulfil
adequately her natural function. For the mother is
the natural teacher of her child, though hitherto wo


have usually seen the blind leading the blind in these
matters.
The small amount that the average mother knows
about her own organisation is overshadowed by her
gleanings from false tradition and conventional
precept. The consequence is that she is ignorant as
to how to take care of her babies or even how to feed
them. The mother of the future must be so trained
in hygiene and eugenics that the school will be only a
place for amplifying knowledge already gained in the
nursery.
She must be taught the basic laws of sexual life as
well as the necessity of contending with false economic
conditions, and not be left to ferret out these things
for herself or to rely upon her instinct.
The masculine woman of to-day is a protest —
though only a temporary one —against the feminine
woman of yesterday. Both the artificiality of the
past and the pose of the present are leading to the
freedom and sanity of the future when the full
expression of both manhood and womanhood will
conduce to the well-being of a nation.
The future education of women will occupy itself
less with the routine studies of old, and more with
the care of children, ordinary hygiene, physiology,
domestic economy, and those arts and crafts which
bear upon the composition of a well-organised life.
The new" Schools for Mothers "and allied institutions
are doing splendid work in. this direction. The
modern craze for athletics must also make way for


such, exercises as dancing, which, while increasing
the suppleness and charm of woman, yet save her
from the over - muscular development induced by
strenuous gymnastics. The over-training of the
muscular system results in an unnatural development
of a woman's body and is a drawback to the safe fulfil-
ment of her greatest work for the community.
If knowledge of herself is one-half of the liberal
education of woman it is more than likely that the
knowledge so gained will enable her to find out her
particular aptitude in order that she can benefit fully
by the second half. This realisation of her choice of
work might lead to a " finishing school where the
specialised vocation by which she means to make
herself a responsible wage-earner in the community
would be taught by specialists alone. In this way
woman would naturally be educated along the lines
of her own temperament and particular gifts.
Whether a woman be a trained mother and house-
wife only, or a cook, a lawyer, a doctor, a mathe-
matician, or a farmer, matters not if the main object
of her education has been to obtain a real under-
standing of her own nature first and then to acquire
all the knowledge possible on the self-chosen line of
her career.
The rational education of woman on these lines
would certainly help to strengthen parental responsi-
bility and at the same time aid in abolishing shoddy
work. When women once realise that to produce a
perfect citizen is the most distinguished of all work,


and when they also face the fact that to bring a human
being into the world so handicapped by disease or
mental instability as to be a danger to his fellows is
to commit the most pitiable of all errors, we shall be
approaching the time when artificial morals will give
place to real morality.
Woman's place in the future evolution of the race
is thus a very important one. She has not only her-
self to protect and develop, but also her offspring, for
the mother is Nature's highest priestess. The educa-
tion which intensifies her aptitude for producing both
good children and beautiful social conditions should
be the mainstay of nations. The more closely this
education brings her, both in thought and aim, to
man, the swifter will be the evolution of economic and
social reform.
The competition between the sexes in the matter
of wage-earning threatens the charm, the health, and
the sanity of the rarest types of woman. The anaemic
competitor and the Amazonian destroyer are the ex-
treme instances of what modern civilisation has to
offer man as a survival of the chattel, the fool, the
angel, and the helpmate. Economic servitude, con-
ventional ideals, marriage restraint and licence, lone-
liness, and rigid formulas about natural things have
at last placed woman in a dilemma bewildering to
herself, to her household, and to statesmen. While
the child is now acknowledged to be the most import-
ant factor in the State, the woman, who used to be its
guardian and educator, has become the hurried and


distraught wage-earner talking of the equality of men
and women, and contradicting the statement by
attempting to do two-thirds of the work of a citizen
at one-half of the pay. The home and the market
claim her. She rushes distractedly from one to the
other, and the artist, potential in every woman, is
hurled back in the double enterprise, to wrestle with
nervous breakdown and competitive conditions.
The scarcity of men, the congestion of cities, and
the love of excitement and lack of serenity have
forced many modern women into positions which,
from even a mere physiological standpoint, they
cannot long maintain. From motherhood to surgery,
or even poultry-keeping, no woman ought to work
at what she dislikes. The difference between her
and man is as the difference between the rock and
the flower. Seas may swirl round the rock and leave
it the same ; the flower is destroyed. Delight in
work is the one way of getting work done well. There
should be an affinity between the work and the
worker ensuring success. It is with work as with
eating. What we like to do or to eat vivifies. What
we dislike produces inadequacy or indigestion.
Surely one of the most important things in facing
questions to do with women is to combine economic
freedom with delight in the work of begetting that
freedom. Some women are born housewives. Those
women are physically or mentally stunted or strained
as typists or journalists. Some women are born
inquisitors and meddlers. These types are better


safely enrolled in the police force than playing casual
havoc in private houses. Some women, again, are
Napoleonic in organisation, and some delicate and
subtle artists in detail.
What the world needs most is beauty. To give
every woman a chance to earn her own living in the
way most congenial to her would surely open up
channels for the increase and distribution of beauti-
ful things under harmonious conditions. When we
realise that neither love nor art should be bought
and sold, and that the " common " things of daily
life can be rendered beautiful through understanding
the complexity of true simplicity, we may be nearing
a time when Commercialism itself can give an orderly
distribution of necessities for an equally orderly
return of work.
Those of us who have tried experiments in wage-
earning may have discovered a few ways in which
modern women could combine economic independence
with beautiful living. It is surely possible so to
modify the strain and stress of modern civilisation
that life may develop into an art and not a vegeta-
tive existence or a reckless vampirism. We have
emphasised the brutal, the unimaginative, and the
commercial too long. Woman has imitated her
child, man, and blindly followed his lead. As a
militant politician woman is anything but original.
She is using man's weakest weapons and ignoring
her more drastic means of revolt. As mystic, as
witch, as conjurer, and as artist it is time she unfurled


her own flag and hoisted her own colours. She has
grown tired of using her charms, her ravishment,
and her manifold poses and potentialities according
to old-fashioned ideas. She is ready for a larger
stage, a bigger nursery, so that she may enjoy what
her maternal devices have at last brought to an issue.
Because woman at the moment is kicking at limita-
tions it does not necessarily mean she is a destroyer.
It means she is a constructer uncertain of her perfect
method. The arch she has been creeping under is
too low ; she wants to build one under which she can
walk upright. The home will be no less a home to
her if she has bigger rooms to make beautiful and
wider doors and windows through which to see the
horizon. Experiments cannot destroy or dwarf her
if she has the insight and courage to be herself and
not another, even if that other tells her on the Testa-
ment and his oath that it is the only way.
Woman is the maternal beautifier of the world
and there is no limit to her work on those lines. She
has but to be herself and then design her life and
her home on realities and not stereotyped patterns.
The atmosphere and very walls of one woman's room
spells a lyric, of another a doggerel, of another a
caricature, and of another a Futurist daub of many
borrowed colours. Every individual woman who
takes herself seriously as the charmer, the mystic,
the winged human with feet firmly planted on the
earth, is the real emancipator. The most drastic
militancy woman can attempt is to make herself both


indispensable and desirable. To earn her living and
organise her life so that she becomes the most necessary-
spoke in the civic wheel is to be at once a menace
and a meaning. One of the ways of accomplishing
this is surely more or less to monopolise those centres
of industry which by nature and inclination she can
run better than man because of her natural instincts
and acquired experiences.
" The home is the enemy of woman," says W. L.
George in his challenging book, Woman and To-
morrow. He looks on the average home of the past
as the oppressor of woman, and concludes that " the
sterility of home labour is the result of social rather
than conjugal conditions." The daily combat with
small details and worries, petty as cobwebs, and the
battling with moods and inefficiency render the life
of most housewives more wearing than battlefields
or the Stock Exchange for men. It is quite time that
domesticity reappeared in a civilised form. This
form, so Mr. George thinks, will be one of " voluntary
organisation, an orderly anarchic society, when the
two sexes no more exact services from each other
than do the individuals." He rightly protests
against the using of women, even in domestic duties,
merely for the procuring of man's comfort. Co-
operation need not imply servility or drudgery for
either side of the contracting parties. Freedom in
work, high pay, and expert labour must take
the place of drudgery, poor wages, and incapacity.
In other words, domestic work must become


a profession and cease to be a haphazard experi-
ment.
In the newer domesticity the slave must go and
the free-woman arrive. The atmosphere surrounding
the sultan and the harem, with wives and servants
as ornaments or drudges, are both out of date, ahd
the " velvety prison "is doomed. The wage-earning
woman has a magnificent chance before her as artist,
decorator, and domestic expert in order to inaugurate
housekeeping as a highly efficient and highly organised
trade. Woman is so essentially a . creator that she
can find endless opportunities in a new system of
catering and housekeeping. The obsolete and nerve-
destroying methods of supply and demand in domestic
affairs must give way to efficient and well-paid
service. Artistic homes, delicious and nourishing
cookery, limited hours for efficient workers, and
higher pay for every form of " menial " work are
the lines on which a possible reformation can evolve.
The co-operative home movement has come to
stay. It is, however, far from complete yet, either
as a democratic or as a financial success. It is an
urgent need of modern life and should be labour-
saving, time-saving, and a husbanding of nervous
force, as well as an expression of democratic
solidarity.
To get the most out of life with the least nervous
strain or financial output is the problem to be faced
by good housewives and home-lovers. Women at
present, through habit and tradition, are essentially


the best organisers of the home, whether that home
is run on democratic or individualistic lines. It
might be well if they formed a monopoly in this
matter through proving their superior efficiency.
The first thing they would have to do would be to
examine the home needs of the modern man and
woman, and then the possibility of supplying those
needs. An elaboration of the hotel or the boarding-
house system does not supply such needs or suggest
home to tired workers. For a home to be real it
must be capable of lavish hospitality, excellent
cooking, cosiness and privacy, at will. It is not easy
to combine the useful and the beautiful under one
roof, or unite freedom, equality, and comradeship on
an economic and domestic basis. The women who
are able to inaugurate this combination of modern
ideals into practical working order can command
big salaries. It is the need of the hour. Many of us
are willing to pay in order to be delivered from irk-
some details, as some of us are willing to be paid
and take our share in the delight or the drudgery
domesticity implies.
The time has arrived when every town and village
should have well-equipped bureaus for the supply
of expert labour to co-operative homes. The
domestic drudge is obsolete and the slut a slur on
modern civilisation. Efficient domestic workers need
training and organising into a compact and highly
paid body, like midwives or nurses, to serve at a
moment's notice any domestic need of the com-


munity. The training and organising of such a staff
is itself a profession for women.
There are thousands of capable women whose
work is lost to the community through the lack of
opportunity such a bureau would create. It would
not only open the doors for congenial work and fair
remuneration to the average woman of average
capacity, but it would enable the artist and the
invalid to specialise or to recruit without over-
working, degrading, or underpaying those who supply
the necessary domestic labour involved. It would
make life a very different thing for the community
at large, for specialised work would open up the way
for specialised talents.
Co-operative homes, run on domestic lines and
implying not only good pay but interchange of
service, would satisfy one section, and that an in-
creasing one, of the community and find employ-
ment for women outside masculine competition.
There is, however, a larger section of the community
who are, and probably always will remain, more
individualistic than socialistic, but who are face to
face with the fact that service is becoming more
impossible and limited than hitherto and more ex-
pensive. These people may realise that even along
individualistic lines there is much room for reform
which may prevent disaster and disorderliness in
household organisation. Simplification in individual
houses, the making of cottages into beautiful homes,
the communal life of congenial friends and families,


run on somewhat the same lines as the co-operative
experiment, would bring about a solution of many
complicated domestic problems.
Every home or room should be the expression of
the personality owning it, and in these various ex-
periments experts are needed to know how to carry
out individual ideas and tastes. From the cleaning
of saucepans to the hanging of pictures a large
organisation of women is imperative who know their
work and can teach others technically to follow their
lead. There is no reason why an elaborate and
world-wide scheme on these lines should not be started
at once. It implies instant employment, a break-up
in congested industries, a good financial and healthy
life for women, and a boon to every member of the
community, either directly or indirectly. Beauty
is worthy of complete emphasis, but under present
conditions it is subordinated to commercialism. The
ostracism of the dolTs house, the bird-cage, and the
prison will mean emergence for both men and women.
The true emancipation is to deliver women from
economic pressure and find new channels for her
manifold maternal powers. In organising and manag-
ing homes of varied beauty and comfort she will not
only become economically independent, but a greater
power in the community. The new system of house-
keeping would make for definite and permanent
reform in household management, which might
eventually become a State concern. To secure per-
fection in domesticity is at least as important as to


have efficient postal or telephonic services. Brain
workers and artists of all kinds would be free to give
to the world their best by working under harmonious
conditions, and manual workers could render their
services in the same spirit. In such an experiment,
carried out more fully than has ever been tried yet,
Individualism could actually develop because of its
twin Socialism, and Beauty would almost certainly
obtain its rights as a result of the combination. For,
after all, the object of social reform should be to
secure liberty for the individual, and through personal
liberty beauty and joy for the community at large.
The struggle for the Suffrage has intensified many
problems which it will take all the intellectual energy
of women to solve. Men are awakening, through the
sane and insane methods of political women, to a
new situation. Women themselves are also being
roused to a clearer idea of what they will be in the
State when the clamour for the vote is over. Hither-
to it has been a fight for mere rights as against
monopolies. In the near future this struggle must
lead to a realisation of duties founded on a level-
headed facing of physiological realities. The normal
woman is maternal. The possibility of becoming a
legislator, a municipal councillor, a mayor, or even a
prime minister cannot alter that fact. The woman
with little knowledge and less wisdom denies this.
She insists on trying to be a poor imitation of man,
or else a mere neuter, possessing neither the virility
of manhood nor the charm of womanhood. Sex


hatred becomes almost as significant a characteristic
of this type of the moment as ivory buttons and
law-breaking. The absurdity of such an attitude
does not free it from danger even to the clear-headed
women, who are working for peace and not for dis-
cord, and whose aims are as sincere and dignified
as those of most of their brothers in the region of
politics. When women either deny their own natures
or become disloyal to one another they are practically
hindering their cause more than those who oppose
the enfranchisement of women. For a woman to
crave a man's place, instead of her own, in the world
at large, is to arrest progress. It is just the maternal
element we need so badly in politics, and it is short-
sighted to endeavour to minimise woman's most
significant warrant for political usefulness. In so
doing, woman is not only damaging her own small
world, but the larger one she hopes to change through
her influence in the State. The question of loyalty
to her own sex and party is only secondary to the
inner voice which demands the fulfilment of maternal
ministrations to the State as well as to the private
home. The loyalty of woman to woman is quite
as important as the loyalty of one sex to another.
The militant woman of to-day is not, to outward
seeming, the maternal woman. If she were, she would
not, in the political nursery, imitate her naughty
boy who, because he cannot immediately get what he
wants, knocks the head from his rocking-horse and
throws bricks in the face of his nurse. We know that


when she means to attain a given end in her own
nursery or schoolroom the maternal woman relies
on her insight and on her resolution. Noise is not
her refuge. She makes herself so necessary in the
nursery that both the roguish boy and the demure
girl find out at last that it is not good policy to try
and kick so good an administrator and so delightful
a playfellow out of the door, or to humbug her any
longer with statements that are false on the face
of them. She makes herself indispensable and
dominates while smiling. The woman who counts
to-day is the woman who persistently and quietly
makes herself necessary by capably filling the posts
already conceded to her, so that she gradually be-
comes regarded as indispensable. Uproar is neither
dignified, dangerous, nor drastic, in spite of all
the arguments in its defence. It more often than
not defeats its own ends.
The one and only way to gain the vote is to
educate women, not only to want it, but to realise its
significance when won. The maternal woman realises
not only its significance but also its insignificance.
One would think, to hear some of our women talk,
that the day the vote is won the world will be a
new Garden of Eden with Adam thrust outside to
commune with the serpent. The vote will not do
more for women than it has done for men. For
them it has been a small means to a possible end.
Other and more potent factors are needed in the
development of men and women alike to give the vote


all the possibilities that are claimed for it. The vote
will not necessarily free ns from petty aims and
malicious actions, nor will it give us courage to pro-
gress until woman brings to its aid the tremendous
maternal force within her. The true mother forgets
herself in the general good. She is happy in giving,
rarely in grasping. She never deals blows, but
cures through firmness and tenderness. Through her
very maternity she realises that new births do not
come about in an hour, and that pain and struggle are
inevitable in all great developments. She is " with-
out haste and without rest." She smiles serenely and
yet tolerantly at party strife and political jealousy.
It is the maternal, then, that we want to bring
into politics to clear it of its slavery to traditions
and its attempts to formulate moral laws. The
morality of the future is very largely in the hands of
woman, so that she will need all the educative dis-
cipline possible to fit her for her responsible work.
The true mother, in a kindly spirit, will put the
dunce's cap on the heads of her hysterical daughters
who mistake noise for freedom and sex hatred for
emancipation. She will help to calm the ruffled
tempers of her sons who, in the political arena,
struggle to keep the floor entirely for themselves.
The maternal woman's great desire is not so much to
be in evidence as to be herself evidence that a nation
inspired by women and governed by men will make
cleaner and juster laws than one governed by women
in defiance of men.


It cannot be too often repeated that sex hatred
means retrogression and not progression. Man and
woman are compensatory but not opposed, equal but
not alike, " equipotential but not equivalent," as it
has been lately expressed. The paternal and maternal
are as essential in politics as in home life. The feeble,
swooning woman is out of date and the masculine
woman is out of favour, but the maternal women has
been for all time and will be always the mainstay of
men and nations. Childlessness cannot kill the
maternal in a true woman, nor can mere political
frenzy. The modern feeling tends towards making
maternity a crowning characteristic of all highly
developed women whose need is to use their innate
force in order to help all the children of the State.
Exclusiveness in the maternal instinct and absorption
in child-bearing is characteristic of the savage more
than of the advanced woman. To be content only to
rock one cradle, regardless of the discomfort and need
of thousands of little ones in the larger family of the
State, has become almost a vulgarity through the
selfish absorption it implies. The maternal instinct
only needs enlarging to be the most effective power of
modern times. The maternal woman, in the work of
the State, as in her private home, will diffuse sanity
and serenity into the difficult details of legislation.
It is too late to ostracise woman from politics, but
it is not too late to save her from becoming a mere
politician. Equal opportunity for political usefulness
does not imply equal methods of carrying out the work.


Diversity implies greater expansion and better state-
craft. It is not a question of superiority of sex, but
of willingness to share burdens. In domestic and
political life the maternal woman is the sweet eman-
cipator and the tactful arbitrator.


POLITICAL MILITANCY: ITS CAUSE AND CURE
I HAVE been told by my friend Mrs. Pethick Lawrence,
who has known me for more than twenty-five years,
that I know nothing about politics, nothing about
militancy, and very little about the woman question
at all. According to her, it is as appropriate for me to
speak on the cause and cure of political militancy as
it would be for a sailor to argue on surgery or a
physician to hold forth on painting. I am quite
willing to agree with Mrs. Lawrence. The first step
in knowledge is to know that we know nothing, but
that surely is no reason why one should not try to
grow closer to apprehension of any truth through
revealing one's limitations and inviting others, by
discussion and opposition, to enlarge our outlook and
perception. I have worked at these questions for
more than thirty years, but I know that does not
imply that I am what Mrs. Lawrence would call
" sound " on them.
I am not going to defend politics or militancy, nor
to deride and belittle them.
Women have been trying for years to get the vote,
as an expression of justice. But the mystic nature of
woman seemed, in her first political awakening, to be a
140


barrier to any vital dealing with her own problems in
connection with those of man. A woman, physio-
logically and spiritually, works from within outwards
—a man from without inwards. It is a law of nature
and has to be reckoned with in dealing with these
questions. The day dawned at length, however, when
a section of women at last realised that, in justice, the
vote is as much the woman's right as it is her right to
drink wine or to smoke if her taste lies in these ways.
It is, however, not insistent upon| her to vote, to
smoke, or to drink if she dislikes these things. But it
is insistent upon men and governments to give her
equal opportunity with men to serve the public good
in the same way that man thinks he is serving the
commonwealth, by voting for what he considers right
as against what he considers wrong.
The women who saw the truth of their cause were
bent on convincing other women who had never even
thought about this matter at all. The educative
process of the deliverance of woman from mere man-
made law had begun. A little advance was made
year by year, but so little that even Punch was not
moved beyond caricature. Few daily papers ever
spoke of the suffrage as it concerns women. Then,
suddenly, the militant suffragettes alarmed all London
by a raid on the House of Commons. Now, whatever
people may say or think about political militancy,
we must remember the fact that, but for the suffrag-
ettes, the apathy of the parasitic women in our midst,
and the ignorance of many men would have remained


just where they were till now. Jog-trot methods were
suddenly eclipsed in a dramatic onslaught. If the
drama does nothing else, it generally keeps people
awake. The first attack was efficient, almost edu-
cative, and more or less dignified. It led to results
which ought not to be minimised, and cannot be
ignored or derided. The awakening was terrific in
importance and magnitude. It spread like an in-
fection, this rebellion of distinguished and cultured
women in our midst, this apparent outrage on woman-
hood itself to gain a recognition of womanhood.
Many of us were stirred to our depths and ignored all
the cheap talk about self-advertisement and hysteria.
People can advertise themselves in more popular and
less painful ways than by going to prison ; and though
many of us deplored the later tactics of the Women's
Social and Political Union, we nevertheless recognise
the immense importance of the fact that the mass of
women who had never weighed the question of para-
sitism among themselves or prostitution among others,
are to-day struggling to solve those questions in their
own homes and in the lives of others. Women are
educating themselves day by day in the only way
education is worth while, by experiment and organ-
isation, and they are also slowly proving their worth
by efficiency in the posts they have already won in
public work. Women must not only be judged by
their mistakes, but by the less dramatic but more
effective results in educative and municipal work,
which is hastening the greater emancipation of women.


Neither men nor governments can resist persistent
efficiency as an argument for the opportunity to do
wider work. The educative work is proceeding more
quickly than many of us realise, and, once women are
organised, there will be no need for drastic militarism
to gain their ends.
At the time the militants made their first dramatic
plunge, we must remember, the majority of men and
women laughed at the idea of women having votes
at all, as they laughed at impossible situations in
comic opera. All that is changed, and tactics must
alter with the new average attitude towards votes
for women. The difference is almost wholly due to
the splendid organisation, the educative process,
and the loyalty of women to each other evoked by
the enthusiastic band of militants.
Militancy, then, as a challenge, has had its use.
I say had its use because, as an organised modern
device through which intelligent women choose to
insist on justice, it seems to me not only ineffectual
but wasteful—wasteful in time and in energy, and
bad in a certain vindictiveness of attitude towards
men and governments. All reforms are fluid and
not rigid things. What is good to-day may be bad
to-morrow ; what is strong to-day may be weak
to-morrow. Militant methods, like all war, belong
to the savage more than to the civilised. War,
vindictive and cruel as it always is, war is loved by the
populace and dreaded by the prophet. Violence
will always have its defenders in a nation which once


loved bull-baiting and cock-fighting, a nation which
still loves prize-fighting, gambling, and hunting
better than music or painting or dancing. The vote
is only a means to an end. It is not the end itself.
It has been sarcastically said that when man gives
woman the vote, he will give it because he knows its
uselessness. It is only of use because it assures a
hearing in that babel of strife, bribery, corruption,
and commonplace we call political life. Its best use
for women, and perhaps its only use, will be to destroy
politics as they exist to-day and introduce measures
by which equality of opportunity can be the birth-
right of every citizen of the State, whether male or
female. When spirituality and common sense have
eliminated party greed and organised monopolies,
then the vote will be useless to both man and
woman. It is imperative to keep this in mind, or
we are liable to get obsessed by the vote, as some
people are obsessed by the imaginary omnipotence
of gold.
The vote is imperative because it is one point in a
circle of justice. It is not and never can be the circle
itself. It is one of the means by which woman can
at last realise herself as an entity and not as an
appendage. The terrible part of the position of
woman to-day is that neither her body nor her time
nor her individuality actually belongs to her. Though
her position is better than half a century ago, she is
still handicapped in producing her perfect self or her
perfect child, because she is not her own. She must


own herself in order to be able to give herself, either
to a man or to a child or to the race.
Woman is awake, and her demands will be met in
spite of man and in spite of herself, for we must
remember that she is as traditionalised in many ways
as her comrade man. He is as absurd a slave to
superstitions on the women question as woman on
the man question or the labour question. Lives are
being dwarfed, brutalised, minimised, and degraded
for the want of united action, and a realisation that
the Cornish motto of " One and All " is significant
of the need of women and of labourers. The labour
question and the women question are twins. The
labourer is awake, and woman is awake, and the
problems of both are in many ways alike. Freedom
must be gained for both, and, with it, equality of
opportunity.
I would not go so far as Mr. Upton Sinclair and
say that the labour movement and the woman's
movement should join hands in order to gain their
rights actually together. They must each insist on
justice, not only for their own sakes but for the
sake of the whole community. Men, however, the
majority of them at any rate, are not emancipated
enough to be trusted not to use women as means to
labour's ends and then rest content with what they
have gained. Woman must first be freed as woman,
as man must be freed as worker. They must be
economically independent first, so that they can later
be interdependent, just as every self-respecting


woman to-day cannot be financially dependent on
any man, not even her husband, in order that the
true law of love and interdependence shall be hastened
for all women.
With regard to the question of capital and labour,
woman must insist on her own emancipation as a
separate freedom because she means later to join
forces with labour and gain the true equality of the
workers and women in one. Serfdom is doomed for
both the woman and the labourer. It is only a
question as to signing its death warrant in politics
and the home. It is women themselves, without
violence or sex hatred, who must organise and
courageously carry through this reformation in the
lives of the individuals who, as men, women, and
co-workers, constitute the State.
Woman had grown so desperate just before
militant methods snared her, desperate through the
lethargy of man and the apathy of woman, that she
violated her own nature and eventually minimised
her power by adopting small means for her great
end—the means of force and spite and artifice. She
simply could not get a hearing, so she reverted to
methods opposed to her make-up in soul and body.
She became, as a militant suffragette, an imitator
of her child, instead of drawing on her maternal
nature to gain her maternal ends. What was she
to do ? She could not get a hearing from men at all.
The first onslaught of the organised militants was
really a cry of exhausted patience. "We want


justice/' they cried. " Attend to us. Meekness has
not sufficed, neither arguments nor intelligent reason-
ing have availed, so we will scream and kick in order
to gain your attention." They certainly gained
attention, from every side and party. The older
suffrage societies were loyal and grateful, and put
prejudices aside in a whole-hearted way and acclaimed
the younger and more ferocious of their sisters in
their attempts to be heard. But the methods which
were allowable for awakening the dead are out of
date at the actual moment of resurrection.
Let us recall for a moment the first organisation
of the Salvation Army. In many points this militant
movement in politics is similar to the first onslaught
of General Booth upon conventional religion. The
drum and fife of the Salvation Army woke many a
lass and lad to the wonders of their own spiritual
heritage. It made the public think; it aroused
criticism. It was clever enough to appeal to the
average in human nature, to the love of noise, to the
inherent cry of the leader to lead and the followers to
follow. Its autocracy, its definiteness, its dogma, its
hero-worship, and its capacity for collecting huge
sums of money to save the lost, were immense, just
as in this woman's movement in politics. It was
vital and dramatic, and made use of the need for
sacrifice and martyrdom which is in the make-up of
us all, and it used the apparently waste material
which came to its hand, and made it a usable product
for the good of the community.


It jarred terribly, just as militant tactics jarred,
but the cry caught many a slum lad and lass, as
militant tactics have taught many a half-evolved man
and woman to think out the woman question for
themselves. When, however, the serious work of the
Salvation Army came on, a process of education came
with it, and less and less emphasis was put upon the
original methods, which were practically methods of
advertisement. The Salvation Army became grad-
ually a constructive power in the State.
The reviving thing about these militants is the
way they are approaching a solidarity unknown
among women in the same degree before. This and
the prison reforms they have consciously and uncon-
sciously introduced ought to reconcile the fastidious
to the little loss sustained by their eccentric methods
of trying to gain a hearing. It is a very significant
fact, this solidarity of women, and is a militancy of
the true order, as the solidarity of women and men is
beyond all need of militancy. This is the fact to be
emphasised about these fighting women rather than
the temporary aberration of window-smashing. For
let us be brave, and declare it is an aberration, as war
itself is an aberration. War is antiquated and ridi-
culous in the light of modern religious and ethical
feeling, and militancy of the window-smashing order
is not only farcical but a waste of precious time and
energy.
We all know that revolution, though by no means
an ideal way of reconstructing society, is sometimes


the easiest of all methods to bring about destruction.
Its ineffectuality is proved by the fact that it more
often than not leads to reaction. France had its
reaction in Napoleon. The tyranny was merely
diverted, not destroyed. Revolution is better than
apathy, but wanton destruction wastes time. What
we must aim at is construction. When it is time for
the apple blossom to disappear there is promise of
the fruit. A wild beating of the tree to hasten the
fruit merely kills it. To haste is as disastrous as to
rest in these matters. At the appointed time, blossom
changes to fruit, so that there is a dual process of
destruction and construction.
Woman should be, by spiritual and physiological
laws, a constructive agent in the world's work. She
is a maternal force. This is even conventionally
granted to be her legitimate sphere in the home, so
why not in the State ? It is not a matter of actually
bearing children. The women who have children of
their own are often less truly maternal than those
who are not mothers in the accepted meaning of the
word. In the future, we have to give the maternal
force full play, for we are badly in need of a new home
and a new State. This is surely the underlying
feeling in women's need of the vote, the need to use
her maternal powers in the State as well as in the
home, the need to emphasise motherhood in the laws
as well as fatherhood.
The maternal element in woman is almost beyond
finding out, and so she is often called a mystic. So


she is; and it is this mystical maternity within her
that will gain her not only the vote, but those stronger
and more beautiful things which no vote can give.
The first thing it will do will be to give her to
herself, a self never realised in her as yet, either as
a savage, a domestic drudge, a mere breeder, or a
politician. It is just this self she must always reckon
with even during her frenzy to get the vote.
If woman is eminently constructive, what means
thereto can she employ in the present crisis of her
affairs ? Surely the first thing women have to do is
to realise that they are maternal, and that maternity
is no limitation of work, but the biggest means
towards the greatest work for the State, for the
redemption from slavery of all the human family.
In woman's struggle to get the vote, she must
never lose sight of a fact that —though she is man's
equal, and possibly his superior in some things, as
he is hers in others —is the foundation of her power.
This fact is that she is ruling her nursery, and that
while doing so she must steer clear of anything
approaching sex hatred. This may sound trite,
but it is a very essential point in this great struggle.
Anything approaching sex hatred is retrogression, is
ludicrous. The worst men are our babies, the best
our lovers and comrades. They are as much to be
pitied when monopolising affairs of State as we are
to be pitied when limited laws either dwarf our useful-
ness or crush us to hell. We must always bear in
mind that man is as far from his true kingdom of


manhood as woman is from her true kingdom of
womanhood. In all this struggle for the vote nothing
is so evident as this fact.
We must, then, keep our love of men as a mother
keeps her love of her children, and never in speech or
action depart from this maternal spirit. Sex hatred
is quite as illogical as maternal hatred. It is with
men, and not against them, that the battle has to be
fought and won. That men have done and are still
doing insanely cruel and stupid things to women is
true. That spirit is the enlargement of the bird-
nesting, hunting, shooting, and caging spirit. The
mother does not hate her son for this. She knows he
will grow out of it, as she has outgrown her doll.
But though she does not hate him, she protects herself
against his primitive instincts, and she protects not
only herself but others from them through organisa-
tion and also through the limitation of his opportunities
for irresponsible outbursts. The very love woman
has for man must be her spur to defend herself and
others from his ignorance and gluttony. By gluttony
I mean man's possession of woman for his own ends.
She must protect herself, just as man must protect
himself from being made a mere means of livelihood
by women.
The saner war, if it still must be war, may consist
in the breaking of hearts as mothers break their
hearts, rather than in the smashing of windows.
Woman must free herself from her present limitations.
She must free herself by her threefold maternal


unfolding, an unfolding towards her lover, her child,
and the State. She must use every legitimate chance
that comes to emancipate herself in order that she
can free others. In these days it behoves women to
cultivate every charm they possess, to dress well, to be
well, happy and desirable in the fullest and finest
sense, in order that the rusty gates of prejudice
should open and the prison doors be unlocked.
Woman must be quick to use the chances which are
hers in order to gain others which are not as yet hers.
Her object should be to become a maternal states-
woman. Let her prove her capacity for this in even
seemingly insignificant ways. Let her prove to the
world that she knows what she is about. Every
detail is significant, every honourable devic® worth
while. Let her use all the votes she already has on
municipal councils; let her home be the home of a
capable citizen and not the home of a doll or a slut or
a slave-driver. Let her be as capable at making a
pudding as at laying down the laws for the perfection
of other people's lives; let her study eugenics as well
as the wonderful art of living; let her voice not be
heard so much in the streets as in the everyday
matters she can and must organise. The little things
really count the most in bringing a final day of reck-
oning. For instance, if every woman who has studied
the fives of sweaters bought at no shop where she knew
underpaying the workers was practised, if she re-
fused, so far as she knew, to use in her home goods
produced by sweated industries, think how, in a few


years, that would divert trade from the sweated and
congested corners of commercial life and bring fairplay
trade into the open. These are constructive tactics.
They are the tactics of Felix Holt in the mouth of a
George Eliot. " Well/' said Felix, in answer to the
favourite remark on this matter that if one does not
do a certain thing, another will, " well, if some men
must be thieves and liars —they may, I won't! "
If we think of it, it is only cowardice and apathy
which retard the millennium. In proportion as each
one of us refuses to be a coward or an idler, do we
advance or retard the true civilisation when men and
women can work together as free citizens. While,
as maternal citizens, we women are trying to get our
voice heard about the questions which chiefly concern
us as women, wage-earning and prostitution, let us
see to it that, as individuals, we are neither parasites
nor sweaters. If we are keen for martyrdom, there is
plenty of it to hand if we refuse to be kept by men
or to sweat women. A sane boycott is a dignified
attitude. It is easier to break windows and go to
prison than to divide a house against itself by con-
scientious and determined action on what is right
and true, whether we get the vote or not. The true
emancipator is not a Jesuit declaring that a given end
will justify any means. No end justifies some means,
but some means, however apparently trivial, will
surely in the long run ensure a given end. The truly
maternal woman sees beyond politics. She sees a day
ahead when even if politics organised or allowed


sweated labour, war, tbe white slave traffic, mono-
polised corners in capitalised industries, there would
not be men and women to avail themselves of the base
opportunities given. For that day to come, every
woman who sees must act according to the light within
her, and the opportunity afforded her from outside.
While she is busy smashing windows, she may be
neglecting her real chance, and real chances rarely
offer twice.
Woman must cease to be either a parasite or a
slave and become economically free. To be eco-
nomically free is to be rid of the necessity to be a
prostitute or a parasite. There are some who are
parasites or prostitutes from choice, and only educa-
tion and ethical eugenics or religious ideals can alter
in several generations these inborn traits. It is well
for us to bear in mind that every woman who is kept
by a man, whether in marriage or out, is already
either a parasite or a prostitute. The legality or
illegality of the situation does not affect the fact.
Woman can never be free, and no vote can make her
free, till she is economically independent of a man,
first as a protest and then as a defence. The true
militant protest of the moment is for every woman
to refuse to be dependent on man till she is recognised
as an equal citizen with him. Love can take or give
anything, but in order to free love, so that it can give
and take righteously, woman must refuse to sell
herself, even in love. We want to get rid of the very
name dependence in this relationship, in order to win


the true interdependence. While a woman has to
go to a man and ask for money—whether for dress
or food—she is dependent. She is in the position of
a slave or a parasite, and no love—however great —
can exonerate her from aiding in the general implica-
tion that woman is not her own —that she is bought
with a price. She must neither be bought nor sold.
She must belong to herself, in order that she can give
or withhold herself as she will. Surely this is a
matter more worth while doing than to go to prison
for breaking windows. It is a greater sacrifice, too,
for it may break hearts instead of windows, but the
maternal woman, like the Spartan woman, would
rather her children should die than that they should
not be free and noble.
Some may say that this is all slow and vague,
and that women want the vote first and independence
through it. True economic independence for woman
depends less on the vote than on education, and
immediate experiment on sound lines. All educa-
tional reform is slow, but it is sure, and the time is
ripe for it and for immediate heroism on the lines
which education and morality suggest. Behind all
the vague and dogmatic things women are doing
now is the longing to do the right thing and at once.
The right thing is a constructive thing. In order to
effect a constructive reform every individual woman
can do certain definite things to-day, now. It is
imperative on each one of us in our different spheres
to set our own and the State house in better order.


As all people like definite statements, I will, in con-
clusion, name a few things women can do.
Women can, first and foremost, refuse to be
dependent on any man. If this implies hard labour,
well, what then ? Freedom has never been won
without it in one form or another.
Women can, again, refuse to add to the sweating
horror by always buying where they know there is
no underpaying, and by refusing to deal where grossly
sweated goods are sold.
They can, moreover, keep their own houses in
order by habitually organising them as if already
bound by the laws they want their votes to introduce.
Women can, by persistent habit, and this needs
particular emphasis, refrain from even a suspicion of
mean trickery or wheedling in love affairs, in clubs,
or in business. Women are still traditionalised in
these matters. To travel first class with a third
class ticket, to steal newspapers from her club, to
bargain the very soul out of another woman's body
in domestic or business affairs, to push her way into
the centre of a queue instead of taking her legitimate
turn at the end, are examples of what I mean by
trickery. If women want the privileges of sexual
equality with men, they must at least play the game
as honourable men play it.
There is another very important thing woman
can do at the present crisis. She can make herself
more desirable and more charming and more capable
than ever before, in order, not to lure men or to sell


or even give herself, but to refuse herself to any man
till she has educated him, through her maternal
wisdom, into the ways of health, cleanliness, and
justice. All this need not hinder her in her sane
boycott as a tax resister or a capable organiser of a
better social world, which no vote alone can give.
The vote can only aid her to enter the vestibule of
her real kingdom, and that is the only reason it is
worth getting.
With these considerations I have suggested in her
mind, woman can also educate herself, while getting
the vote, to estimate its uselessness in the face of
spiritual truth and her own maternal insight.
This may possibly sound like rebellion. Of
course, it is rebellion, but neither of the strident nor
of the arm-chair order. It needs intelligence, control,
drudgery, patience, and no concession. It is the
rebellion of the maternal woman who wants to save,
not only herself, but all her children.


WAR: AN ANCIENT VIRTUE AND A MODERN
VICE
MORALITY is so largely a matter of hemisphere or of
epoch that to dogmatise as to badness and goodness
in a person or in a nation is often futile. A worn-out
virtue may be an up-to-date vice. What appears
strenuous morality in one age or nation may be
counted decadence in another. Take, for instance, the
different attitude towards " Greek love " in antiquity
and to-day, or towards polygamy among the Hebrews
of Abraham's day and the Americans of our own.
The very same action may be heroic or cruel in
accordance with its motive. One boy killing his
father in sudden rage at the sight of his mother
being nearly beaten to death, and another stabbing
his father to secure his money, perform identical
actions. The motive alone exonerates or condemns
the offender. Nations creating a world-wide anguish
through a war begun for gain, are not in the same
position, from an ethical point of view, as those
nations entering the battlefield in order to rescue,
by the only means possible, a small country from the
tyranny of a larger one, or a big national ideal from
a commercial obsession. Sin, according to evolved
158


ideas, is living below instead of on the level of one's
vision. In other words, sin is realising what is the
best to do, and conceding to the second best, if not
deliberately choosing the worst. What is normal in
some animals, as eating dung, would be disgusting
in the savage, as cannibalism would be an offence
in the cultivated human being. Among some
wandering tribes it has been reckoned a fine action
to kill the aged. The " virtue " of this proceeding
can easily be realised when one imagines what hard-
ships the sick and feeble would endure while travel-
ling under irksome conditions and with insufficient
food. To-day, with old-age pensions and reasonable
chances of a cheerful and secure end to their days, it
would be a sin to shorten the lives of those on whom
we have once been dependent. The " virtue" of
destroying female new-born infants as comparatively
useless, now that the social equality of men and
women is becoming recognised, would be a crime.
So we realise that what in the past was recognised as a
virtue may often safely in the present be branded as a
vice. Morality is not a rigid but a fluid thing. Much
of the personal and national anguish in the world
to-day is due to our constant striving for rigidity in
our laws and customs, instead of welcoming and
organising the newer point of view.
In the question of modern warfare the unevolved
human being still clings to the Old Testament ideal
of a tooth for a tooth. The more evolved person
theorises about loving one's neighbour and then


advocates peace at any price. The fully evolved
personality recognises his limitations as well as
his opportunities in this matter of war and peace.
His foe, national or personal, serves as a looking-
glass. Could any militant suffragette during this
present militancy, which dwarfs all other types into
child's play, refuse to learn the lesson which the foes
of true civilisation are teaching day by day ? Possibly
we are learning a new attitude towards our foes as we
educate them and ourselves in a process of defence
against them. Is there not evidence that the day
is at hand when, in our treatment of criminals,
aliens, and foes, we shall " make good " in a double
sense ? To kill, to torture, or to transport for life a
mad or mistaken fellow-being is to proclaim our fear
of him or our incapacity to deal with him in a civilised
way. Is there not in modern civilisation an entirely
new point of view in these matters ? Then why not
a correspondingly new action ? When our national
educators, as the headmaster of Eton College, are
condemned when they ask us to save ourselves and
our foes from hatred, it is proved that the theory of
Christianity and its logical outcome in action are not
yet one in the popular mind.
During the present great war of the nations,
observers have had pretty conclusive demonstration
as to how far modern " culture " has broken up the
brute forces within and without. In times of panic,
war, sickness, and earthquakes, there are sudden
revelations of the worth of individualities and of


communities. The veneer is off, and the searchlight
of truth reveals both old atrocities and new beauties.
In the European War we have a spectacle of what
military and intellectual efficiency amounts to if the
customary decencies of modern warfare are not
observed. If, according to Lloyd George, " treaties
are the currency of international statesmanship," the
breaking of them, when a nation finds it is not to its
interest to keep them, is surely dishonourable. The
laying of mines at random, the placing of women and
children in front of armies, the indiscriminate tor-
pedoing of ships, unmentionable assaults on women,
ruthless killing of the wounded, the wanton destruc-
tion of beautiful churches and works of art impossible
to restore, the march in the name of God while doing
the devil's basest tricks as spies or patriots, in order
to obtain victory at any cost, make us aware with
what kind of foe civilisation has to deal. Even the
strongest advocates of peace have realised that in this
war the partial and pitiable remedy has been a
homoeopathic one —the cure of bloodshed by blood-
shed. The new intention excuses in a slight measure
the old methods.
The real question is as to what we can do to
prevent a repetition of a " holy war " in the civilisa-
tion of the future. The new values must be faced
and tried in action and not only weighed in a theoreti-
cal balance. The treatment of our foes, not only
during the struggle but after it is over, will be the
test of our spiritual retrogression or advance. When


we come face to face with madness and ruin as the
result of passions let loose in looting and destroying,
it is not easy to be tolerant with the foe. We must
remember that we often manufacture our enemies 5
sins, and the attack is generally the outward sign of
a prior aggression. The spectacle of national hatred
is so revolting that it makes one feel that if in the
peace contract a pledge was demanded of all nations
that the equipments of war should all be destroyed
and no more manufactured, it would not be such a
fantastic idea as a year ago. Our eyes and mouths
seem full of blood as we realise that the cure of war
is perhaps in this very madness of it. " Potsdamna-
tion, 55 as it has been called, is having the same horrible
death-throes as cannibalism, slavery, and feudalism.
Birth pains, growing pains, death pains, are definite
agonies leading to reconstruction. Constructive
internationalism, however, will not replace destruc-
tive militarism in a year. Hatred is not easily dis-
persed, even when hitherto unrealised spiritual vibra-
tions reach us from the trenches. We must not
forget that " Potsdamnation 55 is not by any manner
of means made only, or cultivated only, in Germany.
When any nation lusts to dominate entirely the waves
or the air or beneath the seas, it has not grasped the
spirit of modern internationalism or interdependence.
The humiliation of the figure —half Siegfried, half
journalist, as he has been called—of the Kaiser will
not end militarism. It is even possible his downfall
could increase militarism. War to-day concerns


every individual and not only potentates and states-
men. That Christmas Eve message to us from the
trenches spelt a revolution and a reformation. It
was as if we could see men killing one another as
ghosts and eating and playing together as men.
In that solidarity of the moment war was an atavistic
manifestation, a vice and not a virtue. We realised
for a moment that men and women would soon be
unable to think or act in terms of murder, fear, lust,
jealousy, or spite, only in a free interdependence
through which the evolved human being and the
artist could lead the world in freedom and beauty.
When we think not only as Germans, Russians,
French, or English, but in the terms of a universal
humanity, we are ending the wars of the world in a
more common-sense way than any peace treaties
alone could effect. The saviour of his country to-
day will be he who shows ancient insular virtues as
modern and destructive vices, and the fine statesman
will be the one who can most readily realise that it
is never too late to forge a vice into a virtue. To
increase armies and navies in the old spirit of fear,
hatred, and avarice will not ensure our safety. If
w T e increase our defences it must be in the spirit of
a sane householder who provides for a possible fire
or burglary. A Krupps murder organisation will
soon be unthinkable. When armaments are no
longer under exploitation by individuals or single
nations we shall be near a new civilisation. A change
in fashions of thought could bring the new methods


of action. When a man, a woman, or a nation
refuses, under any legal opportunities, to damage
physically or spiritually another nation or individual
we are approaching culture and leaving mere Kultur
behind. If we must endure a police administration,
either in war or eugenics for some time yet, let it he
an international and highly complex body organised
by intelligent men and women in order to endow
humanity with a new conception of service. To hate
the Kaiser or to want to crush Germany is stupid,
unscientific, and wasteful. Does a mother in her
nursery or schoolroom want to kill or crush her
obstinate, cruel, and overmastering child ? If she is
a wise mother she studies the obsession or the particu-
lar dominating vice of her strongest as well as her
weakest son, and she helps the one who has erred
the most to see the best, however long it takes her.
If she cannot do this she is as stupid and as erring
as any member of her household. Militarism, after
all, is only a bad habit, fostered by the press, the
nervous, and the self-seeking. Breaking in upon
the world as it has recently done in all its nakedness,
it is a mirror for nations to find out the worth of race
prejudices, commercial greed, traditional obsessions,
and class distinctions. Is any one of us clean-
hearted or as clean-handed as a dignified and far-
seeing mother would be in her large family ? Even
in the din of battles certain suspicions are growing
in the minds of statesmen that the ancient and the
modern ideas about war cannot intermingle. Can


we hope to produce permanent peace by preparing
for perpetual war ? Can we minimise hatred by
hating ? Can we introduce a new civilisation by
increasing murder, whether legalised by the War
Office or only unspiritually manufactured in our own
hearts ? Can we cure spies by shooting them or
traitors by exiling them ? This is surely ancient
Jesuitical sophistry as devilish in its dogmatism as it
is weak in its logic. The nation that is without sin
to-day let her dare to cast the first bomb.
In the dread and excitement of actual battles
few have had poise or leisure enough to dwell on
many important and far-reaching side-issues. One
of these is the immediate as well as the ultimate
treatment of our enemies. The treatment a man
metes out to his enemy, and the effect the enemy's
actions have upon the man, is a test of his decadence
or his progress. If it is true our enemies are often
our greatest moral levers, and if through them we
can better see ourselves and test our value as national-
ities or personalities, it is time even in the midst of
the horrors of battle to face a few facts. We still
applaud the officer who lets his enemy drop back
into the water because he spat in his rescuer's face.
We still ostracise naturalised " alien " enemies, and
we shoot spies at sight if they belong to any country
but our own. Through these actions we have lost
the right to place ourselves in the rank of reformers
and must be content to be looked upon as learners.
The meanest enemy a nation or an individual can


have appears to be a spy, a person who thinks any
means justifies his end. He seems, at first sight, on a
par with those who listen at doors, open other people's
letters, and give a half-truth which destroys knowing
the whole truth which saves. He is a paid agent for
obtaining information almost impossible to obtain in
any other way. Curiously enough, he is recognised as
part of a nation's legitimate equipment in times of
war, and yet when we catch him, if he belongs to
another nation, we shoot him with the same haste as
we destroy a mad dog.
Perhaps the only way to understand a spy is, in
imagination, to become that personage for a brief
period. We must see as he sees and understand as he
understands. The spy, in his own estimation, may
possibly imagine he is the cleverest and loyalest type
of man existing in the world. His life is at stake
for political ends. He considers himself, if caught, a
martyr, and reckons his death as an unjust crucifixion.
He probably considers that those who shoot him for
what he is pleased to consider his virtues of loyalty, in-
telligence, and courage used for his country are people
deficient in bravery themselves. When he sees the
"brutal enemy" take one of his undefended and forlorn
brothers and shoot him as he would shoot a mangy
cat, he prays to his God for ten more to take his place.
And they do. Why ? Because evil is rarely killed
by evil. It may be in a wrong way, but to him it is
the only way. When he is captured he surely deserves
quite as humane treatment as if he had helped in a


submarine or an airship. Shooting, moreover, does
not put down spying. It is the seed of that particular
herd of martyrs. In the London Times we find this
statement: " Ten may be found in a village and shot
one day. There will be twenty in the next to take
their place." Are we deceiving ourselves ? Are we
not trying to cure a new sin by the ancient virtue of
revenge ? In the truly civilised attitude is there not
a distinct need to reform and even in the end to help
our foes ? It is characteristic of the humanitarian
habit of mind which has been slowly evolving during
the ages. It is malice and revenge changing first into
pity and then becoming transformed into service.
To-day we treat spies as we once treated witches, and
for the same reason. We are killing what we fear
instead of turning a menace into an ally. The witch
might have been of untold value to the community
had her unusual powers been used by the Church. In
the midst of panic it may appear to be the easiest way
to hand to shoot and to ostracise, but it is not the most
effective. It is bad political economy, as the same
power used for evil can be educated, not tortured, into
good. It depends on the forging power latent in what
is attacked to convert the power of destruction into
construction. A fine statesman wastes nothing. He
uses the weak to minister to the strong and the strong
to protect the weak. The Inquisition is out of date.
It is time now to acquire new pow T er in the State
through enabling those who have erred most to see
best. Once war appears a semi-tragedy, an inversion


and a brutal offence against beauty, it is doomed.
The men, lifting their hands as they run from the
trenches apparently mad, are not so insane as those
of us who, knowing the truth, dare not proclaim it,
and who, having sons and daughters, shirk their clear
call to decry to them murder in all its forms. That
this is a " holy war " is the very reason that all wars in
the future shall be branded as unholy.
It is common sense that we cast off war. A sweat-
ing industrialism with its infernal motto that the
weakest must go to the wall and a degenerate material-
ism which we still insist on calling morality will one
day give place, as a reaction against this war of the
nations, to an international courtesy of nationalities
through moral force taking the place of brutal force
and so making civilisation a fine art. Gross mater-
ialism has expressed itself at the moment in this deadly
modern mingling of air, water, and fire to testify, as
Edward Carpenter declares, that " vanity and greed
have met together and patriotism and profits have
kissed one another." Many nations besides Germany
have looked on war as a law of nature and the source of
moral good, the spur of national religion and the back-
bone of a nation. These old-fashioned ethics are as
devastating as war itself. It is the new intuition,
the sane outlook, the wider understanding and sym-
pathy which will create the dynamics and statics
of a new civilisation. Corners in oil and corners in
moralities may cause as much devastation as bayonets.
We want fluid principles instead of rigid rules, spiritual


realities instead of antiquated ideals. Germany is not
tlie only nation whose intellectualism, religion, ethics,
philosophy, and inventiveness are under the obsessions
of exploitation and tyranny. It is a world disease
which is in slayer and slain, ally and foe. The way we
conclude a world peace will be the test of our decad-
ence or our growth, of whether we have uprooted the
fever of war or only subdued it till, in a more direful
manifestation, it becomes a world epidemic. It is for
us in the immediate future to prove whether we are
preys of the powers of darkness or prisms of the fuller
light.
As conquerors or conquered it is in our power now
to begin the new civilisation. The word of advice
Lord Roberts gave us just before his death is invalu-
able now. " May I give a word of caution," he says,
" to my countrymen against the unsportsmanlike
practice of abusing one's enemies. Let us avoid what
Mr. Kipling during the Boer War described as ' killing
Kruger with your mouth.' "
There are definite signs that war is doomed. The
mere fact that we apologise to each other for its exist-
ence is one of the signs. Nothing can make up for
this war but the cohesion of statesmen facing the peace
reckoning, not as mere diplomatists, but as parents,
in a spirit of forgiveness, constructiveness, sanity, and
understanding. The application of evolved theories
to old spiritualities, the sinking of national hatred
into international friendship, may make this war of
Europe the last war of the world. War is a decadence,


Gunpowder is literally dust and ashes. The new
civilisation will have neither war, vivisection, hanging,
or some forms of sport, either to save or to divert man-
kind. It is not shrapnel but spirituality which is to
save us; not submarines but superman and super-
woman—supermen refusing to slaughter and super-
women refusing to provide food for slaughter. At
the end of this w r ar, as Bernard Shaw advises, we had
better all cry " God forgive us all! " and stop counting
either our enemies' sins or our own virtues. If this
horror of blood can at last make us realise that war
is an ancient virtue which has become a deadly vice,
we may indeed honour and almost envy those who
have lost their lives in fires which may eventually
cleanse the world. In the true solidarity of mankind
there is no longer a place for permitted murder. It
is incumbent on a new world to insist on arbitration as
a substitute for bloodshed and to use all the agencies
of civilisation to end war for ever.


THE NEW CIVILISATION
THERE is no donbt that we are on the verge of a new
era in civilisation. With regard to war, love, birth,
death, morals, and art, we all know that some thoughts
and actions are doomed and that others are ready
to take their place. It was while I was in America
that I realised more than anywhere that, as feudalism
is dead, so commercialism, in its selfish sense, is
dying. If the Americans work largely with, one hand
to make big profits they give with the other, and if
they divorce often they love oftener. Their refusal
to go to war is not, as is so often supposed, a lack of
courage or a national laziness, but a realisation that
war, even if apparently necessary, is as decadent a
way out of national misunderstanding as cannibalism
is out of hunger.
It may be of interest to record my first impressions
of that new world at the forge, a new civilisation in
its first experiments. I went to America a little
imbued with prejudice, and expected to find an over-
whelming love of dollars, a rather artificial democracy,
and a noisy clamour of business with little originality
in art. I was mistaken, and came back as much
rejoiced by the new civilisation as in Spain I had


been by the more peaceful atmosphere of an old
culture.
America at the forge may yet teach Europe at the
game of obtaining an evolution which will bring good
education, valiant experiments, and fresh spiritual
episodes into civilisation.
As I left the Minneapolis upon my first voyage to
America, I entered New York in the same mood in
which a child enters its first circus. My impressions
at the end of the day were so rapid and so diversified
that as I fell asleep I felt I had been face to face with
a new civilisation in the making. The faults of youth
and the vigour of it also, the bluster of an outgrown
childhood mixed with the greediness of the schoolboy,
were all before me. I found them in the air, in the
streets, in the vivid faces and the rapid movements.
Neither greed nor snobbery are the real mainsprings
of this new onward swiftness. The clear, alert eyes
give their secrets, the nimble feet theirs. It is a new
world bent on seeking and finding, on amassing and
bestowing. Its vulgarity is a passing episode.
Robust democracy is the spinal column of the new
civilisation. The brutality of amassing is the same
kind of brutality a schoolboy shows when he fights
his fellow for marbles, or pennies. Like the school-
boy when he has won, the people of this new land are
careless about their gains, but on the whole choose to
give rather than to hoard. The millionaire in the
new democracy has the Walt Whitman need to
scatter amongst men and women as he goes. He


loves his achievements more than his possessions,
and in time he will grow to love his fellows quite as
much as his achievements. To amass and to hoard
is an ancient sin. The new civilisation gathers and
scatters. The weakest eventually will not go to the
wall because the strongest puts his back out and
knocks it down if it is a barrier for the weaker.
When listening to " Mother Jones/' the labour
agitator, speaking to three hundred women for nearly
two hours on the Colorado problem, I realised that
I was looking into the eyes of the new civilisation.
She stood before us in her eighty-third year, reminding
me of John Burns in his prime, shouting in Hyde
Park at the time of the great coal strike. The
deafening cheers that greeted her words showed the
trend of the new civilisation. The lust of greed will
soon be a disease as direful as melancholia, and the
passion for service an irresistible desire in a land
which has produced a Lincoln, an Emerson, and a
Whitman. The new impulse is as certain as birth,
as magnetic as love, and as inevitable as death.
I went to America in despair, realising that if
militancy stands for the last word in modern politics
we had better go to sleep and dream no more dreams
lest they change into nightmares. I was scarcely
two months there when I realised that the new
civilisation is as certain as that childhood passes into
manhood if given a reasonable chance. The chic
clothes, the dainty and digestible food, the haste
without actual scrimmage, the subtle echo of a


laughter testifying to a clean joie de vivre founded
on New England ideals, the distinction and dignity of
the arrangement in dwelling-houses, the architecture
of stations and public places in general, are all testi-
monies, in small things, of a new spirit in what, by
some, might be called mere commercialised luxury.
The intelligent working out of a real simplification
of life is being tried at last.
This simplification may justly be described as a
simplicity de luxe, but in the near future it will be
one of the spokes in the great wheel of woman's
economic freedom. Domesticity as a fetish is doomed,
and as an enslavement it will be out of order in the
new ways of living. In the new civilisation woman
will not be a doll, a slave, a parasite, or a drone, but
an artist —not only in handicrafts and the arts of the
Muses, but in the formation of the new life of the
future citizens.
There is in America a distinct intimation that the
future of civilisation will be a realisation of human
ideals and not a mere gallop for personal ones. It
may be a long cry from this first intimation to the
logical working out of Kant's gospel that no human
being should, be used as a mere means to the end
of another, but be an end in himself. The seeds,
however, are planted and the harvest is certain.
When I went over the public schools in Chicago
and realised that the parks had been brought to the
people at their slum doors, and when I saw in those
schools all the gifts of a new civilisation in the elaborate


swimming baths, recreation grounds, and libraries, I
realised another great spoke in the new wheel of
social progress. In the education of a people, on
national lines, lies a nation's future well-being. To
educe the best is to eliminate the worst.
When sitting by the judges in the Domestic
Eelations Court, in the Morals Court, and in the
Juvenile Courts, I knew for a certainty that this new
way of deahng with the poor in spirit and in will,
aided by an understanding of the finest ideals in
eugenics, would, in the near future, free humanity of
its dross and make room for its gold. Especially was
I impressed by these new methods when sitting by the
side of Judge Bartholme in her court one afternoon.
To watch a woman judge and a woman doctor together
analysing frailties and suggesting and compelling
remedies, in the spirit of mother and not in the spirit
of inquisitor, w T as to realise fully the importance of
the maternal in politics and the impotence of sex
rivalry or antagonism. To lead aright and in a spirit
of kindness young girls just developing into woman-
hood is indeed no easy task, and possibly never was
fit to be undertaken by any but women judges.
In the new civilisation women's economic in-
dependence of man will be the greatest means to their
interdependence. To sit for two days in those courts
in Chicago and watch the men and women in all
departments working in equal comradeship is to get a
glimpse into the near future when the savagery of
prostitution, the cannibalism of monopolising com-


mercialism, and the dulness of sexual jealousy and
tyranny will be nightmares of a decadent age. In the
noise and whirr and pathos of those police courts I
saw the new ideals of the modern world and the dawn
of a democracy which is the breath of a new life and
not the mere pose of a lingering death.
In a little stimulating talk with Miss Janette Bates
the legal attorney, I was further encouraged to find
that the judges have no prejudice about the matter of
sex as it touches jurisdiction. I was told that, though
all courtesies are given as from men to women, never-
theless, if the woman deserves rebuke or criticism she
gets it as from one human being to another. In those
crowded courts in Chicago there is an underlying
intimation that, in the civilisation of the future, the
human being will be more in evidence than the sex
being. Perhaps it was a delicate compliment to a
stranger which made both Miss Bates and Mr. Taylor
tell me that the woman invariably gets the best of it
in any dispute between the sexes. Certainly that
was my conclusion during the hours I sat in the several
courts —the most instructive schools I have ever
entered. To watch the Binet method tried and to
hear of some of the wonderful experiments in the
psychopathic laboratory, where men and women work
together in harmonious comradeship in order to solve
the problem of the feeble-minded, is to realise the
immediate needs of a new civilisation.
Every case in those courts has a new significance.
Each difficulty, for instance, brought up before Judge


Fry in the Domestic Relations Court impressed me
with the urgent need of the complete economic
independence of women. The difficulties, however,
of the immediate situation not only are baffling,
but seem insurmountable. Nevertheless, the new
civilisation hangs almost entirely on this economic
enfranchisement of woman. The immediate conse-
quences of any great emancipation mean heartaches,
tribulations, and mistakes in experiments of living in
freedom instead of bondage. But as the law of life
seems to be that we can only learn to walk by walking,
to love by loving, to govern by governing, experi-
ments must be risked and failures accepted as edu-
cative processes.
The great mental hunger and thirst for knowledge
in the new democracy is a sign that a certain mass of
civilised human beings are eager and ready to carry
out a new code of living. Rigidity binds us. De-
cadent domesticity, stereotyped love, hypocritical
devices to secure romance, paralysing conventions,
and a slender hope we often misname faith, are still
cherished as ideals. The keener spirits guess or
realise the newer truths, but they have not the courage
to put them into practice.
Let us consider some of the tendencies which could
easily be carried into actual reforms and so help to
make a new civilisation.
One of the most effectual reforms would be a
simplification of domestic life and a truer view of
" menial labour." To simplify is often to beautify.


To rid modern life of its knick-knacks is to make room
for those things which are necessary and beautiful.
The labour-saving devices in America, the excellent
construction with regard to heating and mechanical
domestic arrangements, are aids to a new domesticity
which will gradually do away with the servant ques-
tion as it exists in so-called civilised countries. The
new democracy holds the near solution of domestic
drudgery. As to a highly civilised human being no
person or race is abhorrent, so to an intelligent
householder no necessary work is " menial," and
can therefore be shared by any or every mem-
ber of the household according to individual
capacity.
Our domestic slaves, as well as our habits of
luxury or gluttony, keep us tied to a way of living
which is savage in expression and boring in result.
To have only beautiful things and artistic devices in
our homes, in order to produce a luxurious simplicity,
would be to emancipate many women and cheer many
men. The new home will not be a cage or a showcase,
but a well-organised and beautiful expression of a
life in which men and women together will gradually
make disorder, dirt, and extravagance conspicuous by
their absence. The labelling of any work as merely
man's work or woman's work is the expression of
an old civilisation. When no stigma rests on any
necessary work, men and women will only do the work
best suited to them and which they love. If, as must
happen, there is some work which no man or woman


cares to do, lots may be cast or we may pay as we now
pay for specialised handicraft.
In this new democracy the humanisation of law
will become an enlargement of the true spirit of the
home, and the maternal in politics will express itself
in the same way. Some men and many women will
choose to work out their individuality in the domestic
sphere; some will find their development in the
development of others outside that sphere and in the
saving of the fnany rather than only the few. For
Judge Bartholme to spend her time in cooking or
Judge Fry in domestic details, rather than at their
posts in settling domestic relations, would be to waste
the best energies of a nation.
When the people are educated to choose their
judges, whether they be men or women, for qualities
which make for humanity and justice, the courts will
slowly become the larger homes, and every man and
woman administering the laws will help to blend
the paternal and the maternal in civic life. The
division of courts, as in Chicago, into Domestic
Relations, Morals, Juvenile Boys or Juvenile Girls,
is at once to concentrate and to expand. It needs a
specialist in psychology to deal with the cases brought
day by day into the Morals Court, as it needs a
humorist as well as a humanitarian to bring peace
out of the domestic disorder of the relationships and
temperaments brought to light in the Domestic
Relations Court.
The simplification of domestic life and the


humanising of legal administration would inevitably
lead to some device for freeing modern civilisation
in the most human way of its feeble-minded and
those physically unfit for service as citizens. It
is possible that if a tax were levied on the incomes of
the fit in order to transport to some uninhabited
island all certified incapable citizens, a complex
problem of modern life would be near its solution.
Such an experiment would clear the way for the
humane and idealistic eugenist to step forward and
prevent the propagation of the unfit through educa-
tion, advice, and even law. To transport those
the eugenist declares should never have been born,
to educate probable mothers and fathers in race
morality, to allot specialists of a rare type to be
judges in these important matters, would bring our
civilisation into line with the new ideals. In the
new democracy the fit will gladly labour so that the
unfit, during their life-term of exile, shall live under
wholesome and beautiful conditions. "He that is
greatest shall be the servant of all" is not the saying
of a decadent or a madman, but of one who knew the
line along which any great civilisation must evolve.
The radical reform needed to bring any experi-
ment into sane and clear working order is the
utter and complete emancipation of women. To
make woman altogether economically free from man
is to give her the power to help man to bring into
working order those civilised ideals which she as
woman and he as man cannot carry out alone.


Shoulder to shoulder as human beings, equal, but
unlike, with complete economic independence, they
will evolve a finer love which will be the basis of the
new civilisation.
The vote alone is only a small, though essential,
point in this matter. A vote may or may not change
civil conditions, but it cannot alone open up a new
spiritual horizon in the relationships of men and
women. When love is disentangled from com-
mercialism, then only shall we have a real social
freedom.
Every separate case I heard analysed in the Court
of Domestic Relations and also in the Morals Court
in Chicago was before the judges because of some
pressure through the fact that woman as sweetheart,
wife, or mother was depending on some man for a
living. In a new civilisation the whole community
will be responsible for its single members and not
one individual for another individual. When all
the citizens give to the community an equivalent of
what they take from it, and give according to their
best capacity, woman and man as equal citizens will
look back upon some of the disgusting and absurd
relationships of to-day as we look back upon the
conditions which produced the plague and smallpox.
For it is worse than even physical disease, that
disease of the soul which, knowing the best, deliber-
ately remains content with the second-best or worst.
The new love is not the supreme egotism, but the
divine fire.


At present all the evidences of a young civilisa-
tion emerging from the brutal manifestations of
primitive savagery are here. The hunger and thirst
after the knowledge which can be put into immediate
action are very evident in America. It has expressed
itself so far in a somewhat worn-out fashion—the
fashion of accumulating and squandering, and out-
stripping others for the sheer love of enterprise. To
spiritualise this ardent and adventurous spirit is to
herald untold possibilities in the region of love and
art, and to make in the future an art of life itself.
To bring beauty and joy into new relationships
while intensifying true purity and rare passionateness,
to bring the home spirit into the order and dignity
of civic life, to have complete economic freedom and
therefore justice for both men and women, while
educing the best and eliminating the worst in each
through right mental and physical education—this
is surely the way to bring into modern life a new
civilisation.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF HAPPINESS
THE art of living, which includes the meaning of
love, and the philosophy of happiness are subjects
more worth while studying than how to attain riches
or even how to fly. The philosophy of happiness
wants more than a philosopher to explain it and to
examine it. To state with any degree of certainty
whether happiness is an art or an accident is not an
easy task. A sound heredity and a perfect digestion
sometimes appear to cover the whole ground, until
one hears the intimate confessions of those who seem
to possess both. These confessions lead one to the
conclusion that happiness has its own special laws,
and that certain conditions are essential to its exist-
ence. To reveal the nature of happiness one really
ought to be something of a child, in order to tell
great secrets almost unconsciously. Possibly, also,
the problem should be approached only by one who
has merged pain into the redemption of joy. Above
all, one needs, as the interpreter, a divine jester, who
is able to express the subtle connection between the
anguish and gaiety which lie at the heart of things.
Many people say they are happy, but, when the
veils are down, and intimate confessions are made,


we find, if we are philosophers, that most of the so-
called happiness of the world is a vague content or
a resigned fortitude. Real happiness is a glowing,
radiant thing, so radiant that the person who is really
and truly happy within, spreads it contagiously, even
if he is at the moment wretched. True happiness
has roots and an inner meaning. It is not an effer-
vescent thing, or a matter of moods. It is an eternal
possession, which no man or woman can actually
give, or wholly take away.
Now what is the philosophy of it ? Is happiness
an art to be acquired, or a mere accident ? Happi-
ness, like love, is a need of the soul and the body.
It is a means of health and a human right. Its satis-
faction makes men and women better citizens, and
legitimate inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, in
this or any other world.
The pursuit of happiness is, however, fatal, as it
is fatal in love to love oneself more than the loved
one. The first rule for the attainment of happiness
is, never to pursue it. We must let it overtake us.
The philosopher, in these matters, realises that to
seek is to lose, and to hold is to fetter. The philo-
sopher of happiness waits and listens, in case a call
to happiness comes, but he never runs after shadows,
nor does he groan at delay. The gods are not merely
pitiless, as they sometimes appear to be, in these
affairs. They are good organisers and great engineers.
What the soul needs for development they send, but
in their good time, not ours. To seek happiness is


the challenge to destiny of a man who is too much
in a hurry to lead a large and harmonious life, which
would itself create his destiny. As the old poet,
George Chapman, says, " Man is his own star/' It
is we who should rule the stars of destiny. The man
who seeks for happiness will have to be content at
the best with a compromise. True happiness, like
perfect love, makes its way inevitably to its own.
What is for us will find us. The laws about these
things are as fixed as the laws of gravitation. We
need have no fear.
The first condition for happiness is never to seek
it. Even the true believer has moments of apparent
atheism on this matter. "Do not hurry —have
faith," said Edward Carpenter. This should be the
text for the philosopher of happiness.
The second condition for the attainment of happi-
ness is an uncrushable sense of humour. A sense of
humour is a veritable gift from the gods, and saves
the philosophic and the unphilosophic alike from
endless pitfalls. It is ludicrous to pant for and to
seek what is not ours, and it is equally ludicrous to
waste time in trying to get what is ours for the asking.
By the asking I mean literally praying. One naturally
inquires as to what sort of prayer ? A mean, selfish,
and self-satisfied, would-be truce with the Infinite
in order that we may get our own ends more easily
and quickly, is not real prayer. There is no humour
in that, and certainly no dignity. It is only drab,
pestilential selfishness, and a lack of faith in destiny.


In crude words it is: " Help me to get all I want."
The only prayer to offer in this matter would be
somewhat like this : " Help me to face Life, with
happiness or without it, sustain my courage, and
make courage a daily habit. Save me from self-
seeking, but open my eyes that I may see and under-
stand happiness if it should come to me. Put my small
will into the larger will and increase my powers of joy.
If happiness comes not, give me grace to rejoice with
either my brother or my enemy who has received it."
There are a great many people left in the world
with puritanism in their blood, and there are others
who suffer from, or even cultivate, a sort of spiritual
anaemia which is mistaken for goodness. These
people are afraid of happiness even while they long
for it. They are soldiers of a great gospel, but the
uniform is often too tight for a splendid warfare.
Happiness has been so wrongly labelled, and names
are such soul-destroying things. There is nothing to
which we give such absurd names as to the things
connected with joy. If we are philosophers, or even
if we are lovers and not philosophers, we know that
a fixed name cannot fit two functions or acts, but
new names are needed by every individual who func-
tions and acts differently from his neighbour. The
spiritually suburban seeker for happiness wants it
placed in a six-ounce bottle, and carefully labelled
" righteous and safe," and warranted not to effervesce.
The true mystic knows that joy is a regenerator and
a cleanser.


When heaven thinks it is good for us to have
happiness it is sent to us in no mean way. When the
hour comes, after fasting and prayer, destiny holds
out a cup to us, full to the brim, if we have obeyed
the conditions. Laxity and compromise must have
no quarter. In order to hold the cup, our hands
must be steady. The spiritual command is, Drink
and be satisfied. Now it is for us to choose whether
we will take that cup and drink it, or not. If we
refuse happiness when it is handed to us by fate
(and there are definite signs to enable us to know the
difference between heaven's gift and earth's gift),
we pay as cowards pay. We go hungry and thirsty,
and poor and enfeebled, till death calls us to act an-
other part. It needs not only the philosopher and
the humorist to accept happiness when it is offered,
but the valiant in soul and the pure in heart, for
these have flung away the fantastic labels by which
tradition and convention rigidly distinguish right
things from wrong things. The pure in heart have
substituted a living morality for a dead and fossilised
morality. "We are all in the gutter, but some of
us are looking at the stars," says Vachell. Why so
many of us are afraid of happiness is because we think
virtue consists in sleeping in the gutter rather than in
singing to the stars. Some of us are afraid of not
getting happiness and we are equally afraid of accept-
ing it, because we have forgotten that the senses
can be as clean as our prayers and as ardent and as
purifying as the sun. As much danger may lie in


cold calculation as in swift spontaneities in these
matters. " Love and do what you like/' said St.
Augustine. The happiness most people are seeking
is that of doing what they like, forgetting that love
seeks not its own. Love can redeem anything and
everything, and never fails. The philosopher of
happiness, who realises happiness as an art and not
as an accident, knows that perfect personal joy is
the right of every civilised human being. Charm,
abandonment, and all fantastic beauty expressed
in song or dance and passionate expressions of all
kinds lead us upward and not downward, if we know
the philosophy of love as well as the philosophy of
happiness. It is at our peril to-day if we allow
ourselves to become anaemic spiritual slugs instead
of rollicking children of the Infinite.
Happiness, then, is our right, but we must not
seek it, nor must we refuse it. When the cup is
handed to us, let us drain it to the dregs. A drop
left means so much less power to the 1 drinker. We
need have no fear. In Dr. Garnett's wonderful
little book on Love ( De Flagello Myrteo) he says :
"At Love's high feasts there are two cups : one never
can be drained, and the other fills itself." He knew
the great secret, that a great love is a sacrament,
and bread and wine do not fail at the high altar.
This brings us to the contemplation of an appar-
ently sad side of this question of happiness. As people
of faith, as philosophers, as parents, as humorists,
and as scientists and artists, we know that life is


often pain to the average person. To some of us,
apparently, whether we seek happiness or not, destiny
seems to offer no cup at all. For these, the philo-
sopher of happiness has a special word. The sufferer
may actually he the cup-bearer and so be a special
servant of the Infinite. We are too foolish yet to
realise whose hand Fate chooses for the offering of the
cup of happiness to her children. Your sorrow, and
my sorrow, unbearable as they may appear to us, may
help to mould the cup for another's comfort. Who
dare deny that your loss and my loss may help to
fill that cup for another, even if that other be our
rival or our defamer ? It may be our lot to press
the very grapes for the wine our rival drinks. This
may be a sort of left-handed happiness, but, to the real
philosopher, it is happiness, because he knows the
" forward ends " of pain, as Hinton so clearly puts it.
Many of us, groaning and grunting, in spite of all we
believe and all we have, can see, as in a map, the
reason why we agonise, and why we apparently fail
and are desolate in spirit. It is as if on a ship we trust
our captain, but that does not save us from sea-
sickness. Those who are training in these matters
know that the day is near when from pain and loss
happiness can literally be extracted. To save others
is at last as though we had saved ourselves, and thus
happiness of a rare and delicate kind is found.
And this brings us back to the image of destiny.
When once destiny has handed us a fragrant wine, we
must drink it to the dregs, and personal happiness is


the best foundation for what, by a great spiritual law,
follows. It is the gift of the gods and not a devil's
poison. If, being wise, we have drunk that cup, and
got all the warmth and strength it can give us, and
we pause, like happy, tired children, then let us have a
care. Our impulse, of course, is to hand back the
empty cup for refilling. This is also good. Destiny
nearly always refills the cup. It seems another
spiritual law that he that hath shall have more, and is
a direct challenge to the ascetic who fancies that self-
control can only be learnt by renunciation of natural
and joyful and beautiful things. The cup is re-
filled, but, before it is taken again, the artist in happi-
ness must be on guard. The second cup is never for
the quenching of personal thirst. It has to be handed
round. The lover, who has had all the delight of
his love, must not remain only absorbed in his
rapture. His passionate outgiving is a mere lesson
in order to train him later to say with Whitman,
" I will scatter myself among men and women as I
go." The woman who has had all the glories of a
passionate surrender must be prepared to go to the
gates of death and hell, in order that new life may come
into the world. The philosopher who, in the silence
of nature, has felt the veil lifted between his soul
and the Oversoul, which to him is a personal happiness
of a very absorbing kind, must be content to move in
and out of crowds in order to minister to the spiritu-
ally deaf and dumb and blind. The poet, living as
he does in a realisation of definite harmony, must do


the scullery work of the world down to its most sordid
details.
If we refuse the first cup of personal happiness,
we pay our price. If we accept it, we have to pay
heaven's price, and that is, that the second cup,
filled to overflowing, shall not only be handed round
and drained dry, for the good of others, but be handed
back again and again to be refilled and emptied for
others till death releases us. To every one who has
been personally happy in the fullest sense, there
comes at one time or another a voice from heaven
about this second draught, this aftermath of happi-
ness. To ignore it is to surrender to the vulgar
wile of the sybarite for excess or to the self-love
of a mere child of this world. As the second cup is
handed to us, it is a challenge from heaven. If we
refuse the challenge, our last state is worse than
the first. To us much has been given, and we must
not spill or waste the wine or break the cup. Fate's
challenge to those of us who have dared to be glori-
ously happy is to go on being happy in the only way
possible. The law is, in this matter, that the personal
joy shall lead to the universal succour. We must
not haste, but neither must we rest, till every one
in the world has a taste of joy. The only happy
person is one who radiates joy even out of personal
pain. To be happy is to know a few secrets that
the gods whisper in their obedient children's ears.
When I was talking with Edward Carpenter a
little while ago about Life and Destiny, he said,


with a smile that was almost a sigh, " The whole
blessed thing is an obstacle race for happiness/' He
was right. Most of us have bandages over our eyes,
sacks tied round our necks, chains on our feet and
hands, or some fettering of our freedom. The world
seems a literal school or prison-house, but we must
remember that the game of happiness not only is
not forbidden, but is in the rules of the house, and
is always worth while. We must become not only
philosophers in studying it, but professional artists
in playing it. Few happy people sin, for most so-
called sins are subterfuges for joy. The solemnity
and absurdity of our crude moralities, the fear of
losing ourselves in unrealised possibilities, the
cowardice of much so-called purity, and the reckless-
ness of much so-called vice handicap us on our way
to perfect happiness.
Once we become lovers in the real sense we are
safe. The lover is only concerned lest he loses his
vision of love, or fails loved ones in their need.
To a few a third cup is sometimes offered, and the
personal and the universal alike are forgotten for a
moment in the cry, " Father, let this cup pass."
It is the cup of wormwood, or the sponge with
vinegar. It is the chalice of crucifixion, and those
who drink from it are the willing saviours of the
world. They are despised and rejected of men, men
of sorrows and acquainted with grief. They have
at last no care for what the world can give or take
away. They are free from condemnation and free


from personal craving. They have seen the beauty
of the whole, and faced death and suffering. The
multitude cannot recognise them. They stone them
and slay their bodies. The Magdalen and the Judas
may call them friends, the little children, simple
folk, sinners, and animals are their companions.
These people, who have appeared in the world's
history at long intervals, have not only " scattered
themselves amongst men and women as they go,"
but they have gladly given their lives for the many.
They have always the new truth to deliver, the old
one to bury. They are the seers and the prophets
of the world, and find their greatest joy in a trans-
ference of personal happiness into human succour.
They condemn neither the Judas, the Peter, nor the
Magdalen. They have passed through the pangs
which turn personal joy into universal service.
Universal service to these children of God has hitherto
implied an acceptance of crucifixion as a gift of the
brother who does not yet know of the deeper secrets.
They have arrived at the state where life or death is
equally worth while because there is something vital
to be done in each—either children to be gathered
together, men and women to be saved, or beauty to
be emphasised. Happiness can never be an accident
to these chalice-holders, because the corn, the flowers,
the pharisee, the saint, the cross, and the mockery
of men have their inner meaning to the real prophet
of eternal joy.
Hitherto the chalice-drinker has been the excep-


tion in the world's history. The Christ and the
Buddha are the chief examples, and men like Gordon
and women like Jeanne D'Arc are lesser instances
of the need to save others. But there is a distinct
change coming with regard to these things. There
is a fashion even in spiritual matters. There is a
sort of uneasiness creeping over society, the uneasi-
ness which comes upon a man in shabby clothes,
the uneasiness which comes over a woman in badly
cut ones. The solidarity of the workers and the
solidarity of women is suggestive. The happiness
of the many is now becoming the imperative demand.
The day is not only coming but is actually here,
when to live in luxury while one human creature
lacks either bread or joy can only be crucifixion to
the spiritual man or the spiritual woman. To be a
millionaire will soon be more pitiable than to be
a leper, because it implies extortion, the sweat of
brothers for mean ends, and the gluttony of one
at the expense of many. The seeker for happiness
soon finds out the- impossibility of real joy on the
lines of monopolies in any shape or form. The
Christ crucified has ecstasy within, because of the
working out of the great truth, that to lose one's
life is often to gain it. The poor ignorant human
who fancies that happiness consists in piling up gold
or wasting it, is to-day enduring a crucifixion of the
worst kind, a crucifixion of fear and insecurity.
The trend of the age is against his short-sighted
ideas of happiness. He is afraid. In a vague way


he is terrified of the atmosphere, even in politics,
which threatens his unstable possessions. He wants
to go on sleeping or wallowing, and the cock-crow
in a new dawn disturbs him. Ideals spread like
epidemics, and the art, not the accident, of happiness
is spreading fast. As it is now almost a disgrace
to be ill, it will soon be a disgrace to be rich or
unhappy, because to-day the only truly happy folk
are those who do not care about a happiness which
implies only comfort, gain, rest, or peace for them-
selves. This attitude is not because of some craving
for an egotistic saintship or a moral superiority
over others, which is as stupid as the search for any
other monopoly, but because while one human being
is hungry or lonely, no evolved person can eat in
peace or rest in mere personal happiness, any more
than they could in their family circle if a sister or a
brother were starving or heart-broken.
Happiness is a definite art and not an accident,
for it is beyond accident, even beyond analysis. It
is an art of the inner life, a result of wise cultivation.
It is sometimes bought at a great price, but the
payment is well worth while. It is often pain forged
into peace, and the personal merged into the universal.
Those who have it stand like children before the
Eternal, content to hold the hands of Life and Death,
knowing that all that happens is meant to form
part of a great picture in which we are the colours.


„
'
r
-
'
*
.
*
■
'
'


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kit's Woman was first published, under the title of Seaweed :
A Cornish Idyll by Edith Ellis, in 1898. In 1907 it was re-
published under its present title by Alston Rivers, and in 1916
transferred to Werner Laurie, by whom it is issued in a cheap
reprint. The title of the American edition (1909) was changed
by the publishers (Mcßride Co.) to Steve's Woman, and the dialect
of the novel modified.
My Cornish Neighbours, at present out of print, was published
in 1906 (Alston Rivers).
The Subjection of Kezia : A Play in One Act, 1908 (Stratford-
on-Avon : Shakespeare Head Press).
Attainment (now out of print) was published in 1909 by Alston
Rivers.
Three Modern Seers, based on six lectures on James Hinton,
Nietzsche, and Edward Carpenter, was published in 1910 (Stanley
Paul).
The Imperishable Wing, 1911 (Stanley Paul).
The Lover's Calendar, an Anthology, 1912 (Kegan Paul).
Love-Acre : An Idyll in Two Worlds, 1915 (Grant Richards).
Love in Danger: Three Plays ("The Subjection of Kezia,"
" The Pixy," " The Mothers "), 1915 (Boston : Houghton Mifflin
Co.).
James Hinton: A Sketch, 1918 (Stanley Paul).


" 11l 1 .Al. .


INDEX
Abnormality, sexual, 38 et seq.
America, impressions of, 171 et seq.
Art, love as an, 70 et seq., 80 et seq. ;
life as an, 183 et seq.
Augustine, St., 188.
Bartholme, Judge, 175, 179.
Bates, Miss Janette, 176.
Beauty in domestic life, 101, 127,
133, 178.
Binet method, 176.
Booth, Charles, 104.
Booth, General, 147.
Burns, John, 173.
Carpenter, Edward, 1, 82, 89,168,
185, 191.
Chapman, George, 185.
Chicago, 174.
Children, and marriage system,
29 ; sex education of, 70 et seq.,
84 et seq.
Democracy, American, 172 et seq.
Divorce, 4, 32 et seq.
Domestic service, on trade basis,
96 et seq.; reform of, 130 et seq.,
177.
Dowries for women, 8.
Economic independence of women,
5, 25, 154 et seq., 177, 181.
Education, in sex, 11 et seq., 38, 70
et seq., 84 ; for social life, 117 ;
of women, 121 et seq., 155.
Eliot, George, 153.
Ellis, Havelock, 38, 49.
Eugenics, 38 et seq., 55 et seq.
Ewart, Dr., 57.
Fabian Society, 115.
Free love, 21, 34.
Fry, Judge, 177, 179.
Garnett, Richard, 188.
George, Lloyd, 161.
George, W. L., 129.
Germany and the War, 162, 164,
168, 169.
Godwin, 25.
Goethe, 48, 110.
Happiness, the art of, 184 et seq.
Hayes, Alfred, 120.
Hinton, James, 32, 53, 189.
Home, and women, 129 ; co-opera-
tive, 130.
Humour, the value of, 185.
Inversion, sexual, and Eugenics,
42 et seq., 56 et seq. ; in Greece,
158.
Jones, Mother, 173.
Judges, women as, 175, 179
Kaiser, the, 162, 164.
Kant, 174.
Labour, demands of, 2; move-
ment, 104 et seq., 145.
Lawrence, Mrs. Pethick, 140.


Legislation in sex, 49, 176.
Love, as an art, 80 et seq.; in
relation to happiness, 188 et seq.
Lvttelton, Dr., 160.
Man in relation to woman, 145,
155 et seq.
Marriage, 4; experiments in, 10,
11, 31 ; noviciate for, 11 et seq. ;
semi-detached, 23 et seq. ; and
divorce, 32.
Marx, Karl, 1.
Merrick, Rev. G. P., 92.
Michels, Robert, 33.
Militant suffragism, 141 et seq.
Militarism, 162, 164.
Monogamy, 5, 13, 27.
Morality, fluidity of, 159.
New York, 172.
Noviciate for marriage, 11 et seq.
Nudity in sex education, 84.
Parasitism of women, 5, 121, 154.
Polygamy, 158.
Prostitution, and servant class,
92.
Puritanism, 2.
Revolution, 148.
Roberts, Lord, 169.
Salvation Army, 147.
Schreiner, Olive, 34.
Servant question, 87 et seq.
Sex, education in, 11 et seq., 38, 70
et seq., 84 et seq. ; inversion of,
42, 56; and legislation, 49, 176.
Shaw, Bernard, 170.
Sinclair, Upton, 143.
Spies in war, 165.
State, women in the, 149.
Suffrage movement, 134, 140 et seq.
Suffragettes, 141.
Sweated labour, 156.
Unfit, problem of, 41, 180.
Vachell, 187.
Virtue, variability of, 159.
War, 143, 158 et seq.
Whitman, Walt, 118, 172.
Wilde, Oscar, 46, 61.
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 25.
Women, economic independence
of, 5, 25, 154, 177 ; dowries for,
8 ; professional training of, 96 ;
and class life, 109 ; as parasites,
121, 154; education of, 122 et
seq. ; and suffrage, 140 et seq.;
in the State, 147 et seq.; mater-
nal activities of, 134 et seq.
PRINTED BY MORRISON AND GIBB LTD., EDINBURGH


//
7 of-;
M "4-
♦
• %
'
\
.
9


3 1508 00287176 7
RATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


■ : ■' y : BBlBB •!•. ' /' ' = : • y : W ■ B : : i X ■!;.>': ■ ■/ vV:::;!-;,.: ■:-V;: !;' ;; ; ; :BSy
II • ■: , ■ i: V: Sh vm*. ;i® •:??S sM;s~ sIS- V ?«j&Hp;|jg :■.«: }&? ': v' '■:g§
«m ; - iiys i :§;?* ■ v-mmm
1 IB Bit? : BIB &m ai s® ; * - -' *i ■ ■" #iS
mmmmm wiiiis - Bit
