

The
Little Round Garden
Gladys Lister
Decorated by
Pixie O’Harris


/■ V\
■


_ * _ *




THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN


The wind had blown rose petals across the floor.


J
THE
Little Round Garden
By
GLADYS LISTER
Decorated by
PIXIE O’HARRIS
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
SYDNEY and LONDON
1938


Set up, printed and bound
in Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
Registered at the General
Post Office, Sydney, for
transmission through the
post as a book
Obtainable in London from
Angus <£ Robertson Ltd,
37 Great Russell Street,
W.C.I.


C 11152
3 0 NOV 1935
PIXIE WHO INSPIRED THIS BOOK
MY FAMILY FOR THEIR FRANK CRITICISM
FRANK DALBY DAVISON FOR HIS ENCOURAGEMENT




63
- - - - 6y
73
So
- - - - 87
93
97
102
CONTENTS
PART I: RAINBOW WINGS
A Strange Happening 3
Everything in the Garden ------ g
Twinkle -
The Tortoise and the Goldfish ig
The Fairy Party - 23
Honey and Chirp -28
The Story of Steve - - - - “33
The Dance of the Autumn Leaves - - - - 38
The Storm - 42
Dearest -
The Butterfly that Remembered --- - 31
Mr Fairy Leaves --35
PART II: RAINBOW RINGS
Looking For Fairy Rings ------ 53
Cookie's and Nanny's Rings - - - _ _ 5 y
Blueboy’s Ring -------- 73
Merle’s Ring g 0
The Big Daddy's Smoke Ring ----- g^
The Big Surprise -------
Creak Gnomes -------- gy
The Little Mother’s Fairy Ring - 102
The Tea Party 10 3




PART 1
RAINBOW WINGS




CHAPTER I
A STRANGE HAPPENING
The Little Round Garden was not quite round, although it
appeared to be so because of a bend in the road. The Little Round
House in the garden was neither
round nor small, although it was
little enough and round enough to
be called both.
A happy family lived in the
house, the mother was called Little
Mother and was loved by all. She
grew flowers in the Little Round
Garden and kept it bright and gay.
When gathering flowers one day
she heard a voice call to her:
“I wish to find the gardener of
this lovely garden.”
Looking up, she saw a quaint
little man bowing to her. He held
a large hat in his hand. His hair
grown long, curled above a high collar. His eyes were blue and
sparkled like sunlight on the sea; and as he bowed, his long coat
tails blew in the wind.
“He looks like a bird. If he flaps his arms, he will surely fly/'
the Little Mother thought, and laughed gaily as she answered “I
am the gardener.”
“If you are the gardener, Madam, I am here to thank you.
Most gardens have high fences and stone walls, hiding what is
beyond. Your hedge is cut, so that all may see and enjoy the
beauty of your garden.”


The little man bowed again. His coat tails blew out and in a
moment he was gone. “He surely flapped his arms and flew
away,” the Little Mother said to herself.
She went inside the house and told her two children, Merle
and Blueboy about the quaint little man. Merle was eight and
Blueboy five; they wondered who the man could be; and when the
Little Mother tucked them into bed that night they were still
guessing. Long after she had gone to bed herself she thought
about the quaint stranger, and when she slept she dreamed of
him.
When the night was nearly over the moon peeped into her
bedroom window. The leaves of the trees rustled and tapped on
the panes, and awakened her.
Do come out,” they seemed to say. “It’s a wonderful night.
Your baby plants are being eaten by snails. Come quickly before
they are all destroyed.”
She crept quietly out of bed, and putting on her gown and
slippers, found her lantern and tiptoed into the garden.
“I do wish I had a fairy gardener,” she sighed holding the
lantern close to a tall delphinium. Something bright shone upon
the blue flowers. Thinking it a snail, she took hold of it with her
finger tips. Great was her surprise to find in her hand, not a snail,
but a dainty creature with gossamer wings,
“Oh!” she cried. “Are you a fairy?”
'Yes, and my name is Twinkle. I am looking for my play-
mate, Wink. I lost him in the garden yesterday with the first rav
of sunlight.”
“Is your playmate a fairy too?” asked the Little Mother.
“Yes. We come to gather colour for our fairy rings. But
we may not stay after the sun rises; if we do, we become butter-
flies or flowers until the sun rises again.”
“How exciting!” said the Little Mother.
“Not nearly as exciting as becoming a mortal. That is every
fairy s wish, although as a mortal he forgets his fairy existence
This wish is seldom fulfilled.”
A sudden ray of sunshine came darting through the trees.


'Uif// ,
xXWv^Ww
s \vn' I /A /// ' '' •
'V -V\K\ \VV" 'll !,! 1 y T////, // '
\v\\, t. i\\\f4'////■.<; ■
“Are you a fairy?”


There was a flash of lovely wings and Twinkle disappeared. The
Little Mother was surprised. But more surprised still to see the
quaint stranger standing before her once again.
“I have come back,” he said, “because I thought that perhaps
you needed a gardener to help in your lovely garden.”
“This must be Twinkle’s playmate Wink, a fairy become a
mortal,” thought the Little Mother. “I am to get my wish and
have a fairy gardener.”
“I do need help in my garden,” she replied. “If you care
to be my gardener I would like to have you.”
“That would make me happy, for I love to be among the
flowers,” he answered.
“There is a pergola at the end of my garden and it would
make a cosy home for you. Come and see it.”
The Little Mother led the stranger down the garden path,
past the lily ponds, under the trees to the end of the garden,
where the pergola was hidden behind creepers and tall hollyhocks.
The new gardener peeped through green shutters, and
noticed that the wind had blown rose petals across the floor.
“If rose petals can blow in, surely butterflies and birds can fly
in,” he said.
“They often do,” the Little Mother told him. “Inside you will
find a cosy bed, pegs to hang your clothes upon, and a table with
a lantern on it. I will leave you now, for it is far too early to be
up.”
She ran back along the garden path to the Little Round
House that peeped through tall foxgloves and blue delphiniums;
where the windows winked and blinked with shadowy lights and
the leaves tipped, tipped, tapped on the panes, whispering and
calling to the two sleeping children within.
“Tip, tap, the sun is up. Tip, tap, the sun is up.”
Merle and Blueboy heard and jumped out of bed, dressed
quickly and ran out into the garden. They were surprised to see
the new gardener, and he was just as surprised to see a little girl
with big brown eyes and long plaits, and a small boy with short
curly hair and blue eyes.


A STRANGE HAPPENING
“Do you live here ?” he asked them; “if so, lam quite sure I
am going to be happy.”
asked him to llve here? ” was the first question they
Yes. lam the new gardener.”
( What is your name?” was the next question.
“My name is Mr Fairy.”
The two children looked at him with wondering eves.
Mr Fairy!” they whispered.
“Yes Isn’t that a strange name? It will surely make me a
fairy gardener.”
Just then Nanny came to look for the children; she overheard
this remark and ran back to tell Cookie. Cookie came running
into the garden. &
What s this I hear about a fairy ?” she cried
His name is Mr Fairy,” Merle corrected her.
, . , 0h ’ th^^ T !t ’ 15 it? ” Cookie said. She ran back to the
kitchen to tell Nanny that it was quite a mistake. “There is a
Mr Fairy m the garden, the new gardener, and no such thing as
a iairy. But she danced about the kitchen
“There you go! And I feel light-headed too, so there’s
something afoot that’s not quite natural,” Nanny said as she went
back to the garden for the children.
They were looking into the branches of a tree and pointing to
a bird perched there. s
that?” Mr Fairy was inquiring.
That s our kookaburra. Uncle Timothy sent him to us
from far away. We call him Kooka, and he is our pet.”
nC^G * s an explorer, and has exciting adventures ”
Merle explained. “He sent us a blue-tongued lizard, who lives
m the garden too. We call him Bluie. We love him.”
“What an interesting place the Little Round Garden is. I
am going to be very happy here,” said Mr Fairy with his head
on one side as if listening.
The trees rustled, bees buzzed gaily, crickets sang, and the
frogs croaked; and without any warning all the birds in the Little
Round Garden came fluttering and flying around Mr Fairy.


CHAPTER II
EVERYTHING IN THE GARDEN
From the first day that the new gardener came to the Little Round
Garden, there was someone who was very puzzled, this was the
Big Daddy, Merle’s and Blueboy’s father. He wondered why the
flowers bloomed early and others bloomed late, and why the garden
was brighter than ever.
“Your sweet peas are out early. Your stocks are blooming
late,” he said to the Little Mother,
The Little Mother knew the reason for this but kept her
secret. Every morning she went quickly into the garden and
found flowers in unexpected corners as well as in the beds.
There were surprises for Merle and Blueboy too. They
found that the gardener knew a great deal about everything, and
seemed to know the secrets of all the little animals and insects.
It seemed the flowers had adventures: Merle and Blueboy loved
to hear about them.
One day they found the gardener looking at two little bees
buried deeply in some bluebells growing in the garden.
“Do you know anything about those little bees, Mr Fairy?”
they asked.
“I love to see the sun glistening on their golden-brown
bodies,” he told them. “Their names are Bunce and Bounce.”
Merle and Blueboy laughed; they were amused at the quaint
names Mr Fairy had for his little garden friends.
“These are the babies in the garden just now,” he continued,
“and very forward too. Early this morning they came to the
bluebells to gather their favourite honey dew, wishing to be here
before all the other bees. On the way they had an adventure


* ••
The Gardener


with two little foxes called Snippy and Snappy. The foxes had
arrived early too, for quite a different reason, and a very different
kind of breakfast. The first thing the foxes did was to borrow
some gloves from the tall foxgloves growing in the garden.”
“Why did they want gloves?”
“To put on their paws so as to be able to creep softly to the
back yard. It was their plan to pounce upon some little chicks.
However, their plans went astray, for Bunce and Bounce fol-
lowed, and just as they were about to snap up the chicks who were
peeping from under their mother’s wing, these two forward baby
bees stung the foxes’ perky ears.
“The foxes howled and awakened old mother hen, who chased
them from the garden. In doing this she awakened the bluebells.
These little flowers love to give all the news to the garden, so they
rang their bells. The Canterbury Bells awakened, however, and
rang their bells loudly too. There was a commotion in the garden.
“ ‘We are the guardians of the garden gate.’ the Canterbury
Bells rang. ‘Who dared let the foxes pass without our consent?’
And the foxgloves kept quiet, for they knew it was their fault for
lending the gloves.
“The bluebells rang gently: ‘We don’t know, we don’t know.’
“The Canterbury Bells rang louder still. All the flowers
awakened in alarm and shook as if shaken by a breeze. ‘What’s
happening?’ they rustled.
“ ‘Go to sleep, go to sleep,’ the foxgloves called. ‘lt was our
fault; we thought to keep Snippy and Snappy out of mischief,
and lent them some gloves, but it seems to have caused trouble.
Go to sleep all of you, we’re tired. It’s quite bad enough to be
disturbed by Snippy and Snappy without all this fuss.’ ”
“Did anything else happen?” Merle and Blueboy asked.
“Yes, indeed. After all the flowers had quietened, that
naughty Kooka of yours tried to snatch Flutey the goldfish from
the lily pond; he wanted a tasty breakfast too. But dear little
Flutey was saved by Flitty, who blew bubbles, disturbing the
water. So Kooka, unable to see, flew away without his breakfast.


Flitty was so pleased with himself he kept on blowing bubbles
and upset the lovely water lily.
Be still/ she said. ‘How can I see myself in the pool if
you disturb the surface ? I wish to see how I look this morning/
“Forty, the little tortoise, who appeared to be asleep beside
the pool, put his long neck out of his shell and said: ‘You look
beautiful, and the fairies thought so too. I saw them just before
the dawn, gathering the delicate pink from your petals/
I know that/ the lily replied. ‘And they left a message for
you, Forty.’
“ ‘Did they indeed? Well, I’d like to know what it is.’
“‘I asked them if they had seen your wife, Filly. I heard
you tell Flitty, the goldfish, as you swam beside him in the pool
yesterday, that you had lost your wife and couldn’t find her any-
where. Fhe fairies saw her when they gathered colour from the
forget-me-nots. She is fast asleep beneath their foliage.’
“ Those selfish forget-me-nots again.’ Forty said crossly,
as he slowly climbed from the side of the lily pond and waddled
towards the forget-me-nots.
“ ‘Selfish, that’s what they are,’ he murmured. ‘Forget-me-
nots, forget-me-nots, spreading themselves everywhere and making
my poor Filly forget me.’ ”
“And were there really fairies, Mr Fairy?” Merle asked.
“Yes, indeed. Fhey danced and sang around my pergola
because it was a moonlit night. Fhey are to me the flowers of the
night; the bright moon brings them out, just as the sun brings out
the other flowers in the garden,” he said.
“I’d love to see them,” Blueboy sighed.
“You are always asleep when they come. Sometime they may
come when you are awake,” the gardener replied.
Merle and Blueboy hoped to see a fairy. Fhey looked for
one every day. One day they peeped beneath a box they found in
the pergola; it had delicate carvings of fruit and flowers all over
it, and fairy figures.
“I wish they were real fairies,” Blueboy sighed.
“Fhe carvings are in pictures and go all the way around in


a ring, over the sides of the box and underneath as well, Merle
said. “It’s like a rainbow.”
“I’d like to see underneath it properly,” Blueboy whispered.
They turned the box over and found that the carving was more
delicate and beautiful underneath; there were fairies holding
hands and dancing in a ring.
“It’s a picture of fairies dancing, and they are all holding
hands,” Blueboy said, “just like a fairy ring.”
They ran to find Gardener; they wished to ask him the mean-
ing of the pictures on the box.
They guessed that it belonged to him.
“There is a story attached to it which I will tell you some
day,” he said. “In the meantime the squirrels come early every
morning and leave nuts and acorns on top of it.
“Xhe squirrels who have their home on the roof of the per-
gola?” Merle asked.
“Yes, their names are Snuffle and Muffle, a generous little
pair. Sometimes I invite them in when the frost is on the ground,
and they cuddle up on my bed on top of my feet, a cosy pair of
footwarmers.”


jj ■ j mr— ‘
CHAPTER 111
TWINKLE
Mr Fairy was happy in the Little Round Garden; but his play-
mate Twinkle was lonely without him, and spent her playtime
hours searching for him. She looked in the Little Round Garden,
where they had so often played. She expected to find that he had
become a butterfly or a flower, and that after a short life in the
garden he would be with her once again.
But time passed
and he remained
away. She looked in
other gardens they
had loved, but could
not find him any-
where. Always she
returned to the Little
Round, Garden, and
so anxious did she
become to find him,
that she even peeped
in the windows of the
Little Round House,
and peeping, found
Merle and Blueboy.
Twinkle sent them
dreams on a moonbeam and they smiled in their sleep. She fell in
love with them, and longed to see them awake and to hear their
laughter.
Twinkle’s playtime was in the moonlit hours of the night.


THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
She might not stay after the sun had risen for fear of having to
remain as a butterfly or a flower until she was released again.
This she did not wish to happen for fear of missing her playmate.
So she could not see Merle and Blueboy when they were awake,
or hear them laugh. She came again and again to peep and send
them dreams, hoping that they would awaken and that she would
hear them laugh.
One night she found a very bright moonbeam, upon which
she sent a dream to Merle. The dream was funny as well as
exciting, and Twinkle peeping in the window thought: “Surely
she will awaken; she is already smiling in her sleep.”
At that moment, however, a sun ray darted into the room.
It played around the ceiling, danced up and down the walls, and
on to Merle’s bed. Twinkle fled. It was, alas, too late to fly
back to her own home. Knowing that she must wait until the
sun set before she could return, she fled to the garden and hid in
the crack of a rock, and creeping far in found some steps 1 She
ran down the steps, and coming to a path, found that it led her
down under the ground. There were houses; strange little houses
with windows like lumps of crystal. Twinkle peeped in the
windows, and saw tiny beds of moss. On these beds little Green
Gnomes lay sleeping —strange little people with turned-up noses
and crinkly faces. There were glow-worms inside the homes,
and gardens outside. Rubies, sapphires, opals, emeralds and
diamonds were the flowers in the gardens. Twinkle was entranced,
and ran from house to house peeping, peeping in all the windows.
Suddenly there was a lovely sound. It rose and fell, tink-
ling far and near, echoing in the distance, coming closer. Twinkle
stood still, listening. The sound filled her with joy. What could
it be? Then there was another sound, the sound of scampering
feet. The little gnomes had awakened and were rushing out of
their houses. They saw Twinkle! They clambered round her,
touched her gossamer dress and beautiful wings! They shouted
with joy.
“You are so beautiful,” they cried, “we will keep you for
ever.”


TWINKLE
“Oh, I want to go back to my own land,” Twinkle cried,
feeling a little frightened.
“No, no!” said the little gnomes, “we imprison what we think
is beautiful. Did you not hear the sound of children’s laughter?”
So that was the sound she had heard. Her heart beat
quickly.
“That sound awakens us each day. We imprisoned the echo
of children’s laughter long ago. We caught it as it echoed in the
garden when the children were at play.”
How wonderful to hear that sound every day! Perhaps she
would stay a while.
“You will be happy here,” the gnomes cried. “See our
beautiful gardens: how we have imprisoned the blue of the del-
phinium in the sapphire, the red of the rose in the ruby, the sparkle
of the dewdrop in the diamond, moonlight in the crystal, sunlight
in the glinting gold in the walls of our houses. We have all things
beautiful.”
“But they are not alive,” Twinkle whispered. “In our land
all beauty is alive.”
“All life is here: we give it to the plants and flowers,” the
little gnomes cried. And they offered to show her their wonder-
ful land. One of the gnomes told her his name was Flip, and
led her down many paths with flowers of coloured fungus on
either side. He pointed to the delicate tracery of the roots of
plants above them that seemed to be tiny searching fingers, feeling
out in all directions. He explained that these were roots from
the garden above, busily searching for food and moisture to send
to their flowers and green leaves in the sunlit garden above.
Flip led her through the roots of trees that twisted and
turned, and wound in and out, and in and out. He intro-
duced her to Crinkle the cricket, living among the roots. Crinkle
was polite, and bowed very low, and called all his brothers and
cousins together. They sang for her, and Twinkle was delighted
with the little brown long-whiskered things, and with the merry
song they sang. This disturbed Bluie, the blue-tongued lizard,
who was sleeping among the roots. He was like a big dragon


among all the tiny things and winked knowingly at Twinkle when
Flip had his eyes turned away.
It would take too long to tell of all the things that Twinkle
saw. When Flip took her back to the gnomes she was tired and
begged to be allowed to rest. They put her on a couch of soft
moss, and laughed and sang, and joined hands and danced around
her, whirling fast. She watched them darting here and there,
till her eyes grew tired. She closed them; soon she slept.
Although it was a wonderful adventure, Twinkle after a few
days longed to go home. However, when she asked the gnomes
to allow her to go they laughed and danced, and Crinkle the cricket
and all the other crickets sang merry songs to amuse her, hoping
she would forget her home.
‘Til show you the way out, little Twinkle,” Flip promised. “I
really don’t approve of keeping you here, although you are so
lovely. Your place is in the skies.”
But he did not do so, and days and days passed by.
Bluie the lizard, who came backwards and forwards from
the garden every day said: “Leave it to me, I’ll get you out of
this.”
But he did not do so.
Twinkle knew that she was a prisoner. She begged the little
gnomes to show her the path by which she had come, but they only
said: “Live with us for ever. We love you.”
One day Bluie came down in a bad temper from the sunlight
above. “The gardener up there,” he said, “is spoiling all my
hiding places by chopping away the rock. Can’t you hear him ?”
Pick, pick, tap, tap, pick, pick, tap, tap. Twinkle heard the
noise. It continued, and she wondered what it could be.
There came a morning when Bluie scurried down the path in
a very bad temper, and said to Twinkle;
“It’s all your fault, and I wish I’d never seen you. I have
nowhere to bask in the sun out of sight any more.”
Twinkle said: “Oh, Bluie, what do you mean? How can it
be my fault? I only want to go back to my own land.”
Bluie sulked and would not answer. Twinkle listened and
could still hear pick, pick, tap, tap, and wondered about it.


TWINKLE
Suddenly there was a loud noise! All the little gnomes ran
away and hid behind the roots, and Bluie rushed down the secret
path from the garden squealing and squirming.
“Go away, go away!” he shouted to Twinkle. “Look what’s
happened now! I’ve lost half my tail through you. That little
gardener has spoilt my last hiding place. I was just basking in
the sun when whallop! his pick-axe came down and away went my
tail. It’s all your fault!” Round and round Bluie ran, making
a great fuss.
Twinkle was very upset. “Oh, Bluie, I’m so sorry. I don’t
know why you blame me. Your poor, poor tail.”
While she was trying to comfort Bluie the earth opened sud-
denly and the gardener peered in. Bluie scurried through the
hole, and Twinkle quickly followed him.
“Well, well, well,” said the gardener, “I’ve dug for many
things in my life, but never for a fairy before. You were quite
right after all, Bluie, and not playing a joke, as I suspected.
There really was a fairy there. I wish Merle and Blueboy were
* 51
nere.
Twinkle now understood what the tapping had meant. “You
kept your promise after all, Bluie. Oh, thank you. You surely
asked the gardener to open the earth for me. And Ido hope your
tail grows quickly.”
“Hush, hush! Don’t tell the gnomes I helped to get you out.
It would never do for them to know,” Bluie said, and he hurried
away.
Twinkle thanked the gardener. He looked at her with eyes
that twinkled like stars, and his smile was mischievous as he said:
“Merle and Blueboy would love to meet you. They are always
looking for fairies.”
“I would rather find my playmate, Wink,” said Twinkle.
Then the gardener blinked; the fairy had gone. One moment
she was there, and the next a lovely flower bloomed where she
had been. He did not know that Twinkle was his playmate, or
that a fairy must remain in the Little Round Garden as a flower
until the sun had gone to bed.


CHAPTER IV
THE TORTOISE AND THE GOLDFISH
Merle and Blueboy ran into the garden to look for Mr Fairy.
They found him shaking his head at Kooka, that wise-looking
bird.
“You frightened Flutey again, you naughty bird, and made
her sad when you snatched one of her children for your breakfast
this morning,” he said.
“Tell us about it,” the children cried.
You know how the little goldfish love to swim close to the
surface when the big green china frog in the centre of the pond
spouts water from his mouth. Early this morning I turned on
the tap, and out came a spray of water: Froggie looked all green
and glistening, and almost alive. I went away. The sun was
just rising; the little birds were beginning to chirp, and insects
were stirring. Old Kooka was sitting on this branch appearing
quite innocent. Now this is what had happened: Flutey and Flitty
were swimming near the surface of the pool, followed by all their
children, when suddenly old Kooka darted from the branch and
snatched one of the tiny fish for his breakfast. This frightened
Flutey and made her very sad. She swam under the lily leaves
and hid away. Flitty looked everywhere for his little Flutey,
but could not find her. While looking he heard a voice from the
edge of the pool:
“‘Flitty, I’m going to dive into the water. Look out! I
want to talk to you.’ And in flopped Torty, the tortoise. Torty
and Flitty are friends; they have a great deal in common. They
often lose their wives, and like to talk about it. They are a
strangely assorted pair: Flitty looks graceful as he swims around


43
4->
3
o
S
c n
• H
43
s
O
u
M—l
u
<u
■4-J
03
£
cn
4->
3
O
cx
on
T3
C
a
<v
43
■*-)
<+4
o
<u
u
4-J
C
<U
U
OJ
43
4->
G
• i-*
tuO
o
u
VM
.s
43
O
C
<L>
(U
fco
txo
• fH
43
V
f5


THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
the pool, while Torty, who uses four legs and his long neck, looks
sprawly and ungainly.
“ Tve lost Tilly again,’ Torty said.
“ ‘And Flutey has gone too. That horrible old bird frightened
her nearly to death, and she is hiding away. I cannot find her.’
“I will get the bluebells to ring the news to the garden and
ask all the flowers to help me find my Tilly.’
“ ‘That is a good idea. Tell them about Flutey too,’ Flitty
replied.
“Torty climbed out of the pool and went quickly down the
garden path, over the lawns until he came to the garden where
the bluebells grew. He told them his troubles and they promised
to ring their bells and let all the other flowers in the garden
know that Tilly was lost. Some of them, surely, would have
seen her. Their bells rang out sweetly in the early morn. But
the Canterbury Bells awakened and rang their bells so loudly that
the sound drowned the bluebells’ dainty ring, and none of the
flowers could hear.
“Torty waited a while; then, feeling upset, went back to the
pool to tell Flitty. Alas, as he climbed the side of the pool, he
slipped and was caught between two cracks in the rock. He cried
for help, but his voice was muffled, because he was standing on his
head; then he waved his legs. Flitty, swimming round the pool
saw them and wondered what they could be. When he realized
that they belonged to Torty, he said:
“ ‘Oh, goodness, it’s Torty, stuck down head first! What can
I do? I can’t get out of the pool. Oh dear, oh dear! I’ll blow
bubbles and make someone notice.’
“He blew bubbles, and a little green frog, named Hoppy, who
was sitting by the pool, wondered about them, and curious, he
hopped on to a lily leaf close to Flitty.
“ ‘l’m so glad to see you,’ spluttered Flitty. ‘Oh, please
save Torty; he’s stuck in a crack between those two rocks, and
I’m sure he’ll die. It’s bad to have all the blood rushing to his
head.’


THE TORTOISE AND THE GOLDFISH
“ ‘Hoppy was only a baby frog, but he had sense for his age.
He hopped over to Torty and said:
“ ‘Don’t kick your legs about any more, or you’ll make your-
self tired. Just wait quietly while Igo for help. Sorry you have
to stand on your head; it must be uncomfortable; but it’s good
practice if you ever play leap frog! Cheer up!’
“Torty, feeling uncomfortable, and getting red in the face,
tried to say ‘Thank you,’ but it sounded like this: ‘hiccup, hiccup,
hiccup,’
“Hoppy wondered what to do. Then he heard Kooka laugh-
ing in his sleep, and an idea came to him. He was a cunning
little frog, and started to croak under the branch where Kooka
slept. yKooka opened one greedy eye.
“ ‘ln the rock over there is a nice big fat toad,’ Hoppy
croaked, ‘it is caught in a crack, and can’t get out. He would
make a lovely breakfast, and you can get him without any trouble.’
“ ‘How about you, young Hoppy? You’ll do for my break-
fast,’ said Kooka.
“ ‘lf you can catch me,’ laughed Hoppy. ‘You can catch the
toad easily, why not try him?’
“ ‘Well, show me the way,’ said Kooka.
“ ‘No, thank you ,’ Hoppy replied. ‘You can find it your-
self ! I don’t want to be your breakfast. The toad is in the rocks
over there.’
“Lazy and greedy old Kooka flew over the rocks. In the dim
light he saw Torty’s legs moving. He grabbed him, held him
in his beak:
“ ‘lt’s a heavy toad, and he’s got a shell.’ Then he dropped
Torty and laughed in anger when he found it was a tortoise, and
knew that he had been tricked by Hoppy.
“Flitty had seen everything that happened, so he kept on blow-
ing bubbles until the water lily, unfolding pink petals to greet the
morning sun, said:
“ ‘Really! you goldfish down there, do you never stop blowing
bubbles? You’re spoiling my reflection. You know it is half my
beauty to be mirrored in the pool. But I have some news for you;


if you’ll stop blowing bubbles for a moment, and listen to me, I’ll
tell you. The Fairies came again this morning, and they whis-
pered to me: “Tell Torty, that Tilly is beneath the forget-me-nots
again, sleeping so fast that if she is not awakened she will sleep
all the winter through.’
“ ‘Those selfish forget-me-nots, spreading themselves every-
where, they hold Tilly in her sleep, hoping she will forget.’
“Flitty was excited, and started blowing bubbles all over again.
This made Flutey swim from her hiding place to find out what
it was all about, and when Flitty saw her he swam around and
around, blowing more and more bubbles, very excited indeed.”
“Oh dear, I’m so glad they found Tilly and Flutey,” Merle
sighed. “The Fairies seem to know everything, and we never
see them.”
“I’m sorry about the little goldfish though,” Blueboy added.
“And I’m very cross with Kooka; we must teach him not to be so
cruel.”


CHAPTER V
THE FAIRY PARTY
Bluie knew the secret path that led to and from Gnomeland.
But when Twinkle was imprisoned there, he could not show her
the way out for fear of making the gnomes angry.
It was clever of him to tell the gardener to dig a hole, but
very foolish of him to be in the way when the gardener was
chopping the rock, for that was how he lost half his tail.
Now that Twinkle had escaped, Bluie was worried about the
hole in the roof of Gnomeland; so he was very relieved to see the
gardener start to build a rock garden over it. He went down the
secret path to sleep until a new tail had grown. While he slept,
the little Green Gnomes made him a prisoner. They had dis-
covered that he had helped Twinkle to escape, so they tied and
bound him with long runners of the morning glory vine that were
growing through a crack in the rocks: when he awakened he
found he could not move.
The gnomes promised to let him go if Twinkle would come
back. But Bluie told them they were selfish. ‘Twinkle belongs
to another land,” he said. “You cannot imprison her, and keep
her with your other treasures. She could not live under the
earth.”
“We love her,” they cried. “She is beautiful. We would
make her happy. Bring her back and you will be free.”
“No, never, never,” Bluie said. And because he would not
do what the gnomes wished they kept him a prisoner.
Only Flip, of all the little Green Gnomes, was sorry for him.
He promised to help Bluie escape someday when the other gnomes
were busy and far away. But “someday” never seemed to come.


in
<u
>
’be
X
o
c+-c
-4-J
bjo
3
O
u
* — l
■*->
tuo
c
• f—•
a-
<u
<u
a,
a;
CO
3
O
E
T3
C
3
O
Ph
(LI
4-»
+-»
•
hJ
<u
H


THE FAIRY PARTY
Crinkle, the cricket, brought him food and water, while all
the other crickets sang merry songs to cheer him.
Meanwhile the gardener built the rock garden over the hole
he had made while looking for Twinkle, and as he worked he won-
dered where Bluie could be, for Bluie had become one of his
friends. Time passed. The plants grew, and still no sign of him.
The flowers bloomed, and still no Bluie. What could be keeping
him? His tail was surely grown by now. Then the gardener
heard there was to be a fairy party, and he was invited to watch
the fairies dance.
When the night of the party arrived, the little Green Gnomes
came up the secret path, all dressed in their best, and waited in the
moonlight on the lawn of the Little Round Garden. There was
mischief brewing in their naughty heads. They hoped to punish
the fairies for taking Twinkle.
Snuffle and Muffle set acorn cups, filled with sweet honey
dew, upon the lawn ready for the
guests’ refreshments.
Snippy and Snappy, the little
foxes, were there, very proud of
their new fox gloves. Bunce and
Bounce, the two little bumble bees,
buzzed gaily to the party in good
time. Torty and Tilly, the tortoises,
were waiting beside their dear
friend, Flitty, the goldfish, who
could not leave the pond, but hoped
to get a good view. The water lily
whispered to him; “My petals close
at night, and I find it difficult to
keep awake; if you happen to see
me nodding, you might blow bubbles
to arouse me.”
Kooka for once was not sleepy. Hoppy had brought all his
froggy friends in their best spotted green frocks, and Kooka kept
his eye on them.


**
THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
The birds twittered excitedly in the tree, and told their wee
babes in the nest to be sure to keep their eyes wide open to see the
loveliest sight in the world.
The bluebells rang their bells; the Canterbury Bells rang
theirs louder still. All the other flowers were shaking with ex-
citement. Mr Fairy chuckled when he heard the stir in the
garden; he kept the shutters of the pergola wide open. There was
a gentle rustling. All the buds moved gently, as if awakening,
and those on the peach-tree seemed to be fairies in brown capes,
with bright pink satin shoes peeping from beneath. A gentle
breeze swayed the branches; the buds threw off their capes; the
trees shivered, and the blossoms opened, seeming to hold dainty
skirts and curtsy to fairies dancing on the lawn. All the little
garden people danced too: Kooka with a dear little frog, and Torty
danced a gavotte with Snappy, the fox.
The naughty little gnomes were busy while the fun was at
its height. They crept to the trees and sprinkled the blossoms
with a concoction of their own brewing.
When the party was over all the little garden people went
home and the fairies, with dainty curtsies, fluttered to the trees to
kiss the blossoms farewell. But a
dreadful thing happened.
They were held prisoners, for the
concoction sprinkled by the gnomes
made them drowsy, and they crept
inside the blossoms and slept.
The gnomes laughed and shouted
and danced beneath the tree in great
glee.
The morning glory vines tempted
them next. They picked all the buds
to take home, hoping that they would
open beneath the ground. They tugged
at the vine, and Bluie feeling the tug-
ging, wondered what was happening.
Harder still they tugged. Suddenly,


THE FAIRY PARTY
snap, snap, the strands broke, and Bluie managed to escape
from the bonds that held him. He ran quickly up the secret path
to the garden. The little Green Gnomes, hidden behind the
leaves, were too busy to notice him. They laughed and clapped
their hands and then crept down to their mossy beds to snatch
some sleep before the dawn.
Bluie found the rock garden, and was so delighted with it
that he decided to make it his new home.
Only two people saw the imprisoned fairies. They were
Merle and Blueboy, peeping from their nursery window. They
saw Bunce and Bounce buzzing busily around the blossoms and
petals falling from the tree; they did not know the petals were
fairies that turned to butterflies as they escaped from the blossoms.
When Merle and Blueboy discovered that the petals were
really butterflies they laughed aloud; and Twinkle, one of the
imprisoned fairies, heard them and got her wish at last.


CHAPTER VI
HONEY AND CHIRP
Of course there were birds in the Little Round Garden. Two of
them were called Honey and Chirp. 1 hey had built a nest in the
tree near the lily pond, a cosy nest lined with horse’s hair.
They were a happy pair and loved adventures; one day they
had an adventure that was nearly a tragedy. However, I must
tell you about their great
friend, the horse, who lived in
a paddock not far from the
Little Round Garden. He was
called Dray and every day
Honey and Chirp paid him a
visit and hopped on his back.
One day Honey said:
“Please, Dray, may I
have a hair from your tail for
our nest? Just one, and I
promise I won’t hurt when I
pull it out.”
Dray turned one ear
round and said:
“Help yourself.”
“Can I pull one, too?” Chirp cried.
“Certainly,” and around came Dray’s other ear. He teased
them and switched his tail from side to side, and pranced about.
But he let them have all the hairs they needed, and when their
nest was finished they told him a secret.
“There are three lovely eggs in our nest,” said Chirp. “We


HONEY AND CHIRP
will not have time to play for quite a long time, for we must keep
our eggs warm.”
“I am sorry indeed,” said Dray. “I will miss you.”
“We’ll come again in the Spring,” they sang, flying round
and round, darting here and there, and calling to him, You can t
catch us, Dray.” Dray galloped after them, kicking up his heels,
full of fun.
Honey and Chirp were devoted to their nest, and took turn
about to keep the eggs warm. One day Honey, in hopping from
the nest, caught his claw in a long hair that had loosened. He was
frightened and fluttered his wings.
The hair was caught on a twig. Honey flew about, trying to
free himself, and instead of doing so, wound the long hair around
himself as well as the twig, thus becoming a prisoner; the more
he tried to free himself the worse his plight became.
Chirp flew about calling for help. “Don’t worry, dear Chirp,
help will come soon,” Honey tried to console her. “Don’t worry
about me; keep our eggs warm, or our babies will die.”
Poor Chirp, she knew she should keep the eggs warm, but
help was needed for Honey, and how was she to get it? It was
growing dark. Spying Hoppy, the frog, she called to him.^
“I really don’t know what to do,” he replied, “but I m sure
the fairies will be able to help you.”
“Yes, I’m sure they will, Hoppy; but I may have to wait for a
long time before they come,” wailed Chirp. She flew back to her
eggs, and tried to comfort Honey. Then she saw Kooka, the
Kookaburra, and asked him.
“Why don’t you ask the gardener? It really needs a great big
pair of scissors and I can’t help you,” he chuckled lazily.
Darkey, the Owl, kept looking at Honey with big shining
eyes, and when Chirp said: “Please, Darkey, can’t you help us?”
he replied: .
“Although I can see in the dark, it would take a long time
to unwind that long hair, and it would be morning light before I
could finish. My sight fails me then, and so it would be better to
ask the fairies, as Hoppy suggests.”


“Oh dear, oh dear, he may die from cold by then, or he may
be eaten by that old tabby cat, who is always looking at us with
his green eyes,” cried Chirp. Then she felt frightened of Darkey’s
shining eyes, he might mistake Honey for a mouse. So she chirped
and twittered, and Honey chirped back, and they tried to be
cheerful. But all the time she was frightened, and Honey was
dreadfully, dreadfully uncomfortable. Poor Honey, tied up to a
twig, and not able to fly or hop from branch to branch! It was
really sad.
“Honey, 1 am sure I can see a fairy among the bluebells,”
Chirp often said through that long night.
Towards daybreak she called: “There is a fairy.” Suddenly
there was a stirring, stirring, like a gentle breeze, and all the
fairies in the world seemed to be there. They had somehow heard
of Honey’s plight. They were sorry for him. What was to be
done? It was true they needed big strong scissors as well as a
mortal who could use them. Hastily they flew away in search of
these.
They flew to the Little Round House, and peeping in at the
window saw Merle fast asleep. A pair of scissors on the table
beside her was the very thing they needed.
“We’ll send her a dream, and in it we’ll get her to help us,”
they said to each other. Sliding down a moonbeam on to her bed
they whispered in Merle’s ear all about Honey’s plight. Merle
dreamt about the little bird caught on a branch of a tree; in her
dream she was sorry for him. She must help the little bird! Still
in a dream, she sprang out of bed, seized the scissors, and carried
them with her to the garden.
There she found Honey caught to the twig in the tree. Snip,
snip, snip; she cut the twig, and holding it in her hand, gently cut
the hair away from Honey. He was free! For a moment he lay
too numbed to fly; then he heard a joyous tweet from Chirp. Feebly
he fluttered to his nest and twittered sadly. Feeling free and
happy, he burst into song —a song of thanks to Merle for saving
his life.


She found Honey caught to the twig in the tree.


The fairies stopped to listen to the song, then gently guided
Merle back to her room. Just as she was being wafted into bed,
the scissors fell to the floor, crash! She woke with a start, her
brown eyes full of wonder. The fairies all fled. Merle heard the
gentle stirring, stirring of their wings, like the rustle of a breezy
and did not know that she had at last found the fairies.


CHAPTER VII
THE STORY OF STEVE
Merle and Blueboy had an auntie who loved to give them sur-
prises. They called her Dearest. One day on her way to the Little
Round House, while sitting in the tram she remembered that she
did not have a surprise for them. She
noticed a man sitting opposite her who
had a tiny white puppy peeping out of
his coat pocket. It had black eyes and
a round black nose.
“The puppy would be a lovely sur-
prise for Merle and Blueboy,” Dearest
thought. “I wonder if the man will sell
it.”
“Do let me buy your puppy,” she
said, leaning forward.
The man shook his head.
“I would like to buy him from you;
do let me,” she begged. But he shook
his head again, and looked at her with
twinkling grey eyes.
“If you will not sell him, let me hold him,” Dearest said
“He is the sweetest puppy I have ever seen.”
But the man did not answer; he seemed to have fallen asleep.
By and by the tram came to a stop, the little man awakened,
jumped up suddenly and left the tram. When it started again,
Dearest found the puppy in her lap. Surely there must be some
mistake.
She got out of the tram at the next stopping place and walked


back looking for the man, but he had completely disappeared.
So she took the puppy to Merle and Blueboy after all. They
were very excited about the surprise, and wondered about the
little man in the tram.
As Merle took the puppy in her arms, he nipped the tip o±
her ear with his tiny white teeth, and she laughed and loved him,
and hugged him close to her. She carried him into the house to
show him to Mother and Nanny and Cookie. They all fell in love
with him. Then she took him into the garden, and put him on the
lawn where he tumbled head over heels, and rolled over and over
like a fluffy white ball. This amused the gardener and Blueboy.
“What are you going to call him?” they asked.
“I don’t know,” Merle said; and ran to ask everyone’s advice.
The Little Mother said, “Snowball, of course.” Nanny
wanted to call him “Fluffy.” Dearest liked “Peter”; Blueboy,
“Billy”; Merle thought “Snowflake.” The gardener said he was
so like a Teddy bear, he should be called “Teddy”; and the Big
Daddy, who always loved a joke, thought that Soot suited him
best of all.
Then Cookie said, “Why not call him Steve? Everyone
laughed, because it was a funny name for a dog; but somehow
“Steve” he was called, nobody knew exactly why.
Steve became a very important member of the family. It
would fill a book to tell all about his mischievous ways. He ran
away with everyone’s slippers; tried to eat the mats, and poked
his little black nose into everything; dug up the garden, and chased
the birds. He even chased imaginary things at night and kept
everyone awake with his yappings. He loved adventures. One
day he was nearly lost: I will tell you how it happened.
The gardener slept with the shutters open in the pergola, for
the scent of the roses floated in, and early in the mornings little
Blue Wrens came to visit him. He loved to watch their dainty
antics, as they flirted their tails and hopped and flew around him.
On moonlit nights fairies danced. He watched them in the same
way as he watched the flowers bloom; to him it seemed the same.


THE STORY OF STEVE
“I wish that Merle and Blueboy could see the fairies, he
thought, “instead of always being fast asleep when they come.”
Steve was often awake, however, and ran round and round,
barking because he was excited. Then the little people disappeared.
“I will have to chain up Steve when the moon shines,” the
gardener said.
One moonlit night Steve whined and barked with excite-
ment, and ran about the lawns. The gardener could not so
he decided to tie him up. Steve ran out into the road, a winding
road that seemed to be always running round trying to catch the
Little Round House. There was something on the road to catch
Steve instead; a big man grabbed him, put him into a dark
waggon, and drove away. Steve was too frightened to even howl,
and cowered down out of sight.
The waggon rumbled away and went on and on for a long
time. When it stopped at last, a hand came close to Steve. He
bit sharply with his strong little teeth. There was a cry of annoy-
ance; Steve sprang from the waggon and ran away; he heard
shouts behind him, and ran faster; footsteps followed, he ran
faster still and kept on running, until he came to a wide field, and
there, shivering with fright, he
lay behind a log and waited
until all was quiet. The moon
was still shining as bright as
day.
By and by he saw little
rabbits come out to play. He
pricked up his ears, and wag-
ged his tail; here was an ad-
venture. He decided he would
like to play too, and rushed at
the bunnies, barking excitedly. They all ran away and disap-
peared into the earth.
He was disappointed and lay down behind the log again.
Presently he heard barking and pricked his ears. here was a


friend. He ran out, tail wagging. A big dog came bounding across
the field, stopped when he saw Steve and barked:
“I could bite you in half with one snap of my jaws.”
Steve’s heart stood still. Then he remembered how he had
frightened the big man; so he bared his teeth and, barking loudly,
rushed towards the dog. The big dog was so surprised that he ran
away with his tail between his legs.
A cow came next, her horns were terrifying, but Steve, still
brave, yapped at her heels and she turned and ran away across the
field. This disturbed a horse and it began to gallop around kicking
up its heels and neighing loudly. Steve chased it; with a great
clatter of hoofs the horse cantered away.
Steve felt tired again; he was panting and out of breath; his
tongue was hanging out. He lay down to rest, closed his eyes for a
little nap. Sleeping, he dreamt of his adventures and gave little
whining yelps.
Suddenly two hands came out of the dark and grabbed him,
and a man’s voice said:
“I’ve got you now; I’ll teach you to bite. A collar and chain
for you this time; you won’t be able to get away then.”
Steve’s bravery had all gone; he whimpered; he hated being
chained up; he howled loudly and struggled to get away. Then
he heard voices, and stopped struggling to listen.
“Isn’t that the dog that barks at night, and keeps us away
from our dear gardener?” one little voice said; in the grass Steve
saw figures light as thistledown, and heard voices like rustling
grass.
“I believe it is,” another voice replied. “The gardener will
love us if we take the dog back to him. Let’s help him get away;
but first he must promise never to bark at us again.”
Steve became excited and started to bark, but remembered
just in time.
“Don’t go away,” he said. “I promise never to bark at you
again if you take me back to the gardener.”


THE STORY OF STEVE
“What’s the matter with this collar, I can’t do it up, the man
Sa ' d Steve guessedTe 6 was being helped, and gave a big tug and
managed to get away. The man gave a shout of annoyance, and
"nilkSto, for him; and the IMe P** “ h “
in the wrong direction by pretending to be a htt e og.
“Yao yap,” they said. It sounded exactly like Steve, b
all the time Steve was running very fast “ the other J r “ tlo^ hich
Soon the man was completely lost and did n
wav to turn. Steve kept a long way off, and by anc y
people who looked like thistledown, joined him and laughing a
dancing- led him across the fields. J
It was a very long way to the Little Round Garden 3Ut v
did not mind. He chased along joyously, taking great care no
bark, and was led right back to the garden gate. When he found
that he was home again he bounded into the garden looking
the gardener, who was looking for him, and the gardener was
pleafed to see him he did not even scold. Steve wagged his tail
and looked with pleading eyes, as if to say; _
“Please don’t let any one take me away again and do
me up I will be good and never get excited and bark when t
akhough he barked at almost everything when a
moonlit night came he only whined excitedly and wagged his ta 1.


CHAPTER VIII
THE DANCE OF THE AUTUMN LEAVES
Summer had come and gone in the Little Round Garden. Autumn
was there when Flip, the little Green Gnome, had an exciting ad-
venture among the Autumn leaves.
The brown leaves were gay
in the Autumn and gave parties
every night during the time of
their falling, and invited the little
Green Gnomes to dance with
them.
The gnomes danced them
down the secret path to Gnome-
land beneath the ground. There
they stayed through the long
Winter, knowing that in the
Spring the busy roots of the trees
would send them back to the sun-
light to be green leaves again.
They well knew that if they did
not reach Gnomeland they would be raked up and burnt.
They danced here, there, and everywhere, fluttering and
twirling along the paths of the Little Round Garden, on the lawns
and even on the verandas of the Little Round House.
When Blueboy heard the rustling and rustling in the night
he was sometimes frightened, and hid his head under the bed-
clothes, not guessing that the leaves were inviting the gnomes
to dance with them.


THE DANCE OF THE AUTUMN LEAVES
One night Flip was enjoying the dance so much that he for-
got the time and danced right through until the morning.
Then a dreadful thing happened. He was raked up among
the leaves and pushed into a sack.
Poor little Flip! He knew he would be thrown on to a tire.
His heart went thump, thump. He tried to scramble out of t e
sack, but a big hand held it tightly closed. The bag was later
turned upside down and shaken over the fire. Smoke and heat
came up through the leaves. There was little hope of escape.
But a merry little breeze sprang up suddenly, and rushed to
the rescue. „ . . -o
The leaf with Flip clinging to it, was thrown against the B g
Daddy, for it was he who held the sack. Flip dung to his coat,
and holding on managed to climb into a pocket, glad indeed to be
away from the dreadful fire.
The Big Daddy finished his work in the garden and wen
inside, never dreaming there was a little Green Gnome in his
ket He went straight to the cupboard in the hall, and hung
old gardening coat on a hook. Click, click-Flip was locked in-
side. He was frightened, but glad to stay quietly.
He tried to get out when the door opened later on; but just
as he got out of the pocket and slid to the floor the door closed
g A big feather duster stood in the corner of the cupboard.
Flip hid among the feathers, hoping that when the door opene
he would be able to escape. He waited for a long time and was
nearly asleep when he heard footsteps approaching. Nanny opened
the door and took the duster from the corner, carrying Flip with
it. He crept closer among the feathers and clung to them.
Flip flap went the duster as Nanny dusted the pictures and
furniture. Flip, flap, all around the room. The little gnome
expected to fall out at any moment. >
Then the duster flapped gently around the glass fringe of a
big lampshade. He caught the fringe and swung himself away
from the duster; dangled a moment, then crept inside the


shade, feeling a little dizzy, very uncomfortable, and not a little
frightened.
Blueboy walked into the room.
Flip had seen him many times in the garden, so he shook the
glass beads to attract his attention. Blueboy at first did not notice.
Flip rattled harder and kept on rattling. At last Blueboy looked
up, and opened his eyes wide in astonishment.
Nanny came back to lay the table for dinner. The little Green
Gnome shook his head at Blueboy, putting his finger to his lips.
Blueboy knew by this that it was a secret. However, he was ex-
cited and kept looking up, and at last tripped against Nanny.
Oh, do go away, Master Blueboy; you’re getting in my
way,” Nanny cried.
He wanted to get a chair to stand on so that he could rescue
Flip; but Nanny, busy setting the table, was in and out of the
room. Blueboy dodged here and there, until Nanny at last said:
For goodness gracious sake, what’s come over you, Blue-
boy, star-gazing like that? Go outside at once.”
She chased him. Blueboy dodged behind the chairs.
Nanny ran after him, past the lampshade. As she did so,
Flip jumped on to her hair and held on with both hands.
“Ough! a beetle, a beetle,” she screamed. “Take it off at once,
you naughty boy! That’s the trick you’re up to, is it?” She ran
screaming to the kitchen; Blueboy ran after her. Flip dropped to
her shoulder and climbed down her apron strings. There he
dangled dangerously. Blueboy caught him, just in time, and ran
to the garden with him.
“Well, well, that was a narrow escape,” said Flip, “but by
no means the worst thing I’ve escaped to-day. Still, I must thank
you, big boy, for your help.” He then told Blueboy how he had
nearly been burnt.
“Would you mind letting me down near that big rock over
there—the one with the crack in it. I can hear all my friends call-
ing me. I’m sure they must be worried.”
Oh, I would love to see them,” Blueboy said.


THE DANCE OF THE AUTUMN LEAVES
“So you shall, for you deserve a reward for rescuing me,”
answered Flip. “Come to-night with your flute, instead of hiding
your head under the bedclothes when you hear the rustling and
creeping of the leaves, and play it to us and you will see a dance
between the little Green Gnomes and the big brown leaves.
Down the secret path Flip ran to tell his adventures to the
other gnomes, while Blueboy ran to tell Merle.
That night the children crept from their beds and out into
the garden. Blueboy played his flute, and they both saw the dance
of the Autumn leaves. A dance of leaves blown by the wind and
fluttering about the Little Round Garden. But Merle and Blueboy
saw Flip and all his friends. The dance grew faster and merrier.
The gnomes hurried and scurried; and the Autumn leaves trembled
and shook with excitement, hoping for a partner for the last dance
of the season.
Merle and Blueboy were delighted, for now that they had
seen the gnomes, they were quite sure that very soon they would
see a fairy with gossamer frock and shimmering wings.


CHAPTER IX
THE STORM
The parties given by the Autumn leaves were over. The little
Green Gnomes had danced many leaves down the secret path to
safety in the earth. A few of the trees, however, had kept their
leaves. These were the evergreens. The little Green Gnomes were
glad there were a few evergreen trees, because it was from these
that they heard all the news about what was happening in the
Little Round Garden.
The leaves were for ever whispering. The branches tapped
out the news, and the little Green Gnomes spent the Winter even-
ings listening in at the roots of the trees.
This is what they heard: “There was a wonderful sunrise this
morning. The colour was half-way across the sky.”
The leaves rustled: “A skylark will now sing a song entitled
‘Hark, Hark, the Lark.’ ”
Then more whispering of the leaves on the air: “The gar-
dener has planted out the bulbs and all the little plants for the
Spring. It is getting cool, and Merle and Blueboy wore their coats
to school this morning.”
One night there was exciting news on the air.
“A storm is coming. The sky is overcast. There are flashes
of lightning.” This was alarming.
The little Green Gnomes listened to the rumble of thunder,
and the swish, swish of the wind in the branches, and felt the
roots tremble. They trembled too, for they were nervous in a
storm. Suddenly more news came over the air:
“Calling all tree-root stations. Calling all tree-roots stations.
Please inform the gnomes that Twinkle is in danger. She is


THE STORM
drenched with rain. Her wings are soaked. She cannot fly. She
is seeking shelter in a bird’s nest!”
‘‘Our lovely treasure, Twinkle, in trouble! We must help
her,” cried the little Green Gnomes. “We must help her.”
The wind howled, rain poured down, flashes of lightning rent
the skies, the branches shook as they whispered the news to their
leaves.
“Honey and Chirp are keeping Twinkle warm, but soon the
nest will be thrown to the ground. We cannot save it; we are do-
ing our utmost to help.” This was the next message the gnomes
heard.
“Tap-tap.”
“Come quickly, or they will be hurt, Honey, Chirp and
Twinkle.”
Crash! More thunder. The roots trembled alarmingly. The
gnomes would need to hurry to be in time to save Twinkle. Flip
led the way along the secret path to the opening, but he and all
the gnomes were blown back again and again. They struggled
against the wind and at last managed to creep out into the garden.
Flip wondered what to do. Suddenly a large leaf blew close to
him. He seized it and cried, “Follow me. Get some leaves.” The
wind caught the leaf, and he was blown across the Little Round
Garden to the tree in which Twinkle was sheltering.
Twinkle was cuddled beside the little birds. When she saw
Flip she cried: “Oh, Flip, I’m so glad you have come! But please
don’t take me to live underground again. I found it too hard to
get away last time. Oh dear, I don’t know what to do. I have
hurt my wing and can’t get through the big black clouds to my
home. lam hoping it will clear so that my friends will be able to
come and help me back. If I stay too long I will be imprisoned
as a flower or butterfly.”
“Why did you come to the garden in this wintery weather?”
“I wished to tell the gardener that he belongs to us. He
needn’t be a gardener if he knows the truth; and I think he may
be my playmate, Wink,” explained Twinkle.


J
THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
“It was wrong of you. Fairies are not allowed to tell. How
did you hurt your wing? Tell me quickly, for all the gnomes will
be here in a moment, and
they will take you back
with them. I must think
of a way to keep you
here.”
“Oh dear, oh dear, I
don’t want to go back.
I’m so frightened, and the
storm makes it much
harder. I came before the
storm and slipped into the
pergola, for the shutters
were all open. The gar-
dener was fast asleep, so I
tickled his nose with the
tip of my wing. He brushed me away. I was knocked over, and
that is how my wing was hurt.”
“Poor Twinkle,” said Flip. “Pm so sorry. But how did you
find out who the gardener is ?”
“We always know one of our own in disguise, although we
may not know the name he had. I feel sure that the gardener is
my playmate, Wink. When I was in the pergola I saw the storm
coming. I couldn’t wait any longer, and set off quickly, and found
it difficult to fly because of my wing. When the storm broke,
I was driven back to the tree, and Honey and Chirp helped me
to their nest.”
A great gust of wind blew a shower of leaves and rain
against the tree, a little Green Gnome was clinging to each leaf.
All the gnomes sprang off the leaves on to the trunk of the tree,
and climbed to the branches, calling, “Where is our Twinkle?
Where is our Twinkle?”
A sad little voice replied: “Here I am, but please don’t take
me back.”
This they would surely have done. However, another gust


THE STORM
of wind came and there was a loud crack and a srtap. The
branch with Flip and Twinkle and Honey and Chirp came crash-
ing - to earth. The little Green Gnomes scattered quickly, and ran
back to the secret path and to their homes under the ground;
trembling and shaking they listened to the storm and did not ven-
ture out again. The roots around them trembled.
Flip helped Twinkle. He took her to shelter in the crack
of the rock that led to the secret path.
Honey and Chirp circled round and round. Poor brave little
birds! Chirp called to Honey; “Don’t worry, Honey, we will
build another nest.” And Honey answered: “Of course we will,
Chirp, and Dray will give us more hairs to help build it.”
Very soon the storm was over, and with the early hours be-
fore the dawn Twinkle’s friends arrived. They had a message
for her; she was to be punished because she had thought to break
a fairy law. But when she crept from the crack in the rock to
tell about her hurt wing, they hastened to heal it, and the magic
in their fingers made it well at once.
They told her she was to stay on earth, and was to be neither
flower, butterfly, nor mortal, but just herself; and that she was
to stay on earth until she found a mortal who believed in fairies,
and one worthy of a fairy gift.
“The little girl and boy who live in this garden believe in
them,” Twinkle said.
“All children believe in fairies,” they replied. “No, you
must find a grown-up mortal who really and truly believes too.”
Then they flew away, leaving Twinkle behind. They were sorry
for her, knowing how hard it is to live as a fairy away from
Fairyland.
For a little while Twinkle was in dismay. Then she thought
about the Little Round Garden and how it loved to play. It
would be nice to live in it. Perhaps it would play with her and
lend its lawns to dance upon, and its beautiful flowers to hide
among; perhaps help in her search. And if the gardener were
really her playmate, Wink, she would surely know by being near
him.


CHAPTER X
DEAREST
It is true that Twinkle and the Little Round Garden played.
There were dragon-flies to race over the lily ponds, goldfish
to tease by ruffling the water, flowers to sway and bend, trees that
beckoned with leafy arms.
. ** one y and Chir P needed a place to build their new nest, and
Twinkle helped them find it. She also wished to help the gardener
as he worked in the garden, but only bewildered him by popping
up in front of him at unexpected moments; she even perched her-
self on the Big Daddy’s gardening fork when he carried it across
his shoulder.
. er^e an d Blueboy were excited when they saw the flash of
rainbow wings among the flowers. It was like a butterfly but
they suspected that it was really a fairy.


DEAREST
“Where will I look for a mortal who believes in fairies?”
Twinkle asked all the little garden people. #
“That is easy,” they answered. “There is the Little
Mother.”
“But she already has a fairy gift,” Twinkle told them,
“and the fairies give only one gift to each mortal.’
Flitty, the goldfish, said: “Don’t waste time looking in this
garden. They are all too happy here and have all the gifts they
need. You must search away from this garden.
“Oh dear,” sighed Twinkle, “I don’t want to go away from
the Little Round Garden, we have such lovely games.”
“Well, why did you ask my advice?” exclaimed Flitty, and
blew bubbles as he swam crossly away.
Merle and Blueboys’ auntie, whom they called Dearest, led
a very busy life, and though she loved the Little Round Garden,
she did not come to it as often as she wished.
Merle and Blueboy enjoyed her visits, for she told them
stories and gave them quaint surprises. After Twinkle came to
the garden they gave her a surprise instead.
“There is a fairy in our garden. Please help us to find her.”
She helped them look, but they could not find the fairy.
Twinkle was playing with Willy Wagtail among the sweet peas,
swinging from one blossom to another trying to swing farther
than Willy Wagtail could hop. When the Little Mother came
with Dearest to pick a bunch of sweet peas for her, Willy Wagtail
flew off and Twinkle was left swinging upside down and looking
into a pair of lovely eyes, eyes that belonged to Dearest. Twinkle
knew at once that she had found the mortal who deserved a fairy
gift. And when she heard her say: “Do look at the lovely fairy,”
she knew she believed in fairies too. Twinkle turned a somer-
sault on to a sweet pea lower down; there she hid, and waited to
hear more. #
“It is the fairy the children have been looking for, said the
Little Mother; and she knew it was Twinkle back again looking
for her playmate. “Let us be very quiet, and perhaps she will
stay and talk to us,” she whispered.


But Twinkle still hid away; and that is how at last she heard
news of Wink.
The fairy makes me think of a wonderful thing that hap-
pened to me/’ the Little Mother said.
“What was it?” Dearest asked.
“It’s a secret, a great secret, and you mustn’t tell any one,
for once it is known I may lose my gardener.”
“Do tell me. I will be very careful not to tell any one else,”
Dearest promised.
My gardener is a fairy in disguise. The fairy in the garden
is his playmate, Twinkle. She is always looking for him; she
does not know him as a mortal but knows that he is somewhere
m the garden. I once wished that I could have a fairy gardener
and this fairy having become mortal also became my wish. I
had to keep it a secret, for I had learned that once a fairy in dis-
guise, who is living on earth, knows about
it, he returns to Fairyland; his adventure is
over.”
Twinkle was overjoyed and flew off to
find the gardener; he was on the lawn, talk-
ing to Merle and Blueboy. When the chil-
dren saw the dainty creature they hardly
dared to breathe, and the gardener’s eyes
twinkled. He had grown to love her, and
watched her now as she swung lightly on a
rose close by. All three stared, until Merle
and Blueboy, unable to suppress their excite-
ment, broke into excited laughter. Twinkle,
who loved to hear the sound of children’s
laughter, became excited too, and dropped
lightly on to Merle’s shoulder.
“I wish to tell you a secret about your gardener,” she whis-
pered. “I may not tell him myself. Please tell him that he’s a
fairy, and his name is Wink.”
She flew away.
“What did she say?” asked Blueboy.


DEAREST
She said that our gardener is really a fairy, and something
about Wink.” 6
They all laughed, for it seemed a joke.
Perhaps she s right; my name is Mr Fairy. When she is
in the garden she makes me feel like one,” the gardener chuckled.
Merle and Blueboy laughed too.
Twinkle flew back to find Dearest, the sound of laughter
following her, for Merle and Blueboy were fast in pursuit.
“Where’s the fairy?” they shouted. “We saw her. Where
is she?”
Dearest had her arms full of flowers, and Twinkle, not know-
ing where to go, hid among them. She knew that she had found
the mortal and that her search was over.
“I saw the fairy this very moment, but she has disappeared
again,” Dearest exclaimed.
They all looked, but Twinkle was hidden; she intended to stay
beside Dearest, it was her chance to do the fairies’ bidding.
By and by Dearest gave up the search, and bidding every
one good-bye, started for home. And no one knew Twinkle went
with her, nor did Twinkle know of the wonderful place she would
see.
Dearest s house was large and grand. A wide staircase,
great halls, big rooms.
Twinkle slid down the bannisters and hid in the curtains; she
loved the bright colours she found in all the rooms. But'one
room she loved best of all, the walls were like a garden of flowers,
the hangings like a bright evening sky: this kept her guessing!
Painted birds perched on the flowers as if real, and butterflies
spread their lovely wings. She wondered why the flowers had no
perfume and why the birds and butterflies could not fly.
In this room Dearest rested, unfortunately her rest was
always disturbed by someone. Every one inside the house, and
many out of it, wanted Dearest for this, that, and the other thing.
She was kept busy doing kindly things for those who needed it,
and sometimes for those who didn’t, and she was often tired.
Twinkle heard her sigh and wish her room could be in a


place where nobody could find it. That was how Twinkle got an
idea. Instead of hiding away she must once again let Dearest see
her, so while Dearest slept she perched herself on a silken cushion.
When Dearest opened her eyes she saw Twinkle.
“I’m glad you’ve come again,” she said.
“You do believe in fairies?” Twinkle asked.
Dearest nodded.
“Because you believe in fairies, when you wish it your lovely
room will be invisible to all but yourself, and when you rest there
the flowers on the walls will shed their perfume, the birds will
sing, and the butterflies’ wings will shimmer with the star dust
danced down by our feet from Rainbowland. Some day you will
learn all about Rainbowland,” Twinkle called, as she disappeared
into the night.
Dearest felt happy and very pleased with this wonderful
secret, and knew that it would be hers for ever.
Twinkle flew back to the Little Round Garden and rested
among the flowers, and watched for her playmate.
“If I could only be a butterfly that remembers instead of one
that forgets,” she said to herself, “I myself could tell him all I
wish.” She knew that Merle had not understood her message.
It was clever of Twinkle to want to be a butterfly that re-
membered, for as a butterfly she hoped to be able to talk to the
gardener and to claim him as her playmate without breaking a
fairy law. She called to her friends among the flowers, and told
them what she wished. They thought it a joke and the Little
Round Garden was filled with the sound of their laughter. The
little Green Gnomes heard it and came running to see what it was
all about. Twinkle laughed. That was a sound they loved.
“I will never stop wishing to be a butterfly that remembers
until my wish is granted,” they heard her say and decided to help
her get her wish.


j!0^
CHAPTER XI
THE BUTTERFLY THAT REMEMBERED
Every one missed Twinkle from the garden. Merle looked for
her until she was tired, then devoted her time to her music instead.
Blueboy, who loved all the little animals, birds and insects in
the garden, kept on looking for the fairy, hoping that his little
garden friends would help to find her; he looked in the big lilies,
under the tall delphiniums, in the
shade of the trees and on top of the
water lily leaves, but could not find
her.
Mr Fairy missed Twinkle and
was sad; he thought that she had
gone for ever.
The Little Mother was wor-
ried, and often thought of the
dainty creature she had seen among
the sweet peas. She wondered if
her gardener would be happier with
his playmate. Perhaps after all she
would tell him and let him choose
whether he would like to stay or go
away. She was really puzzled.
Blueboy, who was always in the garden with her, could not under-
stand, and asked why she was worried; but the Little Mother only
shook her head.
Honey and Chirp knew it too; they hopped to the lowest
branch of the tree as she gathered flowers, and chirped and sang
as if they wished to help her.


'‘Tweet, tweet,” she answered, “you pretty things. I know
you would like to help me.”
Kooka chuckled and chortled as if giving advice. Flitty and
Flutey swam round in circles, as if anxious to help too. Bluie
opened one eye as he basked in the sun and looked cunning and
wise, as if to say, “Oh, you know what to do.” And Muffle and
Snuffle sets nuts temptingly before her.
Torty and Tilly followed her about the garden as if to console
her.
The gardener was the only one who did not seem to wish to
be helpful. He was for ever sitting on the edge of a rock garden,
his thoughts far away, and his hands idle.
“What’s the trouble, Gardener?” the Little Mother asked
him one day. “You look unhappy; tell me what is worrying you.”
“Well, to tell you the truth, Madam, I am like Merle and Blue-
boy. I miss the dainty creature from the garden.”
The Little Mother’s heart went flop, flop.
“Oh dear, oh dear,” she whispered to herself, “he is missing
his playmate. He is lonely—perhaps unhappy; and doesn’t know
why. What am Ito do?”
“Somehow the little creature made me very happy with her
mischievous and gay little ways,” continued the gardener. “At
the same time she stirred a strange longing in my heart. I don’t
know why.”
Now the Little Mother knew he missed his playmate and was
unhappy. She didn’t know what to do about it, for she did not
wish to part with him. And that would surely happen if he knew
the secret. She could not bring herself to tell him just yet.
The Little Round Garden missed Twinkle and did not seem to
want to play. Then one day everything changed. Spring came.
Waking early one morning, the Little Mother knew that some-
thing had happened; she jumped out of bed and ran to the window.
“Oh, Big Daddy, come quickly,” she cried. “Look at my
garden. Oh, children and every one, come and see my garden.
Isn’t it lovely? Isn’t it lovely?” she cried, and ran out into the
garden, followed by every one.


THE BUTTERFLY THAT REMEMBERED
Even Cookie, who was never her best in the morning, was
smiling. Steve ran round and round chasing the Willy Wagtails,
who flirted their tails as if to say, “None of your nonsense/’
Kooka laughed and laughed, and Flitty blew bubbles in the
lily pond. Torty and Tilly danced round the edge, and were so
excited they both fell in.
Bunce and Bounce found bluebells everywhere and the peach-
blossom in full bloom, and flew excitedly from one blossom to
another, sipping honey.
Mr Fairy was smiling. He was happy again. The Little
Mother said to herself: “He isn’t sad any more, so I needn’t tell
him the secret. Perhaps he’ll stay with us always.
She did not know that Twinkle was in the garden again as
a lovely red and white butterfly, and was at that very moment on a
rose beside the open shutters of the pergola, and that the gardener
was listening to a tiny voice.
The little Green Gnomes had seen that Twinkle got her wish.
Now she was a butterfly —not the kind that forgets its fairy exist-
ence —but one that remembered everything.
“I am your playmate, Twinkle. You did not know me as a
fairy in the garden. As a butterfly I may tell you the secret
without breaking a fairy law. You can now remember where
you came from. Your name is Wink.”
“Wink! Twinkle and Wink!” cried the gardener. “Of
course I remember: I am your playmate: I remember everything.
I came to help the Little Miother because she wanted a fairy
gardener.”
Twinkle flew away to tell all the flowers and the birds and the
bees and the insects that she had found her playmate, Wink. First
she flew to the water lily. It was just opening its petals to greet
the morning sun, and was very pleased to see the lovely butterfly.
“Good morning,” the water lily said. “How beautiful the
sun is this morning.”
Twinkle said: “I’ve found my playmate.”
“What do you mean?” asked the water lily.


“I mean the gardener is a fairy, and now that he knows he
must return to Fairyland. ”
The water lily grew quite faint, and was so
upset she nearly closed her petals again. Flitty,
who had heard, said:
“Who are you that you dare say such
things?”
I am a fairy; my name is Twinkle; so I
ought to know.”
I don’t believe it,” said Flitty, as he swam
away. “I know Twinkle well.”
Twinkle flew to butterflies fluttering happily
round the delphiniums, and said to them: “You
may be fairies, living here to find out what it is
like to be butterflies. I am one, and I have just
found my playmate, Wink. The gardener is my
playmate.”
but ter fly n ° nSenSe yOU talk ’” they re P lied l “you are only a
Nevertheless I am a fairy too,” said Twinkle, and flew to
the tree where Honey and Chirp had their new nest. When she
told them that she was Twinkle they believed her, and were so
p eased that they sang it aloud so that every one could hear • and
very soon all the little animals and birds in the Little Round
Garden knew that Twinkle was back again. They came running
and flying from all directions, and gathered round the big red and
white butterfly. There was something they wished to ask her.
Why did you not give the fairy gift to the Little Mother?”
they all said at once. “It was not fair to give it to any one else,”
and they all talked loudly and made a great clatter. Twinkle tried
to speak, but could not make herself heard above the din. At
last they paused to listen. In a tiny voice she said:
I he fairies only give one gift to each mortal, and the Little
Mother already has a fairy gift.”
“What is it? What is it?” they called.
"She has ‘green fingers,’ ” said Twinkle, “which means that


sMV. b' '/
THE BUTTERFLY THAT REMEMBERED
she will always have a lovely garden, because all the flowers and
little plants love her and grow beautiful to please her.”
After that the little animals and birds had to be content.
They stopped their clatter and annoyance, and before they went
about the business of the day they listened to Twinkle’s story
about the gardener. They were all sad at the thought of losing
him.
In the meantime, he had gone to find the family; for he must
bid them farewell, and also keep his promise about the story on his
box.


CHAPTER XII
MR FAIRY LEAVES
When Merle and Blueboy went out into the garden, the gardener
called to them:
I can now tell you about the pictures on my box.”
They ran to him, full of interest. The Little Mother had
overheard, and said: “I’d like to listen too.”
They sat on a grassy bank, Merle and Blueboy on either side
of Mr Fairy. He had an arm round each of them. The Little
Mother sat in front, near the rock garden, where she had first
seen Twinkle.
7 must tell y° u tha * Twinkle was right, for besides this lovely
life I have another existence in Fairyland,” he began.
“Oh!” said Merle . . . “she was not playing a joke?”
“How did you get here?” asked Blueboy.
It seemed as if it was my great love for flowers that caused
this to happen. The Little Mother wished for a fairy gardener,
and I heard and wished I could live among the flowers and helrt
her. I found myself in this garden, not knowing how I came
here.”
Merle and Blueboy looked at the Little Mother and said:
“You knew all the time.”
She nodded, and said: “I have not found out about fairy
rings yet.” J
“Our Fairyland is different to other lands, and must be con-
stantly rebuilt: We rebuild with fairy rings.”
WFat kind of material do you get from my garden?”
“Colour for fairy rings. When the rings are made they
make another ring of colour for our Rainbowland. That is why


MR FAIRY LEAVES
we wish to help mortals get fairy rings. That is the story on my
box.”
“Oh, please tell us about it!” They were very excited.
“Oh, hurry,” said Blueboy.
“You thought it was a rainbow, and each picture was carved
in a half circle; then you discovered, when you looked under the
box, that it was a full circle. It is a picture of Fairyland; for
Fairyland is a rainbow right round the world, not half-way as
you see a rainbow, but all the way round. It is always there, and
made with every one’s fairy rings.”
“I wish I could see it now,” said Blueboy. “Why can’t I?”
“Because you haven’t got a ring. When you get one you
will be able to see it often.”
“But how can we get a fairy ring?” asked Merle. “Do tell
us.”
“I have helped you as much as lam able. You must do the
rest for yourselves. The only thing I can tell you is that it is
something like building castles in the air; but a fairy ring lasts,
where the other fades. Fairyland is a land that every one can
find. It is not easy; but find your rings first and the rest will be
easy.”
“Oh, dear, isn’t it exciting?” said Merle.
“What are all the pictures on the box?” asked Blueboy.
“Just everybody’s fairy rings. The fairies themselves make
each a complete circle.”
“Why?” they both asked.
“That is a secret too,” said the gardener: “I can’t tell you
any more. You will some day finish the story for yourselves.
You will not miss me, for I will never be far away.”
“Oh, how wonderful,” said the Little Mother; and Merle and
Blueboy clapped their hands with excitement.
“Will we be able to see you when you are a fairy again?” they
asked.
“Wait and see,” said the gardener, and laughing gaily, he
went back to his work. He told them he had a great deal to do
„ [s7]
B


THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
in the garden and could not waste any more time. And Merle
and Blueboy, holding their mother’s hands, went inside.
“Do you think it can be true about the fairy rings, they
asked her.
' “Of course it is,” replied the Little Mother, and wondered
how soon it would be before her fairy gardener left. She would
miss him, but felt sure he would continue to visit the garden.
Twinkle still as the butterfly that remembered, went to tell
the fairies how she had found Wink, and waited for them among
the flowers. When they came she told her adventures, and they
all wished to be butterflies that remembered. When the first ray
of sunlight came to warn them of the hour they took no heed.
And later there rose a cloud of tiny butterflies from the flowers.
Not a fairy went home.
Merle and Blueboy ran to the garden very early in the mora-
ine. They had many questions to ask Mr Fairy, and were very
surprised to see the door of the
pergola wide open, and the fairy
gardener gone. His box had
gone too.
Where could he be? They
felt lost without him, but stopped
to look at two beautiful red and
white butterflies fluttering around
the red roses that bloomed over
the pergola. While admiring them,
a cloud of tiny butterflies rose
from the flowers; the big butter-
flies flew to meet them, and led
them in a pretty dance round and
round the Little Round Garden.
There were white butterflies,
like falling snowflakes; pink
ones like falling blossoms; and blue ones like bits of the sky.
Blueboy and Merle ran after them, here, there, and every


t
MR FAIRY LEAVES
where, laughing' and shouting with excitement. Every one in the
Little Round House came out to see the lovely sight.
Twinkle and Wink, together at last, were the two red and
white butterflies proudly showing the tiny butterflies the Little
Round Garden; they even flew in by the open windows of the
Little Round House, in and out again.
When evening came they flew away into the sunset, followed
by all the tiny butterflies, making rosy and snowy white clouds
in the blue sky.
The Little Mother, looking through the trees of the Little
Round Garden, saw two stars that twinkled and winked in the
sunset. She sighed as she thought of the gardener and his plav-
mate Twinkle.


■


PART II
RAINBOW RINGS




CHAPTER I
LOOKING FOR FAIRY RINGS
The fairy gardener had gone and every one missed him. The
Little Mother, Merle, and Blueboy knew where he had gone, of
course, and told the Big Daddy.
“Fairy or no fairy, I
will miss him,” the Big
Daddy said.
And Cookie said to
Nanny, “I’ll miss that
gardener. He grew won-
derful herbs for my cook-
ing.”
“Til miss him too,”
Nanny added, “although
it kind of made me ner-
vous all the queer things
that happened while he
was here. He really had us all bewitched. Merle and Blueboy
could think of nothing but fairies. Perhaps they will get a little
sense into their heads now.”
She did not know that Mr Fairy said he would not be far
away.
He was missed by the flowers. The birds and the animals in
the Little Round Garden hoped that he would come again soon,
remembering that he said he would not be far away.
“Where-can-he-be? Where-can-he-be?” the birds sang; and
the bluebells rang their tiny bells, asking all the flowers if they
had seen him.


The Canterbury Bells rang loudly: “He is sure to come if he
hears us.”
Flitty blew bubbles to attract attention: “I must ask someone
if they have seen the gardener,” he said.
“You are spoiling my reflection, and wasting your own time,”
the water lily told him. “You know that he has returned to Fairy-
land.”
“But he said he would not be far away,” Flitty said.
Bluie went to the little Green Gnomes to inquire if they had
seen his old friend, but not one of them could help.
Flip said: “Watch for him when the fairies come to gather
colour from the flowers.”
“That is before the sun has risen,” Bluie remarked, “and it’s
far too cold for me then. Oh dear, oh dear, Ido miss him.”
Merle and Blueboy talked about him too.
“I wish he had told us more about the fairy rings,” Blueboy
said. “It’s very hard to understand.
“He said we could all have a fairy ring,” Merle answered;
“and the fairies would love us for having one, for it would be
another ring of colour for the rainbow.”
“But where can we find one? That’s what I would like to
know.” said Blueboy.
It was very puzzling. They asked every one how to get a
fairy ring. No one knew.
“We’ll just have to look for ourselves,” Merle told him.
They looked and looked, and kept on looking. First in the
Little Round Garden under all the trees, without finding one. They
peeped into all the flowers, but did not see the secret there. They
looked everywhere in the Little Round House, and sat in the bow
window in the kitchen —the ring-a-rosy window they called it.
They looked everywhere, thinking and wondering about the fairy
rings. Nanny joined them in the garden and looked at the peach-
tree. Its blossoms reminded her of little pink clouds. Just now
there were pink clouds in the sky very far away, and Nanny
sighed. Suddenly something very strange happened.
“Look, look,” Nanny cried.


LOOKING FOR FAIRY RINGS
Whether it was caused by the pink clouds in the sky or some
fairies in the garden, no one could tell. The blossoms looked
lovely enough on the tree, but when they turned to smiling
baby faces, Nanny felt she was bewitched. She ran to the tree,
Merle and Blueboy following, but when she reached it, there
weren’t any baby faces; the pink blossoms were just as they
should be, with numbers of bees buzzing merrily about.
“I’m sure I saw baby faces,” Nanny exclaimed.
“Where? Where? Let us see,” Merle and Blueboy pushed
each other in their anxiety to see.
“In the blossoms,” said Nanny, pointing.
“Perhaps they will come again,” said Merle; and she and
Blueboy stayed to play in the garden, looking towards the tree
every now and then, hoping the baby faces would appear again.
Nanny went back to sit in the ring-a-rosy window, wondering
about the strange thing that had happened.
“I know what I’ll do,” she said to herself. “I’ll make little
pink woollies for babies who haven’t any nice clothes, and they
will look just like the blossoms.”
It was a lovely thought, and Merle and Blueboy did not know
that Nanny had nearly found a fairy ring.
Nanny told Cookie what she intended to do, and Cookie said,
“I wish I could make some too; but I can only make things to eat.”
“Little children love cakes with pink icing,” Nanny reminded
her.
“So they do,” Cookie said. “We’ll give them a party some-
day, and invite all the little ones who never get cakes with pink
icing.
“That’s a lovely idea,” Nanny agreed.
Merle and Blueboy, still in the garden, waiting to see the
baby faces in the blossoms, did not know that Cookie had nearly
found a fairy ring also.
Although they watched, the baby faces did not appear again,
so the children made a daisy chain. Surely the fairies would
make it into a fairy ring. They set it on the green lawn, hoping


that in the night the fairies would come, but in the morning it had
not changed. ~ •. -j m-iU
“Perhaps it isn’t the right colour,” Merle said. “We’ll make
another, with red roses.” The red roses made a lovely ring, but
nothing happened to it. They used every kind of flower from the
Little Round Garden but none seemed right.
“Let’s ask the fairies. We may find them in the garden some
moonlit night,” Merle suggested. When a lovely moonlit mg
came they slipped into the garden, and waited quietly, watching
all the time for fairies. But none came: it was very disap-
P ° mt “Mr Fairy said the fairies love to visit the garden,” Blueboy
reminded Merle, “so they must be here sometimes.”
“I wonder when they do come,” Merle replied. be
in the night. We’d see them if they came in the daytime.
They went back to bed and slept, still wondering. The next
morning they asked Big Daddy, and he said. .
“You are looking too hard. I understand the fairies are
very shy and hide away.
Then they went to the Little Mother.
“Do help us to find a fairy ring,” they begged.
“But everyone has to find his own. You must find yours.
I can’t help you —although I believe the fairies help, she said,
smiling. Blueboy ..j thought it would be
y “You will find it when you least expect it,” said the Little
Mother. “Just go on looking. It’s a lovely thing to look for.
So they kept on looking.


CHAPTER II
COOKIE’S AND NANNY’S RINGS
Cookie opened her door one morning, and saw what she at first
thought were scarlet poppies.
“They must have sprung up
in the night/’ said she. Then she
had a great surprise. A crowd
of Robin Redbreasts on the lawn
appeared to be poppies. Cookie
went inside and closed the door
and peeped out of the ring-a-rosy
window.
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheer
ily,” cried the robins, and flicked
their tails at her, and said: “Tut,
tut, tut, tut.”
“Cheeky, that’s what I call
you,” Cookie called. “Shoo, shoo;
be off with you!” Then she re-
membered :
“Oh, I’ll give you some
crumbs.” So she went outside
and scattered crumbs all over the
lawn.
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheerily,”
the robins cried. “Thank you, thank you, those are delicious
crumbs. We thought you would be kind to us.”


Nanny came into the kitchen and looked from the ring-a-rosy
window too. . . , , , Tf
“Robins,” she cried. She was carrying her work-basket, it
held little pink coats she had been making. She put the basket
on the window ledge, and the fleecy pink things flowed over the)
edge like a pink cloud. Then Blueboy and Merle came running
out to see the robins. . . . , ._ .
“Cheerily, cheerily; tut, tut,” the robins chirped, seeming to
love the Little Round Garden as they hopped all over the lawn.
Blueboy and Merle wished that the robins had come to we
in the Little Round Garden; that they were not only paying a visit.
They knew, however, that very soon the robins would fly away to
another before night fell Cookie was thr ° w £g
crumbs for the robins’ supper, when one little bird flew on to he
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheerily. . . . What about the cakes with
pink icing?”
“What do you mean?” Cookie asked.
“Tut ” said the robin, and with a jerk of his tail flew away.
“Cheeky little bird,” said Cookie. “Shoo, shoo, all of you be
off, and don’t expect any more crumbs from me.” Then she re-
“Well, I did say I would make some cakes wth pink icing
for the babies. But where are the babies?”
“Come with us,” the robins chirped. “Follow us and we 11
show you.” _ ... ~ npvpr
“What’s the harm?” thought Cookie. “Nanny will never
find the babies-and think of all those pink jackets waiting for
them ” So she followed the robins. The robins flew a long way,
and flew so fast that poor Cookie had to run to keep up with them.
She was quite out of breath before they had gone very far.
“You naughty robins,” she panted. “Not so fast, you cheeky,
cheeky little birds.” _ , , , , •
Still she followed, for she really wanted to the babie .
They came to a long narrow street, with poor bleak little houses,


COOKIE’S AND NANNY’S RINGS
all huddled together, seeming too miserable to stand alone, leaning
one against the other, as if to say: . nr ,
“What’s the good, we haven’t a garden to look at, or s y
trees to whisper to us, or green lawns to make us cheer u .
What’s the good of anything?”
The robins would have cheered them with their chee y,
cheerily,” but did not stop until they came to a large square build-
ing with wide steps leading to a big open door; and there were
great windows on all sides. _
“Peep in, peep in,” said the robins to Cookie. Putting
face close to one of the windows, Cookie found that she was look-
ing into a long room.
“Babies!” she cried. . ,
Sure enough, there were babies, crowds of them Babies with
dark curls, babies with fair curls, babies with soft brown curls
Babies with blue eyes, brown eyes, black eyes, and they were a
dressed in little red dresses.
“Where did all the babies come from? gasped Cookie.
“From the little dark houses round about,” chirped the robins.
“This is a creche—a kind of_ day nursery—where mothers leave
their babies while they work.” . ~T , ) r
“Oh, I’ve heard of them before,” said Cookie. It s a wonder
we didn’t think about that ourselves.
“Tut tut,” said the robins.
Cookie was just about to be very cross with the robins when
she noticed people walking up the steps. These people were the
little mothers calling for their babies, and Cookie heard the babies
shou “ they made more noise than all the robins put toge her.
She saw the nurses busily changing the babies into poor little
dresses and hanging the little red ones on pegs round the wa
When all the babies were dressed, Cookie could see that not one of
Tm had a little pink jacket. She was very excited, and turning
t0 th “Show S me"the way home. I must tell Nanny about the
bab ' e “Cheerily, cheerily,” the robins cried. “Follow us.”


They flew so fast that Cooky had to run faster than ever to
keep up with them, and when they came to the Little Round House,
Cookie, although she was out of breath, wanted to thank them.
But before she had time to do so, they flicked their tails, cried
“Tut, tut,” and flew away.
“We will have a party for the babies very soon,” Cookie said,
as she rushed into the kitchen out of breath.
Nanny was surprised.
“I will make the cakes with pink icing on them, and you can
give them the little warm coats you have knitted.”
“But where are the babies?” asked Nanny.
“I’ve found them,” Cookie proudly said, “and we’ll have the
party in the garden.”
The Little Mother was asked to help; so she wrote all the
invitations, and sent them to the creche to be given to the babies
and their mothers.
When the party day arrived it was warm and fine, like a day
dressed in its best. Every one helped to carry the big round
polished table to the garden—every one except Cookie, who was
too busy making cakes with pink icing, and other lovely things
for the party. Nanny said, “Put the table under the peach-
tree.” They did so, and the blossoms and the blue sky were re-
flected in its polished surface.
“We don’t need any flowers,” said the Little Mother. “It
looks lovely as it is.”
The table was laid with bright-patterned plates, and pretty
cups and saucers all around it. There were high chairs for all the
babies, and from the back of each chair a balloon floated gaily in
the air.
The mothers came early: some of them carrying their babies,
and some with their babies hanging on to their skirts and peeping
out shyly at every one. Nanny had a little pink jacket for every
child. That made the mothers pleased and happy.
Merle and Blueboy took the older babies into the Little Round
Garden and played ring-a-rosy with them, oranges and lemons,
and other games. Soon the Little Round Garden rang with their
laughter.


COOKIE’S AND NANNY’S RINGS
When tea-time came, the babies sat at the big round table,
and the mothers stood behind their chairs happy and smiling. e
babies were excited and beat their spoons on the table. Cookie
kept running in and out with more and more things to eat, and
Nanny gave the mothers and babies big helpings of everything.
The little cakes with pink icing were specially good.
A wonderful thing happened while they were at tea. Nanny
saw it first. Reflected in the polished surface of the table she
saw all the little blossom faces again. Nanny thought it was the
babies mirrored there, until she saw fairies dancing m a ring;
some in pale pink, others in bright pink. The babies saw them
too, and stopped banging their spoons on the table, and laug e
and laughed. Then the mothers peered into the polished table
top and whispered to each other: “It’s just like the pictures.
1 The Little Round Gar-
den was an enchanted garden
that day, and the babies’
mothers all joined hands
and danced round the table,
and laughed and sang, and
forgot they ever had to
work.
The babies’ laughter
echoed round the garden till
the little Green Gnomes
caught the echo, and ran off
very fast with it to their
treasure house.
Just as every one was
sure they had had enough to
eat, the fairies disappeared. The babies looked into the polished
surface of the table, but there were none there. Then they looked
underneath the table; they looked into the trees; then up into the
skies, but couldn’t see a fairy anywhere. Only little pink clouds
floated there. Cookie then said to Merle and Blueboy, as she
pointed to the skies:


% %///ij) j\\\\p#
“Is that a fairy ring? It looks like one. The fairies may be
taking it to the rainbow. . . . And there’s another/’ she cried,
pointing higher up. “Oh look, it’s bright pink!”
Merle clapped her hands and laughed.
“They are fairy rings, yours and Nanny’s. Isn’t it excit-
ing,” she said. “And I know how you got your ring.”
She whispered in Cookie’s ear, and Cookie laughed and said,
“I believe you are right,” and bustled off to help get the babies
ready to go home.


CHAPTER 111
BLUEBOY’S RING
Everyone talked about the babies’ party for a long time after it
was over. It was the loveliest thing that had happened in the
Little Round Garden.
Merle and Blueboy could talk of nothing else, until one day
they received an invitation to a party at Dearest’s. She always
had wonderful parties. They counted the days: Eight days!
Oh, it will soon be here.
Then something happened, Blueboy discovered a wonderful
secret in the Little Round Garden. He often played alone while
Merle practised her music. The animals and birds in the garden
were all his friends; they loved him and he loved them.
It was while he sat quietly watching Jenny Wren and Robin
Redbreast that he discovered the secret. He wondered why they
fluttered around the hydrangeas. The lovely flowers were in full
bloom, like a mantle of blue, hardly a green leaf was to be seen.
Robin Redbreast seemed to know his scarlet breast looked beauti-
ful against the blue, and hovered above them all the morning.
Jenny Wren popped in and out among the blossoms.
“What can she be doing?”
Blueboy was puzzled when the birds disappeared among the
flowers. He crept on tiptoes to the bush; there were so many
blossoms it was hard to see. Standing on the very tips of his
toes he peered into the middle of the bush. Presently he saw two
pairs of very bright eyes; leaning closer he saw a nest cunningly
hidden in the centre of the blue flowers; then the birds flew away,
and there in the nest were three little eggs.
“What a lovely place to choose for a nest,” he said to himself
[73]
F


He often played alone while Merle practised her music.
in a whisper. “When the baby birds come out, they will have the
prettiest home you could imagine.
He tiptoed quietly away, and waited for the birds to return.
They returned almost immediately, for they trusted him.
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheerily. Don’t tell any one,” they
seemed to say.


BLUEBOY’S RING
“Don’t be afraid,” he said. “I will keep your secret. I won’t
tell any one, not even Merle.”
Blueboy visited the little birds every day. He had an anxious
time, being afraid that someone would pick the hydrangeas. What
would become of the birds’ nest then? Of course he couldn’t tell
any one about the nest, for he had made a promise, and could not
possibly break it.
The Little Mother picked the flowers for the house each day,
and Blueboy followed her every morning; when she came near the
hydrangeas he felt nervous.
“You won’t pick those, will you, Mummie darling? They
look so lovely in the garden,” he said.
“No indeed, they are far too beautiful where they are,” the
Little Mother replied; and Blueboy would feel safe until the next
day when he would say the same thing all over again.
He was very excited when the baby birds came out of the
eggs, and longed to tell someone about it; but he kept his secret.
Every day he listened to the baby birds squeaking, and Jenny
Wren and Robin Redbreast talking gently to them.
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheerily.” And then to Blueboy: “Peep-
in-the-nest, peep-in-the-nest, peep-in-the-nest,” and he peeped in
and saw the little birds, always hungry, waiting for titbits to be
dropped into their open beaks. It really was a lovely secret.
The day arrived for Dearest’s party, and Blueboy was so
excited he forgot all about his secret. The Little Mother went
alone into the garden to pick flowers: she needed a great many to
send to Dearest for the party. She came to the hydrangeas. They
looked beautiful: it would be a pity to spoil the lovely bush. Per-
haps one from the centre would not be missed. Snip, snip, went
her clippers, and the next second the big hydrangea with the
little nest cleverly hidden in it, was in her arms.
Poor little Robin Redbreast and his wife flew about crying:
“Cheerily, cheerily,” and making a dreadful fuss —not sounding
cheerful at all. The Little Mother wondered what it was all about.
She took the flowers to Dearest’s and helped her arrange
them in great bowls. The bloom with the nest and little birds she


put in a big bowl with other flowers, and placed it in the room
where the children were to dance. She had not discovered the nest,
and the little birds, too frightened to squeak, shrank down out of
sight.
When Blueboy was dressed ready to go to the party he went
into the garden to look at the nest. He could not find it.
Oh dear, surely the hydrangea had not been picked. Before
he had time to look any further Nanny told him to hurry, it was
time to go to the party. At the party he played and danced with
all the other children and forgot that he was worried about the
birds’ nest.
One dance he liked better than any of the others, it was the
balloon dance. The children with balloons tied to their ankles
danced with their partners to merry music endeavouring to burst
each others balloons as they danced. The one who kept his balloon
from getting broken was to get a prize.
Some of the balloons came untied and floated round above their
heads, and caused a great amount of merriment. The little birds
in the nest peeped out at the fun, thinking it a great adventure no
doubt, and wondering what it was all about. However, feeling
hungry, they chirped and called for their mother and father. No
one heard them, because of the music and the children s merry
laughter.
Blueboy, while dancing, noticed the big blue hydrangea, and
when his balloon went off with a bang! he walked to the table on
which the bowl stood.
“I wonder if Mummie sent it to Dearest,” he said to himself,
and his heart beat very fast. He looked into the centre of the
flower, but could see nothing. However, as he leaned nearer he
heard a sound he knew: “Peep, peep, peep.
Oh dear, oh dear, the nest was there. However, the little birds
seemed safe and sound. What could he do about it? He was very
worried and felt unhappy. He did not want to dance any more,
and when all the children trooped into tea he stayed beside the
flowers.


BLUEBOY’S RING
“Oh, do come to tea,” Merle called to him. “Why do you stand
there?”
“I’ll come soon,” Blueboy called back, but he did not move.
Half way through tea Merle called again: “You must come, Blue-
boy,” she said, “there are lovely bon-bons, and trifles and merin-
gues, and all kinds of surprises. It’s gorgeous.”
“I’m coming,” said Blueboy, “in a minute.”
What could he do? He thought of poor Jenny Wren and
Robin Redbreast so unhappy, and looking for their babies.
“I’ll take them back,” he decided. In a moment he gently
lifted the big hydrangea from amongst the other flowers, and,
holding it carefully in his arms, slipped out of the house and down
the drive.
It was a long, long way to the Little Round House. It was
getting dark, and he wanted to get the little birds back while it
was still light enough for their parents to see them; he hurried,
but was very careful of the little birds. Coming to the garden, he
walked along the path and carefully down the steps, and past the
lily ponds, to the hydrangea bush. There he found Jenny Wren
and Robin Redbreast flying about crying and in great distress.
What was he to do with the hydrangea ? He could not tie it on to
the plant unless it was held by someone. It was a secret still, so
he could not ask anyone to help. He must think out a plan. . . .
He climbed into the plant, and crushing himself down among the
other blooms held the hydrangea above his head. Then he was
rewarded. It was wonderful to hear the happy meeting.
“Cheerily, cheerily, cheerily,” sang Jenny Wren and Robin
Redbreast, while the baby birds squeaked and told all their adven-
tures. Soon there was silence; all were tired, and after a few little
cuddly, snuggly chirps, the birds settled down to sleep. Blueboy
was tired too and very stiff, but he held the stalk to prevent it from
falling.
“I do wish Mr Fairy was here,” he sighed. Then he slept,
holding the long stalk in his arms.
Merle missed Blueboy from the party, and told Dearest she
was quite sure he had gone home, and could she please take some of


THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
the lovely things for him to eat, for he hadn’t had any tea. So
while Blueboy slept Merle was on her way home, with a box of
lovely things for him.
The Big Daddy found him. Blueboy had wished for Mr
Fairy. He had forgotten about all the other fairies. But, as he
slept they came and danced round him; danced and sang, with
their gossamer frocks floating like blue mist. Blueboy smiled in
his sleep and presently awakened.
“Oh, oh,” he said, “I did not know there were so many fairies
in the world.” Not feeling tired any more, just happy and very
excited, he watched the lovely dancing. Fairies, fairies in a ring,
fairies in blue, floating above his head to crown his little world
before disappearing into the Heavens. The Big Daddy saw it but
thought it a mist. Coming closer the mist disappeared, but he heard
a voice:
“Big Daddy, please get some string and tie the hydrangea
on to the bush. I can’t hold it any longer.”
“Good gracious, it’s Blueboy! What are you doing there?
And why do you want it tied on?” cried the Big Daddy, very
surprised to see Blueboy in such a funny place.
“It’s a secret,” said Blueboy. “There’s a little nest in it with
baby birds. Please don’t tell anyone.”
While Big Daddy was busy tying the flower on to the bush,
Blueboy told him about everything. Big Daddy listened to the
end without saying a word; then he lifted his tired little boy in his
arms.
“You are going to be just like your Uncle Timothy,” he said.
“Why?”
“Because he is a naturalist, as well as an explorer, and loves
birds and flowers.”
“I’d like to be that, Big Daddy. But I saw a lot of fairies
too,” said Blueboy.
“So did he when he was a little boy like you. And does now,
I’m sure.”
“The fairies I saw were dressed in blue,” Blueboy continued.


BLUEBOY’S RING
“They danced, and sang, and made me happy, and they floated
away in a ring.”
The Big Daddy carried Blueboy into the Little Round House,
just as Merle came home.
“Oh, Blueboy, where did you go?” she said. “I brought you
some lovely things to eat, because you didn’t have any tea.”
Blueboy was hungry, and quite ready for his party now.
While he ate he told Merle all about the little birds’ nest in the
hydrangea, and about the little birds being at the party all the
time, and how he had brought them home because he knew they
were lonely and wanted their mother and father.
“Why didn’t you tell me?” said Merle.
“Because it was a secret,” said Blueboy. “But it isn’t a
secret any more, because I had to tell Big Daddy so that he could
tie the stalk on to the bush again. Then he told her about the
fairies; fairies in blue —and floating in a ring. Merle was very
excited.
“Oh, you’ve got a fairy ring. I hope I get one soon. I simply
must keep on looking.”
“But I didn’t look, it just came,” said Blueboy.
It was very puzzling.


CHAPTER IV
MERLE’S RING
Once again when gathering flowers in the garden, the Little
Mother heard a voice call to her:
“Are you the gardener?”
Looking up she saw a funny little man
in a coat far too big for him, with pockets
bulging out all around. He had untidy
grey hair that curled about his ears, and
grey twinkly eyes.
“Yes, I am the gardener,” the Little
Mother said smiling.
“I often watch you at work in your
garden, Madam,” the stranger said putting
on his hat which he had taken off when he
addressed her. “Can you tell me the secret
of how you manage to keep your garden so
bright and gay?”
“I think it is because I love my
flowers,” the Little Mother said
“When I turn the corner each day,” the man continued, “I
say to myself, ‘What surprise will the Little Round Garden have
for me to-day?’ I am like a child, I pretend not to look; but just
as I pass, the garden jumps out and says, ‘Look!’ —and I look,
and I am surprised. There may be a lovely red rose leaning far
out: it brushes me, as if to shed its perfume about me. It makes
me happy.”
The Little Mother laughed and said, “Tell me some more.”
“Another day, the Canterbury Bells, growing near the gate,


MERLE’S RING
wish to show off their beautiful silken frocks, and in order to do
so, step daintily out into the pathway. Their boldness makes me
laugh. Everything seems to make me happy in the Little Round
Garden.”
“Do you live nearby?” asked the Little Mother, very
pleased indeed to hear these lovely things about her garden.
“No; but I pass often on my way to my pupils to whom I
teach music. My name is Schmidt.”
“Herr Schmidt! I have heard about you. Perhaps you
would teach my little girl. I think her clever; far too clever for
me to teach any longer.”
“I will be very pleased to teach your little girl. I have heard
her music often when peeping into your garden. She is indeed
gifted. When would you like me to commence giving her lessons ?”
“To-morrow,” the Little Mother said.
“To-morrow; it shall be at this time.” The little man bowed
low and walked away.
Herr Schmidt arrived the next day, to give Merle her music
lesson, and before long her fingers seemed to be bewitched, and
she played wonderfully.
Dearest, who was visiting the Little Round House, came to
the door, and stood still to listen to the music. It reminded her of
her own wonderful secret. Herr Schmidt reminded her of some-
one too —she could not remember who —and wondered and won-
dered about it. It was very puzzling.
Some days later she remembered where she had seen him.
“He is the little man who dropped Steve into my lap upon leaving
the tram. I remember him now,” she whispered to Merle.
“Perhaps he is a fairy in disguise,” Merle whispered back.
“Only a fairy would have known how much we wanted to have
a puppy of our own.”
Merle waited until Herr Schmidt came again.
“Did you drop Steve into Dearest’s lap for her to bring to
us?” she said to him.
“Ah, you have discovered a secret.” And her teacher laughed
in his funny way.


“Then you are a fairy in disguise?” Merle said. He shook
his head.
“Oh no, no, not so. I am sometimes called a Fairy God-
father, but not a fairy. I will tell you how I came to have Steve
in my pocket. One of my pupils gave him to me because she
thought I was lonely. I was wondering how I could look after
him, for he was a very little puppy and needed a great deal of
care; but loving him, I thought I would find a way. In the tram
a very sweet lady fell in love with the puppy as soon as she saw
him. I did not want to part with him, I wanted him for myself.
When she begged me to let her have him I shook my head and
pretended to be asleep. While I had my eyes closed I said to my-
self: ‘You are selfish; the puppy is young, and you cannot stay
at home to look after him. You have your pupils; he will be
lonely; the lady will be kind to him; she has lovely eyes.’ I dropped
him in her lap as I left the tram.”
“And you didn’t know about us?” said Merle. She was very
disappointed.
“I think I must have guessed,” Herr Schmidt replied.
Merle and Blueboy were pleased to know that Herr Schmidt
was the little man who had dropped Steve into Dearest’s lap.
Now, after every lesson they would lead him into the garden and
show him all their favourite places. And they told him about
Mr Fairy. He listened to them with great interest, and looked
at the garden, and the Little Round Garden rang with his merry
laugh. He laughed because it made him happy to see so many
flowers, and because it was a garden that seemed to want to,
please.
Merle and Blueboy were quite used to strange things happen-
ing in the Little Round Garden. But one day they were truly
surprised to find little yellow chickens, first under the bluebells,
then on top of the forget-me-nots, and inside the big lilies;
chickens with bright eyes. At first the children thought they
were truly alive, but taking them in their hands, they found they
were made of yellow wool, very soft and cuddly. They wondered
how they came to be there.


MERLE’S RING
Their surprise was greater still when one day later on they
found little yellow ducks sitting on top of the lily leaves in the lily
pond, just as sweet and soft and cuddly as the chickens. Blue-
boy’s excitement was greater still when he found painted gauzy
butterflies clinging to the stalks of the plants, and hovering above
the flowers as if real.
“They are as good as specimens, and will help you to know all
about butterflies,” Big Daddy said when he saw them.
“The fairies surely left them,” Blueboy said, and wondered
where the fairies could possibly get the cunning little clips and
springs with which they were fastened to the plants. The sur-
prises continued day by day. There were fat little bees, and
horse-stingers with gauzy wings, and grasshoppers. It was very
exciting. Blueboy and Merle could talk of nothing else. Where
could they have come from? It was very puzzling.
Merle told Herr Schmidt about it. He was very interested.
But when she asked him if he had any idea where or how they
came to be in the garden, he said:
“I’m not good at guessing; I never could solve a riddle.”
And he laughed his merry laugh.
Nanny and Cookie thought it very strange too.
“What will you do with them all?” asked Nanny.
“Keep them, of course,” said Merle. “I do love them so.”
Blueboy said: “I’m going to keep mine for ever. I’m sure
the fairies sent them.”
Merle was happy about her music, and loved her lessons as
well as her teacher. Herr Schmidt told her wonderful stories
about music; how it was made, and about the people who made it.
One day, just before her music lesson, Merle was looking at
the little chicks and ducks and all the little things she had collected,
and was delighted to see how gay they made her bedroom. She
had them on the mantel, her bookcase, and table —the butterflies
on the curtains. When she was having her music lesson she said
to Herr Schmidt:
“I do love all the little toys we found in the garden.”


THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
“Why do you love them?” he asked.
“They are so sweet, and seem to be alive; and really I do
think the fairies sent them.”
“You could be a fairy yourself,” said Herr Schmidt. Merle
wondered and wondered how she could possibly be a fairy.
One day a strange thing happened; all the blossoms had gone
from the peach-tree, and the tree had lovely ripe peaches hanging
from the boughs. As Merle looked at them, wondering which
rosy one to pick, she seemed to see baby faces, with red and rosy
cheeks. She stared, and the baby faces went away, leaving only
peaches hanging on the tree. Merle went to her bedroom, think-
ing about the strange thing that had happened, and there she got
a wonderful idea.
“I’ll give the toys to the babies,” she said suddenly. She
was not quite sure how to get to the creche, and wondered how to
get the toys to them.
“Perhaps it will be best to post them,” she said to herself.
“I’ll give them to Postie; he’s sure to know the address.”
She found a box, and carefully put into it all the little things,
wrapped the box with paper, tied it with string, and running to the
gate, waited for the postman.
The postman was fond of the Little Round House and every
one in it, and often talked to Merle and Blueboy. So when Merle
told him about the parcel, he said:
“Just leave it to me. I’ll see that the babies get the parcel
safe and sound.”
Merle thanked him. Then she saw Herr Schmidt coming
down the road. She was glad, for she was a little sad at parting
with the toys, and Herr Schmidt had a way of making her feel
happy.
Half-way through the lesson, Merle had a great surprise.
Herr Schmidt, taking a handkerchief from one of his pockets,
pulled a yellow chick out with it.
“Where did you get that?” she exclaimed. Herr Schmidt
shook his head and seemed surprised. Merle then told him about


MERLE’S RING
the babies in the peach-tree, and how she had sent all the little
toys to the babies at the creche.
“So you did find out how to be a fairy,” Herr Schmidt said,
and chuckled.
“Oh! oh! oh!” cried Merle. “You are the fairy. It is you
who drops the toys in the garden. I know now. Do you make
all the little things yourself ?”
“You are very good at guessing riddles, Herr Schmidt told
her. “Now I will tell you all you haven’t guessed.”
“Please do,” Merle said.
“I live alone and have only my music to keep me company.
But when I am busy I am not lonely, especially when I have the
memory of children’s smiles. So I make toys that will amuse
them and make them smile.”
Merle clapped her hands. “That’s it!” she exclaimed.
“In my pocket there are always plenty of little golden
chickens; in the trams there is always a child. I sit close to him;
he turns his head, and the next moment there is a chicken in his
lap. He smiles quickly. He is surprised; his eyes are full of
wonder; they light up. Something has happened; he does not
know how the chick got into his lap. He thinks perhaps a fairy
put in there.”
“I think a fairy did,” whispered Merle. And I would like
to play music to all the little children and make them smile too.
“And so you will, some day, for you have a gift, and all who
listen to you will be taken to another world. Perhaps that world
will be Fairyland, and if it is children to whom you play, thd
memory of their smiles will make you happy always. And now
we have wasted enough time; continue with your lesson, please.”
Merle did not do so, for in the polished woodwork of the
piano she was quite sure she could see fairies; fairies dressed in
yellow, dancing in a ring; and she was so excited she could not
P “Can you see the fairies dressed in yellow, Herr Schmidt?
she whispered.
“Where, where?” he asked.


“In the piano.” Merle pointed, and Herr Schmidt looked,
and sure enough he could see them too.
“Did you say yellow?” he said. “I can see them in ivory, the
colour of the key-notes, and dancing in a ring.”
“They are fairy rings,” Merle said. “Two of them; yours
and mine.”


CHAPTER V
THE BIG DADDY’S SMOKE RING
Merle and Blueboy were anxious that the Big Daddy should find
a fairy ring. When he told them that he thought he was too old
and did not know how to find one, they both said:
“We could help you.”
“If you really want one you can find one yourself,” Blueboy
added. “Mr Fairy told us that every one could have a fairy ring;
that no one was too old.”
“Dear me, dear me, he was surely mistaken. Pm sure I
can’t get one,” said the Big Daddy. Merle and Blueboy, how-
ever, were determined that he should have one, and decided to help
him find it.
One evening, just before bedtime, they were sitting on the
floor in front of the fire in the sitting-room; the Little Mother
was knitting, and the Big Daddy lay back in his arm chair, smok-
ing his pipe. As he blew the smoke into the air it formed rings.
“How do you do that, Daddy?” Blueboy asked.
“That’s my fairy ring,” the Big Daddy said in a teasing
voice. „ .
“It might be too,” Merle said seriously. “Let’s find out.”
“Well, go ahead,” said Big Daddy, as he blew more rings
into the air, and everybody stared.
“You believe in fairies, you know you do, the Little Mother
said to the Big Daddy. But he laughed, and blew more rings
into the air, looking at them with half-closed eyes.
Then something very strange happened. He distinctly saw
the smoke rings turn to dainty figures, and stranger still, he heard
voices that sounded like the crackle of the fire.


“You are not telling the truth,” those voices said.
“I don’t know what you mean,” the Big Daddy said very
softly. And no one else in the room noticed the figures.
“You surely remember the fairies you played with when you
and Brother Timothy were young,” was whispered to him. And
the fire went crackle, crackle, crack, crack.
“I have some recollection,” he replied.
“Tell Merle and Blueboy about them,” came the voices again.
“But I couldn’t do that: I couldn’t remember.”
“You must, you must.” Crick, crick, crack, from the fire
again.
He blew more smoke rings into the air: dainty figures
crowded around him.
“You must remember. Tell them your adventures,” the Big
Daddy heard.
“Oh, very well,” he said at last.
“Are you talking to yourself, Daddy?” Blueboy asked.
“No, no indeed. I am just remembering about some
fairies.”
Merle and Blueboy sat up and shouted with excitement, and
clapped their hands.
“Tell us about them; do please. You really believe in them
after all!”
“Sit very quietly, and I will tell you the story, then you will
know if Idoor do not,” said the Big Daddy. “It’s about Memy-
self’s and Brother Timothy’s adventures with them.”
“Is Memyself you, Daddy?” asked Merle.
“It might be.”
“And is Brother Timothy our Uncle Tim, who was littler
than you when you were little boys?” asked Blueboy.
“It may be too. Now don’t ask any more questions. Be
very still while I tell you. If you put out the light, and sit with
only the firelight, these fairies might come and play with you as
they did with us. They are called the Flicker Fairies.
“I remember once, when Memyself and Brother Timothy
had colds, and were kept indoors day after day, because the


THE BIG DADDY’S SMOKE RING
weather was bleak. There were fires always burning in their
bedroom. They grew tired of being kept in one room, and tired
of everything; tired of looking at picture books and listening to
Nanny reading them; tired of the new toys Mother bought
for them; and even tired of their favourite stories told by her.
They wanted only to go out into the garden to play.
“One night after Nanny had tucked them in and Mother
kissed them good night, Memyself watched the firelight flickering
in shadows on his bed. A tall fender caught the glow of the fire.
It twinkled brightly on the brass bars. The flickering and twinkling
lights seemed to dance on the floor in front of the fire, on the
wardrobes and mirrors, then on the curtains, and last of all on the
bed. Memyself whispered to Brother Tim:
“ ‘Wake up!’
“‘What for?’ said Brother Tim from his little bed beside
Memyself’s.
“ T think there are fairies in the room.’
“Brother Tim sat up.
“ ‘Where?’ he asked.
“ ‘Dancing in front of the fire, on the fender, and even on
our beds. I have seen them!’
“ T can’t,’ said Tim.
“ ‘Close your eyes tight, and then open them again, and you’ll
see,’ said a little voice from the end of his bed.
“Brother Timothy closed his eyes very tightly, and opened
them suddenly. Then he saw little figures, like flickering shadows
dancing about on his bed. One little shadow came running up the
bedclothes and perched itself on the counterpane on top of his
knee.
“ T am a Flicker Fairy,’ it said, ‘and my name is Flit. We
are very sorry that you have colds and have to stay inside, and wc
have come to entertain you.’
“Memyself was very pleased.
“ T knew it was fairies,’ he cried. ‘They have been dancing
and dancing all round the room. You have beeen awake.’


“ ‘Oh, we’ll dance again: that’s easy. Just look at us.’ The
Flicker Fairies danced round the room, here, there, and every-
where, up and down the walls and even on the ceiling. They were
dainty fairies, and wore quaint dresses with long sleeves; dresses
dark and shadowy; but their wings were bright like silver light.
“ Tf you wish to see something exciting come and sit on the
hearthrug in front of the fire and look into the burning coals,’
said Flit.
“Memyself and Brother Tim were glad to get out of bed, but
remembered to put their gowns and slippers on, and sitting in
front of the fire they listened to what Flit had to say.
“ ‘We are very busy in the winter when all the fires are burn-
ing; only when the fire burns low and turns to red hot coals, can
we rest. If you look into those burning coals while we rest, we
promise you some fun.’
“Memyself and Brother Timothy stared and stared, and by
and by they heard bells clanging, and into the fire dashed a fire
engine. There were firemen wearing bright helmets, and the fire-
place seemed to be a fire station. Flit, who had rested long enough,
said:
“ ‘Here is your chance. Jump on one of the fire engines and
you will see a fire worth seeing. Just close your eyes as the next
one appears and you will be surprised what will happen.’
“They were surprised. For just as a fire engine appeared
they closed their eyes, and the next moment they were on it and
dashing through crowded streets, there were firemen beside them,
bells clanging, sirens screeching, people in the streets shouting and
yelling;
“‘Fire! Fire!’
“They arrived on the scene of a great fire. There was more
shouting, and people running here and there. A building many
stories high was on fire. The firemen got out their long hoses,
fastened them to taps from holes in the ground and played water
in long streams on to the burning walls. The flames shot high into
the air and sparks showered in the dark night like fireworks. The


THE BIG DADDY’S SMOKE RING
Flicker Fairies danced round the firemen’s brightly polished
helmets, as if the whole performance was to amuse them.
“Memyself and Brother Tim watched with shining eyes. It
was very exciting. The fire was just dying down when someone
shouted:
“ ‘There is another fire down the road. Memyself’s and
Brother Timothy’s bedroom is on fire. Hurry, we must put that
out before the rest of the house catches on fire.’
“ ‘Oh!’ shouted the brothers, ‘be quick, make haste.’
“Flit helped Memyself and Brother Timothy on to the engine,
and away it dashed again, and all the Flicker Fairies were there
too.
“ ‘Oh, hurry, hurry!’ Timothy shouted. The engine was not
going fast enough for him. Would it ever be in time to save their
house? He thought of mother and father and all his favourite
toys.
“ ‘Can’t you go faster?’ Memyself yelled, thinking the same
thing.
“‘Oh! Oh!
there is a fire,’ they
both cried, when at ’
last the house came
into view. The
windows of their
bedroom were
glowing red. The
firemen placed the
ladders against
their walls and
climbed quickly up A
to the window and
disappeared into
the room.
“Memyself and Brother Tim climbed the ladder too, and just


as they got to the top, the firemen’s heads popped out of the
window:
“ ‘Here now, you two, what’s the joke? It’s only your own
fire in the fireplace burning brightly and lighting up the window
panes.’
“ Tt is not our fault,’ they both cried, as they climbed through
the window. ‘The Flicker Fairies wanted to entertain us, and
must have made it seem like a real fire.’
“ The Flicker Fairies were all in front of the fire again danc-
ing about nimbly. The firemen were annoyed, and climbed out of
the windows and down the ladder again. Memyself and Brother
Tim got back to bed and watched the fairies like flickering
shadows round the room. They stared and stared; their eyes grew
tired; they fell fast asleep.”
“Tell us some more,” Merle and Blueboy begged, as the Big
Daddy ceased speaking.
“Time for bed. Off you go, and to-morrow night I may tell
you another story,” he replied.
“You’ve got a fairy ring, I saw it,” Merle said, as she kissed
Daddy good night.
“I saw it too,” said Blueboy. “I’ve been watching all the
time, and just now I saw fairies in a ring very like your smoke
rings.”
“Do you think that would be the right kind of colour for the
rainbow?” Daddy asked. “It isn’t any colour at all, you know.”
“It’s a fairy ring all the same,” said the Little Mother.
“Yes, it is!” Merle and Blueboy shouted.
“And what about Little Mother’s fairy ring? Where’s
hers?” Daddy inquired.
“We’ll find that soon,” the Little Mother said.
“And if you get up early in the morning, instead of going
into the garden come to me, and I’ll give you a big surprise /’ the
Big Daddy promised, as he kissed them good night.


CHAPTER VI
THE BIG SURPRISE
Merle and Blueboy were up very early the next morning, and
rushed into their mother’s and father’s bedroom, to find out about
the Big Surprise.
“Where is it, where is it?” Blueboy called.
“Do tell us,” begged Merle.
“It’s a very big parcel,” said the Big Daddy, as he sat up in
bed. “I’ll give you three guesses as to what and where it is.”
They couldn’t guess.
“You must be careful how you undo the parcel, for it has
something inside that must not be knocked about,” he said.
“But where is it, please ?” asked Merle.
“What is it, Daddy?” said Blueboy.
“Merle will need her scissors to cut the string. If you try
to pull it off you might do some damage.”
“Where, where ? Do tell us quickly where it is.” Merle and
Blueboy jumped about, too excited to keep still.
“It’s in ” and the Big Daddy paused —“Oh, you must
guess for yourselves.”
“No, no, we can’t. Quickly! Tell us.”
“Have you your scissors ready, Merle?”
Merle ran to get the scissors.
“Now tell us,” she said, running back.
“It’s in the now are you ready? Ready, set, go. It is in
the spare room .”
Blueboy and Merle ran down the hallway to a tiny room at
the end. It was a room they loved. In it there was a little bed
and a big armchair all covered with rosebuds, and curtains the


same. There was a little table with a flounce all rosebuds too, and
the flounce was like a skirt flowing out all round as if the table
were about to dance. It was everyone’s favourite room in the
Little Round House, and was always kept for visitors.
Merle and Blueboy pushed the door open. On the bed was a
great big brown paper parcel tied round and round with string.
The parcel was clumsy, not neat like a parcel from a shop.
What could it be?
“Big Daddy said to be very careful,” Merle cautioned Blue-
boy.
“Cut the string,” he whispered.
A sound came from the parcel. “Perhaps it’s a hen in a
crate,” said Merle.
“It’s something alive” said Blueboy. “Perhaps it’s a kan-
garoo that Uncle Timothy has sent us for another pet.”
“But a kangaroo wouldn’t keep still; it would hop,” Merle
objected. “Oh, it’s only old clothes,” as she tore some paper away,
but it’s too heavy to lift.”
“It’s got hair,” Blueboy said, pulling paper from one end.
“And eyes,” Merle gasped.
The parcel sat up!
They were so surprised they could not speak. But the parcel
spoke:
“I am the Big Surprise,” it said, in a deep voice.
“Oh! Oh!” They were still too surprised to speak.
The parcel spoke again:
“Please undo me,” it said. “I want to hug both of you. I
am your Uncle Timothy, and I’ve got a lot of surprises for you.”
Merle and Blueboy squealed, and jumped on the bed to pull
the paper away from the parcel. They had always longed to see
Uncle Timothy, and here he was all wrapped up and they couldn’t
see him properly at all. They pulled and tore the paper away, and
tried to untangle the string, and the parcel helped undo itself.
Surely Uncle Timothy had learnt to hug from the bears he
hunted, for when he was all undone he gave them big bear’s hugs
that nearly took their breath away, and made them laugh and cry


THE BIG SURPRISE
out. And Steve rushed in barking to protect them, but joined in
the fun instead.
Then the Little Mother and Big Daddy came running in too.
“What do you think of the Big Surprise?” they asked.
“It’s the best we ever had,” said Merle.
“I like it,” said Blueboy. “I love it. And I’m going to be
what Brother Timothy is when I am a big man.”
Everyone laughed again.
“He’s Uncle Timothy,” said the Little Mother.
“I like Brother Timothy best,” Blueboy declared.
“So do I,” Merle said, “be-
cause Brother Tim played with the
Flicker Fairies when he was a little
boy.”
“So you’ve heard about the
Flicker Fairies,” Uncle Timothy
said. “Have you also heard about
the Shadow Fairies? You haven’t!
Then I’ll tell you about them some
day. Please take me into the garden
now, I want to see Kooka and
Bluie.”
Merle and Blueboy were glad
to show Uncle Timothy how happy
the pets were he had sent them.
Kooka laughed and chuckled, and
seemed to remember him. But
Bluie put his blue tongue out, as if
to say, “I got the better of you
after all. I escaped from that old
box you put me in, and Ive no
intention of let-
ting you catch me
again.” And he
scurried away


under the rocks in the rock garden. This amused Uncle Timothy;
he laughed and said:
“He doesn’t trust me.”
But it appeared that someone else trusted Uncle Timothy.
This was Steve, who followed him everywhere, and wagged his tail
and jumped on him. Uncle Timothy patted him and made a fuss
over him, and said:
“He’s a great little chap, that dog of yours; he knows I love
animals.”
Later there were surprises in Uncle Timothy’s trunk; then
his adventures to listen to before going to bed.
“Just one more adventure,” Blueboy kept begging, and his
eyes shone when he heard about the strange birds and insects that
are to be found in other parts of the world.
And just before bedtime Merle whispered to the Big Daddy,
and he laughed and said:
“Well, I promised you, so just one story —then off to bed.
The story is about the Creak Gnomes.”


SL i B/t§ : *'” *■'• .«>v : -L
/ p ‘1 r X/ [ I
p| M
CHAPTER VII
CREAK GNOMES
“In the winter Memyself and Brother Tim always watched the fire
burning in the grate after other lights were out, and when they
should have been asleep.
“One night Brother Tim fell asleep quickly, but Memyself
kept looking at the fire. When he heard creaking noises he
wouldn’t look round, because he was afraid, so he called softly to
Brother Tim:
“ ‘Wake up.’
“ ‘Why?’ asked Brother Tim.
“ ‘Because I hear creaking noises.’
“Tim put his head under the
clothes: he didn’t like it either. Me-
myself kept looking in front of him,
and that was how he came to see a
quaint little figure on the end of his
bed.
“ ‘Who’s that?’ he whispered.
“ ‘My name is Knot,’ it
answered. ‘l’m a Creak Gnome.
When you hear creaking and creak-
ing in the night it’s us. Would you
like us to dance for you?’
“ ‘We’d love it.’ Memyself
pulled the bed-clothes away from
Timothy’s head, and Timothy sat
up quickly, and opened his eyes very wide.
“ ‘Sit on the floor by the fire,’ Knot said.


“Memyself and Timothy jumped out of bed and sat on the
hearthrug in front of the fire, and by and by they saw strange
little figures come out of the wardrobe and the legs of the chairs,
out of the wooden beds, and out of the floor.
“ ‘Creak, crack, creak, crack,’ figures like nut-crackers danced
with jerky steps about the floor.
“Memyself and Brother Timothy tried not to laugh, for fear
of offending them. The mournful dance was not a laughing
matter to the dancers.
“ ‘Why are you so miserable?’ Timothy inquired.
“ ‘We can’t help it. Creak, crack!’ they all cried.
“ ‘So would you if you were us,’ Knot said gloomily. ‘Creak,
crack!’
“ ‘Why?’ Memyself asked.
“ ‘Because it is much nicer to live in a tree than in silly old
furniture, and we hate being trodden on in the floor and on the
stairs. It is very disagreeable. You should know that.’
“ ‘ls that why you creak in the night?’
“ ‘Yes, indeed.’
“ ‘But it makes us frightened sometimes,’ said Memyself and
Brother Timothy.
“ ‘Oh, you need not be afraid. Just remember it is us, and be
sorry for us.’
“ ‘Can’t something be done about it?’ Memyself asked.
“ ‘Yes,’ Knot replied, ‘and we are going to do it at once. We
are going to pay a visit to the forest where we once lived. Would
you like to come with us ?’
“ ‘Rather; you bet we would,’ Memyself said.
“ ‘lt is a long way,’ said Knot, ‘but the Flicker Fairies will
help us. We are going to the camp where the timber-men have
their fires alight, so the Flicker Fairies will be quite at home there.’
“ T haven’t seen the Flicker Fairies about for some time,’ said
Memyself.
“ ‘Just give the fire a poke and you will wake them up,’ said
Knot.


CREAK GNOMES
“Memyself poked the fire, and the next minute all the Flicker
Fairies were dancing round the room.
“ ‘What do you want?’ they sang.
“ ‘We want you to help us get to the timber camp. We want
to warn the trees about being made into furniture, stairs and
things. The camp fires are burning and you could have a lovely
game.’
“ ‘All right,’ said the Flicker Fairies. ‘Just hold on to us
and we will get you there in a jiffy.’
“All the Creak Gnomes held on to the Flicker Fairies, and
Timothy and Memyself held on too. It was very exciting. They
seemed to go flying through the air very quickly, without seeing
anything, until they came to a great many trees. Memyself and
Brother Timothy dropped lightly to the ground, and ran under the
trees. The fairies disappeared. Suddenly they all appeared
again, dancing on the leaves of the trees. In a clearing there were
camp fires burning.
“The Creak Gnomes said to Memyself and Brother Timothy:
“ ‘Come with us, the Flicker Fairies are quite happy now, and
we’ll run through this forest of wonderful trees.’
“Knot led the way, running ahead, and all the gnomes
followed. Memyself and Brother Timothy had to run very
quickly to keep up with them.
“ ‘Where are you going?’ they cried.
“ ‘To the river,’ shouted Knot. T want to warn the trees.’
“They came to a river. The moon was shining on its smooth
surface, and quite close to the shore a dark mass of logs floated,
moving gently down stream.
“ ‘Come along, jump on to them,’ Knot cried. T want to tell
them to get jammed and refuse to move.’
“They all leapt on to the logs.
“‘Stop, stop,’ Knot shouted. ‘Don’t go any farther. You
will only be put into a sawmill and cut up and made into furniture
and have to live inside houses for the rest of your lives. It’s much
nicer to live in the trees.’


“‘How can we stop?’ the logs creaked and groaned. ‘We
are not trees any longer: as logs we must move with the tide.’
“ ‘Wait, wait,’ cried Knot, jumping from log to log. Memy-
self and Brother Timothy followed close behind.
“Suddenly the logs creaked and groaned, bump, bump, then
stopped.
“ ‘That’s good,’ Knot yelled. ‘l’ve stopped them at last!’
“Zirr, zirr-zirr, zirr, zirr.
“ ‘What’s that?’ he cried.
“ ‘lt is the sawmill; we have arrived,’ the logs groaned.
“ ‘Do the men work at night?’ Timothy and Memyself asked.
“ ‘They are doing night shifts,’ Knot said. ‘The Flicker
Fairies should be here. Where are they? They could help to stop
that dreadful saw.’
“Zirr, zirr-zirr, zirr, zirr.
“The great saw had wheels that whirled. Zip, zip, and logs
of wood were cut quickly into small pieces.
“ ‘l’ll put a spoke in the wheel,’ Knot shouted.
“‘No, no!’ cried the Creak Gnomes. ‘You will be ground
to powder.’ But Knot ran towards the great saw and would not
heed them. He disappeared.
“Snap, snap, the great wheels came to a standstill suddenly.
Where was Knot? Men came running from all directions, hold-
ing torches high above their heads. The Flicker Fairies had all
arrived and were dancing about on the tops of the big wheels.
The men examined the machinery, looking for the trouble.
“ ‘Here is the reason,’ shouted one of the men. ‘A knot of
wood caught in the wheel.’ And the next moment poor Knot was
thrown to the ground.
“Knot’s bravery seemed all for nothing, for the wheels whirled
again as if nothing had happened, zip, zip, as more logs were cut
into small pieces. It was very disheartening. Knot asked the
Flicker Fairies to get them home quickly. This the Flicker Fairies
managed so well that almost in a second they found themselves at
home again in front of the fire.
“ ‘Never mind,’ Knot said, T warned the logs, and they know


CREAK GNOMES
what to expect. It is not my fault if they haven’t got enough
sense to keep away from the big saws,’ and he danced his mourn-
ful little dance again. All the Creak Gnomes danced with him.
“ ‘I believe you are really happy after all,’ said Memyself.
“ ‘Of course we are, but we are never so happy as when we are
miserable,’ he replied. ‘But hush! It is time you slept.’
“Brother Tim and Memyself thought so too, and were soon
fast asleep. They were never nervous in the night again.”


CHAPTER VIII
THE LITTLE MOTHER’S FAIRY RING
And now it seemed that everyone in the Little Round House had
a fairy ring—every once except the Little Mother.
“I know I must have one/’ she said, “but I haven’t discovered
it yet. When I do, Til give a party.”
And one day she found it in the garden. She was watering
the plants before the sun became too hot, and held the hose high
above her head and sprayed the water in a long arch to the far
end of the garden. As she did so, it became a rainbow. She
called to Blueboy, who was swinging on a new swing the Big
Daddy had hung from the bough of a tree.
“Look at my fairy ring.”
Blueboy jumped from the swing, and ran to her.
“Oh!” he cried, and stood staring at a dancing, shimmering
ring enclosing the garden in a glory of colour.
“You see, my garden is my fairy ring,” the Little Mother
said to him.
“I must get Merle,” Blueboy cried, running off. He found
Merle practising her music.
“Come quickly,” he shouted, “and see Mother’s fairy ring.”
Merle left the piano, and ran with Blueboy back to the
garden. But arriving there, they found to their disappointment
that a light shower had commenced, and the Little Mother had
ceased watering and taken shelter under a tree. They joined her,
and Merle wanted to hear all about the fairy ring. Just as the
Little Mother commenced, the sun came from behind a cloud and
a rainbow enclosed the garden once again.
“It must be Fairyland,” Blueboy shouted. “Mr Fairy said


THE LITTLE MOTHER’S FAIRY RING
it was a rainbow all round the world; that it is there all the time,
but we can only see it some times.” He clapped his hands and
shouted with joy.
“Now you know why fairies come to the garden,” the Little
Mother said.
“Perhaps we’ll see our own rings,” Merle whispered. “Mr
Fairy said that every one’s rings help to make Fairyland.”
“Surely that is Nanny’s ring now,” the Little Mother said,
pointing.
“Oh!” Merle and Blueboy exclaimed.
One of the rings of colour had become a ring of dancing
children. They were all wearing little pink jackets. Then came
a brighter ring, showing plainly little children in red dresses danc-
ing in a ring too.
“That’s Cookie’s,” they all thought. And before they had
time to speak, there was a blue ring shining brightly. Bluebirds
circled in this happy ring.
“Mine of course,” Blueboy said proudly. Each ring shone
out brightly for a second. A band the colour of the keys of the
piano showed distinctly, and music came floating on the air. They
all knew it was Merle’s ring, but it faded quickly and the music
died away. Then children s shouting and laughter sounded,
echoed by a deeper laugh.
“That’s Herr Schmidt’s laugh,” Blueboy cried.
“Then it is his fairy ring and it is yellow,” Merle said, staring
as all the colours blurred into one.
“Smoke rings.”
“Oh! Oh! It’s all fading: it is going away.”
“It has stopped raining,” the Little Mother said, and sighed
as if waking from a dream.
“Don’t forget the tea party you promised when you found
your ring,” Merle reminded her. “Can we invite Herr Schmidt
and Dearest?”
“Of course you can. Oh, listen! Everything in the garden
is making a fuss.”


They listened.
The crickets were singing, birds chirping, butterflies flitting
gaily, frogs croaking. Glad, it seemed, that the happy family in
the Little Round House had discovered Fairyland.
And the trees rustled and whispered:
“Isn’t it a wonderful surprise?”


CHAPTER IX
THE TEA PARTY
When Cookie heard there was to be a tea party she promised to
make very special cakes and to cover them with icing. Nanny
said she would decorate the tea-table and make it like a birthday
party.
When Herr Schmidt and Dearest arrived there was great
excitement in the Little Round House. They heard that there
was a wonderful secret to be told later on.
“I can hardly wait,” Dearest said.
“First come into the garden,” the children begged. “We
have a lovely new swing.”
They each took a hand of their favourite auntie, and led her
out into the garden.
“Sit on it,” they said. “We can push it and swing you very
high.”
Dearest sat on the swing, and Blueboy and Merle pushed
her backwards and forwards. She closed her eyes, the swinging
made her drowsy. Higher, and a little higher they swung her,
until she swung among the leaves. Higher still, above the
branches. Then it seemed to be as high as the clouds. Higher,
higher—to the stars. Then she felt herself falling, falling. She
opened her eyes. She was in the garden. Merle and Blueboy
laughed.
“We did swing you very high.”
“Nearly to the clouds, I do believe,” she said.
The tea-bell rang and they went in to tea. It was a delicious
tea. While they were having it Cookie poked her head round
the door to be sure every one had enough to eat. And Nanny’s


Dearest sat on the swing.


THE TEA PARTY
eyes shone when every one admired the table decorations, which
were flowers set in rings.
When tea was over it was getting dark. They all went to
the sitting-room and there gathered round the Little Mother to
hear the secret.
First she told about the rainbow in the garden, and that she
was quite sure it was her fairy ring, that they had at last found
Fairyland and seen how it was built of fairy rings.
“I do not quite understand about fairy rings,” Herr Schmidt
said.
“You’ll have to guess,” the Little Mother replied. She de-
scribed all the fairy rings they had seen, and the wonderful arch of
colour in the garden. Cookie and Nanny were in the doorway
listening and were excited to hear that their rings came first.
Merle and Blueboy listened and were just as entranced as if
they had not seen it too. Every one was interested.
“I wish I had a fairy ring,” said Dearest. But she was
very happy, for she had her own secret.
“Pd like one too,” Uncle Timothy exclaimed.
“Perhaps you have one,” Blueboy said consolingly.
“Tell me about mine,” Herr Schmidt demanded.
“I saw it,” Blueboy said proudly. “It was yellow, and there
was music like children laughing.”
Herr Schmidt’s merry laugh rang out.
“It sounded like that too,” cried Blueboy. “But not all the
time: it was like an echo.”
“I have it! I have it!” cried Dearest. “I’ve guessed first.
I know the meaning of fairy rings.”
“What is it?” every one asked.
“It is the echo of our happiness. Didn’t Mr Fairy say we
must find it ourselves? It must be a complete circle, and the
fairies help to finish it.”
“Yes, yes,” said Merle and Blueboy together.
“Didn’t you find on the box a half circle, and when you looked
underneath you found it was a whole circle?”
“Yes.”


"Don’t you see now?”
"No. Please tell us.”
"Why, it’s the happiness you make for yourselves with lovely
occupations, and through these occupations the happiness you give
to others, which makes a complete circle. And that is where the
fairies help; they keep it as an echo, and dance it in a colourful
ring for ever. It was Herr Schmidt’s laugh that made me think
of it, for it is echoed in the children’s laughter when they find his
gifts.”
Dearest put her arms round Merle.
"Merle loves her music, and how I love to listen when she
plays, as every one else always will. Now do you understand?”
Every one laughed, for it all seemed so simple.
"But what about Big Daddy?” cried Blueboy. "Is smoke a
colour?”
Big Daddy laughed.
Every one laughed.
Surely it is my fairy ring,” he said
Suddenly Steve, who lay sleeping on the floor at Merle’s
feet, sprang up, wagged his tail and whimpered.
"Who’s there?” the Big Daddy said, looking out of the
window. "How close those stars are,” he exclaimed, pointing
to two stars shining through the trees.
"And how bright they are!” every one exclaimed.
Steve still whimpered. Stars may twinkle and wink in the
skies, but to twinkle and wink in the garden made him excited.
The Little Mother became curious and slipped out into the garden.
Steve followed, and when once on the lawn he ran wildly round,
more excited than ever.
"What is it, Steve?”
Steve, wagging his tail, ran down the garden path. The
Little Mother followed, past the lily ponds, under the trees.
There was a light in the pergola, the shutters were wide open.
The gardener sat at the little green table! He held a flower, and
looked at it as though reading a book. Steve dashed in through


THE TEA PARTY
the open door, yelping. Gardener looked up, saw the Little
Mother, and rose:
“I am back again, Madam. I had a very nice holiday.”
“Where did you go?”
“To a country that has a strange name, so strange I cannot
remember,” and he rubbed his head in puzzlement.
The Little Mother then knew that he had forgotten once
again. She was so happy she wanted to sing. She turned to go
back and tell the family the good news. In passing a tall del-
phinium, something shone upon it. She held out her hand won-
deringly. Something delicate and bright perched there.
“Who are you?” she whispered.
“Twinkle,” came a little voice.
“Will you not miss your playmate?” she asked. “Please tell
me why he has returned.”
“Because all the fairies were so happy about his success in
helping mortals find fairy rings, thus enlarging Fairyland, that
they sent him back again. I will not miss him, for I have work to
do. lam to make a ring around the world of children’s laughter.”


Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney








\


THE LITTLE HOUND
GARDEN
GLADYS LISTER
This charming fairy tale tells of the
adventures of fairies, insects and
birds, etc., in a beautiful garden and
of the fairy gardener who tends it.
One meets quaint and bright char-
acters, “Kooka” the kookaburra,
“Bluey” the lizard. “Twinkle” the
fairy, and lots of other tiny folk, not
forgetting, of course, Merle and
Blueboy, the boy and girl who are
always looking for fairies, unaware
that their own gardener is a fairy
in disguise.
A fairy tale of the most delightful
kind. Children will love the little
people and familiar creatures that
the author makes so fascinating.


