

ADDRESS BY
The Hon SIRWILLAM CULLEN.K.C.M.G. CHIEF JUSTICE.
ENTITLED
THE DEFEATOFGERMAN MILITARISM-THEONLY HOPE OF A STABLE PEACE
DELIVERED ON OCT 2[?] 1918.


WAR LITERATURE
SOCIETY
Patron:
The Hon. Sir William Cullen, K.C.M.G.
Chief Justice. Chancellor of the University of Sydney
President:
The Hon. George Earp, M.L.C.
Committee:
The Hon. the Premier, Mr. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.
Major-General G. L. Lee, C.M.G., D.S.O.
The State Commandant
His Honour Judge Backhouse
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney
Colonel J. Lamrock, C. 8., V.D.
Camp Commandant, Liverpool
Colonel R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes, M.L.C.
Major J. H. Strong, V.D.
Captain Chaplain Colwell
Professor W. E. Cooke
Government Astronomer
Mr. John Sulman
Mr, William Gillanders, B.A.
Gen. Sec. Y.M.C.A.
Mrs. W. A. Holman
Mrs. George Earp
Mrs. G. L. Lee
Mrs. William McMurray
Mrs. John Waugh
Captain H. G. Grace, V.D.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C. P.A.
Hon. Secretary : Asssistant Sec.:
Major J. H. Strong (Miss) M. E. Hannah
Atlas Buildings, Spring Street, Sydney


“The Defeat of German Militarism
the only Hope of a Stable Peace’’
Address by the Hon. Sir WM. CULLEN, K.C.M.G.
Chief Justice, Chancellor of the University of
Sydney—to members of the War Literature
Society and others, on October 21st, 1918.
Hon. G. F. Earp, M.L.C. in the chair
Many things have happened since the title of this address was
chosen some weeks ago. We have no longer any need to specu-
late about the attitude of the Prime Ministers of the Allied
nations. President Wilson, M. Clemenceau, and Mr. Lloyd
George are not going to be deceived. The leading statesmen in
all the Allied countries are unanimous. . The Press is under no
illusions. The armies and their famous leaders from their splen-
did Generalissimo down were never more determined. What
does it all mean? Perhaps the homely old proverbs may supply
the keynote: “Once bitten, twice shy.” “The liar we can never
trust, even when he speaks the thing that’s true.”
Then, since those in whose hands the power and responsibili-
ty for further operations are placed give forth no uncertain
sound, is there need for us to do anything more than just to wait
in confidence? Yes, there is much need; with us rests the duty
and responsibility of understanding the situation, that we too may
not be lacking in our duty. For there are malign influences here
as elsewhere. Anyone who dreamt that the microbe of German
propaganda could be active only .in the Western or Northern
hemispheres of the world, and spare this one and unique gem
of the South and East, contradicts the lessons of experience.
Here as elsewhere there are just two kinds of national senti-
ment and spirit. There are those who, convinced not only of
the righteousness of the cause of the allied nations, but also of
the overmastering predominance of its claims, have whole-
heartedly accepted the duty of serving it, and those who are
either not so convinced, or, being convinced, have for any
reason whatsoever failed to help that cause so far as lay within
their power. Among the latter, somewhere or other, there will
inevitably be material that can be swayed by enemy propaganda.


I take it for granted that those whom I address need no con-
vincing that our British nation and our Australian people had
no option but to fight if they were not prepared to play the
traitor to humanity. To those who do not believe this, I have no
message to-night. The time has gone past for arguing with
such. I would only remind you how patiently, sympathetically,
with what an open mind and intense passion for peace the Pre-
sident of the United States gave Germany the benefit of every
doubt; gave her every chance to put herself in the right. I do
not mention the rulers of Great Britain or France, because as to
them we might suspect the existence of a prejudice in our own
minds. But if ever a nation or a man accused of wrongdoing
had a fair and patient trial by an unbiassed and even sympathetic
tribunal, Germany had it from the United States during the
first two and a-half years of this war. The condemnation by
that nation, when disillusionment was at last forced upon it, was
overwhelming, unanswerable, and final. The firm determination
consequent upon this, which in the space of a few months has
levied, trained, equipped and transported an army of two mil-
lions to the shores of France, following that up by two millions
more, and as many more again if needed, proves what down-
right, fair-dealing America thought of the merits of the case.
Who was it who invented that strange paradoxical term
“Peace offensive?” How could peace ever be offensive? But
those who have studied the methods of Germany’s rulers and
her docile government-ridden people know that there is grim
truth as well as a grim irony in that expression. They know by
the bitterest experience that that nation has vulgarised the holi-
est emotions of man’s nature in this contest, and that even the
word “Peace” in the German war-lord’s mouth is treacherous
and profane. So men talk of a “Peace offensive” as something
which denotes just another characteristically Prussian mode of
making and furthering war.
Yet some good folks would bid us not to be uncharitable;
would tell us that a vanquished enemy is a potential friend, and
that hatred is a dangerous and fatal passion. All which is very
true, but not to the point. For with an enemy so entirely de-
void of good faith, so utterly oblivious to every moral and legal
canon of conduct, as Germany has proved herself, the cry of
“Kamerad” is no evidence that we can regard her as a “van-
quished enemy,” or that she has the smallest disposition to be-
come even a “potential friend.” Will anyone think me unchari-
table if I liken her to a snake with its back broken; but still able
and disposed to bite fatally if you are foolish enough to give it
the chance. Then let such a one read again, or read now if he
has not done so before, the infamous and well-verified record of
German outrage and treachery during this war.


Till four years ago the world’s record of remorselessness and
cruelty in modern times was supposed to have been attained in
certain incidents of the famous French Revolution. When the
German Army first broke loose in Belgium we goodnaturedly
thought the reports must be exaggerated; that the occasional ex-
cesses of a few drunken soldiers who had got out of hand must
have earned a bad name for the whole army. But the facts,
scrupulously inquired into by British and French Commissions
of trustworthy men, proved that this was not so. All that has
happened since that date proves that this so-called “frightful-
ness” had all been intended. We have lived to see the worst
excesses of the French Revolution paling into insignificance in
the face of the organised brutality and bestiality, the murdering
and ravishing, the robbery and incendiarism, the systematic
outrages upon the lives and limbs, the property and liberties of
innocent civilians in Belgium and France, to say nothing of Ger-
many’s outrageous treatment of prisoners of war, the gruesome
fiendishness of her treatment of sailors and passengers on the
merchant ships she has sunk without warning, and her forever
unforgivable attacks upon hospitals, hospital-ships, and relief
ships carrying, under her own guarantee of immunity, food to
the Belgian families she was robbing and starving. Add to this
the infamy of her forced exactions of money from Belgian and
French occupied districts, the drafting of their young men and
women to enforced and degrading servitude, semi-starvation,
and exposure to disease, the ruining of their means of livelihood
by the wanton destruction of machinery and working implements
and otherwise, even to the cutting down of their fruit trees;
add the unmentionable outrages and insults on the very fabric
and contents of their plundered homes and churches, the wanton
and offensive insults and even torture and butchery of their
priests; add the systematic laying waste of towns and occupied
territory after the filching of everything that could be carried
away, even in the recent retreat, and since they began bleating
about peace, and then tell me, if you know, how to speak in a
way you would call charitably.
But I who believe, as I am persuaded you do, that these things
are the natural and inevitable fruits of Prussian _ militarism,
whose exponents not only excused them on the lying plea of
military necessity before the war began, in such books as Bern-
hardi’s and others, but have gloried in them ever since—l for
one cannot learn to say “Let us cry quits now Germany is on
the run.”
No: in all charity, mindful always of the innocent victims who
have the first call upon my charity, I would rather, as Shakes-
peare says, “ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue in every


wound” of Belgium and of France, yes, and every gasp of the
sailors and seafarers of all nations who have suffered.
As for the hatred which we are warned against, it is true
enough that hatred of human beings is a dangerous and degrad-
ing passion. That way madness lies; let us shun that. But if
we are asked to go further and be in charity with miscreants
who are still determined at all costs to escape responsibility for
such misdeeds, while retaining the power and disposition to re-
peat them, then we are asked to do something equally dangerous
and degrading. For if we are so complacent as to be ready to
condone this unpunished and unrepented infamy, or so mealy-
mouthed that we hesitate to condemn it in plain words, then we
are equally incapable of both love and hatred, and our virtues
are salt without savour. As to hatred of treachery and cruelty
I hold with Emerson, one of the noblest and gentlest spirits that
ever dignified this earth with its presence, when he wrote, “Your
goodness must have some edge to it —else it is none. The doc-
trine of hatred must be preached as the counteraction of the
doctrine of love when that pules and whines.”
I am not afraid that the great Allied nations shall ever copy
German methods, however much their indignation may be given
rein. They have every excuse for anger; Belgium and France
most, but England also, have suffered direct outrage; the United
States, through the vile propaganda that honeycombed her body
politic during the years of her neutrality, under the cover and
with the connivance of the German embassy at Washington,
through the intrigues in Mexico and through the slaughter by
the sinking of the “Lusitania” and other merchant vessels. But
these peoples are not of the breed that sink to the Prussian level.
Neither are our own Australians, but we are so far from the
vortex of war that we more easily forget what we have read and
heard.
A more real danger awaits us in complacency. The wish for
peace; the unspoken longing to see our dear boys safely back
out of it all, may lead us to deceive ourselves.
Yet consider how we stand. Are the peace overtures to the
Allied nations any more sincere than those which led Russia to
her ruin? You know how those poor optimistic fanatics were
tricked. The Revolution was fondly supposed by many to be a
reaction against the pro-German treachery which was sapping
Russia’s efforts to protect herself in the war. The German
rulers knew better than that. No doubt the revolution had to
come because Russia’s plight was intolerable. But German
brains and German gold directed its course just as they had
directed the pre-war revolution in Turkey. Poor Russia got a


German peace—no annexations, no indemnities. But somehow
Russia has lost all her Baltic provinces, Finland and Poland are
to have German kings. The rest of Russia is torn asunder,
anarchy, starvation, massacre, and civil war are raging, and the
German tools, the Bolsheviks, have taught her people only too
well what Germany means when she talks of Peace.
Hapless Roumania followed next, because she could not help
herself. The no annexation and no indemnity policy seems to
have been turned upside down in her case also.
With these illustrations of German good-faith let us turn to
Germany’s recent offers. Not so long ago those offers were
very vague, and their fine-sounding words were almost drowned
by rumblings of threats from German sources about what was to
happen in “the next war,” when Germany would avoid the mis-
takes made in preparing for this one. Have we even yet lost
the echo of those threats ?
And what does the wanton destruction of towns, and the
carrying off of their boys and young men, and the continued
submarining of ships, even while the peace message is on the
wires, portend? Where is there any sign that the leopard has
changed his spots?
There is another passage to the point in the same classic:
“Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among the
wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him.” By all the logic that appeals to the German mind, all men
should have been most “horribly afeard” when he ran amok on
land and sea. Yet it only had the effect of turning men into
soldiers who would never otherwise have dreamt of it, and
stiffening the humblest Jack Tar into a hero. And yet the fool
in the Prussian could not be convinced, and is not yet aware that
there is a weak point in his logic.
If Lord Milner were right in his apprehension that Bolshe-
vism would seize upon Germany, if her murderers and pirates
in high places were driven from power, it would only show that
the German nation is as unable to rule itself as the Russian. But
such a conclusion would belie German history. And, anyhow, the
thing for which the Allied nations are responsible is not the
ruling of Germany, but the security of the civilised world, which
has got to be achieved, Bolshevik or no Bolshevik.
If that is not accomplished now there will be Bolshevism ram-
pant not only in Germany, but among all the nations. For
amidst the general devastation of resources which a Prussianised
Germany has caused, there will be enough of desperate and im-
poverished ruffians to profit by the immunity which German
ruffianism will have gained by an inconclusive peace. Ihe


hideous waste of resources which Germany has caused will bring
about discontent and unrest enough, however complete her dis-
armament may be, without taking any additional risks.
Then who is to pay back to the plundered peoples of Belgium
and France, to mention these nations alone, the value of their
pilfered property? And for the cruel and grossly illegal exac-
tions in money levied upon their towns? Who is to pay the
wages of their labor to their illegally enslaved civilians? I say
illegally, because even the strong hand of a conqueror has limita-
tions in international law, recognised for centuries by all civilised
powers, and sanctioned by the Hague Convention. All this is
demanded by the merest consideration of justice. Its exaction
from the Central Powers to the uttermost farthing would leave
the plundered people of Belgium and France no better off
financially than before, and the health of most and the lives of
many will still be gone for ever.
Who is to renovate their towns, their houses, and their de-
vastated agricultural lands? Who will buy them new machinery
and implements of industry? Then, are the millions of millions
added to the national debts of all the Allied countries to be
meekly borne by their harrassed peoples, while Germany is to be
free to save all her resources to beat them down in trade, to levy
and equip new armies, and build new ships which will secure
her the mastery whether her will may be directed towards war
or peace ?
These hideous wrongs may perhaps go unrighted, because the
Allied nations shall have grown war-weary before the resistance
of Germany is broken, or because they may be beguiled into ac-
quiescence. But such a Peace would be neither just nor honor-
able. The German game at this moment is patent to all. Let
but an armistice be granted without a. just retribution being
guaranteed, and a thousand devices for delay will then come
about. Do you remember Russia’s old tactics in Asia, when ever
and again some fresh aggression placed her in occupation of
some neighbouring territory; her pledges to evacuate these after
the slow processes of diplomacy had at last exacted such
pledges; and still her forces would continue exactly where they
were. This shows the futility of diplomatic negotiation and
bargaining with any militaristic autocracy, and Germany knows
her England even if England does not know her Germany.
Do you doubt that Germany’s diplomatic delays during Peace
negotiations are already planned with scientific German preci-
sion? Do you wonder that they are anxious to get back their
colonies, which at least do constitute some kind of pledge that
may be kept in hand ? Let them once go back under the specious
plea of “no annexation,” and we of the Pacific Ocean will never
be free from the terrors of war.


Australia and New Zealand have New Guinea and Samoa
before their eyes as a perpetual reminder of what might have
been and what may yet be. Can we forget that before the war
the Pacific had been harnessed to Berlin by the construction of a
series of powerful and expensive wireless stations? Why? Can
we leave out of count the continued exploitation of German New
Guinea by Germans even since the date of our annexation? Are
its inhabitants to be reckoned among the peoples whose poll is to
be taken under the plea that the wishes of the Colonial popula-
tions are to determine who is to govern them? Remember, too,
that by a gross short-sightedness thirty years ago, when a south-
eastern slice of Papua was detached from the north by limiting
the British occupation to the shores contiguous to Australia,
Germany was enabled to become a land-neighbour to Great
Britain, as the Commonwealth of Australia later on became when
British Papua was handed over to us. Are we content to have
our Government again bounded on land by an imaginary line
with such neighbours on the other side ?
Remember the bitter and expensive controversies, sometimes
accompanied by a real danger of war, that have arisen between
Great Britain and the United States over the delimitation of the
Canadian frontier. Remember how near we came to war with
Venezuela less than a generation ago, and how Russia used to
plague us over the so-called buffer states between her and India.
Remember, above all, how Prussia t grew by aggression upon her
neighbours from the days of Frederick the (so-called) Great
down to those of the arch-fox Bismarck, and try to imagine, if
you can, why or how you should trust an unbroken Prussia to-
day.
Apart from war dangers in the future, what kind of allies
would we be reckoned to Belgium, France, Servia, Roumania,
and other devastated countries if Germany were placed on an
assumed level with them in a patched-up peace? The fleeced
victim of the robber forsooth is to start in level competition with
his dispoiler in trade and industry. For this Peace Offensive
involves a commercial offensive for which the plans have long
been laid, and have been maturing fast during the years of war.
Herr Ballin and Dr., Solf are not downhearted. Indeed, why
should they be when they still regard all nations as fools and
flats when brought into competition with Germany in Peace. They
know exactly how to begin and how to proceed when the seas
are again opened. I hey see the Allies already denuded of mer-
chant ships by their submarines; they have arranged huge forward
purchases of grain, wool, and raw material in neutral countries
ready to pass into Germany when the hour has struck. No—the
nations will not start level even on a commercial basis.


And on a moral basis we would be pitting the nations which
on the whole have taken an honorable stand, and who if they now
stayed their hands would be acting with extreme geneiosity,
against a people actuated towards us by the deadliest hatred.
The malice which planned their abominable outrages during long
years preceding the war only grew more bitter as they found
themselves baffled by the present unexampled world-combination
against them. Should that combination now be dissolved, leaving
their present power unchecked, think you that that malice would
be lulled to sleep? No, for its fierceness would only be swollen by
the added impulse of revenge. The horrors of invasion in Bel-
gium and France would be only a chastisement of whips com-
pared with the scorpions reserved for the victims of the next
war. Malice, inflamed by revenge, is what you may look for if
that is allowed to happen.
But the very existence of the present combination of Allied
nations, the very fact of the presence in Europe of the millions
from the United States, with millions more preparing to go; of
the millions from Great Britain, and the millions more of trench
and other nations, with the fact that the seas are swept clear of
German warships by the navies, chiefly of Great Britain and Japan
this is the safeguard that German militarism is doomed and a
stable peace is on the wing to the troubled earth.
President Wilson will want to know what he is to do with his
millions other than keeping them inactive in Europe or mobilised
at home awaiting Germany’s pleasure. Great Britain and France,
whose troops have not so far to travel homeward, are none the
less concerned to end the matter finally and decisively now then-
hands are in. Fast or slow, soon or late, the inexorable end will
come, and that end is not likely to leave unserved those principles
of justice and future peace for which the whole civilised world
has been drawn into conflict with Germany and her tools.
As someone has lately pointed out, this combination of the
Allies is a true League of Nations against militarism. It is al-
ready an accomplished fact and needs no new-fangled paper
constitution to tie its hands. It would be vain and futile to draw
up such a constitution with Germany under her present rulers
as a party to be consulted. Such a pact, intended to be perma-
nent and absolutely just, must not be colored or qualified by any
stipulations from the military caste of Prussia. _ The Peace 1 erms
. to be agreed upon must be kept absolutely distinct from this, io
introduce any pledge about a League of Nations into a peace
treaty with Germany would be as foolish as to insist upon two
quarrelling men, one of whom is not a sportsman, shaking han s
and promising friendship. To introduce into the Constitution


of a League of Nations any terms suggested by Germany’s pre-
sent rulers would make their exceptional and transient policy
under the crisis of to-day an ingredient in a pact, whose only
merit would be the hope it affords of a permanent practicable
agreement, based upon a very few unalterable fundamental prin-
ciples.
Let once the present combination of the civilised powers
against Germany be dissolved, with Germany’s future still in
the hands of the Prussian, and that hope will be a mockery. I
have described what seems to me to be the danger and folly of
mixing up the terms for constituting such a League with the
terms on which Peace with Germany is to be declared.
But assuming that conferences between the nations for the
establishment of such a League are deferred till after the dis-
bandment of the Allied forces, fresh dangers are obvious. Hav-
ing surrendered their powers of coercion, they will have, while
the Hohenzollern King of Prussia is still Emperor of Germany,
parted once and forever with the only means of ensuring a stable
peace.* For the Hohenzollerns and the Prussian magnates never
yet yielded to anything but force.
Then let us suppose a conference, after peace is declared, be-
tween the peace-loving nations and the war-infatuated militarists
of Germany. They might frame a beautifully worded constitu-
tion for a League of Nations, but who would there be to put it
into operation and enforce it?
With a Prussian-ridden Germany outside that League the
Nations composing it would still need to maintain an overmaster-
ing military and naval establishment, which would mean the per-
petuation of militarism. With a Prussian-ridden Germany
within the League, treachery and intrigue would continue to
nullify its efforts.
There is but one way in which the proposal for a League of
Nations offers any practicable promise. Whether its constitu-
tion is drawn up before or after Peace is declared, the military
caste of Prussia must first be deposed, unless it is destined to
prove just one more of those vain and pathetic dreams which
theoretical constitution-builders have so often indulged in.
For Prussian militarism is an anachronism in the modern
world. It has become a diseased vermiform appendix, which
keeps Europe morbid. The only cure is excision, and until Ger-
man thought is ready for that, no treaty of Peace and no League
of Nations can restore health. The German publicists know this
well; have known it to be so ever since that last pathetic display
of independent will-power in Prussia in 1848. They have known


that Prussian autocracy cannot co-exist with European demo-
cracy, and that unless the domineering militaristic policy of Prus-
sia is kept alive and assertive, democracy must supplant it.
Now, I do not come forward to discuss democracy’s merits;
1 know’ its perils and its weak points, but I know also that every
system, like every man, has its perils and its weak points, and I
know that democracy is the only practicable safeguaid against
tyranny. For several generations before this war, from back
about the sixties, when Thomas Carlyle and a few others first
introduced the fashion amongst Englishmen of sneering at their
own free institutions, we had become habituated to the practice
of not taking those institutions too seriously. But we have seen
during this war what democracy is capable of, and what the
Prussian opposite is capable of. Conceive now the contrast be-
tween two such regimes as that of England and that of Germany
under Prussian dominance. England, since Magna Charta, seven
long centuries ago, never lost her legal and constitutional checks
upon her ruling powers. She established a representation of the
people in her Parliament not long after, which though fragmen-
tary and incomplete was very powerful, and grew in time to the
dimensions it now possesses. Well, think of it ; what your an-
cestors thought so precious, what they flew to civil arms to pro-
tect twice over in the seventeenth century, under Charles and
James 11., what has grown into the very fabric of our national
life, the Prussian system still anathematises, and can no more
co-exist with than oil can mix with water. The Prussian theory
of government, the so-called German Kultur, and German mili-
tarism are three inseparables.
The whole civilised world has grown to distrust and detest
all three. It may take years for the slow, methodical, convention-
ridden German mind to realise what has happened to it. Even
among other nations there will still be some to discourse upon
the old and foolish theme that “a benevolent despotism is the
ideal form of Government.’’- Perhaps it would be if the world
were made up of children. But I think it a safe conclusion from
the study of evolution that the Almighty intends the adult sane
man to take on the full responsibility of his manhood, and to
take no chances with despotism, benevolent or otherwise. Kultur
was defined by one of its recent advocates as “the inherited
stock of bodily and mental peculiarities, ideas, customs, and social
arrangements which characterise a given group of human beings,
a stock which is handed down and increased from generation to
generation.” We have seen what the Prussian brand of this
Kultur leads to. A docile plod-headed German population has
proved ready to carry it with fire and sword into the outside
world, like Mahomet’s myrmidons with their creed centuries


ago. In the hands of the Prussian Junker it has become
a high explosive, and he can no longer be trusted by his neigh-
bours, The militarism inseparable from it was fully understood
by the intellectual class in Germany long before the war com-
menced. “Soon after the outbreak of hostilities a manifesto was
signed by ninety-three of Germany’s foremost scholars, theolo-
gians, and men of science, in which they declared among other
things that, “but for militarism German civilisation would have
been destroyed long ago.”
“Similarly a manifesto published on October 10th, 1914, and
signed by 3,200 university professors, and teachers in the Higher
Schools, contains this declaration: “We firmly believe that the
salvation of the whole of European civilisation depends on the
victory of German militarism.” (Professor Barnet on Higher
Education and the War, p. 2.) Ido not know whether it is
possible to protect such a people against themselves, as some have
charitably imagined. But Ido know that it is possible now, as it
never may be again, to protect the rest of the world against them.
That task, as I have said, is now in the hands of wise and
experienced men, whose illusions have all been cleared away at
last. For what remains to be done by ourselves, let us cast aside
all doubtful and hesitating counsels; let us summon all our cour-
age and constancy; let us keep in touch with the terrible facts
burnt into our very souls during the last four years. “Lest we
forget; Lest we forget.”
Vale & Pearson, Printers, Sydney.
