

%\t dcroh :
A SERMON
PREACHED IN
NEWARK PARISH CHURCH,
AT THE
EVENING SERVICE FOLLOWING THE
LAYING ON OF HANDS,
SUNDAY, APRIL 4TH, 1875,
J. B. PEARSON, M.A., L.L.M,,
Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, and Vicar of
New ark-up on-Trent.
NEWARK:
PRINTED BY TOMLINSON AND WHILES, STODMAN STREET..
ffbej 7 tT




To those Parishioners who have lately been Confirmed.
My Dear Friends, —I have been desirous that you should have a
small memorial of the pleasant, and I hope profitable, hours that we
have spent together during the last few weeks, and so I am venturing
to print the Sermon that was preached in the Parish Church last
Sunday Evening. Its subject was suggested by the Confirmation, and
I now offer it to you who have lately been Confirmed.
I hope and believe that some of you have thought with real
earnestness about the Christian life, and I am now anxious to impress
upon your minds this truth—that the only way to keep that life bright
and active within you is to put good resolutions into practice at once ,
Thus and thus only a habit of holiness may be formed; thus and thus
only you may indeed “ grow in grace.” You must not expect that
the special emotions of Confirmation time will last: they of necessity
pass away : but they will not be lost, if they leave you with a mind
“ set upon righteousness.”
There was one feature about our Easter Communions this year,
which gave a certain sadness to that which should be the great Festival
of joy. This was the fewness of young communicants. How is it that
among the guests at the Lord’s Supper the number of those confirmed
within the last four or five years is so small ? I think that one great
cause of this is the want of system in the religious life of many amongst
us. A right thing that we do not prepare to do, and do, at fixed
times, is very apt to be left undone. Let me urge then upon you, the
desirability of becoming regular communicants, whether weekly, or
fortnightly, or monthly. I am not so much concerned just now to
recommend frequency as regularity , in your coming to the Holy Table.
The unsystematic easily become the negligent.
Wishing you all that peace of mind which is the companion of
purity in heart, and that real happiness which flows from active
goodness,
I am,
Your faithful Friend,
J. B. PEARSON,
Newark Vicarage,
April B th, 1875




X hi. 12.
Fight the good fight of faith.
He who gave this soldier-like charge to his young fellow-
soldier at Ephesus had a right to speak of faith. His faith—
his confidence in the unseen—or in plainer words, his trust in
God —had been the mainspring of his life. It had kept him
going true to his Maker, true to his calling, true to himself.
Through faith he had given up much that men hold dear
readily, through faith he had done a great work earnestly,
through faith he had borne sore trials bravely. A few months
later he could write with thankful heart; I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith ; henceforth there is laid up for me
a crown of righteousness. Yes—St. Paul had a right to speak
of faith : he had the same right to speak of it that an old
soldier has to speak of his rifle, or an old sailor of his ship : he
had tried it; and through all these long years of Christian,
warfare his voice seems to ring out loud and clear, like that
of a brave captain in the battle field, rousing the careless and
encouraging the faint-hearted, Fight the good fight of faith.
The words have a martial ring about them like that other
exhortation, Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit- you like
men, he strong. I think that they are just the words we
want to-night.
And why particularly to-night ? Because we have been
engaged this day in a service which is meant to send forth
Christian warriors, while the vigour of youth is yet in them,
strengthened to fight this fight, to resist evil with firmer front,


to conquer for God and goodness, inch by incn, the small city
of their own hearts; and not that alone, but by every available
means to push forward in the world around them the triumph
of that kingdom which bears upon its banners these four
words : First pure, then peaceable.
While yet the memory of that service is fresh in our minds,
let me recall a few phrases from its prayers ;
Strengthen them, we beseech Thee, O Lord, with the Holy
Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them thy manifold
gifts of grace.
Defend, O Lord, this thy Child with Thy heavenly grace,
that he may continue thine for ever.
Let Thy fatherly hand, we beseech Thee, ever be over
them; let Thy Holy Spirit ever be with them.
With such supplications for her young members does the
Church besiege the throne of grace. Defence and strength .
these are the burden of her petitions, they are just what we
need in battle. St. Paul, perhaps partly because of the natural
energy of his disposition, was much given to describing the
Christian life as a contest, a race, or a wrestling match. He
was a man of strong feeling and of firm purpose, and the grace
of God had consecrated and hallowed this natural disposition
without violently changing its tone. Ihe whole direction of
his efforts had been changed, but there was still the old native
force about him. He was, one might almost say, by nature a
warrior—by grace he had become a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.
In the wars which from time to time have wrought such
sad havoc upon the earth, it must often have been a sad
thought to those engaged in them, that their actual opponents
were probably in many cases good men, good husbands, good
fathers, good citizens. I think indeed that war is sometimes
unavoidable—that there must lie an appeal to arms when
reason fails. But among the individual soldiers of two
opposed armies, it is no doubt true that there are good men on


both sides! In fighting each for his country, one soldier of
Christ may kill or disable another. In cases like this, the
individual is lost in the cause, and as we read accounts of
battles and sieges in the newspapers we think of the number,
not of the character of those slain. We think of it as a
fight country against country —army against army—not man
against man—and we rightly think of it in that way.
Now the Christian life is a combat: it requires courage and
watchfulness and effort in those who would be on the Lord’s
side. It requires a brave heart and a firm will in them who
would be faithful unto death. But there is this great comfort
in it, that every blow that is struck, every shot that is fired,
every fortress that is defended, is struck or fired or defended
against an enemy that is in itself bad—an enemy that we
should set ourselves against with set purpose and fixed
endeavour, without a single feeling of tenderness towards it,
without a single qualm of conscience. For the enemy is the
great enemy of you and me and of every man and woman that
Christ died to save. That enemy is the power of sin. Thou
shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins .
Their sins—What is it that divides neighbour from
neighbour, and often breaks up a family into selfish atoms
of humanity, “ lords of themselves, that heritage of woe.''”
What but disobedience to the Christian law of love ?
What is it that makes men distrustful one of another, that
makes it impossible for us always to receive as true the
reports that reach us day by day ? What is it that creates
suspicions, often groundless, of the honesty and good faith
of those that we have to deal with. It is the mischief
wrought by the mischief-working principle of falsehood.
What is it that propagates sin like an evil disease from
one to another, from house to house ? What but the
temptation of others to sin ?
Here is good work neglected—work that ought to be done,
and nrght be done, if the might-be worker had any interest in


it. It is indeed a sad sight—good work neglected. How does
it come to pass that there is so much of this ? One great
cause thereof is the fact that we are apt to love pleasure over-
much. Even innocent pleasures, good as recreations, make
but a sorry business of life ; and yet is it not too true that
people with money and time to spare seem often hard put
to it how to while away the time with the spending of the
money ?
Look at the world again. Here is a neighbourhood as one
may say under water. The aged have lost the earnings which
were to last them while life lasted—the young have lost the
means of their education, the chance of what is called having a
start in life. This is the work of a rotten bank or a bubble
company. Trade is bad, work scarce, and cheerful workmen
are fast becoming grumbling paupers. The love of money has
had the principal share in bringing about this result.
In going down the street I meet a man who walks with
tottering steps—a man who is old while he is yet young, his
constitution broken up, not worn out. I ask what his occupa-
tion is, and am told that he has lost a good post lately and is
now looking out for something. I find his home hardly and
with difficulty kept together, his wife either very anxious, or,
even worse, growing reckless and desperate, his children in a
fair way for becoming vagabonds. The demon of intemperance
has got hold of that man and is bringing misery on that home.
How many men, how many homes, I wonder, in Newark does
that description describe ?
You shall see one more sight of sorrow, and then we will
turn to a more cheerful aspect of the fight of faith. You
shall see one who has lost purity, and has brought shame
and misery upon dearest friends by deeds of which it is a
shame even to speak. Keep thyself pure , was the word of
Christ’s apostle to a young Christian. They shall see God ,
was the beatitude that Christ himself promised to the pure
in heart. A part, and no small part, of the Christian’s fight,
is the conflict with impurity.


Now I would put it to any man of clear common sense,
of what people call practical business mind, and of good
kindly feeling towards his neighbours, whether the fight
against these influences that oppose the higher life is not
a fight worth fighting. I would ask the question ol such
a man, even though to use the common but objectionable
phrase, he make no profession of religion, whether the next
generation would not be better even so far as the interests
of human society in this world are concerned, if those
enlisted in such a service as this really did carry on the
battle. I would ask him whether we clergy are not working
truly for the good of mankind in striving to impress upon
young minds the dangers of their lives and the safeguards
which the Christian faith affords them ? For in that series
of little photographs of dark deeds, I have but been
amplifying part of the oath of Christ’s recruits, the promise
of Holy Baptism, to renounce the devil and all his works ,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the
sinful lusts of the flesh; the promise which hundred after
hundred in this county of Nottingham have within the last
few weeks owned to be a right and reasonable promise,
and a promise that ought to be performed. My brethren,
if those hundreds would only perform that promise in the
strength of Christian faith, there would be a reform in our
society such as Parliament with all its power can never
effect; there would be an agency for good set going in our
midst such as those who look but at external improvements,
and overlook the preparation of the heart in man, can never
with their most wisely devised schemes accomplish. I do
not undervalue wholesome legislation ; I do not undervalue
such rules and regulations as conduce to the healthy
condition of England’s teeming population ; but I do say that
the good fight of faith, the fight against every form of
ungodliness and sin, heartily entered upon and heartily
carried on, would do more to change the face of the land and
to brighten the condition of the people than all other


agencies put together. No other teaching will supply the
place of the training of Christian soldiers. The good fight
—the fight which is conspicuous by its moral excellence,
which is lofty in its conception, noble in its character,
blessed in its issue—is the fight of faith. It is carried on in
reliance upon the sustaining power of God, in obedience to
the great Captain Christ. I know not why we should
engage in that fight against evil at all unless we believed
that we had been put into this world by God, with a work
to do, and a calling to fulfil. Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die. I know not how to argue an unbeliever
out of that cheerless and short-sighted code of morals, unless
I can recommend to him the power of trust in the unseen.
The very thought that we are here for something, that out-
lives have a meaning and a purpose, rests surely upon the
conviction that the Great Father of us all has put us here,
given us our place, and intends us to fill it honestly and
earnestly. And further, the sustaining belief that the good
fight of faith is destined in the long run to be crowned with
victory, rests upon the Easter truth of the finished work of
Christ, our Elder Brother and our King. We may fight
with unflinching hearts and brave front, for he has led the
way and he has conquered. Of him it is written, that he
was tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin. As
the annals of this world’s warfare tell, there is nothing like
a good leader for inspiring the troops with needful courage—
and in the good fight we have a good leader, unseen, yet
ever near—gone before, and yet where two or three are
gathered together in his name. The voice of Christ may yet
be heard—heard above the strife of tongues and above the
busy whisperings of temptations, a voice which says to
each of us— Follow thou Me.
And what support in difficulties, what comfort in trials,
there is in the Gospel teaching of the Holy Ghost. It tells
us that we do not go out to war unaided and unblessed.
It assures of constant help, constant grace, constant


strengthening of the divine life, constant energy for the
combat. It is because they have heard that there is a Holy
Ghost, and a Holy Ghost for them, that the young soldiers
of the Christian army, can take up those words of the
Confirmation hymn :
We need Thee more than tongue can speak,
’Mid foes that well might cast us down ;
But thousands, once as young and weak,
Have fought the fight and won the crown ;
We ask the help that bore them through,
We trust the Faithful and the True.
For strength in the conflict we look up to Him the One
God of whom the old creeds tell—Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; Creator, Saviour, strengthening Guide. Alter all it
seems that what we want for living such lives as pure, honest,
loving men and women ought to live, is just a firm hold upon
those eternal realities of which the Catechism and the Creed
have told us in our childhood, and will continue, 1 hope, to tell
to generation after generation, when we have passed to rest.
I must not' detain ycfii long, for some of you have
had a long day. Let me just give a few words of advice
to young soldiers. The first shall be founded upon a
saying of the great Duke of Wellington. When asked
how he managed to win all his battles, he answered that
he never despised an enemy. It is a great rule that—never
to despise an enemy. Do not think that because the enemy
does not present himself in outward form, he is necessarily
not at work. If the power of evil were to come to us like
the pictures of Satan in some old books, an object hideous
to behold, we should shrink back, startled and terrified. Not
so does sin work its work against us. It is little by little,
little by little. Very likely mis-spent Sundays, bad company,
loose conversation, prepare the way for evil deeds. It catches
us at our weak point, and does not present itself in its
badness and blackness all at once. Watch, that ye enter not
into temptation. And while ye watch, pray; for prayer is


the secret of Christian strength. Your prayer may, like St.
Paul’s for the removal of the thorn in the flesh, not be
answered in the way you wish ; but it may be answered still :
My grace is sufficient for thee ; for my strength is made
perfect in weakness. There is one special means of grace
for the strengthening and refreshing of the Christian soldier,
which if you mean to do true allegiance to your Heavenly
King, you will surely not neglect, I mean the Holy
Communion. There to the faithful soul, Christ doth himself
impart; and to have him is-to be strong indeed.
One word as to the issue of this conflict; it shall be the
Captain’s own word :
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.
Tomlinson and Whiles, General Machine Printers, Newark.
41m ■
