

The
Seven
Services
of
the
Bushlands
Based on an address
by E.H.F, Swain, ...
Commissioner for ..
Forests.N.S.W,,to the
Sydney Federation of
Bnshwalkers,
18th. May, 1945,
A . Forestry . Commission . Bulletin




THE SEVEN SERVICES OF THE BUSHLANDS.
Based on an address to The Sydney Bushwalkers* Sydney* N.S.W.*
on 18th May* 1945* hy E.H.F. Swain* N.S.W. Commissioner for
Forests,
You have heard of the Seven Seas and of the Seven Deadly
Sins | of the Seven Dwarfs and of the Seven Keys tb Baldpate;
of the Seven Wonders of the World* and of the Seven Ages of
Man?
And of various other Sevens?
May I now introduce to you the Seven Services of the Bush-
lands? The most important Seven of alii
These Seven* by-the-way* do not include agriculture* which
the Bushlands furnished as a bye-product, hy first converting
the slag-crust of geologic earth into humus-enriched living
soil* thence to he turned into “smiling farms 11 to yield to us
Our Optimum Diet.
The basic Seven* however* are of much more consequence to
us than their hye-product. For* bellbve it or not* man can ex-
ist without agriculture.
The aborigines proved that first.
And modern technology demonstrates it anew.
For modern technology now askss “Why out down forests to
grow grass to grow sheep to grov/ wool when you can make the
end product straight from the trees? 11
And why plant sugar-cane when* hy reversing Nature r s chem-
istry* Y/ood can he turned hack into half its weight of sugar
which, by the addition of yeast* can he converted into meat and
drink; and cattle fodder with a higher feeding value than oats?
Agriculture has become a modem luxury; and silviculture a
modern necessity!
I do not suggest that we need dispense with our agricultural
luxury and with our optimum vitamins.
But whilst we could actually dispense with agriculture* v/e
could not have become civilised* nor could we remain civilised -
without the Seven Services of the Bushland.
Let us get this right - for it is important to every Aus-
tralian.
THE SEVEN BUSHLAND SERVICES:
The bushlands furnish these Seven Key Services;
1. Landscape Protection and Adornment; |
Without which the countryside would be exposed to unmitig-
ated wind-blasts; opened wide to increasing extremities of
heat and cold* sterilising and loosening the soil until it
blows wide and far* reducing production from the unsheltered
farms* evacuating the bird-life and substituting insect pests
for avian music* exchanging the crowning glory of forests
and trees for a bald land* reversing the succession of nature
from high-forest back to its original hoathland.


2. Waterflow OontrolTj
Without conservation by forest canopy and forest floor,
torrents would he unleashed, rivers break and fail, irrig-
ation dams silt up, urban water supplies foul, and farmlands
erode; until production from the bye-product agricultural
service falls, and living standards decline.
5. Bushland Recreation;;
For nature-worshippers, nature-lovers, artists, ecologists,
naturalists; for bush-walkers, boy-scouts, tourists, motorists,
picnickers, camp-fire gatherers, waggon-wheelers, hunters, and
w 3ust people”.
Without which there would be no psychic antidote to our
Twentieth Century mechanic-economic urbanism; no retreat
from the artificial uniformities of a coded civilisation,
to the wild, the natural, the spontaneous and the various;
no refreshment for the mentally-laden; no escape from living;
no preparation for re-living; no bushland scent or music; no
billy-tea and gumleaves; no wattle blossom.
4. Forest Produce;
Without which the British Pharmacopeia would be abridged to
a few pages, honey would become a rarer and loss delectable
dish, and beekeeping would decline, eucalyptus oils would go
off the market; the tanning of hides would cease, forest forage
would no longer come to the rescue of starving stock in drought,
the cellulose-plastic industries would not emerge, and many
other forest based industries would fail.
jb. Timbers
Without which, building, mining, railways, shipping, aviat-
ion, defence, the press, publication, education, administration,
could no longer function, and civilisation as wo know it, would
come to an end,
j 6. Forest Employment~|
Without which, Full Employment would be an Impractical political
dream, and community-economic development would recede
p 7. The Australian Character!?
Without which, Australia would have no significant world
contribution to make, in Culture - in fauna, flora, art, music,
literature, architectures and Anzao personality. 1
LET US DISCOVER THE OBVIOUS/
Vital, Indispensable, Critical, these Seven, when laid out
thus for your inspection, aren't they?
Even coal, base of our Western Civilisation, successor to char-
coal, was supplied by the forests - the old forests, placed in
”cold storage” by Providence for millions of years, against our
present need.
Man, indeed, was born of the forests. His whole history has,
as its background, the history of the forests.
Man's future still depends on the forests.
But man has not yet become cognisant of the Obvious. Ee had
first to destroy the obvious before he could discover it.


Air is also Vital, Indispensable, Critical - but we can’t
destroy air. Forests we can destroy and are- doing - only to
prove that these so-thought, ’’residual”, ’’waste”, ’’tinimproved”,
”breedlng grounds of noxious animals” - and what-not of our
early colonial thinking, are the actual Cornerstones of our
Economy. 1
THE INDIVISIBLE FORESTS:
For our simpler understanding we could classify the functions
of the forests in the Four Categories;
1. The Primaeval.
2. The Protective,
3. The Recreational.
4. The Productive.
But, then again, how can you divide the Indivisible?
For the Primaeval forest is also Protective - and the Pro-
tective forest is also primaeval. The Recreational forest v/ould
also be Primaeval and Protective, except that not all people are
nature-worshippers, ’’pausing in the green and gold of forest
glory, like one with all the life transfigured”, or, horrified
with delight by grotesque Blood Gums, which ’’with bloody arms
outstretched, shriek maledictions to the sky”; or spell-bound,
in the Inland, by ’’all day the vision splendid of the sunlit
plain extended; and at night the wondrous glory of the ever-
lasting stars”; or finally, dwelling in rapt adoration within
the enchantment of ancient forest ruins.
There are others to be catered for, not so moved by these
contemplations. Such as those who surge unseeing through the
bushlands, in quest of bush-walking records; or as boy-scouts,
living on the country, seeking camping and swimming spots, even
boiling snakes in their little billies for tucker l Or at a
later age finding equivalent thrills in wild duck shooting, and
in fishing for cod in the billabongs of the Red Cum forests; or
ski-ing on the snow slopes among the Snow Gums; or aspiring to
physical fitness in the woods, or in carnivals of axomanship.
Strange as it may seem to the reverent nature-worshipper,
those quite human demands have also to be met by the Bushlands,
since man is diverse, and diversity is something to be conceded
to the human democracy if it is not to be regimented to any one
attitude of life.
But there is also the Productive foresti Without which the
nature-lover, and the hiker, hunter, and scientist would not be
housed, or furnished, or transported or civilised - whereby man
comes to the rescue of over-populated, congested ’’cities of trees”,
cleans up what, to the Productive attitude,are silvical slums,
accelerates Nature’s successions, and sets a new forest bursting
with the urgencies of renewed growth, to furnish a sylvan cornu-
copia for the supply of economic man.
That is what Man did in Central Europe, once covered from
end to end with the ’’horrida sylvis” of primaeval Beech and Oak
woods, lately transformed into man-made pinewoods, whose undue
reduction to mental man’s limited code of uniformity has been
thwarted, however, by Nature’s climatic, topographic and edaphic
conditioning, which insists on the invasive adornment with natur-
al things of man’s attempted artificialisings.’
So that in 1945, even the man-shaped forests of Central Europe
can still yield the Seven Essential Services of the Forests; and
still subserve all the various attitudes to life, in fair measure,
even though here in Europe the Primaeval forest be all but gone
from the land.


The Productive forests also, therefore, can he hoth Product-
ive, Protective, Recreational, and partly Primaeval.
And if you have never glimpsed the serried silver holes of
the Kauri Pine plantations of North Queensland; or the new-
coined copper glints of massed green-mantled Hoop Pine treelings;
or the princeling stands of young Bunya Pine forests, re-created
hy man, you have missed some hush delights which the forester
experiences as adjutant to Nature in these Australian lands.
Each one of these attitudes is entitled to its due respect;
and each can he served hy the forests to gain at least a subsid-
iary appreciation from the others.
By multiple-purpose forest management. 1
Which is the management of wild lands for the full realis-
ation of their multiple usefulness for all men, 1
TINDER NATURAL MANAGEMENT:
Nature herself is in no douht as to how her hushlands should
he treated.
She ahhors geometric separatisms, just as she ahhors a vacuum.
She governs instead to grow a diversity in unity - so that the
seven services function in co-ordination, naturally.
Using climates, topography, and soils as her tools, and her
abundance of flora and fauna as her ingredients, she easily
fashions an ecological tapestry for her varied landscapes, not
to he cut up into yards of material just to satisfy the cash-
and-carry attitudes of economic man.
The mountain is not separated from the valley, nor the creek
from the plains, nor the high forest from the low forest, nor
the protective from the primaeval, nor the recreational from the
productive, nor the hushfire from them all.
There is only Pattern.
It- is for Man to see the Pattern, know the Pattern, use the
Pattern.
That is the lesson the forester has to learn. Against all
the odds of man f s vain efforts to reduce a complex to his prim-
itive ends, hy over-simplification for his simple understanding.
THE PATTERN;
”The Climates make their Pageantry”,
Vegetation functions and grows when air, water, light and
heat are available.
i/i/hen light fades, vegetation changes color and form; when
moisture dries up or when temperature fails to reach 49°F, veg-
etation ceases to grow.
Here are the rainy tropics where water, light and heat are
in plentiful and continuous supply; and vegetation grows lush,
in tier upon tier of the Forests.
Introduce a seasonal lapse of rainfall, and many tender things
fall out, whilst the remainder lignify and toughen to make the
Monsoon Forest-type.


Widen the rain-laps ©, month after month, and the scene
changes to Savannah Parklands, to Thornbush, and finally to
Hot Deserts where the Date Palm only remains - "with its feet
in the water of the oasis, and its head in the fire of the skies n
No matter how high an annual rainfall may_ he, it is the
length of the seasonal drought - the period during which the
monthly rainfall is less than two inches - that decides first
the pageantry of the landscape.
Return to the wet tropics, and withdraw only the Warmth,
degree hy degree of Fahrenheit, as you ascend the mountains,
and the pampered vegetation of the low-land jungles gives
gradual way to the hardy Araucarian Pines and Acorn Oaks that
hold the Owen Stanley Ranges in New Guinea.
Change over the period of seasonal drought from winter to
summer, and continue to withdraw the warmth, and you create the
Alpine Ash and Snow Gum shrubbery of the Australian Alps.
Reduce both warmth and water and you evolve the vegetation
of the tundras.
The permutations and combinations of these withdrawals de-
termine what vegetation Nature evolves and what mere man can
grow.
Add a varying topography and you introduce finer and finer
climatic effects and consequences.
Vary the soils, and you reach the ultimate of -Nature's
patterning.
And this patterning you must follow - or be sllvically out-
witted I
Our Blackbutt tree was bred by Nature for the regions of
continuous rains, where the sun is warm, but drought is unknown.
It sprouts abundantlyj and, like the Phoenix, rises again as fast
as bushfires burn it down. Although the white ants gain in-
gress to its heart through the fire-scars of root and butt and
branch, it keeps on keeping on. When its fellows crowd off its
branches, it still slims upwards to its kingdom. It endures to
successful old age and regenerates its kind abundantly in counter
attacks against fire. But its "feet of clay 11 are susceptible to
drought and frost. N ature places it, therefore, above the
frost-hollow and below the dry ridges. In the frost-hollows she
uses the Blue Gum Instead, and on the dry ridges the Spotted Gum.,
the Grey Gum and the Ironbark.
There is another tree, which like the Blackbutt, fears
frost and drought, and needs the regions of continuous rain.
But it can't stand heat or flrei So it climbs the mountains
to cooler and safer heights. But it can't stand extreme cold
either. So it creeps under the shelter of the tougher jungle
trees and there, content with little, it builds up its forest
competency, and produces a wood resilient strength
that it finally reaches the skies as Mosquito-aeroplanes, man-
made from this Coaohwood tree of ours.
And there are the Hoop and Bunya Pines, of that long Arauoar-
ian lineage which is represented also in the banco lime of South-
ern Brazil. They cannot stand fire but they can withstand
drought, and they can endure domination for man5 7 ’ years, await-
ing opportunity for their liberation. So, under the Grey Gum
and the Grey Ironbark and Brush Box, they take their stand as
two-leaf seedlings pinned in the leaf-litter. And forty years
later they may still be only breast-high treelings, biding


their time. But sooner or later they dominate the forest crests
as kings of all they survey, to’ yield "beauty and butter boxes,
in the service of man. Who in his turh can save them these
fcr ty years of waiting -by forestry. 1 Adequate forestry]
And there are the eighteen Cypress Pines, of asserted temp**
oraments for assorted conditions - of which the most extensive
is the ?/hito Cypress Pino which, with sufficient moisture, has
the capacity to grow fast, but exiles itself to the
wildernesses because it fears the bushfires, and the barbaric
company of the rainy coast; and there, on the edge of the de-
sert, it creates its own arboreal civilisation of endurance,
subsisting on rain smears, surviving long droughts, scenting the
air, and finally furnishing its aromatic whitc-ant proof pine-
wood for the building needs of the inland; and the flooring
requirements of the metropolis.
There ore six-hundred different sorts of Eucalyptus trees
in Australia. There are 20,000 different sorts of trees in the
world; and each has its place and its personality; and each of
each is as different as fingerprints, and the forester knov/s
them personally as the sheep man knows his sheep.
But Nature knows them better. And how to use them in her
patternings.
”There is no form, no principle, no refinement which man
uses but does not already exist in the great matrix of
nature. All colour resides in the inter-action of sun-
light with the varied surfaces of rock and leaf. All
form and all we shall ever know of physios existed from
time immemorial in the unguessable rythms and masses of
earth and space. All our knowledge of materials had been
anticipated in the multifold arrangement of some seventy
elements and their compounds - and so clever is Nature’s
chemistry that we still do not know how to synthetise
more than a handful of organic compounds. Our own natures
were derived from an aeon of struggle with the elemental
things of the wilderness, and our civilisation for all we
know to the contrary has sprung from a chance mutation in
the cranial capacity of a forest mammal, which acquired its
prehensile hand from a forest way of life, and could not
have become civilised without it, though its brain developed
to 140 ozs. instead of its present 70, So, after 8,000
years of recent trying we are beginning to see that civil-
ization is but a veneer drawn clumsily over the primordial,
and pursuing its own limited ends clumsily and laboriously
because we have not yet learned to live with and
the great pattern of nature”.
UNDER MAN MANAGEMENT;
Unless and until the forester learns his ecological lessons
from Nature, ho cannot manage her bushlands.
It goes further than that, really, because man cannot even
manage his societies until he knows this same ecology - the way
Nature expresses herself in her creations through climate, topo-
graphy and soils. Today the architects talk of ecological
architecture, and the sociologists of ecological sociology; and,
indeed, the prophets now speak of the approaching blo-teohnio age
when man will come to the impasse of his artificialities, and
be, at long last, natural too]
The forester has also much to live down, because ho, too,
thought with the times, to put his forests into a totalitarian
strait-jacket, and to subject them by liquidation, repression
and regimentation, to his own small artificial ends.
Nov/, ho is beginning to know better, but, being more mortal.


much too slowly and clumsily still.
Nevertheless, hi* forests are commencing to assume a more
hatural fashion, and-“to realise their full destiny in Bushland
Service.
At least they are being protected increasingly from bushfires
- the first ABC stop in bushland management - and in N.&.W., State
Forests can now be discerned by their greenness and wholeness
fr om the blackened wildernesses between.
And, on the State Forests, the pattern of Nature, too, is
being surveyed and mapped. For its maintenance -by silviculture.’
There are 6,000,000 acres of State op. d National Forest in
N.S.W. out of the 200,000,000 acres that are Now South Wales.
But only two million acres of this six million acres of
State Forest are at present zoned as Productive, The four
million acres as yet function only as Primaeval, Protective,
or Recreational. Even within the Productive Zone, however,
sections are now demarcated and reserved to the Protootlve-
Primaoval-Rooreativo-Eoologioal, following Nature’s design, and
the productive balance is being accelerated to now forest creation.
Follow, the Pacific Highway north or south and you pass through
young forests which, under the hand of the forester, have taken
the place of the Primaeval hardwood forests which were logged out
by pioneering Australia in the first two decades of this century.
But perhaps you thought these too wore original primaovals? Be-
cause they look so natural, and so different to the wrecked
forests of the selections?
You see, the* forester gets credits - and discredits - only
for his artificial ugly duckling phases. 7 The final silvioal
achievements in which ha takes pride do not gain for him the
unversed recognition readily given to waterworks. Government
buildings, roads and bridges, and other rank obviousnesses of
our development n - because they look natural.’
Yet the forester has also roaded and bridged his forests to
render them accessible for bushland service, and to save them
from fire. And you may oven descry on the forest skyline the
lookout towers which he places there in watch for the incendiary.
But these too ho tries to architect ecologically so that they
seem to be a natural expression of the landscape, and not some-
thing "struck on” to affront the eye. And his forest residences
are also built now to fit into the forest naturally, and arc
gardened accordingly. And travelling the road through the man-
aged forests, you will find, instead of bridges and culverts, a
road that has become a dam, to create roadside lakelets; re-
freshing picnic points maybe, but also ready sources of water
supply for the Christmas time of bushfire, when the forester
cannot bo as merry as other men, because a great annual care
is upon him; and toil and sweat and tears, and oven blood and
burns and total exhaustion may bo his Yule-tide portion, that
ho may save his forest for seven-fold service for democracy -
from democracy.’
There stands at the gateway of the National Forest at
Wallaroo - hear Raymond Terraco, N.S.W. - an old-fashioned stocks,
imprisoning an effigy, bearing this sign:


The Freedom of the National
Forests is awarded to
Responsible Citizens Only.
n
I U : 1
HE WAS PILLORIED BY PUBLIC
OPINION AS BEING UNWORTHY TO
HAVE THE FREEDOM OF TEE
NATIONAL FORESTS.
He carved his name in living trees? He
loosed fire to burn the Bush? He stole
the iron bars from the People’s Fire-
places; He played at Ringbarking; He
ohooped saplings for Tent Poles; He
pulled out the Native Shrubs; He litter-
ed the Landscape with his Rubbish; He
daubed advertisements on the Beauty of
Nature; He despoiled a Sanctuary*
. EE . YJAS . JUST . PLAIN . SILLY .
WALKING AMONG THE TREES I
Isn T t it a marvellous feeling to leave the city behind*
and to walk among the trees - in the morning scent of the bush-
land?
You "travel the road", past urban uglinesses* along the
"broad highway" (somewhat narrowed* however, by possessive
fences imprisoning "stark-white ringbarked forests all tragic
to the moon" - and dismaying to the Sun).
Past the Signboards;
"I think that I shall never see*
A signboard lovely as a tree;
And p ? raps* until the signboard fall*
I shall not see a tree at all.’"
And soi "Behold the Vale of Avalon"* the loveliest sea-
scapes in the world, proclaimed and priced as such on the
hoardings of Realty Developments Ltd,, fit site for the fibro-
cement shacks of those who purport to seek the beauty of Nature
unadorned the most.
And along the claustrophobic roads of the "open country"
with the ghosts of old colonial camping places haunting the
gaoled waysides - and never now a spot to camp.
And at last into the Great Australian Bush - with its
blackened stumps bravely flaunting again this year’s greenery.
And so you come to an old-remembered haunt, and find it
desecrated and destroyed - by an ardent new selector trying
to wreat a hillbilly living from the former glories of Nature*
Your breast swells to bursting with the fury, of resentment.


You are ready to take the miserable selector by the throat*
and to throttle him by all the G-ods that be.
You feel highly aboriginal.
Whilst he, unsuspecting, swells with pride in his applauded
role of pioneer. And invites you in to share his morning billy
teal
There are also people who stand for cabbages as against
wild flowers, and for timber as against trees I
We can have no quarrel with those who turned the forests
into smiling farms, because we can have no quarrel with our
bread and butter.
But there are so many farms which don’t smile and will never
smile. Because which has the final decision* did not
intend them to be farms at alii She patterned them for the
even more important seven-fold Services of the Bushland.
We do not yield readily to the truths of experience. 3h
one case, we have 11 thrown open” ( 11 thrown” and ’’open”) for
Settlement 11 , an area of eleven portions of land, on which Natur
had determined to produce her good Australian hardwoods. The
first Selectors n ’’took them up n s and sold the pick of this hard'
wood for their better living - until they found a better patch:
when they forfeited them] The second selectors did the same.
Over the years 22 different selectors have descended the scale
of living by timber selling off these so-called Selections”,
until they could find no more timber to cut, when they forfeited
And now it becomes harder and harder to find a twentythird
a twentyfourth to be accredited as having been ’’settled” on this
land. And so far, this particular forest has not been turned in-
to a Smiling farm 11 . And never will - because Nature patterned
it for trees.
We do not easily learn]
And sol Much of our bushland now lies unnecessarily wrecked
and burned, and useless; a liability to be reclaimed, at cost,
from man’s misuse to man’s best use, to prove future truth by
past error]
In New South Wales, the Minister for Conservation (Hon. W.F.
Bunn, M.L.A.) has announced a policy of forest redemption for
this State. In Queensland, also, £IOO,OOO per annum are now
placed on the estimates every year, to redeem the forests which
failed as selections, in the ’’gold rush” of individualistic
exploitation, when the profit motif destroyed its own profits,
and its own vital forest resource.
What shall it profit?
THIS AUSTRALIA:
This Australia is a colorful picture-land of antique land-
scapes, enlivened by prehistoric birds and animals, set in a
mosaic of old-world climates.
A few of its koalas and its kangaroos, somewhat cruelly con-
fined in but a remnant of Sydney’s bushland, attract queues of
cars on Sundays, and visitors from overseas on weekdays.
From the aboriginal wildflowers of Western Australia to the
Kauri Bine monarchy of North Queensland, from the Royal Ash of
the Australian Alps to the Epsteinian Red Gums of the Murray,
from the alligator-barked Carbeen and fairy Lcopardwood of the
Centre to the beehive-crowned Araucarlans of the Bunya Mountains
from the honey-filled malices of the South to the bulbous Hurra-
Jongs of the North, from the scented Callltris forests of inland


to the Coaohwood jungles of the mist belt, from the Karri
giants of the South-west to the Ebony, Sandalwood, and Buddha
dwarfs of the North-east -
This is Australia!
In all the world, there is nothing like it.
The Australian Bushland is all important - how important
vie are yet to realise. But this truth is being proved to us
as we seek to establish the contrary.
We gave away 300 acres of Hoop Pine forest in southern
Queensland to a selector, to prove that agriculture pays best!
And the trees that we threw in gratis with £3OO worth of land
(payable in twenty yearly instalments) turned into gold in his
hands, and absolved him £rom his agricultural advocacy by es-
tablishing the contrary superior value of the forest in the
sum of £47,000 realised from timber sold.
We thought to prove the inconsequence of the high forests
of the Eastern Dorrigo by turning them into thriving farmlands
in 1905-10 - only to realise in 1945, Instead, an evacuated
frost-bitten weedy wilderness, awaiting reconversion by for-
estry to its Intended usefulness to man.
We rlngbarked our coastal eucalypts - to prove the worth-
lessness of wood; and were forced to import logs for our saw-
mills to establish the contrary. And, in the process, we sought
to centralise our timber industry in Sydney - in order to est-
ablish, contrarily, the importance of decentralisation.
We coined the justificatory slogan for our consciences:
"Better children than trees", in order to denude the country-
side - and produced erosion; to establish the contrary need
for soil conservation, for the children, by forests and by trees.
We sought to turn our Antipodean landscapes into English
gardens. And proved instead the Australian significance of
our Australian flora.
We massacred the Koala bears. And established them as
favorites of the World.
We thought to urbanise our people in the samenesses of
Western civilisation. And succeeded in establishing them as
nature lovers Instead.
We have, indeed, established, by Error, the Importances of
the Australian wilderness.
MAN!
The present landscape reflects our stage of development as
our stage of culture.
Obviously, it cannot stay at that!
But, if wo are to prove the theory of truth, only by the
practice of error, then we still have much more to destroy be-
fore we can establish our convictions!
The evolution, of course, is inevitable. Nature presides
over our* human Tower of Babol, winking her sun-eye, knowing
that the marriage of earth and sky is eternal, and will yet
boar its abundant, destined, fruit; in all the aeons yet to
be, when busy man has passed on.


But man is here also to evolve. He will not evolve by re-
maining secure within the white egg-shell of his conceits, re-
fusing to be hatched out into the wide world, lest his shell be
cracked and spoiled, for someone's jest.
Because of this refusal, never was Confusion more confounded
than it is on earth today. We are engaged in saving egg-shells.
We have as yet no purpose in common. But wo are seeking!
Man cannot jrot see the Future - for the Past; the Whole -
for the Part| the People - for the Self; the Forest - for the
Trees.'
Yet, inconsequentially, persistence in error is hero also
establishing truth by mistake!
T.V.A. :
The T.V.A. story is, of course, that People, as well, as
Forests, are indivisible. And now feeling divided, feel by
contrariety, the need for re-integrations!
Over in the TJ.S.A. someone thought of taking a whole river
basin, its people, its forests, its streams, its soils, its
mineral resources, and welding them into one indivisible organ-
ism of volunteer-progress. An authority-was set up to stimulate
this volunteer progress - the now famous Tennessee Valley Auth-
ority. That authority commenced with the organisation of the
river-flow for irrigation and for power. It brought in the
necessary support of forest service - it enlisted the under-
standing of the people, taught them the lessons of Nature and
how N aturc preserved the soils. It encouraged them to be
"self-starters" under its fatherly guidance, eschewing enforce-
ments, using instead comradely assistance. The people came
alive, the century-looted soils wore restored, crops flourished,
water power lent the aid of its mechanical "slaves", forests
grow, industries extended, a lost province and a lost people wore
refound.
By co-operative goodwill and the light of learning - without
the rod!
From all over the world now, authorities go to the Tennessee
Valley to see a New Order in operation, a happy, active people,
flourishing farms, a service of streams, a frame work and support
of forests - primaeval-protective-rccreational-productive„
Wo sc ok to copy the T.V.A. idea, but missing the principle,
grasp at the shadow of its outward forms instead.
The success of the T.V.A. is due to its actual realisation
of the Indivisible | and to its consequent dynamic integration
of men and work in the team-game to win; under the democratic
inspiration of a guidance in fellowship.
The precise form it has assumed is merely the Tennessee
shadow of the principle which is its substance.
If wo merely copied its concrete Tennessee shape wo should
achieve only Dead Sea fruit.
If wo accept its Principle, the future is ours!
,r SHADOWS BEFCRB
Forty years ago, Queensland passed a four-page Bill; and
styled it the National Parks and State Forests Act of 1906.
That Act placed these bushlands under one Management. Under


Forest Service Management. For diversity in Unity.
Was this a conscious recognition of the principle of
ion? Or only a legislative accident?
Perhaps Queensland does not yet know that this 1906 Act
was advanced legislation for 1945 J
But now you have the Lamington .National Forest Park* the
Bunya Mountains National Forest Park* the Hinchinbrook National
Forest Park, and other primaeval-recreative magnificences of
Queensland, in the safe care of the Queensland Forest Service -
which also grows the butter boxes, and the building timber, the
mining timber, the timber for railways, bridges, harbors, and
industries - the Timber for Living.
But which knows also how to manage the bushlands for multiple
forest-service, for all people.
These National Forest Parks of Queensland contain great
stores of valuable timber, and wartime knows no sentiment. But
they were patterned for the Primaeval-Protective-Recreative; and
not one tree is missing from its ancient place. For both fire
and axe have b een absent from them for forty years - what time
the Queensland Forest Service has been furnishing the timber
market without resort to imports and working with Nature to
create new native forests for old, in a fraction of Nature's
time.
But the State Forests of Queensland, dedicated to the Pro-
ductive, are made to subserve the Primaeval-Protective-Recreative
as well.
Contiguous to the 48,000-acre Lamington National Forest Park
- haunt of the natural and the wild, made accessible by the
Forest Service by picturesque graded tracks - are.a chain of
these State Forests, designated for the Productive, but inte-
grated inseparably, by their topography, with their own Prim-
aeval-Proteotive-Reoreative constituencies,
This National Forest Park, and these contiguous State Forests
are being linked up into a wilderness unit, styled Brisbane's
Scenic Rim - "a ninety-mile crescent-shaped run of mountains
with a radius of about 60 miles from Brisbane" to be served by
camp lodges, walking tracks, and camp-fire places.
And Fire-Protection. 1
Here is the concept of multiple forest service in construct-
ive operation.
That same concept entered into the 1935 amendments of the
N.S.W. Forestry Act, for these amendments provided for the sett-
ing apart of scenic parts of the National Forest Estate for
m anagement for the Proteotive-Prlmaeval-Hecreationali and
therefore for their withdrawal from the Productive.
Out of the six million acres of the N.S.W. State Forests
less than half have thus far been assigned to the Productive.
The designation given by the Amendments to the Primaeval-
Protective-Recreational sections of the N.S.W. State Forests
was "Flora Reserve” - it should have been "National Forest
Park" - which is what was meant.
The British Forestry Act establishes National Fa? ests for
timber production, and within them demarcates as National Forest
Parks those zones which can render more useful service in the


field of the Primaeval-Protective-Recreative. It manages them
both for their separate purposes under one management - Forest
Service management.
In 1939, the National Forests of the U.S.A. received
14.332.000 visits from campers, and 20,471,000 visits from
sight-seers. The U.S.A. Forest Service provided 4,600 free
public camp-grounds, with stoves, safe fireplaces, drinking
water, and conveniences; and camps with bunkhouses, mess-
halls &0., with food and transportation for forest holiday
seekers - for four dollars per week per person.
In New England a chain of inns was established to accommodate
hikers. And these inns paid their way even In the years of the
depression.
In these ways and by these means are the wild lands being
organised for multiple forest service,
”Comlng events” oast these ’’shadows before”.
COMING- EVENTS;
Because, in our uncultivated thinking, we knew of only one
use for land, and that not even agriculture, but '’settlement”,
we have broken up our wild-land economy into thousands of dis-
connected bits and pieces. Many of these bits and pieces have
proved worthless for agriculture, and exist today as hill-billy
’’failed selections”, on which the former forest resource has
been wrecked and burned.
These lands serve no community ends in their present owner-
ship.
In the Clarence Region only one-eighth of the wild land we
have alienated in a hundred years has been put under grass or
crop, whilst in the rich agricultural district of Young, of
400.000 acres of arable land, only 88,000 acres are under crop.
So we have to Import half our sawn timberi
On the other side, the wild lands of N.S.W. still left in
the hands of the Crown have been broken up into 320 different
redundant types of reservation on the maps.
It is all so futile to dispose of interdependent problems
by labelling a map with different names, and then abandoning it
all to bushfires; or to trustees without funds, facts, functions,
or fellowship.
The Bushlands need reincorporation to serve the State as
they were meant to do.
And they need actual land management.
There can be only one Bushland Policy - the policy of In-
divisible Management of Indivisible Bushlands for an Indivisible
People.
According to Pattern, For Seven-fold Service.
This is the Coming Event.’
In days yot to be, if our now eight thousand years old food-
producing and now mechanised civilisation is to broaden its base
for higher building, and not to decline and fall, then, among
other things these so-called ’’residual lands”, left over from
honestly-needed, efficient agriculture, will bo redeemed and
incorporated, under forest management - to be the cornerstone
of the coming bio-teohnio age.
