

THE BAROSSA ELECTION.
The honor of publicly opening the cam-
paign for the Barossa election fell to Mr. E.
J*. Nesbit, the well-known Adelaide, Q. 0.,
and the Institute Hall contained about 350
electors, including a dozen or so of ladies,
on Tuesday evening, to hear the eloquent
gentleman detail his political creed
His Worship the Mayor (Mr. W. H. Cox,
J.P.) occupied the chair.
Hr. Nesbit, who was well received, said
tbis was not the first time he had proposed to
seek the suffrages of the electors of Barossa,
Eleven or twelve years ago he announced
himself as a candidate, choosing that district
as he bad chosen it now, because although
almost a stranger to the men and women of
Gawler, Barossa was his native district, and
it had been the dream of his life to represent
it in Parliament. Oa that occasion he was
an opponent to the then Government of Mr,,
afterwards Sir John, Bray, but finding that
there were sufficient candidates for Barossa
who were opposed to the Government he
retired from the contest because his principal
object was likely to be attained. To bis
mind that Government was about the worst
that ever held office in South Australia, and
Sir John Downer’s Ministry took its place.
("That was worse still.”) No, not worse.
Sir John Downer was a better man than
Sir John Bray. Time had seen many
changes since then. Seven years ago bis
dear friend and partner, John Gordon, came
forward to seek the suffrages for a seat in
the Legislative Council, and he said to him,
“ When you want to come forward I will
stand back.” He had waited for seven
years, he had served his partners, he bad
stood back. But he was now forty-three
years old, and getting into the sere and
yellow leaf, and it was about time, if he
ever intended to, to seek to realise the
dream of his life to represent Barossa. The
speaker then touched upon federation,
which he said he longed above ail things to
become an accomplished fact. There was
no colony whose best interests would be
more likely to be advanced by federal union
than our dear colony of South Australia.
This was not election butter. (Laughter.)
It was true. He appeared before them with
much pain as an opponent of the Kingston
Ministry. He had supported Kingston for
several years, not because he always ap-
proved of his policy, but because he thought
that in the main Charles Cameron Kingston
was doing good work for the colony. Even
now he yielded to no man in his apprecia-
tion of the good qualities of that great man.
(Applause.) Because Charlie was a great
man. He had measured him against the
great statesmen of Australia and of England,
and Charles Cameron Kingston, with all his
faults, was one of the greatest men in Aus-
tralia to-day, (Applause.) He paid that
tribute to the man who was now his political
enemy because he thought he deserved it.
(Applause.) There was no man in all Aus-
tralia with the same force as Kingston,
except old Parkes—(laughter)—whose day
was done. Mr. Kingston had done good
work. Having said this he must pass on to
declare with great pain that he considered
in the interests of this oouminnity and in
the interests of Kingston himself that he
should retire for a brief season. (“No,”
and “Yes.”) For two or three years he
should serve in Her Majesty’s Opposition.
He did not want to see him out of Parlia-
ment—he was far too good a man to be lost
to Parliament. But be had got too big for
his boots. (Laughter.) He was also suffering
from swelled head. (Laughter, and “He is
not the only one.”) He honored Kingston
for his adhesion to the Labor Party ; he
honored him for standing up for the
masses against the classes, but he bad gone
too far. (“'Not a bit ”) He had not only
supported the Labor Party in their just
claims and demands, but he had truckled to
the meanest passions among them. Then
the Premier, a lawyer himself, had degraded
the position of our judges, (“True.”) Was
it worth anything that we bad a Chief
Justice, who was the greatest lawyer on the
bench in Australia? Was it worth any-
thing that Chief Justice Way was a great
lawyer, and a just judge? Was it worth
£2.000 a year? (The Hon. James Martin—
" Yea.”', U; course it was. Mr. Nesbit
then referred to the Arthur case, and the
Malcolm lands case, and condemned the
Premier’s action in connection therewith.
He (Mr. Nesbit) was a Democrat. Who
would dare to say that be was not ? He was
one of the oldest members of the Adelaide
Democratic Club, had spoken over and over
again at their meetings, and had supported
the Labor Party in all their just demands.
But he told them they must not go too far.
Labor was great, the people were great, but
justice was greater. (Applause.) They
could not make any demand against the
interest of the general community without
injuring themselves in the long run, because
the community was a social organism, and
he could cot have a diseased foot or a
diseased bead without his whole body being
MR. E. PABISS NESBIT, 4-0., AT
[Reprinted eroti “ The Hr nVI i’.' Friday, March 20, 1596.]
(Laughter.) He was reminded of Rudyatd
Kipling’s lines :
affected. Mr. Nesbit next defended the pay-
ment of high salaries for the management of
our railways. It was worth it. On the
success of the railways of Australia rested
an enormous issue, almost incalculable. If
the State railways were not a success they
would pass into the bands of a private
syndicate, and the course of civilization
would be put back fifty years. (Applause.
“ How much is Dalby worth ?”) If he
would come forward he would tell him.
(Langhter.) He grieved very much to see
amongst some members of the Labor Party,
a jealousy of proper payment for great
talent. They oould not get away fiom the
fact that one man was not as good as
another. (Hear, hear.) Potentially yes,
but actually no. If we wanted good services
we must give liberal remuneration. (Ap-
plause.) Another indictment against Mr.
Kingston was that he had not given fair
play to the squatters. No one would accuse
him (Mr. Nesbit) of being the tool of the
capitalists. He had refused to join the
National Defence League, although its plat-
form was right enough, because most of the
members were Tories, He had the misfor-
tune to appear tor the Government in the
Malcolm land ease and he was never so
ashamed of a client as in that case.
(Laughter.) Although in pursuance of his
duty be tried to oppose the course of jus-
tice, he was glad that the Chief Justice
swept away all technicalities, stretched the
law a little bit and did justice. (Applause.)
The policy which dictated the iniquitous
conduct of the Kingston ministry in that
case had governed the conduct of the
Government ever since, Tney were afraid
the squatter would make a little money.
But wnat would it matter if he did? He
could not eat it. (Laughter.) Everybody
would he benefitted by the beneficial occu-
pation of our waste lands. (Applause.) If
Charles Cameron were not an obstinate pig
he would have taken the advice of Holder
and John Gordon, both of whom were
strongly opposed, he was sure, to the miser-
able policy of dealing with the squatter.
But Kingston was such an obstinate ass—
(laughter)—such a mule—(continued laugh-
ter) that he would not yield a hair’s
breadth even if the Angel Gabriel came and
said “ Charlie you must turn aside.”
(Laughter.) He would only put his ears
back and kick. (Laughter.) What did
they think about the hospital business ?
(“ They’re on strike,” and laughter.)
Kingston bad listened to the dictates of a
few Labor members and he had degraded
and dishonored the hospital. (Applause
and “No.”) Then what did they think of
the patron saint of the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union—(laughter and applause)
—and the social impurity society, Charlie
Kingston? (Laughter and "Saint Charles.’’)
He liked a man to be either a saint or a
sinner. He (Mr. Nesbit) was a sinner.
(Laughter and applause.) He was proud of
it. He gloried m it. He was a bigger
sinner than St. Paul, who called himself the
chief of sinners. (Continued laughter.) But
he was a good sinner. He had never injured
man or woman in his life. But, if they
pleased, Chailes Cameron Kingston was a
sinner at uight and a saint in the morning,
(Loud laughter.) And the next night lie
was a sinner again. (More laughter.) He
gave him warning a month ago. He said to
him “ Charlie my boy, I don’t appiove of
your policy, but if you truckle to those
miserable women—(great laughtei)—l shall
change sides.” And the very next week he
licked their boots. (Continued laughter.)
That was the la>t straw which broke tnac
camel's back. (Laughter.) It was a simple
fact that Kingston began well, but he had
got to think that he was bigger than God
Almighty. He thought that if he said a
thing it was justice, and he sat upon us with
that great tat unwieldy carcass of bis unit)
he well-nigh strangled us. (Laughter.)
They could Dot walk down King William-
street without his leave. (Laughter.) A
little while ago a man came here with £7OO
and Charlie put him in gaol and collated the
lot. (Laughter.) They had a telegram out
from Eoglann that he was an insolvent, and
it was not till he (Mr. Nesbit) appeared be-
fore the judges in chambers that the man
was allowed £3O out of the sum to defend
himself. You could not wear your hat on
the wrong side ot your head. (Laughter.)
It was despotism ; an evil despotism. It
began by being a good despotism, but
Kingston had become so surfeited with
power that he wanted to rule iu everything.
Had they seen the published platform of toe
W.C.T.U.? No tobacco, no beer, no wine.
And they wanted to raise the age of consent
to 99 years. (Loud laughter.) That was
too old. (Laughter.) Ninety-nine years
and no beer. (Renewed laughter.) Ho
said to Dr. Magarey recently, It seems to
me you want to prevent me having a glass
ot wine in my own house.” He replied,
5 es that is just what we want to do.”
("Rot.”) Yes; rot. Thatpulicy woulduproot
all the vines in Barossa and make it a howling
wilderness. (“No.”) They said so. ("No”
and hear, hear.) And they wanted them to
do without their pipes. “My conscience !’’
Woman is only a woman,
But a gooi cigar is a smoke.
TV. BARNET, P WINTER) GAWLER.
(Laughter.) This (holding up bis pipe) was
the only rival a woman really bad, because
she could not scratch its eyes out. (Loud
laughter.) Kingston did not smoke nor
drink, because it made him sick—(langhter)
—and therefore was a patron saint, holy and
chaste, of.the W.C.T.U. and Social Imparity
Society. (Laughter and “He is in good
hands,”) He (Mr. Nesbit) objected to these
Societies. (Hear, hear.) The minds of our
boys and girls were becoming tainted by
them. Woman’s protection ! What was it?
Her own honor and sense of chastity. (Ap-
plause.) He considered that men required
protection against prurient women and girls.
It was the law of life that consciously or un-
consiously in nearly all these cases the
temptation came from woman. No man
who was not nearly mad with drink would
assault a chaste woman. There was a re-
fusal which meant consent and a refusal of
indignation which no man dared to cross. If
a woman were chaste, and upright, and
honorable no man in all Australia would
dare to assault her. The speaker then dealt
with the,assault case against Dalby in which
be recently figured. He admitted that the
electors had a right to say, “ We will not
have a brawler to represent us.” He was
not a brawler. He was a gentleman, He
only whipped that porter because he mauled
him. And if there had been a lawyer on
the Bench, or two justices who could tell B
from a bull’s foot, they wculd have found
Dalby guilty and let bim off. (Laughter.)
j He did not assault Dalby until Dalby as-
saulted him. Would they not have done it ?
("No” and “Yes.”) The next railway
porter that put his hands on him would
| receive like treatment. (“ Why did you
not use your fists?”) If he had used bis
fists theie would have been no more Dalby,
(Laughter,) Fortunately he did not lose his
temper. He never did. (Laughter.) But
be had it fiom Mr. Dawe, a fishmonger in
the Central Market, that his clerks were
always complaining about Dalby, and a lady
had told bim no woman went in without
being insulted by him. If he had known
what he knew then he would have given him
a hammering. (Laughter.) He was sorry
he had not given him more, because he de-
served more. He repeated that he had
never done man or woman an injury in his
life. (“ You ran the women down just
now.”) Ran them down ? He adored them.
(Laughter.) There was no man in the
world who had a higher veneration for
woman. (Laughter.) What were they
laughing at? Let the man who laughed
stand up. There was no man in the
world who had a higher veneration for
woman in her proper place, the fireside.
Ho believed in the Bible and it said to
woman "Thy desire shall be unto thy
husband and thou shalt serve him.” It was
j also said “ A whistling woman and a crowing
hen aie neither good for God or men.”
(Laughter.) In her proper sphere woman
| was an object of worship. (“Superior to
man.”) Superior to mau, certainly. He
| was opposed to woman’s suffrage. He
thought her place was at the side of her
husband. (“ The question is bow are you
1 going to keep her there?” and laughtei.)
A woman was out of place cackling and
strutting about the place attending these
woman’s unions. (Laughter and applause.)
A few crowing hens ran about the streets
and said they were going to have the same
rights as men. They would not bo worthy
the came of men to submit themselves to the
petticoat governmentof afew unsexed women.
Hefeareuhehad already given them too much
notice. But be was indignant that they
should call themselves Christian. A man
said to him the other day “Will you sign the
pledge?” He replied "Certainly not.” It
was not Cunstianity. Then in speaking of
the wine made by Christ be said it was un-
i fermented must. (Laughter.) He replied
“Jesus Christ was a gentleman, and no
I gentleman would give bis guests that rotgut
stuff.” (Loud laughter,) What would Mr.
Martin or Mr. Harris say if be invited them
to his house and then gave them unfermented
must? (Laughter.) They would say “ You
are nut a gentleman to give us that adjective
stuff ?” (Laughter.) These people were
wiser than the Creator. What was the
i remedy for drunkenness ? He denied that
Australians were a drunken race. (Ap-
plause.) It was a wicked lie. The drunk-
ards were the imported element. It was a
very rare thing amongst the native Aus-
tralians. (“Not rare enough.”) Quite so.
Ho liked a man who could take his glass of
wine, and have a jolly time occasionally,
(Laughter.) He would nut support Sunday
closing. He objected to repressive legisla-
tion. It was not for Mrs. Nichulls to say
whether he should have a glass of wine.
Repressive legislation was not the way to
cure drunkenness. One hundred and twenty
years ago no gentleman went to bed without
being drunk, (" Gentleman ?’) Yea. they
generally went to bed drunk three nights a
week. (Laughter.) Was that so now?
GAWLER.
(“No.”) Why! Because of the greater
complexity and variety of color and interest
in modern life. That was why the middle
classes did not get so drunk. That was
why it was a disgrace now, when it used to
be a glory. They drank then because they
had nothing better to do. (Laughter,)
They did not know how to pass the time.
What was wanted to cure drunkenness was
not repressive legislation, but brighter lives
and happier conditions for our poorer classes.
(Applause.) Would they leave it to a lot
of women to say whether they should have
a glass of beer on Sunday or not ? He felt
very strong about it, because if they had
strict liquor legislation it would have just
the opposite effect to that which they hoped.
Mildura and Renmark were prohibition
colonies and were the most drunken places
in Australia. (“Question,” and “It is a
lie,” and “Go to Willaston,” loud laughter.)
Dr. B. W. Richardson, the greatest
authority on alcohol, had given it as bis
opinion that good liquor, ethylic alcohol,
never gave a man delirium tremens. Let
these temperance societies change their
tactics and see that good liquor was sold.
A publican or merchant who sold poisonous
liquor ought to be hung, (Laughter.) He
would string him to the nearest tree.
(Laughter.) Hanging was too good. Public
houses should be open half a day on Sunday
at the option of the publican. He trimmed
his sails for nobody. He asked for no man
or woman’s vote. Although it was bis
ambition to represent Barossa he asked for
no man or woman’s vote. No one did him a
favor by voting for him, but they did [him
au honor. If they considered him worthy
of their support they would vote for him,
if they did not consider him worthy they
would vote for the other fellow. (Laughter.)
When the Piemier announced bis policy be
would speak at Gawler again. He was
more of a strancer at Gawler than in any
other part of Barossa. His address that
evening had only been fragmentary and by
way of introduction ; then he would speak
on all the questions. He would also have
something to say about the strike. He bad
already asked for a statement from the men
and from Mr. Martin, but had not received
any from either, so he did not know any-
thing about it. He knew this, that in nine
oaaos out of ton, the uieu wore right, (Loud
Applause.) But this might be the tenth.
(Laughter and applause.) He did not know.
He invited the labor leaders, and he invited
the Hon. James Martin through himself or
Sir John Downer or any other member of
the firm to give him a statement of the
position from either side, and then he would
say what in his opinion was the right thing.
If the men were in the right he would
support them as he always did when they
were in the right. (Applause.) But if
they were wrong he would not support
them. (Applause.) And if his services as
a lawyer of ability, as a man of unquestioned
integrity, who desired justice above all
things, could be of any assistance in bring-
ing the lamentable trouble to an end he
could only say that he placed them fn'ly
and unreservedly at their disposal. (Ap-
plause.) If they elected him he woild
devote to politics the best of his energies.
He bad attained the summit of his ambtion
iu his profession. Next to Symou he vas
at the top of the tree, and he was row
prepared to place his profession second ind
his country first. He oould easily mak as
senior counsel on three days in the reek
£3O a week, and whether he made £3l or
£lO a week was a matter of indiffeienc; to
him, for £5OO a year was ample fernim.
(“I should think so.”) He only waited
more in order that he might help his fiends.
Barossa, with its various industries and
natural advantages, was entitled to be con-
sidered the premier and leading distritt of
South Australia. (Applause.) The great st
man who had ever visited South Austrah
Henry George—(applause)—told him tha.
these colonies reminded bim of those small
communities in Greece, which were the light
of the world. If Australia was the Greece
of the world South Australia was the
Athens of Australia. (Applause.) He
thanked them for the patieat and attentive
hearing they had given him, and hoped to
be similarly favored waen he visited them
again, (Loud Applause)
In reply to questiois Mr. Nesbit said he
was iu favor of payuent of members ; he
was not in favor of ai increase of the land
tax unless an exert) n.ion of the price paid to
the Government were made; if we could
relieve the farmer by taking off customs
duties and iucrersing the land tax to Id. in
the £ be would do so ; he was against the
sale of Crown finds ; he opposed the Mort-
gagors Liability Bill, and was in favor of
reducing the nmuber of legislators ; and he
was iu favor of a capitation grant to Roman
Catholic schools.
A vote of thanks was accorded the candi-
date on the inotio? of Mr T. O. Joses,
J.P., seconded by Mr. Frank D. w Mims.
In reply Mr. Nesbit said that w.
was elected or not, he hoped Baross,
! have its fair share of representation.
| not always had it in the past.
E. Fariss Nesbit, spibornc Chambers,
