

THE
PRISON HULK
“SUCCESS”
OPEN DAILY.
FROM TEN A.M. TO TEN P.M.
The oldest and only remaining Convict ship of Victoria in the
Early Fifties.
ADMISSION ONE SHILLING.
CHILDREN UNDER 10 HALF-PRICE.
ADELAIDE:
SHAWYER & Co., PRINTERS, CURRIE STREET.
1894.




CATALOGUE.
THE SHIP.
M|fof?AS built at Maulmain (now Moulmein), a rice settlement in
f/ British India, near the coast, and is constructed of solid teak,
a wood peculiar to the place. On looking at the top of the
main mast, it will be noticed that a slight indent was made during the
mutiny of the crew, who were Indians, at the time of the Indian
mutiny, the shot being fired from Fort William, in Calcutta. It is
the intention of the proprietors to exhibit her at London, and after-
wards in America. She was built as a first-class passenger ship, and
traded for nearly half-a-century as an East India trader, and has con-
veyed many thousands of passengers to and from England and the
Indies. Her first trip to Australia was made in the year 1849, when
she arrived with a full complement of emigrants. Returned again to
England, and made a second visit with another lot of emigrants in the
year 1851, when her crew deserted and went to the goldfields of
Victoria. Being left totally unmanned, she was sold at Port Phillip
to the Victorian Government, who speedily converted her into a prison
ship of remarkable strength. She is the only remaining convict ship
of Victoria, the other four, viz, the “ President,” Lysander,”
“ Sacramento,” and “ Deborah ” being sold and broken up, this being
the restriction placed upon them, but the “ Success ” was sold without
that restriction, hencQ her being on exhibition to-day.
UPPER DECK-BOW.
1. The Compulsory Bath. —The compulsory bath or
“ Coffin’ ’ was used for refractory prisoners who were unwilling to con-
form to the regulations of the ship with respect to their “ toilet.”
They were placed therein, and sea water was pumped on three or four
at a time from the ocean, besides being scrubbed by the warders from
the top with the aid of a long-handled brush. This was a practice
invaribly performed each morning, as there were always some of the
prisoners to be washed by force, to say nothing of the fun experienced
by the warders, who enjoyed the “ coffin soaking ” of the prisoners.


2. The Galley.— The exact position of the galley when in use
as a convict, ship.
3. Windlass. — This is the original windlass of the ship, and
has fully served its purpose, although as sound to-day as it was when
built.
4. The Sentry boxes. — Immediately over the forecastle and
behind the figure-head will be noticed the sentry-boxes, where two
warders or police were constantly stationed for four hours duty night
and day, io order to watch the gang ashore, and also to keep away
from the u sacred or holy ground ” any intruder within the prescribed
limit.
5. The Wheel. — This wheel was used for two purposes :
firstly, the lowering below to the prisoners their food morning, noon,
and evening ; but also for bringing on the top deck, in a cage, for
exercises, such prisoners as were in solitary confinement, and who were
unable to get to the top unless raised by the wheel, as their irons were
of such a weight as not to allow of their being able to walk with the
addition of the punishment ball, which alone weighs 72 lbs., and the
chain attached 8 lbs., total 80 lbs.
6. The Hatchway. — With the exception of the iron stanch-
ions surrounding it, is truly original.
7- The Main-mast. —This is the original mast of the ship
which was built in British India, in the year 1790,at Maulmain, a rice
settlement near the the coast. Like the whole of the ship it is decidedly
good. If, on looking up this mast, near the band at the top will be
noticed a slight indent. This was caused by a cannon ball striking it
at Calcutta during a mutiny which arose there.
8. The Old Pump. —The original and only pump used in the
ship. Previous to her departure from Melbourne the ship had not
been pumped for the space of six months.
9. Improvised Armour and Headgear, worn by Ned
Kelly at Glenrowan, weight 92 lbs.
10. Leg-irons worn by all prisoners, heaviest being 35 and
40 lbs weight.
11- The Original Bell with inscription. When Edgar
Allan Poe wrote his poem “ The Bells,” he might have added to the
list The Prison Bell, and truthfully might have said —“ What a world
of melancholy its melody foretells.”
12. The Officers’ Quarters, 1852.— The office on the star-
board side was the superintendent’s room, whilst those abaft and on
the port side were for the accommodation of the warders.
13. The Officers’ Bath is on the starboard side in the
quarter gallery, and is as it was built in 1790. The port quarter
used by the officers for accommodation purposes.


MIDDLE DECK.
BOW.
HENRY POWER —Otherwise 11 Harry ” Power, alias John-
son, was a bushranger, audacious and daring He was a native of
Waterford, Ireland, and arrived in Victoria in 1848. In March, 1855,
two troopers met him at Daisy Hill, near Maryborough, and calling on
him to halt, accused him of stealing the fine black horse on which he
rode, and (the colour of the horse corresponding) they insisted that he
must be the outlaw for whom they were searching, viz., Captain
Melville, and attempted to arrest him. Power’s explanations being
disregarded, and his offers to produce receipts refused, he made a
determined resistance. Revolvers were drawn by the police, shots
were exchanged, a trooper fell wounded and Power escaped. A week
after he was secured and sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment for horse
stealing and shooting with intent. While on the “Success” he was
most daring and desperate. He was conspicuous as being implicated
in the Stevens and Melville rush, and when on his trial escaped the
gallows by a legal quibble. Being again returned to the “ Success,”
he suffered two years and half of its cruel discipline. Shortly after
he was removed to Pentridge, from whence he escaped unnoticed (though
within gunshot of armed sentries) on 16th February, 1869. On May
7, he robbed the mail coach near Porepunkah, in the Ovens district
and afterwards, single-handed, held up the Buckland coach within
five miles of Beechworth. In August, 1869, £5OO reward was offered
by the Victorian Government for his arrest. He was captured by
Superintendents Nicholson and Hare and Sergeant Monford while
asleep in a guayah built in a cave in a mountainous part of the
Glenmore run, at the head of the King River, Victoria, on Sunday,
June 5 th, 1870, the rain descending in torrents the while. By his side
was a six-chambered revolver, and a double-barrelled gun capped and
loaded hung within easy reach On being conveyed in a cart to prison
he seemed flattered by the curious crowd that followed, and he even
held his hand-cuffs aloft to attract attention. He expressed disappoint-
ment at the trial that he had not died fighting , and informed the Judge
that “ If he did not draw it mild he would return the compliment
should he meet him in the bush.” He was sentenced to 15 years
imprisonment on three charges of robbery on August 2, 1870. A
redeeming feature in Power’s career was that he never harmed one of
the weaker sex. Excellent behaviour and the fact of his health failing,
gained him his freedom after having served the bulk of his time.
As a free man he was engaged by the former owners of the “ Success”
to be of interest to visitors to the old hulk, and the old hulk was
always of interest to him. His ill health preyed upon his mind, and
having wandered away, was shortly after reported to have been found
drowned in the Murray, near Swan Hill, 7th November, 1891.


ANDREW GEORGE SCOTT, alias Captain Moonlight,
was a man of dauntless courage and a most notorious scoundrel. He
differed from most in that he possessed a good education, being quali-
fied as a surveyor and civil engineer. He was born in 1845, oi
Protestant parents, at Down, Ireland. Arrived in New Zealand in the
“ Black Eagle, early in the sixties, and served in the volunteers in
that colony from 1861 to 1867. In 1868 he arrived in Sydney, and
two years after began his criminal career by serving a sentence of 18
months for forgery and uttering. On the 23rd July, 1872, he was
sentenced to 10 years for robbery under arms in Victoria. His conduct
in prison gave ample forecast of his subsequent criminal career. He
was punished for no less than 22 breaches of discipline, two of which
were violent assaults ; one on Chief-warder Kelly and the other on a
fellow convict. On the 17th February, 1877, he actually had the
temerity to bail up” the officer in charge at Pentridge, threatening
to murder him with a knife with which he had armed himself, and
demanded his watch and chain without delay.- He then retired with
his plunder to the bathroom, warning the warders not to come near
him, as he was well armed and well victualled for a few days.” For
this freak he obtained extra imprisonment. Upon his liberation, in
1879, he gave a series of lectures in the Temperence Hall, Melbourne,
on his prison experiences, which were a financial failure. He is next
heard of as a leader of a gang of desperadoes, who stuck up and
robbed the Bank at Egerton. The police were soon on their trail and
encountered the gang at Wantabadgery, where a bloodthirsty skirmish
took place, which resulted in Senior-constable Bowen and two of the
bushrangers being shot dead. Moonlight and Kogan, the only other
survivors of the gang, were executed at Darlinghurst Gaol, Sydney, on
the 20th January, 1880. The former wished to make a speech, but
Pogan was stolid and indifferent, and there, standing on the scaffold,
with white caps drawn, they shook hands, and were instantly afterwards
launched into eternity.
DANIEL MORGAN —Will ever be remembered as a crueb
brutal ruffian, standing almost alone amongst bushrangers for cool
audacity and unfeeling ferocity. For the most part, his plunderings
and murders were perpetrated single-handed. He possessed the
solitary instincts of a prowling beast of prey. In a word, he com-
mitted no less than 10 robberies underarms, plundered three mails,
wounded four and murdered three men. On January sth, 1864, the
N.S.W. Government offered a reward of £SOO for his apprehension.
He replied by overtaking Police Sergeant McGinnity, robbing him of
his horse and fire-arms, leaving him lifeless on the road. The reward of
£SOO was then doubled. John McLean and Sergeant Smith (who
received fatal wounds from the merciless miscreant) were the next
victims, and then the reward for him, dead or alive, was increased to
£1,500. In J 865 he crossed the Murray, and stuck up the station of
Mr. Evans, of Whitefield, Victoria. With a revolver in each hand
and four others in his belt he ordered his horse to be brought, and,
mounting it, deliberately turned and fired indiscriminately among the


persons he had assembled, a ball passing clean through the hand of a
man raised in protest. Teamsters were bailed up all along the line
of route to Wilton. On April 9th, emboldened by previous successes,
he visited Pecchalba Station, 20 miles from Wangaratta, owned by
Mr.McPherson. Having made prisoners of all he fourjd on the station,
he helped himself to a hearty meal, having ordered a lady to play for
his gratification on the piano the while. Ho attended to his toilet
with great care, hut all this bravado cost him his life. On his arrival,
a servant girl, had slipped away unnoticed 'and communicated with
the police. Morgan having packed up everything of value, was leaving
when he found every avenue of escape cut off by a cordon of 28 troopers
and armed settlers. Goaded to desperation, yet daring as ever, he
was hurrying to the paddock to secure the fleetest horse, when John
Quinlan, a station hand, fired point blank at him, the bullet going
clean through the body. He fell yelling and cursing and died in great
agony. At the inquest the jury returned a verdict of justifiable
homicide.
THE TIGERS’ DEN.
MIDDLE DECK-STERN.
PRICE’S MURDERERS.
JOHN CHESLEY— Was of the Ohruch of England per-
suasion, a carpenter by trade, but with all the low-bred instincts of a
criminal. He arrived in 1841 as a prisoner in the “ Eliza,” but
shortly after completing his sentence, was found guilty of assault with
intent to rob. He was then sent to Norfolk Island from whence he
escaped and came to Victoria. He made a most daring attempt to
escape from Pentridge in March, 1855, but was recaptured about 3]
miles from the gaol by a band of settlers who had joined the warders
and police in the chase. As a carpenter he had been engaged repairing
the warders’ quarters, when one morning, he boldly mounted one ot
Mr. Price’s horses, and with his tools in his hand attempted so pass
the armed sentries as if he had leave from the Inspector General.
Einding himself challenged he rushed through, running the gauntlet
of the prompt firing from every direction. One bullet went through
his hat, another grazed his face, wliile his jumper and shirt were
riddled with shot. He was slightly wounded, and was sentenced to a
term on the hulk “Success” in 361 b. irons. He was tried for com-
plicity in the murder of Mr. Price in 1857. During that memorable
trial he conducted his own defence, pointing out very ingeniously
where its different points did not agree, and after thanking God for
moving the hearts of the jury in favor of his fellow-prisoners, he
boldly asserted he had neither hand, act, or part in the murder.
This statement being totally at variance with the evidence, he was
executed on April 30th of the same year at the early age of 32.


FRANCIS BRANNIG AN— Alias “ Bragan,” was born at
Birr, Ireland, in 1814. Transported to Tasmania by the “ Tortoise”
for a trival offence in 1842 for 14 years. Crossed the Straits to
Victoria in the “Mary” in 1854, became notorious through being
concerned in four robberies in the Maryborough district, and, though
committed for trial, escaped from custody when en route to Castle-
maine. He was wounded by the police sentry at the time and £IOO
reward was offered by the (Government for his arrest. On the 14th
April, 1855, he was secured at BuUarook Forest, Victoria, in company
with five others, known afterwards as Brannigan’s gang. They were
all sentenced to 15 years, first three years in irons, for numerous high-
way robberies. The leader, being a violent ill-tempered ruffian, was
ordered to a special cell on board the “ Success,”wvhere he afterwards
led the wild mob that murdered Mr. Price in 1857. He was the first
man to attack the Inspector General, whom he caught in his arms and
hurled to the ground when the rush was first made. Of the seven
men executed for the crime, April, 1857, Brannigan alone admitted
his guilt. On the hour of his execution he recognised his former
captor, Inspector Stony, amongst the crowd assembled at the foot of
the scaffold, and bowing, wished him “ a very good morning.”
WILLIAM BROWN— Was a mere lad, being scarcely 19
years of age. He arrived in Victoria in 1852 as a free seaman in the
“ Helen,” who had worked his passage out to the colonies. He
deserted his ship, and on finding a mate went to Forest Creek gold-
fields. Being unsuccessful at the diggings he and his mate started a
downward career, for they were implicated in several robberies with
violence. He was secured and received a sentence of seven years.
He was one of Mr. Price’s murderers, and was executed on Wednesday,
April 29, 1857. In height he was sft. lin., of slight frame, fair
complexion, with brown hair and light grey eyes. He was born in
Glasgow in 1838. He had been brought up to the sea, and was a
Presbyterian. His appearance was far from repulsive.
RICHARD BRYANT —Or “Bryan Hennis,” was born in
Dublin in 1803. He had followed the trade of a sawyer, and was a
Roman Catholic. He arrived in Victoria by the “Moffatt,” in 1840,
and after committing several highway robberies under arms on the
Melbourne-road, near Keilor, in company with two others, he was
arrested, the other two getting away. After obtaining his liberty he
was on two different occasions convicted of robbery, for which he
received seven years. He was an old and hardened offender, in whom
reformation was perfectly hopeless. He was a most designing man,
and nothing ever made him afraid. He was one of the prisoners con-
cerned in the murder of Mr. Price, and was executed on the morning
of Wednesday, the 29th of April, 1857. In height he was sft. 11 Jin ,
of stout build, sallow complexion, dark brown hair and hazel eyes.
He was in his 54th year at the time of his execution. A more u tiger-
like ” demon never paced the boards of the Success,” and as for


being concerned in every deed of violence committed, he was one of
the ringleaders.
JOHN PRICE —Late Inspector-General of Penal Establishments
for Victoria, was also Chief Commandant of Penal Establishments
in Van Dieman’s Land. He was a son of Sir Rose Price, a Cornish
baronet, and was married to a neice of the late Sir John Franklin,
and at the time of his death left a widow and six children. He is
supposed to be the Maurice Frere of Mr. Marcus Clarke's depicting in
“ His Natural Life,” and is here shown as he appeared after the fatal
blows were struck on the afternoon of the 26th March, 1857, which
were committed by the prisoners along with him.
Cells No. 1 to 38 were for the better conducted prisoners or
those whose sentences were of a lighter nature than the lower deck,
and also for prisoners who were working ashore in the quarries after
having served a probationary term of two years in the lower cells.
The Store-room adjoins the “ tiger’s den” and is absolutely
as in use when in full “ rig ” as a convict ship.
LOWER DECK-BOW.
Captain PRICE commanding GIPSY SMITH to return to his
cell at the time of the rush of Melville and his comrades on the even-
ing of the 22nd of October, 1856.
3. Solitary Confinement Cell.
2. GIPSY SMITH was one of a number who, becoming
excited by the utterances made by the leader of the Chartist agitation,
at a meeting held on Kennington Common, looted a pawnbroker’s
shop in Southampton Row, London. He loaded himself with watches
and jewellery, and was promptly seized and sentenced to 12 years’
transportation in Yan Dieman’s Land. From thence he escaped, but,
being recaptured, was sent this time to Norfolk Island. He escaped
from there to Victoria in 1854. Having taken to bushranging, he was
soon standing his trial for murder, but the charge being afterwasds
altered to highway robbery, he received a sentence of 16 years on the
“ Success.” In confinement he was notoriously uproarious and insolent,
but under the influence of Mr. Ohaup, the Inspector-General who
succeeded Mr. Price, he became so changed as to be released on
ticket-of-leave, and was afterwards employed by Mr. Lang (son of the
Rev. Dr. Lang, Sydney), who often had occasion to entrust him with
large amounts of money, which confidence he never forfeited. Return-
ing to the Ovens district, he decided to marry, but living unhappily
he one night drowned his wife in a dam. Doomed to death, he tried
to defeat the law by cutting his throat with a jagged piece of razor
that he had successfully concealed in his boot. He had pretended to
be asleep with a rug over his head, when the warder at his side felt
the prisoner’s arm fall heavily on him, raised the alarm, and
obtained assistance. Executed on the day following, 22nd April;
1861.


3 and 4. Solitary Confinement Cells.
5. WILLIAM STEVENS —A native of Cornwall, England*
He was a partner with his brother in a brig which arrived in Victoria?
in the latter part of 1853, laden with timber. Soon after their arrival
the crew deserted. The brothers, however, managed to discharge
their cargo, and, having employed a watchman for the craft, started
also for the diggings, whither the crew had gone. The weather,
however, was against travelling, being awfully boisterous, and as their
dray was constantly “ stuck,” they, were a long time on the roads, and
as they were drinking freely, their stock of grog soon ran out. One
night they camped close to Sawpit Grully, near a party who were also
proceeding to the diggings. In a drunken state, William Stevens
advanced to the travellers, and demanded a case of brandy, either by
payment or otherwise ; but he would have it. The carrier from whom
the grog was demanded refused, which caused a quarrel to ensue, the
result being that firearms were used pretty freely. One of the
travellers was wounded On the next day he was arrested, and
brought to Melbourne, where he was tried for stealing brandy and
firing at with intent. He received a sentence of 10 years, and was
forwarded to the “ Success,” where he formed in a few years the leader
of the gang which made so desperate a struggle to escape with Melville,
and who was the one who struck Owens, the warder, and then, with
the stonecutter’s axe in hand, jumped overboard. His body was
never recovered.
6. RICHARD JONES —A native of Wales. He came to the
colony a free man, but on arrival started for the Ballarat diggings,
where, in a drunken brawl, a man named Conroy threw a tumbler at
him, injuring him seriously on the thumb. He was arrested, after
resisting violently, and was sentenced to seven years on various charges.
He was the prisoner who feigned sickness for the space of three
months for the purpose of effecting his escape, having secreted five
knives in his cell ; but after the expiration of three mouths, seeing he
had only managed to cut his way half through the ship, his heart
failed him and his plot was discovered.
7 and 8 Solitary Confinement Cells
9. HENRY GARRETT. —This remarkable man first gained an
unenviable reputation in 1855, by sticking up the Bank at Ballarat,
Victoria, and robbing it of £16,000, in broad daylight. On his escape
to London he was followed and brought back in custody and sentenced
to 10 years’ imprisonment on the ‘Success” In 1861 he went to
New Zealand, on ticket-of-leave, where he resumed his criminal career.
On one occasion, in 1862, he bailed up and tied to trees no less than 17
men in one day, for which he received another sentence of 10 years,
this time for robbery under arms. On becoming free he adopted clothes
of a clerical cut and a white tie, and carried a large Bible under his
arm, and while in this dress the police saw him enter a store by a dark


right of way and caught him red-handed looting the safe and loading
himself with valuables. Some 20 burglaries, of which he had been in
no way suspected, were now-traced to him, and he received in all 22
years’ imprisonment. He had much literary ability, having written and
published a very readable “ Essay on Crime,” and many other fictional
sketches. As a burglar he was ingenious in his disguises and astute in
his methods, and as a bushranger it is said of him that he never took the
life of any of his victims. He died a few years ago, aged 72, thus
finishing a chequered and misspent career.
10. OWEN SUFFOLK —Was a native of London. He was also
transported to Van Dieman‘s Land, but did not stay long there, as he
escaped and came over with nine others in the year 1853. Received 3
years in Victoria, for sticking up the mail coach running between
Melbourne and Geelong. The mail that day was a comparatively light
one, and he did not receive much recompense for his labour. Having
served his full time on that charge, he started on a second expedition,
in the way of forgery, for which he received 17 years. After doing a
portion of his sentence, he was allowed on shore to work in Wiliiams-
town, and during the whole of that time he was always concocting
“ rushes,” but the others (who were not pleased with him or his ideas,
he being at that time considered “ Price’s spy ”), were not to be caught
by him. He was eventually taken on board the “Success,” and never
allowed ashore. When he became free he went to Melbourne from
Williarastown, and in a few days wrote a book which was entitled “ The
Days of Crime and years of Sufferance,” for which he received a sum of
£4O. He was the most accomplished rogue that ever stepped into shoe-
leather, and whilst on the “ Success ” he was constantly concocting
something of a villainous nature. He afterwards went to London,
where he married a widow lady with an only daughter, and one day he
arranged with them for an outing on the water in a small skiff. This
was accomplished, and whilst on their way homewards he threw mother
and daughter into the Thames. He immediately proceeded to the house,
in order to secure all his wife’s property and deeds of a portable nature.
He was followed by a boatman who had witnessed the whole affair, and
from his evidence he was sentenced to 22 years’ imprisonment. The
pamphlet he wrote contained a unique and graphic description of the
early days of Victorian criminalty.
11 and 12. Solitary Confinement Cells
13. RICHARD HILL —A native of London. He was a well-
educated and pleasant-speaking man. He had been a lawer’s clerk in
London, but came to Victoria in the year 1803. When at the Bendigo
goldfields he committed several robberies under arms, sticking up several
small stores on the outside of the diggings. He was soon arretted and
sent to Melbourne, where he was tried ou the abo\e charge, and sen-
tenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. He was sent to the “ buccess, and


being clever at stone-cutting was alTowed on shore to work. He
was chosen by Stevens as one of the party in the rush, and was the
person to receive the first shot from the shore during the escapade, and
which is fully described in the pamphlet.
14. RICHARD ROWLEY A native of Limerick, Ireland,
born in 1817, convicted in his native town of attempted murder, sen-
tenced to 10 years’ transportation in Van Diemen’s Land. He escaped
from Port Arthur in 1804, and came to Victoria. After working at
the diggings a short time, he took to bushranging between Melbourne,
Bendigo, and the Black Forest. He was captured at the Lady of the
Lake Hotel, at Bulla, near Melbourne, on the road to Bendigo, nine
months after starting his exploits, and received in Melbourne, where he
was tried, a sentence of 22 years. He was sent to the “ Success,"
where he was confined four or five years. After the death of Mr. Price,
he was removed to Pentridge ; being there a few months he assaulted
one of the overseers (Kilmartin) by striking him on the head with a
pick-handle, at the same time pushing him into a quarry 30 feet deep.
Kilmartin’s legs were broken at the thighs, together with receiving a
deep scalp wound on the forehead. He was attended by the Chief
Medical Officer, Dr. McCrea, who pronounced his case hopeless. He
lingered, however, for a period of two years, but eventually recovered
sufficiently to be able to walk about, but he was the most pitiable object
to be seen at Coburg, or ever the lot of man to discern, although
previous to the assault one of the most upstanding of men. Rowley was
then forwarded to the Melbourne Gaol, and brought up for trial for
assault and attempted murder before his Honor Judge Barry. He was
sentenced to death, and was executed a short time after.
Necklets. —These were worn by prisoners as punishment for
insubordination, for 12 hours on bread and water. The handcuffs were
fastened behind their backs.
15 and 16. Solitary Confinement Cells.
17. JAOKY WILLIAMS —Or “ Big Black Jack,” as he was
generally known amongst those on the “ Success.” He was the
recipient of a sentence of 15 years in London, when he was sent to
Van Dieman’s Land, for robbing a store and safe-cracking. He did a
portion of his time there, when he escaped and came to Victoria, in
1853. He took to the roads immediately after his arrival in Victoria,
but was soon arrested on a charge of highway robbery. He was
serving this sentence on the “ Success ” at the time of the attack on
Mr., Price, and while the officers’ attention was directed towards the
outrage he broke his leg-irons and escaped, was re-arrested and
sentenced to wear the iron punishment band, as represented. He was
recognised by Mr. Price as an absconder from Norfolk Island, and it
did not require much insubordination on his part to receive an
additional three years from Mr. Price. He, however, served his full
time and became a free man, but nothing was heard of him afterwards.


18 to 21. Solitary Confinement Cells.
22. HENRY SMITH, alias “Shylock;” born in Dublin in
1818. Arrived in Sydney by the “ Sovereign,” in 1843. He was then
sentenced to a term of seven years, under the name of Christopher
Brennan. His time expiring, he sailed to England, but returned as a
free immigrant 1847, by the “Coromandel,” and was subsequently
convicted of horse-stealing, lie had but two months to serve when
he became conspicuous in the attack on Mr. Price, whose head he
shattered with a fearful blow with a shovel. In evidence at the trial,
it came out that during the melee , he stripped off his shirt (which was
one mass of blood), and burned it in the blacksmith’s shop adiacent.
Executed 28th April, 1857.
23 and 24 Solitary Confinement Cells.
25. Cell occupied by Power, the bushranger, while serving
14 years for horse-stealing and attempted murder.
26. JOHN YOUNG —Was a native of Cloford, Gloucester,
England. He was one of the Pentonville’s who were sent to the
colonies and landed quietly at Geelong. Went off to the diggings,
and there he settled down to a life of quietude for a considerable time,
but he again became anxious to gain the filthy lucre, as in an
unguarded moment on the pait of his comrades, he placed a quantity
of strychnine in the tea, but his plot was discovered. He was arrested
at Bendigo and sent to Melbourne, where he was tried by Chief
Justice Stawell, and received a sentence of 12 years aboard the
“ Success.” He was another of the most troublesome of prisoners;
he was constantly in trouble. He was kept on board the ship, never
allowed ashore. He, however, served his full time; but once free, he
again became as violent as ever, and was not long at liberty before he
committed one of the most atrocious of crimes. He was executed in
Castlemaine Gaol, 21st August, 1865. On the 28th December, 1864,
a miner named Graham, residing in Dayiesford, on his return from his
night shift, after 12 o’clock, found his young wife Margaret—to whom
he had been married only six weeks —lying on her bed with her throat
cut, and her legs hanging over the side of the bed. On the Bth of
the following January, Constable Brady arrested Young for this most
foul murder, and after a great deal of delay and difficulty, sentence of
death was passed upon him on the 28th July, 1865. Born at Colford,
Gloucestershire, about 1831 ; by trade a miner. He was also one of
the men tried for the murder of Mr Price, but he was acquitted.
27 and 28. Solitary Confinement Cells.
.29. WILLIAM JONES? otherwise “ Black B 11,” was a
native of Cardiff, Wales. He was transported from his native town
to serve a sentence of 10 years in Van Pieman’s Land for attempting
arson. He escaped from there, and came to Melbourne, but hearing
of the diggings of 1853, he, in company with two others, started for
Castlemaine and Forest Creek diggings. On their way they started


pilfering and sticking-up, but were soon captured. They were all
tried in Melbourne together and received various sentences. The
Judge gave a light sentence to the two comrades, viz., five years each,
but Jones received rather a severe one, as the Judge, taking into
consideration that he was an escaped convict, sentenced him to 22
years. He was also implicated in the murder of Mr. Price, but as
there was no evidence to prove he even struck a blow, he was acquitted.
After serving a long sentence, with as much solitary as would have
killed a dozen others, he was transferred to Pentridge. where he
served the remaining part, and became free.
30 DANIEL DONOVAN—Was a native of Ireland, but
was transported to Van Pieman’s Land for a period of seven years for
arson. After doing some of his time in Yan Pieman’s Land he was
sent to Norfolk Island, where he became acquainted with Mr. Price.
Whilst at Norfolk Island he was witness to one of the most revolting:
acts of humanity it was possible to see. The then Inspector-General
of Penal Establishments, a Mr. Machonochie, was rather of a humane
disposition towards the convicts and allowed them liberties of which
they were pleased, and won their respect. For instance, each prisoner
who was of good behavior was allowed a little kitchen garden around
his hut, besides when at work the liberty of a “ billy ” of tea at
dinner-time. When Mr. Price took charge and succeeded Mr.
Machonochie absolutely, he did not fall in with this idea, and quickly
confiscated the “ billy ” of tea, besides removing them to more remote
portions of the island, away from the gardens. This was the
beginning of serious acts of revolt and rebellion, and his life was not
safe on the island. In order then to put their plan into effect a man
named “ Jacky Jacky,” who was serving a sentence for life, murdered
one of the watchmen of a gate at the Stockade, and on Mr. Price
coming amongst them, although always on the alert, had to retreat
speedily amongst the ranks of the soldiers who were keeping guard
over them. After this an order was issued by the Government that
on the next occasion of a like nature the soldiers were to fire on the
miscreants. The prisoners implicated were tried within the gaol walls
by the visiting Judge, and 11 men were executed for this affray.
Ponovan soon after this managed to effect his escape, and crossed to
Victoria, but started a series of highway robberies, and on being
arrested and tried received a sentence of 16 years, which he served on
the “ Success.” He became a free man, but like many others who
had been in this “ ocean hell” found that his health was seriously
impaired, and he soon afterwards died.
31 and 32. Solitary Confinement Cells.
33. FREDERICK . MACDONALD-A native of
Glasgow, Scotland, arrived in Victoria about the year 1852; was
charged with forgery, for which he received a sentence of nine years
before Mr. Justice Stawell, when he was also sent to the “Success.”
On the evening of the boat’s affray he was discovered sitting in the


boat, having overheard the plot, and wishing to be free had secretly
hidden there. When Power discovered him he said to Macdonald,
“What are you doing here, and why did you not say you wanted to
come ? ” to which he replied, “ Oh ! dont throw me overboard, Harry,
for I want to get away ; and thinking that you were going to be free
I would like to be the same.” He was tried with the boat’s crew,
and returned to the “ Success,” where he served his full sentence,
34. THOMAS MALONEY — A native of Limerick,
Ireland. He was transported with another to Yan Pieman’s Land for
attempted murder, for a term of ten years ; escaped from Yan Pieman’s
Land early in 1854, when he came to Yictoria, and proceeded to the
Bendigo goldfields. He soon committed a series of petty robberies, but
being caught was sentenced for a term of eight years, and was sent to
the “ Success ”to complete it. He was one of the most insubordinate
of all the prisoners thereon, as his sentence accumulated to 14 years
for insubordination and breakages of prison discipline. He was one ot
the gang who assisted in the murder of Mr. Price, for which he was
executed with the others. The records state that he arrived as a
prisoner of the Crown in the “King William ” in 1840, and after
obtaining his freedom w r as convicted of felony. He was by trade a
butcher. In height he was sft. Tin., of stout build, pale complexion,
brown hair and grey eyes. He was 32 years of age, and anything
but prepossessing ; and at his trial after the death sentence had been
passed on him by Judge Barry for the’’murder of Mr. Price, requested
that he might be publicly executed.
35 and 36. Solitary Confinement Cells.
37- JOHN HEFFERNAN— Otherwise “ Big Jack ’ —
was a native of Kilkenny, Ireland. He was also transported to Yan
Pieman’s Land, and it is known he formed one of a party of 10 who
left a boat at Brighton Beach in which they had escaped. He found
his way to the Bendigo diggings, and was arrested for highway robbery,
receiving a sentence of 10 years on the “ Success.” He was nick-
named the “ Chief Justice ” of the ship and was generally respected by
his comrades. On the third finger of his left hand will be noticed a
ring which he was allowed to wear, a concession seldom given to any-
one, but as it was a closely fitting ring and a present from a friend he
was allowed to wear it.
38 and 39. Solitary Confinement Cells.
40 The Refractory Cell of “ CAPTAI N‘ J MELVILL E
—Frank Melville, or better known as Frank M’Cullcch at Fort Arthur,
and Captain Melville in Yictoria. Supposed to be a native of Glasgow,
Scotland. Two ladies who are still living and are advanced m years
stated when they saw him on bis trial at Geelong that he was the man
who acted as “ captain ”of the ship by which they came to ictona
(hence the application Captain), and who have lived ever since at


Point Henry. He was not long in Victoria before he took to bush-
ranging, and a small army of police were sent to capture him. He,
however eluded all their stratagems for a few years, but was arrested
in 1852. He was tried before Mr. Justice Barry on a charge of
robbery under arms. He boasted he had SO men in his gang and was a
constant reign of terror in up-country districts for nearly three years.
He received a sentence of 82 years, and was sent to the “ Success,”
where he performed so many acts of daring, together with the attempted
escape, and which is fully described in the pamphlet.
41 and 42. Black Holes,- -In which prisoners were confined
from 1 to 28 days on bread and water.
LOWER DECK-STERN.
THE NOTORIOUS KELLY GANG.
From 1878 to 1880 these desperate men continued a career of
lawlessness unparalled in any part of the world. To rid the country of
their presence, no less than 217 members of the police force, besides a
number of detectives and black trackers, all armed with the latest im-
proved weapons of war, were at one time on their trail.
Ned Kelly, leader of the gang, aged 27, executed Nov. 12th, 1880,
for shooting Constable Fitzpatrick in April, 1878, and murdering
Sergeant Kennedy and Constables Scanlan and Lonigan in October of
the same year.
Joe Byrne, aged 21, shot dead by one of fifty police who sur-
rounded -the hotel at Glenrowan, while he was toasting ‘‘Prosperity to
the gang ” at the bar of the hotel.
Steve Hart, aged 20, and Dan Kelly, aged but 18, whose charred
remains were found among the debris of the hotel after it had been
fired by the police, June 28th, 1880.
Shawyer & Co., Printers, Currie Street,
