

S\&. I
f ; '
•'i / ? * ‘"/"
r *7
■ €>OC
v --p e
* ■' ~
0 w
THE
11F gl B S l ’ M Js, la IE la ISa Wo
DECEMBER, 1877.
THE LAND QUESTION.
IS not done with yet. We intend to write mainly about Victoria, but the other
colonies are bound up in it.
Two years ago, corresponding for the Otago Guardian, and trickling out ink
over this Land Question, predicting in 1875 a terrible rumpus in 1877, which has
not exactly come off yet, but still we did not turn out delusive prophets altogether,
and perhaps set readers usefully thinking the thought floated up, “ After all,
was it a good thing for the Imperial Government to make over the Australian
lands to the local Governments, without any check ?” As we thought, we wrote,
and a certainly original paragraph resulted, which the Editor of the O. G. cut out,
and probably we would have done the same had the positions been reversed, for
no doubt the paragraph was crude, startling, and what might be termed
unpractical
Yet in this Austral Review, which has everything to gain and nothing to lose,
here we say is a virgin space, open for daring, which, be sure, can never be
emulated when the Austral Review has worked into the ranks of the snug and
comfortable. It will be like old Kean’s acting “ They applaud me now at Drury
Lane, and give me £2OO a week, but I tell you I used to act better round the
barns at 15s. ”
i f 8 till we can never be outre for its own sake. Truth is our divinity. Yet here
is a view which has never been presented. We are convinced that the Imperial
Government, and what does that mean ? did not abandon these rights to the
colonies after mature consideration. Well intentioned Englishmen are endeavoring,
at the present day, to gather up the lost skeins of the British Empire, including
Great Britain. The work is absolutely hopeless. Here are growths which
1 cannot be repressed at such an advanced stage. Practically, we have wrought into
I republics.
English statesmen, a quarter of a century ago, dealt with colonies in a very off-
hand way. They had no solicitude for them at heart. 'I hey were glad to shuffle
off responsibilities. Australia belongtd to the whole English people.
Ihe Victorian Land Act of 1862 was passed under like circumstances
to the Land Tax Act of 1877, designed to remedy the mischiefs commenced
by the former. In 1862 men said “we distrust this bill. It is too much of a
novelty. Our instinct declares that it will turn to mischief in some way not fore-
Js seen. It is not a complete rounded off measure, of which we can define the orbit.
U - >' . ■
V
V Sti
; Vw


It is a plunge, a leap in the dark.” As usual with such measures it directly
frustrated the purpose. Who fought against it ? The land-holders. Whom did
it benefit ? Them, almost solely, in a most unprecedented and overwhelming
manner.
Actually everybody says this Land Tax Act is a crude, angular one, and we add,
of the most dangerous type for those reasons. It is the great characteristic of
English statesmanship to distrust these hasty, ill-digested, bolted measures. We
are not to be called upon to point out how the mischief will ensue. When a
drunken man staggers about a crowded street, one is justifiably nervous for him.
The Victorian Land Tax Act is of the deepest interest to New South Wales,
which is following on our track. After all, we were surprised to notice the Act
being got through so easily. Perhaps the argument used behind the scenes was
that it would prove a frightful blunder. Although Sir Charles Sladen, Sir
Samuel Wilson, Messrs. Fitzgerald, Campbell, Graham, Bromell, and others,
were so bitter against the act, an idea flits across our mind at tM§ present writing
that they might not have resisted but for the knowledge that it was sure to pass.
There was something in the atmosphere of that council which left an impression
that the members had not all gone thoroughly into the bill, and decided without
the thought of ulterior consequences.
Probably Sir George Bowen telegraphed home to know whether he was to assent
off hand or not The telegraph is* useful at such times, for otherwise any doubtful
measure gets hung up for nearly a year.
Certainly the squatters of Victoria and Eiverina have a league to watch their
interests, and its head quarters is in Melbourne. No doubt there are skeins of
alliance extending all over New South Wales, and perhaps even to Queensland.
When pecuniary interests are touched, a critic need have no fear about imagining
the intrigue to be deeper than it is.
It is a pity that the Land Tax Act could not have been polished into a measure
which commended itself, if merely as a piece of machinery, to the judgment. The
violence of the Assembly, or rather of the electors, has prevented that. The
machinery appears to be generally condemned.
Sir Charles Sladen raised the objection that the liberty of the subject was invol-
ved in the povers of the Land Tax Commissioners They are to be able to
imprison for contumacy, and have quite the powers of a Supreme Court judge in
regard, that which Knglish law is very chary of giving, and only gives to men of
the highest standing and education. Now it is the spirit of true Democracy, if
that means liberty, to fence such powers about with extreme caution.
The Land Act of 1869 raised the Minister of lands above the Supreme Court
judges, and the Land Court is a queer place, with members of Parliament for bar-
rister, and plenty of fee§ goings oven if it be only a handy sucking pig or a turkey,
the latter of which is specifically on record in one published case.
M. tmile Montegut, in the Revue des Deux Mondes, has been treating,
in two articles, about Australia in a very sensible manner for a French-
man. T hat is to say, with reference to Australia, about which the French
cannot be expected to know so much as the English. It is many years since
any English review devoted such exhaustive papers to the A ustralian colonies.
Does not this fact show the hollowness of the United Empire agitation? M.
Montegut breaks up quite new ground in the Revue, and we venture to suggest
it is the healthy kind they should cultivate. He urges the general poverty of the
soil, which must cause its aggregation in large holdings. Nature has chalked
such out. Our Clarkes, Wilsons, Chirnsides, Macphersons, Robertsons, Austins,
will dominate.
For the first time in a European review, the British included, this Frenchman
explains the position of the selector.
It was quickly perceived that the debate in the Legislative Assembly on the


Closed Eoads question involved very important considerations. Whichever way
our Land system be looked at, it is, in short, difficult. The Victorian Legislature
has enacted that every square mile of land alienated, under the selecting pro-
visions, shall be bounded by a road on every side. But selectors have handed
over their holdings, in lumps, to the squatter, 'the roads are no good to him. or
anyone else. 80 he fences them in, with or without swing gates. Now the
democratic members want to lay down the principle that every square mile must
be bounded by its road, under any circumstances, that is to say all selected land
which has been mopped up. Mr. Higinbotham saw the force of this, and insisted
upon it last session, when the relative strength of parties was quite the reverse.
The Land Tax will not operate so disastrously as this provision, if it can only be
rigidly carried out. We do not approve of it, or of any measure of mere spite.
Mr Berry will be too sensible to attempt it. In fact no ministry would. It is
just a good cry for the democrat out of office.
Mr Longmore, the Victorian Minister of Lands, has not figured well in his
attempted limitation of interest on selectors’ mortgages, for attempted only we call
it, whatever he may think himself. He meant well. Any dealings with the Land
question, as it has become embarrassed, are like floundering in a bog. The ordi-
nary rules of statecraft and business have been set at defiance. Everything is to be
hand to mouth, dependent on individual judgment or honesty, from the Minister
downwards and selector upwards. Such are not the ties and sanctions by which
we desire to be governed, or which experience declared to have worked best in the
art of government. It may be eccentricity, but our weakness is for Law and rule,
basing the world of society upon the material world. The Victorian Legislature
has explicitly declared that the Supreme Court judges cannot be trusted.
The mere fact of the Governor assenting so readily to the Land Tax Bill proves
the slenderness of the tie which binds us to England. Is that bill conformable to
to the policy of the British Empire ? If the Empire were really one, and indivi-
sible, could such a measure be allowed in any part ? The loyalty of Australia,
and Victoria in particular, as an American remarks, is about as much as you can
put in your eye, and not see the worse for.
Where is it ? What is it ? Empty sentiment. Gas. Absolutely worthless,
if brought to the practical test of £s. d. We hoist our own flag over the
Cerberus to signify that she assists the British interests just so far as they square
with ours, and no farther. Not a sea-going ironclad ? We will be bound Com-
modore Hoskins would take her outside quick enough on an emergency, and that
is just the time in which we are prepared to declare she shall not go. Our loyalty
will never bear pinch or strain. The question of opening the Dardanelles to the
Russians concerns Australia vitally, as an English dependency. Otherwise it
don't. We act on the otherwise. Australia might contribute materially, without
feeling it, towards Imperial expenses, and coaid stand the whole cost of the finest
ironclad in Besika Bay. But this is not our game ; England knows it. Victorian
protection against British manufactures is significant enough. Our conduct
towards England always means that, with regard to the benefits of the connection,
we take as much, and give as little, as we can.
Mining on private property has been a legislative difficulty these twenty years
during which fifteen bills to deal with the subject have been introduced, and,
nearly all foiled by the Legislative Council, the Upper House, which so potently
represents the land owners.
The subject is intricate. All gold in the soil belongs to the Crown ; this has
been laid down by the Privy Council within the last year or two, in Winter v.
The Queen, &c., but it was the recognised principle before, as Sir John
O'Shanassy pointed out in the Assembly by quoting from the preamble of the
Mining on Private Property Bill of 1857. He says that all which has been paid
for hitherto by mining lessees to owners of land is the right of entry, but that is


a very nice point. Technically it may be argued, but actually we know it is not
so. It was not for the mere right of entry that old Jock Winter got £120,000
for land that cost him £4o—the immortal Winter’s Freehold.
STATES OF MIND.
THE mental student will fix upon the relations of men and women as his chief
key. The statement has even been made that some Russian we will
not say she dogs, were at the bottom of the present war. That has appeared in
print before now. With all our faith in the Duke of Wellington’s unvariable test
question for a scrape “ Who is she ?” we yet charitably think that the war cannot
by any means be traced to the old Adam through the old Eve. But wait till the
Memoirs come to be published, in a quarter of a century or more. Things will
Gl§§p QUt. One thing is certain, we are mere summer flies playing above the
shambles to-day.
In this paper we are going to dig the pen in deep, and fork up some new
ground. Or rather, we will only offer to drive a rough plough, and writers full of
information, the lack of which is our weakness, can teaze the stuff up, and lead to
more useful developments than are immediately apparent under our prentice hand.
In these matters there are hosts of skilful organ players, but they want someone to
give a turn at the bellows, which figuratively speaking, is our humble duty and
privilege, having some rough matter which may be of use in the market.
Now we have Dr. Balls-Headley twiddling roundYictorian Matrimony in the Mel-
bourne Review. What could a fashionable doctor say ? His writing was just on
a piece with a dash along of the high stepping horse and tilbury, to the admiration
or envy of Collins street. His practice lies in female diseases of the kidney and
liver, bound up as they are with womb diseases, for which ignorance, cloaked by
sanctity under Victorian Matrimony, is largely responsible.
This is disgressing, and we will make another excursion over Bent’s Contagious
Diseases Bill. There is much to be said on both sides, but no one can justify the
encouragement of ignorance.
Education will have to be remodelled, that is a fact. Conventionality hides
truth, nature, and instruction. Education appears to be mainly directed to ensure
failure in life. When we look back, it is disgusting. No good will be done until
all children are put on the same level, and instructed as human creatures, for
their work in life. Dr. Balls-Headley wants more marriages. Are there no
neglected children ? The social apparatus creaks terribly. The children of the
rich are spoilt, and those of the poor wasted.
Our mmd§ are identical in the important features, Aeting upon this knowledge
is how men secure power. T1 ey see how the moves are in regiments. The in-
experienced think every person is different. Hence arises a great charm in life to
be sure \ the mind is filled with pleasant visions, often dizzi y exalted. It is
mirage, smoke, glittering bubble. These are the illusions which require to be
smashed. '•he constitution of the world is stern and cold. When people feel
what they call happiness, they ought to put on a good discount immediately, and
never be satisfied until they return to the common level, in mind, because other-
wise there will be a reaction. We are preaching sound philosophy, founded on
the very essential nature of things. Stagnant and foul water shows bright,
variegated colors under the sun. Take that to heart. The analogies of nature
are perfect.
This is a cheerful philosophy too, not a cheerless one. We merely ask you not
to be captivated by the beauty of disease, but to reflect in your minds the clear
spring water. Try and make life even. The heights are perilous, and the
depths are awful.


Witnessing a stage play, and tired of the bareness which appears through the
painted sticks laid together to simulate a fire, referring hereby even to the
beauties of the scene and passion of the actors, we reflect. “ But this looks very
different to the youth, and even to the unaccustomed man or woman.” The play
fires them. It is something far more wonderful than any book. The calm
habitude of the mind is lashed up into waves. Now this is not bad. We want
more of it, but reason and discipline must preside over all. Otherwise passion is
the invariable mood of weakness.
As with the play, so with the world. A raddled harridan of Bourke street,
painted up, disgusting, almost kicked from the path like a rotten magotty bone,
an utter thing of contempt and loathing to ordinary acquaintances by sight,
becomes invested with heavenly charms in the eyes of a newly arrived sailor or an
ardent youth from the bush. Are not these all important questions in social
pathology ? You want a personage like the mind doctor to lay his iron grasp on
the wristi and arrest—the vicious ?—say rather the ignorant. The clergy, who wi'l
not think this word to be used so offensively as appears on the first blush, usually
paint vice in such a way as to invest with a subtle charm to be resisted. For
instance, a mere ceremony by themselves can make the distinction between virtue
and vice. Exploring min is so worked upon we find very ineffectual barriers, utter
cobwebs, against the assault of the evil agents which undoubtedly abound in the
world on every hand, so that to an observer who will not be content without
searching ultimate causes, there appears to be a persistent and inextinguishable
source of evil at work. Our hypothesis is that good and evil are constant quanti-
ties. Evil seems to possess itself of every new agency, in exactly the same pro-
portion to good as has been maintained from time immemorial. We roll up the
stone of Sisyphus, it tumbles again, and yet it is ever our duty to give another
heave.
The mind is like a musical instrument, with multifarious but not infinite stops,
as Hamlet puts it. Walk in Collins-street at mid-day. If you are sensitive, how
many whiffs of the mind's variety will communicate themselves to you. Yet it is
all one mind acted upon by circumstances.
As the fool thinketh, so the bell clinketh. Now it is the object of true
education to seize the real clink of the bell-
The soul is a fact, and it may be wounded, almost destroyed.
But let us take the other step back again to the sublime. The impression
under which we are educated is that, in ordt r to accomplish a great work, a state
of elation of mind is necessary. One fancies that the victors in a battle must
needs be those who are the wildest. But experience shows the reverse. The very
greatest things are accomplished by the coldest hands; in war, politics, business,
surgery. After the battle of Gettysburg numbers of rifles were picked up on
the field with from two or three charges to half a dozen or more, and one loaded
almost to the muzzle. Wellington's Despatches are most instructive.
“He that is ready to slip with his feet is despised by him that is at ease.'' It
has been our individual privilege to experience both. W hen one is under water
there is a state of mind, and another when one is above water. The same indivi-
dual will pass under these phases; aye, from one end of the gamut to the other.
Eich and poor, aristocrat and democrat, are the identical stuff. Each is irre-
sistibly driven to fight for his own hand. Therefore, place no trust in benevolence.
It is all there exactly when not wanted—superabundant, running over. Dear me,
why didn’t you come to me yesterday P
The great work of our minds is to freeze on to the boundless resources provided
by Nature for us to operate upon. That end is lost sight of in education. The
man who can hardly read or write will have a decided advantage in the future, if
things go as at present. A young mind is divisible into two parts—the educated
and uneducated. If the former has been perverted, the latter actually becomes the


stronger. Well, beginning at home, we feel that our cultivated soil has been
destroyed. We abandon it, confident that there is more strength to be got out of
the forests around. Every man and woman has aspirations, and the real secret of
power appears to be for these to be so irresistible as to crack up the whole trodden-
down and hard-baked surface of the mind, like the volcanic fires of South
America. Absurd as it may look, a person involuntarily asks—Am I myself ?
One who is satisfied only with feeling a resting place in “ things themselves, and
not the shows of things/' as Facon puts it, perceives that there is an eternal
antagonism between the community and the individual. The object of society,
pursued unrelentingly, is to cramp every young mind so that it will be like to
every other as so many bricks. The individual of will upsets society's apple-cart.
All nerves and no nerve, A paper wall will keep back thousands who come and
look at it, until one man comes straight and walks through. Thus with the con-
ventionalisms of life, meaning those which are not universal, and grounded on the
essential nature of things. We are hedged all round, say, with tinfoil bayonets, of
which just one is steel.
There is a practical belief held by each individual in his or her immortality.
We mean that they are never going to die. This is very useful from the common
point of view, keeping up energy; but from a narrow point of view, it requires
limitation. It is a favorite idea of ours that every individual ought to be lim-
bered up, so as to be taken out without any disarrangement. This is intimately
connected with states of mind. It is a great reflection upon an individual’s plan
of operations when the whole comes down with a clatter on the mere and likely
accident of his death.
OUR RAILWAYS.
SYDNEY will be connected with Melbourne by rail in about two years, but it
appears doubtful whether the connection between Melbourne and Adelaide will
be finished in five years. When Mr Gillies was Minister of Railways, Mr
Boucaut, the Adelaide premier, made overtures for concurrent surveys to the
border, but Mr Gillies said his surveyors were all engaged, and then the news
came that the South Australian government had decided on bold advances to the
Murray, in which direction they have since given alarm to Victoria, so that im-
portant changes in our own proposed lines have been mooted. It must be
admitted that Mr Gillies was at the time pinched in his operations by the lack of
duly qualified surveyors. The Victorian staff is always short, and the want must
be felt in a greater degree in New South Wales, South Australia, Queensland, and
probably New Zealand. In educating a good boy for a surveyor in Australia the
father cannot go far wrong. The demand will continue for many years, and,
indeed, it can hardly be limited from the present outlook.
What a bold stroke is that of South Australia, in beginning the-railway to Port
Darwin ! More power to them. It is of a piece with the electric telegraph across
the continent, for which Mr * odd, the South Australian Inspector of Telegraphs,
will be almost immortal in his line. Altogether we think that colony is really
going ahead more than any other in Australia, except Queensland. Their press
seems to burst with information, as if facts welled up so strongly that they could
hardly be told. Now there is a languid air about Victorian newspapers. Crossing
the straits what natural resources there are in that Island of Tasmania ! Why, it
is scarcely explored.
But this is not talking about Railways. A very ludicrous exhibition of
incapacity was made by the Victorian Legislative Assembly over the Railway


Construction bill, when they passed the line through Government Domain, simply
on the word of the Ministry, without independent examination. The Legislative
Council favorably contrasted with them, in taking evidence laboriously One can
rely better on a chamber which goes thus to work. While Members of the
Assembly were kicking their heels at the Mayor’s Fancy Dress Ball, for which they
adjourned, the Council, on the same night, was engaged until late making a
genuine inquiry into the < <overnment proposals. The Assembly deemed anything
of the kind quite superfluous. Old Bat-ism redivivus.
The Assembly showed up again most unfavorably over the Goulburn Yalley
line. We heard Mr Woods, the Minister of Railways, dilate in the Bouse upon
the superiority of the line which the Ministry had chosen, passing through Rodney,
on the west of Goulburn River, amidst the thick of the land selectors, although it
was a aood thing for squatter Winter too. Orr and Sharpe, the representatives of
Moira, on the east bank of the Goulburn, and divided by it from Rodney, made
evidently a forlorn hope of an attack, to secure the line for the east bank. Woods
wouldn’t hear of it. .the whole mass of the huge Government majority backed him
up, and was down on its good friends Orr and Sharpe. The fairness and conscien-
tiousness of Mr Woods, in giving a line to two such dogged Oppositionists as
Gillies and Fraser, the members for Rodney, was palpable. Yet he was persuaded
just to take a Sunday trip of inspection, under the tutelage of Mr Orr, while the
conscientious and Lord’s Day respecting Sharpe reluctantly stayed behind and
offered up prayers in chapel. The Minister was converted ! The whole majority
gave in too !
Now here are a precious lot of members. Every man of them had carefully
investigated the rival claims, and deliberately and conscientiously decided for the
West side. Every man of them was immediately converted with the Minister !
Almost a new Pentecost.
The Brothers Higinbotham, George and Thomas, are complete opposites,
except in the attribute of thorough gentlemanliness. Mr. T. Higinbotham, our
Engineer-in-Chief of Railways, is a conservative, and is identified with the
Victorian Railways, those enterprises which, on the whole, have been carried out
with honor, and the whole Gabrielli loan of eight millions, their foundation, was
not squandered.
Mr. Higinbotham’s report on his inspection of Foreign Railways has been even
laid on the table of the English House of Commons, but still we did not think so
much of it, and regard the trip as really valuable for the education of the mind of
our Engineer, who is such an immensely valuable factor; indeed, no influence in
the department is comparable with his. He just furbished up the report because
it was expected. The most interesting parts were the least pretentious.
He visited the United States, Canada, Great Britain, parts of the Continent of
Europe, and just glanced at India, where he would no doubt have spent a longer
time had he begun at that end of his journey, for Indian railways must he power-
fully instructive, from the Australian point of view. The great main line across
the Continent, from Calcutta in the north-east to Bombay in the west, occupying
three days’ journey, and graphically referred to in Jules Verne’s Around
the World in Eighty Days, is the latest big thing after the Pacific Railway, which
takes six days to rattle over, from N.Y. to Frisco. There are huge railway works
in India, such as the great bridges over the Ganges, Jumna and ( henaub, the last
named of which Mr. II reports upon English capital built the railways, with
guarantees of interest in some cases from the Government —an idea opposed to
theoretical political economy, and which is said not to have worked well. Still, we
have to progress somehow in the world, catching at this and that, like monkeys
jumping in the trees; and railways were indispensable to India. Same here—the
Government had to break through somehow, and make railways. From
Queensland protests come against the tremendous sales of land made


along the new railway lines. Of course there will be inequalities, as everywhere
through life, but we must drive ahead. Action can hardly ever be on a pure
mathematical basis Facts have to be arranged as best possible on exigency.
Mr Higinbotham gave much attention to America. We have a notion that he
has been frustrated to some extent by our instability in Governments. He sent
out the two long saloon carriages, first and second class, manufactured by Bushe
and Co., Troy, N.Y. State. Mr Woods, the new Minister of Railways, wanted his
own carriages. We allude to his short tenure of office in 1875. IS'ow Mr Woods
is back, with the prospect of being rooted. The bad feeling over the Oakleigh
connection, through Government House Domain, appears to indicate that there is
not that smoothness in the departmental cranks and bearings which might be
wished.
Mr Higinbotham found 70,000 miles of railway open in the United States. He
praises the engines and the drivers, and must have included in his favorable pur-
view gentlemen who joined the recent mammoth Strike. He saw the wonderful
bridge over the Mississippi, at St Louis costing two millions sterling, or ten mil-
lion dollars.
Duffy said the opening of Gippsland Railway would add a new province to
Victoria. This will be a rare line for excursionists. We never feel much desire
to go for a trip along the Ballarat, Sandhurst, or North Eastern line, t ither it is
bare plain, stony perchance, or bleached and skeleton woods. 1 ’ne fancies a plunge
into the Gippsland forests will be romantic. There is an inexpressible attraction
about the district, a sort of virginity.
The Hobson’s Bay Railway Company has not managed so badly, despite of the
abuse lavished on it. They have never killed anybody, during the 23 years since
they took down their shatters. For many years past there has been no accident to
speak of.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
SAGACIOUS persons remark that our institutions are generally estimated in an
inverse ratio to their real comparative importance. Thus, in fact, the main
springs are eminent individuals, after them, in practical domestic affairs, come the
municipal bodies, thirdly the Parliament, and lastly the ornamental Governor.
Mr Laurens, who has managed somehow to get into the Assembly, evidently
acts on this view with regard to the innportance of municipalities and legislatures.
He watches there to see that the bu.rrys ”as typified by his beloved Hotham, are
not infringed upon, and w T e never saw/ a more extraordinary instance of how the
driest materials can be worked almoslt into poetry by the glow of sympathy and
imagination. When he rises amidst; a scornful or wondering House, we reflect,
<f After all, what is Parliament compared with a Public Wurruks Commytee?” and
we not sure that A, K. Smith is not imbued with the identical sentiment, and is
burning to say at times, “ Pitch this monsense about privileges and so forth over-
board ! Get to work ! Resolve ouirselves into the Legislative, Public Works,
Finance, Health, Defence Coirmittoses. Let those committees deliberate and
report. Let the House adopt the reports, or refer them back to the ‘commytees/
Bring in Fitzgibbon as hecorder of Piarliament. I will open proceedings myself,
with my scientific lecture on the Bnoad versus Narrow Gadge of Eluestone, and
Hand-Brokken versus Machine-Brokken Metal, as delivered before the Royal,
society of Vic f oria, and which I ventiure to say is the only really practical scientific
paper they ever had amidst their jargon about moons, comets, protoplasm, evolu-
tion, and all that, ”
Mr Nimmo would second the mawition. “Mr Speaker—Sir, I regard it as a
glorious sign of the times that the City Council has obtained three such zealous


representatives in this Assembly as Councillors A. K. Smith, Carter and Story;
that the Hotham Council has secured my nobly-modest and truly-progressive retiring
friend Mr Laurens. Sir, I regard it as an inestimable privilege to breathe the
same air with these men—although I would prefer rather better ventilation.
(Laughter, in which the hon. member joined heartily). Regard, sir, the model
burrow of Emerald Hill. I say, sir, it is a model for this Parliament, and for all
Parliaments until the end of time, although I say it who am bat a humble member
thereof; but, sir, if a Cromwell perchance stood in this chamber at this moment,
exactly where I am standing, to what would he bend his energies ? to what would
he say, “ take away that Bauble ?” Why, sir, to spread the eaglewings of the
segis of municipal institutions, which, a small cloud now, will cover the Parlia-
mentary sky like the sound of rushing waters. Sir, I have a profound belief in
municipal institutions. I regard that Legislative Council but as the dry and
putrid Bone Mills, which the model borough with my humble assistance swept
away to limbo.”
Mr. Fitzgibbon, Town Clerk and Recorder of Melbourne, has issued a
pamphlet, in which he advocates the above views in a soberer form. He may yet
see a party in the Legislature supporting him,. Mr Kerferd, as Attorney-General,
gave a considerable amount of quiet work to* the Local Government Act, which
has run with tolerable smoothness during the last two or three years. The Par-
liament of the day was too rash in abolishing tolls. How is it that the Legis-
lative Council failed to interpose a veto, which would have greatly raised them
in public estimation throughout the country districts ? Twice the provisional
grace allowed to the toll system has run out, and found the Legislature quite un-
prepared with a substitute. This is not dignified or creditable. Surely the
Assembly has had plenty of leisure. A money bill cannot originate in the Legis-
lative Council, or otherwise they would doubtless have made better use of the
time. The proposed wheel tax was a fiasco, and regarded as out of the frying-pan
into the fire.
Another most unsatisfactory point concerns the Government endowments to shires,
which now include the Road Boards, abolished under the Local Government Act.
Here, the Legislature appears to have failed in statesmanship. We are patching and
patching. A determination was made, and expressed in the Act, to refine away
the whole endowment system by degrees, but practically, it appears destined to go
on, more especially as the Country Party has got its head up, and its back up.
An excellent feeling has grown up among the Municipal bodies of Victoria,
extending also to those of New South Wales, South Australia, Queensland,
Tasmania, and New Zealand, for communications are often passing. Municipal
buildings, streets, culverts, lamps, abattoirs, general economy in business, and
numerous other matters, are continually being inquired about. A newspaper
paragraph on some improvement evokes communications from the most distant
quarters all over Australia and New Zealand. Then it is not an uncommon prac-
tice for a Council to issue circulars all round, on a point, or points, of working
which they desire to have elucidated. The form, perchance, is : Would you
kindly answer the following questions ? How do you manage when ? and so
forth. Thus improvements percolate.
Our local Governments, the phrase is new but not inappropriate, have done
remarkably well in the erection of p üblic offices, in fact, far better than the central
government, with its abominable hashes. Look at City Hall, which was struck
complete at a blow, that is to say in one course of building, straight off, without
pause, from the pick and shovel work in the clay to fixing the hollow 30 foot iron
pole aloft on the tower, for the English Mail Flag, or the big White Corporation
Banner, faintly emblazoned with the ship, the whale, the lamb, emu, and kangaroo,
a mysterious and unique flag, invented when time was—we don’t know.
Contrast the Town Hall with Parliament House, and that is all we ask you to


do. The suburbs of Prahrau, Richmond, Hawthorn, Eitzroy, Hotham, &c., have
their Town Halls, equally creditable, Hotham is the most elegant, and the
best situated. A, first class site appears to be a particular inspiration for an
architect. Yet nothing here beats the Melbourne Post Office, up to the roof.
THE GERMAN EMPIRE.
GERMANY is the keystone of Europe for the time being, replacing
France—that is to say, Bismarck for Napoleon lll.—Russia, England, rrance,
Austria, Italy, Turkey, all radiate from Germany, on European policy. We are
intense opponents of war, in any shape, but must say that Hngland appears to fall
back on Christianity and benevolence when she is afraid to fight. Why did not
England assist Denmark, Austria, and France ? Because she was too weak. Her
gains and riches are spent in indulgence, which is sapping her to the core. England
crawls comparatively feebly after Germany in military organisation. It was said
that Gppoo, the son of Hyder Ally, owed his defeat, overthrow, and death at
Seringapatam, at the hands of the British, to his abandonment of the native style of
fighting, and adoption of French drill and military customs. British generals
could do nothing against Hyder's cavalry, which was practically abolished by his
son.
We hate Bismarck, in common with a majority in Europe and a strong minority
in Germany. Europe will heave a big sigh of relief when he departs peacefully
from this orb. An overwhelming personality has been applied to terrible
mischief.
The modern Germans suggest the ancient Romans, and obviously emulate them,
not only in citizenship but also in domination, for Bismarck is only halt way in
his schemes ; in fact, they are without bounds, for whatever he appropriates will
only be a leg in to something else, and men of his gigantic calibre never stop until
brought up by equal force. Holstein, Sadowa, and E'edan are steps to Holland and
the ruin of Austria, which is as ticklish as a great power ever was. Bismarck's
game is not half played. His pawns are the lives of other men, about which he
is as unscrupulous and unsparing as Napoleon.
Bismarck's course has been one of fraud. He deceived Austria and France, and
will deceive England and Bmssia as sunartly if he has the chance. He is not to be
trusted for an inch. The Emperor of Russia knows that in the present crisis
Bismarck is only using him. if they overawe Europe between them, it will merely
be to fall out, as Prussia and Austriai did. Captain Burnaby, in his Ride to
Khiva, refers to the hatred of Germamy among the native Russian officers, who
have no ill-will against England, althouigh they believe their destiny is to fight that
power over India. “ Thank heaven !'' ejaculated the Czarewitch, when in a roll of
German names among his officers a Popanoff turned up, for Germany has
furnished a host of officers, in past yeans, to the Russian army.
Bismarck's attacks upon the church and the press are in the identical spirit of
Csesarism. We heard a Church of England clergyman, in Melbourne, forcibly
denounce Bismarck’s persecution of the Roman Catholic church, as being, in truth,
directed against religion itself. The shaughter, of life and mind, and the cruelty,
brought about by this man will never hie forgotten against him. He is a butcher.
Future times will execrate him, as filled with the spirit of Napoleon and
Alexander. With the power he would have capsized his own master. Nothing
but impossibilities stop these men. What a plight his country will be reduced to
when everything hangs upon his life.
Read Klaczko's Two Chancellors, Bismarck and Gortschakoff. Politics have
become a game of duplicity. Nobody trusts anybody. The field has been
broken up. Alexander of Russia writhes under the hand of Bismarck, feeling


himself only a tool, a monkey to draw the chesnuts out of the fire for the cat. The
great maestro is eager to operate upon the Eastern Question, and prove himself
once more a focus of mischief. We only attack his morality, which does not
count for much in this period To call his ability immense falls short. No
statesman in history ever was gifted with such a powerful mind, and never one had
such opportunities, which do not even fail him at this time of day. Suppose we ever
read of the Fall of Bismarck ! It might be.
The Empire is not, apparently, on a lasting basis. Bismarck is another
Napoleon I. The genius of a man has twisted up a system, foreign to the people.
The Germans are honest and solid, not greedy of conquest, but liable to intoxica-
tion of mind. They don't want to dragged into another war now, but there will
always be hot water in store with Bismarck. He cannot subsist without excite-
ment. 'ihe mere pressure of eleven Socialist members in the Eeichstag is enough
to warn this successor of Napoleon that outward events must be stirred up again.
Surely the Germans are not anxious to fight Turkey,
Napoleon the First was the creator of the German Empire, which now over-
shadows Europe. After the battle of Jena, in which he crushed the Prussians, he
laid it down that the army should never exceed EO.OOO, The Germans evaded this
by raising 40,000 fresh troops every year, and sending the others into a nominal
militia. Under the patriots Scharnhorst, Stein, and Hardenberg, the foundations
of the greatness of to-day were laid, and, on the abdication of Napoleon, in 1814, the
leading strings of the Prussian army were withdrawn, although it had then proved
its great quality at Leipsic, &c., and Napoleon had taught it the system of forma-
tion, which was thenceforward adopted as the basis, calling up annually the whole
fresh young strength of the kingdom. Captain Hozier, an Englishman, points
out that if the Germans succeded in landing 150,000 soldiers in England, the
English volunteers, and their small backing of soldiers, would go down like chaff,
and we believe him, although holding, hona fide, that the Englishman is the better
man.
As a naval power Germany distinctly menaces England, and nothing else. The
immense Kiel and Wilhelmshaven threaten England squarely. Even in the South
Seas the German war vessel dogs the English. At Samoa both have been watch-
ing to pounce. The German war vessels in Australian waters have already
equalled the English at periods within the last three years. Such craft as the
frigates and corvettes Elizabeth, Hertha, Louise, Arcona, and Gazelle, which have
been roving about in this hemisphere, are very significant. They are on a par with
our Wolverenes and Sapphires. Are we unpatriotic? un-English? No The
alarmist is the best fiiend to his country, even if he strains a point, for, believe it,
the tendency is always to repose on the soft lap of danger. We can, and do, claim
to feel the poet's sentiment: —
Though old and languishing in exile here,
My friends, my country, still to me are dear ;
Firm in their cause, 111 ne’er degenerate prove,
But to the latest breath retain my love.
It is very nasty to read of the continual breakdowns in the English fleet. Such
disasters as those which have befallen the Thunderer, Vanguard, Tourmaline, and
numerous others, are anything but re-assuring. Meanwhile Germany creeps up
with a grand fleet, the Kron Prinz, Kaiser, Deutschland, Eriedrich Wilhelm, Frinz
Carl, Preussen, and the rest, a new influence as they cruise in the so-called British
Channel, or as Admiral Batsch leads them past the gut of Gibraltar, as he did
lately, for the M editerranean, halting to exchange the civilities of which jealous
nations are so awfully profuse—-as witness the !*mperor of Austria's recent
affectiona'e outburst towards the Czar, between whom and that political villain
Bismarck he quakes and sweats. Now, Austria is a power for which we have a real
sympathy, managed by gentlemen of the Andrassy and his predecessor Beust
type.


Without doubt the glorious machinery of the German army will ultimately
relapse into woodenness, and will be cracked up to pieces just as the systems of
Frederick and Napoleon were. Bismarck’s policy will not stand the test of
experience. We look ahead, Fven the Civil War in America dug the grave of
the Kepublic.
THE CIVIL SERVICE.
RATHER more than 20 years ago, when there was a cry for work, Mr.
as Premier, had the bluestone foundations laid of an immense
edifice, in what are now called Treasury Gardens, It was to be the Chief Secre-
tary’s office, his own office, in this wonderful young colony. We don’t know what
have become of the plans of that establishment, but suppose there were plans. As
youths many of us trotted over the foundations with admiration. As men we sat
on their edge and wondered yet at the gigantic brains which some living statesmen
used to have. Now the foundations are covered with the new Public Offices,
which are 10 embrace a variety of departments —so has time shut up the telescope
of Victorian aspirations.
Well, there is to be a great reform in the Civil Service. Our respected and
lamented father used to say regularly once a year, “ This is the First of January,
and the household turns over a new leaf from to-day.” On the 2nd, things went
exactly as usual.
To plunge into the midst of our subject, we will grapple with the Lands Office.
How is it Brough Smith never got a chance to play round crackers there ? Surely
the Mining Department made efforts enough to throw him over to the excellent
billet of Secretary for Lands. He was cruel, but so was his provocation.
We have heard the Lands Office described as a sink for all the genteel loafers in
Melbourne, but any such violence as that is to be deprecated. Nevertheless, a
visit to the Land Office must impress, say, a patriot with an uneasy feeling that
there is a good deal of human paste around, not applied in the mill of industry to
the full extent of its capability, or of the ardor which inspires it to be truly useful in
its day and generation, scorning to receive high pay and merely scheme to fill
out time.
Mr O’Ferrall, who has been languishing in Pentridge, was the great
reformer in the Lands Office. At a paltry cost to the country of £IO,OOO or so,
he laid his finger, nay, his whole hand., like a whale’s ear, on the weak spots, and
initiated all the improvements.
About eighteen months ago there was some talk about appointing a Permanent
Head of the Victorian Civil Service, ito be over the various Permanent Heads of
Departments, who at present are : Clhief Secretary, Mr Odgers ; Treasurer, Mr
Gudemann ; Attorney General, M r Harriman ; Minister of Justice (we suppose),
Mr Gurner ; Minister of Mines, Mr (Couchman ; Minister of Lands, Mr Archer ;
Minister of Public Works, Mr Wardelll ; Minister of Railways, Mr Labertouche ;
and Commissioner of Customs, Mr Tyler. People of Victoria, these form your
real Ministry, and not half a bad one tlhey are. Well, which man should be picked
for Permanent Premier ? (We hate allliteration, but this is the only way to put it).
Odgers is a good easy man, and a good Civil Servant, but we cannot have him for
master. There is a lot in Gudemann, the most retiring man in the whole
Service, and although we have ferreteid round everywhere we cannot say that we
know him more than, by looks, and they go a long way. _ He impresses one with
the idea of a man who thoroughly grasps his work, and it is the most important of
all, the vitals, iu'nards, everything—Finance! Barriman is a nice painstaking
man, and puts us in mind of old Davenport, the actor, whom the audience used to
quarrel with for some lack of ginger, and he would say, “ What do the people


Always neat, always perfect in the text, and wig combed not an hour
ago ! Well, Harriman s business at present does not require ginger, and the
headship of the Civil Service would. Some people hint that Gurner is lazy, but
he always comes up on the right side of the fence, and has an awful head on him.
When he is gone he will be sighed for. Couchman is a thorough Mining officer,
but somehow we don t think he is quite equal to the old Tiger, although practice
will make him superior. Archer is a profound arithmetician. Wardell is an
architect and a gentleman, although a vulgar man might have raised fewer com-
plaints in the billet, Tyler is silent as the grave, officially, although he is said to
be an excellent companion, and if not indispensable where he is we would make
him a candidate for the top Labertouche would not take it if offered to him,
and, being the junior, it never would be, but there is not a more genial or con-
scientious man in the Service. We would not be astonished if Gudemann were
suddenly brought into the fierce light of criticism by his appointment to the new
place, which could hardly be less than £I2OO a year.
THE COUNTRY PARTY.
AY ANKE E visitor to Melbourne said, “ Yours is a fine city, but there’s nothing
behind it, so that our display of all in the shop front does not take foreigners in.
The luxurious caterers of fashion in Bourke and Collins streets never care what
filthy mud their wonders are displayed over, nor for the wretched back premises.
The same idea actuates the town party. When the Duke of Edinburgh came,
false painted canvas fronts were put up to Parliament House, and the Public
Library, to impose on his Highness, with a notion of what they were to be like.
In all this docketing up of Melbourne there is a similar fancy of imposing on the
visitor.
That hideous muddle, Parliament House, is set in fair train for swallowing
public money. It will be beautiful for ever. Government House and grounds
have mopped up near £200,000 The lawyers unanimously agree that business is
declining, and yet we are launching into half a million over the new Law Courts,
West Melbourne—a conspicuous monument of political gratitude—for did not
1 angton secure them, and what is his reward ? The Public Offices are huge—
£3oo,ooo not a farthing less to start them going. These are the biggest
samples of late.
Now, we do not advocate liberal expenditure of public money on country
buildings, or anything but works of public necessity. A State policy, the aim of
which, or, at all events, the result of which is to draw more people from the
country to the metropolis, must be vicious. The patriot’s object is not to feed a
bloated Carthage, a sink of vice, a nursery of weakness.
Agriculture is toe source of power. The Kara-Kara and Wimmera selections
are the kinds of growth we like to encourage.
FEDERATION.
EROM a Victorian point of view, its fiscal policy appears right, but taking in
all the Australian colonies, Free trade looks inevitable New Zealand is not
going to federate, with us, and may be almost left out of the calculation, although
it is pronounced Free trade. N. Z. is an empire in itself, the “Britain of the
South ’ and mistress amidst the civilized peoples growing up in Samoa, Fiji, &c.
The principal newspapers of Australia exhibit as overwhelming majority for
Free Jrade. In fact there is not a thorough t rotectionist newspaper out of Vic-
toria. The Sydney Morning Herald, Brisbane Courier, Adelaide Register and
Advertiser and Hobart Town Mercury, head the phalanx on the other side, which
be sure, must be^t.


A Custom’s Union among the Australian colonies will come. Tasmania has
been suggesting the matter from time to time. A minority in that isle would
like to see it entirely annexed to Victoria. With Free Trade, no doubt that minority
would be larger. But this would not suit, under hardly any circumstances, in the
present growth of the world. That little island (not so very small neither, please
ye continentals) would be a veritable Ireland. Yet we might pour in some of our
surplus vitality, and, in this southern outlet, acquire a compensation for the failure
of our attacks upon Riverina, in the north. But please Heaven, we’ll have both !
How ? By a federation, the capital of which must be built, for Melbourne will
never do ! Say Echuca—Moama. Keep your eye on that spot, with divergent
lines to Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney, although the last named will have to
angle up from Albury.
GAMBLING.
THE vogue which this practice has obtained indicates rottenness in society. Mr.
Yarley has dealt trenchantly with it at the Town Hall, in our hearing. In a
place of business we were struck with the rebuke administered by a Chineese gentle-
man to a party who accosted him with “ What will you back for the Cup ?” r J he
reply was, “ You gamble—no good.” Now this was a heathen.
All the old forms of gambling, rigorously put down by law in dark ages, are
turning up again under free and enlightened institutions. First in order here is
that cancer, turf gambling. Worse still, in quality if not in quantity, are the
gambles for the advancement of education, in the art unions of the ! allarat and
Sandhurst Mechanics’ Institutes. These poison the springs of morality. Under
the pretence of forwarding knowledge—which is the best service of God—men,
women, and children are urged on to the mischievous, destructive fever of
gambling. It is devilish. Words cannot be fetched up strong enough. Depend
upon it, our very liberties are undermined by such wickedness. Ballarat is working
its second gambling lottery for the Mechanics’ Institute. The example filters down
through society to the Temperance art-union for a cottage and land, the art-union
for workmen’s dwellings, the sensation lolly packets, the lucky packages from a
penny upwards to tempt and corrupt the children, and other forms; all make the
gangrene. If one wins, it is the worst loss. Such is a profound 1 ruth.
THE YOUNG BUSINESS MAN.
PASSING by the Banks’ Clearing House, in Collins Street, we saw boys finger-
ing large heaps of notes, representing, no doubt, thousands of pounds, and
that gave the immediate cue to the present article.
The business to be here treated of is that variety which means the application
of the brains to commerce, unaccompanied by manual labor, and it is the depart-
ment of Australian life most vitally deficient in morals, and the worst governed,
from the standpoint of the employee, especially the young one.
Banks first. are filled with young men who have got in by patronage,
and numbers of whom do not feel the necessity to struggle and perfect themselves
in business affairs, because they are secure in the large balances to credit of their
parents, other relatives, and friends. This is, indeed, a dangerous billet for a
young man to occupy. Have there not been cases in which the balance referred
to has vanished, materially altering, indeed reversing the position of our young
friend? His nose to the grindstone, then, or a smart dismissal. But even
supposing that such a reverse in the friendly balance has not taken place, Ins
state is most unfortunate, exposed to moral ruin, walking amidst tremendous
dangers, as ever} man or women is whose position is factitious, and whose way of


life is not based upon a healthy grappling with our reasonable service in this
world. It is not a mere idea which traces moiral flaw through all correlations, but
it is the infallible teaching of experience. Iff a young man, untrained and un-
fitted, be hoisted by influence to a position, there is a moral flaw, of which he is
only too likely to be the victim.
Banking, in Melbourne, is on a mixed basis. ’'here is a circle of really sound
banks, who will support each other on a crisis, and there are a number of little
banks, entirely on their own hook, tubs standing proudly on their own bottom,
and they would go smash at the first real pinch. There will, some day, be a
terrible breakdown of little banks and large building societies, especially the latter,
in Melbourne. All these affairs are nurseries of cheap and inefficient brain labor.
They are full of young men learning nothing. These are used up when they
arrive to maturity, and fresh boys are got.
The Warehousing business demands special attention. It is overcrowded when
youths engage for nothing their first year. The temptation is strong for employers
to work largely on this ticket. A young fellow speedily becomes useful. The
business requires high ability, which is evidenced in the visible strain undergone
by warehouse clerks, as compared with others. We mean that their business, in
many lines, obviously taxes the intellect to the uttermost, so that the young men
engaged in it live very keenly, and are prone to dissipation, unless they have
genuine principle. The young warehouseman is never a student. His brains are
wrought out daily over his avocation, and we say it is a good thing. One dislikes
to see a young man in slumberous business, dawdling his public time and absorb-
ing in Euclid, Algebra, Latin, Greek, and all those speculative matters which are
the business of other people. He won’t get on with regard to either of the forks
into which he divides his attention, This is about the most earnest period in the
history of the world, and we have to concentrate.
ELECTRIC TELEGRAPHS.
mBE last project for a line is that from Gondokoro, in Northern Africa, to
Unyanyembe in the South, but both this North and this South
must be understood as deep into the interior, on the very confines of settlement.
The completion of such a line, only reported to be 1,500 miles, would give Africa
unbroken communication from extreme North to extreme South, Alexandria to the
Cape of Good Hope, lines being already in existence up to the points mentioned.
We have done nearly as much as this when South Australia reaches to Port Darwin
and the tropics by the medium of the electric wire. Our line from Eucla to West
Australia has been very tremblesome to construct, over the wilderness and prickly
spinifex, Australians might well consider the advantages of a Pacific line, from
New Zealand to San Francisco, via Honolulu, on the route surveyed by the U.S.
man of war Tuscarora. There will be continual faults on the Indian Archipelago
line, through the prolific insects in the shallow waters, and the sharp rocks. Capt.
Audley Coote has mooted a line from West Australia direct to Ceylon, with a
station on the Cocos group of islands. Sir Julius Vogel attempted unsuccessfully
to negociate the Francisco line three years ago, when in America, and the U. S.
Government declined to subsidize it, which appeared at the time to be the only
difficulty. There are three routes laid down in Asia : 1. Via the Red Sea, exclusively
controlled by the English Government; 2. Via Teheran, semi-Russian ;3. Via
Siberia, wholly Russian. The Russians have unbroken communication right from
St. Petersburg to their settlements on the Pacific, North East coast of Asia,
Vladivostock, &c., from which they are supposed to threaten Australia. These


colonies have not recovered from the alarm of ten years ago, when the relations of
England and Russia were critical, and it was stated that Admiral Popoff, who has
since invented the circular ironclad Popoffka, was ready with half a dozen men of
war to dart upon Melbourne,having taken boat soundings of parts of the Victorian
coast when he was here before, as captain of the Russian man of war Bogatyr.
Press telegraph messages, in Victoria, go for the absurdly low rate of Is. 6d.
per 100 words and 6d per each additional 50, and it is surprising that they are
not more availed of by country newspapers, for metropolitan news.
LEGAL REFORM.
MR Higinbotham remarked once, in the Legislative Assembly, that England
really advanced more in law reform than Australia, which timidly waited
upon the mother country. This was a-propos of the parliamentary enfranchisement
of women. He thought it would be accomplished in England before it was here.
Mr H. did a very useful thing himself, in prepairing and issuing the Consolidated
Statutes, as Attorney General, which went for a good deal more than his fiery
leadership in the Darling Grant agitation.
Money exercises an influence over justice Appeals to the Privy Council are
reserved as the privilege of the rich. £5OO deposit at least, as security, is required.
Therefore a poor man can never appeal to the Privy Council.
It may be fairly argued that, in mere issues between man and man, the highest
court should exist within Australia. Why should the rich man have more justice,
merely because he has more money ? Obviously it is so. Mount and Morris,
without money requisite to appeal to the Supreme Court, would still be serving
their 15 years for blackbirding. Ergo : The equality of rich and poor before the
law is a lie.
GAS.
SO the Melbourne, Collingwood, and South Melbourne Gas Companies amalga-
mate. That is always the way. Hundreds of thousands of pounds are
sacrificed in competition, all three companies going for various districts, and laying
down superabundant mains. In one locality the public obtain gas almost below
cost price; in another, where one of tftie rivals luxuriates alone, the profit is made
up. But the Metropolitan Amalgamated Gas Company’s bill is to lay down a
regulation of price.
Perhaps the Melbourne Gas Compamy lacked a business Napoleon at the head
of affairs when it started with its magnificent field. Why did the company not
seize it ? With due enterprise they miight have gripped the whole city. Yet the
Collingwood Company was allowed to sneak up, and prove a thorn in the side for
years and years. The want of grandleur in the conceptions of the Melbourne
company is the more remarkable, becamse when it started the popular belief antici-
pated a far quicker growth for the city r than has been achieved. There must have
been some over-cautious men at the head of affairs. The Collingwood Company
lias, relatively, been far more prosperous than the Melbourne, which ought to have
absorbed up the whole connection. ißesides over-caution, there was greediness.
It lurks yet, be assured, in the new legal monopoly. The quality of gas is to be
altogether in the hands of the Metropolitan company. The bonds of a Parliamen-
tary committee are like straw rope to a Samson. We would lay sto 1 that the
company breaks through the net in any direction it chooses; ave, even with regard
to the price of gas, which is being so nicely adjusted. The Act of Parliament
will be a gaseous one.


COOPER AND BAILEY’S.
Aboard Steamer.—Melbourne Again I—Tenting—Pictur’ Cards—
Our New Brutes—Gentle Ann E.—Etcetery.
Sydney.
OUR passage from San Francisco to Auckland, and on here, with the menagerie
did not afford so much incident as our pioneer trip last year. Then what
excitement there was on the departure of the steamer from San Francisco with the
animals ! Hoisting six elephants, five camels, hippopotamus, lions, tigers,
giraffe, zebra, wart hogs, bear, &c. in for Australia was as queer a sensation as ever
America saw, and only beaten by the excitement of hoisting them out at the other
end. The least nervous part of the business was getting to New Zealand, over
The Smiling Pacific
Where, at one time, we steamed eight days with hardly a ripple. At Honolulu
we saw the native women riding astride on horseback, and heaps of the natives
came on board steamer to look at the wild beasts, when little Anne R. Leak the
armless lady, made a tidy purse on deck. A half dol. was charged for the
menagerie. The voyage from Auckland to Sydney was feared much, being often
stormy, but we have escaped twice, and Bailey declares he will
Come Every Year
With fresh animals, and doubless his profits will insure him against the loss of a
cargo, for there would be I don't know what to pay if we should get into weather
like that encountered by the City of Melbourne and Oandenong. '»he bit of a
land storm at Newcastle was enough, when the canvas flapped about our ears, the
cages got overturned among the people, and Johnston only kept the lion's head
and shoulders within the cage by the butt end of his whip. Under Dermer's
active superintendence, the steamer Macedon brought us round to Melbourne, and
in Victoria there ensued a quantity of astonishment we can never hope
to see again It was like the first sight of white people to savages
that is to say, merely giving a comparison. What a marvel was the
Procession through Melbourne,
With elephants and camels walking, and the lion, tiger, and leopard on top of their
cages, blinking their eyes in the sunshine, and gazing placidly on the throngs of
men, women, and children,—the thousands and thousands of children—along the
route, especially Bourke-street. Then we were bunked up in the second-class
railway carriages, and slept as we travelled between shows, being the first to intro-
duce this ' mericau notion in Australia. Recollections of the
TENTING SEASON
In the I nited tales would form a volume. Many a time has our whole immense
troupe camped in the bush, and we were the Great International Ten Allied Shows
in America, with treble the establishment brought to Australia, Nor can we ever
forget the promptitude and kindness of Mrs. Bailey at such times—never satisfied
until she gets the boiler of tea on the hob of the forest blaze, and serves out all
hot to the ladies and gentlemen of the company, and the tired and grateful
employes Altogether, we footed up to a hundred Hart, of ( incinnati and the
best other engravers of the 1 nited States—the Philadelphia Ledger Print, and so
forth, have furnished us with a lot of new
SHOW POSTERS,
And for ardstic excellence, beauty and variegation of color and immense size, they
are unequalled. Nothing like a good twelve or twenty four sheet, particularly in
the country towns. Melbourne is the worst place on the globe for posters—hardly
a stand in the city. In Sydney there are plenty of gaps, and I hear we are to get
plastering in Collins-street this time. Lost oiur polar bear and ostrich en route
V fr° m New York to San Francisco, and have so> much the less to gratify the boys
and girls of Melbourne j but we have the Haig rhinoceros, den of performing
o


leopards, performing hyaenas, and a monster bison. Our tents form
A PERFECT ENCAMPMENT,
And that for the circus has two rings inside, and performances go on at the same
time. Its immensity is only second to Wilson’s Great Hippodrome tent. After
all, George Middleton, with his side show, made the greatest profits as compared
with expenses last tour in Australia. Ann B. Leak (Vlrs. Thomson) stuffed her
pockets well, too. I send you the Anaconda wall print, and tigers grappling —the
two best. Miss Leak will run a show of her own, as two years ago, when she had
Bismarck, the educated hog, and other attractions. She and Pearl Foster, the
Albino lady, sent kind wishes to all friends.
NAUTICAL CHATTER.
Australia’s Fuel Box—Glance at Steamers —Poor Dykes—The
Nobbys.
Neivcastle.
THE evening of a busy life finds me pleasantly stranded here. I hold on to my
little bit of property, and get more knowledge in a week than I would in
Melbourne in a year. The current of sea-faring men that passes through
Newcastle is most varied, and everybody has ample leisure to yarn without distrac-
tions, as in the Queen city of the south. Newcastle’s prime value as the coaling
station of the southern hemisphere is recognised in the Imperial debate, behind the
scenes, on its fortification. The ports of communication extend from
VALPARAISO TO PETROPAIJLOVSKI,
Where files of Ausiralian newspapers are received via Newcastle. Ihe old Edina
steamer has come round this way sometimes. She was built for Leith and Ham-
burg trade, but gravitated to the Melbourne and Warrnambool, for which she did
not continue good enough in competition with boats like the Otway, 'which has
been so quickly followed by the Julia Percy, IN elson, and Dawn, indicating great
briskness in the line familiar to me with the Champion and Lady Bird; while the
< ity of Sydney, Waratah, old Wonga Wonga, and so forth, served for the Sydney
line; the defunct City of Hobart for the Hobart Town; the Black Swan, Hoyal
Shepherd, and Queen, for the Launceston ; and people did not Wit much to go
to New Zealand, for which they mostly sailed. The Edina recruited
smith’s colliers,
And I thought she was going to see Melbourne again after the wreck which made
a hole in the fleet, but the Ly-f e-moon filled it, and then the Cheviot. I read an
article in an American paper lately proving that cheap men. officers, engineers, or
sailors, never paid in the long run, and I would like affectionately to commend
this principle—not to any one shipowner, but to all, to read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digesn Poor Dykes, the Cheviot’s second engineer, has experienced the
hollowness of the world. Governor Bowen presented him, at the Melbourneown
Hall, before a crowd of people, with a reward in common with Peterson, Anderson,
and Eklund, forming
THE GALLANT QUARTETTE,
The so-called immortal boat’s crew of the Dandenong, which returned for its
second load of passengers. Dykes got into trouble, through neglect it is true, but
not a word was heard then of the gallant rescuer—the man who so fearfully risked
his life to save women and children. But I promised to look up old notes. A
party tells rm. that the man who kept the lighthouse on Ihe Nobbys for some-
time, and who saved the only survivor from the wrecked steamer,
caw ark s
Was himself the only survivor from the Dunbar, saved by the brave Antonio
Woolier. The Cawarra was the last of the paddle steamers on the Melbourne and
Sydney trade, but was not employed long in this service, and did not become very


familiar in Hobson’s Bay. She had a straight cutwater, and was painted white.
Talking of The Nobbys, I don’t know whether Jervois has his scheme quite ready
for the defence of this port, which, by some .English military authorities, is
r egarded as foremost in importance.
AMONG THE JAPS.
Commissioners Home. —Bits of Sketch. Hiogo.
MESSRS. Hashi-motn, Yama, and the other Japanese gentlemen who visited
Australia, have been giving lectures. 'hey have delivered out the eleven
Leicester sheep they ferried over from Brisbane, in the Torres Straits Mail Steamer
Bowen, on their homeward trip. Nothing they saw impressed them more than
5,000 acres under green wheat, for the English market, at Burtle Fisher’s, in
South Australia. The crockery merchants ponder over another descent upon your
continent. The sheep in Japan were originally imported from China, and are a
poor breed. Monckton Synnot ought to have a grand field, introducing
Australian Wool
To China. I have travelled a good deal in 187 5-6. The notion of immensity, in
a city, is given by Jeddo more than perhaps any other, because of its flatness. All
round the houseroofs extend to the circling rim of the horizon. I visited the Bay
of Nagasaki and valley of the Homoco, a lovely fertile region, with Japanese farm-
houses strangely resembling English ones, but set alongside green expansive
Fields of Paddy
Sorghum, or on elevations by rice patches, which brought to my remembrance the
incident of Her Majesty’s gunboat Nemesis chasing the Chinese junks over a
rice-field, when flooded, as they all are at a season of the year. She was flat
bottomed, and especially sent out. At Kagosima I witnessed the launch of a
small Japanese man of war, and in this quarter the French are the most popular,
so that the vessel was built under their auspices, and a few glittering Jrench blue
uniforms were displayed. Then circumstances brought me to the splendid moun-
tain country of
HIONF,
On the road to which Europeans and Americans can travel singly amidst a
populous district, and are well received. The inn at Hione is quite fashionable,
both for foreign ladies and gentlemen, and it is almost a little Saratoga, being a
deliciously cool locality within a day’s journey of the very hot, in which trade has
to be carried on. Skirting a little of the
Great Inland Sea,
I was reminded of Craig’s description of the noble coast of New Guinea, with
Mounts Gladstone and Disraeli each a lofty wooded peak, at the entrance of one
of Nature’s harbors. Out of the coast towns we miss the profusely numerous
Japanese gentlemen in stove pipe hats and spike tail coats, both of the severest
black American cut, and 1 have even seen little Japaneses, ten years old or so, got
up in that identical style. Mrs Wakley could make a fortune in knickerbockers.
The Japanese ladies don’t appear to be in a hurry to adopt foreign costumes.
SAMOA.
I must tell you first that the Goddefroys, of Hamburg, are the merchant
princes of vSamoa, and therefore the German sentiment prevails. They have
a powerful fleet trading here. You will remember the Caesar Goddefroy
(ship) that used to come to Melbourne. I haven’t got round all their plantations,
but they are bigger than those of a firm at Tahiti, which employs 800 Kanakas
and 400 Chinamen. The Goddefroys are in agonies over the prospect of annexa-


68 LONDON —CEESWICK, RISTORI & MATHEWS.
tion to England. They petitioned Bismarck to seize this colony. Steinberger
returns, and his party among the natives has been waiting for him with the power
inits hands. It is hard to disabuse one’s mind of the idea that Captain Stevens, of
H.M.S. Barracouta, was dismissed from the English service for breaking the egg
too soon at Samoa, although the ostensible reason given was cruelty to Paymaster
Gain. Had Germany—had Bismarck no hand in this ? The Rev. S. J Whitmee,
Congregational Missionary, late of these islands, is in London, and working in the
cause of British annexation. Samoa raises £2OOO annually for missionary enter-
prise outside its boundaries. The Independents seem to desire the Wesleyans to
abandon competition. The latter hold Fiji, while the Presbyterians have Anei-
teum and the New Hebrides, all better cruising grounds than what is left for the
Episcopalians, in such choice lots as f*anta Cruz and the like. The Homan
Catholics are to the other missionaries—like hornets everywhere.
LONDON.
I cannot help thinking England is far too much given up to amusement. Forty
fneatres open in London for the winter! Drury Lane Opera, Covent Garden
Opera, the Haymarket, Lyceum, Strand, Olympic, A delphi,. Vaudeville, Court,
Globe, Folly, Comique, Aquarium, Criterion, St. James’, Gaiety, Alhambra, Prince
of Wales, Alexandra, Crystal Palace, Princess, do not exhaust the list patronized
by the better orders People must even have their afternoon shows. Old England
changes under the flood of pleasure. A run to Scarborough and back has just
freshened me up wonderfully. There one sees the elite of the theatrical world,
making holiday. The principal theatre is the Londesborough, called after the
noble lord who dropped £30,000 in the production of the gorgeous spectacle
Babil and Bijou, at Covent Garden Theatre, London, probably the most extravagant
aftair ever nut on any stage. Boucicault and Blanche helped to spend the
money, and be sure there was a Avoman in it. Toole, the comedian, keeps 276
portraits of himself, in as many different characters, displayed in his house. That
is the acme of modesty. The world has received a shock through reading the full
reports of the death of Amy Fawsitt, in New York. Bhe was the original Lottie
in the Two Hoses, played for 150 nights with Henry Irving as Digby Grant, and
afterwards she played Lady teazle 400 nights at the Vaudeville. Accepting an
engagement for £3O a week at the fifth Avenue theatre, to play in Augustin
Daly’s Life, she forfeited all through her unfortunate passion for drink, and sunk,
in a few r months, to the protection of a low bully in a lodging house, and this man,
it is reported, killed her, by throwing her down some stairs, after she had been
reduced to such straits that she haid nothing left but an old dressing gown !
Honible, horrible, most horrible. AHI her brilliancy and degradation was com-
pressed within five vears ! i believe shes was only 25 when she died.
CRESWICK, RISTORI,&MATHEWS.
Scene Green Hoorn of the (Gaiety Theatre, London, during an
afternoon performance of Hiclhelieu. Entr’Aote music audible.
Enter Charles Mathews and Callboy.
Mathews.—Mr. Creswick ? Ah—mm—where is he ? Eh?
Boy.—in his dressing-room, sir, marking up for the next act.
Mathews,—Very good. I will stay a minute. [fait Callboy .
Enter Madame Ristori.
Ristori.—Oh, someone here. Is it Mr. Johnson P (Eyeglass.)
Mathews.—No, my dear Marchioneiss, it is I.
Ristori.—Mr. Mathews! How are you? (Shakes hands.)
Mathews.—You have been round the world since last we met.


Ristori.—Yes, Mr. Mathews.
Mathews.—(Draws chairs.) So glad to see you ; and how is the good Marquis ?
Ristori.— My husband is well I come hiere to show the General's book on
Australia to Mr. Hollingshead, and have left it somewhere while I was in gossip
talk. Oh, here it is. (Shows blue volume.)) Have you read it ?
Mathews.—No ; must be interesting. Wlho is this General ?
Bistori.—General Gallega, of His Holiness’s late army. He accompanied us
round the world
Mathews.—(Turns the leaves over) “ Melbourne”—ah—hum.
Bistori.—The General is so droll there, so (comical—must extreme. In beautiful
Melbourne they gave me a gold crown, which I have at home. Gitoso! The
droll man ! Oh, I shall forget him never—ha, ha, ha, ha!
Mathews.—l don’t remember him at all.
Ristori.—He was the Mayor and gave me tthe crown before, oh, so huge a com-
pany of my friends in the City Hall.
Mathews.—Some mushroom fellow.
Bistori.—lndeed, no He told me he wmuld be Mayor three years. lam
disillusionised if Gitoso be not the greatest mian in Australia, next to her Majesty’s
Generals Bowen and Robinson.
Mathews.—Mais, Madame, parlez de TArt;.
Ristori.—Point de fagon. J’entends la imusique de I’entr’acte C’est pour
moi comme I’odeur de la poudre a cheval sur le champ de bataille ! Mais Ristori
est devenue vieille.
Mathews—Non, Madame, non, parbleu ! L’Art c’est immortel.
Enter Okeswick as Gandinal Richelieu.
Creswick.—(Absorbed, mutters.) Thus do I draw around her the circle of our
Mother Church—lrreverent ribald ! Beware the falling ruin—(feebly)—Reign ?
With absolute power ? The Spaniard!— Where will he be to-morrow ? (With
all his force)— There ! at my feet I (Attitude.)^
Mathews.—Bravo ! Bravo, William ! Gaid, I must wipe my eyes.
Creswick. —Upon my word, Charles, I hadl no idea that anyone was here. What,
Madame Ristori!
Bistori.—We were talking of Art. Do you play at Drury Lane, Mr. Creswig ?
Creswick. —Drury Lane, no; they will haive a wild Irishman on the stage one
day and live horses the next. From boyhood, my dear lady, it has been my
I ambition to follow in the steps of Macready and other great masters, to embody
as my life work the creations of Shakspeane; but alas my best years have been
spent, where ? At a so-called minor theatre, but heaven defend that I should say
a word against the great Old Surrey, where my name has been as magic, although
the honest fellows would have me in The Brigand, the Flower Girl of Madrid, or
stuff of that kind, and indeed I have even played low comedy !
Mathews.—And well, too, William, well. Confound you, always good. How’s
the house ?
Creswick.—Shy.
Mathews. — (To Ristori) We are talking oif the demrio.
Ristori.—The cash (All laugh).
Mathews.—But come, William, we cannot be always on the high ropes. You
play Richelieu here this afternoon, and I play My Awful Dad to-night.
Bistori.—Awful Dad ? What is that ?
Mathews.—Terrific Father.
Ristori. —Tragic ?
Mathews.—Yery.
Creswick.—Do you know that I am contemplating a flight to Ultima Thule, the
Antipodes, the Golden Land of Australia ?
Mathews.—Glad to hear it.
J Creswick.—They have a recollection therce of a man named Brooke.


Mathews.—Our sweet Williams shall bloom again beyond seas—Shakspeare and
Creswick ! I know it, my boy, I know it.
Ores wick. With the managers I may have some difficulty, for my turn of mind
is independent. All I ask is—in the vulgate—a show, ihey may keep me walking
about, inspector of pavements, for a month, but I will rely on my British public.
Mathews—Bight, right.
Creswick. —I can speak to you as a fniend, Charles. Excuse a little effusion.
I will hit out right from the shoulder. Virginius, yes, Virginius.
Enter Bridget Muldownet, with broom and tin pail.
Bridget.—Misther Cri/zick, the curtain is just goin' up.
Creswick. —How's this ? The sweeper of the theatre sent for Me ! Johnson !
{Enter Deputy Stage Manager .)
Creswick. —What is the meaning:, sir, of this gratuitous insult ?
Johnson —Very sorry, sir, but the call boy has gone to May's and Cask's about
the ballet dresses, which were positively to be ready by three o'clock for the new
burlesque to-night.—(Aside) An old humbug ! {Exit).
Creswick.—Better endure the ills we have—No—l shall fly to a New England,
for this is sunk in— Pah ! [ Bell tingles , and he rushes upon the stage.
THE GLOBE.
Epilogue. —How she turns on her Axletree —The Old Mother —
Europe’s Murder Plots of Thrones—-America Hazy—Old
Afric too—And Little Asia and Big Australia—Give Peace in
our Time 0 Lord.—[By The Eagle.
WIND up with the overture. Look at this globe, friends; turn it round
leisurely and see how the race of men progresses just up to this very day,
includiug the latest news brought to us by the mail steamer, telegraphed for the
first time from King George's Sound with the little hop by estafette to Eucla.
Old world and new world !
Mast, nor sail, nor oar,
Need I, ask I, to explore
Thine expanse from shore to shore.
For my brain is as full of matter as an egg is of meat. First, start with the bona
fide top of the sphere—
OLD ENGLAND.
Band—“ God Save the Queen." Boys, we are in love with Vicky, and never,
never will she be old to us, for our personal loyalty to that lady has sprung again,
after an eclipse, in which we circulated Tomahawk and John Brown scandals, which
we be ieve now in heart to be unfounded, and that slander has been cowardly with
the most defenceless woman in the world.. Yes, our heart's blood is hers ! What!
The Royal Lady who incurs obloquy through reading the Bible to dying cottagers
Let us be ever careful of that tongaei which is an evil member, and set on fire
of hell. Alexandra, too, she is an idol of the British nation, and there may be
heavv draughts on affection in the future through the folly of another, whom the
gods" apparently are bent on ruining amd so drive mad. Well, England's fleet
lies still ominously at Besika Bay, where a pack of harriers has been sent for the
officers to amuse themselves on shore, butt how the men are to amuse themselves is
not stated, and we only hear of insubordiination and the Hercules being sent by
Admiral Hornby on a punishment cruise. Next,
FRANCE
Claims our attention. La Patrie is agaim in hot water, but Frenchmen say that
since 1789 they have only been rehearsimg the century which is to commence for
England about 1889, when France reposes under a settled Government. No one
knows when the English revolution may break out, for providential recoveries of


THE GLOBE. 71
the Prince of Wales are but slender halyards for the Royalists to grip on by.
What is MacMahon's game ? Is there anything in the rumor that his daughter is
to marry the Prince Imperial and become Empress of France ? Now far
GERMANY,
But that I see has got its special article. Ob, that cunning Bismarck !
Beware, Bisky, beware the day
When Europe shall meet thee in solid array.
If we live long enough, and why should we be mealy-mouthed over the life of him
who has slain so many thousands ? Poor Austria we can lump with Germany,
and now scan
RUSSIA.
The Colossus, the Octopus. Friends, don't be in a hurry to conclude that Russia
is chawed up. We believe she is the coming power, with the greatest destiny in
the world from the present outlook. Peter the Great did not plant the gunpowder
mine for nothing. We doubt the celebrated will with its provisions for India and
Constantinople, but undeniably it embodies a national sentiment, and is a kind of
political bible in short, not a fabrication but a myth gathering round vital ideas.
TURKEY
Fights. Never was the ingratitude of the world “To him that hath shall be
given 1 ' more strikingly exemplified. Little Mustapha is kicked all round, England
included, for his patriotism. The gamecock ! The plucky bantam ! More power
to the Koran ! Will you extinguish him, eh, ye double-headed Yulpes ? Fuad
Pacha says, with Jeff Davis in the past. “ England shall be dragged in.” How
the Generals have sprung up—Osman, Suleiman, Mehemet Ali, Mukhtar, on
the one side ; Skobeloff and Gourko on the other. How quickly the unknown
man springs to a name in war. Even our Forbes, the correspondent, shows
how grit will t 11. The Pope is the only friend Turkey has got, and this
leads us to
ITALY
An ambitious power, grappling tight a league with Germany, and ready for an
attack by France, which made Italy what it is, by the campaign of Solferino. Good
God ! Is this juggling and hanky panky among nations to go on for ever ? It
is diabolic. Give us a religion which shall cover our politics too. Meanwhile
SPAIN
Creeps up, and has evidently settled under Alfonso, but we will never have peace
until these monarchs are wiped out altogether. Spain, even, has to amuse its
i people with a little fighting in Cuba, and the irrepressible Don Carlos is reported
to be looking on at the old sport near Plevna. U }e thieves and murderers may
f you get your wizens cut and be thrown into lime pits (This is exuberant, we don’t
quite mean it but red hot writing is popular) Talking of Cuba, the Imperial party in
A M ill HIC A
Want it. But the United States is under President Hayes, the finest king on the
■ tarth, and his queen too, plain Mrs Hayes, nee Webb, may be named with the
proudest of them all, and above a good many ! Yes Rutherford B. Hayes, we give
you, and all your family, the right hand of friendship, may you live long and
prosper The best minds of all the world gather round you n longside Presi-
dent Grant's immortal “ Let Us Have Peace” will be inscribed your words in a
noble Presidential address “ May peace and happiness, truth and justice, religion
and piety, dwell among us for all generations.' Uh, it is refreshing to turn horn
the old dynastic slaughter houses to this. Hayes will be a success ! We know
it. And what a treat it is to read of General Grant’s reception in “ ngland It is
hunky! John and Sam, hold fast for eternity. From mied a H. M. Stanley
will give us an excuse to leap to
AFRICA
Where he has been making discoveries, and a name in a style we cannot approve.
The dragon's teeth are sown, to grow into larmed men, and every traveller will not


I. ft 5
s back
- hot.
s-s'W >
not
y>
ur
|
, is
be an
V1
“ N ow then,
If
have the wealth of James Gordon Bennett and the New York Herald at his
to surround him with a regiment. However, Egypt is the place that is waxing
Cross Suez and
ASIA
Comes floating slowly on the panorama. Germany says Russia is to have Arme-
nia, General Kauffman, Russian, of German extraction, still feels towards India,
notwithstanding Turkish distractions. The British Sepoys are being armed quickly
with the Martini-Henry rifle. Russia bids for China’s alliance. Japan has not
quite stamped out its rebellion, fomented by the conservatives, who hate Yankeeism,
And, at last we get round to the most interesting continent of all, which, really.
must be chopped up into sections, beginning with
VICTORIA.
Now, if we write anything about payment of members it is very likely to turn up
wrong, because affairs are exactly on the balance, and printers are hungry to fill
the last pages. Devil take this away After surveying the globe, smooth your
wrinkled fronts and compromise. Let the Council give way, and also let the
Assembly give way, and remit the question to the next general election. That is
to say, pass the Payment of M embers Bill, and let the Appropriation Bill be an
honest, straightforward measure, with no smart practice.
NEW SOUTH WALES
Has been in the throes of elections. Those veterans Parkes and Robertson, it
seems, must still hand the plate of loaf and fish from each to each
old man, you know it is my turnand such has been the perpetual remonstrance
in New South Welsh politics ever since Martin was sent to heaven, although not
being dead he yet speaketh from the Supreme Court bench, and, like the soapy
but masterly Duffy, troubles active politics no more. The working men’s party in
hew South v ' ales is but a thin shaving off Victoria, and we say this with a desire
to see it strong and hearty, as in Victoria. Now for
QUEENSLAND
Railways and settlement form the burden of the pleasing tale. No doubt there is
worry in politics, but the din fails to reach thus far, and we only hear the names
of Thorn, Palmer, and so forth, a long way off from time to time; and fancy that,
after all, they are much of a muchness, and that there is such a more of a moreness
about the great country as expands every mind, and squabbles evaporate.
There is the Chinese difficulty, but, people, that is .National and Australian. A
rapid skim, in fancy, lands us right back in
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Healthy and prosperous it is. Boucaut is one. of the Australians we view with
special favor, because he is a man of large ideas and a practical Federalist, But
happy the people wiio§e assail are vaeask ft i§ ajmgst sq with §Quth Australia,
as regards sensation. The energy goes all into hard stuff, and we cannot recall
any period in which South Australia was really lashed into foam.
TASMANIA
Is brisker, for there are more difficulties to contend against, and politicians are not
n ' •
and elasticity with which othei
altogether carried on by the tide. That
places are blest is lacking here, but we do
sweet English county set in the ocean !
the island of beauty, rue
that our existence could be spent
there, forgetting the dusty and exciting race for TOe in this chip of America
N. W Z ALAND
Finds us cornered for room, and we can only say that Vogel’s brilliancy is a little
dimmed, that J"ir George Grey is n>t the man to grapple with him when he
comes back, which appears to be imminent, that politics can never revert to the
Staffords of the past, and that we suppose the hour will bring its man to tone
down Vogel with Grey, and Grey with
Vogel, without being a Stafford.
