

THE ROAD TO
MASS ORGANIZATION
OF PROLETARIAN
CHILDREN
YOUTH INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS


The Road to
Mass Organization
of Proletarian
Children
YOUTH INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS


CONTENTS
Introduction 3
The Situation in the Communist Children’s Movement,
and Its Immediate Tasks (Resolution of the Plenum) 5
Theses on the Situation and the Tasks of the Communist
Children’s Movement (Decisions of the IV
International Conference) 10
Instructions on the System and Methods of Work in the
Pioneer Leagues (Decisions of the IV Interna-
tional Conference) 22
Printed in the U. S. A.
Distributed in the United States by the
YOUNG COMMUNIST LEAGUE
43 East 125th Street, New York


THE ROAD TO MASS ORGANIZATION OF
PROLETARIAN CHILDREN
{Decisions of the IV International Conference of Leaders of Communist
Children's Leagues, Moscow, September, 1929, and the Resolution of the
Enlarged Plenum of the Y. C. 1., Moscow, December, 1929.)
INTRODUCTION
The situation in, and the activities of our Communist chil-
dren’s leagues have for the first time been given thorough con-
sideration since the Fifth World Congress. The situation in our
children’s organizations was found unsatisfactory as early as
September, 1928, the time of the Fifth World Congress, when
the causes which were hampering the development of our or-
ganizations in the sphere of mass work were investigated. On
the basis of experience since the Fifth World Congress, it must
be laid down that the view taken of the situation then was
absolutely correct. As in the general work of our youth leagues,
the work in our children’s leagues since the Congress revealed that
some of the important questions were not clearly understood by
the Fifth World Congress and that some of the clauses in the
decisions of that Congress must now be altered.
A characteristic feature of the present period is not only the
intensified struggle for the young generation, but also the fact
that hand in hand with the radicalization and revolutionization
of the masses of young and adult workers, the masses of children
are also becoming more active and being drawn more and more
into political life. The result is that the militancy of and the pos-
sibilities for organizing the proletarian children increase.
It is the task of the Communist children’s leagues to utilize
and develop the growing political interest and activity of the
proletarian children in the struggle of the revolutionary pro-
letariat. The task of work and struggle of our Pioneer organ-
izations is now on a higher level than a little while ago. The
task of our organizations is to go over from only agitation and
propaganda work which was the substance of their work until
recently, to intensive militant activity, i, e, to the mobilization


and organization of the broad masses of children. The Fourth
International Leaders’ Conference and also the Fifth Congress
of the Y.C.I. have quite correctly emphasized the importance of
carrying through a decisive turn. The winning over of the
masses of children for the struggle, the organization of that
struggle and the development of the Communist Children’s
leagues into genuine revolutionary mass organizations of pro-
letarian children — that is the goal the Communist children’s
leagues must have before them now.
But also in an ideological respect the past conferences marked
a step forward for our children’s movement. All tendencies
opposed to drawing the children into struggle have been severely
combated. Our Communist children’s movement is an educa-
tional organization, but this does not mean that it is an ordinary
“educational” organization, its educational work is to be carried
out on the basis of struggle.
Children are not adults. They need amusement, play and
recreation. This does not mean that participation in the struggle
and recreation and play exclude each other. We must find
methods of daily struggle which will appeal to the children, and
find forms of play which will contain an element of education
and training for the struggle. In this respect our organizations
have still much to learn. They imitate too mechanically the or-
ganizations of adults and the forms and methods used by them
are far from being suitable for children.
Then there is the decisive question, the question of close con-
tact between the children’s and the youth leagues. Heretofore
the guidance of children’s organizations by the Y.C.L.’s and
C.P.’s has in general been unsatisfactory. The Bolshevization
process in the Communist Parties, the energetic carrying through
of the turn in the work of the Y.C.L.’s will improve this situa-
tion and guarantee the development of the Pioneer Leagues into
real mass militant organizations. Our Pioneer organizations
must actually become the reserve forces for the Y.C.L.’s.
International Children’s Bureau, E.C. Y.C.I.


THE SITUATION IN THE COMMUNIST CHILDREN’S
MOVEMENT, AND ITS IMMEDIATE TASKS
1. The fact that the turn decided upon at the Fifth World
Congress of the Y.C.I. was not carried through, has had a bad
effect on the children’s movement. The most important coun-
tries (Germany, France and Britain) are going through a crisis.
The situation is very unsatisfactory also in most of the other
leagues, though very favorable premises for our work exist.
Characteristic features of the situation in our children’s leagues
are the numerical strength of the Pioneer organizations as com-
pared with the Y.C.L. and Party organizations, instead of being
broader than the Party and youth organizations, are weaker,
their activity is not suitable for a children’s organization, they
underestimate the increased political activity of the children, they
have not been the organizers of the activity of the workers’ chil-
dren. Only a decisive turn towards mass work, a complete
departure from sectarianism and isolation, a fundamental change
in the wrong system of work can clear the road for the further
development of our children’s leagues into mass organizations.
2. Capitalist rationalization is making the condition of work-
ers’ children worse than ever before and drawing more and
more children into industry. Bourgeois schools are adapting
themselves more and more to capitalist rationalization and to
preparations for imperialist wars. The fascist, social-fascist and
religious organizations are being put to an ever-increasing extent
at the service of imperialist education both inside and outside of
school. They are centrally organized and subsidized, receiving
much support from the state, the municipalities and from in-
dividuals. The social-fascists work especially under the cloak
of pacifist and “League of Nations” propaganda and lately the
Boy Scouts are wearing the same mask in order to conceal their
real face, as reactionary organizations for the preparation of war.
The Communist children’s movement is now confronted with an
enemy which is becoming increasingly dangerous.
3. The determined course of the Y.C.I. for the develop-
ment of Bolshevist mass organizations necessitates that the Y.C.L.
devote the greatest attention to the children’s movement, since


the organization of children’s mass leagues is one of the most
important tasks in carrying through the turn to mass work. That
the militancy of the proletarian children is increasing can be seen
not only in the growing participation of the working class children
in strikes and in mass demonstrations of adults, but also in a
whole series of school strikes in various countries, some of which
have for the first time been organized and conducted by Pioneers.
The fact that hand in hand with radicalization and revolution-
ization of the masses of workers the broad sections of proletarian
children are becoming active and interested in politics brings
forward the question of their organization as a most urgent task
for all sections of the Y.C.I.
4. The new tactics of the Party and the Young Communist
League must find expression also in the children’s movement.
This must first of all be accomplished by transferring the chil-
dren’s leagues into organizations engaged in struggles and in
mass work instead of having the education of the children as
their chief object, as is still largely the case now. The children’s
organizations must, however, under all circumstances, refrain
from automatically copying the forms and methods used by the
Party and the Young Communist League which give the chil-
dren’s leagues the character of children’s political parties.
Considering that the Communist children’s movement is sup-
posed to train the proletarian children on the basis of struggle,
that it must be wider than that of the youth movement and must
meet with the interests and requirements of the children, the
Y.C.I. rejects all Right and Left deviations, especially the Social-
Democratic outlook which stands exclusively for educational work
which greatly hampers the activities of our organization. These
deviations are expressed first of all in the underestimation of the
importance of the social-fascist children’s organizations and in a
wrong view as to the attitude of the proletarian children’s or-
ganizations towards them. Then there is the wrong view of the
Boy Scouts, the disbelief in the possibility of influencing and em-
bracing the majority of proletarian children, sectarian isolation
and slavish imitation of the methods used by the Party and by
the Young Communist League.


Taking these principles as a foundation for our work, the
Communist children’s leagues must carry through a determined
change in the sphere of mass work along the following lines:
(a) Wide masses of proletarian children should be mobilized
for concrete slogans and watchwords comprehensible to children
in connection with the economic and political struggles of the
adults. Above all the interests of the child workers should be
defended. Special children’s sections should be formed in the
Red trade unions; other organizational forms can only be applied
in order to get hold of these circles of children. Struggles of
the working children are to be started and organized and at the
same time a sharp course must be taken against the bourgeois
school and against social-fascism in the schools, for school strikes
and school struggles. Participation in strikes must not be only a
solidarity action, the children of the strikers must be gotten hold
of, the mass of the children must be mobilized in support of them,
the struggle must be carried right into the schools. In the struggle
for the masses of proletarian children the Communist children’s
organizations must set up a united front of all proletarian chil-
dren against the reactionary and social-fascist children’s organi-
zations. At the same time, a struggle is to be carried on against
imperialist training and war preparations not merely by issuing
opposition slogans as has been the case hitherto but in conjunction
with training for Red defense.
(b) These militant tasks can be carried out only with the
application of live methods and forms of work suitable for
children. Instead of the work hitherto done which suppresses
the activity of the individual Pioneer, a system must be instituted
to give scope to the activity of the children, to be attractive to
the various sections of the children representing their various
interests, and making each Pioneer responsible for the work and
the struggle. The greatest attention must be paid to the training
of a body of functionaries to be in charge of the organization.
Systematic and successful work among the masses of children can
be carried out only if a strong kernel of active Pioneers is or-
ganized. The institution of a system of school delegates (of
workers’ children) is an urgent task. The holding of delegate


and children’s conferences provides forms suitable for all or-
ganizations and is an immediate task. Side by side with school,
factory or special sections of children’s papers, mass children’s
papers should be issued. Revolutionary competitions must become
an important means in our children’s movement in raising the
activity of the whole organization.
(c) Planned-out work among the masses of children pre-
supposes that the organizations are formed on the basis where
most of the children are to be found. First of all there must
be nuclei in schools and factories where the children study and
work. In this connection it is also necessary to have organiza-
tions embracing children on a residential or a tenement basis.
The Pioneer organizations must understand the interests and
requirements of the children. The Pioneer organizations should
be surrounded with a network of various auxiliary organizations.
The organization of children’s sections in the Red sport organi-
zations, in freethinkers’ societies, and other revolutionary bodies,
is essential. Efforts must also be made to have the co-operation
of all these organizations with the Pioneer organization.
(d) A particularly urgent task of the Y.C.L. is the creation
of groups of leaders and the raising of their qualifications.
Among the measures to be taken are the renewal and enlarge-
ment of the number of leaders in the children’s movement by
drawing in proletarian elements; the creation of competent lead-
ing organs in the national and local organizations of the League;
systematic schooling of the leaders.
5. Another very urgent task is to capture the influence
among worker and peasant children in the colonies. With the
help of trade unions, the Anti-Imperialist League, the revolu-
tionary peasant organizations and the auxiliary organizations of
the Young Communist League, legal auxiliary, organizations of
an economic and cultural character should be formed. Work
must also be started among children in the white terror coun-
tries, especially in the Balkans and in fascist Italy.
In spite of repression and persecution, which is bound to in-
crease owing to the development of mass and militant work, the
children’s leagues must carry on a struggle for legality with


all the means at their disposal, through the mobilization of wide
sections of children and workers. In case of the Pioneer or-
ganizations being outlawed, legal forms of the children’s move-
ment must be developed. If that is impossible, we must carry
on work illegally, making preparations now.
6. More effective guidance and leadership of the children’s
leagues is certainly one of the most important premises regarding
the taking up of mass work by the children’s leagues. In this
respect some Young Communist Leagues have made serious
mistakes and have not done justice to their tasks as leaders of
the children’s leagues. The work of the children’s leagues must
not be divorced and isolated from all other youth work. The
leading committees of the Y.C.L.’s must conduct the children’s
movement in their daily activity, constantly control it, regularly
point out definite tasks, and undertake investigations as to their
work.
Neither has the work of the International Children’s Bureau
been satisfactory. The importance of carrying through the
decisions of the Fifth World Congress was not brought forcibly
enough to the notice of the leagues, and the turn which had
been decided upon was mentioned for the first time, in a concrete
form, only at the Fourth International Leaders’ Conference.
One must also admit that political leadership in the International
Children’s Bureau through the E.C. Y.C.I. hardly exists.
7. Generally speaking, the C.P.’s have not yet realized the
importance and role of the revolutionary children’s movement.
The Parties which give the children’s league ideological and
material support are exceptions. It is absolutely necessary that
the Y.C.L.’s place forcibly before the Party organizations the
question of practical support to the children’s movement. This
support should not only be given to the executive organs, but
above all to the lower organizations, in the form of patronage
of Party factory nuclei over school nuclei, children’s factory
nuclei or Pioneer groups, etc. It is of great importance that
the Parties should include in their plan the activity of the chil-
dren’s movement, assigning to it definite tasks within the frame-
work of the general tasks of the Communist movement as a


whole. Another urgent necessity is adequate space to the chil-
dren’s movement in the Party press, and regular special children’s
corners in its columns. The revolutionary mass organizations
must also be convinced to give practical help to the children’s
movement.
THESES ON THE SITUATION AND THE TASKS OF
THE COMMUNIST CHILDREN’S MOVEMENT
The Fifth Congress of the Y.C.I. gave a clear analysis of
the situation in the proletarian children’s movement based on
the decisions of the Sixth Congress of the C.I. The Fifth
Congress found the state of affairs in the Communist children’s
movement absolutely unsatisfactory. It stated that the reason
for it was inadequate mass work, the absence of systematic mass
work, neglect of the Communist children’s movement by the
Y.C.L., and the absence of support from the C.P. It decided
upon the tasks of the Communist children’s movement on the
basis of this analysis of the international situation.
The correctness of the estimate given by the Sixth Congress
of the C.I. of the third period of post-war capitalism as a period
in which the general crisis is maturing, in which the internal
and external contradictions of imperialism are sharpening, in
which preparations for imperialist war against the Soviet Union
are increasing, is becoming clearer every day. All this leads to
inevitable imperialist wars, to great class conflicts, to a develop-
ment of a new revolutionary tide in the outstanding capitalist
countries, and to great anti-imperialist revolutions in the colonial
countries.
This period of acute class struggles confronts the Y.C.L. with
the problem of capturing the majority of young workers, the
task of carrying through a complete turn in its general work
and activity, and equally brings the Communist children’s leagues,
owing to the growing part the proletarian children play in the
present period, face to face with the problem of embracing the
masses of proletarian children and of connecting them with the
struggle of the working class.


/. —The Position and the Role of the Proletarian Children
in the Present Period
1. The period of accentuated class struggles sharply raises
before the C.P.’s and the Y.C.L.’s the problem of organizing
the working class children for the struggle for the emancipation
of the proletariat from the chains of capitalism and for the dic-
tatorship of the proletariat as an immediate aim. The bourgeoisie
and the Social-Democracy wage a sharp struggle for the growing
generation of the proletariat.
2. Capitalist rationalization greatly aggravates the conditions
of the workers and constitutes a basis for greater employment
of proletarian children in industry. The increased number of
accidents and occupational diseases increases the rate of infant
mortality as a result of capitalist rationalization.
3. The bourgeois school is being constantly more adapted to
the preparations for imperialist war. This finds expression in
direct propaganda, military training, open and active support of
the bourgeois and fascist children’s organizations, camouflaging
of the military preparations by means of pacifist phrases (propa-
ganda in favor of the imperialist League of Nations idea, etc.).
4. The bourgeoisie is engaged in a systematic struggle to
influence and embrace the masses of proletarian children out-
side of the school. It creates social-fascist, nationalist,
religious and sport children’s organizations. By means of these
and with the aid and support of the capitalist governments the
bourgeoisie seeks to influence the masses of working class children
inside and outside the school. Radio and the press also serve this
purpose of capitalist education as a means of preparation for im-
perialist war.
5. Ever larger sections of children are being affected by the
process of radicalization. They take part in the industrial and
political actions and struggles of the working class and there are
independent children’s strikes in schools and factories (Germany,
Poland, America), expressing the radicalization of the working
class children.
The bourgeoisie and the Social-Democracy use every means of
moulding the mass of radical children and of keeping them


from the influence of the young and adult workers. If
the bourgeois school, the children’s organizations, the radio,
cinema and press are of no avail, terror is resorted to. The bour-
geoisie and the social-fascists resort to persecution and suppres-
sion of the revolutionary children’s movement.
//.—Development of the Communist Children’s Movement
1. The characteristic features of the children’s movement
today are:
(a) There is a crisis in our leagues in Germany, France,
England and Austria.
(b) The American league made great progress up to 1928,
but is not growing now. There is no progress to be observed in
Czecho-Slovakia, Norway and Canada.
(c) There is a numerical increase in our organizations in
Sweden, Finland, Poland, Mongolia and Switzerland.
(d) The Chinese children’s league was in 1927 of the nature
of a revolutionary mass movement; it has been practically
destroyed by the White terror, and is now continuing under most
difficult conditions. The children’s league in Mexico has in the
past few years become a relatively strong organization.
(e) New organizations have been founded in New Zealand,
Australia, Palestine, South Africa and Belgium. There is a
rudimentary organization in Tana Tuva.
This situation in our international movement must be con-
sidered extremely unsatisfactory. The fact that the situation
is so bad when the conditions are favorable for development and
when the Social-Democratic children’s organizations are making
progress is very serious. Should there be no change in the very
near future and should we not be able to carry out our class
line also in countries where our organizations are still developing,
we shall be faced with an international crisis in the children’s
movement. Only by a decisive turn towards mass work,'linked up
with a fundamental alteration of the present wrong system of
work, can the international crisis be averted and the road cleared
for further development of our organizations.


2. The outstanding subjective causes retarding the develop-
ment of our children’s movement are:
(a) Insufficient militancy, bad methods and a wrong system,
with no systematic mass work.
(b) Inadequacy, and some times complete absence, of real
political leadership on the part of the Y.C.L., a low level and
constant fluctuation of leaders, no assistance from the C.P., or
very little of it.
Concretely this is expressed in the fact that:
(a) The political activity of the children’s leagues is very un-
satisfactory. The struggles of the working class are practically
made no use of as a means of raising this activity. The Com-
munist children’s organizations do not organize the activity of
the children. The May Day events in Berlin, a series of chil-
dren’s strikes and participation in struggles of adult workers in
Germany, Czecho-Slovakia, France, etc., bear this out. The
result is that some of our organizations are still simple educa-
tional organizations and not the exponents of the militancy of
the workingclass children. With the exception of some attempts
to fight in the interests of the exfloited children this problem
has not been solved by any of the leagues. The organization of
the children of the unemployed and children who have par-
ticularly bad conditions is given no attention. The activity of
the children’s leagues is mostly expressed in assisting the Y.C.L. s
and the C.P.’s.
(b) Our children’s organizations are in most cases of a sec-
tarian character and are isolated from the masses. The organi-
zational structure does not meet with the requirements of a
militant organization; there are but few school nuclei and prac-
tically no factory nuclei. The question of creation of proletarian
children’s auxiliary organizations has as yet not been considered.
(c) It was a big political mistake that no systematic struggle
was waged against the social-fascist children’s organizations.
There is no systematic struggle against the Boy Scouts. The
religious organizations which influence large sections of children
are given practically no attention at all.
(d) The rigidity and imitation of methods used by the or


ganizations of adults are copied by the children’s leagues. This
gives them the character of “children’s political parties,” and the
result is that the children’s need of play, sport and collective
work and study is not satisfied. The inadequate adaptation of
work to the requirements and demands of the children of the
various ages causes insufficient development of initiative and self-
activity in the organizations.
(e) The opportunist tendencies in our own ranks concerning
the fighting methods and organizational structure are not com-
bated with sufficient vigor. The underestimation of the sig-
nificance of the social-fascist children’s organizations and the
disbelief in the possibility of reaching and influencing the major-
ity of the proletarian children are also signs of opportunism. The
Y.C.L.’s do not devote sufficient attention to the development
of new leaders for our children’s movement. The dissolution
of important organizations is a result of the lack of leaders in
many cases. The Communist Parties, with the exception of the
C.P.S.U., give our organizations no support and cling to their
traditional Social-Democratic conceptions on the question of
“education for children” (but not through struggle), which only
hampers our activity.
3. The good sides of our mass and militant work consist in
the following;
(a) Participation in a number of strikes and organization of
strikers’ children in special clubs in America, actions under Pioneer
leadership in schools of Berlin, Hamburg and other German
towns against the celebration of Constitution Day, organization
of the first conferences of proletarian children in America and
Germany, campaigns for the boycott of Empire Day in England.
(b) An increase in the number of children’s papers, the cir-
culation of the papers being in all countries greater than the
membership; the number of school papers has considerably in-
creased; there are the beginnings of a system of school delegates
in Germany.
(c) Practically all Leagues have begun to organize summer
camps. In many countries there are rudimentary living news


papers and a beginning has been made in training the active
Pioneers.
(d) The number of Pioneers and leaders visiting the U.S.S.R.
with the purpose of establishing closer contact with the Russian
organizations, increases yearly. Contact between children’s
leagues in capitalist countries has improved (delegations, interna-
tional camps, etc.).
4. Last year’s development of the Communist children’s
movement in the U.S.S.R. is characterized by an increased poli-
tical role of the Pioneers in the general struggle of the working
class in the sphere of socialist construction, development of ac-
tivity and self-activity of the children in connection with the
introduction of a new system and new methods in many organi-
zations, which brought the children closer to the leaders. Fluc-
tuation has greatly diminished and the organizations have grown.
The national and local meets have fully confirmed this.
With all this there are difficulties to be recorded in the develop-
ment of the Pioneer organizations even in the Soviet Union. The
leaders are unsatisfactory; insufficient work is being done amongst
the masses of children, especially the proletarian children; slow
transition on the part of a large number of organizations to the
new forms and methods; inadequate aid on the part of the
public (before the meet). The increase in membership is slow.
The chief difficulties lie in the slow rate of adoption of live
forms and methods of work and poor leadership on the part
of the Y.C.L., the slowness in catching up with the requirements
arising out of the period of reconstruction and socialist construc-
tion in the Soviet Union.
lll.—The Chief Tasks of the Communist Children’s Leagues
1. Within the framework of the general political tasks of
the C.P. and the Y.C.L. it is the task of the Communist chil-
dren’s leagues to win over the majority of the proletarian children
and to wage a struggle along the following lines:
(a) Against capitalist rationalization.
(b) Against imperialist war.
(c) Against fascism and social fascism.


The carrying out of these tasks will increase the terror of the
bourgeoisie against our children’s movement. The broad masses
of proletarian children as well as the adults must be mobilized
for a struggle for legality of our organizations, while Pioneer
leaders should simultaneously be prepared for underground work
in case of being outlawed.
A 'prerequisite for the carrying out of these tasks is a decisive
turn towards mass work in connection with real political leader-
ship on the part of the Y.C.L. and an energetic struggle against
all reformist and opportunist views.
2. The decisive turn towards mass work must be particularly
expressed in;
(a) A mobilization of the broad masses of proletarian chil-
dren for concrete aims and slogans of the political and economic
struggle understood by the children. Constant representation
of the interests especially of the exploited sections of the pro-
letarian children. Participation in the most important political
struggles and actions of the Y.C.L.’s and the C.P.’s.
(b) Intensified struggle against the Social-Democratic organi-
zations, especially the “Red Falcon,” against the fascist, national-
ist and clerical organizations. Joint struggle with other pro-
letarian children’s organizations under Pioneer leadership.
(c) Systematic activity towards establishment of school and
factory nuclei as the real basis of the movement.
(d) Application of the system of “transmission belts” through
the formation of special organizations for the child laborers,
cultural organizations, sport sections, atheist groups, etc. Special
attention must be paid to the formation of auxiliary and camou-
flage organizations in countries of the White terror.
(e) Change of the methods and elaboration of a system from
top to bottom which will help to overcome isolation and to es-
tablish contact with the masses of proletarian children. Better
adaptation of the general work to the psychological character-
istics of children, more interesting work in the children’s leagues.
(f) Creation of real children’s mass papers, good literature
for children, organization of a children’s correspondents’ move-
ment.


(g) Use of methods which would make it possible for every
Pioneer to take an active part in the work as a necessary con-
dition for the development of initiative and self-activity and
raising of the role of the active Pioneers as a driving force
stimulating the work of the Pioneers in general. Leadership
of the nuclei and groups by active Pioneers, and systematic work
amongst the latter.
(h) Renewal and enlargement of the number of leaders in
the children’s movement, to be drawn from the good proletarian
elements and mass workers. Creation of competent leading
organs in the national and local institutions of children’s leagues.
Systematic schooling of the leaders.
(i) Constant political guidance, control and formulation of
tasks on the part of the Y.C.L. Greatest possible support and
aid from the Party and the proletarian mass organizations.
IV.—The Immediate Tasks of the Communist Children’s
Leagues and the Carrying Out of the Turn
1. (a) Daily struggle for the economic interests of the chil-
dren in close contact with the support of the Party and the youth
in their political struggles, in spite of the interference on the
part of the bourgeois State and the reformist trade unions.
(b) Active participation in strikes and lockouts not only in
the form of securing material aid for the strikers by means of
collections and entertainments, but also in the form of active
participation by means of influencing the proletarian children and
carrying the struggle into the schools. Participation of the chil-
dren in the economic struggles of the adults must not be merely
in the form of solidarity action, but should be of the nature of
a struggle for the economic demands of the children themselves.
(c) Special attention should be paid to the organization of
proletarian children. This task can be accomplished only if
auxiliary organizations will be created for the various sections of
working children. These organizations must assume rigid organi-
zational forms and be able to fight in the interests of the children.
(d) The organization of the exploited sections of children
must be carried on in close contact with the trade union revolu


tionary organization of the adults. Wherever possible, children’s
sections should be set up in the Red unions. If for practical
reasons this is impossible, other forms should be found for the
industrial organization of the exploited children. The organiza-
tion of children in the reformist unions can be permitted only
if this would strengthen the revolutionary opposition.
(e) The W.I.R. is a proletarian mass organization which
must be chiefly utilized in order to bring the broad sections of
proletarian children under our influence. This is particularly
necessary in time of strikes and lockouts in which connection the
W.I.R. organizes the striking children in clubs and other or-
ganizations. Further it will be the task of the W.I.R. to organize
the children through the establishment and organization of read-
ing rooms, homes, clubs, festivals, camps and excursions. All
this work must naturally be done in close contact with and under
the political guidance of the Pioneer organizations, in which
connection the Pioneers must take active part.
2. The struggle in the school must also be carried on in
connection with the economic struggle. The struggle against
religious education, against preparations and propaganda in favor
of war, linked up with an energetic struggle against the social-
fascist and bourgeois children’s organizations, is also an urgent
task of the children’s leagues. The organization of this struggle
is, however, possible only if we set up a network of delegates
with the object of linking up the Pioneer organizations with all
schools and classes. It is essential to organize frequent meetings
and conferences of delegates. Wherever no school nuclei exist
it is particularly essential to gain influence in the school through
the delegates.
3. Against imperialist education, for Red defense! The
struggle against growing militarization and nationalist propaganda
which constitutes an essential part of school education is not
waged with sufficient vigor. The tasks of our organizations are
not to fight against military training as such, but against its im-
perialist character. In cases of optional military training the
Communist children’s organizations must carry on an energetic
campaign against participation of the proletarian children, and


do their utmost to discredit the enterprise. Wherever military
training is compulsory the fight has to be carried on by means
of internal disruption and elucidation of the imperialist and anti-
labor character of these military preparations.
The struggle against imperialist education and war preparation
can be also carried on in connection with Red defense training.
This must constitute a part of the turn in our work. The crea-
tion of children’s revolutionary defense organizations, especially
in time of strikes both in town and country, should be encouraged.
Wherever the opponent and fascist organizations attack us most,
special forms must be adopted of training the mass of proletarian
children in the spirit of Red defense. Collaboration with the
Red sport organizations and the organization of sport compe-
titions and games are a good means of work along this line.
Our children’s leagues must make it their task to explain to
the masses of children the importance of defending the father-
land of the proletarian children all over the world, the U.S.S.R.,
the role and significance of the Red Army, as an army of the
world proletariat. In practice, this should find expression in in-
dividual and collective protests in the schools, against the slanders
spread by the teachers, under the slogan: “The enemies of the
U.S.S.R. are the enemies of the workers and of the proletarian
children.”
In connection with the political tasks of strengthening the
international ties it is necessary to acquaint the children with the
process of socialist construction in the Soviet Union, the Five-
Year Plan and the life of the proletarian children in the U.S.S.R.
4. United front of all toiling children, struggle against
the opponents. In the struggle against war preparations and for
the influence on workers’ children, the children’s organization
must create a united front of all proletarian children, against
the bourgeois and social democratic children’s organizations.
The most important and most dangerous opponents in the
European countries are the social-fascist children’s organizations.
The social-fascist character of these organizations and their
pseudo-radical slogans (especially of the “Red Falcons”) must
be exposed before the proletarian children by means of sys


tematic propaganda in the schools and on the playgrounds. The
struggle against the Boy Scout movement which embraces large
sections of proletarian children must be conducted in conjunction
with the struggle against military training and imperialist educa-
tion. Work must also be done in exposing the anti-labor char-
acter of the masked “neutral” organizations.
The best means of fighting against the opponents is the em-
ployment of united front tactics from below with regard to the
proletarian children belonging to the opponent organizations.
These tactics can give considerable success especially in time of
strikes. It is necessary to utilize all inner contradictions in the
Boy Scout movement and to use in connection with that the
tactics of the united front from below and above, with the ob-
ject of splitting away the proletarian children from the opponent
organizations.
V.—Work in the Colonial and Semi-Colonial Countries
In view of the fact that as a result of the class struggles and
antagonisms between the imperialists, the colonies are becoming
of increasing importance, the entire Communist movement is
faced with the burning problem of winning over the masses of
workers and peasants in those countries.
The vast number of children employed in industry and agricul-
ture raises before us also the immediate task of starting a broad
revolutionary children’s movement in the colonies and semi-
colonies. The chief content of Pioneer work must consist in
an effort to improve the working and living conditions of the
children, as was done especially by the children’s movement in
China in 1927-28. Then the children must take part in the
revolutionary struggle of the toiling masses, especially against
imperialism and its allies in the colonies.
Pioneer organizations should be set up by the trade unions,
the Anti-Imperialist League, the revolutionary peasant organiza-
tions and the auxiliary youth organizations. It is a particular
task to organize legal auxiliary, and camouflage organizations
of an educational character in the colonies.
While supporting the Communist children’s movement in


China, special attention must be paid to the creation of children’s
organizations in the industrial centres of India. The children
of the imperialist countries must establish contact with the chil-
dren in the colonies and support in every way the activities of
the latter and carry on an energetic struggle against colonial
propaganda in the schools.
Vl.—The Struggle for Legality
As a result of the accentuated class antagonisms and the carry-
ing on of militant mass work on the part of our organizations,
repressions and persecutions will increase in proportion to our
movement. It must be our task to fight in every way for legal
existence through the mobilization of the broad masses of children
and toilers by means of demonstrations, meetings, etc., under the
leadership of special committees of the C.P.’s and Y.C.L.’s and
the proletarian mass organizations. Should our organizations
be outlawed they must not cease their activities but should re-
organize their ranks.
Only by means of utilization of auxiliary children’s organi-
zations, the creation of new “independent” children’s organiza-
tions, utilization of clubs and playgrounds, drawing in of the
1.L.D., the W.I.R. and other proletarian organizations, and
the development of real mass work, is it possible to defy the law.
In case of illegality, the illegal school and factory nuclei
will have to become the foundation of the Communist children’s
organizations and supply the active elements for work in the
legal camouflage children’s organizations.
In the organization of theatrical performances and camps
and in all other measures of this type, the Pioneers must play a
leading part. The leaders of the Communist children’s or-
ganization must beforehand get ready to work underground,
and particular attention should be paid to the training of the
leaders of the children’s movement in the Y.C.L.’s and the
Party organizations. (The possibility of drawing non-Party
sympathizers into the leadership of auxiliary organizations is not
out of the question).


INSTRUCTIONS ON THE SYSTEM AND METHODS
OF WORK IN THE PIONEER LEAGUES
The Fourth International Conference of Pioneer Leaders
goes on record that the decisions of the Third Conference
concerning the methods and system of work have not been carried
out. The result is that the introduction of live forms suitable
for children have not been realized in the daily work (living
newspapers, camps), that the daily work consists too much in
assistance to the adult organizations and that no systematic mass
work is being done amongst the children, that there is no uniform
live system of work either in the nuclei or any other organiza-
tions, including the International Children’s Bureau, that there
is no political guidance given by the Y.C.L.’s, that there are no
auxiliary organizations which would help to bring the unor-
ganized children and those belonging to opponent organizations
into our children’s leagues. The Fourth International Confer-
ence of Pioneer Leaders sets the task of carrying through a seri-
ous turn towards mass work in conformity with the decisions
of the Fifth World Congress of the Y.C.I. This turn towards
mass work can be accomplished only if the children’s leagues
set up a uniform instrument for the solution of their tasks;
this instrument is to be found in a system of work. In turning
towards mass work the forms and methods hitherto used are of
no avail, the children’s leagues must develop new forms of strug-
gle, they must adopt methods more suitable to the requirements
of the children, to their interests and to their psychological needs.
How is the System of Work to be Organized?
1. The system of work must make it possible for the children’s
leagues to reach the mass of children, to mobilize them, to es-
tablish close contact with them. It must further the Communist
education of the children. If the system does not lead to that;
it is a bad system.
The Existing System
The system now in existence is wrong. The chief short-
comings of it are:


(a) The predominance of residential organizations and the
weakness of school and factory nuclei.
(b) The absence of systematic daily work among the masses
and the failure to understand the sentiments of the workingclass
children.
(c) The abstract activities and lack of daily recruiting and
agitational work of the Pioneers.
(d) The suppression of initiative and self-activity of the
Pioneers by the leaders, the bad division of labor which does
not take into consideration the abilities of the children and their
interests, and the resulting artificially created inactivity of most
Pioneers.
(e) The isolated and family character of the Pioneer Leagues.
(f) The insufficient concrete guidance of the children’s
leagues by the Y.C.L.’s; the absence of a serious study of the
situation of the workingclass children and the processes going
on among them and the Pioneers, the inadequate evaluation of
experience, lack of knowledge concerning the organization to
be led, lack of control of activity.
If the children’s leagues are to become mass leagues, this badly
functioning system must be discarded and replaced by another
system, a system of mass work.
The System of Mass Work
The system of mass work presupposes:
1. That the Pioneer organization is located where the work-
ing-class children can be organized in masses ; where the working-
class children are under capitalist influence, i.e., where they are op-
pressed and exploited, a Communist mass organization of children
must be built in the capitalist and colonial countries on the basis
of school and factory nuclei.
2. That every plan of work is made by all members.
3. That the Pioneers themselves are the responsible organ-
izers and fighters, that each nucleus adopts a uniform system
of division of labor and every member is given a concrete task,
that the activity of the Pioneers is utilized and that work is
distributed according to abilities and inclinations of the members.


4. That the nucleus works against bourgeois education and
uses every means in order to bring up the Pioneers as energetic,
brave and active fighters.
5. That there is no contradiction between the inside work
of the nucleus and the group, and the tasks of the Pioneers among
the masses, and that the nucleus or group be the concentration
point of all work; that it takes into account all the requirements
of the children in order to train the Pioneers to be Communists.
6. That all experiences, successes and failures made by the
children are discussed and generalized by them.
7. That the Young Communist League gives the children’s
league concrete and political guidance, that the leaders earnestly
study the processes going on among the proletarian children, that
lessons are drawn from the experiences and that the organization
is concretely investigated and controlled so that a system of con-
crete guidance is worked out.
The Nuclei Must Emfloy Live Methods and Forms in Order to
Meet with the Requirements of All Children and Embrace All
Phases of the Life of the Children
The children’s leagues must not simply copy the forms and
methods used by the Y.C.L.’s and the Parties; they should find
live forms of work of interest to the children. The first task
is to educate their members to be young Communists. For this,
certain ceremonial forms of work are necessary (the ceremonial
acceptance of new members, greetings, taking the oath, Pioneer
rules of conduct). But these should not isolate the Pioneers
from the masses. For this it is necessary to bring to the mem-
bers, and through them to active workingclass children, certain
habits and knowledge which the ’ Third International Leaders’
Conference laid down as a basis for the Pioneers who are to be
the future members of the Y.C.L. and the Party. Every Pioneer
must be able to help the children of the toilers and to organize
the oppressed children. But he must also take the initiative during
play-time and in sports, walks, etc., and take part in the struggles
of the adults by organizing children.
In order to develop these habits in a Pioneer it is necessary


to take the interests of the various ages of the children into con-
sideration. In this connection the Pioneers in big school nuclei
should be divided according to the classes they attend and also
in sections (in the camp) in dividing the work. The initiative
of the Pioneers can be enhanced by the organization of contests
of various kinds. The system of various ranks and individual
contests is to be rejected and instead of the passive school methods
now in vogue in many leagues, live and interesting forms of work
should be adopted satisfying the intellectual and manual require-
ments of the children in games and amusements. The Russian
league in this respect points the way to the others. Greater em-
phasis must be laid on such forms as sports, games, the living
newspaper, excursions, orchestras, camps, films, wall newspapers,
Red corners, which should really be made to serve the revolution-
ary struggle and the requirements of mass work.
The Training of Active Pioneers
Groups of active Pioneers to be responsible for all work of
the organization should be developed in all leagues. These ac-
tive Pioneers should be trained locally and nationally. Work
among the active Pioneers is one of the best methods of raising
the activity and initiative of the Pioneers and of bringing about
good work and discipline. It is not enough to train the active
Pioneers in general, they should be trained for the performance
of special tasks.
For instance the organization of special conferences of leaders
of school nuclei, of secretaries of Pioneer papers, of correspon-
dents, newspaper boys and agents. Active Pioneers trained thus
guarantee that the league will develop into a mass organization.
Apart from special conferences, political study circles should be
organized for active Pioneers adapted to their various ages. The
principal problems of Communism should be brought home to
the Pioneers and their interest in these problems should be stimu-
lated. Special manuals should be written for these schools.
Spheres of Work of the Nucleus
The nucleus must become the concentration point of all work
of the Pioneer leagues. It must engage in all spheres of work


and the work of the individual Pioneers. Every member of
the nucleus must be the organizer in the struggle of the children
for their economic, political and cultural interests in the school,
in the place of employment, on the playgrounds, in the streets
and blocks, in the institutions of the bourgeoisie, in the nationalist
and fascist organizations, and at home.
New Forms of Current Work
The following forms of support and development have been
brought forward in the struggles in the schools:
1. School Meetings. These can take place during recesses
and after school hours to discuss concretely the problems of the
school. These meetings need not consist of dry speeches and
reports; they should be enlivened by means of living newspapers,
lantern slides, films, orchestras, questions and answers, teachers’
trials, etc. Meetings during recesses can be held also in illegal
organizations.
2. The School Pafer is the most popular method of struggle.
It need not consist of long articles, but should contain such
articles and reports on school questions linked up with general
political issues. It should have caricatures, light verses, stories,
questions and answers, dialogues and jokes.
3. Leaflets , circulars i school telegrams to all children, open
letters to all pupils, small and striking stickers with slogans pre-
ferably in verse, containing material in support of the struggle,
can be used apart from the school paper.
The struggle in the schools has hitherto been waged in the
following forms:
1. Discussion with the pupils and teachers.
2. Proclamation of oral and written demands.
3. Refusal to take part in Jingoistic and religious lessons.
4. Boycott of some teachers and singing revolutionary songs.
5. Elections of school representatives.
6. Sending of delegations to the authorities with demands.
7. Written protests against punishment, bad food, high ex-
penditures, through the Communist parliamentarians by means of
collecting signatures from the schools.


8. Leaving school when threatened by the teacher.
9. School strikes.
The organization of these struggles should be exclusively the
work of the nucleus. School delegates should be elected in all
classes to help in this work. These delegates are to hold regular
conferences both locally and on a city scale.
Delegates should be elected at school meetings to conferences
of working-class children to decide what action is to be taken
in connection with various campaigns (August 1, May 1, Inter-
national Children’s Week, November 7, Russian delegations,
etc.). Students’ committees or committees for the election of
these are to be chosen for the performance of definite tasks by
the delegates, school representatives and representatives of parents’
organizations.
The Nuclei Must Pay Special Attention to the Participation of
Children in Strikes and Lockouts of Adults and to the
Organisation of Working Children
The following are the most important forms of children’s
participation in strikes;
1. The meetings of these children (in clubs of working chil-
dren) must take place in the evening. Apart from discussing
the condition of the children in the given industry the meetings
should be enlivened by living newspapers, music, lantern slides,
cinemas, theatre, which should be presented in an interesting
form. The children themselves should report through their cor-
respondent circles on the situation and also through a
2. Paper of the children of the given industry. This paper
should report on the condition of the children in the various spheres
of work. The paper of the children working on farms should
write on the children in agriculture; for the children of a city
district special papers should be issued. These papers should deal
with the causes of child labor and the struggle against child la-
bor. They should advocate the children’s demands. They should
contain funny stories, caricatures of slave-drivers of children, and
should by their form be of interest to the children.
3. Songs and collective recitals are also of agitational and
organizational value.


It is necessary to establish rigid organizational forms for these
working children and to create a delegate body also here for
permanent contact between the children’s league and the work-
ing children. The tasks of these delegates are to be the organiza-
tion of working children in the various parts of the city, the
establishment of contact with the unions, with the Young Com-
unist and Party nuclei, the sending of delegates to the unions,
and municipalities, the leadership of struggles. It is important
to stimulate interest among the working children in the fate
of their comrades of other capitalist countries and to inform them
on the conditions of the children in the USSR by means of mutual
correspondence.
While Most of the Work of the Leagues Is to Be Conducted
in the Schools and among the Working Children y They
Must Not Neglect Their Work among the Chil-
dren in the Street and on Playgrounds
The majority of the children spent most of their free hours
in these places. Here is where they play and develop their
faculties, where they think for themselves, where they are their
own organizers of games and excursions, of experiments and
discoveries.
Closely studying the games and the life of these children the
nuclei and the groups must work in the yards, streets, sport
grounds, skating rinks and halls, instruct some Pioneers to
organize the children in these places and to lend to their games
a proletarian character. Punch and Judy shows and living
newspapers, radio and collective recitations, marches and or-
chestras are the things which should enliven the workers’ streets
in the summer. This work is also to be conducted on the play-
grounds and in swimming pools, on the skating rinks, and in
gymnasium halls. It is an important task of the children’s leagues
to fight for new sanitary, spacious and free playgrounds, swim-
ming pools, skating rinks and clubs. The children in the street
and in the workers’ sport organizations should be rallied around
these slogans and by means of demonstrations, moving pictures,
collective recitals, the demands should be advocated. They should


also be advocated in the tenement house papers of the Communist
Party and by issuing leaflets to the children.
Work among Children in Opponent Leagues
Hitherto this work has been grossly neglected. It must be the
task of the nuclei to create a proletarian united front by means
of intensive work in the school, by means of live forms of inside
work, in order to draw the proletarian children of the opponent
organizations into our struggle.
The bourgeoisie and the Social-Democracy are now trying
particularly to keep the working-class children away from their
class and are creating for this purpose thousands of different
kinds of children’s organizations. Only intensive work in the
school in the interests of the toiling children will make the strug-
gle against the opponents successful. One of the methods would
be the publication of special material to the children of the op-
ponent organizations. It is necessary to work among the chil-
dren in the Social-Democratic organizations —the Red Falcons,
the Friends of Children, the Socialist Sunday Schools—who can
be won over for the struggle in the interests of the children in
order to create an opposition in those organizations.
A special struggle should be waged by the children at home.
This activity need not be confined to the winning over of chil-
dren alone. The Pioneers should try to win over the adults,
especially working-class mothers, urging them to read the Party
press and to become interested in the Party.
This activity requires also a struggle in the family against
backward ideas (religion, petty-bourgeois tendencies). Through
the organization of Red corners, through the rejection of bour-
geois holidays and customs, through the propagation of proletar-
ian holidays, through assistance to mothers, through collective
bringing up of the children, the Pioneer can become the exponent
of Communist ideas at home.
To liven up our mass work such forms as the living news-
paper, entertainments, demonstrations, films, lantern slides, mass
games, excursions, rambles, public reading of the children’s press,
festivals and camps, are good means. More emphasis must be


laid on that. Here some of the methods used by the bourgeois
children’s organizations, especially the Boy Scouts, should be
tried, since they stimulate the interest and initiative of the chil-
dren, enhance the sturdiness of the proletarian children and are
attractive to them: sporting games, codes, signals, following of
trails, map reading, hiking with a compass, camps, mass gather-
ings, orchestras, uniforms, military parades, etc.).
To stimulate interest and to satisfy the requirements of the
children it would be expedient to organize circles in the school
nuclei and groups which could be attended by Pioneers as well
as by unorganized children. These circles are not to take the
place of the nuclei, but should help them out in their work.
The nature of these circles may be of different kinds. A circle
of correspondents of the school paper or the children’s press
has as its object to speak with the correspondents about their tasks,
about the writing of reports, about reporting at the playgrounds,
etc.; to acquaint the children with the technique of the printing
of a paper, to develop specialists, draftsmen, story writers, poets,
etc.; to enlarge the number of correspondents, to discuss op-
ponent and foreign children’s papers, to organize criticisms of
papers, etc.
The sport circle emphasizes the importance of workers’ sports
for workers’ children and tries to encourage sport. It speaks
also of the struggle against the bourgeois children’s organizations
for the unity of the workers’ sport movement. It can organize
shooting practice, exercises and military games with the object
of developing the faculties of self-defense among the working-
class children.
After good practice the musical circle can contribute to the
enlivenment of mass work. It can encourage and develop in-
dividual capacities, the composing of songs, etc.
There can also be circles for the production of posters, illu-
strated magazines, etc., circles for the organization of living
newspapers, photo circles, radio circles, handiwork circles.
The organization of political classes for older children is of
political importance. These should deal with all political current


questions and fundamental problems through the wall news-
papers, lectures and discussions.
The Children's Press
One of the best weapons in our struggle, the best way of es-
tablishing contact with the unorganized children, is the children’s
press. The chief task of this press should be to secure the co-
operation of the children and contantly to criticize them. Our
children’s press must be the press of the proletarian children them-
selves. That is why the utmost attention must be paid to the
development of a correspondents’ movement. The children cor-
respondents must be drawn in for systematic work in the press.
This is possible only if the editors carefully and favorably con-
sider the correspondence, give their replies and take interest in
encouraging the correspondents. The children correspondents’
movement is important not only in connection with the proletarian
revolutionary and child-like character of our press; it is also a
great organizational factor which enables us to know the situa-
tion and the sentiment of the working-class children, enables us
to penetrate the schools and workshops and to talk to the children.
The organization of children’s correspondents’ circles, in con-
nection with the school papers, the children’s columns in the Party
papers and the national press, is one of the best methods of lively
mass work. That is why the children correspondents should carry
their own emblems (pens) in time of demonstrations and special
material should be issued for the recruiting of more correspon-
dents.
The central children’s papers must more than heretofore be of
a child-like character. They must represent the interests of the
children, their contents should be such as would satisfy the re-
quirements of the children, and they should deal with all possible
phases of life. Side by side with correspondence from children
they should contain articles on current political issues, revolu-
tionary stories and poems, articles on foreign countries, articles
on natural science and technique, humorous stories, jokes, puzzles,
etc., of interest to children. Children’s afternoons, festivals and
demonstrations should be organized as a means of advertising


these papers. The sale of the national paper should be system-
atically organized jointly with the Communist Party so that they
reach the widest possible sections of working-class children.
A good complement to the national papers is the institution of
children’s pages in the Party press. They make it possible not
only to deal with local events of interest to children, to publish
articles in the local dialect; they also guarantee steady readers
who cannot be reached through the national children’s press, they
enlarge the number of children correspondents and inform wide
circles of adult workers, especially women, on the problems of
the children’s movement. It is important that the editors of local
or district publications place the children’s page in the hands of
the children’s bureaus so that the political aspect of the page be
guaranteed.
The principal forms of children’s papers are the school paper,
the district paper, and the paper of the working children. These
papers can deal with the questions of immediate interest to the
children. In these papers the children are not only correspondents,
but also the editors, printers and sellers. Greatest attention is to
be paid to giving these papers a lively form. The creation of
these papers should be assisted by the centre by means of technical
and editorial instructions, by means of regular publication of
material for these papers. Simultaneously contests should be or-
ganized as to the most regular publication of school and district
papers, the best school correspondence circle, which should be
furthered by means of introduction of a column with criticism
in the functionaries’ organs.
In addition to this press there is also to be mentioned the pub-
lication of special literature, which is now very poor. Interesting
literature which is now skilfully used only by the bourgeoisie
must be replaced by cheap but good revolutionary literature.
The End


II- 11 ■'
Young Communist , Step Forward!
"STORM” THE FACTORIES
To build our TUUL Sections, to extend our influence among
the youth, to establish active shop nuclei, to build a MASS
YOUNG COMMUNIST LEAGUE, WE NEED A POW-
ERFUL WEEKLY ORGAN.
the YOUNC WORKER
\fhe best guarantee that our Weekly “Young Worker” will be
''kept up and built up into a mass organ, is the mobilization of
the entire League membership for work. Every member of the
Young Communist League must subscribe to the Young Worker.
Every Young Communist must sell the “Young Worker” at
factor}’ gates, at meetings, in the working class neighborhoods, at
union meetings, in mass youth organizations, etc.
Read Spread Build and Write for
the YOUNC WORKER
SUBSCRIPTION RATES: One year, $1.50; Six months, 75 cents;
Three months, 50 cents.
SUB BLANK
[ am sending $ to pay for my sub ta the “Young
Worker” for a period of months.
Name Address
City
State
TWO NEW PAMPHLETS
Issued by YOUTH INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS
Every League member must read them
No. I—THE ROAD TO MASS ORGANIZATION OF
PROLETARIAN CHILDREN 10c
No. 2—WHERE TO BEGIN? 10c
Special rates on quantity orders.
Rush your order for these pamphlets to:
YOUNG COMMUNIST LEAGUE
43 East 125th Street New York City
