

The
WAR MEMORIAL
HOSPITAL
HRfDISTICE DAY, 1925




War Memorial Hospital, Waverley
RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT
A Song of T hanksgiving.
“Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name give
Glory.” The Council of the Hospital humbly and gratefully
record their sense of the Divine Guidance in the affairs of the
Hospital and in the success which has been attained in this effort
made in the name of the Great Healer,
How It Began.
Having decided that the most fitting memorial of our Methodist
people to the boys who had “gone West” was the foundation
of a Hospital, the question had to be faced as to location and
buildings. It was just at, this point that Mrs. Ebenezer Vickery
and the members of her family made their magnificent offer of
“Edina” and the surrounding grounds, and thus that which
might have taken years to accomplish was immediately
practicable.
The Romance of Finance.
Very wonderful has been the way in which people have re-
sponded to the Hospital appeal. Apart altogether from the
magnificent gift of the main house, £25,640 has been spent in
additional buildings and land, and £7,595 in furnishing and
equipment. The Council gave their promise that they would
endeavour so to manage the affairs of the Hospital that it
should pay its own way, and that whatever generous people
gave should be expended on the reduction of the capital debt
and the necessary enlargements. This promise it has been
possible to keep to the fullest extent, despite the fact that the
most generous consideration has always been given to those not
able to pay the nominal charge which the Hospital makes.


A Multiplication Table.
The growth of the Hospital’s activities is revealed by the
fact that during the year 1921, 310 patients passed through
our hands; 462 patients in 1922; 843 patients in 1923; 1,114
patients in 1924, and 932 for the nine months of 1925. The
working expenses of the Hospital have naturally increased
accordingly, as the following figures will shew:—l92l, £2,297;
1922, £3,855; 1923, £6,642; 1924, £9,123; 1925 (nine
months), £7,547.
The Kingdom of the Baby.
The maternity department from the very beginning has been
an important feature of the work, and now a whole block has
to be devoted to that section. When it was first decided to
set aside the building now occupied for this purpose, we wondered
whether it would be too extensive, but the problem now is that
it is barely adequate in size for the demands that are made
upon it. To date 816 babies have been welcomed into the
world by the staff in this department.
The Nurses of To-morrow.
As soon as the Hospital was established the Australian Trained
Nurses’ Association put their seal on it and recognised the War
Memorial Hospital as a fully-accredited training Institution.
This side of the work has grown apace and there are under
our care 24. Probationers, who are cheerfully facing the
four years’ intensive training which is required before the
imprimatur of the Hospital and the A.T.N.A. can be placed
on them. Many of these are country girls, and it is impos-
sible to estimate the service that is being rendered the com-
munity generally by this training scheme, and we are satisfied
that the War Memorial Hospital Nurses will stand in the
front rank of this great Profession.
The Touch of Home.
Those able to judge have expressed the opinion that the Nurses’
Quarters are equal to anything provided in Australia, and that
the adjunct of the beautiful grounds makes it an ideal home
for the young folk under our care. Whilst of necessity, seeing
that life and death are involved, the discipline of the Hospital
is strict, the aim is always kept in view of letting the trainees
feel, as far as ever it may be practicable, the atmosphere of
home.
Ho nour Where Honour Is Due.
If the question be asked to whom most should the success of
the Hospital be attributed? there is only one answer that can
be given, and that is, to the Matron and the magnificent staff


of Sisters, Nurses, and Probationers who have so splendidly
rallied round her. The Council records its great appreciation
of the administrative ability and high nursing skill of Matron
Hunter, who has given herself unsparingly to the task com-
mitted to her charge. It is well that we should be ever mind-
ful and grateful to the noble women who chose the nursing
profession in preference to many others which from a worldly
standpoint would give more of means and more of ease.
The Lady Folk.
Next to the nursing staff our tribute must be paid to the splen-
did band of ladies associated in the Waverley War Memorial
Guild and the associated Guilds in other districts. Each year
a Fete has been held, with the result that not only have the
general funds of the Hospital been benefited, but the whole of
the linen has been provided without any call on the Treasurers
at all. If it were not for this it would have been impossible
to present so satisfactory a result, and the energy and enthu-
siasm of Mrs. Herd, as Honorary Secretary, and of the
members, have been a delight and an inspiration.
Greatly, too, are we indebted to the ladies of the Flower Guild,
who, year in, year out, provide and arrange the flowers in all the
wards of the Hospital, and speak words of kindly cheer to the
patients.
One Increasing Purpose.
All along those who have had the honour of being given the
responsibility of directing the Hospital’s affairs have been work-
ing to an ideal. We want, in memory of our honoured dead,
that this Hospital should be in equipment, service, and com-
pleteness, equal to anything in Australia. No tribute that we
can pay can be sufficient; but we have never relinquished our
aim to keep our heroes in remembrance by a beautiful and
complete temple of healing that would be at least a worthy
memorial.
Our Dreams.
We are planning many things for the future. It would be of
vast benefit to us to have a fully-equipped X-ray plant. The
establishment of our own laundry would mean a definite
economy, and there is a great demand for further buildings to
meet the very real need for a rest-home, and to still further
extend our hospitality in providing for necessitous cases. The
grounds are admirably adapted for the fulfilment of many
extensions which we have in mind, and remembering the splen-
did giving in the past, we are sure that those who admire the
work of the Hospital will find the means to make our dreams
come true. 1


Do Not Be Afraid to Ask.
There are many questions which will occur to those who are
interested in the Hospital in relation to its present activities
and its future development. Very gladly will we answer any
questions relating to the scope and operations of the Insti-
tution, for we want our people everywhere to realise that this
is their memorial, and the Council are merely the Trustees of
the Methodist people and other friends, endeavouring to carry
out their behest.
Your Task.
We shall most gladly acknowledge monetary gifts, be they
large or small, but there are many who are not able to help
financially, who nevertheless can render magnificent service
by making the Hospital more generally known, and speaking of
it in sympathetic and kindly terms. From the beginning we
have been greatly encouraged and heartened by the sympathetic
attitude and generous thought of the Methodist folk, and we
ask a continuance of that kindly outlook which is essential for
the lasting success of the Hospital.
Talking About Wills.
Our people generally have not much to leave when life’s tasks
are finished, for the doctrine of giving is so well fulfilled that
in many instances there is not much left at the close of the
day. Nevertheless, there are many people who, in their Wills,
like to remember the sick and the suffering, and to them we
commend the insertion in their Will of a clause, leaving a
generous gift to the Treasurers of the Methodist War Memorial
Hospital. Already we have been substantially helped in this
way, and of this one thing everyone may be satisfied, that the
utmost care and the fullest of our ability is being exercised to
get the best results out of money placed in our hands.
To You Our Hearty Thanks.
It is impossible for the Council to individually say “Thank you”
to the many folk of all types and classes who in numerous ways
have helped the Hospital. Will they accept this inadequate
but most heartfelt expression of thanks. It would never have
been possible to have succeeded so splendidly had it not been
for this league of service in which so many lovers of their kind
have joined to help those in whose hands the control of the
Hospital has been placed.
HAROLD WHEEN,
President of the Council.
H. M. HAWKINS,
November 11, 1925. Hon. Secretary
Epzuorth Press, Sydney.
