







GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW ZEALAND.
SKETCH MAP
OF
NEW ZEALAND
SHOWING
PRINCIPAL MINERAL
LOCALITIES.
BY
JAMES HECTOR.
me.


THE
HANDBOOK
OF
NEW ZEALAND MINES
(WITH MAPS AND ILLUSTRATIONS).
PART I.
GOLD, SILVER, COPPER, AND ANTIMONY MINING, ETC.
PART II.
COAL-DEPOSITS AND COAL-MINES.
APPENDIX.
SCHOOLS OF MINES, PRINCIPAL FOREST-TREES, BUILDING-MATERIALS,
MINERAL WATERS, MINERAL. LEASES, ETC.
WELLINGTON.
BY AUTHORITY: GEORGE DIDSEURY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1887.
Price 5s.]




GENERAL GOVERNMENT OF NEW ZEALAND.
LEGISLATUEE.
The Legislature is composed of the Governor; Legislative Council, appointed
by the Crown for life; and House of Eepresentatives (ninety-five members),
elected for three years.
GOVEENOE.
Lieutenant-General Sir William Feancis Dbummond Jebvois, G.C.M.G., C.B.
CABINET.
Premier, Attorney-General, and Minister
of Education
Hon _ sir Eobbet Stout, k.C.M.G.
Colonial Treasurer, Postmaster-General,'
Commissioner of Telegraphs, Com-
missioner of Stamps, and Com-
missioner of Customs
Hon. Sir Julius Vogel, K.C.M.G.
Minister of Public Works .. •• Hon. E. Richardson, C.M.G.
Nativo Minister, Minister of Defence,
Minister of Lands, and Com- ■
missioner of State Forests
Hon. J. Ballance.
Minister of Justice .. .. .. * Hon. J. A. Tole.
Colonial Secretary ..
Minister of Mines and Minister of)
Marine J
Hon. P. A. Buckley.
Hon _ w _ j_ Larnach, C.M.G.
Member of the Executive (without!
portfolio) J
Hon. W. H. Eeynolds.
Secretary to the Cabinet .. .. A. J. Willis.
AGENT-GENEEAL IN LONDON.
Sir F. Dillon Bell, K.C.M.G.
GEOLOGICAL SUEVEY DEPAETMENT.
Director .. .. .. .. James Hectoe, C.M.G., M.D., F.E.S.
Analyst .. .. .. .. W. Skey.
Clerk .. .. .. .. E. B. Gobe.
MINES DEPAETMENT.*
Acting Under-Secretary . . .. T. H. Hamee.
Inspecting Engineer . . .. H. A. Goedon, F.G.S.
Chief Clerk .. .. .. J. T. Maeshall.
Inspectors of Mines .. .. .. Geo. J. Binns, F.G.S., and J. Gow,
Middle Island; J. M. McLaren
and Geo. Wilson, North Island.
* Names of Wardens and Eeceivers of Gold Eevenue will be found in their respective
districts.




PREFACE.
Having, as a colonist, always felt a keen interest in tlie
development of the mineral resources of New Zealand,
I have for a long time thought that a great want would
be supplied by the compilation of a handbook on
mining in the colony, to aid those persons whose tastes
and proclivities foliow in the direction of mining, as
well as my mining friends generally who may now he
practically engaged in such pursuits. The value that a
publication of the kind would have in disseminating
authoritative information became more apparent to me
in the beginning of 1885, after I had taken office, and
had been able to visit the numerous mining districts,
and personally inspect the many and various important
works in which miners are at present occupied. Although
I had been living eighteen years in New Zealand, I had
never learned, nor even realized, that her mining indus-
tries could boast of such magnificent monuments of
enterprise—the results of capital and labour —as are to
he found in the Middle and North Islands.
In Otago and Westland there are large tracts of
country where hydraulic, sluicing operations are carried
on, notably in the neighbourhood of Tinker’s, Skipper’s
Point, and the terraces of the Shotover Biver; at Bimu,
Boss, Humphrey’s Gully, Kumara, and Addison’s Flat.
The improved appliances now in use show that this
branch of mining industry is still vigorously worked,
and the system produces fully one-half of the total yield
of gold in the colony. The great extent of country
containing gold-bearing quartz reefs both in the North
and South Islands is, I am glad to state, receiving more
attention from those who take an interest in mining. The


reefs are continually and steadily being developed, and
the yield of gold therefrom is annually increasing; while
that produced from alluvial workings has been gradually
decreasing. We may therefore look forward to a regular
growth in the product from our quartz-mines, and it is
from them that the permanence of our gold-harvest will
in the future mainly depend. The promised richness
of the silver-lodes which have been discovered all along
the Hauraki Gulf, in the North Island, the enormous
amount of capital invested, the large number of men
employed, and the valuable plant and machinery
provided for testing and smelting the ores, must tend
to secure for this class of mining in the colony a
beneficial and lasting prominence.
In the Middle Island the lands which contain auri-
ferous-gravel drifts and gold-bearing-quartz reefs com-
prise an area of nearly 20,000 square miles, or about
13,000,000 acres—say 9,000 square miles in the Otago
mining districts, 7,500 square miles in Westland, 2,800
square miles in Karamea, 200 square miles in Wairau
and Pelorus, and 60 square miles around Queen Charlotte
Sound. In Stewart Island gold is known to exist over
an area of 130 square miles, although mining is not
carried on there to any extent, nor have any rich deposits
yet been found. In the North Island, with the excep-
tion of small quantities of loose gold gathered from the
beds of creeks and gullies, and mixed with quartz, the
valuable auriferous and argentiferous discoveries have
been confined hitherto to quartz lodes.
The area of land proved to be richly auriferous and
argentiferous in the North Island extends from Wai-
orongomai, near Te Aroha, almost due north to Cape
Colville, and comprises about 900 square miles.
This gives a total area of nearly 21,000 square miles
of gold- and silver-bearing lands already known and
proved in New Zealand, both metals having been found
over that area at various and numerous localities, from
Stewart Island in the South to Cape Colville in the
North.


In the Provincial Districts of Otago, Westland, Nel-
son, and Marlborough are the old and familiarly-known
mining centres of Tuapeka and Blue Spur, Weather-
stone’s, Waitahuna, Waipori, Maerewhenua, Naseby,
Black’s, St. Bathan’s, Tinker’s, Roxburgh, Alexandra,
Dunstan, Cromwell, Arrow, Skipper’s, Shotover, Mace-
town, Queenstown, Wanaka, Criffel, Riverton, Round-
hill, Orepuki, Longwood, Switzer’s, Haast, Bruce Bay,
•Gillespie’s Beach, Okarito, Ross, Rimu, Kanieri, Wai-
mea, Kumara, Greenstone, Greymouth, Grey Valley,
Westport, Lyell, Boatman’s, Charleston, Addison’s
Plat, Mokihinui, Collingwood, Wangapeka, and Waka-
marina—if these names are not euphonic I am not
responsible—and numerous other localities, containing
alluvial gold as well as auriferous-quartz deposits.
Each centre has been more or less worked by the
miner; but each has ample room for extra labour and
capital to better and more fully develop the wealth
•still lying dormant. So extensive are these fields
that generations may come and go, and then only
a portion of their riches will have been given up ; for
gold has been found and traced across the Middle Island
from Bruce Bay, on the West Coast, to the Molyneuxor
Clutha River, until she empties herself into the sea, on
the East Coast, a distance of 200 miles ; and from Mar-
tin’s Bay to Collingwood, on the West Coast, a distance
of 350 miles.
In respect to coal, valuable fields of brown and
semi-bituminous coal are known to exist in the North
Island, as seams have been worked for many years
in the localities of Kawakawa, Kamo, Whauwhau,
Whangarei, Waikato, and Mokau; while on the West
Coast of the Middle Island there are gigantic seams of
the finest bituminous coal, many of which vary in thick-
ness from 18ft. to over 40ft., and are to be met with in
the country extending from Collingwood to the Buller
nnd Grey Rivers.
True anthracite, or glance, coal is to be found in
-situ in the vicinity of Lake Coleridge, in Canterbury;


and there are extensive seams of brown and pitch coala
in several parts of Westland, and in Marlborough, Can-
terbury, and Otago. The seams in the south, near
Kaitangata, are of great thickness, ranging even up to
40ft. These coal-measures extend over a very con-
siderable area, and only await the aid of enterprise and
capital to fully develop them.
Cinnabar, the best of mercurial ores, has been known
for some years to exist in alluvium in the localities of
Waipori and Waitahuna, and recently it has been found
in situ. A leader of this ore occurs in the galena lode
lately discovered at Tui Creek, near Te Aroha, in the
North Island.
Cassiterite —din ore—is found in alluvial drifts in
the country between the Mokihinui and Waimangaroa
Rivers ; also between Jacob’s and Paringa Rivers, and
south of Jackson’s Bay. It has never yet been seen in
situ in this colony, but no doubt it will be found in that
condition as more of the forest country becomes opened
up by tracks and roads.
Galena—lead sulphide—exists on Cape Colville
Peninsula, and a large lode is to be seen at Tui Creek,,
in the North Island. It has also been discovered in
the districts of Collingwood, Wangapeka, Rangitoto,
and several other places in the Middle Island.
At Vv r aipori, in Otago, and Queen Charlotte Sound,
in Marlborough, as well as in many other places both
in the North and Middle Islands, antimony has been
found. There are now large smelting-works in full
operation at Endeavour Inlet, where a rich lode has
been traced for a considerable distance. The metal
produced and exported to England has been pronounced
by competent judges to be of high quality.
Copper has been found and worked at the Kawau
and Great-Barrier Islands, north of Auckland; also at
the Bun Mountain, Aniseed Valley, and D’Urville
Island, near Nelson; and it has been met with at
Waipori, Moke Creek, and other places in Otago;
although I am unable to say that there has yet been


a satisfactory prospecting for this mineral, nor have
any lodes been thoroughly tested.
In close proximity to Collingwood, near Nelson,
coal, iron, hcematite, and limestone —each excellent
in quality and prodigious in quantity—are to be had
together, sufficient to manufacture all the steel rails
necessary for the use of Australasian railroads for the-
present and succeeding century. These natural and
valuable gifts lie modestly waiting among the easy-
sloping hills looking down on the sea, and seemingly
watching for an union of enterprise with capital to
come and blend them.
In the North Island there are extensive deposits of
kauri-gum, which have already yielded upwards of three
and a half millions sterling to the wealth of the colony,
and are probably destined to add several millions more
ere the rich deposits are exhausted. As the rapid
growth of the towns and populations in Otago and
Westland has in a great measure been due to their
auriferous wealth, so also to a large extent has the
prosperity of Auckland been 'aided by its kauri-gum
fields and the valuable parent kauri tree, which is only
found in the northern forests of the North Island.
Had I not been taught by ocular demonstration that
these natural circumstances and conditions are real and
encouraging facts, I should have been ignorant of them.
How many thousands of people in New Zealand are still
uninformed that such stores of rich natural resources
exist over many portions of the colony, and which only
await the aid of capital and labour to amply reward those
who may have the enterprise to search for and develop
them ?
' • Lastly, viewing all the circumstances that I have
briefly set forth here, it may perhaps he admitted
that this little work will supply a want to the public ;
and, while I cannot pretend to think this first edition
of “ The Handbook of New Zealand Mines ” in all
respects what I desire it should be, I ask the reader’s,
indulgence for any imperfections. When I state that


innumerable difficulties were met with in getting toge-
ther the information requisite for compiling the book, I
feel sure that every allowance will be fairly made for
its shortcomings.
If any merit is attributable to the work, it is fairly
due to Mr. Patrick Galvin, of Wellington, who has been
employed by me to compile it from data which, after
much time and labour, have been collected.
To Dr. Hector, the Wardens on the different gold-
fields, and the officers generally of the Mines and Lands
Departments, as well as to many of those friends both
directly and indirectly engaged in mining, I beg to ex-
press my thanks and gratitude for the readiness with
which each one did his part in collecting and supplying
necessary and valuable information.
To the honourable gentleman who may succeed me
in the office I have now the honour to fill I make this
request: that he will arrange to have further informa-
tion and material supplied from time to time, with the
object, on some future occasion, of issuing from his
department a second and improved edition of this book;
and if meanwhile it assists to instruct any of those who
may be engaged or interested in mining, and helps to
■extend the progress of the industry in New Zealand,
my purpose will have been satisfactorily served.
W. J. M. LARNACH.
The Camp, Otago, 31st December, 18SG.


CONTENTS.
PART I.
GOLD, SILVER, COPPER, AND ANTIMONY MINING, Etc.
Pages.
Introductory .. .. .. .. . • .. • ■ xvii.-xix.
Otago and Southland .. .. .. .. .. • • 1-9*
Early gold-discoveries .. .. .. .. • • 1-H
Quartz-reefs, iron, and copper .. .. .. • • 14-15
Tuapoka Warden’s District .. .. .. .. • • 10-3 d
Dunstan Warden’s District .. .. .. . - .. 36-45
Wakatipu Warden’s District .. .. .. .. • • 46-57
Mount Ida Warden’s District.. .. .. .. •• 68-84
Maerewhenua Warden’s District .. .. . - • ■ 85-87
Hindon Warden’s District .. .. .. .. •• 87-00
Orepuki and Longwood Warden’s District .. .. .. 90-04
West Coast (Middle Island) .. .. .. .. - ■ 95-236
Explorations and early gold-discoveries .. .. .. 95-149
Jackson’s Bay and Olcanto Warden’s District .. .. .. 150-154
Hokitika Warden’s District .. .. .. •• •• 155-175
Grey Warden’s District .. .. .. .. • • 176-185
Inangahua Warden’s District.. .. .. . • • • 186-210
Bullcr Warden’s District .. .. .. .. • • 211-236
Nelson .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 237-268
Early gold-discoveries .. .. .. .. • • 237-251
Collingwood Warden’s District .. .. .. • • 252-260
West Wanganui District .. .. .. .. • • 261-263
Wangapeka Warden’s District .. .. . - - • 263-268
Marlborough .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 269-274
Wellington .. .. .. .. .. - - - • 275-277
Auckland .. .. .. .. .. . - • • 278-343
Early gold-discoveries .. .. .. - • • • 278-281
Hauraki Warden’s District .. .. .. ■ •• 281-343
Economic Minerals .. .. .. .. .. • • 344-354
Iron-ores .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 344,345
Hematite-ores .. .. . • • • • • 344,345,348
Ironsands .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 346
Massive iron-ores, oxides, and titanites .. . - • • 347
Black-bands, or spathic iron-ores .. .. • • • • 348
Chrome-ore .. .. .. .. .. . - • • 348,349
Copper- and lead-ores .. .. .. .. .. 349,350
Zinc- and antimony-ores .. .. .. .. • • 351


Kconomic Minerals— continued. Packs.
Manganese-ores .. .. .. .. .. .. 351,352
Mineral oils anil oil-shalos .. .. .. .. .. 352,353
Graphite .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 354
Nr.w Zealand Gold .. ... .. .. .. .. 355-357
Composition and assay .. .. .. .. .. 355
Market price -.. .. .. .. .. .. 355,35 G
Gold reckoner .. .. .. .. .. .. 357
Hints to Prospectors .. .. .. .. .. .. 355-3 GB
Facilities for prospecting .. .. .. .. .. 358-3 GO
Prospecting for quartz reefs .. .. .. .. .. 3GO-3GG
Prospecting for alluvial gold .. .. .. .. .. 3GO-3GS
Improved Mixing Appliances .. .. .. .. .. 3G9-384
Crushing-machinery .. .. .. .. .. .. 3G9-377
Itock-boring drills .. .. .. .. .. .. 377-381
Pall dredger .. .. .. .. .. .. 381-384
Gor.n Exported from New Zealand .. .. .. .. 385
Mineral Ores Exported from New Zealand • .. .. .. 3SG
Works Constructed on Goldfields .. .. .. .. 387
Water-races, Etc., on Goldfields .. .. .. .. 387,38 S
Mining-machinery on Goldfields .. ' .. .. .. 389
Miners Employed on Goldfields .. .. .. .. 399
llate of Wages on Goldfields .. .. .. .. .. 391
Prices of Provisions and Live Stock on Goldfields .. .. 392
PART 11.
COAL-DEPOSITS AND COAL-MINES.
Introductory .. .. .. ... .. .. .. iii.-v.
Coal-deposits of Nfav Zealand .. .. .. .. 1-9
Coal raised, imported, and exported, &c. .. .. .. 10
New Zealand Coal-mines .. .. .. .: .. 11-59
Auckland and Taranaki mines .. .. .. .. 11-18
Nelson and Marlborough mines .. .. .. . - 19-21
West Coast (Middle Island) mines .. .. .. .. 22-29
Canterbury mines .. .. .. .. 30-3 G
Otago and Southland mines .. .. .. ... .. 37-54
Statistics of workings in coal-mines .. .. 55, OG
APPENDIX.
Schools of Mines .. .. .. .. .. .. 1-22
Principal Forest-trees .. .. .. .. .. 23-3 G
Building Materials .. .. .. .. .. .. 37-43
Mineral Waters .. .. .. .. .. • • 44-53
Mineral Leases .. .. .. .. .. .. 54-59
Index .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57-71
Advertisements .. .. .. .. .. • • 73-82


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAET I.
Page.
Perry’s Hydraulic Sluicing-plant, Gabriel’s Gully, Otago .. 32
Dredging, Washing, and Sluicing Machinery, Clutha River,
Otago .. .. .. • • • • •■ •• - 38
Mr. John Aspinall’s Claim, Skipper’s Point, Otago .. .. 48
Phcenix Company’s Crushing-works, Skipper’s, Otago .. .. 51
Phcenix Quartz-mine —Sectional Elevation .. .. .. 54
Mr. John Ewing’s Claim, Vinegar Hill, Otago .. .. 70
Captain’s Reef (Showing Mr. Green’s Discovery), Ophir, Otago 75
Ross United Company’s Mine—Section of Main Shaft .. .. 160
Ross United Company’s Mine—Elevator for Liiting Tailings .. 168
Ground-sluicing, Soldier’s Creek, Reefton .. .. .. 186
Wealth of Nations Crushing-battery, Crushington, Reefton .. 188
Keep It Dark Crushing-battery, Murray Creek, Reefton .. 195
Globe Company’s Aerial Tramway, Battery, and Turbine, Devil’s
Creek, Reefton .. .. .. • • • • • • 138
Endeavour Inlet Antimony Company’s Smelting-works, Queen
Charlotte Sound .. .. .. . • • ■ •• 272
Graham Stown —Showing the Positions of some of the Principal
Thames Mines .. .. .. • • • • • • 286
Kapanga Mine, Coromandel .. .. .. •• •• 296
Telephone (late Union Beach) Mine, Coromandel .. .. 298
Prince Imperial Mine, Thames.. .. .. •• •• 311
New Era Crushing-battery, Waiorongomai, Tf. Aroiia .. .. 323
Ball Dredger .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 381
PAET 11.
Waimangaroa Incline, Coalbrookdalf. Mine, Waimangaroa River 23
Wallsend Coal-mine, Grey River .. .. .. .. 28
Walton Park Colliery and Brickworks, Green Island, Otago.. 45
Kaitangata Coal-mine, Otago .. .. .. .. • • 49
MAPS.
Sketch-map of New Zealand —Showing Principal Mineral Facing
Localities Title-page.
Map of Middle Island—lndicating Extent of Mineral Work-
ings, Etc. .. .. .. .. •• 1
Map of North Island—lndicating Extent of Mineral Work-
ings, Etc. .. .. .. •• •• •• 28 1




PART I.
GOLD, SILVER, COPPER, AND ANTIMONY
MINING, Etc.,
IN
NEW ZEALAND.




INTRODUCTION.
From the year 1857, when the gold-export duty was first im-
posed, to the 31st December, 1886, the value of the gold exported
from New Zealand has been estimated by the Customs authorities
at £43,231,476; the gold-export reaching its highest point in
the year 1866, when 735,3760 z., valued at £2,844,517, were ex-
ported. Mr. J. McKerrow, F.R.A.S., Surveyor-General, who
occupied the position of Secretary for Goldfields for several
years, calculated, after making careful inquiries, that about
16,0000 z. are annually absorbed in the colony by jewellers,
dentists, and others. If to that quantity be added the small
parcels taken away surreptitiously in order to avoid the duty, it
may be inferred that there would have been a further addition to
the gold-product of 300,0000 z. to 400,0000 z., of the value of
about £1,500,000. In round numbers, the produce of the
goldfields of New Zealand may therefore be set down at nearly
£45,000,000; and an attempt has been made to place before
the readers of the “ Handbook,” in a concise form, the past and
present position of an industry of such vast importance to the
colony. The Warden’s Districts, as they existed at the time the
Editor began to arrange his work, were selected as being most con-
venient for grouping the information, especially with regard to
the tabulated matter which will be found at the end of each
district. The colony has since been divided into six Mining
Districts—namely, llauraki,Wairau and Pclorus, Queen Charlotte
Sound, Karamea, Westland, and Otago—the boundaries of
which are set forth in the Map compiled by Mr. Gordon.
Although great pains have been taken to secure accuracy (in
many instances the proof-sheets were submitted to five or six
persons), there will, doubtless, be some errors, as there are in
all first editions of works of a similar nature. Those who can
supply more authentic information will oblige by communicating
n


with the Mines Department, as a second edition will probably be
issued a few years hence.
In addition to the numerous reports, works, and files of
newspapers* which have been consulted during the progress of
the “ Handbook,” the Editor has been greatly indebted to the
officers of the Mines, Lands, Survey, and Geological Survey
Departments, without whose valuable co-operation the results of
his labours would have been less fruitful, and his work - much
more difficult. Considerable assistance has been rendered by
gentlemen on the West Coast (Middle Island) Goldfields, and
by Legal and Mining Managers throughout the colony; hut
the information supplied has been, in every instance, carefully
revised by officers possessing the necessary local and technical
knowledge.
The “ Handbook ” may, possibly, afford persons outside the
colony a means of judging as to the past development, whilst at
the same time affording them an insight into the present and
future prospects, of the New Zealand Goldfields. Information is
also supplied to that enterprising class of men who are associated
with the mining industry in the colony, and who still produce
* Principal References.
Reports of Wardens and Mining Registrars, 18G4-BG.
Reports of Secretaries for Goldfields : 1872-7 G, Hauohton ; 1877, Giles ; 1878-8.5,
McKebkow.
Reports of Secretary Otago Goldfields, “ Appendices to Journals, House of
Representatives,” 1863-G4, Pyke.
“ Papers Relating to the Discovery of Gold in Australia,” presented to the Im-
perial Parliament.
Notebook (MS.) of first Goldfields Warden, West Coast, Revell.
“ Report Relative to the Thames Goldfield,” “ Appendix to Journals, House of
Representatives, 18G9,” Mackay.
Annual Reports, Inspecting Engineer, Mines Department, 1883-BG, Gordon.
Annual Reports, Inspectors of Mines, McLaren and Wilson.
“ Geological Survey Reports,” 18GG-85, Hector.
“Transactions Philosophical Society,” Hector.
“ Handbook of New Zealand,” 188 G, Hector.
“ Colonial Laboratory Reports,” Skey.
“ Reports of the Mining Registrars,” Victoria, 1884-BG.
“Report on Mining Machinery, &c., in Victoria and New South Wales,” 1885,
■ Gordon.
“New Zealand: its Physical Geography, Geology, and Natural History,”
Hochstetter.
“ Gold Coast of New Zealand,” Reid.
“ Appendices to Journals, House of Representatives,” 18G3-85.
• General Government and Provincial Gazettes.
Newspapers— Otago Witness, Otago Daily Times, Canterbury Press, Lyttelton.
Times, West Coast Times, Grey River Argus, Nelson Examiner, Wellington
Independent, Thames Advertiser.


gold to the value o£ nearly one million sterling per annum.
Sketches of the operations of some of the principal companies
in the various districts are given. It was impossible to obtain
the necessary information from all the companies at work in
different parts of the colony, from Cape Colville, in the North,
to the Longwood Ranges, in the South. The tabular matter
has been generally compiled to the end of the year 1885, as it
was intended to issue the “ Handbook ” earlier, had not many
unexpected delays occurred; hut in the body of the work the
data has been supplied to later periods.
The Maps issued with the “ Handbook/’ compiled by Dr.
Hector, C.M.G., E.R.S., Director of the Geological Survey
Department, and Mr. H. A. Gordon, F.G.S., Inspecting Engi-
neer, Mines Department, show at a glance that New Zealand is,
for its size, one of the richest mineral countries in the world.
The Maps and Illustrations have been executed by the officers
of the Survey Department, under the superintendence of Sir.
Alexander Barron, Office Surveyor.
With regard to the various places referred to in the work,
even where the orthography has been deemed faulty, particularly
in the case of localities with Maori names, the Maps issued by
the Survey Department have generally been followed.




MAP OF THE
MIDDLE ISLAND,
NEW ZEALAND.
indicating extent of
MINERAL WORKINGS.
1886.
Lithographed at the General Survey Office Wellington N. Z. February 1886.


HANDBOOK OF NEW ZEALAND MINES.
OTAGO AND SOUTHLAND.
THE FIRST GOLD DISCOVERIES.
In November, 1863, Mr. J. Hyde Harris, who was at that period
Superintendent of Otago, in forwarding to the Colonial Secre-
tary a valuable report written by Mr. Vincent Pyke,* who was
then Secretary for the Otago Goldfields, drew attention to the
-fact that since the reported discovery of gold at Tuapeka by
Mr. Gabriel Read, in May, 1861, upwards of 1,000,0000 z. of
gold had been won by those engaged in gold-mining in. Otago.
Mr. Harris, in requesting that the report should be sent to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, pointed out that the only
information regarding the gold discoveries in Otago which had
teen accessible to the population of the Mother-country had
hcen derived from the colonial Press, but principally from the
Australian journals, which had always endeavoured (for obvious
reasons) to represent the goldfields of New Zealand as of little
yalue. The following extracts from Mr. Pyke’s report, which
18 to be found in the “Appendix to the Journals of the House of
Representatives ” for 1863, will show the extent and importance
°f the discoveries to which Mr. Harris drew attention :
“It is difficult to say when or by whom gold was first dis-
covered in Otago. That the Maoris were aware of its existence
before the arrival of European colonists is an undoubted fact.
I have been informed by Mr. Palmer, of Moeralti Bush, that
many years prior to the settlement of the province he was
assured by the Native Chief Tu-hawaiki that 'plenty whiro,’ or
* For many years M.H.R. for tho Dunstan.


yellow stone, such as that of which the seals of the white men
were made, could be obtained in the-interior of the Island;
and the country of the upper Clutha River was particularly
indicated as a gold-bearing locality. At a later period other
Natives confirmed these statements, and at least one party
of settlers attempted to discover El Dorado. In March,
1852, a party of five —a person who represented himself as
being a Californian miner being amongst the number—started
up the Clutha River in a whaleboat, which Mr. Thomas B.
Archibald had brought from Dunedin, and prospected the bars
and banks of the river as far as the creek now called the Beau
mont; but, as none of the party knew anything about gold-
mining, they returned after a three weeks’ cruise, as they could
get nothing more than the colour. Gold was found by the set-
tlers in various parts of the province; but the fact was either
suppressed, as likely to produce mischievous results, or neglected
as of trivial import. I have been shown a small quantity of
fine, scaly gold which was procured in 1853 in the neighbour-
hood of the remarkable chert rocks known as the Fortifications
(West Taieri Goldfield).
“ The first official intimation of the discovery of auriferous
deposits in Otago appears to have emanated from Mr. C. W.
Ligar, formerly Surveyor-General of New Zealand, and after-
wards of Victoria. In a letter, written in 185 Gto Cap-
tain Cargill, Superintendent of the Province, he .stated:
*ln my recent visit to the south part of the Province of
Otago I found gold very generally distributed in the gravel
and sand of the Mataura River, at Tuturau; and, from the
geological character of the district, I am of opinion that a
remunerative goldfield exists in the neighbourhood.’ But no
effort was made to test the value of this discovery. In com-
menting upon it, the Superintendent observed that 'in no
circumstances would it be advisable to allow a searcher to go
upon a run without leave of the lessee, or upon a Native
reserve without leave of the Natives.’ Still, from time to time,
vague rumours were circulated of gold being found in the
mountain-streams, and individuals occasionally brought into
Dunedin small quantities of the precious metal. In a report
on the reconnaissance survey of the southern districts, the Chief


Surveyor, Mr. Thomson,* stated that the existence o£ gold was
undoubted, hut added, ‘ I have nowhere yet known of individual
success at the occupation of gold-washing or digging as a business,
nor have I seen above the small fraction of an ounce in the hands
of any one.’ Mr. Alexander Garvie, who executed a reconnais-
sance survey of the south-eastern districts in 1857—58, reported
that ‘ traces of gold were found in the gravel of several of the
streams and rivers. It was found in the Clutha River, above
the junction of the Manuherikia, and in the Tuapeka Stream, in
sufficient quantities to make it probable that it w r ould pay to
work if set about in the proper manner, with some wholesale
system of washing, such as sluicing. Specks were also found
in the Manuherikia, Pomahaka, and Waitahuna Rivers.’ In a
foot-note to Sir. Garvie’s report the Chief Surveyor stated that
the best sample which had been brought into town was found
in the south branch of the Tokomairiro River, and indicated a
workable goldfield. The locality referred to was afterwards
known as the Woolshcd Diggings, where a native of Bombay,
named Edward Peters, was in the habit of obtaining small
quantities of gold from sands of the river. Peters also ob-
tained gold from a gully on Messrs. Davy and Bonder’s run,
near the north hank of the Tuapeka River, and consequently
uot far from Gabriel’s Gully.. In 1858 the Chief Surveyor
discovered gold in the Lindis River; and traces of gold were
found shortly after in the sands of a small stream which enters
the sea near the township of Hampden, on the Moeraki Beach.
“But, notwithstanding these accumulated proofs of the
distribution of gold throughout the province, no systematic
search was prosecuted until March, 18(51, when some men who
yere engaged on the new road which the Government was form-
lng across the run of Mr. McLean to the pastoral districts
keyond the Lindis Pass, in the Dunstan Mountains, accidentally
struck upon a deposit of the precious metal. A small rush
immediately set in; but, although fair prospects were obtained,
the general yield was not very encouraging. The field was pro-
nounced a failure, and the greater part of the miners returned.
Scarcely had the brief excitement consequent on the Lindis dis-
* Afterwards Surveyor-General of the colony.


covcries subsided when it was revived by information of a more
determinate character. On the 4th June, 1861, Mr. Gabriel
Read wrote as follows from Tokomairiro to Major Richardson,*
who was then Superintendent of Otago : ‘ I take the liberty of
troubling you with a short report on the result of a gold-prospect-
ing tour which I commenced about a fortnight since, and which
occupied me about ten days. During that period I travelled
inland about thirty-five miles, and examined the ravines and
tributaries of the Waitaliuna and Tuapeka Rivers. My equip-
ments consisted of a tent, blanket, spade, tin-disli, butcher’s
knife, and about a week’s supply of provisions; I examined a
large area of country, and washed pans of earth in different
localities. I found at many places prospects which would hold
out a certainty that men with the proper tools would be
munificently remunerated; and in one place, for ten hours’ work
with pan and butcher’s knife, I was enabled to collect about 7oz.
of gold.’ A portion of Mr. Read’s statement found its way into
the public Press, and numbers of persons of all classes flocked to
the scene of the discovery, which was afterwards called Gabriel’s
Gully, in honour of the discoverer.f
“In August, 1861, the first gold-escort brought to Dun-
edin 5,0560 z. of gold. The excitement soon became intense.
Thousands were bitten by the gold-fever, and abandoned their
ordinary pursuits to try their luck at the diggings. The
contagion spread to the adjacent provinces, to the North
Island, and finally to Victoria and the other Australian colonies.
The rush to Otago soon assumed enormous proportions. In
1860 only sixty-nine vessels entered inwards; in the following
year 256 vessels, many of them of large tonnage, entered the
port. The population, computed in December, 1860, at 12,691,
had increased by December, 1861, to 30,269. Within the short
period of twelve months the population had been more than
doubled, the imports and Customs duties had increased three-
* The late Sir John L. C. Richardson, for many years Speaker of the Legisla-
tive Council.
t Mr. Read, who had unreservedly, and in the most generous manner, placed,
liis discovery at the disposal of the Superintendent, and subsequently, at the
request of the Provincial Government, prospected without remuneration, and
settled several claims and disputes, received a bonus of only £5OO, but that sura
was supplemented afterwards by an equal amount.


fold, the exports ten-fold, and the territorial revenue by one-
half.
“ Wetherstone’s and Munroe’s Gullies were shortly after-
wards opened up by the miners; and in July, 1861, another
rich goldfield was discovered in the Waitahuna Stream by Mr.
Gabriel Read and Captain Baldwin. The first dishful of
earth, washed by Captain Baldwin, yielded a quarter of an
ounce; the next, washed by Mr. Gabriel Read, yielded half an
ounce. The place was rushed by about five hundred men, who
speedily deserted it, and declared the Waitahuna to be a ‘ duffer. 5
For some time there w r ere only three parties at work. The
number again increased : on the Ist September there were two
hundred men on the field; on the 30tli of the same month four
thousand were reported to be doing well.
“In the month of September, 1861, occurred one of those
feverish reactionary movements which would appear to he neces-
sarily consequent on every new rush. The world-famous gold-
fields of Ballarat, Bendigo, and Ararat, in Victoria, were all
rushed and deserted as unprofitable when first opened up. The
senseless panic which hurried thousands from Otago in 1861 is
only another illustration of the same general rule. Many who
hastened to seek sudden fortunes at Tuapeka were utterly un-
provided for the purpose; and numbers, deterred by the gloomy
details of unsuccessful diggers, never even quitted the jetty at
Dunedin until they re-embarked for Melbourne. At this
juncture the Government issued a Proclamation (28th Septem-
ber), in which the peculiar features of the goldfields, and the
difficulties attendant on mining operations in Otago, were fairly
a nd honestly pointed out, and exaggerated statements were
denounced as ‘ likely to be productive of much suffei’ing. 5 The
Superintendent (Major Richardson) asserted in this document
the existence of a valuable goldfield, of considerable extent,
capable of affording remunerative wages- to a large population,
aud avowed the confidence of the Government in the auriferous
capabilities of the province as a highly-remunerative field for
capital and labour, but, at tiie same time, deprecated the incon-
siderate influx of persons from other colonies, and cautioned
intending immigrants to act with greater prudence. The result
as a temporary diminution of immigration; hut there is no


doubt that the goldfields progressed all the more favourably
from the absence of undue excitement. A sufficient number of
miners remained to test the ground, and in November, 1861, the
escorts attained an aggregate of 73,90-loz. of gold, thus afford-
ing indubitable evidence of the capacity of Otago to afford re-
munerative employment to a large mining population.
“ Early in the year 1862 further discoveries of auriferous
deposits were made on the Waipori River and its tributaries,
and also on the Woolshed Creek, a branch of the Tokomairiro
River; but with the approach of winter came first a cessation
of immigration, and then a gradual exodus from the province.
The Victorian miners were alarmed at the prospect of a rigorous
winter in a district where fuel was scarce, and the population
consequently sustained considerable diminution, until in July
(midwinter) the total number of persons resident on the
goldfields was estimated by the Commissioner at about seven
thousand persons, of whom probably only two-thirds were-
actually engaged in mining. Many of those who left professed
their intention to return in the spring; others, deceived by the
appearance of the country —so different from what their Aus-
tralian experiences taught them to consider as auriferous—en-
tertained the fallacious idea that the mines were exhausted.
Those who remained certainly had no reason to regret having-
done so, for the minimum yield of gold in any one month —
that of July—as evidenced by the escort returns, independently
of the quantities brought down by private persons, was 10,5570 z.
“ Some discoveries of smaller extent, yet promising great
results hereafter, were made during the winter months of the
year 1862. The first of these was at Timbrell’s Gully, under
Mount Ilighlay. Deepdell Creek, a branch of the Shag River;
Filly Burn, a branch of the Taieri; and Murphy’s Gully, all in
the neighbourhood of the Mount, were successfully prospected.
Gold was also found at Coal Creek, on the head-waters of the-
Shag River. More recently a party of miners were discovered
working on the Dunstan Stream, near its junction with the
Manuherikia; and in a report on the reconnaissance survey of
the north-western districts Mr. McKcrrow* stated that gold
* At present Surveyor-General of the colony.


had been found by a shepherd between Lake Hawea and Lake
Wan aka, on Quartz Creek, a small stream which takes its rise
in the watershed between the Hawea and Wanalca Lakes.
“In August, 1862, two Californian miners, named Hartley
and Reilly, lodged at the office of the Chief Gold Receiver in
Dunedin 1,0470 z. of gold. The locality whence this treasure
had been obtained they refused to divulge until the Govern-
ment had guaranteed to them a reward of £2,000, conditionally
on 16,0000 z. being brought down by the escort within three
months. These terms having been accepted, they stated that
the scene of their labours was on that portion of the Clutha
River which is situated between the junction of the Manu-
herikia and that of the Kawarau Rivers. No sooner was this
information made public than a rush of unprecedented magni-
tude occurred. Without waiting for any confirmation of the
prospectors’ statements, thousands -hastened to the new field.
Clerks resigned their situations, and mechanics quitted their
work. On the other goldfields miners deserted payable claims ;
and for a brief period Tuapeka and Waitahuna were nearly
deserted. That a reaction should occur was inevitable. It
was hastened in this instance by a scarcity of provisions, princi-
pally of breadstuffs, which could not be procured in a remote
district in sufficiently large quantities to feed an extensive
population. Half-a-crown was readily paid for a pound of
flour; other stores were retailed at proportionate rates; and
wood for making the miners’ cradles sold at fabulous prices, as
much as £3 having been paid for an old gin-case. Much.dis-
appointment was caused by the peculiar character of the work-
ings. Even the experienced miners of Australia and r iuapeka
were unaccustomed to regard the bed of a rapid and turbulent
river as the repository of gold, hi any returned to Dunedin
with even greater haste than that with which they had rashly
quitted it. Those who remained, however, quickly overcame
the novelty of the position, and their labours were amply
rewarded. The banks of the river on either side became occu-
pied by a numerous population, whose tents gradually extended
from above the confluence of the Kawarau River to below the
gorges of the Beaumont Burn, a distance of nearly seventy
miles. Others tested the Manulierikia; and perhaps the most


valuable and productive claims in the district were those at and
near the junction of this stream with the Clutha. The auri-
ferous country discovered by Messrs. Hartley and Reilly is at
the western base of the Dunstan Mountains. It was therefore
called the Dunstan Goldfield.
“ In September, 1862, another discovery was communicated
to the Provincial Government by Mr. James Lamb, one of a
party of six Victorian miners, who brought to Dunedin about
28oz. of coarse, nuggetty gold, obtained at Moa Creek, on the
Nokomai River, a branch of the Mataura. Contiguous to this
creek there is a large extent of auriferous country, bordering on
the Nokomai, and extending over the dividing-range through'the
valley of the Nevis to the Kawarau River, throughout the whole
of w'hich parties of miners arc working with satisfactory results.
The Dunstan, Nokomai, and Wakatipu Goldfields are therefore
united by a continuous scries of gold-workings.
“ Before the close of the year 1862, 70,0000 z. were trans-
mitted by escort from the Dunstan Goldfield; but this was not
all derived from the river-workings. Towards the end of Sep-
tember the Clutha, flooded by the melting of the snow in the
far-distant mountains whence its sources are derived, covered
the beached, and drove the miners from their claims. Then
they began to explore the surrounding country, and numerous
rich gullies were discovered amidst the ravines of the Obelisk
Ranges. One of the first and most important of these was
Conroy’s Gully, so called after the name of its discoverer. The
Carricks, a bold and lofty chain of mountains, separate the •
Dunstan Goldfield from the valley of the Nevis, the latter being
comprised within the boundaries of the Nokomai District.
Three miners, crossing this range, discovered payable auriferous
ground on the western watershed, near the short track to the
scene of Lamb’s discovery at Moa Creek. In one day they
obtained 2oz. of rough gold with a shovel and tin-dish, and
immediately reported the circumstance to the Warden at Dun-
stan. As usual, a rush took place, and some exceedingly rich
finds w'ere obtained. The locality received the name of Potter’s
Gully, in honour of one of the prospectors. About the same
time several gullies were opened in the Umbrella Ranges; and
on the banks of the Waikaia, a tributary of the Mataura River,


ii permanent goldfield of some extent was also discovered. It is
worthy of note that shortly after the discovery of Tuapelca
Mr. Read reported the existence of gold on the Wendon and
other streams, hut little note was taken of it at the time.
There was, indeed, a small rush to what were termed the Blue
Mountains in the early part of 18G2; hut the prospectors failed
to discover a remunerative goldfield, and the development of an
extensive tract of auriferous country was thus reserved for a
later period.
“ Discoveries of greater importance were shortly after made.
In October, 1862, it was rumoured that a miner named Fox had
found a goldfield of surpassing richness in some remote and un-
explored region, and this rumour was confirmed hy the statements
made by Fox himself during a brief visit to the Dunstan Town-
ship. Numbers went out in quest of the new field • but for a
time their researches were baffled, and the disappointed miners
began to regard the report as a delusion. One party, however,
whilst roaming through the country on this errand, accidentally
lighted upon auriferous deposits of considerable value and extent.
The scene of this discovery was the Cardrona Creek, a tributary
of the Upper Clutlia. The attendant circumstances were thus
narrated in a letter addressed to the Warden of the Dunstan
Coldfield by Mr. Michael Grogan, one of the prospectors:
‘On the 9th of November, whilst a crowd of diggers were
camped on the banks of the Cardrona, Mullins and myself took
a walk to see how that part of the country looked, and in
Walking along the river, where what I call a slide had occurred,
there had been a track formed by the cattle. I, being a little
further up the creek, sat down until Mullins came up. He im-
mediately told me that some person must have lost some gold,
a nd produced about 4dwt. that he got on the cattle-track. We
s till continued up the creek, until we thought it time to return
to our camping-ground ; and on our way back he showed me
the place, but on searching for more we could get none, and
f r °m the appearance of the hlack soil we certainly thought that it
ttmst have been lost by Fox or some other person. . . . .
fhro days afterwards, having received some information as
to where Fox was working, myself and mates were-ahead of
°thers, and on coming again to the spot I took my swag and


laid it on tlie bank, saying, “ There is where the gold was got.”
Then I walked to the spot, and on breaking up the surface the
first thing that I discovered was a bit of about 3dwt., and that
afternoon we nuggetted out 9oz. Gdwt. 12gr.’ A number of
people hastened to the new field ; hut in the meantime Fox had
been tracked to his haunts, and the fame of the Cardrona was
quickly eclipsed by the greater attractions of what was termed
‘ Fox’s Rush.’ At the time Dr. Hector,* the Government Geo-
logist, was on a tour through the country, and he happened to be
a spectator of Grogan’s discovery. Following up the Cardrona
to its source, he crossed the Crown Ranges, on the western side
of which he came upon Fox’s party and about forty others,
quietly working in a gorge of the Arrow River. A
few days after Dr. Hector’s visit a large party of miners, pur-
suing the same track, observed the smoke of the camp-fires, and,
following the clue thus given, suddenly presented themselves on
the scene of operations. Secrecy was no longer possible. The
news was quickly circulated throughout the province, and an ex-
tensive migration from other fields ensued. The Arrow and its
tributary gullies were thoroughly prospected, and large quanti-
ties of the precious metal rewarded the toil and industry of the
miners.
“ The attention of the miners was next turned to the Shot-
over, a considerable stream, or, rather, mountain-torrent, the
head-waters of which take their rise in the Alpine Ranges,
near Mount Tyndall. The fortunate prospector was Mr.
Thomas Arthur, who, with three mates, obtained 200 oz. of gold
in eight days, by wushing the sands of the river-beach. The
passage up the river was impracticable, owing to the lofty and
precipitous rocks which hem in the channel on either side.
But nothing daunted the hardy adventurers who had invaded
the hitlierto-unexplored solitudes of this remote region. Armed
with picks and shovels, they climbed the rugged mountains —■
some of which attain an altitude of 7,000 ft. above the level of
the sea, their gaunt sides seamed with dangerous ravines, and
their summits clothed in perpetual snow —and wrested the auri-
ferous treasures of nature from the wild glens where probably
•James Hector, Esq., M.D., C.M.G., F. 8.5., the present Director of the
Geological Survey of New Zealand.


human foot had never ventured before. Thus the rich locality
known as Moke Creek, and its tributary, Moonlight, were
attained by surmounting the very crest of Ben Lomond.
“ Higher up the Sliotover numerous rich gullies were dis-
covered, principally on the western -watershed ; and the beaches
of the river itself were successfully prospected for a distance of
more than thirty miles, the miners crossing the adjacent ranges,
and descending to the stream wherever it -was found practicable
to do so. One of these beaches was named Maori Point, owing
to its discovery by two Natives of the North Island, Dan Ellison,
a half-caste, and Zachariah Haeroa, a full Maori. As these
men were travelling along the eastern hank of the river they
found some Europeans working with great success in a secluded
gorge. On the opposite shore was a beach of unusually pro-
mising appearance, occupying a bend of the stream, over which
the rocky cliffs rose perpendicularly to the height of more than
500 ft. Tempting as this spot was to the practised eyes of the
miners, none of them would venture to breast the impetuous
torrent. The Maoris, however, boldly plunged into the river,
and succeeded in reaching the western bank; hut a dog which
followed them was carried away by the current, and drifted
down to a rocky point, where it remained. Ellison went to its
assistance; and, observing some particles of gold in the crevices
of the rocks, he commenced to search the sandy beach beneath
'from which, with the aid of his mate Ilaeroa, he gathered 300 oz.
of gold before nightfall. A systematic investigation of the
locality ensued, and resulted in the discovery of valuable and
extensive deposits.
“ Other gullies and beaches further up the river were shortly
afterwards opened up. The richest and most considerable of the
former is Skipper’s Gully, which, with its numerous tributaries,
may be said to constitute a goldfield of itself. The shores of
Lake Wakatipu have also been explored. On the northern
Watershed of the w r cst arm, and the eastern watershed of the
north arm of this, one of the greatest of our inland seas, several
famous gullies have been discovered, as Eew r ’s Creek, Simpson’s,
the Bucklerburn, and others of less note. Still more recently
mining adventure has progressed in the direction of Mount
hlacintosli (the Earnslaw of the maps), and on the Rees River


and its eastern tributaries a considerable extent of payable
ground bas been struck.
“In March, 1803, and the following months, several small
gullies were discovered near Mr. Gardiner’s station, on the
Tallaburn, at the southern extremity of the Mount Benger Gold-
field ; and about the same time gold was discovered at Moa
Greek, a tributary of the Poolburn. In April a rush took place
to the Manuherikia Valley, where a small goldfield, found on
the run of Mr. Black, afforded remunerative employment for
a time to a considerable number of miners. More important
discoveries were made in May, 1883. The first of these was at
Campbell’s Creek, which runs from the Obelisk into the Wai-
kaia lliver, on the western side of the Obelisk Ranges. The
next discovery was that of the Mount Ida Goldfield. On the
20th May a miner named William Parker and his mate found
payable prospects on the Ilogburn, a small stream which takes
its rise in Mount Ida, and joins the Taieri River above the lake;
and several contiguous creeks have been successfully tested. The
first escort brought down 4,3.200 z. of gold from this new field.
In Junc it was reported that gold had been discovered on some
of the branches of the Serpentine Creek, a western tributary of
the Taieri. On the 15th July an application was made by Mr.
Simon Frazer for a prospecting claim on a creek which rises in
Powder Hill, on the east bank of the Taieri, about sixteen miles
from Dunedin.
“ Perhaps one of the most peculiar conditions under which
gold has been developed in Otago is presented by the coast-work-
ings near the Township of Hampden, on the Moeraki Beach*
Very fine but rough gold is there found amongst the detritus of
the sea-shore, intermixed with ironsaud, fragments of crystals,
and minute gems, chiefly garnets and zircons. Samples, tested
by competent metallurgists, have yielded at the rate of from
50oz. to lOOoz. to the ton. The quantities operated upon have
been small, and the results are consequently indecisive; but the
particles of gold are so generally diffused through the sand as to
leave no doubt of its remunerative character if subjected to
proper scientific treatment. These sands are found along the
* The beach is now being remuneratively worked.


coast from the mouth of the Big Kuri Stream to Vulcan Point,
and similar deposits have been discovered beneath the soil in the
adjacent creeks and gullies. Gold has also been found under simi-
lar circumstances on the sea-coast near the mouth of the Clutha
River, with this difference : that the fragmentary gems are absent,
and the gold itself is flatter and more w-ater-worn than at Moeraki.
“ The quantity of gold exported to 31st July, 1862, amounted
to 458,4480 z. 18dwt., and there remained in the hands of the
Treasurer at that date 4,7870 z. 6dwt.; in all, 463,2360 z. 4dwt.
In the year ending the 31st July, 1863, 514,3850 z. 17dwt. were
exported from the Port of Dunedin, and 9,2400 z., the produce of
Otago, from other ports in New Zealand. To these amounts
must be added 23,6570 z. 3dwt., which, at the above date, were
lodged in the Dunedin Treasury in excess of the balance on
hand on the 31st July, 1862. By adding these amounts to the
produce of 1861-62, we arrive at a grand total for the two years
of 1,010,5190 z. Calculating 24,0000 z. as a ton of gold, this gives
42 tons 2101 b. troy, of the estimated value of £4,042,080. Even
this does not fully represent the produce of the Otago mines.
On the 31st July, 1863, 10,000 oz. were held by the banks, besides
a considerable quantity in the hands of country branches and
gold-buyers. The miners themselves are known to retain a large
,amount of gold in their possession; and on the whole I feel
assured that I am rather under than over the mark in assuming
that 30,0000 z. have been obtained in addition to the quantity
officially reported. When it is borne in mind that the -whole of
this treasure has been raised in the space of twenty-four months,
% a mining population whose average number for the entire
Period is computed at 12,000, it is impossible to avoid recogniz-
lng the fact as one of the most splendid results ever attained in
an y gold-producing country of ancient or modern times.”
The escort brought down to Dunedin for the first five months
after Mr. Gabriel Read’s discovery, 203,4830 z., the returns for
each month being as folloxv :
Oz. dwt,
August, 1861 .. .. 5,056 0
September, 1861 .. .. 19,039 15
October, 1861 .. .. 46,613 5
November, 1861 .. .. 73,904 0
December, 1861 .. .. 58,870 0
203,483 0


For the three following years the escort returns for each
month were :
Month.
18G2.
1863.
1864.
Oz.
dwt.
Oz.
dwt.
Oz.
dwt.
January
47,391
0
48,567
5
32,335
14
February
42,473
0
72,311
14
38,042
7
March
32,202
5
40,691
12
37,614
18
April
22,862
10
70,010
12
43,649
11
May
22,945
10
47,031
5
52,845
6
June
12,870
10
43,013
8
22,141
15
July
10,375
18
30,398
9
24,323
7
August
14,186
0
22,904
2
28,906
5
September
12,018
6
41,101
G
26,353
16
October
38,777
14
40,612
14
29,939
8
November
37,664
18
43,803
8
33,283
18
December
37,260'
1
57,955
6
24,527
17
331,633
12
565,661
1
393,964
2
For the first three years and nine months after Mr. Read's
discovery 1,099,6670 z. had passed through the Dunedin Custom-
house, and 63,9700 z. had been exported from other ports. This
gave a gross total of 1,763,6370 z., of the estimated value of
over .£7,000,000, or an average of nearly £2j000,000 per annum.
In the Census taken in December, 1864, the population of the
goldfields was set down at 15,700 persons, of whom only about
10,000 were actually engaged in gold-mining; so that the re-
turns were very large as compared with the number engaged in
mining operations. The total quantity of gold exported from
Otago and Southland up to the 31st December, 1872, was
3,026,7550z.j of the estimated value of £11,838,456.
QUARTZ REEFS.
Even in the early days of the gold discoveries the existence
of quartz reefs was carefully noted, and spasmodic attempts
were made to work them in some places; but the difficulty
of getting machinery and mining-timber on the ground,
coupled with the high rate of wages, proved great obstacles.
Quartz reefs require perseverance and capital for their proper
development; and, whilst alluvial ground was accessible, and new
fields within easy reach of the miners, few of them cared to
settle down to quartz-mining. None of them doubted that there


were large areas containing highly-auriferous quartz in every
direction; but the temptations -were too great in other respects,
and it was only when there w 7 as a lull in alluvial mining that
attention became seriously diverted towards the quartz lodes.
But, as compared with the colonies of Victoria, New South
Wales, or Queensland, our progress in quartz-mining has been
very slow. Indeed, it may he set down as an indisputable
fact that reefing is only in its infancy in New Zealand.
Capitalists, with few exceptions, stand aloof—and capital is as
requisite as labour. On one line of reefs in Bendigo, such as
the Garden Gully, Hustler’s, or New Chum, there is probably a
much larger amount of capital invested in quartz reefs than in
the whole Province of Otago. Men without money, however
experienced, or however strong their faith as to ultimate
success, have to stand aside until capital combines with labour.
Occasionally there has been a disposition on the part of busi-
ness men in Dunedin, Christchurch, and other centres to
invest .in quartz-mines; but the floating of companies, with the
flew of merely selling scrip at high prices, has often retarded
real bond fide work, instead of assisting the development of the
reefs. Great expectations have been generally held out of
immediate returns, and, as a rule, these promises could not be
fulfilled, for quartz-reefing is a slow and tedious process. The
consequence has been that many of those who feel that they
had been deceived in the past cannot be prevailed upon to
mvest their capital in what they have been tanglit to regard as
rtoubtful enterprises. What is wanted is not so much the
floating of companies, and the spending of a large amount of
capital in directors’ fees and managers’ salaries, but steady, per-
severing work, such as has been done by Messrs. Bullcn
Brothers at Skipper’s, by Mr. John Aspinall at Skipper’s Point,
aud by Mr. John Ewing at St. Bathan’s. One hundred men of
the same stamp in different parts of Otago would soon prove to
the world that the riches of the past have been only a fore-
runner of what may be reasonably, and almost with certainty,
expected in the future. There are large areas in Otago in which
there arc perfect networks of reefs. Where such a vast quantity
cf alluvial gold was won in a few years, the sources whence it was
rterived have only to be tapped to yield an abundant harvest.


IRON AND COPPER.
In his valuable report on the goldfields Mr. Pyke noted that
iron had been found in almost every possible form and combina-
tion, freely interspersed with the sands of the sea-shore and
rivers, and largely diffused through the rocks. A very extensive
lode of pyritous copper-ore, yielding by analysis 24 per cent, of
metallic copper, was discovered in 1862 in the vicinity of Ben
Lomond, between Lake Wakatipu and Moke Creek.
TUAPEKA WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The Tuapeka Warden’s district now comprises tlie sub-districts
of Tuapeka, Waitahuna, Waipori, Woolshed, Tapanui, and
Waikaia. Tuapeka was proclaimed a goldfield in July, 1861,
and tlie following month the escort took away over 5,0000 z. of
gold. Soon after the rush to Gabriel’s Gully gold was found
at Munroe’s Gully, at Wetlierstone’s, and along the low hanks and
flats of the Tuapeka Creek. Enormous quantities of gold were
obtained, and at one period four or five thousand miners found
profitable employment. Mining operations have been steadily
carried on ever since, with varying success, all over the district;
The chief centre of attraction at present is the Blue Spur, at the
upper end of Gabriel’s Gully, on a range between that and
Munroc’s Gully, where large deposits of cement have been
worked for many years. A quarter of a century ago the Blue
Spur was an exceedingly busy locality, and gold was found in
all the small creeks and gullies. Of late years the gold-working 8
have been confined to the beds of Gabriel’s and Munroes
Gullies, and to crushing the cement from the terraces. For a
long time the cement was broken up with picks and hammers,
and sluiced in the ordinary way; but this method was found too
slow to prove remunerative. When the richest patches were
worked out, steps were taken to work the remainder of the
ground in a more wholesale and systematic manner. By break-
ing up the cement with hammers a great deal of the gold wa*
carried away in unbroken pieces with the water in the sluice*


boxes. This led to the substitution o£ crushing-batteries, and
it was then found that the poor-grade cement gave better returns
than some of the richer stuff did under the old system of 'work-
ing, with the result that for many years several claims paid
handsome dividends. The large number of men required has,
however, proved a great drawback, and steps are now being taken
by one or two of the claims to introduce machinery for reducing
the cement in a more economical manner. The Bertrand roller-
mills, which have to a great extent superseded the crushing-
batteries in Nevada, are probably best adapted for pulverizing
these cements. They possess many advantages over the ordinary
batteries: they are cheaper in the first instance; the cost of
wear and tear is very much less ; and a greater quantity of stuff
can be crushed with the same power, and with less labour.
There are still large hills of auriferous cement in the district,
which will pay handsomely when improved machinery reduces
the cost of working. Capitalists on the look-out for invest-
ments might well turn their attention in this direction.
The area taken up at the Blue Spur is over fifty acres.
The Great Extended Company, which has been working for the
past twenty years, has an area of 13 acres and 20 perches, which
is held under mining leases. One of these leases, comprising
2 acres 3 roods 34 perches, on the Gabriel’s Gully side, formerly
belonged to Messrs. Hales and Hinde, who realized handsome
competencies from the proceeds of their claim. On the death
°f Mr. Hinde, about two years ago, the lease was purchased for
upwards of £4,000 by the Extended Company. For- many
years a twenty-head battery was employed in crushing the
cement; but a portion of the claim is now worked by means of
hydraulic hose, the latter method having been found more profit-
able in dealing with the cement, which has latterly turned out
to be of a poorer quality in a portion of the area held by the
eouipany. On the Munroc’s side of the Spur a part of the
®taim has been let to tributors, who are working to a depth of
2 °oft. The cement is brought to the surface in trucks, by
’Ucans of a turbine-wheel, to a ten-head battery. The tributors
a |' e taking fair wages, and there are about eighteen men em-
P°yed. The portion of the claim formerly owned by Hales
an d Hinde is at present worked by Perry’s system of hydraulic
2


sluicing, but a sufficient length of time has not yet elapsed to
enable a satisfactory opinion to be formed as to its success or
otherwise. The workings are considerably under the surface
of Gabriel’s Gully. A large paddock is excavated out of
the bed-rock, and into this the whole of the material is
sluiced from the face. An upright or slightly-inclined pipe,
15in. in diameter and 47ft. in length, connects the bottom
of the paddock with a flume, which extends for about two
chains, and empties' into a small tank, ■where a second in-
clined pipe of the same diameter is placed, having a vertical
height of 37ft. The water and sluiced materials are then
conveyed into a large flume, and carried away as in an
ordinary sluice-box, having ripples and false bottoms to save the
gold, the tailings being deposited in the bed of Gabriel’s Gully.
•By these two'pipes the water and tailings , are raised to a vertical
height of 84ft. To accomplish this about twenty sluice-heads of
•water are required. Five sluice-heads are employed in breaking
the cement and sluicing it into the lower paddock; seven and a
•half sluice-heads are employed to raise the water to the first
flume, 47ft. in height; and seven and a half sluice-heads are
employed to raise the water and tailings from the second tank
or paddock up to the main sluice-box, a further height of 37ft.
An enormous quantity of gold has been extracted by the Great
Extended Company from the time of commencing operations
n couple of years after the first discovery by Mr. Gabriel Read;
but the exact figures are not obtainable. The shares, as a rule,
Rave been held firmly, and those occasionally sold have realized
large sums in excess of their nominal value, as handsome
dividends were regularly paid for a number of years.
The Otago Gold-mining Company has been at work f° r
about the same length of time as the Great Extended. It has
an area of four and a half acres, and for the last eighteen years
has kept a battery of twenty heads going. The cement is
blasted with dynamite, and broken with hammers and picks to
such an extent that it can be lifted into trucks, which are hauled
'up an incline with winding-gear attached to the turbine water-
• wheel that drives the battery. At the top of the incline the
: trucks run into a “ kick-up,” and are emptied into hoppers, each
•hopper feeding ten heads of stamps. Two men are employed b 1


each hopper to break the cement sufficiently small for the stamps,
to operate on. Instead of using the ordinary punched grating
employed in quartz-crushing batteries, there are vertical bars of
round iron, fin. in diameter, placed fin. apart, which is found-
hy experience in crushing this class of material to be sufficiently
close together. By this method about 100 tons arc crushed in
sixteen hours, or with two shifts of men per day. After the
material gets through the grating it falls on inclined tables
similar to those used for saving gold in quartz-crushing batteries.
Then it goes away in a line of sluice-boxes or flumes, which have
false bottoms, and the tailings are deposited in the bed of
Gabriel’s Gully. About as many workmen are employed at the.
stamping-battery as there are in the face. This company s
cement averages from sgr. to 6gr. of gold per ton, which is
stated to be something like a fair average of the whole hill.
The Perseverance Company, which holds a lease of 7 acres
2 roods, has discontinued the use of the ten-head battery, as it
was found more profitable to work the ground by ordinary
sluicing, and to employ hand-labour to crush the cement while
the water runs it off.
In Morrison and Company’s claim there is a fifteen-head
battery which is now idle, the ground being worked in the
ordinary way.
There is a battery of tw'enty heads on the Nelson Company’s
lease; but it has not been worked for some time. The com-
pany has now entered into a contract for the erection of a new
system of crushing-machinery, "which it is anticipated will
materially reduce the cost of extracting the gold.
The North of Ireland Company, which holds a lease of about
( eleven acres, has a battery of ten heads ; but crushing operations
have been suspended, so as to admit of the high ground being
sluiced away.
The Blue Spur Tailings Company was formed —as its name
Would indicate—for the purpose of washing the tailings of the
Blue Spur claims, which had for many years accumulated in
Gabriel’s Gully. Patches of the tailings were worked by small
Parties of miners, and yielded good results. The company,
"'hich has been mainly formed through the exertions of Mr.
Berry, carries on work by the system patented by him, and


enormous quantities of the tailings can now he worked at a
small expenditure of labour. The total quantity of gold ex-
tracted has been over 3,0000 z., of which upwards of 500 oz. were
the product of six months’ work. As 9oz. per week are suffi-
cient to pay working expenses a considerable margin of profit is
left to the company. Fourteen heads of water have been leased
from the Waripori Water-race Company to enable the Blue
Spur and Gabriel’s Gully Sluicing Company to carry on the
work.*
The Wetlierstone’s Cement Gold-mining Company has been
working during the past seven years at Wetherstone’s. The
original claim was taken up by Messrs. Brown and Gascoigne
in 1878 for the purpose of working cement of a similar
character to that at the Blue Spur. The original claim was
six acres; but the adjoining ground was afterwards taken up,
and the company then held an area of sixteen acres. Although
this claim has not proved so remunerative to the shareholders as
their enterprise deserved, it has afforded employment to a large
number of miners, thirty to thirty-five men having been
generally kept at work. A ten-head battery is used in crush-
ing the cement, the water being obtained from the Phoenix
Water-race Company. In July, 1885, the company surrendered
its leases over the sixteen acres, and was granted a special claim
of twenty acres, including the old ground, at a reduced rental.
Fifteen men are at present employed, and the shareholders have
lately been receiving small dividends.
The Tuapeka Prospecting Association, which was formed for
the purpose of prospecting various parts of the district, was
compelled to cease work after expending about £9OO, half of
which was contributed by the Government, and the remainder
by subscribers. A shaft was sunk at Wetherstone, 285 ft. in
depth, and a tunnel was put in a distance of 300 ft.; but gold
was not found in payable quantities. A good deal of labour
was expended in prospecting for quartz reefs at Wetherstone,
Blue Spur, and Clarke’s Flat, but without satisfactory results.
The principal water-races which have been cut for the pur-
pose of supplying water to the Blue Spur are the following :
* Puller particulars of this important patent will be found at page 32.


Name of Company.
Miles
in Length.
No. of
Sluice-heads.
Waipori Water-race
43
14
Perseverance .. ..
15
4
Hibernia
20
4
Great Extended
15
8
Fidelity
3i
2
Nelson
4
3
Otago .. .. ..
4
10
Morrison and Co.’s
27
10
131J
55
The Phoenix Water-race Company, which was formed twenty
years ago for the purpose of supplying water to the miners at
Wetherstone’s and surrounding localities, constructed a large
dam and reservoir on the liill, a short distance at the hack of
Wetherstone’s. The work, which is of a most substantial
character, and cost £5,000, is at a sufficient elevation to supply
water to all the mining-claims in the neighbourhood and
at the Blue Spur. The Borough of Lawrence has also been
supplied with water for many years by this company, which has
four races, fifteen miles in length. The water is brought in
from the ranges between Wetherstone’s and Waipori. There are
one thousand shares of £llos. each in the present company. The
shareholders have received upwards of £5,000 in dividends.
The reservoir was constructed by a company with a much larger
capital: the present company is a reconstruction of the former
one.
Dredging is steadily carried on in the Clutlia River. There
a re two dredges at the Beaumont; hut one of them (the spoon-
dredge) was not found suitable, and is about to undergo an
alteration. The other, which cost about £1,200, has been steadily
Worked with good results. There are five other dredges at work
between the Beaumont and Roxburgh, a distance of thirty miles.
Dreat results are anticipated from the dredging operations on
this river, as gold is obtainable in almost every portion of the
river-bed.
A large amount of capital has been expended in the district
bi the construction of water-races and tail-races. Of the former,
there are 331 cut, 1,073 miles in length, carrying 1,132 sluice-


heads, at an approximate cost of £21,460; of the latter, 683, at
a cost of £9,200; and 256 dams, at a cost of £7,900.
~ WAIXAHUNA. .
Immediately after the rush to Gabriel’s Gully, Mr. Gabriel
Ecad discovered payable gold in the Waitahuna Eiver. Gold
was found in the low flats and .the spurs along the river; but the
latter were not worked for some time, owing to the scarcity of
water and the difficulty of bringing it in along the hills to com-
mand these spurs. At the present time there are three or four
large sluicing-claims at work in the upper end of the gully, and
there are several small parties working in the river-bed and low
flats adjoining. The Chinese number about a hundred and
twenty, and hold several good claims and valuable water-rights
along the river-flats. Among the principal claims now worked
at Waitahuna are those of Thompson and party, McLaren and
party, and Ferris and party. The area leased by these three
parties comprises twenty-six acres. The claims are of a perma-
nent nature, and yield good dividends. The Norwegian Water-
race, -which is held by Thompson and party, is forty-eight miles
in length, and is brought in from the Tolcomairiro Eiver; it is
made to carry eighteen heads of water. McLaren and party’s
race is seventeen miles and a half in length, and is constructed
to carry three heads. Ferris and party’s race is ten miles in
length, and carries four heads of water. Quilter and party hold
a race ten miles in length, carrying two sluice-heads.
The Township of Waitahuna is seven miles from Lawrence
by rail or road. On the first Thursday in each month the
Bailiff of the Court visits there, to receive mining-applications
and objections thereto, preparatory to the sittings of the
'Warden’s Court at Lawrence.
WAIPORI.
This portion of the Tuapeka "Warden’s district lies back
near the foot of the Lammerlaw Eanges. Gold was first dis-
covered in the Waipori Eiver and adjoining flats in the early
part of the year 1862, but the field was not thoroughly opened
up until the following summer. Though quartz reefs were
discovered as early as 1864, alluvial mining has been the princi


pal means of support for the population in and about Waipori,.
and parties in possession of water-rights are able to make fair'
wages by sluicing. There are strong indications of a deep lead
existing on the Waipori Flat, which is now being prospected by
the Waipori Deep Lead Prospecting Association, aided by sub- ;
sidies from the County Council and the Government. As the
lead is supposed to extend from five to seven miles down the >
flat, the discovery of payable gold would be the means of afford-
ing employment to a large number of miners.
The oldest quartz-workings in Otago were on the Shetland
Reef. Several quartz reefs were taken up in the early days, but,
owing to want of knowledge and skill, the capital of the various
companies was to a great extent wasted, and the 'leases were
abandoned. The Maori and Maud Quartz Reef was thrown up
about 1872, although good quartz was found in different shafts
50ft. to 60ft. from the surface. The reef averaged 4in. in
thickness in the lower levels, and yielded about 2oz. per ton.
It was thought at the time that an expenditure of £6OO would
have developed the reef to a paying point. The Pioneer Com-
pany, which was formed to work the Shetland Reef, erected a
ten-head battery, which was driven by an overshot wheel, 26ft.
■n diameter. Although a large quantity of gold was obtained from
the reef, operations ceased in 1870. To further develop the mine
an expenditure of about £3,000 would he required. The Devil’s
Creek Company stopped work in 1873, although the trial-crush-
lng proved satisfactory. The reef was found to he very hard
an d thin, and the capital of the company, was exhausted. The
Cosmopolitan Company sunk a shaft 60ft. on a reef 4ft. thick:
the trial-crushing gave a yield of |oz. to the ton, hut
110 further work was done. After an expenditure of £2,500 in
sinking a shaft, the Canton Company (composed of Chinese)
ocased operations about 1870, as the reef was not struck. The
Undaunted Company, after exhausting its capital, ceased work
last year: the stone which was tested turned out to he of poor
quality.
During the present year fresh interest has been evinced in
Uie development .of the quartz reefs in the Waipori District.
Uive leases have been issued, for an area of fifty-two acres. Two
°I the claims, comprising twenty acres, were formerly held by


other persons, hut the leases were cancelled. The remainder of
the area taken up is new ground. Prospecting is now going on
in all of these claims, and the holders appear sanguine; hut
sufficient time has not elapsed to enable them to properly open
out their workings.
Manganese was found in 1864, hut the samples tested did
not yield more than 8 per cent. Coarse pieces of scheelite were
picked up the following year in the alluvial workings, but no
steps were taken to find the lode. Cinnabar, much water-worn,
was also found in small lots. In October, 1875, about sixty
tons of antimony were shipped to England to be smelted. The
lode is well defined, and is considered payable if the ore could
be smelted at the mine ; but the necessary machinery and plant
would cost £IO,OOO to £15,000. Copper was discovered about
the year 1866. A few years ago a company was formed to work
the lode, and seventeen tons of the ore were shipped to England
to be smelted. The company expended £2,000 in machinery
and work about the mine, but no well-defined lode was found.
To thoroughly test the ground, and to develop the lode, if it
exists, would necessitate a large expenditure.
Lignite of a poor quality is found in the district, but is
very little used. There is plenty of good peat available, and it
is obtainable by the miners far up in the Lammerlaw Ranges.
Timber and firewood have to be carted ten miles on a bad road
from the Waipori Bush.
The principal water-races at Waipori are those of the Wai-
pori Sluicing Company, which has two races, one eighteen miles
and the other fourteen miles in length, carrying twenty sluice-
heads of water; Parker’s race, five miles in length, carrying five
sluice-heads; Knight’s and others’race, thirteen miles in length,
carrying seven sluice-heads; Green’s race, ten miles in length,
carrying fourteen sluice-heads; Carnegie’s race, six miles in
length, carrying ten sluice-heads; Fiddler’s race, five miles in
length, carrying five sluice-heads; besides a number of other
races of smaller extent.
The Bailiff of the Court visits Waipori on the third Thurs-
day in each month, to receive applications for mining-privileges.
A police-constable is stationed at the township.


WOOLSHBD (or GLBNOEE).
In 1862 the Woolshed was opened ; hut Edward Peters (more
generally known as “ Black Peter ”) obtained small quantities of
gold from the sand in the bed of the Tokomairiro River about
two years before the rush took place. Gold of a very good
qualitv was found in the various creeks and tributaries discharg-
ing into the Tokomairiro River, and during the first twelve
months after the field was opened the escort took over ll,ooooz.
of gold to Dunedin.
Quartz reefs were discovered in 1863, and three or four
leases were taken up. They were worked for a short time, and
then abandoned. The Canada Reef Company erected a battery
of ten heads, and worked the reef, which was 3ft. thick, for
several years. They sank a shaft 60ft., and drove out by tunnel-
ling. In consequence of the shaft having caved in and destroyed
the working-plant, the claim was abandoned in 1878, and the
battery was afterwards sold and removed.
At the present time there are only a few parties, principally
Chinese, working at the Woolshed Creek and at Adams’s Hat.
The reefs are considered payable if properly worked; hut it is
difficult to get capitalists to invest money in developing them.
The total yield of gold has been roughly estimated at from
40,0000 z. to 50,0000 z.
The Woolshed (now better known as Glenore) is about six
miles by road and rail from Milton, where sittings of the
Resident Magistrate’s Court are held on the second and fourth
Tuesdays in each month; hut all the business of the Warden’s
department is transacted at Lawrence. The police-constable
as Clerk of Court .at Milton.
TAPANUI.
The first payable gold-workings were found at \\ aikaka in
1865, hut indications of gold were frequently seen in parts of
4e district as far hack as 1853. Gold can still he obtained
al °ng the hanks of the Pomahaka River and its various tribu-
taries, and also on the low terraces adjoining—on the freeholds of
Captain McKenzie and Mr. Logan- —hut only in sufficient
Tmntity to pay small wages. Towards the close of the year
1885 a few miners were allowed to work, on condition that the


holes were refilled and a small amount was paid weekly for the
privilege of working. One party started a dredge on the
Pomaliaka River, hut were unable to make it pay. At present
there are only a few miners at work on the hanks of the river
and on Mr. Logan’s land. One man, who had taken up an
extended claim of one acre, and secured certain water-rights
outside the boundary of the run, has obtained a fair prospect.
• Lignite of an inferior quality is plentiful in the district. A
new mine has been opened at the Conical Hills, and the owners
are raising about twenty tons per week. There is a saw-mill
within four miles of the Tapanui Township.
A monthly sitting of the Resident Magistrate’s Court is held
at Tapanui on the second Wednesday and Thursday in each
month. The police-constable acts as Clerk of the Court. The
business of the Warden’s Court is transacted at Lawrence.
WAIKAIA.
The Waikaia includes the old districts of Nokomai and
Switzer’s, or the Upper Waikaia and Whitecombe. Gold was
discovered at the Nolcomai in the early part of 1862 by Mr.
James Lamb and party in Victoria Gully, which is about three
miles in length and two to three hundred yards w'ide. The
creek takes its rise in the high ranges, and empties into the
Nokomai River above the Middle Gorge. During the first two
or three years after the discovery of gold a large population
settled in the district, and a Warden was stationed at Nokomai.
After the rush to the "West Coast the population gradually
dwindled down, until there were not more than about eighty
persons residing at the Nokomai. The various gullies and tri-
butaries yielded large returns ; hut they were worked out in a
few years, and the decrease in the yield of gold was as marked
as the decrease in population. Towards the close of the year
1885 a change for the better took place. In November Messrs.
Hunter Brothers found good payable wash-dirt on the Lower Flat
at the Nokomai, at a depth of 64ft. The wash-dirt, which is
4ft. to sft. in thickness, yielded loz. to the load. They erected
an Asbury’s patent pump, capable of discharging 12,000 gallons
per hour, with an eight horse-power engine to work it. Having
been driven out by foul air, they sank another shaft 41ft.,' and


then drove through to their first shaft, a distance of about
200 ft. Paddon and party (now known as the Pioneer Com-
pany) sank a shaft 35ft. at the head of the Upper Plat, and
found good payable wash-dirt of a similar kind to that on Hunter
Brothers’ ground, and placed an eight horse-power engine on
their claim to work the pulsometer. In consequence of these
discoveries, several gold-mining leases were applied for and
granted in March, 1886. McKay and party placed an engine
on their ground, and had started putting down their shaft; hut
work had to he suspended on all the claims in consequence of
the great increase of water in the shafts when the heavy rains
set in after the long dry seasons. Arrangements are now being
made to provide more powerful machinery to keep down the
water. There are about thirty Chinese at work on the Nokomai
and adjacent tributaries. Strong indications of quartz reefs
are to be seen at the head of Victoria and Bullock Head
Gullies; but, so far, nothing has been done to develop them.
Shortly after the opening of the Nokomai, gold was dis-
covered at Switzer’s, on what was then known as “ Sam Perkins’s
Sun.” The workings were confined for some time to the
binding Creek; but in January, 1863, further discoveries
"'em made in "Welshman’s and Moffat’s Gullies. The ground
being shallow, it was soon turned over, and the miners spread
°ut over other portions of the district. Rich finds were made
along the banks and bed of the Waikaia River for a distance of
twenty miles, and gold was found for a certain distance up
Gow Creek, in Dome Creek, and on the Scrubby Terraces.
Water was very scarce on the terraces and spurs, and several
"'ater-races had to be brought in from different sources to work
them. The principal one was the Argyle Water-race, capable
carrying twenty-four sluice-heads to Switzer’s, a distance of
fifteen miles. The race was afterwards extended across a deep
Sully to Welshman’s by means of an iron syphon, and was
taken over other gullies on . a fluming erected on very high
staging. A company of Chinese purchased this race, and have
since expended over PI,OOO in extending it to Moffat’s Gully
a ud adjoining terraces, where it will command remunerative
ground. Gold of a payable kind has been found in the Upper
aikaia, on the low terraces in the bush, and at Campbell’s


Creek, Potter’s Creek, and Whitccombe. A quartz reef has keen
found at Campbell’s Creek, on the Old Man Range, which
shows gold all through the stone at a depth of 16ft.
Gold was found at Waikaka, about eighteen miles from
Waikaia, in the year 1865, and gave occupation to about a
hundred and. fifty miners for several years. There are at
present only a few Europeans and about thirty Chinese at
work.
Gold has been found in the Mataura River, outside the
limits of the goldfields, and on the Waimumu Creek and other
tributaries running into the Mataura River, near Gore, Mataura,
and Tuturau, on private property. Some miners are paying
2s. 6d. to 6s. per week for the privilege of working the ground,
and are making fair wages. Fine gold has also been found
lately in the black sand on the sea-bcaclies at Waikawa, and
near the mouths of the Clutha and Catlin’s Rivers, where two
or three parties who have command of water occasionally work.
Since the year 1876, the mining population at Nokomai and
Waikaia has remained almost stationary, the number in both
places being about three hundred to three hundred and fifty.
The yield of gold in the early days was very considerable, and
from the year 1871 to 1875 it averaged 9,4000 z. per annum.
During the last ten years it has gradually declined, the yield
for 1885 being only about 3,0000 z.
Hematite has been found at Welshman’s Gully, but the
specimens analysed have not been favourably reported upon.
Indications of cinnabar and graphite have been found on the high
ranges between tbe Nevis and Nokomai; and marble was
recently found cropping out on the Nokomai, but no steps have
been taken to test its quality or open out a quarry. Three
seams of lignite are worked in the district, and there is a good
seam in the Upper Nokomai, which has not yet been worked.
The future prospects of the Waikaia district are considered
promising. There is every probability of quartz reefs being
developed in the Upper Waikaia, whilst large areas of alluvial
terraces, which are known to be payable, would be worked if
water was obtainable, and w r oukl afford employment for two or
three hundred men. A supply of water could be brought on to
what are known as the “ Scrubby Terraces,” near the Waikaia


Township, from Steeple Creek, at a cost o£ £SOO to £6OO. An
expenditure of £2,000 to £3,000 on water-races would afford
steady employment for some years to come to two or three hun-
dred men on the alluvial terraces. There are large areas of good
agricultural land suitable for settlement, in addition to the
numerous farms which have already been taken up in the dis-
trict.
Sittings of the Resident Magistrate’s and Warden’s Courts
are held on the third Tuesday in each month at Waikaia Town-
ship, which is situated on the Waikaia River, fifteen miles from
Riversdale, one of the stations on the Waimea Plains Railway.
A branch railway-line, connecting Waikaia with Riversdale, has
been projected and partly formed, but the works have been at
a standstill for some time past. The police-constable holds the
appointment of Clerk of the Courts and Receiver of Gold
Revenue.
GOLD RETURNS.
The following are the returns of the gold sent by escort
mi the early days from Lawrence :
Year. Ounces.
1861 .. .. .. .. 171,038
1862 .. .. .. .. 199,547
1863 .. .. .. .. 63,365
1864 .. .. .. .. 55,713
1865 .. .. .. .. 45,612
1866 .. .. .. .. 27,741
During the first three months of 1867, when the escort
ceased, 6,5340 z. were sent to Dunedin. The yields from Waipori
ar e included in the above returns. The following are the escort
returns from AVaitahuna :
Year. Ounces.
1861 (November and December) .. 35,709
1862 .. .. .. .. 48,429
1863 .. ..... .. 12,114
1864 .. .. .. .. 8,113
1865 .. .. .. .. 12,523
1866 .. .. .. .. 7,383
1867 (to 21st February) .. .. 1,084
Prom the termination of the Government escort to the end
1873 the annual yield from the whole district was about
25 ,0000 z.


■ The estimated yield of gold for the following years (ending
the 31st March) from Tuapeka, Waitahuna, and Waipori is
as follows :
Year. Ounces.
1874 .. .. .. .. 28,383
1875 .. .. 19,743
1876 .. .. .. .. 21,106
1877 .. .. .. .. 26,155
1878 .. .. .. .. 27,260
1879 .. .. .. • • 26,694
1880 .. .. • • .. 29,288
1881 .. .. .. .. 28,476
1882 .. .. .. .. 22,500
1883 .. .. .. .. 19,500
1884 .. .. .. .. 19,000
1885 .. .. ~ .. 17,000
1886 .. .. •. .. 15,000
AGRICULTURAL AREAS TAKEN UP BY MINERS.
Under the regulations for granting agricultural leases to
miners, 70 sections, comprising 600 acres, were taken up under
“ The Goldfields Act, 1862,” the area at that time being limited
to 10 acres. Under “The Goldfields Act, 1866)” which extended
the area to 50 acres, 461 sections, comprising 17,500 acres, were
applied for. Under “ The Goldfields Act, 1879,” which extended
the area to 200 acres, 473 sections, comprising 39,500 acres,
were taken up. Under “ The Mines Act, 1877,” which extended
the area to 320 acres, 76 sections, comprising 10,500 acres, were
applied for. The total number of leases taken up was 1,080,
and the total area 68,100 acres. Leases for 8,000 acres were
cancelled, and 8,775 acres were exchanged under the provisions
of the Land Acts, of which over 6,000 acres have become free-
hold, and the remainder is in course of conversion. With the
exception of 1,572 acres, still existing as leasehold, and the
8,000 acres cancelled, all the land taken up under agricultural
leases has become freehold property.' A large number of miners
have thus been enabled to exchange the pick and shovel
for the plough and harrow. Some of the most enterprising
farmers in the district formerly belonged to the mining popu-
lation.


PRICE OF GOLD.
The price of gold throughout the district is £3 15s. per
ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.-SITTINGS OF COURT.
The Warden for the Tuapeka District is Mr. W. 11. Revell,
R.M., whose head-quarters are at Lawrence, the principal town
in the district, with upwards of a thousand inhabitants. Mr.
H. J. Abel is Clerk of the Court and Mining Registrar, and
Mr. W. E. Shury is Assistant Clerk and Bailiff. The Clerk
of the Court at Tapanui is Constable King. The Clerk of the
Court and Receiver of Gold Revenue at Waikaia is Constable
Maher.
DIST AN CE S.—COMMU NIC ATION.
Miles.
Dunedin to Lawrence .. .. .. 60
Lawrence to Waitahuna .. .. • • 7
Lawrence to Waipori .. • • .. 16
Waipori to Outran! .. • • .. 22
Waipori to Waitahuna .. .. .. 16
Lawrence to Woolslied .. .. ..15
Woolslied to Milton .. .. •• 6
Lawrence to Tapanui .. .. .. 35
Tapanui to Waikaia .. .. ..15
Lawrence to Waikaia .. .. ..50
Waikaia to Riversdale .. .. .. 15
Waikaia to Gore .. • • .. 33
Waikaia to Invercargill .. .. .. 73
Waikaia to Dunedin .. .. • • 132
Waikaia to Nokomai .. .. .. 30
Nokomai to Parawa .. .. • - 6
Nokomai to Invercargill .. .. .. 72
There is railway - communication between Dunedin and
Lawrence, and trains run twice daily both ways. From Milton
■to Lawrence is a branch of the main line, twenty-four miles
long, on which arc stations at Glenore and "Waitahuna. There
■is also a good road between these places. Waipori is connected
V telephone with Lawrence. The roads and tracks in that
s nh-district, with the exception of ten miles of road leading to
the bush, which is cut up by the heavy traffic, are in fair con-
dition. Tapanui can be reached from Lawrence by the main
t'Qad (thirty-five miles) or by railway (eighty miles). ■ The roads


and tracks in that sub-district are in fair order during the
summer months, but when there is heavy traffic in winter time
they are easily cut up. The Nokomai diggings are six miles
from the Parawa siding, on the Invercargill-Kingston line.
THE BLUE SPUR AND GABRIEL’S GULLY SLUICING
COMPANY.
The Blue Spur and Gabriel’s Gully Sluicing Company occupies
a special claim of twenty-four acres, extending down the course of
the gully from opposite the Blue Spur. This ground was worked
in the early days, but in an imperfect manner; and when the com-
pany started operations the old surface was covered to a great
depth with millions of tons of tailings discharged from the Blue
Spur claims since 1861. This mass of stuff, and portions of the
original ground on which it rested, were for many years supposed
to be payable if some wholesale system of sluicing could he
introduced. There was plenty of water available, but not suffi-
cient fall, and the problem seemed insoluble until Mr. J. R.
Perry, the principal promoter of the company, took the matter
into consideration, and succeeded in introducing a very ingenious
device for working these immense deposits. By his plan the
stuff is forced up a pipe by a powerful jet of water let in from
a nozzle at the lower end of the pipe. This jet has a head of
over 300 ft. So great is the suction induced by its ascent that,
as the stuff is fed into the lower end of the pipe by a stream of
water, it is at once drawn in, and rushes up the pipe, and would
be discharged at the top as from a catapult or volcano but for
an iron hood, which serves the double purpose of breaking any
agglomerated nodules, and guiding the stuff into the sluice-
boxes, along which it is carried by the water, and is shot over
at a convenient distance from the workings. In this way the
stuff, instead of being washed away down a sludge-channel, is
simply turned over and shifted a short distance. A few grains
of gold per ton are sufficient to pay working expenses. The
works consist of a drainage-race, pipes to lead head-water, an
elevating-pipe, and sluice-boxes. The drainage-race is made of
sheet-iron, forming a pipe 30in. in diameter. At the lower end
of the race this pipe is laid on the surface of the tailings, and d
is extended up the gully through a channel opened in the tailings,


SKETCH PLAN
PERRY’S HYDRAULIC SLUICING PLANT
GABRIEL'S GULLY




with just sufficient inclination to allow water to drain down the
gully. This pipe is continued for a distance or 1,500 ft. up the
claim. Sluicing operations were commenced five or six years
ago near the head of the drainage-race, a large open space being
made down to the bed-rock, where the elevating apparatus was
placed in position. It consists of a double sheet-iron pipe, loin,
in diameter, with an aperture of 12in. or 14in. The elbow is
placed in a shallow well-hole in the bed-rock, and the ends rise
nearly perpendicularly 12ft. or 15ft. above the surface of the
tailings. One end of the pipte is joined to another of the same
diameter, which conveys water from a supply-dam situated at an
elevation of 291 ft., thus affording great pressure. The other end
of the pipe is made to discharge into the head of a long line of
sluice-boxes, supported on trestles over the bed of the gully.
When water is let in from the dam it passes down through the
water-pipe, and then rushes up the elevating-pipe, drawing as it
does so through the aperture in the elbow all gravel, cement,
earth, or water within reach. An enormous quantity of stuff
can thus be lifted, and it is projected up the pipe with immense
velocity, estimated at the rate of about one mile per minute, by
which means all unbroken lumps of cement strike a thick plate
of iron placed for that pnirposc at the top of the pipe, and by
force of the concussion become pulverized. Everything reaching
the head of the pipe then flows through an aperture into the
sluice-boxes, which, being raised, can be so arranged as to dis-
charge debris at any locality or distance. Another appliance
ls a line of 15-inch piping, about 000 ft. in length, which con-
eys water from a lagoon at the head of the gully to near
the face of the workings. The pipe is there fitted with a
Patent nozzle, by means of which the water is played upon
the face, sides, and bottoms of the workings, and forces the
earth and tailings in large quantities towards the aperture in
the elbow of the elevating-pipe, whence they are drawn up the
pipe and deposited in the sluice-boxes. The quantity of water
Used by the company varies from fifteen to twenty sluice-
heads. Hydraulic sluicing on a somewhat similar principle has
been in use in California for some years; but suction has been
uiore depended on than direct pressure. A sketch of Mr.
ferry’s ingenious hydraulic plant is appended. It is the first
the kind introduced into New Zealand.
3


Registered Mining Companies in the Tuapeka Warden’s District actually in operation on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
j. M
o 9
•2 3
■S3
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters'
Shares.
Total Value of
Total
Capital
Actually
Iteccived
from Calls.
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company's
Mine.
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid by
Com-
pany.
Amount
of Last
Dividend.
Date of Last
Dividend.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
S3
<U
?o J
O ft
s|
55
Blue Spur and Gabriel’s
Gully Sluicing Company
(Limited)
30,000
£
30,000
£
8,742
£
3,774
£
9,959
£
£
••
Mar., 1881
Washing
tailings.*
7
Great Extended Sluicing
Company (Limited)
400
4,000
4,000
53,500
21,038
200
Mar. 7, 18S3
1802
Cement-
crusli-
ing
20
Otago Gold-mining Com-
pany (Limited)
4,800
4,800
4,800
42
Mar.15,1883
1802
Cement-
crush-
ing
15
Phcenix Water-race Com-
pany (Limited)
1,000
1,500
1,500
• •
••
5,070
100
June 1,1880
1802
2
Wetlierstone’s Cement Gold-
mining Company (Regis-
tered)
8,000
8,000
0,200
2,200
28,000
2,000
200
Sept., 1884
1878
Cement-
crush-
ing
14
in
in
Q>
O
O
Pi
u
3
c 3
Jh
V
n
«■


Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Tuapeica Warden’s
District on the 31st December, 18S5.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date -when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
r-*0
«2 -n
§ g a
<
a. n. p.
£
W. Evans*
Mar. 1, 18/5
1 2 31
2
T. Mark*
Feb. 28,1870
3 1 25
Sept. 20,1880
C. Thomson
4
and others
T. Evans and Co.*
Oct. 23, 1877
4 0 0
4
Great Extended Sluicing
Sept. 9,1881
5 2 30
6
Company*
W. Evans and Co.*
Sept. 9, 1881
4 3 10
5
J. McHattie and others*
Sept. 9, 1881
0 2 14
i
S. Johnston and others*
Sept. 9, 1SS1
0 2 22
i
Ditto*
Sept. 9, 18S1
0 1 32
J. Hancock
i
R. Grieve and others* ..
Sept. 24,1881
3 3 32
Oct. 12, 1882
4
and others
Ditto*
Sept. 24,1881
7 1 11
Oct. 12, 1882
Ditto
8
Blue Spur and Gabriel’s
Jan. 1,1880
24 1 3
25
Gully Sluicing Com-
pany!
Wetherstono’s Cement
July 1, 1885
19 0 G
10
Gold - mining Com-
panyf
13
J- Cox and E. Clifford*
liar. 24, 1882
12 1 10
J. Cox*
Mar. 24, 1882
10 0 0
10
Cox and Clifford*
April 1G, 1883
12 3 7
. .
Cox, Durie, and others*
April 1G, 1883
5 0 0
5
W. Evans and others* ..
April 28,1883
4 2 12
5
xuapelta Prospecting
Aug. 20, 18S3
7 1 G
8
Company*
Johnston and Co.* ..
April 25,1884
1 0 17
2
W. Johnstone and others*
Sept. 2G, 18S4
1 0 3G
2
*■ McLaren and others*
Nov. 21,1884
110
Great Extended Sluicing
Nov. 7, 1884
2 0 19
3
Company*
Ditto*
Mar. 13, 1885
1 2 19
2
Ditto*
April 1G, 1885
0 3 32
1
Ditto*
Dec. 8, 1885
2 3 34
3
jL" Harris and others* ..
July 10, 1885
1 3 27
2
Crugo Gold-mining Com-
Dec. 11,1885
4 2 23
5
pany*
x- Mark and others* ..
•Tan. 23, 18S0
G 3 24
7
?■ Sutherland and others*
Jan. 23, 1880
5 3 32
5
h. Thomson and Co.* ..
Jan. 23, 1880
7 2 2
8
Dxairs and others* ..
Jan. 23, 1880
5 0 1
G
McNab and others*..
Sept. 9, 1881
3 3 21
4
n,, Waikaia.
Thomas Collins*
Juno 4,1878
5 2 1G
Nov. 11,1882
W. Cowman,
N. Sweetman,
and A. 13recn
3
* Lease. + Special claim.


DUNSTAN WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The discovery of gold at the Dunstan was reported to the
Superintendent of Otago in August, 1832, by two Californian
miners, named Hartley and Reilly, who brought down to Dun-
edin ljOOOoz. of gold. Before the close of that year 70,0000 z.
were sent to Dunedin by the escort. The first discovery was
made at the western base of the Dunstan Mountains, on a beach
of the Clulha River, about ten miles above the present town of
Clyde. Fresh discoveries followed until there were continuous
workings between what are now known as Cromwell and Rox-
burgh. The banks of the river were soon covered with tents,
which gradually extended from above the confluence of the
Kawarau River to the gorges of the Beaumont Burn, a distance
of nearly seventy miles. Mr. Jackson Kcddcll, who was then
Warden, estimated the population of the Dunstan and Manulicrikia
districts at the close of the year ISG2 at 4,400, 3,200 being set
down as miners. Ever since that time the field has been worked
continuously, though the number of men engaged in mining has
not been anything like so large during recent years. The Dun-
stan is still noted for the richness of its auriferous deposits.
The Mountain Race Company, with a paid-up capital of
only £5,600, has declared dividends amounting to .£38,500.
At Bendigo, twelve or fourteen miles from Cromwell, the reef
now owned by the New Cromwell Company, which was first
opened out in 1865 by the original prospectors (T. Logan and
party), who afterwards formed a company to work it, must have
yielded in eighteen or twenty years gold to the value of .£500,000
or £600,000. Between March, 1876, and October, 1881, divi-
dends were declared amounting to £29,952. The Royal Oak
Company, Carrick Range, paid £14,000 in dividends in a feff
years. It is somewhat surprising that, where such rich alluvial
deposits have been found, and where the quartz has been tested
with such good results, so little attention lias been paid by capi-
talists to these reefs. Had such large yields been obtained in
some of the quartz-mining districts of Australia, hundreds of
thousands of pounds would have been readily invested in work-
ing and developing the reefs; but so little attention has been


paid to the vast area of reefing-country in the interior of Otago
that there are only five companies at work at the present time
in the Cromwell and Alexandra subdivisions of the Dunstan
District—namely, the New Cromwell Company, at Bendigo;
the Star of the East and ltoyal Oak, at the Carriek Range;
White’s Reef, and White and Gavin’s, on the Old Man Range,
above Bald Hill Elat, where excellent stone has been discovered.
The Royal Oak is merely a prospecting association, formed for the
purpose of prospecting the ground formerly held by the Royal
Oak Company, in whose claim rich auriferous quartz was found
near the surface. Similar indications were visible in the Star of
the East claim, where a low-level tunnel has been driven about
1,000 ft., so as to strike the reef at a greater depth than lias been
hitherto worked. There is a crushing-plant on the ground
which will enable the company to thoroughly test the quartz.
The Royal Oak and Star of the East have been subsidized by
the Government with the view of having the country prospected,
and new reefs opened out.
A great deal of energy has been devoted to the construction
of water-races, tail-races, dams, and reservoirs. At Clyde, about
120 miles of water-races, giving 81 sluice-licads of water, were
constructed at a cost of nearly id),000 ;at Alexandra, 230 miles
of 'water-races, giving 150 sluice-heads, at a cost of .£10,000; at
Roxburgh, 1-10 miles of water-races, giving 222 sluice-beads, at
a cost of over .£15,000 ; at Cromwell, 720 miles of water-races,
giving GSO to GGO sluiee-lieads, at a cost of .£BO,OOO to £90,000,
or at the rate of about .£l2O per mile. The Carriek Range
Water-race Company (largely aided by the Government) ex-
pended £14,000 on a twenty-mile race, which yields .£1,500 per
annum, 20 sluice-heads being sold to the public at a weekly
charge of £1 10s. per head. The tail-races, extending for a
distance of about three hundred miles, cost £BO,OOO to £40,000.
Antimony was found on the Carriek Range, near Bannock-
burn, a few years ago, and an unsuccessful attempt was made to
develop it; but until there is cheaper transit to the seaboard
this mineral cannot be profitably worked. At the Upper Nevis
cinnabar has been found, and it is probable that an attempt will
shortly be made to work the deposits, which are reported to be
v °ry large. Traces of silver have been found at Matatapu, and


of iron, copper, and plumbago in various places ; but so far no
attempt lias been made to develop these minerals.
The future prospects of the Dunstan District, judging by
recent discoveries, appear to be promising. The alluvial work-
ings at the Nevis and Bannockburn ; on the terraces on both
sides of the Upper Clutha, towards the Lowburn and its tribu-
taries ; at Quartz Beef Point; and on the lower faces of the
spurs of the Pisa Range, are all giving fairly remunerative
returns.
DREDGING THE CLUTHA RIVER*
The Clutha is undoubtedly one of the richest gold-producing
streams in the world. Prom Lake Wanaka, whence the river
issues, until it reaches the sea, near Kaitangata, a distance of
about a hundred and fifty miles, it drains an immense water-
shed, and affords an outlet for the Ivawarau, Fraser, Manu-
herikia, Tcviot, Tuapcka, 'VVaitahuna, and Pomahaka Rivers,
and also for many other considerable streams. There is not a
single reach of the river in which gold has not been found; and
to this day it would be difficult to find any portion where a fair
prospect could not be panned out from the bed of the river.
From the early days of the gold discoveries up to the present
time the banks and beaches of the river have been worked for
scores of miles, and large quantities of gold have been obtained.
There have been proposals made to turn the river, and so lay
bare the treasures of its channel; but the vast outlay required to
form a new channel utterly precludes the attempt. In ISO!
the Provincial Government had the volume of the Clutha River
carefully measured at a time when its waters were low; and the
result was found to be something extraordinary, being not less
than 1,090,400 cubic feet per minute. The following com-
parison with other large rivers was published at the time :
Cub. Ft. per Min.
Molyncux .. .. .. .. 1,090,400
Tay * 274,000
Boyne .. .. .. .. .. 180,000
Thames 102,000
* This river is very often referred to as the Molynoux River, probably on
account of Holyneux liny being marked on the Admiralty Chart, and ilolyncux
Township having been laid off near the mouth of the river.






Cub. Ft. per slin.
Clvde ~ .. . - .. .. 48,000
Rhine .. .. .... .. 3,960,000
Rhone .. .. .. - • • • 049,000
Tiber .. 618,234
Saone .. .. .. .. •• 460,000
Arno .. .. ;. .. . • 260,800
Nile .. .. 1,380,000
Irrawaddy .. .. .. • ■ 4,500,000
Thus, the Clutlia River, when at its lowest, was found to he
larger than the Nile, six times the size of the Tay, nine times
that of the Boyne, and sixteen times that of the Thames.
Several dredges have been placed on the river with satis-
factory results. If some efficacious method could he found
for taking the gold from the interstices of the rocky bottom,
a large number of dredges could then be placed in different
parts of the river with every prospect of success, and hun-
dreds of men might be profitably employed. A company has
keen recently formed in London with the view' of working
the river near Alexandra South with improved hydraulic appli-
ances; and Mr. Gibson, an old Dunstan miner, who represents
the company, appears to be very confident that large yields
will result from the operations. In his last annual report Mr.
H- A. Gordon, Inspecting Engineer, furnished the following
Particulars in reference to one of the dredges: “ A short dis-
tance above Alexandra there is a large double-action steam-
dredge at work, which has now been employed in dredging the
ked of the river for about four years. It was constructed by
■Messrs. Kincaid and McQueen, of Dunedin, and is well adapted
for excavating auriferous drift from the beds of rivers. Indeed,
this dredge is the most complete one (although far from being
Perfect) that has yet been employed in gold-mining in the
colony; and, from what I could learn, has been successful in
obtaining sufficient gold to pay the proprietors for tlieir outlay.
Not only i s the dredged material lifted, but the whole of it is
Washed on board. Credit is due to the manufacturers of the
re( lge for the ingenious manner in -which everything is placed
So a s to economize labour. There are three men on each shift,
an( l the dredge is kept continually at work day and night, stop-
only on Sundays and when it is absolutely necessary for


repairs. After lifting the wash-dirt out of the river, and empty-
ing it into a hopper, the dredged material goes through a re-
volving screen, and is washed on hoard, the large stones passing
behind the dredge in one place, and the fine tailings in another.
The dredge; is GGft. long, built of iron, having two pontoons,
one at each side, extending the whole length of the hull and
about 2ft. Gin. clear from the side, so that the total width of the
hull and pontoons is 26ft. On the deck of the dredge framing
is erected to carry the dredging-shaft, hoppers, and washing-
apparatus. There arc two sets of buckets and dredging-ladders,
one on each side, which work between the hull and pontoons.
I'lacli set can be worked separately or together, as required. The
buckets arc capable of lifting 150 tons of stuff per hour, dredg-
ing to a depth of 25ft. below the level of the water. The
dredged material falls into a shoot which carries it into a re-
volving cylinder, 4ft. in diameter and Gft. long, made of boiler-
plate, and perforated with holes one inch in diameter. This
revolving cylinder has a dip or inclination towards the stern of
the dredge of llin. to the foot. On the inside of this cylinder
short pieces of angle-iron are riveted here and there all round
the cylinder, to prevent the stones getting away before they
are properly washed. All the fine stuff passes through the per-
forated holes in the cylinder, and falls on to inclined screens,
thence into ripple-boxes, where the gold is collected, and the
tailings are carried away clear of the stern of the dredge.
The large stones and coarse gravel that come through the end of
the revolving cylinder pass into a shoot at the stern of the
dredge, and are deposited in the river. "Water for washing-
purposes is lifted by a centrifugal pump, and is so conveyed
that jets are made to play on the screens, thereby washing the
stones and coarse gravel, and carrying the gold into the ripple*
boxes. The ripples in these boxes are made of bar-iron, laid on
the flat across the box, and placed about threc-cigliths of a n
inch apart, having under them, on the bottom of the boxes,
eoeoanut-matting. The water coming down these inclined
tables forms ripples in each of the interstices, and there the
gold is deposited. The first set of inclined tables are set across
the dredge at an inclination from the outside towards the centre,
where the tables from each of the revolving screens join on to


another inclined table, which carries tlie sluiced material into
the river at the stern of the dredge. The whole of the drcdg-
ing-macliinery is worked by a vertical inverted compound steam-
engine, having cylinders of 12in. and 22in. diameter respectively,
and 18in. stroke, working under a pressure of GOlb. to the
spare inch. A powerful double-cylinder steam-winch lifts and
lowers tlie dredging-ladders, as well as works the mooring-cliains,
of which there are five in number —viz., three at tlie how and
two at the stern. Each chain has its own drum, which can he
connected or thrown out of gear as desired. These arc all
under the control of one man.” A sketch is appended.
NEW CROMWELL QUARTZ COMPANY, BENDIGO.
The lodes in this company’s claim were first discovered by
Logan 'and party about eighteen years ago, and were worked by
them privately until January, 1870, when a company was
formed under the Mining Companies Act. It has been esti-
mated that gold of tlie value of about .£500,000 was obtained
by Logan and party, and from 1876 to the end of 1880 20,0000 z.
°f gold were obtained from the mine. The deepest level worked
by this company was 430 ft. ; but a reef, which has been proved
for a length of GOOft., exists at this level. "Whilst working on
this reef the mine got flooded owing to the pumps being too
s ®all (only din.) ; and, the shaft being old and in a dangerous
state, and not large enough to carry pipes sufficient to cope with
tbe water, the directors proposed to the shareholders to sink a
new main s ] la ft t 0 a d C pth of GOOft. At that period (Sep-
tember, 1884) the mining excitement at llccfton and the W est
Coast collapsed, and, as nearly all the shareholders in the Crom-
"ell Company were heavy losers, they were disgusted, and deter-
mined to wind up the company; hut a few of the largest sliare-
mlders purchased the mine and plant and formed the New
Cromwell Mining Company (Limited). This company at once
(e termined to sink the new shaft as proposed, and it has now
Cached a depth of 280 ft. During the sinking several small
Tmrtz leaders have been met with, and the metalliferous iiulica-
mus have been pronounced by Professor Ulrieli as of a most
sa hsfactorv character. The cost of sinking lias been found much
Skater than the company calculated on, and in consequence an


increase of capital will probably be necessary. There is ample
water-power, races having been constructed at a great expense
by the old company for driving the batteries and doing the
pumping and winding. The machinery erected at the mine,
which is in thorough working order, is the .most perfect of its
kind. It consists of a battery of twenty head of stampers, tables
and ripples, amalgamating-barrels, four berdans, fifty-horse-
power turbine-wheel; and, to enable crushing to proceed in
winter, when the water-races are at times frozen, a fifteen-
horse-pow r er engine was erected by the old company. At the
shaft is erected winding-gear, fifty-horse-power turbine, and air-
compressor. There arc also two rock-drills, electric and blasting-
battery, &c.
PKICE OF GOLD.
The general price of gold in the Dunstan District is £3 las.
jrer ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
Warden : Sir. J. S. Ilickson, R.M., Clyde. Receiver of Gobi
Revenue, Clyde : Mr. F. Jeffrey, wdio visits Alexandra two days
in each month, and Roxburgh once a month. Receiver of Gold
Revenue, Cromwell: Mr. S. M. Dalgliesh.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Jlilcs.
Dunedin to Clyde .. .. .. 137
Clyde to Alexandra .. . . . . 7
Clyde to Roxburgh .. .. .. 36
Clyde to Cromwell .. .. ..13
Cromwell to Pembroke .. .. 40
Clyde is the head-quarters of Mr. Warden Ilickson. There
is coach-communication north and south on alternate days. The
road from Cromwell to Clyde, Alexandra, and Roxburgh is 8
good summer road, hut it gets heavy in places during the winter.


HEOiSTEitSD IMining Companies in tho Dun stan Warden's District actually in operation on the 31st December, 1835.
*3
p
B
©
o
o
o
E
p
o
O
©
Number
of Shares.
Amount
of Capital.
Capital
declared j Capital
paid-up, j Actually
including ! Deceived
Promoters’ from Calls.
Shares.
Total Value of
Total
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Mino.
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid by
Com-
pany.
Date of Last
Dividend.
Amount
of Last
Dividend.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
a
9
og 1
■§a
A
Dunedin Gold - dredging
210
£
7,200
£
5,520
£
1,920
£
9,811
£
1,CS0
June 4,1S85
£
120
Oct., 1881
Gold and
12
Company (Limited)
Golden Gato Gold-mining
6,000
6,000
4,650
150
4,344
Feb., 1S78
lignite:
dredging
Alluvial
6
Company (Limited)
2,304
10
Mountain Race Gold-min-
32
6,100
5,000
5,000
52,500
38,500
1885
1872
„
ing Company (Limited)
Undaunted Gold-mining and
120
5,500
*
16,000
8,000
Dec., 18S5
300
1872
10
Water-race Company (Li-
mited)
Quartz
Union Gold-mining Com-
17,000
8,500
850
330
Oct. 27,1883
5
pany (Limited)
White’s Reef Gold-mining
10,000
10,000
5,012
2,012
907
Mar., 1884
*
6
Company (Limited)
CnoinvELL.
New Cromwell Quartz-min-
12,000
12,000
8,100
2,100
500,000
to
Jan., 1885
14
ing Company (Limited)
Star of the East Quartz-
1,200
12,000
9,630
3,030
600,000
15,908
3,200
Sept. 23,
300
6
mining Company (Li-
mited)
1878


Quartz-mixes at work or held in the Duxstan Warden’s District on tho 31st December, 1885.
3
p
B
o
o
Cl
o
B
p
0
o
o
55
3
o
n
Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital.
Date when first
opened.
Lcaso or Claim.
At
Survey
District.
and
Block.
or under
Protec-
tion.
or
Lid
u
ri 13
c n .
>*3tC
® u£
d ?r 3
O s o
?g ; S
fi p d
A TV
§ 5.9
t&i
tn*
Ph O
CO
Crushing-
'
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Stoncbreakcrs
Tablos with
Copper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
Concentrators
tables.
o
o o
o
o£
m 3 gj
a 3
CjOg
>
3S rt
o
OrS
EH
Old Man Range. .
£ £
A.
n. v.
£
£
White’s Reef Gold-milling
10,000 5,012
1881
12
1 99.
Sees. 3
Cairnhill
At work
, t
450
Company
and 21
13. II.
13
2 21
Secs.
(
. 20,21,
B. III.
)
Caubick Range.
1
1G
2 0
Sec. 3,
New Cromwell Quartz-
12,000 2,100
Abt.
1805
B. III.
V Wake-
At work
Water
Wtr. J
20 stampers,
Copp.-plates
5,000
500,000
mining Company*
16
2 0
See.
I field
4 berdans
and
to
(
4
1 0
B. III.
Sec. 22,
B. III.
blankets
000,000
Koyal Oak Company (J.
1G
2 4
Sec. 7,
Cromwell
At work
. ,
, ,
Bruce and others) f
B. II.
Star of tho East Companvt
12,000 8,000
1870
1G
2 4
See. 10,
Cromwell
At work
Steam Steam
10 stampers
Quicksilver,
tables with
1 ,500
B. III.
copp.-plates,
and blanket-
tables
* Tlie company, which was at first formod in March, 1670, was wound up in September, 1834: tho new company was registered in December, 1884.
■V ltoccived subsidies from Government. The Star of tho East’s ground was protected for twelve months.
\ 1? if t een-hor so-p ow or steam-engine in winter.


Gold-mining Leases and Sdeciae Claims hold in the Dunstan Warden’s
District on the 31st December, 1885.
Date when
transferred.
Name of
Person or
Kamo of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Company to
whom
transferred.
_ c
§11
p rH
a. n. p.
£
Patrick Murphy*
3ec. 17,1S7B
5 0 25iJunc 12,1883
Undaunted
G. M. and
0
W. R. Co.
Charles McQueen and
Jan. 1,1SS4
228 2 0
War. 21, 1884
Dunedin
£119s.
two others!
Gold-dredg-
ing Co.
Dunedin Gold-dredging
War. 5,18S5
39 1 0
5
Company t
Moses E. Manuel*
Tuly 22,18S5
5 0 0
. .
5
William Grcenbank and
Nov. 11,1SS0
9 3 22
. .
10
five others*
10
Ditto*
Nov. 11,1880
9 8 10
Ditto*
Dec. 9,1SS0
4 3 33
. .
. .
5
Frederick Wm. Plow* ..
Nov. 10,1881
5 0 0
5
James Kicolson*
•June 29,1883
7 0 0
War. 23,1885
W. Rolands
7
4 0 0
and others
4
Undaunted Gold-mining
Way 9,18S3
. .
and Water-race Com-
pany*
8
John Simes* ..
Jan. 10,18S4
7 0 12
, .
..
Undaunted Gold-mining
Jan. 1,1882
0 2 0
. .
..
4
Water-race Com-
panyf
Stephen Read*
Juno 3,1885
5 0 0
. .
..
5
Mountain Pmco Gold-
June 3,1885
7 3 4
8
Mining Company*
10
Ditto*
Juno 3,1885
9 3 31
. .
..
Undaunted Gold-mining
•June 3,18S5
9 3 39
..
10
and Water-raco Com-
pany*
Ditto*
Juno 3,1885
2 3 8
..
3
James White*
May 8,18S2
G 3 13
War. 28,1884
White’s Keel
7
G. M. Co.
May 7,1883
5 2 9
War. 28,1884
Ditto
G
“Mphen Foxwell and
Nov. 5,1883
1G 1 3G
.
17
■Rrm eo fliers*
uliam Wookey and
8 2 1
Sept. 18,1884
David H.
9
Nov. 11,1883
another*
e °rge and
Mervyn
Dec. 3,1883
9 2 0
,
*
10
another*
Mon Gold-mining Com-
pany*
antes White and five
Dec. 3,1882
Dec. 3,1832
13 1 35
14 3 35
*
14
15
others*
°k? Baker and two
others*
James White*
a .’? es McCormack and
~*™ee others*
6 1 15
••
7
April 7,1884
April 7,1S84
12 3 23
..
. .
13
April 7,1884
1G 2 4
* »
17
* Lease. + Special claim.


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date ■when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
0
111
< £
<
A. R. P.
£
William Quayle and
Dec. 1,1884
10 2 4
17
another*
CROMWELL.
Star of the East Quartz-
May ( J, 1870
1G 2 4
17
mining Company*
Cromwell Quartz-mining
Oct. 1, 1881
13 3 21
17
Company*
17
Ditto*
Feb. 24, 1883
1G 2 0
Ditto*
Feb. 24, 1883
1G 2 0
17
Ditto*
Mar. 30, 18S3
4 11
5
Royal Oak Company (J.
Feb. 0, 1885
1G 2 0
17
Bruce and others)*
10
J. McElligott and others*
Feb. 6, 188540 0 0
C. Masters and another*
June 15,1885
0 0 0,
G
V. Pyke and another* ..
June 15,1885
0 1 28j
7
* Lease.
WAKATIPU WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The Wakatipu Goldfield, has been one of tlic richest and most
extensive in the •world. In a report on the reconnaissance
survey of the Lake Districts in 1863, Mr. J. McKerrow, the
present Surveyor-General, stated that up to that date gold had
been found over an area of six hundred square miles; -whilst the
extent of payable country at that period, as indicated by the escort-
returns, extended over three hundred square miles. “ The boun-
dary-line of this country,” remarked Mr. McKerrow, “ describes
a parallelogram. The north boundary is a line drawn from the
head of the Wakatipu Lake east to the source of the Arroff
River, on Mount Hyde; the eastern boundary is a line drawn
from the source of the Arrow River to its junction with the
Kawarau River; then, for the remaining boundary-line, follow
up the Kawarau to the lake, and then up the east side of the
lake to its head. Every creek within this extent, with only ° ne


or two exceptions, lias been proved to be auriferous.” In 1862
gold was discovered by a miner named William Fox in the Shotovcr
River, and at the Arrow River in 1863. For a time these dis-
coveries were kept very quiet, but at length Fox’s haunts were
tracked out by the enterprising miners, and a large population
was soon located on the present site of the Arrow' Township.
Then followed fresh discoveries in the Upper Shotovcr, Skipper’s
Creek, Moke Creek, Twelve-mile Creek (now' known as Mace-
town), Cardrona, and various other localities. The latest of any
importance has been at Mount Criffel, on the Pisa Range,
I,oooft. above the sea-level. Gold was found in the river-beds
and beaches in immense quantities. In the early days one party
averaged 240 z. per day from beach-workings; and 3oz. to 4oz. per
day was common enough amongst those working in the river-beds.
At Carmichael’s, above Skipper’s, one dish of wasli-dirt panned
°nt the extraordinary yield of 80oz. With the rudest appliances,
half an ounce or an ounce per day could be obtained. Mr.
tyke recorded the fact that one party wdio worked in the river
ttear Maori Point valued a disputed piece of ground, 12ft. long
ail d sft. w'idc, at ,£3,000, and subsequent events proved that the
Cs hmatc was not exaggerated. Mr. Wright, who occupied the
post of Mining Surveyor in the early days, estimated that fifty
Parties w r ho w'ere engaged in attempts to divert the waters of the
Breams from their natural beds, so as to obtain the gold de-
posited on the bed-rocks, expended as much as .£150,000 in
three months on materials and wages, the latter then averaging
h Per day. In a claim on the Arrow' Flat, 1760 z. w r ere taken
in three days. Six tin dishes, which were washed consecu-
ely, panned out 720 z. Mr. Beetham, who was at that time
arden, mentioned this instance as having come under his own
serv ’ation. One party of six miners obtained 700 oz. in six
e ks, and another party of four realized 400 oz. in eight weeks,
every stream connecting with Lake Walcatipu gold has been
I , and big fortunes were made by many of the hardy pioneers,
.7ho be lost, in several instances, in other ventures. As the
alluvial ground got worked out, the miners gradually
ed away to the West Coast and other places; but some
the enterprising men who remained carried on extensive
1 r ations in spite of enormous difficulties. As a specimen of


what capital, skill, and enterprise can effect in connection with
mining, the following extract from a letter written by Mr. John
Aspinall to the Hon. the Minister of Mines may be given:
“ I began work ben; (Skipper’s Point) in 1867, and bad the
first lease which was granted. Two other parties held claims
adjoining, and we worked the ground by blocking it out with
timber, so that a person could walk in at my tunnel at the
Skipper’s Point side, and come out at their tunnel on the Shot-
over side. Five of mv neighbours left the country —a Swede
with .£2,600; two "Welshmen with £1,500 each; a \ankcc with
£3,500; and an Englishman with £3,500. My brother, who
was my only partner, left for the Old Country with about
£4,000. My neighbours gave their ground to two relatives,
who, after working for some time, struck a fresh patch, which
gave them £’1,500 a-picec. After I had commenced sluicing 1
introduced iron pipes; but subsequently, owing to the difficulty
of packing them, I got machinery up and made them on the
ground.” In addition, Mr. Aspinall constructed three dams,
two of which were blasted out of the solid rock. He brought
in two water-races —one a quarter of a mile in length, at a cost
of £4OO ; the other a mile in length—all of which had to be cut
out of solid rock, with the exception of about two hundred
yards. One rock-tunnel was driven 370 ft., at a cost of £IOO to
£500; and another 250 ft., at a cost of £375.
Those who have not been in the interior of Otago would fi> l(
it difficult to form an idea of the obstacles which have been over-
come by men like Mr. Aspinall. Miners with little capita
have been working here and there, earning at times only a bare
subsistence, but always with the expectation of finding some ric
deposits to enable them to carry on systematically, or perhaps
with a view of selling shares at high prices. The great want 1S
capital. With that would come all the latest and best a P
pliances for saving the gold, more systematic working, and 1
utilization of electricity and water-power on a large scab
similar to what has been done at Messrs. Pullen Pros.’ 101116
at Skipper’s, as detailed further on. If English capitalist
who have invested millions of money in Indian, California 11 ’
and South American mines, were to turn their attend 011
towards the interior of Otago, they would get far better rcturP
for their capital.


MR. JOHN ASPINALL'S CLAIM
SkippersPoint, Otago.




In the course of time the richness of the quartz reefs in the
Wakatipu District will probably cause as much excitement as
the alluvial workings did a quarter of a century ago; and it
Trill then be a matter for grave men to wonder why these reefs
were so long almost neglected. Practical miners and scientific
men are agreed that there are extensive and almost inexhaustible
auriferous-quartz areas in the interior of Otago. Those who
have carefully watched the development of quartz-mining in
Victoria, New South "Wales, and Queensland are aware of the
vast importance of that branch of mining to those colonies.
From the first publication of the “ Mineral Statistics of Vic-
toria” up to the end of 1884, the quantity of quartz crushed
has been set down at 20,931,576 tons, which yielded 11,050,6760 z.
of gold, being an average of about lOldwt. per ton. In 1884
the total yield from 876,692 tons was 432,9960 z. 15dwt. of gold,
or an average of less than lOdwt. per ton. The average is very
Much higher in New Zealand; but we crush a much smaller
quantity of stone. In 1884—85 the yield of gold from the
quartz crushed in this colony was 88,2990 z. from 92,872 tons, or
a u average of nearly loz. per ton; in 1885—86 the total yield of
gold from quartz was 111,4320 z. from 94,016 tons, or an average
of about loz. per ton.
Mining matters have been steadily improving during the
Past few years, especially at Skipper’s, where several new leases
have been taken up, a Victorian company having been formed
to work them on an extensive scale. An improvement is also
Noticeable at the head of Lake Wakatipu, where the quartz reefs
® re being steadily developed. The reefs at Macetown have not
ee n giving such large yields lately, but their successful develop-
assured. The great drawback to the profitable working of
ese reefs has been the want of cheap timber; but the cost has
. eea Materially reduced during the past few years, owing to
NNproved facilities for communication. Two or three years ago
ueelite was discovered at the head of the lake, and it will soon
e forked by a company.
A large amount of money has been expended on water-races,
'Vaces, dams, and reservoirs. In the Queenstown subdivision
ha ■ lni^CS "water-races, giving 334 sluice-heads of water, and
Vln g an average fall of about 10ft. per mile, were constructed, at
4


a cost of £IO,OOO ; 150 tail-races were cut, at a cost of £4,000;
and 40 dams and 11 reservoirs were excavated, at a cost of over
£2,000. In the Arrow subdivision 151 miles of water-races,
giving 214 sluice-heads of water, the average fall being about
10ft. per mile, were constructed, at a cost of £SO to £6O per
mile; 180 tail-races were cut, at a cost of nearly £5,000; and
30 dams and 30 reservoirs were excavated, at a cost of £2,500.
MOUNT CKIFFEL.
It is only within the last two or three years that attention
has been directed to this new field, which is situated on the top
of the Mount Pisa Range, between the Cardrona River and Lug-
gate Creek, about 4,000 ft. above the sea-level. A small party
of three miners had been quietly working there for some time;
hut it was not until the year 1884 that rich auriferous ground
was discovered. In the early days the debris brought down
from the mountains during heavy floods was proved to he
highly auriferous, and that may have had some effect in turning
attention to the locality. In consequence of its great elevation,
work can only he carried on'at the Criffel diggings six or seven
months in each year; hut, from the richness of the deposits and
the extent of the auriferous country, it is likely to afford re-
munerative employment to a considerable number of miners for
many years. The prospectors (Messrs. Wilson, Halliday, and
Beattie) obtained 300 oz. of gold for one season’s work. They
were not, however, so fortunate the next year. They stacked
seventeen hundred loads of wash-dirt, intending to collect the
snow-water to wash it; but when the water was available it
was found that the whole of the loosely-stacked wash-dirt had
been frozen into a solid mass. Men like the prospectors are
not easily daunted. There was plenty of water available in the
Luggate Creek, and they were determined to have as much
as they required; so they set about the construction of a water-
race, which is now finished. During the past two seasons
fifty to sixty men were at work on the field; hut the want of a
water-supply and a passable road has proved a great drawback.
The Lake County Council has been authorized by the Govern-
ment to expend £I,OOO in the construction of a passable road
to the diggings, and last year the pack-track was improved.


PHŒNIX CO CRUSHING WORKS.




Messrs. Moylan and Hawthorne employed four men on their
claim ; and after paying all expenses they netted over £2O per
week. Craig and party and others were also successful. The
wash-drift from which a large percentage of the gold is obtained
is an old deposit of quartz-drift, all the pebbles being much
rounded, indicating that at some period the drift must have
been deposited in its high mountain-bed by a stream of water.
In some of the claims petrified trees, apparently manuka, have
been found lying among the wash-drift near the schist rock.
The ground has different layers, and varies in depth from 4ft. to
55ft. The gold is found right down from the roots of the
grass on the surface until the schist rock is reached; hut the
richest portion of the wash-dirt is in a layer about 4ft. in thick-
ness next the bottom.
The discoveries at Mount Criffel have given a stimulus to
prospecting in other localities. On the opposite side of the Lug-
gate Creek, and about one mile and a half nearer the Clutha
River, thirty or forty men are now at work on the Mid Run.
The field being about 1,200 ft. lower than the Criffel workings,
miners can carry on their operations the whole year round. The
Luggate Flat has also been prospected, the indications being
promising.
PHCENIX QUARTZ COMPANY, SKIPPER’S.
This mine, which bids fair to become one of the best
an< l most permanent in New Zealand —perhaps in Australasia—
ls situated on the north side of the right branch of Skipper’s
Creek, about six miles above the junction of the creek with the
Sbotover River. It belongs to Messrs. Bullen Brothers, of
■Marlborough, who were for many years well-known business
in Melbourne and Otago. They purchased the mine about
twenty-five years ago from the original prospector, and have been
forking it since then. At times fair returns were obtained;
but up to the beginning of 1884 the work was principally con-
®n ed to prospecting. On the upper levels rich patches were
occasionally met with, but the lodes were very broken and
Regular. In spite of great difficulties, owing to the elevated
Mature of the ground, and the difficulty of getting machinery up
pack-tracks with extremely steep grades, the owners still per


severed, and expended at least £50,000 in developing tlieir mine.
But in 1884 prospects began to brighten, and between the
months of February and November the yield of gold was
6,4000 z. The yield has gone on steadily increasing since then:
the daily average is now about 60oz. to 70oz. Up to the 30th
of June, 1886, the total yield from this mine may be set down
at 15,0000 z. to 20,0000 z. There are four different lodes in the
Phoenix Mine, each of which carries gold in payable quantities.
The average width of the Main Reef, which is worked down to
the water-level, is 10ft., the shoots of gold varying in length from
50ft. to 100 ft. As is generally the rule with big reefs, the gold
does not run uniformly through the whole width of the lode,
but is found in the quartz on the hanging-wall side. The
yields have varied from loz. to 6oz. per ton. The average width
of the Middle Reef is about 6ft., and the shoot of gold has been
worked for 300 ft., the average yield being loz. Bdwt. per ton.
There is a sufficient quantity of payable stone in these two lodes
to keep the battery going for a couple of years. The Promised
Land Reef, which lies to the north of the middle lode, averages
4ft. in width, with runs or streaks of gold about 200 ft. in
length. This reef averages 16dwt., which may be regarded as
very satisfactory, considering the large quantity of quartz that
can be taken out. The Northern Reef is about 2ft. wide, and
carries the run or shoot of gold for a distance of 300 ft. The
quartz from this lode averages from loz. to 3oz. per ton. The
whole of these lodes continue, and can be seen in a gully about
one mile distant, in an easterly direction from the place of opera-
tions ; and, except the middle lode, which has not yet been
traced on the high ground, they are again seen about three
miles distant in a westerly direction on the eastern slope of
Mount Aurum, where they all contain gold along the surface.
The quartz reefs in this locality, as well as those at the
head of Lake Wakatipu, are well defined, and do not occur
in bunches or blocks nearly so much as on the West Coast.
The foot- and hanging-walls of the reefs can be traced for a
long distance, the space between them being in many places
filled with mullock. The quartz is not continuous, but occurs
here and there at intervals along the line of lode. In all
quartz lodes the gold runs in shots or streaks, and extends only


for a certain distance along them ; but, generally, by following
the line of the foot- and hanging-walls, auriferous quartz will
again be found, although the value of the shot or run of gold
may be entirely different from the one formerly worked. The
four lodes in this company’s ground run almost parallel with
each other on a general east-by-north direction, the main or
southern lode being 100 ft. south from the middle lode, and the
other lodes being about 30ft. apart from each other. The
ground has been well opened out, and the mine in every place
promises to pay the owners handsomely for the large amount of
money they have from time to time expended. Mr. Fred. Evans,
the manager, is confident of obtaining gold to the value of at
least £IOO,OOO from the lodes that are at present opened up;
and, judging from the appearance of the stone, with the large
amount of gold that can be seen, the estimate the manager has
formed of the value of the quartz does not appear to be too
high. An engine-shaft has been sunk on the main lode in one of
the main drives, where the winding- and pumping-machinery
will be driven by compressed air. Great difficulty was ex-
perienced in connection with the water-supply for the crushing-
fflill, and, in order to obviate this, electricity has been successfully
applied. In November, 1885, two of Pelton’s hurdy-gurdy
water-wheels were erected on the left branch of Skipper’s Creek,
which will be worked by a head of water equal to 18Gft.,
having Sp’yin. jets playing on each wheel. The quantity of
water is six and a half sluice-heads, which, at 186 ft. in height, is
equal with these water-wheels to over 100-horse power. The
PTes leading the water down to the hurdy-gurdy wheels are
22in. in diameter at the intake end, but tapering down to a much
less diameter at the bottom. This large amount of motive-
power is employed to drive two Brush dynamos, each of which
18 capable of transmitting twenty-horse power. The dynamos
arc situated about two miles from the crushing-battery, and the
current has to be transmitted by a No. 8 n.w.o. copper wire from
Ihe dynamo to a Victorian motor, which is placed in the same
ouilding as the crushing-battery. The battery consists of thirty
ea d of stampers, 7cwt. each, having Sin. drop, and making about
ei ghty blows per minute. These are now driven by electric
P°Wer and a Leffel turbine, 16in. in diameter, working under


a head of water equal to 51ft. Steam-power is utilized in con-
nection with the stonebreaker and two air-compressors, which
drive in the mine, 1,200 ft. distant, one Tangye pump, one
winding-engine, and two rock-drills, and ventilate the inner-
most drives. Great interest has been taken by the mining
community in the erection of the machinery (which was
put up by Mr. Prince, of the firm of Pletchcr and Co.,
electrical engineers, Dunedin), as it was the first application
of electricity in connection with a crushing-mill in this
colony. Should it prove successful, as appears very pro-
bable, it will open up a new means of utilizing the mountain-
streams and rivers for motive-power. The manager of this mine
uses nothing hut blankets for saving the gold coming from the
crushing-battery. No attempt is made to save the pyrites
beyond what adheres to the blankets; hut Mr. Evans has been
conducting experiments, which so far have been very successful,
for saving gold by a new process. He uses hydraulic troughs on
something of the same principle as classifiers and pyramidal
boxes for saving tin, but w r ith this difference : that he intends to
employ chemical action to convert the gold into a trichloride,
and collect it in that state. Where any improvements could be
made in crushing-machinery or gold-saving appliances, no ex-
pense has been spared. A stone-breaking machine to pulverize
the quartz as it is taken from the mine, previous to depositing it
in the paddock near the battery, enables the crushing-battery to
get through a much larger quantity of stuff. The pulverized
quartz is taken from the paddock where it is deposited after
going through the stone-breaker, into self-feeding hoppers, which
act automatically and feed the stampers. There are ninety to
one hundred men usually employed, most of the w r ork being
done by contract. The mine and crushing-battery being situ-
ated at a great elevation, for some time it was only during the
summer months that crushing could be carried on; but during
the last two years the battery has been kept going continuously.
The battery-house, offices, private rooms, and chambers in the
mine are illuminated by electricity. There is telephonic com-
munication between the battery and generating-station, and also
with the office at Queenstown; whilst the mine-chambers and
air-compressors are connected by electric bells. The value of
the plant is about ,£IO,OOO.




PiHC&YriC OTfABTZ Mira.
SKIPPERS CREEK. UPPER SHOTOVER.
OTAGO, NEW ZEALAND.


Professor Black, in the record of his lecturing tour and
travels round the colony in 1885, states : " From the Rees I
proceeded to Arrowtown, where I delivered three lectures, and
thence to Skipper’s, where Mr. Fred. Evans, the enterprising
manager of the famous Phoenix Mine, had made excellent
arrangements for the lectures. Here I was fortunate in having
the use of the Bullen Hall, which Mr. Evans hurried to com-
pletion for the accommodation of the classes. The hall was
brilliantly lighted with the electric light, which, with the
telephone connection with Skipper’s Point, Mr. Evans had
recently introduced. All the men here are in one way or
another connected directly with the Phoenix Mine. There are
about ninety of them altogether, and nearly all attended the
lectures, and showed a considerable degree of interest in the
methods of testing the ores. During my stay here I visited the
Mount Aurum Reef with Mr. James Evans. From the top
of the mountain, some 7,500 ft. above sea-level, we could trace
the outcrop of many reefs traversing the ranges in the direction
of Macetown. They were easily recognizable with a good glass
by the yellowish-brown colour they showed on the outcrop. The
colour is due to the oxide of iron produced by the weathering
and oxidizing action of the atmosphere on the iron pyrites
contained in the mullocky quartz. Messrs. Bullen, the enter-
prising proprietors of the Phoenix Mine, have set an example in
another direction to the Australasian Colonies which is sure to
be followed : this is, in the application of electricity, generated
by water-power, to the purpose of driving the crusliing-
®achinery. The dynamos were fitted up in a spacious building,
011 a beautiful and most romantic site, on what is called the
left-hand branch (hut really the right-hand branch) of Skipper’s
at a distance, following the surface up and down over the
btfty spur that separates the branches, of two or three miles
from the Phoenix battery. The dynamos are worked by two
Pelton wheels, driven by a splendid fall of water directed through
fr'° strong iron pipes, with a pressure of about 120 ft. The
dynamos had not been started at the time of my visit, hut
d learn they are now working splendidly, and capable, in the
°pmion of Mr. Evans, of driving twenty-five or thirty head
°d stampers. The success of this system at the Phoenix Mine


opens up new possibilities in the way of driving crushing-
machinery in situations where steam cannot he raised for want
of fuel and where water-power is available. Here the water-
power is two or three miles from the battery, and, it may he, at
a lower level. The current is carried from the generating
dynamos to the battery by a thin copper wire, supported, like an
ordinary telegraph-wire, on poles, and at the battery the electric
current is reconverted into the moving-power which turns the
wheel that drives the stampers.”
GALLANT TIPPERARY COMPANY, SKIPPER’S.
The Gallant Tipperary Quartz Reef has been worked for
about twenty years. Companies from time to time have been
formed to work it—indeed, it may be said that the same
company (the Gallant Tipperary) which is now at work took the
ground up in the first instance; but, having expended all its
capital, the company changed its name three times, and was re-
formed with fresh capital. Nothing was obtained from this
reef until about three years ago, when it w r as let on tribute, the
company receiving 15 per cent, on the gross yields of gold.
The tributors’ time being up, and the mine promising to pay,
the company took it over, and is now constructing a deep-level
adit to work the stone advantageously, which will, when com-
pleted, give from 200 ft. to 300 ft. of backs. The reef has been
struck in the deep level, which shows a little gold in the stone.
The thickness of the reef varies from 2ft. to 4ft. This company
has a crushing-battery of twelve heads of stampers, driven by a
turbine water-wheel, the water being brought across the Shotover
River in malleable-iron pipes hung on a wire rope. Quicksilver
and blanket-tables are used for saving the gold. The plant is
valued at £3,000.
PREMIER COMPANY, MACETOWN.
On the right branch of the Twelve-mile Creek, about four
miles above its junction with the Arrow River, this company 3
reef is being worked. A tunnel was driven from the face of
the hill, about 120 ft. above the level of the creek, for a distance
of 380 ft., with the result that a quartz reef containing payable
gold was struck. The company then drove 220 ft. along the


lode, and sunk a winze 60ft., where the lode, which is 3ft.
thick, is now being stoped out. In the bottom level the com-
pany is driving westerly along the lode on a dip inclination.
The quartz is conveyed from the passes on this level to the
bottom of the winze in Cornish wheelbarrows. It is then
capsized, shovelled into small trucks or buckets, and hauled
up to the main level, the winding being done by a small portable
steam-engine at the mouth of the tunnel. Even with such an
expensive system of working, the stone, which averages 16dwt.
per ton, pays to work, and occasionally dividends are paid by the
company. If worked in a systematic manner, a large margin of
profit would doubtless he left. The mine is so situated that
a tunnel could he constructed on a level with the creek, and all
the quartz above that level could be stoped out and run in
trucks from the passes into the paddock, instead of being handled
about four times. The wages of the additional men employed,
and the expense of coals for working winding-engine, &c., would
soon amount to .the cost of putting in a low tunnel. The quartz
lode in this mine is very hard : sometimes it takes four hours to
drill a hole 2ft. Gin. deep. Compressed-air rock-drills could he
used with great advantage, especially where the lode is not of
great thickness. This company has lately purchased a crushing-
battery from the Maryborough Quartz-mining Company, which
consists of ten heads of stampers 7cwt. each, and one berdan.
These are driven by an overshot water-wheel, 30ft. in diameter.
At the present time quicksilver, ripple-tables, and blankets are
Used. The quantity of quartz crushed from this mine during the
year ending the 31st March, 1886, was 1,596 tons, which yielded
®9Boz. of gold; w'hile the total yield from the mine has been
of the value of over £IO,OOO. Sixteen men are
employed, by the company.
TIPPERARY COMPANY, MACETOWN.
During the eight or nine years the company has been at
or k the yield of gold has been about 14,0000 z., of the value
0 £53,000. The average yield has been loz. per ton. There
three distinct runs or shots of gold in this mine, all on
e same line of reef. The eastern shot is about 130 ft. in
en gth; and the middle, 77ft. The length of the western one


has not yet been determined : it has been worked for 80ft., and
still continues. The general direction of the reef is about 10°
south of west, the strike being westerly, and the dip or underlie
being northerly about 1 in 12. The width of the lode varies
considerably : in some places it is only about 2ft. wide, while in
others the reef is 15ft. wide. The company has recently sunk
an underlie-shaft, following the dip of the lode, in the main
level going in from the creek, to a depth of 312 ft., and com-
menced to open out levels from the bottom of this shaft in
easterly and westerly directions. The underlie-shaft is 6ft. x 3ft.
6in., having partition for winding 3ft. 6in. square, the other
portion being used as a ladder-shaft for the men to get up and
down to their work. The quartz is hauled up this shaft in
a small truck or box capable of holding 7cwt. of stone. The
box has wheels like a truck, and is kept in position by rails
fixed in the shaft. When the box is wound up to the top of
the shaft another truck is run underneath it, and the quartz in
the box is emptied into this truck from a trap-door at the
bottom of the box. The winding in this underlie-shaft is done
by a water-balance erected outside the mine. The water-balance
is a tank mounted on wheels, which runs on an inclined
tramway the same length as the depth of the shaft where the
winding takes place. When the tank is at the top of the
incline it is filled with water, and the weight of the tank, when
filled, is sufficient to bring about 7cwt. of stone in the box up
the winding-shaft. When the tank arrives at the bottom of the
incline there is an iron knob projecting which opens a valve in
the tank, and allows the water to be discharged. The weight of
the empty box in the winding-shaft is sufficient to haul up th e
empty tank to the top of the incline, to be again refilled with
water, so as to bring up the next loaded box. The winding-rop e ;
sin. in diameter, made of best plough-steel, is carried on pulle}' 5
in the main drive to the incline-shaft, where there is brake-g ear
erected so as to regulate the speed of winding. One iu an
works the brake-gear ; and also, by levers attached to a telegraph'
wire, the same man can shut off and put on the water to fill
tank or water-balance when it is at the top of the incline. Thi s
winding-appliance is very simple, hut it is too slow a process
and only suitable for winding for a small party of men.


conducting large mining operations it is mere waste of money to
construct what may be termed a makeshift. This company has
a crushing-battery consisting of ten heads of revolving stampers,
7cwt. each, one berdan, and one buddle, driven by a Whitlaw
turbine water-wheel 3ft. in diameter. Quicksilver is used in the
stamp-boxes, and ordinary ripple-tables covered with copper plates.
The tailings afterwards go over 16ft. of blanket-tables, the
blankets being washed out every hour into tubs, the blanketings
ground up in the berdan, and thence going through an amalgamat-
ing buddle. There is a large quantity of pyrites in this mine;
hut no effort has yet been made to save it beyond what has been
collected on the blanket-tables; and even some of the stuff that
has gone through the berdan and has been put aside as waste
product still contains a large percentage of gold. The crushing-
battery is situated about one mile from the mine, and it costs
2s. 6d. per ton to cart the quartz that distance. The number of
me n employed on this companv’s works is thirty-two, exclusive
of those engaged in getting mining-timber, &c. This district,
oohl about eighteen months ago, was very heavily handicapped,
33 no dray or wagon could be brought within about twelve miles
of the mines. All mining-timber, tools, machinery, and provi-
Sl °ns had to be taken by pack-horses over the top of a high range,
was not accessible during the winter months. However,
has been remedied by the Government constructing a dray-
r°ad up the gorge of the Arrow River at a cost of £10,000; and
Materials can now be carted to the mines. Mining-timber,
formerly cost 10s. per prop, can be delivered for 35.;
at hs are procurable at £3 7s. per 100 for sft. lengths; and
Saim timber at 17s. 6d. per 100 ft. superficial.
INVINCIBLE COMPANY, REES VALLEY.
This company’s mine is situated on the face of the range on
e east side of the Rees River, fifteen miles above Glenorchy, at
e head of Lake Wakatipu. The main reef worked by the com-
any 's about 12ft. -wide. This has been stoped out to a depth
helow the surface, and 250 ft. in length. The whole of
9oz °^ C as highly impregnated with iron pyrites, which contain
;to lOoz. of gold per ton; but until quite recently the
les was neglected. An analysis made by Professor Black


showed that it contained a large percentage of gold. Tt:
manager then collected 11| tons, which he ground in a berdai,
and obtained IOB2OZ. of gold. A contract has been enters!
into with the Pyrites Company to hand over all the tailings
from the battery, the Invincible Company taking 15 per cent,
•of the gross yield. A quartz lode containing gold has "beea
discovered at about I,oooft. under the present Avorkings, so that
the future of this mine looks very promising. The companj
has a crushing-machine, consisting of ten heads of stampers,
and seven berdans, driven by an o\ r ershot water-wheel. From
November, 1882, Avhen the company commenced operations, up
to the 31st of December, 1885, 7,755 tons of quartz vers
crushed, which yielded 3,8280 z. of gold, or an avers:?
of 9dwt. 21 gr. per ton, to which has to be added 108 ioz. h°®
111 tons of pyrites. Besides paying for the machinery out of
the proceeds from the mine, the company paid £2,975 u>
•dividends. Por the twelve months ending the 31st March, 1886,
2,682 tons of quartz gave a yield of l,loooz. 13dwt. of g°H
and the tailings yielded 108 oz. lOdwt., making a total ®
1,2090 z. 3dwt. for that period. The total quantity of quad 1
crushed up to that date vvas 8,555 tons, which gave a yield d
4,2000 z. 6dwt. 7gr. of gold, or an average of about half a 3
ounce to the ton. Sixteen men are employed underground s ‘
this mine, and eight on the surface.
A little further up the range, and extending up the Be®
River Valley from the Invincible Company’s mine, anoth®
quartz lode has been discovered, w'hich promises to be of l
highJy-payable nature. The direction of these quartz «e !
corresponds with the reefs at Skipper’s, and they are apparen I
in the same belt of country; but the formation of the lodes
entirely different.
PRICE OP GOLD.
Per Ounce.
Mount Criffel ... ... ... £3 7 6
Other places ... ... ... 3 15 0
GOLDPIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
Mr. J. S. Hickson, R.M., who is Warden for the Wakaf’f 0
as Avell as for the Dunstan District, resides at Clyde. Mr-


N. Firth, Receiver of Gold Revenue at Queenstown, visits
Arrowtown once a week. Forms can he obtained at Pembroke
from the police-constable. Sittings of tbe Warden’s Court are
usually held on the second Wednesday and Thursday in each
month.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Dunedin to Queenstown (via Waimea Plains) 208
Dunedin to Queenstown (via Lawrence) .. 196
Invercargill to Queenstown (via Lake Waka- 109
tipu)
Queenstown to head of Lake Wakatipu .. 36
Queenstown to Skipper’s .. .. .. 20
Queenstown to Maori Point .. .. .. 16
Queenstown to Arrowtown .. .. .. 12
Arrowtown to Cardrona .. .. .. 18
Arrowtown to Pembroke .. .. .. 36
Arrowtown to Macetown .. .. .. 12
Arrowtown to Gibbston .. .. . • 10
Queenstown, which is the county town of Lake County, can
Cached daily, via Kingston, by railway from Dunedin and
Invercargill, thence by Lake Wakatipu steamer. There is com-
munication by coach with Lawrence on alternate days, and a
coach runs twice a week in summer time to Pembroke, which is
dose to the Mount Criffel workings. There is a fairly good road
° Te r the Crown Range through the Cardrona Valley to Pem-
br°l®) on the shores of Lake Wan aka. Pembroke can also be
reached from Cromwell three times a week. There is telegraphic
communication with all the places mentioned.


Registered Mining Companies in the Wakatipu Warden’s District actually in operation on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
-4J
o p
S+3
sl
o'|
sec
Sq
o
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
Total Value of
Total
Capital
Actually
Iteceived
from Calls.
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Mino.
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid by
Com-
pany.
Amount
Date of Com-
Quartz
Alluvial,
Dividend.
of Last
mencing
or other
Dividend.
Operations.
Process of
Mining.
a
©
So
© Cm
l|
S3 H
A
Macetown (Twelve-mile).
Lady Fayre Quartz-mining
24,000
£
12,000
. £
6,000
£
3,404
£
1,859
£
600
March. 17,
£
600
Sept. 21,
Quartz
2
Company (Limited)*
New All Nations Quartz-
28,000
28,000
1882
1878
July 17,
5
mining Company (Limited)
Premier Quartz - mining
12,000
6,000
5,700
8,700
10,227
1,800
Dec. 16,
600
1880
July 17,
21
Company (Limited)
Queen Victoria Quartz-min-
1884
1880
ing Company (Limited)
Tipperary Quartz - mining
12,000
12,000
3,000
120
49,461
13,500
March 19,
600
1878
31
Company (Limited)
Skippeb’s.
Gallant Tipperary Quartz-
24,000
24,000
13,700
1,700
550
1885
April, 1885
10
mining Company (Limited)
Rees Valley.
Invincible Quartz - mining
21,000
21,000
16,100
2,498
14,862
2,975
April 16,
350
Dec., 1882
31
Company (Limited)
Mount Earnslaw Quartz-
20,00020,000
500
500
1885
Feb., 1884
mining Gompany (Lim.)f
1
* In liquidation.
+ Lease cancelled July 26,1886.


Quaiztz-&il2tes at wot k or Jaeld in the Wakatipp Warden's JDrsTRiCT on the 31s b December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
/ 1
/
/ 4
«d
1
_§§
c?
*
*3
g
p.
3
*A,
© o
o
©
a
o
£
Paid
3
P
c3
©
P
a 9
°Ss.
g'O'S'
' S3
s.g
e* 0
cS'o
I v-'M
1e
*gj
its
ill
© t, -
gsi
Ph «
CO
1 Crushing-
[ ... plant:
Gold-savintr
1 Number of
Appliances:
Hoads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables witli
Stonebreakers
Copper-plates,
Rollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
«-■ a
©
O g
©
a .
t>§
*m ** *
« © O
>m a
’3^
*5^2
-Urrt
o
oS
B
B ©
O
BIacetown.
£
£
A. IS. P.
£
£
Lady Fayre Company* ..
12,000
6,000
Sep. 21,
6 0 0
Sec. 2,
Skipper’s
At work
, ,
, #
1,859
1878
B. XII.
Creek
f
1 3 39
Sec. 7,
)
New All Nations Com-
28,000
1878-j
B. XII.
[Ditto..
„
Water
Water
5 stampers,
Blanket-ta-
1,000
. ,
pany
7 3 37
Sec. 3,
|
1 bcrdan
bles, copper-
l
B. XII.
J
plates
Premier Company
6,000
5,700
July 17,
7 2 34
Sec. 12,
Steam
10 stampers,
Quicksilver,
1,400
10,277
1880
B. XII.
1 berdan
with blanket-
Queen Victoria Company
, ,
, ,
t #
10 0 0
Sec. 29,
tables
B. XII.
4 2 30
Sec. 274,
Shotover
'
B. XIII.
Tipperary Company
12,000
2 0 0
Sec. 23,
B. XII.
Skipper’s
Creek
' n
Water
Water
12 stampers
Quicksilver,
1,500
53,000
3 3 2
Sec. 1,
Shotover
blanket-
Skippeb’s.
B. XIII.
tables
Wm. Caldwell and others
, ,
, .
, ,
9 3 24
Sec. 34,
Pro-
B. XI.
specting
Gallant Tipperary Com-
. .
. .
. .
14 1 1
Sec. 7,
Skipper’s
At work
Water
Water
12 stampers
Quicksilver,
3,000
600
pany
B. XI.
Creek
blankets
D. Henderson
, ,
, ,
, .
10 0 0
Sec. 20,
Ditto ..
B. II.
a
o
c 3
'3
•Sf
3
*


Nam© of Company or Owner.
Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital.
Date ■when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
Section
and
Block.
Survey
District.
At
Work
or under
Protec-
tion.
S’g
u
n 3
•y ..<
i £ do
>»W&
o a o
&3 £
£l5
S 2 ”
S'S a
c3 fl.s
1 O S
P«w d
& ®
tcK
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables with
Stonebreakers
Copper-plates.
Rollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
-a
O
o o
©
©«a
® g ©
> |
■3*
4-»
-2nd
s
£ o
Skippeb’s.
£
£
A. n. r.
£
6 0 0
Sec. 18,
B. II.
6 0 0
Sec. 19,
B. III.
15 2 34
Sec. 20,
Phoenix
..
14 0 0
B. III.
Sec. 21,
Skip-
At work
Air
Elec-
30 stampers
Blanket-
10000
60,000
B. III.'
per’s
tricity
tables
16 2 37
Sec. 14,
Creek
steam,
B. II.
and
Secs. 2&3,
water
A. Southberg*
••
1,331
2 0 0
B. XIII.
Sec. 10,
B. III.
j
"
»
••
••
•*
. .
350
1,305
6 0 0
Sec. 1,
Southberg and Others* ..
••
••
1864-
o
o
B. III.
Sec. 12,
B. XI.
Sec. 10
„
Hand
Water
16 stampers
Quicksilver,
800
6,300
Rees Valley.
copper-plates
Independent Company! ..
• ,
, ,
16 0 0
Earnslaw
and blankets
15 0 0
Sec. 5
* *
Invincible Company
21,000
16,100
Dec., -
1S82
15 0 0
5 0 0
Sec. 6
See. 7
- n
At work
, ,
Water
10 stampers,
Blanket-
3,046
14,862
MountEamslaw Company!
5 0 0
7 berdans
tables
20,000
5001'Fe‘b. G,
15 3 21
Sec. 9
Pro-
\
\ 1884
\
\
specting
** TtßiUßiwced to a Ho\bo\M;nQ company.
o
i
0
0
55
+
i
H
i
»
s
■$
0
0
0
a
4
0


Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Wakatipu Warden s
District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
o
2
0 P <D
a oq3
<
Arrow Subdivision.
It. P.
Carl Heni
£
Sons of fortune Com-
Tan. 17, 1876
2 0 0
April 5, 1877
2
pany*
Henry John Cope*
April 18,1876
8 0 0
Nov. 13, 1883
Equitable
Invest-
8
ment Co.
Ditto*
Nov. 28,1876
8 0 0
Oet. 10,1879
Homeward
8
Bound Co.
Ditto*
Nov. 28,1876
8 0 0
Dee. 23,1881
New All
8
Nations
Q.M.Co.
Henrico Piazzoli and
May, 1876
6 0 0
Sept., 1877
Lady Fay re
C
' othersf
Co.
Ditto*
Feb. 13,1877
2 0 0
Deo. 6,1881
New All
2
Nations
Q. M. Co.
16
Main Lode Mining Com-
Nov. 28,1876
16 0 0
. .
-•
pany*
Henry John Cope*
Feb. 13, 1877
7 2 23
April 25,1883
Victor
Emmanuel
8
Co.
Ditto*
Feb. 1.1878
7 2 35
Aug. 25, 1880
Dee. 7, 1880
Premier Co.
8
D- B. Dougins and
Jan. 9, 1878
5 210
Caledonian
6
others*
KumYokand Seo Tie* ..
Jan. 9,1878
10 0 0
Q.M.Co.
10
Frederick Hoffman*
Jan. 11, 1878
8 0 0
. .
8
John Evans and others*
Jan. 1, 1878
4 019
April 25,1879
Tipperary
5
No. 1
South
horenzn Resta*
Jan. 1, 1878
1 2 27
Aug. 24, 1883
Tipperary
2
Jan. 1, 1878
12 0 0
G. M. Co.
12
William John Peerkin
. .
and others*
ihos. Logan and others*
Jan. 1, 1878
4 3 20
. .
..
5
»ames Mackay and
June 1, 1878
6 0 0
. .
• .
5
others*
J ohn Beale and others*
Jan. 1, 1879
3 3 2
Geraldine
Mining Co.
4
Healey and others*
Jan. 1,1879
4 3 7
Defiance
Q.M.Co.
5
A. Chapman*
Mar. 22,1880
3 0 32
Macetown
Q. M. Co.
4
H onry John Cope*
April 28,188C
7 0 24
Sept 2, 1881
Garibaldi
G. M. Co.
8
Sew Hoy and Co.*
June 28,188i
10 0 c
..
Queen Vic-
10
toria Co.
Gold-mining
June 28,1881
4 0 C
..
4
Company*
* Lease. t Special Claim.
5


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date 'when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
transferred.
o
CJ-W.J
ggg
<
John Magee* ..
June 28,1881
A.
2
It. P
3 4
£
3
W. F. Sligo* ..
June 27,1881
8
1 c
..
.
9
Robert Kerr and others*
Sept. 20,1881
7
3 38
Sept. 20,188S
..
United G.
8
John Clayton*
Oct. 31, 1881
G
0 C
M. Co.
G
William Barrett*
May 3, 1883
9
2 C
..
, ,
10
Ditto*
May 3, 1883
10
0 0
, ,
10
Charles Patton*
May 3, 1883
10
0 0
. .
10
James Cowan*
May 3, 1883
May 29, 1883
6
0 0
# ,
. ,
6
Maryborough Gold-min-
8
0 0
.,
. ,
8
ing and Quartz Com-
pany*
Alfred Burch* ..
May 29, 1883
4
2 38
,,
, ,
5
William T. Smith*
June 4, 1883
8
0 0
8
Gladstone Gold-mining
June 14,1884
2
0 0
,,
, ,
2
Company*
Homeward Bound Gold-
June 12,1884
8
0 0
.,
. .
9
mining Company*
Maryborough Gold-min-
Fob. 12,1885
2
0 0
..
. .
2
ing and Quartz Com-
pany*
1G
William Jenkins*
July 15, 1885
16
0 0
••
••
Queenstown Sub-
division.
S. MeFarlano*
Sept. 19,1873
G
0 0
Sept. 13,1878
Southberg
G
Patrick Walsh*
Feb. 30,1874
5
0 4
and party
£12/10
Ah Go*
May 22, 1874
3
0 0
, ,
, .
3
Monk and Mclnnes* ..
Sept. 25,1874
2
0 0
. .
, .
2
Andrew Southberg*
July 23, 1875
Slay 8, 1877
2
0 0
. .
2
Auguste Sorenson*
1
211
May 13, 1879
John As-
2
John Aspinall*
Kov. 29, 1877
8
0 0
pinall
8
Thomas Pitzgibbon* ..
Nov. 19, 1879
16
0 0
Oct. 27,1884
Gallant
16
Fisher and Caldwell* ..
Nov. 13, 1879
1
135
Tipperary
Co.
2
Rainey, Boy.es, and
Wilson*
Davis and others*
Juno 22,1880
15
0 0
Slar. 27,1881
Invincible
15
Juno 22,1880
15
0 0
Slar. 27,1881
Q. M. Co.
Ditto
15
William L. Davis*
Nov. 23, 1880
5
0 0
Slar. 27,1881
Ditto
5
James Evans*
Dec. 20, 1880
10
0 0
. .
, ,
10
J. N. Durie* ..
Dec. 20, 1880
5
3 30
,
6
Samuel Gower*
Slay 4, 1881
10
0 0
.
, .
10
R. Johnston* ..
Sept. 9, 1881
9
313
,
10
William L. Davis*
Sept. 15,1882
10
0 0
.
.
10
Cadwell, Low, and
Dec. 19, 1882
10
0 0
.
.
10
Quinn*
* Lease.


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
o
d 4^
•
SS fl
a
a a
©
a o
<8
P5
<
George F. Bullen*
Jan. 5, 1883
A. It. P.
6 0 0
£
6
Ditto*
Jan. 5, 1883
6 0 0
, ,
6
Southberg, Olson, and
Feb. 21,1883
4 0 0
, ,
. .
4
others*
D, Fitzpatrick*
May 17, 1883
4 0 0
. ,
. .
4
Joseph Walde and
Jan. 9, 1884
15 3 21
May 5, 1884
Eamslaw
16
others* ,
John Aspinall*
Mar. 12,1884
10 0
Q. M. Co.f
1
William L. Davis*
April 1G, 1884
5 0 0
5
George F. Bullen*
May 14, 1884
16 0 0
16
Gallant Tipperary Com-
May 14, 1884
14 1 1
15
pany*
Ditto*
May 14, 1884
16 1 9
17
Crozier rad Murphy* ..
Dec. 10, 1884
10 0 0
10
George F. Bullen*
Dec. 12, 1884
14 0 0
14
& Wenkheim*
Dec. 10, 1884
16 0 0
16
and Williams* ..
Jan. 21, 1885
5 0 0
5
Jones and Griffiths*
Mar. 9, 1885
3 0 0
3
John Aspinall*
Mar. 9, 1885
April 20,1885
4 12
5
Ah Moke*
3 10
4
Mitchell and Hender-
April 20,1885
10 0 0
10
son*
George F. Bullen*
May 12, 1S85
16 2 0
17
John Aspinall*
July 13, 1885
1 318
2
Roderick Kvans*
Oct. 26, 1885
16 0 0
16
i Ditto*
Monk and Mclnncs* ..
Nov. 16, 1885
4 0 0
4
Nov. 17, 1885
10 0
1
* Lease.
•j- Cancelled July 26,1886.


MOUNT IDA WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
Gold was discovered in the Hogburn Gully, on the present
site of the Naseby Township, in June, 18G3, by a miner named
William Parker and his mates. The Hogburn is a small stream
■which takes its rise in Mount Ida, and joins the Taieri River
above the lake. Soon afterwards gold was found at Hamilton’s ;
then followed fresh discoveries at Hyde, Sowburn, Kyeburn,
and Fullerton’s. In 1801 gold was discovered at Blackstone
Hill and Dunstan Creek (or St. Bathan’s), and shortly after at
Cambrian’s. The Mount Ida Goldfield embraces within its area
a large number of streams, all of which have been proved to be
auriferous. A few months after the first discovery about five
thousand persons were attracted to the field, and the first escort
brought down to Dunedin 4,3200 z. of gold. The field has been
continuously worked since then.
Sluicing has been carried on very extensively in the Mount
Ida District. Over 300 water-races, about a thousand miles in
length, giving 1,132 sluice-heads, have been constructed, at
a cost of £20,000 to £25,000 ; 683 tail-races, at a cost of about
£9,000; and 256 dams, at a cost of nearly £B,OOO. Between
the years 1877 and 1885, seven dams, with a holding-capacity of
about 4,500,000 gallons, were excavated, at a cost of nearly £4,000.
In addition to the numerous private water-supplies which have
been brought in, the Government constructed a water-race from
the Manuherikia River to Naseby, a distance of seventy miles.
This race is capable of conveying' about forty sluice-heads of
water, or 2,400 cubic feet per minute. In order to provide for
the deposit of tailings, the Government also constructed a tail-
race, about ten miles in length, to the Taieri River, which has
enabled a large mining population to be employed. The cost of
these works has been over £65,000. Forty-three claims, giving
employment to 130 men, are supplied with water Horn these
races, the value of the gold obtained being estimated at £12,000
to £15,000 per annum.
The Extended Water-race and Sluicing Company, which was
.started in 1865, has obtained gold to the value of £25,000, and


paid dividends amounting to £B,OOO. The company constructed
a water-race twenty miles in length, at a cost of £3,000 ; a tail-
race six miles in length, at a cost of £1,400; and five dams
with a holding-capacity of 2,500,000 cubic feet, at a cost of
£I,OOO.
ST. BATHAN’S.
The St. Bathan’s portion of the district was opened in 1863,
and has contributed its steady quota of gold ever since, the
yield for 1885 being nearly 4,0000 z. There are about one hundred
men employed, all being engaged in hydraulic sluicing. Large
deposits of quartz-drift have been found in this neighbourhood.
Some of the layers are very rich, whilst there is a little gold dis-
tributed through all the deposits. Mr. Gordon, Inspecting
Engineer, says : “ This drift is of an old formation. At the time
it was deposited it must have been in horizontal beds; but now
it is found lying at all angles from vertical to horizontal, but
always corresponding with the angle of the Silurian rocks which
it lies against, showing that after it had been deposited the
whole country had, by some freak of nature, been tilted up.
The quartz-gravel is all rounded, as though at one time it had
been greatly washed and tossed about with water. In some
places there are beds of leaves sft. in thickness, and so perfectly
are they preserved that the leaves of the We.imnann.ia racemosa ,*
which is common to most parts of New Zealand, can be easily dis-
tinguished. There is no regular run or lead of this quartz-drift,
but it is found here and there all over the district. The diffi-
culty is to understand where it had originally come from, as
none of the present mountains in the vicinity outside a certain
limit contain this formation. It appears to follow round the
T alley from the foot of the Dunstan Range, at the Devonshire
Lead, near Tinker’s, going through Cambrian’s, Vinegar Hill, St.
Bathan’s; thence following round the foot of the mountains to
Nascby; and again it is found on Mount Burster, about 4,000 ft.
above sea-level, where rich deposits of gold have been obtained;
thence through the valley of the Macrewhcnua.”
The miners combined together and constructed large tail-
races, in order to get sufficient fall to work' their ground, and
. * The kamahi or towhai, which grows to a. height of 50ft.; trunk, 2ft. to 4ft.
111 diameter.-


the sludge-channels at St. Bathan’s and Muddy Creek have been
constructed so that these large drift deposits might he profitably
worked.
Mr. John Ewing, one of the most enterprising men to be
found on the goldfields, has successfully carried out several large
undertakings. In 1874 he constructed a water-race, eight miles
in length, at a cost of £700; the race was afterwards extended
another mile and a half at a cost of £3OO, and enabled him to
carry on extensive operations. Tail-races and other works
were constructed, at a cost of £2,400; and a dam, with a
holding-capacity of 270,000 cubic feet, was excavated, at a cost
of £SOO. In addition to these works, which are situated at St.
Bathan’s, Mr. Ewing has much more extensive works at Vinegar
Hill, in which he has invested over £5,000. He holds a special
claim of twenty acres at St. Bathan’s, and two leases of ten
acres each at Vinegar Hill. Owing to the hard nature of the
stuff to he treated, a large portion of the ground taken up by
Mr. Ewing was considered unworkable for many years. He
purchased the rights of the various owners on adjoining claims
for £3,000, and then set to work on a big scale, employing
twenty to thirty men. From 1874 to 1886 he obtained gold to
the value of £20,000. There is every prospect of the yields
continuing for many years to come, and that the energy, enter-
prise, and pluck shown in this large undertaking by Mr. Ewing
will be amply rewarded.
The Mountain Water-race and Enterprise Companies, which
were amalgamated in 1872 under the style of the “M. and B.
Water-race Company,” has obtained gold to the value of about
£23,000, and paid £2,318 in dividends, or over 30 per cent,
on the paid-up capital. The company constructed a water-race
twenty-six miles in length, at a cost of £2,000 ; a tail-race, at a
cost of £700; and two dams with a holding-capacity of 1,000,000
cubic feet, at a cost of £2,000. The very large body of water
which the company was able to take advantage of enabled it to
work the ground to very great advantage.
The Muddy Creek Channel Company has a lease of thirty
acres of alluvial ground, and carries on hydraulic sluicing on an
extensive scale, using from fifteen to forty sluice-heads of water,
as the nature of the ground requires. In 1884 the company


MR JOHN NWING'S SLUICING CLAIM.
VINE GAR HILL, SIBATHANS.




constructed twelve miles of a water-race at a cost of £I,OOO.
Between 1874 and 1885 four miles of a tail-race were cut at a
cost of £II,OOO, the Government giving pound for pound up
to £I,OOO, on the understanding that the public should he
allowed to use the tail-race.
Important works were carried out by Mr. It. Wheeler and
party, who constructed a water-race, fifteen miles in length, at
a cost of £2,000 ; and a dam was excavated, with a holding-
capacity of 96,000 cubic feet, at a cost of £3OO. These works
have lately fallen into the hands of Mr. James Nicolson.
The St. Bathan’s Channel Company, which has a special
claim of twenty-five acres, has constructed a w'ater-race, five miles
in length, at a cost of £800; and cut an expensive tail-race, one
mile and a half in length, at a cost of £3,500.
Mr. P. Talty and party constructed a water-race, eight miles
in length, giving six sluice-heads, at a cost of £I,BOO. They
cat and tunnelled five hundred yards of tail-race, at a cost of
£9OO.
OPHIR (ok BLACK’S).
Gold was discovered at Tinker’s and Drybrcad in the early
part of 1863, at Ophir (or Black’s) a little later in the same
year, and at German Hill and Black’s No. 3in 1865. It is
impossible to give even an approximate idea of the quantity of
gold obtained in this portion of the district, as, in addition to the
hanks, every storekeeper and every publican was a gold-buyer, and
large parcels were taken to Melbourne, and even to England,
hy some of the more fortunate miners. The future prospects
are good, especially at Tinker’s, where the Blue Duck Company
has paid about £45,000 in dividends during the past fifteen
°r sixteen years, and at the Dunstan Range, where the false
bottom hitherto worked upon has been found payable. So far,
this stratum, which is to he found on either side of the
ran ge, is of unknown depth. Mr. Greenbank, manager of the
largest company in the locality, gives it as his opinion that the
deposits at Tinker’s are almost inexhaustible. This may also
he said of Black’s and its immediate surroundings, where a man
a pick, shovel, and cradle can at any time make small
a ges, with the chance of obtaining something better. At
Present about twenty-five men are doing very well with these


simple appliances, but four times that number could be profit-
ably employed on the side of the range at the back of the
Black’s Township, and that part known as Black’s Flat, where
the subsidized drainage - channel has been nearly completed.
The Ida Valley Deep Lead, at Black’s No. 3, has been opened
up several times during the last fifteen years. The prospects are
very good, the wash-dirt being 3ft. wide in some places, and
yielding the handsome return of half an ounce to the load.
Although the lead has been proved to be so rich, several com-
panies have had to succumb owing to exhaustion of capital.
The extremely high price of timber, which has to be carted
about ninety miles, has been a serious drawback, and until it
can be procured at something like a reasonable price the lead
must remain unworked, unless the known richness of the ground
should again prove too tempting.
Professor Ulrich reported as follows on the drift deposits at
Ophir and Black’s Nos. 2 and 3: “ I cordially agree with Mr.
Pyke that they are unjustly neglected, and offer excellent
chances of rich returns to enterprise and capital. If an efficient
water-supply were brought down from the Upper Manuherikia
(which I was told would be the most advisable course) on to the
range above Ophir, it 'would not only permit the hydraulic
sluicing of all the rather imperfectly-worked drift terraces above
the township, but lead, no doubt, also to the discovery of other
high drift-deposits of equal richness lower down the valley
towards Alexandra. The workings at Black’s Nos. 2 and 3,
now nearly abandoned, indicate, as Mr. Pyke says, the existence
of a genuine deep lead; but examination of the ground and
information about the depths of the shafts show that they ere
in reality upon two deep branch-leads, dipping in opposite
directions towards the broad Ida Valley, in which, no doubt, a
deep main lead lies hidden. The two branch-leads start at
Black’s No. 3, very shallow, from a saddle between the main
range and an isolated outcrop of mctamorphic rock, and, while*
one runs for three-quarters of a mile down-valley along the
foot of the range towards Black’s No. 2, reaching gradually a
depth of over 100 ft., the other runs up-valley, with a curve
towards the centre of the latter, attaining already, within a short
distance of the last shaft worked, a depth of close upon 200ft-


This shaft, according to information kindly given me by the Hon.
Captain Fraser, who was interested in the claim, was abandoned
on account of a body of water breaking into it; and from the
very limited workings nearly two thousand pounds' worth of gold
was obtained. About the results of the workings on the other
lead, Mr. Pitches, who has known the field intimately since its
opening, gave me a most favourable account. Payable and even
.rich gold was found in most of the claims (as much as 40oz. a
day in one case), and the lead was not lost; only the great
expense of timbering, occasional trouble with the breaking-in
of drift-sand, and principally the rush to the West Coast, led
to the gradual abandonment of the field. Not doubting the
correctness of all the information given, I can only say that, if
such a promising place existed in Victoria, it would be rusbed
directly. It only requires several parties of skilful miners with
sufficient capital, or one or two well-managed companies, to
recommence working, and, I have no doubt, this deep-lead
fold will again become prosperous and attract a large population
the more so as there is every probability of similar branch-
leads and surface-drifts to those worked existing and being
°pened up along the as-vet-unprospected foot of the range
fi'gher up the valley.”
GREEN’S REEF, OPHIR.
This so-called reef is within about 30 chains of the Ophir
(°r Black's) Township, at the head of Specimen Gully, where a
deal of prospecting has been carried on for many years
Wl th the object of finding gold in what has been locally known
as the “ Captain's Reef.” Mr. W. Green, one of the numerous
Prospectors, who happened to wash a dishful of the decomposed
schist rock which abounds in that locality, was astonished to
o gold thickly intermixed with quartz-grit after the schist
a been puddled. The auriferous schist is enclosed by a well-
foot-wall, and is apparently from 20ft. to 30ft. in
1 th. The hanging-wall is not very clearly defined, but at
dtle distance, where it ought to be, there is a kind
? bard chlorite schist. The occurrence was thus described
bfr. G. H. F. Ulrich, F.G.S., Professor of Mineralogy at
e Otago University: “ This is at present exposed and


prospected for a distance of 8 to 9 chains, and in one place
for a width of near 30ft., running at a strike of E. 10° N.,
W. 10° S., between two gullies, across the intervening ridge,
which is about 60ft. in height. Near the top of this ridge, on the
eastern side, are several old shafts sunk by former prospectors,
and it is here where Mr. Green first found richly-auriferous
quartz-specimens, discovered the auriferous character of the
stuff presently to he described, and has, so far, carried on most
work. The stuff composing the deposit consists of a thinly-
laminated, decomposed, soft, and friable metamorphic schist—
probably originally chloritic mica-schist—showing nearly hori-
zontal bedding, and being more or less abundantly traversed in
all directions, from horizontal to vertical, by broken quartz-
veins, ranging from a thin thread up to an inch in size. A soft
white mineral occurring frequently in irregular small patches and
veinlets proved on examination to he silicate of magnesia. The
colour of the decomposed schist, when freshly broken, is dark
greyish-blue, hut fades quickly, on exposure to the atmosphere,
to bluish white, interspersed with brown ferruginous spots.
According to Mr. Green’s trial-wasliings—some executed in my
presence—the gold is distributed through the stuff in hackly,
spongy, crystalline particles, from the size of a bean down to a
state so fine and light as to he hardly recognizable by the naked
eve, and scarcely retainable in the tin-dish. Besides this, d
occurs in the quartz-veins, especially those with a steep or verti-
cal dip, some of which have furnished specimens of great rich-
ness, consisting, in cases, of more gold than quartz. A f eff
which Mr. Green showed me would, if the quartz were broken
out, yield small nuggets from several pennyweights up to p er '
haps nearly an ounce in weight. Owing to the irregular dis-
tribution of these auriferous quartz-veins, it is not possible to
form any estimate as to the gold-contents of the stuff in th e
average, hut so much can with certainty he foretold that, should
the ground, on further exploration in strike and depth, prove a 3
rich throughout as at the place about the old shafts, Mr. Grec®
will he handsomely rewarded. Regarding the geological charac-
ter of the deposit, and what it represents in a mining point o
view, I was enabled to make the following observations: A®
open cutting between the old shafts shows that the soft stuff lS


sharply cut off on the south side by a hard quartz-vein, a few
inches in thickness, dipping N. 10° W. rather unevenly, at
angles varying from Go° to 70°. Beyond this quartz-vein, which
is called the ‘ Captain’s Reef,’ and for the prospecting of which
the old shafts have been sunk, follows thinly-laminated mica-
ceous quartz-schist, showing nearly horizontal bedding. The
quartz-vein has mostly been removed off the quartz-schist; but
at one place a patch is left, showing a finely-polishe.d surface
with deep striations normal to the line of strike —a so-called
‘slickenside’—whilst the ends of the laminations of the soft
stuff are slightly turned upwards on the quartz-vein. Whether
towards the north a similar wall exists has not been proved as
yet, and nothing can be seen on the smooth surface for a dis-
tance of about two chains, where Mr. Green has prospected with
fair results of fine gold from the gully upwards to near the top
°f the ridge, a second run of soft decomposed rock striking
parallel to the first, but showing a lighter colour, and more
abundant and larger ferruginous patches. Adjoining this
farther northward follows chloritic mica-scliist, which, though
s °ft in the gully through action of thp water, and richly inrpreg-
"ated with pyrites, becomes soon hard up the ridge, exhibiting
there massive rocky outcrops. The following sketch cross sec-
t'on will serve for illustration of the several features men-
tioned :
Fr “
d ,^ ese features, considered in connection, clear evi-
Sc y Ce ls afforded by the slickenside and the adjoining quartz-
PWe a * ; lc nc °f the Captain’s Reef a fault has taken
from* ie resu ff °f a downthrow of the soft auriferous rock
P r obably a very high level; whilst in case of a second wall


being found to the northward beyond the second run of soit
auriferous rock—of which there is some probability—the whole
of the intervening mass would constitute a huge mullock-reef,
• such as exist on a smaller scale at Skipper’s Creek and man;
places in Victoria. The alteration of the rock and its impregna-
tion with gold within the two lines of fissures, or, at any rale,
off the faulting fissure running along the Captain’s Reef, is in
my opinion mainly due to the meteoric waters once circulating
in this fissure, an hypothesis for which the fact speaks somewhat
in favour of the richest specimens and best prospects of loose gold
having been obtained by Mr. Green close along the Captain’s
Reef, which itself has so far not proved gold-bearing. Judgin'
from similar occurrences in Victoria, a great part of the fins
gold is doubtless derived from decomposed auriferous pyrites,
an ore which may likely occur as a rich impregnation of the
rock in depth below permanent water-level. There can hardlt
be a doubt that the fault, and with it the deposit —though
whether it be of the same richly-auriferous character is uncer-
tain—extend further westward in strike than at present opened-
Several chains westward, on the western side, of another gulty
Mr. Green obtained, from greenish rotten rock, fair prospects of
fine gold, of a similar character as occurring in the soft rock o
his workings. Prospecting further westward would, hove'®,
be rather difficult, as the line of strike of the fault ru®
across a drift-terrace into the fiat, and extends through *t e
Township of Ophir. Towards the east the chance of the ext®
sion of the deposit, at least of some width, seems unfavourable
' J p itfl
as the ridges in that direction show in the line of strike or
fault massive outcrops of hard metamorpliic rock rather ck> se
together. Regarding the extraction of the gold from the ®
lock, the softness and friability of the latter permit its T®
conversion into thin mud by the action of water; and therefore
use of a puddling-machine, with a plentiful supply of clear ff ater ’
and the crushing of the quartz portion remaining in the m
by means of a Chilian mill, would, in my opinion, be the® 1
advisable process to adopt. Since Mr. Green’s discovery,
ral places, showing similar decomposed rock, have been &
on the ridges in different parts of the district, but app arC ®;
without success in finding payable gold, the geological co


tions of Green’s mine being evidently wanting. Only one of
these trial-places, called McLeod’s workings, deserves, I think,
some further exploration, as the run of rotten rock seems to
strike nearly in the- same direction as that of Green s, and pro-
spects of fine hackly gold are said to be obtainable from it by
tm-dish trials. Considering the great scarcity of quartz reefs
in the district, in connection with the fact that there are a
number of surface-workings and dry alluvial gullies high above
the boundary-line of the Manuhcrikia Lake-drift, which have
yielded payable gold from gravel very poor in quartz, it is highly
probable that such gold was derived from mullock-deposits
similar to that at Green’s, and the district therefore certainly
deserves more extended and systematic prospecting.
Mr. H. A. Gordon, E.G.S., Inspecting- Engineer, adds :
“With regard to the method of working this deposit, I quite
agree with Professor Ulrich that a puddling-machine would be
the best method of first dealing with the material, and afterwards
crushing the residue in either a Chilian mill or Wheeler s pans.
schist, being extremely friable, would be carried off by the
action of puddling, leaving only the small quartz-grit to be
finally dealt with.” When. Mr. Gordon visited the claim in the
ea rly part of the year, Mr. Green was taking the stuff out of a
face and washing it in a cradle similar to those used in the early
fiavs; hut even with such a primitive appliance he was getting
f°z. of gold per day. Yet for many years this rich scliist-
fieposit was passed over by prospectors, no one expecting to find
§°Winit. Even Mr. Green’s discovery lias to be attributed
m °re to chance than to anything in the nature of scientific ob-
lation. The bearing of the lode is similar to the generality
°f quartz reefs in Otago, being nearly east and west, having an
underlie to the north.
QUARTZ-REEFING.
During the last twenty years attempts have been made to
the reefs at Rough Ridge, and in many instances as much
to the ton have been obtained. The Ridge is a perfect
® et *ork of reefs, leaders, and lodes, ranging from lOin. to sft.
quantities of other minerals accompany the gold, and it is
* *cved that, if efficient appliances were at hand for coping with


and destroying the power of the sulphides over the gold, stone
which generally averages 2oz. to 3oz. could he made to yield
from soz. to Boz. per ton.
The reefs operated on fifteen or sixteen years ago were tie
Homeward Bound and Lloyd’s, worked hy the Ida Valley
Quartz - mining Company and the Great Eastern Company.
There is no authentic information of what gold was obtained;
hut one crushing of about sixty tons resulted in about 3oz. to
the ton. That was from the Great Eastern; but the heavy
expenses—viz., crushing, £2 per ton; carting to machine, ss.
per 18cwt.; and wages at 12s. per day for men who did not
understand the work—disgusted shareholders : the companies
were wound up and the leases surrendered. The former of
these companies’ leases was taken up at the end of 1885 by
some working miners without capital, resulting in a winding-
up of the partnership and a re-formation of the company, which
has been registered, under “ The Mining Companies Act, 1886,
under the style of the Progress Gold-mining Company. One
crushing of fifty tons during the first week in November gn ye
82oz. of gold. At the rate the company is going to work the
quartz should be brought to grass at a minimum, and, with go°d
machinery, the property should prove a valuable one. The Great
Eastern, on the old site of the company of that name, has
recently been registered under the Mining Companies Act, and
has good prospects of success. The Otago Central, which was
taken up in November, 1884, has expended a considerable sum
in prospecting, but is now in regular work, and has never g ot
less than loz. of gold to the ton of quartz, with everythin?
put through the machine; so that its future outlook appe ars
very promising.
At the Garibaldi Diggings, on the summit of the Kong D
Ridge, a few miles south of the Otago Central Mine, rce ,
have been discovered- by some of the sluicing-parties. Tl lS
shows that the reefs are not confined to any particular sp°*’
and affords incontestible evidence as to their value iw
future, when more attention will probably be bestowed up 0 ®
them by capitalists; for it is only by the investment of
sums of money that reefing can be systematically and profit 3 ®''
carried on.


FUTURE PROSPECTS.
The future prospects of the district are very hopeful.
Between Nasehy and the Little Kyeburn there are three or four
miles of country where miners can make £1 10s. to £2 per
week, after paying for water. The Water Trusts Race, and the
races in the hands of private parties, command the ground;
and when work gets slack at Nasehy these races will probably
he extended, the engineering difficulties in the way of an ex-
tension being light. Thinking men are of opinion that more
gold will he obtained ten years hence than now. That opinion
is shared in by Mr. Warden Wood, who does.not, however,
look forward to much increase at Hamilton’s, Hyde, or Macrae’s,
hut thinks there is a great future for the Rough Ridge, where
the reefs are turning out well. Illafckstone Hill, which has
never been thoroughly prospected, and was deserted for the West
Coast rush in 1864, is likely to become a remunerative goldfield,
though not an extensive one, consequent on the limited supply
of water. St. Bathan’s will, in all probability, give larger yields
°f gold a quarter of a century hence than it does at present;
whilst at Vinegar Hill and Cambrian’s gold-mining is likely to
ho carried on for very many years. Under the Dunstan Range,
Sallies as rich as Tinker’s and Dryhread will probably yet he
found, and gold in payable quantities will he obtained on the
hot on the other side of the Manulierikia River. When the
Cos t of timber has been reduced through railway-communication,
the deep ground which is known to exist on the eastern side of
fhe Raggedy Ridge, in German Gully, will he worked. Some
°f the reefs which were tried at the Serpentine have been
onioned, owing principally to exhaustion of capital; hut it is
. °ttbtful whether they can he made to pay till cheaper materials
Can be brought on the ground.
PRICE OF GOLD.
The average price of gold is £3 15s. per ounce.
goldfield OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT,
.burden; Mr. J. Nugent Wood, R.M., Nasehy. Receiver
Gold Revenue : Mr. J. F. Garvey, Nasehy. Receiver of Gold


Revenue at Clyde: Mr. F. F. D. Jeffrey, who visits Ophir twice
a month. Forms can he obtained from the officers in charge
of the various police-stations. The Warden’s Court sits every
week at Naseby, the first Saturday of every alternate month at
Hamilton, once in three months at Hyde and Macrae’s, on the
first Wednesday in the month at Ophir, and on the second
Friday in the month at St. Bathan’s.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Dunedin to Naseby .. .. .. 88
Naseby to Kyeburn .. .. .. 9
Naseby to Hamilton’s .. .. .. 18
Naseby to Sowburn .. .. .. 20
Naseby to Hyde .. .. .. 25
Naseby to Macrae’s .. .. ..38
Naseby to Rough Ridge .. .. .. 15
Naseby to Blackstone Hill .. .. 17
Naseby to St. Bathan’s .. .. .. 25
Naseby to Cambrian’s .. .. .. 29
Naseby to Serpentine .. .. .. 52
Naseby to Ophir (or Black’s) .. .. 40
Ophir to Tinker’s .. .. .. 7
Ophir to Drybread .. .. .. 8
Ophir to German Hill .. .. .. 4
Ophir to Black’s No. 3 .. .. .. 4
The roads, as a rule, are in good order, except in wint®
time, ancl finger-posts have been erected at nearly all the cross-
roads. There is communication by coach twice a week to all
parts of the district.


Heqistered Mining Companies in the Mount Ida. Warden's District actually in operation on the Slat December, 1885.
Name of Company.
•O 3
S Q.
o S'
pec
So
*•3
<**
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
• Total Value of
Total
uitn.1 Gold, Silver,
actually Antimony, or
other Metals
fiSSfr-n c taken from
from Calls, company’s
Mine.
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid
by Com-
pany.
Date of Last
Dividend.
Amount
of Last
Dividend.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Ouartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
a
3*53
© ►»
go,
S a
3 ®
A
Naseby.
Extended Gold-mining Com-
150
£
3,000
£
2,000
£
2,000
£
2,407
£
280
Dec. 1,1880
£
50
May, 1882
Alluvial
5
pany (Limited)
Great Eastern Gold-mining
2,000
2,000
375
125
1800
Quartz
2
Company (Limited)
Naseby Hydraulic Mining
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1880
Alluvial
2
Company (Limited)
Otago Central Gold-mining
10,000
5,000
1,590
1,478
1,700
Oct., 1884
Quartz
7
Company (Limited)
Progress Gold-mining Com-
10,800
5,400
1,080
930
320
1880
7
pany (Limited)
St. Bathan’s.
Dunstan Creek Water-race
32
1,800
1,800
1,800
1873
Water-
1-8
Company (Limited) *
Scandinavian Water - race
240
12,000
12,000
12,000
27,208
10,530
1879
240 t
1804
race
Alluvial
8
Company (Registered)
St. Bathan’s Channel Com-
27
3,780
2,820
2,820
1881
4-8
pany (Limited) {
St. Bathan’s Water-race
48
7,233
7,233
2,538
7,050
1872
7
Company (Limited)
United M. and E. Company
152
7,000
7,000
7,000
23,420
2,318
1879
190 §
1872
G
(Registered)
•This company’s water-race is used by the different shareholders, but the claims are not registered as companies. + Total amount of
dividend pe r£so share, £GBl7s. Gd. X Channel designed to work ground not yet reached, 8 Total amount of dividend per £5O share, £l5 ss.
a


Quartz-mines at work or held in the Mount Ida Warden’s District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital.
Date when first
opened.
At
Lease or
Claim.
Survey
District.
Work
or under
Protec-
tion.
°S
© ..^
u 3 ti
-2 K.S
a p-3
(fas
o 0 °.
&S S3
> is a
© S.<3
S'g a
=3 B.H
t-c:^
111
£W
Jh ®
cn
Crushing-
plant :
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
St&mpers,
Tables with
StonebreakerSiCopper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
~s
o o
<0
p .
<a a
>’*■2
•sS
_ *3
«3^.
o2
Eh
Great Eastern Company
£ ■
£
A.
R.
p.
£
J£
2,000
80
1886
25
0
0
Black-
Wtr.
stono
Otago Central Company
5,000
1,750
1884
25
0
0
Ditto..
At ■wrk.
Hand
Stm.
5 stampers,
Blnkfcs. and
500
1,800
1 amalgmtr.
copp. -plates
Progress Company
5,600
1,000
1886
25
0
0
" ..
-
Horse
150
••


Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Mount Ida Warden’s
District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date wlien
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
l-f °
d -t* .
5 § c
l§«
Naseby.
A. R. P.
£
William Grayson*
Nov. 23,1874
5 0 0
. .
5
William Guffie*
Dec. 18,1872
8 0 0
. .
. .
8 '
{Enterprise Water-race
Aug. 20,1880
8 0 0
8
Company *
Simon Hewitt*
Aug. 20,1880
4 0 0
, .
4
Matthew Young*
Aug. 20,1880
4 0 0
. .
4
Walter Inder*
Tan. 28,1881
3 1 3
4
John Robertson*
Feb. 25', 1881
7 0 0
July 13, 18SG
W. William-
7
Enterprise Water-race
son
Sept. 10,1882
7 0 0
, 7
Company*
Walter Inder*
May 15,1883
10 0 0
. 10
William Grayson*
July G, 1870
10 0 0
10
William Thomas*
Mar. 1G, 1877
10 0 0
. #
10
William Grayson*
Gee Wee*
Mar. 1G, 1877
Nov. 28,1SS3
5 0 0
5 0 0
f.
5
Orchard Gale*
Nov. 23,1882
GOO
,.
G
Walter Inder*
Blanchard and Gale* ..
~uncan McLellan*
enterprise Water-race
Nov. 28,1883
5 0 0
5
Nov. 28,1883
Jan. 0,1884
G 0 0
2 1 19
0
3
Jan. 9,1884
GOO
.,
G
Company*
«mes Brown*
Andrew White* !
James Brown*
obert Strong*
Hydraulic Com-
pany*
Water-race
July 1G, 1884
Sept. 17,1884
Juno 9,1885
Sept. 1.18S5
Jail. 2G, 188G
8 0 0
3 0 0
10 0 0
1 3 20
GOO
* •
8 '
3
10
2
G
Oct., 1885
5 0 0
£2 10s
Sluicing Company*
o„„ ,® T - Bathan’s.
" c andinavian Water-race
Company*
T otnas Hughes*
.
Watson*
race n*' and Water-
\Y ace Comp any «
others^“ m ” nd and
May 23,1870
July 22,1879
Jan. 1,1881
GOO
5 0 0
19 2 28
G
5
20 '
Juno 8,1880
5 3 27
6
Juno 8,1880
June 22, I860
9 2 0
9 1 35
April 25,1885
Jolm Ewing
10
10'
S-Williams*
3ton Potter*
Dbrid\?' COlson * • •
St.Baa Uns , muir *
-^mig__ Wator - r dce
June 22,188C
Juno 22,188C
July 20,188C
Nov. 29,1881
3 0 0
5 0 17
5 0 37
10 0 C
.
.
••
3
G
G
10
April 13,1885
10 0 C
.
10
. JAtnnT * Lease. + Special Claim.
H. ana p x 5 in 1872 with the Mountain Water-race Company, under the style of the
lj< Water-race Company.”


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
-
transferred.
a] +».J
C 3 ©
fl°(3
<
St. Bathan’s— contd.
A. R. P
-
s,
Win. Williams*
Aug. 17,1883
10 0 c
. .
10
Peter Tiernan*
Sept. 21,1883
GOO
. .
6
United M. and E. Water-
Oct. 19,1883
4 2 37
5.
race Company*
James Nicolson*
April 18,1884
6 0 0
, ,
# #
6
Wm. Williams*
June 21,1884
10 0 0
10
John Ewing* ..
Sept. 19,1884
10 0 0
# .
10
Hector Stewart*
May 8,1885
5 12
6
W. J. E. Watson*
Fob. 5,1885
GOO
5
John Davis* ..
Feb. 5,1885
GOO
6
Patrick Taltyf
I St. Bathan’s Channel
Sept. 1,1883
18 0 5
, ,
18
Jan. 1,1884
17 2 17
f #
1
Company f
St. Bathan’s Water-raco
Jan. 1,1884
30 0 0
5
Company!
Scandinavian Water-race
Jan. 1,1884 35 0 2
, ,
. .
18
Company!
Muddy Creek Channel
Company!
1873
30 0 0
1881
Scandinavian
and United
M. and E.
W. R. Co.
Serpentine.
Bobt. M. Turnbull* ..
Feb. 25,18S1
15 3 1G
16
Golden Link Company*
Mar. 9,1883
1G 0 0
16
Golden Belt Company*
Mar. 9,1883
1G 0 0
••
16
Hamilton’s.
Paul Williams*
July 0,1882
5 0 0
..
5
John McDonald*
Sept. 3,1884
10 0 0
10
W. II. Trcgonning*
Sept. 3,1884
5 0 0
••
•*
5
Hyde.
8
Alex. McKay*
July 5,1882
8 0 0
, .
,,
Clias. D. Smith*
Sept. 25,1884
1G 0 0
**
••
16
* Lease. f Special claim. -
t Granted to claimholdcrs in St. Bathan's Basin: channel to work their claims had w
pass through.


MAEREWHENUA WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
It is not an easy matter to form a correct estimate of the
quantity of gold obtained in the Maerewhcnua District, as there
was not at any time an escort, nor did the banks find it neces-
sary to open branches, as the field was limited, and Oamaru was
within easy distance. Since gold was first discovered in the
district in 1868, it is probable that the yield has not been less
than 25,0000 z. to 30,0000 z., of the value of £90,000 to .£lOO,OOO.
The district is likely to support a limited number of miners—
sav, thirty or forty—for many years to come. The claims, as a
rule, can only be worked by heavy sluicing, and all the water
available for them has been taken up; so that no appreciable
increase in the number of miners employed on the ground at
present opened out in the vicinity of Livingstone is to be
expected. It is, of course, possible that new discoveries may be
made at any time in the district, though anything to cause a
rush appears unlikely to happen.
Outside the boundaries of the goldfield as proclaimed gold
ls to exist in several places in more or less payable
quantities. On the sea-beaches in the neighbourhood of Kaka-
-11111 and Hampden there is found in places a heavy black-sand
which contains gold. The beach-workings have never assumed
au y great importance, only a few men having taken to them,
and even those few not working continuously 7 . The yields arc
mostly small, and beach-working must be rather regarded as a
Ver y useful resource, when work of other kinds is scarce, than
f 5 a regular industry. 'Within the last few months there lias
ec n something like a small rush to some property of Colonel
mtchener’s, between Hampden and Palmerston. A few men
arranged with the proprietor for permission to work, and set in;
nt as yet no results of any consequence have been reported,
klost of the miners have done fairly well. One party of two
obtained gold to the value of .£1,230 from 1882 to 1885;
miner, eijsoo from 1379 to !885; another, .£5OO from
3 to 1885 ; and other parties can show equally good results,
.the miners have cultivations, keep cattle, and can easily get
at shearing or harvest time, they are all fairly well-to-do.


About 170 miles of water-races, giving fifty sluice-lieads of
water, have been constructed at a cost of nearly .£15,000, the
average fall per mile ranging from Oft. to 12ft. Over three miles
of tail-races have been cut, having a fall of Oft. Bin. to sft. 6in.
per chain, at a cost of £800; and twenty-four dams, with a
.holding-capacity of over 2,000,000 cubic feet, have been con-
structed at a cost of over £1,500.
Quartz reefs have been found in the district. They were
tried some years ago, but abandoned, as the reefs opened out
did not give payable returns. It is, however, very doubtful
whether they have been thoroughly tested.
Lignite has been worked at Kurow and some other places
during the last twenty years, but oidy for local consumption.
A fine white limestone, similar to the Oamaru stone, exists in
practically-unlimitcd quantity in various parts of the district,
and has been used to some extent by the settlers from the time
the country was first occupied, as it can be easily and cheaply
worked; but, as in the case of the lignite, it will only be used
by those residing in the district.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
The Maerewlicnua gold-workings are about thirty miles in a
straight line from Oamaru. The easiest mode of communication
is by rail from Oamaru to Duntroon (twenty-seven miles))
thence by a good road (nine miles). From Duntroon to Living-
stone there is a good driving-road, which is always maintained w
fair order by the Waitaki County Council. From Livingstone
to Naseby there is a bridle-track through a mountain-pasS)
known as the Maercwhenua Pass, and there arc snow-poles along
the pass which act as guide-posts for travellers in snowy weather.
The track is kept in passable condition by the Waitaki and
Maniototo County Councils.
GOLDFIELD OFFICEES.—SITTINGS OF COUKT.
Mr. 11. W. Itobinson, R.M., Oamaru, is the Warden for the
district, and holds sittings of the Court in the Livingstone
Schoolliouse on the second Friday in the months of February)
April, June, August, October, and December. Applications f° r
mining rights have to be lodged in the Warden’s office a *
Naseby w-ith Mr. J. F. Garvey, Mining Registrar.


■Registered Mining Companies in the Maerewiienua Warden’s District
actually in operation on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company.
S> g
as
•2 C3
a .a
og 1
pCQ
So
o
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
Date of Com-
mencing .
Operations.
£
£
April, 1874
Pioneer Water-race and Gold-mining
3G0
3, GOO
3, GOO
Company**
* This company does not mine : it only owns a water-race, which is leased.
HINDON WAEDEN’S DISTRICT.
Gold -was discovered about twenty-two years ago at Hindon.
Antimony, coal, and cinnabar were found a few years after-
wards. It has been estimated that the total yield of gold from
this locality has been about 30,0000 z., and 100 tons of antimony
have been brought to the surface. Hydraulic sluicing, where
anything like a steady supply of water is available, has been
very successful. The Grant Company (under various names)
has been working payable ground for years at Deep Stream.
Cameron’s claim at Hindon has been giving good returns, which
■ Tou ld have been trebled had a regular supply of water been
available. The Sutton Water-race Company (Fenwick and
party), whose water-race is over eight miles in length, and cost
upwards of £3,000, is now in full operation, and the prospects
are considered very favourable. The water has been brought
111 from the Sutton Stream, about nine miles above its junction
the Taieri l!iver. The ground is a part of the University
Endowment Reserve, on the Barewood Run. There are several
parties scattered here and there, making irregular though fair re-
muneration when water is obtainable, by sluicing on a small scale.
During the past eight or ten years seven registered quartz-
unning companies have ceased operations, owing to exhaustion of
Ca Pdal. As a general rule, the reefs were only worked near the
surface, so that no adequate idea can yet be formed of the per-
manency or otherwise of the various lodes. At the Mount
yue Company’s mine (Mr. Charles McQueen’s) an adit is being


put in, and other preparations are in progress for the further
development of the mine, from which favourable results are
expected. There is a substantial battery of ten heads of
stampers and a powerful steam-engine in connection with this
mine, which formerly belonged to the New Caledonia Company.
The Sons of Freedom Company (Mr. A. T. Kenny’s) had a
small payable crushing recently", and work is likely to he car-
ried on regularly. The ground is a portion of that which was
formerly held by the Hindon Company. The Lyder Company
(Mr. H. Lyder’s), in connection with which there is a six-head
battery driven by" water-power, has obtained a yield of 250 z.
from 75 tons of quartz, and, as there is plenty of stone easily
available, the prospects are considered satisfactory.
The great desideratum in connection with quartz-mining in
; this district is a good water-supply", to enable comparatively poor
stone, of which there is an abundance, to be crushed cheaply.
The want of water is also much felt by those engaged in alluvial
mining. A permanent supply for that purpose could he ob-
tained from Boundary or Fortification Creek, at a cost of about
,£5,000, and would be the means of affording permanent em-
ployment to numbers of miners, as large areas could then be
worked which are now almost untouched.
PBICE OF GOLD.
The price of gold is £3 15s. per ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COUIII.
The Warden for the district is Mr. J. P. Maitland, J.P.>
Dunedin, where all business has to he transacted. Mr. W. E.
Sessions, Dunedin, is the Mining Registrar, Receiver of Gold
Revenue, and Clerk of the Warden’s Court, which sits ou the
first Friday" in each month, in the Land Board Room, Dunedin.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Dunedin to Outram .. .. ..18
Outram to Ilindon .. .. ..14
Dunedin to North Taieri .. .. .. _ 13
There is railway - communication to Outram ; thence b)'
coach to Hindon. For the Silver Peak and Mullocky Gullf
portion of the district the easiest way is by train from Duncdu
to North Taieri. The roads and tracks are in fairly good order.


Quaetz-jiines at work or hold in the Hindon Warden's District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
Date when first
opened.
«3
5
3
Q
w
O
A
Section
Survey
At Work or
under
Block.
District.
Protection.
0%
|“ 05 .
U 3 tfi
n.s
in
'S <
o •• s
>>tG£
o q o.
- 2
EV-i O
? o-5
a Sts
S^Q?
3c.g
SUfl
-S«
Ph s
CO
Crushing-
plant :
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Tables -with
Stampers,
Stonebreakers Copper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators,
o
O 9
©
©4-
C3 m
*3 a
dps
s*-3a
i^s
o
■§2
B
*3
Mount Hyde.
Charles McQueen ..
May, 1S82
A. It. P.
1G 2 0
Sec. 3,
B. V.
Mount
Hyde
Partly at
work
Hand
Steam
10 stampers
Copp.-plates
and blankets
£
2,500
£
200
A. T. Kenny
Dec., 1884
12 3 4
Sec. 44,
b. y.
Ditto
Ditto
Water
• *
200


Gold-mining Leases held in the Hindon Warden’s District on the
31st December, 1885.
Name of Lessee.
Dato when
Granted.
Area.
-'d
3g
A 5
-2 a
d d
Name of Person
/ or Company
to whom transferred.
ng®
3s«
<
Charles McQueen
June 1,1882
A. R.P.
16 2 0
£
17
John Harrison ..
Nov. 1, 1883
1G 0 0
May 6,
Don Quartz-mining
16
Arthur Thomas Kennyf
1885
Company*
Mar. 5,188G
12 3 4
13
* Since lapsed.
t Applied for and working in December, 1884, but lease not granted until survey
received in March, ISSG.
Note.—There are no special claims.
OREPUKI AND LONGWOOD DISTRICT.
Gold was discovered at Orepuki and Longwood about twenty
years ago ; at Round Hill in 18G8; and at Merivale in Sep-
tember, 1885. The whole of the Longwood Range, extending
for a distance of ten miles, has been proved to be more or less
auriferous ; but dense bush, want of tracks, and the consequent
difficulty and expense of obtaining supplies and material, have
combined to retard the development of the goldfield. Alluvial
ground has been found all over the range, and auriferous-
quartz reefs have been struck in many places. The difficulties
already alluded to, coupled with the fact that there has only
been a limited and expensive water-supply, have interfered to a
great extent with the successful prosecution of the discoveries
made. At Round Hill, on the south-western slope of the Long-
wood Range, payable returns have been obtained, although
water was very dear and scarcely obtainable in summer time?
when the miners could use it to most advantage. If the ground
was not of a highly-auriferous nature, it could not have paid f° r
working under such circumstances. The present price of wat er
in the Round Hill district is £3 per week for each sluice-head;
until quite recently the price was £3 10s. per week.


the completion of Berndtson’s water-race, the supply will he
greatly augmented, and the price considerably reduced. The late
Mr. Berndtson felt the immense importance of an adequate
water-supply for such a highly-auriferous district; for in the
opinion of practical miners the ground at Round Hill is only a
fair sample of the general character of the whole district. Four
years ago Mr. Berndtson commenced the construction of a
water-race, sixteen miles in length; and, though the work had
often been delayed for want of funds, he persevered with liis
undertaking. Just as there was every probability of the water-
race being completed, owing to the opportune assistance of the
Government, Mr. Bcrndtson’s death occurred, causing general
regret throughout the district. The race is calculated to bring
down at least twenty sluice-heads of water from the right-hand
branch of the Purapurakino River to the Round Hill diggings, and
"will be of great benefit to the whole mining population. It is not
alone in the reduction of the price of water that the race will
benefit the miners of the district. There is a creek, now sludged
U P, running through the Orrawarra Flat, which stretches from the
workings to the ocean-beach, a distance of nearly four miles, by
about one mile in width. There is a fall of 51ft. from the
workings to the beach, and the water, after leaving the tail-races,
runs over the flat, and is of no use in carrying the sludge; but
is thought that, if confined in a proper sludge-channel,
with the increase of waste water from Berndtson’s water-race, a
c bannel might be made to the beach which would greatly
benefit the miners.
The Orepuki diggings arc about eight miles to the south-
of Round Hill, on the shores of Tcwaewae Bay, where gold-
lining has been carried on for over twenty years with varying
Access. The original workings were on beacli-deposits ; but the
of gold, extending inland, was followed up, and proved to be
Immanent. Latterly the miners have successfully combined
farming and grazing with their other pursuits : the result is that
4e mining community is fairly prosperous, and attached to the
district.
the south-east slope of the Longwood Range, at what is
generally known as Longwood, rich deposits have been found
Uring the last twenty' y r ears. The yield of gold from this part


of the district has been variously estimated at from 6,0000 z.
to 10,000 oz. The greater portion of the gold was very coarse,
with nuggets weighing from 13oz. downwards : in one parcel of
330 z. none of the pieces weighed less than loz.
Five or six years ago three men obtained 50oz. from a claim
about seven miles from Riverton. Owing to some partnership
dispute the claim was sold, and Mr. George Printz, who pur-
chased it, got 50oz. from a tunnel which he drove into the side
of the hill. The Longwood Reefing Company, which rvas
formed some time afterwards to work the ground, obtained 50oz.
or GOoz. from 120 tons, although a great portion of what was put
through was useless mullock. About 200 oz. were obtained
altogether, for which very little useful work was done, though
a large sum of money was expended.
Several auriferous-quartz reefs were struck in this neighbour-
hood, and satisfactory prospects were obtained. While the
Longwood Reefing Company was at work sixty leases were taken
up in the vicinity of the claim at Specimen Gully, but were all
cancelled after the company had ceased operations. As in
every other part of the colony where quartz reefs exist, the great
want is capital to develop them. The prospects obtained,
if found at Ballarat, Sandhurst, or other large mining centres
in Australia, would immediately attract the attention of
capitalists.
Practical miners are convinced that a branch from Berndt-
son’s water-race, which comes within a mile and a half of what
is still known as Printz’s claim, can be easily taken through the
gullies and made the means of testing what is generally believed
to be a large stretch of auriferous country.
The richness of the prospects obtained in the Longwood B |S '
trict is little known in other parts of the colony, or even m
other places in Southland. The quantity of gold taken fr oDl
what can be, as a rule, only termed scratchings, has been very
large ; but still the field lies comparatively untouched, waiting
for the energy, enterprise, and skill that, sooner or later, must
conclusively prove that a great source of wealth was neglected
for many years.
Sluicing has been carried on at Orepuki and Longwood f° r
about twenty years, and the miners who have been able to com'


mand a sufficient force of water liave done very well. One
hundred and twenty-five water-races, 130 miles in length, giving
300 sluice-heads of water, have been constructed at a cost of
£IB,OOO to £20,000; fifty-two tail-races were cut, at a cost
of £2,300; and fifty-four dams, with a holding-capacity of
800,000 cubic feet, have been excavated, at a cost of £SOO.
MEEIVALE.
On the northern slopes of the Longwood Range, near
Merivale Station, gold was found in September, 1885, and at
one time seventy miners were at work. During the following
ten or twelve months 500 oz. of coarse gold were won. The
limited supply of water will, however, prevent the permanent
employment of any considerable number of men. Though
wter can he brought on to the ground, it would involve a large
expenditure of capital and labour.
FUTURE PROSPECTS.
The future prospects of the Orepuki and Longwood District
are highly favourable. To assist in developing its resources,
tracks through the hush arc much wanted; hut the contracts
let by the County Council out of the Government subsidy of
£SOO will give easy access to nearly all parts of the goldfield,
f sludge-channel from the Round Hill workings to the sea-hcach
18 required; hut, above all, the completion of Berndtson’s -water-
race should receive immediate attention.
PRICE OF GOLD.
Per Ounce.
£ s. d.
Merivale .. .. .. ..320
Waiau .. .. .. ..386
Round Hill, Orepuki, aud Longwood .. 316 6
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
The Warden for the District is Mr. 11. McCulloch, R.M.,
Qvercargill. Mr. Grant is Mining Registrar and Clerk to the
ardeips Court at Riverton, where sittings are held for the
°le district every alternate Tuesday.


DISTANCE S.—COMMU NICATION.
Miles.
Invercargill to Orepuki .. .. 43
Orepuki to Round Hill .. .. .. 9
Invercargill to Riverton .. .. .. 25
Riverton to Longwood .. .. .. 8
Longwood to Merivale .. .. 22
There is easy access to nearly all the gold-workings in the
district. Orepuki and Riverton are connected by rail with
Invercargill. Round Hill can he reached via Colac Station, to
which place the railway extends; thence by a corduroy track -which
leads through the bush for a distance of three and a half miles into
the centre of the Round Ilill diggings; but a good road, now in
course of construction, will shortly supersede this track. Long-
wood can he reached by boat from Riverton, going up the Pura-
purakino branch of the Aparima. There is also a fairly good
road, about ten miles in length, between these places; hut most
of the goods are conveyed by boat. .Merivale can be reached by
rail from Invercargill to Otauta (33 miles) ; thence by eleven
miles of good road.


WEST COAST (MIDDLE ISLAND).
EXPLORATIONS AND EARLY GOLD-DISCOVERIES.
Many parts of the West Coast were visited by whalers and
seal-hunters, and in 1836 scaling-parties under Green and Toms
lived for some time at the Steeples, Cape Foulwind, near West-
port. Toms on one occasion was caught and thrown down
by a large seal, which hit him severely on the thigh; hut he
escaped death hy dealing it some hard blows with his clenched
fist on the nose. After the advent of the New Zealand Com-
pany, the late Major Ilcaphy and the late Air. Thomas Brunner,
two of the company’s surveyors, visited the West Coast in the
year 1845, and travelled on foot from West Wanganui, near Cape
Farewell, to the Grey River. They suffered great privations,
having very little to subsist on except the natural productions of
the country. At West Wanganui the old cannibal chief Niho
refused to allow them to proceed unless he received payment
trespassing in a country hitherto unexplored hy Europeans.
'Fbey had taken so little in the shape of provisions, tobacco, or
jnoney with them that they were unable to meet his demand;
bn. they managed to decoy old Niho across the harbour in a
c anoe, where they left him bewailing his fate and muttering
something like curses against the pakehas. On tlieir return to
e «on they reported unfavourably of the West Coast as a
for settlement, stating that the rivers could not be entered
I ooasting-vessels. Subsequently Sir William Fox, who was
period agent for the New Zealand Company at Nelson,
acc °tnpanied hy Messrs. Ileaphy and Brunner, explored the
ea d-waters of the Buller River and the country adjacent to
aaes Roto-iti and Rotoroa, and the Tiraumea River. On
® ae occasion Sir William Fox had a narrow escape, having
eri washed off his feet whilst crossing a river; but, being
t 0 ex P er t swimmer, he managed, after much difficulty, owing
a heavy swag which he carried, to swim ashore. Soon


afterwards Mr. Brunner started from Foxhill, twenty-two miles
outside the City of Nelson, and followed the Buller River from
its source to the sea. lie was accompanied hy two Natives,
and, after many adventures and severe privations, they accom-
plished the journey. They were so short of the necessaries of
life that Mr. Brunner had to kill and eat his favourite dog,
being afterwards called hy the Maoris “Kai-kuri” (Dog-eater).
After striking the sea-coast, Mr. Brunner proceeded from the
mouth of the Buller River along the coast to the Grey River,
going south to the Waiho River, which he was unable to cross
owing to floods. He retraced his steps to the Grey, and on the
way discovered the coal-seam which was afterwards called after
him. Passing the Mawliera-iti, he proceeded over a saddle to
the Inangahua, and journeyed on to the Buller, passing through
the Roto-iti Plain; thence back to Nelson, after an absence of
eighteen months. His services were recognized in the colony
and in London, the Royal Geographical Society’s medal having
been awarded to him; hut he died at the comparatively early
age of fifty, his death having been hastened in all probability hy
the privations which he endured on that memorable exploratory
trip. What the extent of these privations were can only he
known to those adventurous explorers who followed, and to the
hardy gold-miners Avho afterwards travelled over a great deal of
the same ground in search of the precious metal. The nikau
(or cabbage-palm) was only to be found near the sea-coast, and
there were only two edible ferns (the mamalcu and katote) t 0
be found on the journey. The root of the former, which only
grows on fertile land, when properly cooked in a Maori oven, I s
fairly good food; but the latter, which generally grows i®
black-birch forests, is very bitter, and is only partaken of lD
the last extremity.
In the year 1853 Sir George Grey, who was at that tim e
Governor of the colony, entered into negotiations with the "Wes*
Coast Natives for the purchase of all their lands, subject t°
certain reservations. Before the arrangements were concluded
Sir George Grey left for England, and the late Sir Donald
McLean, wdio was then and for many years subsequently Nati ve
Lands Purchase Commissioner, was instructed to conclude s ie
negotiations. The following year Mr. Brunner, Governine®*


Surveyor at Nelson, and Mr. Jenkins, Native Interpreter, were
despatched to mark off the boundaries; but, owing to the jealousy
of some of the Maoris, there were many delays, and it was not
until March, 185 G, that a settlement was effected, by the payment
of £2,000 in addition to £5,000 already agreed upon. One
or two claims were still left in abeyance, and were finally settled
in 1860 by Mr. James Maclcay. The reserves which were made
for the Natives are now bringing in an annual income of nearly
£4,000, and, as there are only about a hundred Natives on the
West Coast, they arc comfortably fed, housed, and clad, peace-
able and sober, and generally respected by their European
neighbours.
In 1855 Mr. James Maclcay, who was the first Goldfields
Warden in the colony, having been gazetted Warden of the
Aorere Goldfield on the 15th September, 1853, explored the
“whole of the mountainous country lying between the head-
waters of the Aorere, Heapliy (Walcapoai), Alack ay (Karamca),
and Anatoki Rivers, and also a portion of the country between
the sources of the Takalca and Karamca Rivers ; whilst in 1857
Mr. Mackay travelled on foot along the sea-coast, from M est
Wanganui to the Bullcr River. In his first exploration he was
accompanied by the late Air. John Clarke, of Palcawau : two
Massacre Bay Natives went with him on his second trip. Air.
Maclcay, having taken soundings of the Bullcr, which he found
navigable for coasting-vessels of considerable draught, proceeded
t° the Kara-o-tamatea Plains (Waite’s Palciliis), and travelled
lnl and to Ngawaitalcerc (Charleston), and then along the coast.
On reaching the Alilco Cliffs (better knowm afterwards as Jacob’s
ladder), near Romney Point, the ladders which were used by the
Natives were found to be decayed, and Air. Alackay and the
Maoris accompanying him had to replace the old timber with
before they could get on to the cliff and proceed further,
ben they ascended, and hoisted up their sw'ags and dogs, voices
heard exclaiming, “He kuri pakeha.” The Alaoris im-
me<liately ran into the bush, and some time elapsed before they
c °nsidered it safe to approach the exploring party. AVhcn all
Se nse of danger was over the Natives appeared very pleased at
a European, as no white man had been there since Mr.
inner’s visit in 1817. They agreed to defer their trip to the
7


Buller, and promised to accompany Mr. Mackay to the Grey,
on reaching which he made arrangements with the Natives to
convey him in a canoe up the river as far as Ahaura, for which
he agreed to give them £lO. When they got there the West
Coast Natives persuaded the Massacre Bay Maoris who accom-
panied Mr. Mackay not to proceed further with him, and
threatened that they would not allow him to go unless he divided
£SO amongst them. Mr. Mackay, who was then a strong,
athletic young man of about twenty-five years of age, replied to
these threats by throwing one of the Maoris into the river, and
knocking another down in the canoe. Tarapuhi, the head chief,
then appeared on the scene, acted as peacemaker, and volun-
teered to go as guide. Mr. Mackay explored the grass and
open country at the Ahaura, Totara Flat, and Mawhera-iti
(Little Grey), and returned to the mouth of the Grey River,
where he took soundings in a canoe, with the result that he
found the river navigable for small craft. He afterwards
returned to Massacre Bay by the coast, carrying with him the
first sample of Grey coal seen at Nelson. After his return he
was appointed Assistant Under-Secretary for Native Affairs, as
there were grave disputes between the Maoris and Europeans
who were at that period working on the Aorere Goldfields.
Mr. Mackay once more proceeded to the West Coast,
accompanied by his cousin Mr. Alexander Mackay (at present
Native Commissioner and Judge of the Native Land Court), and
completed the purchase of all the lands, comprising about seven
and a half million acres, between Kaliurangi Point and Milf°
Haven, and extending inland to the watershed of the East and
West Coasts. When they arrived at Lake Sumner they found
Mr. John Rochfort (now and for many years connected with the
Public Works Department), who had entered into a contract to
survey the southern boundary of the Province of Nelson, and to
traverse the Grey and Buller Rivers and a portion of the coast-
line. Towards the end of April, 1859, the party started to cross
the saddle dividing the Ilurunui and Tcremakau Rivers; hut
snow fell heavily, and confined them to camp for a week. When
the weather cleared, Messrs. James Mackay and Rochfort took the
lead and pushed ahead till they came to a bluff point which com'
pelled them to cross the Teremakau. Rochfort lost his footing ° n


a slippery ledge of rock, and was rapidly carried down the stream,
the current tossing him about like a piece of timber. His com-
panion, who luckily went down to a lower ford, managed to grasp
him as he floated past, and raised his head above water till the
rest of the party came to his assistance. They kept together until
they reached the Otira Stream, when Rochfort and his two men
proceeded with their work, and continued the survey down the
Teremakau to the Pakihi Plain; thence by Lake Brunner and the
Arnold River to the Grey. The Mackays followed the Terema-
kau to the sea, and went on to Mawhcra (Grcymoutli), where
negotiations were begun for the purchase of the lands from the
Natives, who agreed to take £2OO, but declined to sell the block
lying between the Grey and Hokitika Rivers. Messrs. Mack ay
and Rochfort had chartered the cutter “ Supply ” (Captain John
Walker) to bring provisions to the Grey; hut, owing to had
weather, the cutter could not cross the bar, and was compelled to
land the supplies at the Buller. So far as can he gathered,
the “Supply” was therefore the first coasting-vessel to enter
the Buller River. After many hardships and privations,
the Mackays, who endeavoured to reach Nelson by the Maruia
Rain and Upper Buller, were forced to retrace their steps and
proceed along the coast to the Buller, where they found the
cutter “ Supply,” which had made a second passage to that river,
a ud they embarked in that little vessel for Nelson. Air. James
hlackay, after an interview at Auckland with Governor Gore
Browne, who instructed him to complete the negotiations for
the purchase which he had begun, again started for the West
Coast in February, 1860, his cousin accompanying him, and also
hfr. Frank Flowers and three Maoris from the Massacre Bay (or
Collingwood) District. They proceeded to the Roto-iti Plains,
the intention of finding a practicable road-line, via the
%er Buller and Maruia, to the Upper Grey, at the point where
Uackay’s exploration had terminated the previous year. Sir
von Ilaast, who had been engaged soon after his arrival
111 New Zealand to report on the geology of the south-western
P a d of the Province of Nelson, accompanied the explorers during
a Portion of their expedition. He remained in the vicinity of
he Tiraumca, awaiting a fresh supply of provisions, whilst the
ej plorers were engaged marking a track for his guidance up the


Maruia Valley, through the hush and on to the grass-plains.
The party were almost destitute of provisions, and the supplies
of birds and edible vegetables were very scanty, which compelled
Messrs. A. Mackay and Flowers to reluctantly return to Nelson,
leaving Mr. J. Mackay and the Natives to continue the explora-
tion. But they progressed slowly, owing to want of food. The
Maoris became disheartened, and refused to proceed further,
stating that they were in an unknown country, which was probably
inhabited by wild men of the woods or enormous lizards: they
would return to Nelson, or sit down quietly and die in the camp.
Mackay had meantime caught sight of a distant hill which he had
ascended in the Upper Grey, and assured the Maoris they would
reach the Grey in two days. He had a swollen knee; hut he cut
and gashed it with a razor, so as to ease the swelling and enable
him to move quicker. At length they succeeded, after a journey
which occupied seven weeks, in reaching the Grey, having marked
the track from the Maruia Plain to the junction of the Brown
Grey and upper Grey Rivers. On reaching the Mawliera native
settlement they found seven Maoris from Collingwood, with Mr.
S. M. Mack Icy, who had travelled by the coast from West
Wanganui; and Sir Julius von Haast and party, who had endured
very great privations, arrived shortly afterwards. The schooner
“ Gipsy,” which had been chartered by the Nelson Provincial
Government to take supplies for the geologist and his party to
the Grey, entered the river about the same time; and, so far as
known, she was the first vessel which crossed the bar. After a
short stay, Messrs. Mackay and Macklcy, accompanied by the
Natives belonging to the Grey, Teremakau, Arahura, and Hoki-
tika, proceeded along the coast to the pa at Poherua (near Okarito),
where the negotiations for the land-purchases were resumed.
The Natives finally agreed to accept £3OO in full satisfaction of
all their claims to seven and a half million acres, on condition
that ample reserves were laid off. When the negotiations were
concluded, Messrs. Mackay and Mackley, with the Natives from
Collingwood, travelled up the coast, and on reaching the Buller
they found a party of twenty Europeans who had arrived from
Canterbury in a vessel from Lyttelton in search of gold, the
report that the precious metal had been found by Mr. Rochfort’s
survey party having got abroad. These early gold-seekers were,


however, dissatisfied with their prospects, and wished to return,
to civilization, little dreaming at that period of the .vast quantity
of gold which was afterwards to he unearthed at the Duller and
on the West Coast generally. Mr. Mackay offered to pilot them,
and took them overland from the mouth of the Ileaphy, crossing
the saddle between that river and the Aorerc. All arrived in
safety, and the Provincial Government voted Mr. Mackay a bonus
of £l5O for defining the track from the ltoto-iti Plains, via
Maruia, to the mouth of the Grey Itiver.
Towards the end of the year 18G0 Mr. Mackay and Major
Lockett explored a considerable tract of country between the
head-waters of the Takaka, Karamea, and Wangaro Rivers; and
in 1862 Mr. Mackay and Messrs. John and Arthur Knyvett
hlazed a saddle-track line from the Upper Aorcre to the mouth
of the Ileaphy River.
9n the 13th April, 1863, Mr. George Whitcombe, sur-
vc }’or, accompanied by Jacob Loupe r, a Swiss, and two other
men, with a horse and cart containing 2001 b. of biscuits, tea,
Bu gar, a quarter of mutton, tent, ropes, hatchets, rat-traps, &c.,
loft Christchurch with the view of discovering a practicable pass
from the head-waters of the ltakaia to the West Coast, proceed-
ing by way of the Woolshcd Hill, situated about four miles
above the confluence of the Rakaia and Wilberforco Rivers. As
the country beyond the station began to get rough, Mr. Whit-
oomhe determined to leave the cart and some of the biscuits
behind. When they got close to the ranges, the two men were
'nstructed to go back to Christchurch, get the horses shod,
return to a camping-ground near the Tcrcmakau Saddle, and
await the arrival of Mr. ‘Whitcombe and Loupcr, who went on
the exploration, carrying a small stock of provisions, and
freeing to subsist on tw r o biscuits each per day, Mr. Whitcombe
nalculating that they could reach the west coast from the Tere-
ma bau Saddle in fourteen days, as it was only about fifty
®nles off, and the country would have to be very rough if
e y could not make five or six miles each day. When
e y reached the foot of the glacier near the source of
e Rakaia—on the 22nd April —the blue waters rushed out
violence from a vaulted cave under the ice. They as-
Ce aded the first low glacier that blocked up the valley: it was


400 ft. to 500 ft. higli, but nearly level, and they easily climbed
to the top. They had a magnificent prospect of other glaciers,
rising on all sides to a great height. The pass was found to be
4,000 ft. above the sea-level, the saddle consisting of disjointed
blocks of rock. The weather, which had been very fine up to
the tenth day, then changed, rain and snow falling, and satu-
rating their biscuits, which had hecome a mass of wet dough.
Several times they had to get up at night and shake the snow
off their blankets, as the weight became unbearable, and they
had left their tent behind. On the 24tli April, about mid-day, they
reached some rocks in the Teremakau river-bed; the boulders were
of enormous size, and there was a deep whirlpool, where the water
boiled, hissed, and foamed like a witch’s caldron. This ap-
peared impossible to cross, the sides being perpendicular; but to
return was even more difficult, as a great depth of snow must
have fallen on the pass since they crossed over. Eut Louper
had had experience of difficulties amongst his native Swiss
mountains, and, seeing the point of a rock projecting over the
surface of the water, he fastened a rope to a small rock, which
he placed in the water on the opposite side, then threw the
other end on to the projecting point, and lowered himself care-
fully down with his hands. He descended up to the chin into
the whirlpool, but, as he could feel no bottom, he drew himself
back on to the rock. Perceiving a small hollow in the side of
the rock, about a foot above the water, where he could just place
half the length of his finger, he hoped with the aid of that to
get across, and directed Mr. Whitcombc to push the rope on top
over to the side wall; then, holding himself up to the neck m
water, he managed to reach the side and the little notch in the
wall, let go the rope, and held fast to the notch. He had no
trouble in crossing over; being deep in the water, it supported
him, so that he could hold himself up with one finger. He g°f
on to the next rock with case, and then scrambled into the bush,
where he cut three long saplings, by the aid of which, and with the
assistance of Louper, Mr. Whitcombc managed to overcome that
perilous descent, the least mistake in which would have meant
almost instantaneous death. The next day they came to a plae e
where the river fell straight down over a high rock, spreading
out broad and deep at the bottom. They scrambled on the


whole day, going to a great height across a very dangerous point,
and then down the opposite side; hut they had only managed to
advance, in ten or twelve hours, with the hardest work, about two
hundred yards. They could not light a fire, and their dough was
getting more and more sour and unpalatable. They slept close
together to keep themselves warm, and Louper noted that poor
Whitcombe trembled very much. Next day the rain was cease-
less; hut they pushed on, clambering over rocks, and glad if
they could find cavities between them through which they could
creep. The day following they reached a level spot about three
miles long and two miles broad, the whole surface being covered
with an exceedingly dense growth of scrub, with high hush
growing around the edges. They left the river, and travelled
through the forest, which wus, however, like an immense
lagoon; they were above the knees in water. They passed the
mght under an overhanging rock, which protected them from
wind and rain. The following morning, whilst Louper was
getting the tea ready, Mr. Whitcombe examined the road, when
Louper, looking towards the bank of the stream, thought he
observed some splendid-looking washing-stuff—fine gravel, mixed
w ith quartz and ironstone. lie took the lid of the hilly, washed
about two handfuls, and found some fine specks of gold, or what
Aggers would term “ the colour.” He then washed some more,
and laid the gold on a green leaf. When Mr. AVliitcombe re-
tained he knocked some of the stuff down with the iron point
°f bis compass-stick, and Louper went on washing as fast as he
c ould. They got about two grains of fine gold, when Mr. Whit-
c°mbe said, “That is enough, Jacob: we shall claim the reward*
■tr r J ® t
’ e c annot spend any more time here.” He asked Jacob if it
would pay to work, and Louper, having had some experience on
jhe goldfields, replied that perhaps it would with ground-sluicing,
at not in any other way: they had not, however, found the
ott °m, which was always the best. Mr. AVliitcomhe scraped
!'P tbe gold carefully on a hit of paper, which he tied up
a corner of his handkerchief; he spoke of it often, and
a n great hopes concerning the discovery. The same day he
slate of a silver-greyish colour, and took some specimens
Wv for tile discovery of a goldfield had been offered by the Canter-
" rovincial Government.


of it with him; whilst Louper picked up a piece of greenstone
as big as his two fingers, very pretty and transparent. They
were obliged again to take to the bush and swamps. It rained
hard, and was very cold. They camped in the bush with a poor
fire, and spent a very cold night. On the following day they
could hear the noise of the sea, and they pushed on, hut could
not manage to reach the coast, and they had to camp again in
the hush. The next day they had to cross a low hill, and
Louper slid down about 10ft. into the bed of the river. Whilst
in the act of doing so the hag in which he carried the biscuits
caught in a branch of a tree, which tore it in two, and they lost
half of their small store —a misfortune which had happened once
before. They reached a swampy place, and had to make a
circuit of many miles through dense scrub, which scratched and
tore their hands and faces. Weary to death, they lay down, and
were half-frozen with cold all that night: they had not the
energy to make a fire. The next day the same difficulties were
met with, and they vainly endeavoured to reach the sea-coast,
but night overtook them. They could, however, see the shore
distinctly—it was not more than half a dozen miles from them.
During the day Mr. Whiteombc found a very beautiful stone,
of a greyish colour, nearly transparent, with red veins: b
looked more like marble than quartz. The rain still poured
down incessantly, and the explorers had only about one handful
of dough left—not half enough for one man. They decided to
finish it, as they hoped to find a Maori on the beach who had
on a previous occasion supplied Mr. Drake and Louper with
cels and potatoes. They were too cold to sleep, and early next
morning they continued their journey through the dense scrub
and bush without a morsel of food of any kind; but they a*
length reached the sea-sliore about four o’clock in the evening)
and the weather began to clear up a little. Louper recognized
the place as the mouth of the River Hokitika. _ They were very
weary and hungry, but in good spirits, thinking their sufferings
were nearly at an end. They made a large fire, and dried their
blankets for the first time during thirteen days—the period occu-
pied in travelling to the sea from the head of the Rakaia, or three
days longer than they had calculated. They had been soaking
all that time, and during the dreary journey they had not caught


cither a bird, a fish, a rat, or anything else. No Maoris were to
be found; hut the tracks of wild dogs were seen on the sand,
and these wretched pests had killed all the woodhens in the
neighbourhood. Next day the explorers followed the beach to
the Arahura River.* “ How different it was walking on a firm
sandy beach, in the warm sunshine ! ” remarked Louper in his
diary of the exploration, a translation of which was published in
the Canterbury Provincial Gazette of the 6tli July, 1863. They
were not long in reaching the Arahura; but when they got to the
Maori pa they were much disappointed —the hut of the friendly
Maori had been burnt down, and he had departed. A vigilant
search of two hours only disclosed a handful of small potatoes
and a little Maori cabbage. While this poor fare was being
cooked Mr. Whitcombe fell asleep, and when he awoke lie
remarked, “ You have lost a good deal of flesh, Jacob. How do
I look? 1 feel very weak and hungry.” His companion
cheered him up; but noticed that his eyes were sunk deep in his
head, that liis lips were w’hite, his face yellow as wax, and his
teeth could be seen .almost through his checks. Then the brave
fellows ate their last meal together. Louper proposed that they
should remain that night and gather shell-fish, but Air. Whit-
combe wished to cross at once, and get to the Tercmalcau, wdiicli
ls ol dy nine miles off. The rain commenced again, and, as Mr.
hitcombe became very restless, Louper tried several times to
cross the river at different places, but failed. At length, after
Sl tting down in the drenching rain for over an hour, Air. Whit-
COm be said, “ Jacob, we must do our very best to get over. I
aiJI harassed through hunger, cold, wet, sandflies, and fleas. We
ttust get out of this misery as soon as possible.” Half an hour
ae r they tried again, going up to the armpits in the water,
k hiding fast to a stick, and so managed to get across, as
® river was not very rapid. The beach was solid and level, and
e y arrived shortly after midnight at the Tercmakau. The next
®orni n g they could see the Alaori pa distinctly on the opposite
e > but no smoke ascended from it, nor were any voices or noises
atl y kind to be heard. Numbers of wild pigeons flew about
e °rest, and the explorers bitterly regretted that they had not
* Louper spoke of it as the Brunner Bivcr in his diary.


brought a gun, as Louper had strongly advised. After looking
about for an hour, and finding no signs of human beings, Mr.
Whitcombc said, “ You perceive, Jacob, there is no one here to
give us any assistance : ive must get across somehow, or we shall
be starved to death.” Louper urged that they should follow
up the river, and endeavour to catch woodhens, as the river was
not fordable; but Mr. Whitcombe said that he was too weak to
take to the bush again; that if he did not find Captain Dixon’s
ship at the Grey he would take a Maori with him to the Buller,
where vessels were arriving frequently; that he would go on to
Nelson and send provisions to Louper, who could then get to
the Teremakau Saddle, and proceed to Christchurch with the
two men who were to await their coming. Louper tried
strongly to dissuade him from crossing in a raft, as he had
proposed, and at last they found two old canoes, which were tied
together, and, much against Louper’s judgment and entreaties,
they pushed out into the swift current; but they had not got
many yards away from smooth water before the canoes filled
quickly, and in a short time they were sinking fast. Taking off
his coat, Mr. Whitcombe said, “Leave the canoe, Jacob, and
swim to this side. Quick, quick, or you will be drowned.”
Then he took a great leap into the stream, the recoil turning
the canoes sideways in the water. Louper saw him making
powerful strokes in the direction of the south side, whence they
had started, and which was still nearest to that portion of the
river where the canoes had filled and capsized : he had no doubt
that Mr. Whitcombe would save himself, as he was an expert
swimmer. Louper thought that he was lost beyond all hope;
as he was a very poor swimmer; but he held fast to the pole®
which bound the canoes together, and rolled an end of flax three
or four times round his left hand. At length he could no
longer keep his head above water, as the canoes continued to
sink deeper, and Avere turned upside down in the mid-channel-
They afterwards rose a little, wdiicli enabled Louper to
about for an instant : he was just at the foot of the first breaker
and he bent down close to the canoes, when the breaker passe
over him, burying him deep in the sea. After much buffetioff
with the Avaves, during Avhich Louper w'as carried out to sea
several times, he at length extricated himself from the canoed


ani a wave dashed him on to a pile of drift-wood, which he
managed to grasp till the water receded. He lay there all
night, terribly sore and sick to death, and in the morning found
that he was about a mile south of the river they had attempted
to cross. He walked along the beach with great difficulty, and
came across Mr. Whitcombc’s coat, which he had thrown into
the river, a parcel of tobacco, hair-brush, biscuit-hag, pieces of
blankets, and the canoes. A little further on he saw a pair of
hoots sticking upright, and, hurrying to the spot, was horrified
at discovering the body of Mr. Wliitcombe, with his head and
body buried deep in the sand. Louper pulled him out; but he
was quite dead, although the face was neither distorted nor cut,
except about the nose, where there was a little blood. A grave
was dug by Jacob with his hands in the sand, pieces of blanket
and the coat were wrapped round the body, and logs placed
overhead. Early next morning Louper, who was much weakened
by his sufferings, and famished with hunger, tried to push along
through the dense bush which skirted the river, hut had only
Proceeded three miles when he had to stop. At night he heard
the barking of a dog, and at last saw' the light of a fire. He
jront ovei’j and found a Maori, with his wife and child. The
*aori said he had no food, and that he had waited a long time
0r Dixon’s ship, but he could not remain longer, and was about
b> leave the spot next morning. After Louper had related his
and given the Maori four sticks of tobacco, he got
* u ple of very small potatoes which were cooking : they tasted
e 'cious. During the night the Maori caught a few small fish
j n a fixed net, three of which, with a couple of potatoes, he gave
D° u Per, which made him feel much better. He travelled all
through, the bush, and in the evening had got about three
'6s. further up the river, when suddenly lie heard some one
s Peaking j and, running to the spot, saw a canoe with five Maoris
down. They expressed great surprise at seeing him,
th *t>° rn they were coming from the diggings, and going to
j. . u *lcr. They put Louper across the river, but had no food
wh^ Te hie wcn t on the same evening to the diggings,
I ere he found two Maoris and their wives. They had little
0 0r themselves, but gave him a small piece of roast wood-
’ an d promised him a good breakfast if they caught any eels


during the night. He slept in the hut, and, after giving the
Maoris some tobacco, determined to leave the Teremakau and
proceed in the direction of Lake Brunner, following up the
Hohonu Creek, and walking in the water. Next day he heard the
axe of one of Mr. Ilowitt’s survey party, and found himself once
more amongst kind friends, who attended to his wants, and gave
him clothing as well as food. Mr. Howitt lent him horses, and
put him across the lake in a canoe, and in two days he joined
the men who were waiting for him and Mr. Whitcombe at the
Teremakau Saddle; hut Louper was so much worn and fatigued
that they failed to recognize him. Two days afterwards they
reached the station of Mr. Taylor, who immediately despatched
one of his men to acquaint Mr. Whitcombc’s family of their
bereavement. In five days more Louper and his companions
reached Christchurch, where the news of Mr. Whitcombe’s death
caused general regret. The Provincial Council voted the sum
of £I,OOO to his family, and gave a gratuity of £IOO to his plucky
and faithful attendant. . Mr. Whitcombe was the first officer em-
ployed by the Canterbury Provincial Government who had met
his death in the discharge of his public duty. In April, 1861,
the body was removed from the place where Louper buried it, and
conveyed to the Grey, where it -was interred in the cemetery.
After the discoveries at the Shotover, Arrow, and Wakatipu,
various attempts were made to penetrate to the West Coast of the
Otago Province. In January, 1803, Mr. Q. Caplcs, now oflteefton,
one of the most enterprising and successful miners in New Zea-
land, started alone, without either gun or mayr, and crossed the
mountains at the head of the Dart River, cutting steps in the
glaciers with a shovel, and descended the western watershed to a
river which he named the Ilollyford. Driven back by the want
of provisions, having been compelled to subsist on native rats a
portion of the time, Mr. Caples made a second attempt, and suc-
ceeded in crossing the ranges near the sources of the Greenstone
River. Proceeding along the Ilollyford, he managed to reach
Martin’s Bay on the 10th March. The creeks and river-beaches
were carefully prospected for gold; and on one of the larg
tributaries of the Ilollyford, which Mr. Caplcs named Pyke’s Cree
(after Mr. Vincent Pyke, M.11.R., who was then Secretary of th®
Otago Goldfields), he found two coarse specks of gold in aso


quartz vein, on a hard slate hotttom, exposed between two
boulders. He prosecuted his search for two days, hut failed to
procure another particle, and throughout the remainder of the
expedition he could only obtain the colour. Mr. Caplcs fur-
nished a very interesting report of his explorations, and also a
sketch-map, which subsequent surveys proved to he wonderfully
accurate, considering that his sole survey equipment consisted
of a small pocket-compass. Subsequently Mr. Alabaster
entered the Hollyford from the sea in a small schooner, the
“Aquila,” in which he succeeded in reaching the head of
Lake McKerrow, and discovered another small lake at the head
of Pyke’s Creek, on the beaches of which he reported that he
found traces of gold.
A party, consisting of Messrs. Alphonse J. Harrington,
Antoine Simonin, and James Harrell, made several trips from
Queenstown towards Jackson’s Bay, with the view of pro-
specting for gold. On one occasion, in the early part of the
year 1861, they endured great privations, and one of them lost
Lis mates for six days in the hush on the return journey. Con-
stable Winter reported, from the head of Lake AVakatipu, that
''Len the party arrived there they presented the appearance of
Lbng skeletons. Barrington stated, after their arrival at Quccns-
to'Tn) that he had found some quartz reefs; and a small vessel
* as Luilt and fitted out to take him and a party to Jackson’s
%• When they got there the reef described by Barrington
found, but was not considered payable. Although the party
ent up the Arawata (or Jackson’s) River for a distance of forty-
bve miles, they found nothing worth staying for; hut it was
plated that' the prospects washed on the beach at Jackson’s
a y Would give a return of 7s. Cd. to 10s. per day to each man.
V/ er a considerable stay Barrington and party went on to the
re y> where they arrived in December, 1804.
Qu the 28th August, 1805, Mr. Vincent Pyke, Goldfields
dietary, accompanied by Mr. Coates, Mining Surveyor, and
jj ee m cn, with two mules and two horses, started from the
Un stan with the view of finding a practicable line of road to
e West Coast via Lake Wanaka. Two days afterwards they
Newcastle, where they met Hai Monare Weti
known on the Otago goldfields as Maori Jack), who


was engaged to go with the expedition. It rained incessantly
for several days, and on one occasion the Haast River had to
he forded fourteen times during a day’s travelling, whilst
another time the progress of the party was barred hv an
almost unbroken scries of rocky gorges, through which tie
river foamed in a succession of cascades and rapids over and
amidst huge piles of rock, which encumbered its channel for a
distance of ten to twelve miles. Being fearful that the pro-
visions would not hold out whilst the road was made passable for
the mules, they were turned loose, Mr. Pyke having taken tie
precaution to stop) the track, so that the animals might he found
on the return of the party ; hut, to their great disappointment,
when they came hack, the mnles had broken through all tie
fences, and had crossed the Fish Stream, though the animals were
subsequently recovered near the head of Lake Wanaka. After
leaving their tenth camp, the party were unable to find a piece
of level ground of sufficient extent to pitch their tents. They had
to take shelter for the night under the projecting ledges of a
huge mass of rock which had travelled from its original bed to
within 3ft. of the edge of the river. Sir. Pyke caught a chill
through lying in a pool of water which had collected during the
night, the consequence being that for three days he suffered fro®
an acute attack of gout, under which the leader of the expede
tion could only travel with difficulty and in great pain, more
especially as he had to carry a heavy swag over the roughest P° s '
sihle ground. Fording the Haast to the right hank above the
junction of the Burke, the party came on an old camp, and ff> uD
carved on a tree, “Nugget Prospecting Party, Sep. 3,
Below the junction of the two rivers the Haast widened out to
fifty yards, and the valley opened out, affording a magnified*
view of the Grey and Moorhouse Ranges. The river ran f° r
nearly eight miles between wide flats, some of which
partially grassed, hut for the greater part were covered w 1
dense scrub and underwood. From the junction of the Claf'
with the Haast River the bed of the latter widened out to
mile, and sometimes to one and a half and two miles. The P
reached the sea-coast on the 2nd October, thirty-five days aft®*
starting from the Dunstan, and remained three days, so as
enable the men to mend their clothing and prepare for the retuta


journey. As their stock of provisions was reduced to twenty
pannikins of flour and meal, and a little tea and sugar, they
kept an anxious look-out for passing vessels, hut none appeared
in sight, and they were not aware until their return that miners
were at the time located at Jackson’s Bay and Bruce Bay. The
return journey was commenced on the stli October, and two
days afterwards the first entirely fine day occurred since the 27tli
September; but the Haast was much higher than on the down-
ward journey. On the arrival of the party opposite the depot
below the junction of the Clarke, Mr. Pyke sent two of the party
across the river to fetch the stores which had been left there.
Unfortunately, one of them, when returning, attempted to
ford the Haast where the water was deep and the current very
strong: he lost his footing, and was obliged to drop) his load,
swimming ashore with difficulty. The oatmeal, tea, sugar, and
four were lost; but, luckily, 61b. of the flour was recovered on a
sand-bar, and that, with a little brosc-meal, was all that was
kft, They hurried on till they reached the Burke, and took up
tbe biscuits which were stored opposite the Wills Itivcr. They
Pressed forward to the Makaroro Valley, which they reached the
following evening ; but when they got to the Fish Stream they
found it flooded by the incessant rain, and foaming and roaring
through its rocky channel in a torrent which it was impossible
to ford. Tree after tree was felled in the vain effort to throw
one over the chasm; and nothing but the fact that their last
Uiseuit was consumed could have induced them to persevere in
tbe midst of the steady downpour, which so chilled them as to
reduce a drowsy lethargy of the most painful description. At
l en gth they managed to cross by constructing a rude ladder of
Sa plings reaching from a rock in the river to the top of the
opposite cliff. On the 14th October the party arrived at the
of Lake Wanaka, and reached Clyde on the 19tli, ten days
s A°rt of two months from the time of their departure.
reiferous indications were observed at various parts of the
’jAtej which Mr. Pyke considered a practicable one to the'West
frdm Lake Wanaka, the distance being then estimated at
T>ut ninety miles. Mr. Coates suffered from a severe illness
® er Ais return to the Dunstan ; but Mr. Pyke and the workmen,
° U SA considerably worn out, were in good health. Mr. Pyke


and Mr. Coates were afterwards entertained at a public dinner,
their explorations having caused a great deal of interest through-
out the province.
There were many other adventurous explorations in the early
days. In Otago Mr. J. McKerrow (the present Surveyor-
General) pushed westward the Reconnaissance Survey of the
Lakes District, and back to the watershed of the Southern
Alps, covering and mapping an area of 8,000 square miles in
the two summer seasons of 18G1—02 and 1802—03. Dr. Hector
covered a great deal of the ground in his geological ex-
plorations, his predictions as to the deposit of gold having been
verified at a later period; and, as already noted, Sir Julius von
Ilaast made a geological tour to the West Coast of Nelson, and
subsequently to the West Coast of Canterbury. Messrs. Lee,
Dobson, Harper, Walker, and Hewitt, of Canterbury, made
exploratory trips to the West Coast at various times between the
years 1858 and 1803. Those who travel now over well-formed
roads and good bridges can have little idea of the difficulties
which were overcome by the brave men who paved the way f° r
prosperous mining communities and agricultural settlements,
and opened one of the most beautiful countries in the world
to the tourist, the invalid, and the tired brain-worker.
The existence of gold on the West Coast was known to the
Maoris for some years, but nothing payable had been found by
them; in fact, most of the Maoris were ignorant of its value
until after the opening of the Buller diggings. Europeans who
visited the Coast bad found indications of gold, and also those P er "
sons in the early part of the year 1803 went over from Canterbury
to prospect, taking a supply' of provisions with them; but, haviDo
many difficulties to contend with, their provisions ran short, an
it was with great difficulty that they were able to return. Du r J D °
the year 1803 the Canterbury Government sent out the followin»
survey parties to cut tracks about Lake Brunner and down
Teremakau River to the sea : Mr. Howitt and party of three men»
Mr. Drake and party; Mr. A. Dobson and party; and in 1801 a
John Rochfort and party went out. The schooner “ Gip s f
(Dixon, master) put into the Teremakau River early in 1° '
(probably mistaking it for the Grey), and whilst there p a J' a
gold was found in the terrace on the south bank of the riv ef '


close to the sea-beach. The men working in the survey parties
about Lake Brunner and the Tcrcmakau went prospecting during
the wet weather in the adjoining gullies and creeks, and obtained
gold, from a few colours to a few grains, with rough appliances.
In May, 1863, the Canterbury Provincial Government sent
the schooner “Wild Wave” (Captain Buxton, master) round to
the Grey with a general cargo of provisions and stores, under
the charge of Mr. Charles Townshcnd and three men —viz., Peter
Mitchelmore, John Smith, and Solomon (a Maori) —to erect a
store to supply the survey parties on the Coast, and any persons
who might be travelling through to the Buller, or hack to Canter-
bury, requiring relief. The schooner arrived off the Hokitika
River on the 25th May, hut the party were unable to land
iu the whaleboat until the 27th. They found the bar very
rough, hut managed to beach the boat on the South Beach, and
afterwards hauled the boat about three hundred yards across the
sandspit into the lagoon, and crossed to the north hank of the
r ' v er. Captain Buxton, Mr. Townshcnd, and the men in the
boat had to remain on shore all night. Next morning there was
u° sign of the schooner, and they remained until the morning
°f the 29th, when the schooner hove in sight. Captain Buxton
*ben attempted to go off in the whaleboat, hut found the bar too
r °ugh and dangerous to attempt. On the 30th they decided to
Walkthrough to the Grey River, as the schooner appeared to he
standing away in that direction, and had made no signal in answer
to a large fire kept up during the night by the party ashore, who
Were very short of provisions, and had to use the tops of lucifer
batches to discharge the gun, having forgotten to take percussion
Ca ? s when leaving the vessel. They arrived at the Grey on the
s b and found the schooner standing off and on the bar, which
Was very rough. On the Bth June the schooner managed to
eater the Grey River, having had a narrow escape of being cast
%>u the North Beach. On the 15th June Mr. Howitt and two
is lnen arrived at the Grey from the Teremakau for provisions
e y remained a few days, assisting to erect the store and get the
all safely placed. A coloured man named Johnston arrived
jj C day, quite knocked up :he had been relieved by Mr.
°Witt at the Teremakau and Lake Brunner, and was making
18 Way to the Buller. On the 15th July Mr. R. A. Slierrin and
8


his party arrived from Hokitika, where they had been prospecting,
and left again the next morning to prospect up the Teremakau
River. On the 25th July five men arrived at the depot from
the Teremakau, where they had been prospecting and found a
little gold. Having been supplied with some provisions, they left
for the Teremakau, intending to go further south with Mr.
Sherrin. On the Gth August Sir. Townsliend received informa-
tion from Peter (a Maori) that Mr. Howitt and two men had
been drowned in Lake Brunner on the 4th. James Hammett, the
fourth man, left in charge of Mr. Ilowitt’s camp at the Lake,
had arrived at the Teremakau, and Mr. Townsliend met him
next day at the Saltwater, about five miles south of the Grey. On
the 10th August, Hammett and Peter Mutu, the Maori, started
for the Buller with despatches and report for the Canterbury
Provincial Government relative to the death of Mr. Howitt. Mr.
Townsliend, having arranged with Mr. Sherrin to carry on the
track-cutting with three men, a Maori experienced in manag-
ing a canoe being left to assist, started on the 14th August
for the Grey with Sherrin and party to search for the bodies at
Lake Brunner, hut returned on the 7tli without finding any traces.
On the 14th September Mr. Arthur Dobson, surveyor, and party
arrived in the schooner “ Gipsy ” with a supply of stores, to
carry out a heavy contract south of the Grey. The schooner
went ashore on the North Beach when taking the Grey bar. The
stores were all safely landed, hut the schooner broke her back
and became a total wreck. Mr. Dobson left for the south on
the otli October. Solomon and another Maori were sent up the
Arnold River in a canoe to search for the missing bodies P
Howitt and his men near the lake, hut were unsuccessful, an
returned on the 2Gtli September, leaving Sherrin and party cut
ting the track from the beach at Paroa, via the Holionu, to L a
Brunner. On the 7th October Mr. Townsliend, Peter Mitck e
more, and Solomon started for the Hokitika River to bring 1
Government whaleboat, left there when they first landed, to
Grey. They took two Maoris with them from the TcreinakaUj
and returned off the Grey bar on the following afternoon, D
when crossing the bar the boat was capsized in the surf, and '
Townshend, Mitchelmore, and Solomon were drowned, the r
of the crew being saved. The bodies of Townshend and Mit cll


more were washed up on the North Beach, hut Solomon’s body
vas not found. Mr. Shcrrin started the next day for Christ-
church to convey the sad intelligence to the Government, leaving
Mr. J. Smith in charge. On the 14tli November Mr. Shcrrin
and party returned from a prospccting-tour, having been south
as far as the Waitaki, and left a few days after for Christchurch :
they got some prospects. Some of the men working on the
survey parties remained in and about the Little Hohonu and
Greenstone Creeks, near the junction of the Teremakau, pro-
specting about for gold, which could he found in small quantities
in the hanks of the creeks and low gullies ; but no good or fair
finds were reported.
Mr. W. 11. Re veil, Inspector of Police at Timaru, was ap-
pointed Agent for the Government on the West Coast, in the place
of the late Mr. C. Townsliend, and arrived with his brother, Mr.
John Itcvell, at the Grey, on the 24tli January, 1864, in the
schooner “ Mary,” from Nelson. Mr. John Rochfort and survey
P a rty arrived at the same time, to make a survey of the coast south
to Jackson’s Bay. About the end of January some of the men
Prospecting up the Teremakau River came to the Grey for pro-
tons, and Mr. Revell bought loz. 16dwt. from one man at the
rate of £3 io s . per ounce; and the late Mr. Townsliend had bought
a few ounces from other prospectors. On the Btli February,
1864, Mr. W. H. Revell started overland, via the Teremakau,
Hohonu, and Lake Brunner, for Christchurch, with two men who
ha d been working on the tracks. The trip occupied fourteen days,
Ihe party having been detained by a very heavy freshet in Lake
runner, which rose from sft. to 6ft. after forty-eight hours’ in-
ecssant downpour of heavy rain. This was the heaviest flood
e Maoris had experienced for years at the Grey. The river
*° se Bft. over the hanks, and washed away about two chains of
e tank, leaving the Government store and dwelling-house
s ending within half a chain of the river, although when first
ere cted it was about three chains back. Mr. Revell returned
garland to the Grey on the 29th March, and found that his
rothe r had removed the store and dwelling-house to the site
selected—on the old Maori garden, at the head of the
wT' t^lC April the °IH Priori chief Tarapuhi, who
“ e en a good friend to many of the Europeans arriving in the


early days at the Grey, died. Tarapuhi, who came to Mr. James
Mackay’s assistance, was often known to share half his provi-
sions with Europeans and put them over the river free of charge
when on their way to the Buller.
On the lltli April three horses and one mule were brought
overland to the Teremakau and the Grey. The horses were the
first which had been brought to the Coast,- and some of the old
Natives were astonished: they could only compare the animals
with their dogs. On the 19th April the Maoris reported that four
men who were gold-digging at the junction of the Greenstone
Creek and Teremakau were doing well. There was a Maori
camp at that place, and it was then known by the name of
Hohonu.
An experienced miner named Albert Hunt had been ex-
ploring the accessible hills for many months, going through as
far as the Wairau on one occasion. He at length attached
himself to Mr. Drake’s survey party on the West Coast, and,
when not required on Government work, took every opportunity
to explore the country and examine likely spots for gold. When
no longer required on the survey, Hunt was so impressed with
the appearance of the Ilolionu that he returned with a party,
and, when his mates had despairingly left him, owing to the
Provincial Government depot at the Grey not being available for
a constant supply of provisions to those remaining on the spot,
Hunt contrived to stay behind, and in a few months g°l
together about 20oz. of gold in the course of his prospecting-
tours, with only the simplest contrivances for washing the gold-
At Maori Point, three and a half miles up the Greenstone Creek
above the junction with the Little Holionu River, Hunt marhe
out a claim with the assistance of a Maori. Two to six
of soil, covered with heavy timber, was removed, and benea
was found nearly 4ft. of waslulirt, consisting of coarse brown
gravel, somewhat rounded, and mixed with large boulders,
was said that Hunt obtained a quantity of gold from this claiob
which was a few miles off the track from Lake Brunner to t
Teremakau. It was stated that work could be found in
vicinity for four to five thousand diggers. A quartz reef iva *
discovered two miles above Hunt’s claim, and it was noticed t
granite prevailed in the surrounding hills. Hunt was the o ;


European in tlie locality for some time. Tlie country all around
the Hohonu, down to the beach, was densely wooded, and so
thickly covered with underscrub as to he all hut impenetrable.
Supplies could, however, he got from the Grey to the Teremakau,
as there was a hard beach between, and canoes could easily be
taken up the Teremakau to -within three miles of the diggings.
Plenty of rough gold was reported to he in the vicinity of Hunt’s
claim, and fine gold all the way to the beach, and southwards.
Hunt was said to have averaged about £2 per day whilst prospect-
ing. He, with the Maoris, had, however, to subsist for some
time on potatoes and fern-roots, with a little help occasionally
from the Government depot. Hunt afterwards received a bonus
of £2OO from the Canterbury Provincial Government. Messrs.
French and Smart also put in a claim, hut it was decided that
Hunt had precedence of them.
On the 20th June, 1861, James Hammett arrived overland
from Christchurch with letters for Mr. Itochfort, Mr. Dobson,
und. Mr. Ilcvcll, with instructions to sell off the Government
st °res, and make preparations to leave the Coast about Sep-
tember. On the Uth July Mr. Re veil, in company with
Hammett, visited Maori Point, Greenstone Creek, where Hunt
rras working his claim with a Maori mate, and saw' Hunt w'ash
4 20 z. of coarse, shotty gold, which he stated wrns the yield for
the day’s work for two men. Two Maori parties were also at
rrork in the adjoining claims. The Maoris, whilst working in
the creek at Maori Point, discovered an enormous greenstone
boulder, nearly 3ift. square ; hut, finding that they could not
s PHt it up properly into thin slabs, they sent two of their party
Christchurch to purchase cross-cut saw's and wedges to work
Up. This would account for the report which had been
that they had gone to claim the Government reward
0r the discovery of gold. On the 19th July Mr. Ilcvcll pro-
dded overland to Christchurch with James Hammett to report
he discovery of gold at the Greenstone, and took 16oz. of coarse
S°id with him as a sample. The new's quickly spread to the
'filer, where gold was discovered in 1860, and several parties
ai si "cc been at work w'ith varying success.
Messrs. M. P. Drench aud AV. Smart, w'ho had been pro-
sPectmg a} )out t ] ic Q rC y ; go t 4 gr . to the dish in several places,


the gold being similar to what had been found at the Buller.
Mr. Smart wrote to Mr. Waite, Nelson, in June, 1861: “I con-
sider it far before the Buller, for we could get gold wherever
we tried. In a paddock on the hank of the river a party got
7oz. for eight days’ work.” It was probably in consequence of
this communication that the first large party of diggers pro-
ceeded to the Grey. On the 22nd July the steamer “Nelson”
arrived in the Grey, bringing seventy diggers and a quantity of
stores for Mr. Reuben Waite. The following day the schooner
“ Mary ” arrived from the Buller with Mr. Blake and some
diggers. Mr. Blake’s goods having been landed on the beach west
of the lagoon, lie opened a store at the place which was afterwards
known as Blaketown; and Mr. Waite took up a block of the Maori
Reserve fronting the Grey River, and opened his store. Some
of the miners went direct to the Greenstone, and, after remaining
a few days, forty of them left dissatisfied, and threatened to
lynch French and Smart, who had been prospecting about the
Teremakau, Hohonu, and on the north side of the Grey Ri'’ er
for two months previously. An attack was made on Blake s
store; but, fortunately, he had a few trusty men with him, and
they succeeded in warding it off.
But everywhere along the sea-shore, between the Grey and
the Teremakau, the sands which were washed gave the colour.
Gold similar to what was got in the Clutha River was found id
payable quantities in the Paroa Stream, which runs into the
sea about seven miles south of the Grey. These digging
afterwards extended up the Paroa (or New River) to the Marsden
Saddle. There was a large township, knowrn as Rutlierglen>
about two miles inland from the beach, and a tramway five md es
in length was constructed from the Saltwater Creek, near the
ocean-beacli, connecting with the Grcymouth tramway running
to the Teremakau, in 1867.
Mr. John Rochfort, who had been making a survey of the
West Coast from the Grey to Jackson’s Bay for the Canterbury
Provincial Government, brought to Nelson in August,
250 z. to 300 z., and reported that some of the Buller diggers who
had gone to the Hohonu were well satisfied with their
The gold was coarse and nuggety. Two hundred men were sa
to be at the Hohonu.


Judging by the comments of the newspapers of that period,
some of the good people in Canterbury did not appear over-
anxious about the discovery of gold in the western portion of
their province. The Lyttelton Times, in a leading article on the
30th July, 186-1, remarked : “If a goldfield is, after all, to be
forced upon Canterbury, without the consent and contrary to the
expressed desire of the settlers, they must nevertheless submit
to fate ; and should the natural feelings of discontent, swelling
up in their prudent bosoms when Fortune’s golden favours are
thrust into their bands, be somewhat hard to subdue, the consola-
tion exists that the goldfield has turned up in the remotest cor-
ner of the province.” But, if some were disposed to take
matters easy, there were others who were exceedingly anxious to
proceed to Eldorado. On the 18th August four men arrived
overland with pack-horses from Christchurch, and began packing
goods from the Grey to the Teremakau, a distance of ten miles;
the goods were afterwards taken up the river by canoes to the
Hohonu. Information of the arrival of the miners on the coast
having been received by the Canterbury Provincial Government,
Mr. Itevell, accompanied by Sergeant Broliam (now Inspector of
Police at Timaru) and Constable Cooper, arrived at the Green-
s!one, via Lake Brunner, on the 21st August —having left their
horses in the paddock at the lake—and found about one lfundred
men at work, They met Albert Hunt on his way to the Taipo
h«er from the Greenstone. He stated that he had got good
Prospects there; but Mr. Bevel! found out afterwards that,
although going to the Taipo, Hunt had left the Greenstone
ecause the miners bad threatened him there, and if it had not
ee n for his own pluck and determination, they would have
ass aulted him. Hunt knocked one fellow down with a shovel,
a ml thus rather frightened the mob. He went from the Taipo
Borland to Christchurch, and met a large number of miners
bating f ro m Otago, where the news of the fresh discoveries had
Cre ated considerable excitement.
Hire steamer “ Nelson ” became a regular trader to Grev-
bringing numerous passengers and goods. She took
ac k to Nelson in August, 18(31, 27 tons of coal, which had
jj 611 bought down the Grey Biver in boats from the Brunner
' llle - Small sailing-vessels were also constantly arriving at


the Grey. There were thirty to forty horses busily engaged
packing stores from Grcymouth to the Tcrcmakau and other
rivers along the coast. In September the transport service was
increased by tbe introduction of a bullock-dray. On the loth
October Mr. George Preshaw, of the Bank of New South
Wales, who was the first bank agent to visit the Coast, arrived
per “ Nelson ” to report on the goldfields, and returned a few
days after. On the 12tli September, 18G1, Mr. Revell reported
that the majority of the diggers were making £2 to £5 per
day. All were quiet and orderly. Forty miners had left the
Greenstone for Taipo, but some had returned with unfavourable
accounts of the new field. Mr. Revell warned intending diggers
from coming till more favourable ground was discovered, and
stores established. In October one hundred and fifty diggers
had gone out from the Greenstone to prospect the ranges be-
tween the Teremakau and Hokitika : seven hundred men were
reported to be on the goldfields at that period. That month
the steamer “ Nelson ” (consuming Grey coal all the way) arrived
in Nelson with 500 oz. of gold and .£I,OOO in notes and specie.
A rush set in to the Araliura River, five miles north of the
Hokitika, during October, and the following month there was a
rush to the Totara, thirteen miles south of the Hokitika. Two
Maoris arrived on the morning of the 7th November at the
Maori Camp) at Greenstone, and that afternoon the others were
seen packing up and leaving quietly, two or three at a time, f° r
the Teremakau. It soon became known that gold had been found
up the Totara River, and about three hundred European digg ers
followed the Maoris; but, with the exception of three or f° ur
claims, the others were at that time pronounced failures, nnd
there was a regular stampede back to the Greenstone for
purpose of jumping the best claims which had been abandoned-
About this period the West Coast goldfields were attracting
more attention. A township), consisting of eight or ten stores
and several shanties and restaurants, had sprung up at Blakctot'® 1
Mr. Preshaw, agent for the Bank of New South Wales, a n ®
Mr. D. Walmslcy, agent for the Bank of New Zealand,
at the Grey to open branches on the Coast and purchase g°' ( j
from the miners. Mr. Peter McTavish followed a fortnig l '
afterwards to open a branch for the Union Bank. On the 28*


November Mr. Preshaw brought 3500 z. of gold to the Grey
from the Greenstone diggings, which continued to yield
steadily. On the Ist December Mr. Bevell, accompanied by
Mr. Walmsley, visited the Totara Diver and found that the
miners there were doing well, and that three stores had been
opened—by Mr. Con. Murphy and Mr. Pat. Sweeney, six miles
np the river, and the other by Mr. J. Maxwell (well known
on the Coast as “ Daddy Maxwell ”) about half a mile from the
beach, at the junction of Donnelly’s Creek. Mr. 'Walmsley pur-
chased 300 oz. of gold from the diggers in Sweeney’s store. On
the Bth December a rush set in to the Six-mile, on M aimea
Creek, six miles south of the Teremakau. Very good prospects
were obtained, and the majority of the miners who visited the
place prospected about the various gullies and settled down to
steady work, with good returns.
As the country north and south of the Hokitika continued
to attract large numbers, Captain Leech (now Harbourmaster at
Westport) was sent on the 7th December to take soundings on
the bar, and lie reported favourably. On the 19th December lie
took the steamer “ Nelson ” safely into the river, and landed
sixty passengers and a general cargo on the South Spit. The
ooxt day Captain "Whitwcll, master of the steamer “ "Wallaby,”
crossed the bar, which was as smooth as a mill-pond, in the
ship’s boat, and took soundings : lie afterwards brought the
Wallaby” into the lagoon, .and discharged cargo. The same
da 7 two Maoris crossed the Teremakau bar in a canoe, proceed-
along the coast and into the Hokitika Diver. On the 23rd
tt Member thirty-nine men arrived, in the cutters “ Petrel” and
Nugget,” from Jackson’s Bay (Barrington and party being
Ofliongst the number), where they had all been prospecting, but
oond nothing to induce them to remain. The business people
aving decided to erect their stores, &c., on the north side of the
J' Ter ’ Mr. Bevell laid off several business lots, and selected a site
° r i'e police-camp further away from the river. Eight or ten
S ° res were started, and the Bank of New Zealand took up an
near the river. On the 23rd December a rush set in
Creek,* five miles south of the Grey, and about
, rithtw,* ialcawau > generally called the Saltwater, and frequently confounded
e Paroa (or New River).


one hundred men settled down to work with good results. On
the 27th December there was a rush up the Hokitika River,
and men were coming in from the Totara. The Hokitika Town-
ship was increasing in size, and Mr. Re veil had some difficulty
to keep the street, which was 40ft. wide, from being encroached
upon.
It was roughly calculated that about 2,5000 z. of gold had
been shipped to Nelson from the West Coast up to the 31st
December, 1864, and the population was estimated at fifteen
hundred. One party of four men, who had been working
quietly in the bush near the Two-mile (or Ballarat) Creek, south
of the Grey, obtained 1,2000 z. of gold from their claim for about
four months’ work, and they afterwards got GOOoz. more from
the same claim : they then left for the Old Country. An ounce
per man per week was considered to he a fair average for all
those working on the Most Coast towards the close of the year
1864. On the 21st December the entire population on the West-
land (or Canterbury) goldfields was officially set down at 830.
The year 1865 opened with bright prospects for the Coast.
The population was increasing rapidly, and men belonging to
various nationalities were arriving daily by steamers and sailing-
craft. Many came overland from Canterbury : some of them
had only taken seven days to walk from Lyttelton—a great feat
in those days, when travelling was so difficult. Two women were
reported to have walked the whole distance, and a man with a
wooden leg also braved the dangers of the road. Mr. Michael
Cassius (of the firm of Cassius and Comisky) was appointed
Postmaster at Hokitika, which was another proof of its growing
importance; whilst the police shifted their camp from the
Teremakau to Hokitika, where a township had been laid off tyf
Mr. Rochfort, and which was fast becoming the principal busi-
ness centre of the goldfields. It was declared a port of entry
in April, and the General Government despatched Custom®
officers to look after the revenue.
The population at the Grey having been considerably re
duced, the police camp was shifted from that place to the Si*'
mile (Waimea), which was well spoken of, and men ffere
leaving good claims at the Totara, Greenstone, and Saltwa ter
Creek in order to proceed there. Many parties were ohtainm»


rich finds, and the field was said to be a “ second Gabriel’s.”
Mr. Revell visited the township, and laid off several frontages
for business sites. One man brought into Hokitika 121 b. of
gold, the result of five weeks’ work by a party of four, and
it was not uncommon for men to return with 40oz. or 500 z.,
the result of a few weeks’ work. Provisions were dear, but
that did not matter so long as gold was plentiful. Flour sold
at Is. Gd. per pound; tea, ss. per pound; sugar, Is. Gd. per
pound; beef, 2s. per pound ; and bacon, 3s. 6d. per pound. It
TO calculated that by March the population had increased to
considerably over two thousand persons. Early in that month
the steamers “Nelson” and “Wallaby” brought to Nelson
1,5000 z. of gold. At a public meeting in Christchurch Mr.
kevell stated that he knew parties who were making £SO per
TOk; and it was said that one man had “ planted ” 401 b. weight
of gold pending the establishment of the gold-escort, as he was
afraid, to take it to a port for shipment. The gold-digging
■oania had reached a high pitch of excitement in Christchurch
an< l Lyttelton. Several clerks and persons employed in ware-
houses, shops, and hotels were leaving for the new field. It was
computed that no less than one thousand diggers had passed
througlr Kaiapoi in eight or nine days, en route for the diggings.
The excitement had reached Otago and Victoria, and steamers
began to arrive daily at Lyttelton with contingents. The rush
from Marlborough to the Grey was stated to have paralysed all
frade operations at the former place. Every river and stream
or forty miles along the Coast was reported as gold-hearing. The
J’st week in March three new rushes were reported —one to
e frft-hand branch of the Araliura, and another to the north
? the Grey, where gold of a peculiarly coarse character was
As the various rivers were ascended, the yield and size
0 particles of gold increased; hut prospecting was ex-
oeedingiy difficult, owing to the gorges in the rivers. The
mms generally were said to be easily worked, the bottoms being
a low, hut the whole of the top soil, as a rule, was wasli-dirt.
"aduals were getting a pound weight of gold every week for
lr w °rk, and some parties averaged 3oz. per day pier man for
month. The second week in March the steamer “ Nelson ”
r ° u ght 1,9000 z. of gold to Nelson, and the “Wallaby” l,loooz.


That gave at the rate of about 3,0000 z. per -week from the Grey
and Hokitika.
Whatever the feelings of some of the inhabitants might be,
the Canterbury Provincial Government fully recognized the
importance of the goldfields which had been found within the
borders of that province, and did a great deal towards insuring
their successful working and permanent occupation. On the sth
March, 1865, the West Coast, from the Grey River to the southern
boundary of the Canterbury Province, was proclaimed- a gold-
field ; Mr. William Horton Revell was gazetted Resident Magis-
trate and "Warden, and Mr. James Turner Clerk of Court. The
Commissioner of Police (Mr. Shearman, now Inspector at Wel-
lington) arrived overland from Christchurch with a party of
constables and horses for duty on the Coast; and Sergeant
Brohanr (now Inspector at Timaru) was appointed Inspector of
the "Westland District. On the 19th of March Mr. W. Rolles-
ton, Provincial Secretary, Mr. W. Seed, Collector of Customs,
and Mr. Itcvell, arrived at Hokitika in the steamer “ Nelson.’
For about a month the Provincial Secretary was actively at
work, day and night, arranging all matters of administration.
The W arden’s Office was opened for the transaction of business
two days afterwards, and Mr. Revell was busily engaged every
day in hearing cases of disputed rights to sections, claims, & 0,
On the 15th April Mr. G. Sale (now Professor of Classics
at the Otago University) arrived at Hokitika, having been ap-
pointed Commissioner of the Westland Goldfields by the Canter-
bury Provincial Government. Diggers were pouring in evel T
day by land and sea : it was not uncommon for three steamers
to arrive at Hokitika in one day-. A private letter from
Greenstone, dated the 7th March, 1865, stated that there h a
been a great rush to the Three-mile Creek, Six-mile Creek;
Callaghan’s Gully, and'Maori Gully-, and that the whole of th ese
places had turned out very well. Miners were prospecting
gullies in every direction.
Captain John McLean made his first voyage from Dune*! 1 ®
to Hokitika in the steamer “Alhambra” about that peri° '
He left Port Chalmers on Saturday, the 18th March, 1865,
arrived off the Hokitika River on the following Tuesday-
his return to Port Chalmers the following Saturday, Capt® 111


McLean described tlie whole coast-line north o£ the Wanganui
River as being a most likely tract of country for settlement,
apart from any mineral resources which it might be found to
possess; and the scenery along the coast was magnificent. The
“City of Dunedin” made a trip to the West Coast about the
same time, and anchored near the “ Alhambra/' close to the
mouth of the river. The steamer “Bruce,” from Nelson,
with sixty passengers on board, who paid £6 per head, lay
alongside the same night, and at daybreak on Wednesday,
the 22nd March, she commenced to land her own passengers
and those by the “ City of Dunedin,” proceeding each time over
the har in safety. Subsequently' she landed the “ Alhambra’s ”
passengers (the entire number from both vessels being about nine
hundred) at £1 per head.
As usual with nearly all goldfields, there were predictions
as to the West Coast proving unremunerative. Seven passen-
gers returned to Port Chalmers in the “ Alhambra,” and re-
ported that there were many more anxious to leave, as the
Agings were only considered “tucker-ground.” Many men
Ireie walking about the streets of Hokitika, anxious to get
aira y, and some of the newspapers suggested that the Can-
terbury and Otago Provincial Governments should assist the
wen to return overland, with the view of prospecting the
country as they returned. Air. Rollcston did not write very
encouragingly as to the prospects of the Coast : he deprecated
cnything iu the shape of a rush till matters had assumed a more
mte shape, and the goldfields were proved to be of a perma-
nent character. The following extracts are from a letter to the
Canterbury Press, dated Hokitika, 31st March, 18G5 : “ Gold
appears to be found in greater or less quantities over the larger
Portion of the Coast. The cycn character of the country may be
reason for the equal distribution of the gold. The nature
country, however, renders it incapable of bearing a rush.
e re is not a scrap of horse-food which is not imported. The
thr^ lniea n ° W 1C I^ aoc ' w^lcrc most diggers arc at work, about
ee to four thousand being within a radius of five or six
one scvcnt y- r t-'l )C old hands arc doing well; the new
could do better if provisions were cheaper. I saw several


parties who -were getting 3oz. a clay with a sluice; and a num-
ber of men showed me their prospects, which averaged from half
a grain to a grain to the dish, from wash-dirt taken indis-
criminately from near the surface, or from the top of the blue
clay which everywhere underlies it. The blue clay appears in
lofty cliffs along the stream-sides, sometimes 40ft. to 50ft. high.
The gold is very fine, mixed with a good deal of black-sand.
Storekeepers and others have agreed to open out a direct track
into the Arahura, and the Government has agreed to share the
expense. That would bring the diggings eight miles nearer to
Hokitika. There are numbers of diggers at the Arahura rush,
and about fifteen hundred at Fox’s rush are reported to he
doing well. There are probably now about five thousand diggers
distributed over the Three-mile (or Kapitca), the Waimea, and
Fox’s rush; but numbers are coming away from the Totara,
where it is said there are not two hundred left. There are
about two hundred on the Greenstone Creek, and forty or fifty
on the Saltwater Creek. The total population is about seven
thousand. The Town of Hokitika [“ This is the correct way
of spelling the word,” remarks the correspondent: in the Otago
Witness and other newspapers it was generally spelled “ Okitiki ”]
is crowded with people—very orderly, but many, I fear, in great
want: 972 people have arrived by sea since the 22nd March
(nine days), and 213 have left; a large number will leave to-
morrow by the ‘ Alhambra ’ and c Waipara;’ in fact, the depar-
tures are now as numerous as the arrivals. Numbers would get
away if they could.” In spite of all predictions of failure, the
Wellington Spectator drew attention to the significant fact that
10,3400 z., chiefly the produce of the West Coast goldfields
which had been brought to Nelson during the month of March)
had been despatched to Melbourne by the steamer “ Tarawcra-
Mr. Seed, at the request of the General Government, trans-
mitted, in April, 1865, a valuable report, from which the
following extracts are taken : “ Gold in paying quantities has
been found on all the rivers from the Buller to the
viz., on the Buller, the Grey, Saltwater (Paroa), Tcrcmak aU '
Ivapitea, "Waimea, Arahura, Hokitika, and the Totara.
prospects have also been found down the Coast as far as M° llll
Cook; so that, as far as at present ascertained, the northern


half of the West Coast of the Middle Island appears to he
auriferous, Mount Cook being situated about midway between
Cape Farewell and the southern end of the West Coast. I spoke
to numbers of men on the Waimea, where the principal diggings
are, and they all said that gold in small quantities could be
found almost everywhere it was dug for. Many experienced
diggers, who had been on the "Waimea diggings for several
months, expressed it as their opinion that the West Coast gold-
fields would last for many years, and that any one who worked
industriously on them w'ould be sure of a certain amount of
success. They all described them as c a good poor man’s
diggings.’ .... At the end of March I estimate that
there must have been about seven thousand people on the
Coast. Of these about three thousand were at the Waimea
(or Six-mile) diggings, two thousand digging and prospecting
m other places, and two thousand congregated in the town-
ship at Port Hokitika. Among the latter would be included
the people who are constantly coming to and leaving the
diggings, the packers, storekeepers, and a considerable number
belonging to a class having no particular occupation, but which
seems always to be inseparable from the various rushes to new
diggings. I found it very difficult to get any reliable informa-
t'on as to the yield of gold, for the diggers, as a class, are not
c °mmunicative on this point. I saw, however, on the Waimea
parties of four men each wash out between them, for their
a ys work, about soz. of gold : this would yield about £2 7s.
P er man. Very few were getting more than this, and many,
I* 0 doubt, very much less. The quantity of gold purchased by
e various banks during the fortnight I was at Hokitika was
a out 5,6000 z. Estimating that there were three thousand
constantly at work—and this is perhaps rather above than
0w the actual number —tbe amount of gold I have stated
gi ve on an avera g e £3 lOs. per week for each man.
• • . It is quite impossible to account for the present
t^ aracte ristic restlessness of the diggers, which appears to impel
join in every great rush to new goldfields. Many dis-
jointed diggers will, no doubt, soon leave, but large numbers
0 have good claims will remain for a long time in the dis


trict Tlie only present practicable means of
intercommunication overland between the different ports of the
district is by the sea-beach.” The miners and business people
held a public meeting (probably the first) in Driscoll's Music
Hall, Hokitika (Mr. Commissioner Sale being in the chair), to
devise means for the formation of a new track from the Ocean
Beach to the Waimea, at a cost of about £I,OOO. It was re-
solved that half the amount should be subscribed by the people
at Hokitika and Waimea; the Provincial Government to grant
a subsidy for the other half.
The special correspondent of the Otago Daily Times (the
late Mr. Alexander licid), in a letter dated Hokitika, 6th April,
1865, stated, “ There can be but little doubt that a very large tract
of country about here is rich in gold, and, if it could be worked
with ordinary labour and expense, would satisfy most people.”
He estimated that there were at that period eight to ten thou-
sand on the various diggings, fifteen hundred of wiiom were at
Hokitika, and tw y o thousand at the Six-mile (’Waimea). The
“ Wallaby,” on her last trip, had taken aw r ay 2,8000 z. for the
Banks of New Zealand and New South Wales. Several parties
had started up the Hokitika in boats well stocked with provisions,
with the view of thoroughly exploring and prospecting the
numerous creeks and gullies which lie betw'ccn the nearest hills
and the main dividing-range. The boats were able to go thirty
miles up the river. News came to Hokitika that the Victorians
had caught the West Coast gold-fever, and were hurrying thither
in eight or nine large vessels. The first contingent of 12®
arrived in the “ Albion ”on the sth April. The correspondent
of the Nelson Examiner did not estimate the population at mol*
than six thousand. He wrote, on the 6th April, 1865, “ The rC
arc 2,0000 z. awaiting removal to the Port, and there arc l,oooo*-
in the banks here, giving a total value of £11,250 for the l aS *
month amongst a mining population of, perhaps, six thousan
men. The Hokitika Itivcr has a most mercantile appoaran ce '
There are no less than twenty-two vessels inside the bar,
three or four arc in the offing.” Fourteen small craft, huh®
with merchandise, crossed the bar one afternoon. Ten d»P
afterwards the same.correspondent w y rotc, “’There will be a l al '® e
quantity of gold for the f Wallaby ’ —about 11,0000 z., the P r °‘


duct of about seventeen days’ work.” The “ Omeo ” took away
10,000 oz. the last week in April, and 3,2000 z. were shipped by
the Union Bank, per “ Maid of the Yarra,” to Nelson.
A ludicrous and expensive blunder was committed by the
Canterbury Provincial Government. Otago had, like Victoria,
its gold-escort; and Canterbury determined to have one.
Carriage-builders were set to work, and wagons impervious ■to
the shots of bushrangers were built. A troop of smart young
fellows were placed in charge of Mr. Inspector James (now
Inspector at Wanganui), a small stud of good horses was pur-
chased, an experienced driver, named Chamberlain, was engaged,
stables were erected at intervals along the road, and a constable
stationed at each as groom. When the escort arrived at Hoki-
hka, after travelling a distance of 147 miles across the Alpine
Hange, it created some amusement. It started on the return
journey in the month of September, but made only one trip
to and fro, being then discontinued, as the gold was principally
s ®t away by steamer, and was fully insured before leaving
the river; whilst the Government declined to insure any gold
that might be intrusted to the escort. Altogether there was
three-quarters of an ounce of gold deposited with the Gold
Receiver at Hokitika for transmission by the escort, and those
composed the escort were afterwards drafted into the police
orce 011 the Coast.
Mr. Hamilton, Collector of Customs at Lyttelton, who visited
°Mtika in May, 1865, calculated the yield of gold for the first
' e Months of the year at 52,4000 z., and his estimate of the
istoms duties for the year 1865—66 was £85,000. He stated
at IT Lemmin S> '"'bo bad been acting as Collector of Customs
Hokitika, had carried on his duties anywhere about the streets,
er ebest he could, at all hours of the day and during many
. Urs °f the night, and yet had given satisfaction to the mcr-
ants of the place. In seven weeks he had collected nearly
; *°°°, of which £3,300 was for duty on gold, and £4,700 on
good,.
n March, April, and May several new rushes took place,
to the Totara did not prove so successful as expected.
Ibe colour could he got everywhere, there were no heavy
S- The gold found there was similar to the Grey gold, and
9


far coarser than the gold obtained at the Six-mile or Three-mile
Creek, the latter being extremely fine, scaly gold. Fox's Gully,
eight miles from the Six-mile, yielded good yvages to a limited
number of diggers. The news from the Greenstone was ex-
tremely encouraging, about two hundred and fifty miners being
at work there, and, for the most part, doing well. A baker
commenced business in April, 1865, up to which period loaves
of bread were selling at ss. apiece.
The Five-mile (Kanieri), at the junction of the Kanieri and
Hokitika Rivers, attracted a large number. The prospectors
(Sandy and party) obtained from the first dish of wash-dirt
3dwt., and got 18dwt. from five buckets of wash-dirt from the
bottom. Several parties had found very rich gold. The depth
of sinking was 18ft., and it was calculated that the claims
would take six months to work out, whilst some parties expected
their claims to last two years. In May twelve hundred diggers
were located there, and a great many more were going up.
The gold was heavy and sliotty. In June it was estimated
that there was a population of four to five thousand at the
Kanieri. Substantial stores and hotels were erected, and the
town almost rivalled Hokitika. The miners were building I°b
huts, with a view to settling permanently on the field, and there
were parties working seven miles up the river who were making
more than wages. On the shallow sinking in the flat J e ®
Budlcford’s party were said to he averaging .£.‘so each per
In July McGrath and party bottomed on a hluisli-grey
and in half an hour cradled about causing great excite-
ment. James Mitchell and party (who were old Ballard
miners) bottomed at 24ft., and got ldwt. to l|-dwt. to the
dish. In the Flour of Wheat claim, next to McGrath’s, a ®
share sold for £ BO, and £llO w r as offered for another fift '
One party obtained lib. weight of gold from a small ho
sft. by 3ft., and McGrath and party took a pound and a ha
weight of gold from a shaft of the same dimension 8 '
McDonald and party obtained ldwt. to the dish, and Burts au
party lOdwt. to the load. Nearly every inch of ground 0
Tucker’s Flat was taken up, and the Kanieri Junction M
Company was formed to purchase engines, with the vie" -
throwing water on to the terraces by force-pumps. * ar
working there were making £6 to £3O per week each.


Although many of those who first went to the Grey were
tempted to leave by the richer finds at other places, a good deal
of prospecting was done during the earlier part of the year
1865 ; hut it was not until July that a rush set in up the
river at the Twelve-mile, and the discoveries extended to No
Town, Red Jack’s, and Nelson Creek. Pack-horses were very
scarce, and packs of 301 b. weight were placed on the backs
of some staunch dogs. These places being within the boundaries
of the Nelson Province, Mr. John Blackett (now Engineer-in-
Cluef of the Public Works' Department) was despatched there
as Warden, &c. ; whilst the Canterbury Provincial Government
sent Mr. Revcll to the Grey, where he opened the Warden’s
Court in June, the late Air. Harry Kcnrick (who up to the
time of his decease was Resident Magistrate and Warden at the
Thames) being transferred from the Waiinea as Clerk of Court.
Mr. Rochfort laid off a town on the Canterbury side of the
Grey, and as he advanced along the surveyed lines people
followed and put in tlicir pegs. There was a rush for business-
sites close to Waite’s store, on the Maori Reserve, and the
whole of the river-frontages (4,000 ft.) were taken up; but the
Maoris would only let the ground in small lots, charging a yearly
rental of £1 to £2 per foot frontage for three years, and 10s.
Per foot for the back allotments ; whilst frontages to Mawhcra
Guay fetched as high as £l2 per foot. Some substantial build-
mgs, including large stores and two-story hotels, were quickly
er ected. On the 6th July thirtv-feur allotments on Government
land, with frontages to the river, were taken up and occupied
l° r business purposes, two chains fronting the river being rc-
served for the street. In the middle of August the Bank of
New Zealand opened a branch at Greymouth, as the town was
*hen called, and it had been declared a port of entry some months
Previously. Sites in the new township were speedily covered with
calico and timber, as much as £2 10s. per 100 square feet having
been given for timber, and .£5 per 100 ft. could have been obtained
111l 11 a short time. Provisions became very scarce owing to the
ar ge influx of miners, flour selling as high as £l3O and £l5O
ton, and candles at Is. each. But, if everything was dear,
he gold came in plentifully, and the high prices did not cause
ttlUc h alarm. It was currently reported and believed at the


time that many of the claims at Maori Gully and Red Jack’s
■were yielding their lucky owners a pound weight of gold per
day. The representatives of the Bank of New Zealand and
Bank of New South Wales were in the habit of taking away
800 oz. to l,ooooz. each when they visited those places. A large
nugget, weighing 220 z. 17dwt., was found at Blackball Creek by a
Maori working with Cundy’s party, from Nelson, and nuggets of
loz., 20z., and 3oz. were quite common. In July a party of three
men brought in from Maori Gully 5000 z., the result of ten weeks’
work. In the winter of 1865 a large number of miners left the
Kanieri and Waimea for the new rushes at the Grey. In July
the population was estimated at three thousand, a large proportion
being located on the northern side of the Arnold, in the Nelson
Province. Four vessels (“ lona,” “ Flying Squirrel,” “ Jane
Anne,” and “ City of Nelson ”) sailed from Hokitika to the
Grey, laden with supplies for the diggers. Many claims at
Maori Creek were yielding in the winter £lO to £l2 a week per
man, and it was expected that when sluicing, which was then in
its infancy, was more generally adopted, the yields were likely
to he much larger. The gullies which abound in the neighbour-
hood were profitably worked, and new leads were opened up
almost daily. There was scarcely a place which would not give
a return of £2 to £3 per week clear of all expenses, including
tucker. A small terrace in Maori Gully proved remarkably
rich. The gold could be easily discerned all through the wash-
dirt for a depth of Bft. One pound weight of gold per day
was said to be about each man’s share.
In the autumn of 1865 very considerable mining works wei e
undertaken. Raceswere cut, and,in some instances,woodenfhnn es
three miles long were constructed, with a view to terrace-work-
ings. The population was becoming more settled, and a larg e
number of applications had been received for agricultural
A hospital had been built at Hokitika, the post-office had bee n
completed, and a contract had been entered into for piling
chains of the Hokitika wharf. The West Coast Times (wbk
had been started in May, 1865) stated that the gold export duty
collected at Hokitika from the 22nd March to the Bth $$
amounted to £3,000, and £1,300 had been collected at Nek 011
to the 30th April, representing about 34,0000 z. of gold, of lC


value of about .£130,000, raised on the West Coast in seven
weeks. Sir Julius von Haast, who visited the goldfields about
that period, likened the country to the Ural, which had been
worked by the Russians for years without showing any signs of
exhaustion. The import duties at Hokitika during the same
period amounted to .£4,500. A temporary Customhouse was
opened in Messrs. Palmer’s iron store. Some idea of the busi-
ness transacted may be inferred from the fact that the “ City of
Dunedin” brought no less than 2,500 letters to Hokitika in one
trip.- Provisions were getting cheaper. Plour was selling at
£24 to £2B per ton in Hokitika, beef and mutton at 4d. to 7d.
per pound, potatoes at £l2 per ton, and everything else propor-
tionately cheap; hut horses were literally starving for want of
food, and could be pricked up for very little. The new track to
the Waimea was nearly finished, and provisions were getting
cheaper at that place. Plour was selling at £2 per 501 b. bag,
bread at 3s. per 41b. loaf, sugar at Is. 3d. per pound, beef at
b- 6d, per pound, butter at 3s. per pound, and hams and bacon
2s. Gd. per pound.
As the winter approached heavy rains set in, causing floods,
and putting a stop to work. In consequence, miners began to
leave the Coast, and besieged the shipping-offices. Within a few
da ys the « Omeo ” took away eighty, and the “ Lady Darling ”
slxt y-two diggers. The roads were impassable, and all com-
munication with the diggings was stopped. The bars at the
re y and Hokitika Rivers, silted up, many vessels were stranded
and °tbers were withdrawn, while a large number of store-laden
went to Nelson and discharged their cargoes at that port.
kinds of provisions rose to an exorbitant price, and a scarcity
Supplies at Hokitika was apprehended by the residents. Not-
. tanding the bad. weather, the “ William Miskin,” which
ar dved in Nelson at the end of May, brought 11,0000 z.,
Q kad she been able to wait for another tide she could have
ctl UjOOOoz. more. In June the escort took away from the
guinea 4,5000 z., which had been sent by two of the banks: the
U« r retained its gold. In July the steamers brought
t * a t Hokitika amounted to £3,000, and the import duties
nearly £4,000. Up to the 23rd July, 1865, 73,0000 z. had


been exported from Hokitika, and 1,5000 z. in 18G4; the total
value of which was set down by the Customs at £288,000.
In August a steady rush set in towards the district lying
between the Totara and Mikonui Rivers, near Lake Mahinapua.
Some very good finds were made at the new diggings, and troops
of diggers were to be seen from early morn till late at night wend-
ing their way in that direction. The ferryman at the Totara
stated that three hundred and fifty had crossed in one day, and
three thousand men were on the ground in a fortnight. Whether
in the creeks or hills, in dry or wet sinking, deep or shallow
ground, the yields were equally satisfactory. The gold presented
a coarse, water-worn appearance : some of it had a brown coating
which it was difficult to remove. In one claim, with 10ft. of
wash-dirt, the yield was ldwt. to the dish. Two pounds of gold
per day among three men, working only with a cradle, was
not uncommon. A correspondent, writing to the Canterbury
Press on the lltli September, strongly urged the Canterbury
people to come over at once, before a heavy rush set in from
Victoria.
At the Auckland Lead, about nine miles north of Hokitilm;
which was essentially a beach-diggings, gold was found a littk
above high water in September 18G5, and prospects ranging
from ldwt. to 7oz. to the dish were washed. Some ox the
claims yielded as high as £IOO per week to each man; and fr°®
one of the richest claims 6-loz. were obtained in one day. h° r
several weeks Bill Hyde and his mates obtained 80oz. to 100oZ-
per week from their claim. The usual interpretation of a “ uag cs
claim ” was £8 to £lO per man per week. When a claim ' ffaS
worked out it w 7 as quite a common occurrence for each man to
receive £SOO or £OOO, and in a few instances as much as
as his share of the profits. New's of rich finds came from t
Wanganui River and Okarito; and the Maoris, who were
the earliest and best pioneers of the goldfields, were noticed to
travelling in that direction, good specimens having been sent up
by their friends. Some Europeans had also gone down and r ®
ported that they were getting 3dwt. to the dish. Three poun ®
of rough gold were said to have been obtained in a very sll^ '
time. It w 7 as expected that payable diggings would be found 0
hundreds of miles, and that the returns would far exceed a


original expectations. At Woodstock/" about eight miles up
the south bank of the Hokitika River, two hundred miners set
to work, the sinking being 20ft. on the terraces at the back of
the township. Prospects of 2|dwt. to the dish were obtained,
and mining operations were extensively carried on. The yield
of gold continued very steady, and many parties —such as Inglcs’s
party, Hammond and Graham’s party, and others —were making
during the winter ..610 to .615 a week each.
In September the following estimate was made as to the
population on the various goldfields :
Grey and Arnold .. .. • • 2,000
Grey mouth .. .. .. • • 600
Saltwater Creek .. . • • • 300
Greenstone .. .. ■ ■ • • 400
Teremakau .. . . • • ■ • 100
Waimea . . .. .. • • 1,000
Hokitika .. .. . ■ • • 2,500
Kanieri .. .. .. • • 3,000
Totara .. . . . - - • • 4,000
Further south .. .. • • 2,000
15,900
population was increasing, in spite of all drawbacks, at
Ihe rate of about three thousand per month. In May there
was a novel addition, Mrs. T. McCarthy and a Mrs. Smith having
given birth to children during that month. “ Hokitika McCarthy
wouldn’t sound badly,” remarked the West Coast Times: “ the
® rs t child born at the Dunstan was called ‘ Clutlia.’ ” Dr.
jl e y, however, claimed the honour of the first birth for Mrs.
Kith, whose child was born on Friday, the 21st May, whilst
* rSi -McCarthy’s son did not make his appearance till Monday,
24th May.
Mith the approach of spring confidence was restored, and
few thought of leaving. There was a marked improve-
laeilf in the mechanical appliances for the more effective and
s Peedier working of claims. Horses were utilized in connection
,Vl^i Machinery for draining the ground, tail-races were cut, and a
°mbined system of working began to take the place of detached,
esultory efforts. The Kanieri still maintained its reputation.
" c^r ath and party obtained 50oz. from their paddock, and
the early days Woodstock was generally known as the Eiglit-mile.


Sandy’s claim yielded 15oz. to the set of timber (oft. by 4ft.).
Shanks and party were receiving £lO to £l4 each per week
from their claim. The Ballarat party, who had laid down a line
of sluice-boxes, and were bringing in a race, expected 50oz. to
60oz. per week when in full working order. The New Chum party
obtained lOoz. for one day’s cradling from wash-dirt which was
3ft. to 6ft. Hawke and party obtained lOOoz. from one paddock
(12ft. by 15ft.). Mitchell and party got 12oz. for one week’s
work; and the next claim washed fdwt. to the dish.
In September a small cutter, with thirty diggers on board,
left for Bruce Bay, and the steamer “Bruce,” carrying one hun-
dred diggers, followed a few days afterwards, the Warden being
also on board. Though the country looked favourable, no large
finds were reported. Mr. Vincent Pyke’s exploring party
reached the Coast from Lake Wanaka about the same period,
having followed the course of the Haast River to its mouth.
In December the largest quantity of gold (14,7600 z.) ever
taken to Nelson up to that time by one vessel was brought
by the steamer “Wallaby” from the Grey. The information
from the diggings was generally of a most favourable kind.
Towards the close of the year very rich layers of black-sand
were found along the sea-beach between the Grey and Hokitika,
and yielded handsome returns. On the beach south of Grey-
mouth claims were taken up on the low terrace just above
high-water mark. Two or three layers of black-sand were
found at a depth of 7ft. to 9ft., with gold freely distributed
through them. From £3O to £IOO per man for a week’s w r ork
was the general average. So .rich was this sand that on ° ne
occasion £3 was paid for a pannikin as a sample for exhibit^ 11
purposes. Along the low ground below the Grey and Saltwater
Creek numerous other claims were worked, from five to eight
chains in width, which yielded very good returns, and last*
from two to three years; some of the ground being worked to *
depth of 20ft. to 30ft. by means of large water-wheels, whi*
were erected to keep the claims dry. Similar leads were opeo e
near the Teremakau—Auckland Lead, Six-mile Beach, Arabura,
and Three-mile Creek, near Hokitika—which paid the owner 3
£4O to £7O, and in some instances as high as £IOO a man p el
week. Five miles north of the Grey, in shallow ground n ear


the beach, from 7oz. to 30oz. to the paddock was by no means
uncommon. At the Blackfcllow’s Rush, on the side of the range,
at an elevation of 100 ft. to 200 ft. above the sea-level, the claims
were still better. A few of them were extraordinarily rich, the
wash-dirt turning out from 12oz. to 20oz. to the load. At the
Arnold a party of three miners got off the bottom of one
paddock 80oz., and many were said to be earning £ls to £2O
each per week. From the Three-mile, south of the Grey,
which carried a large population, heavy parcels of gold were
purchased. The original prospectors were reported to have
lodged half a hundredweight of gold in the hands of Mr.
Proctor, gold-smelter, Hokitika, to be melted.
The Okarito (or Five-mile Beach) created great excitement
towards the end of the year. Hundreds of diggers were taken
from Hokitika by the steamer “ Bruce,” which did the journey
in about twelve hours, and was generally crowded with excited
passengers, who willingly paid £5 for that short distance. Mr.
ft- C. Reid, who went to the field as gold-buyer for the Union
hank, on the occasion of bis second visit, accosted a party of
four, who were paddocking wash-dirt, and asked if they had any
gold to sell. One of the party inquired, “ How much money
tav e you, mate?” To which Mr. Reid replied, “As much as
you require.” On reaching the tent he was presented with a
couple of “billies,” both nearly brimful of the finest gold-dust,
which he was told was the result of six weeks’ work. When
weighed, Mr. Reid found he was a couple of hundred pounds
s h°rt, although he carried £2,000 in notes with him. Indeed,
an y persons who happened to alight on a good claim at Okarito
ma( ie small fortunes. The returns in some instances were
almost fabulous, and it was not to be wondered at that many
°f the diggers gave way to the wildest extravagance. The
gainer “ Bruce ” was bringing to Hokitika 3,0000 z. to 4,0000 z.
? S°lH every other trip, and. Mr. Reid knew of one party of
°ar miners who forwarded l,ooooz. on their own account. The
SOll them beaches took six to nine months to work, and then the
P°pulation gradually diminished to a limited number.
The Grey River Argus (which bad been recently started)
on the 20th December that the rush to Lake Brunner
attained immense dimensions. A prospector’s claim had.


been granted to the Kangaroo party, who spoke highly of the
prospects of their ground : one of the party showed a sample of
6oz. of nice sliotty gold. A large Maori party, thirty-eight
in number, who had gone up the Grey River in three canoes,
had caused a great deal of excitement, and there was much
speculation as to their movements. It leaked out that they had
struck good gold somewhere about the head of the Aliaura and
watershed of Lake Brunner, and were returning with stores,
&c. The majority of the new arrivals at Hokitika immediately
shouldered their swags, and were off to the Grey, in the vicinity
of which there were so many inducements, and such good pro-
spects of a pile. The close of the year, which was in every
respect satisfactory, brought news of fresh discoveries in every
direction, and hundreds of men were hurrying to and fro daily.
Favourable accounts came from the Bullcr and Lyell, and large
numbers of diggers were proceeding thither.
Although the majority of those who flocked to the diggings
were orderly, and only bent on unearthing the hidden treasures
of Nature, or administering to the wants of those who worked
with pick, shovel, and cradle, there was the usual, alloy which is
to be found amongst all heterogeneous populations, and robberies
and murders were committed. On the evening of the sth
February, 1805, at about six o’clock, a valise belonging to Mr.
Walmslcy, agent for the Bank of New Zealand, which contained
gold and notes of the value of £1,710, was stolen out of a sack
from a tent belonging to Mr. Finney, a chemist, at Waimea.
The notes and valise were found next morning in the bush, hut
2600 z. of gold which Mr. Walmslcy had purchased the day
the robbery was gone. On the sth September, 1865, Mr. Walms-
ley was stuck up on the track between No Town and Twelve-
mile by five armed men wearing masks, and robbed of the contents
of his valise, which contained 821 oz. of gold and ,£I,OOO
notes; but, fortunately, the packer who was in front of him,
who carried a larger share of the gold, got away safely. Tl> e
agent for the Union Bank, who had only passed the same pl ace
about a quarter of an hour previously-, was not
Though other robberies occurred, it was not until the follow 111 ?
year that a brutal murder had to be recorded in connection wh
them. On the 28th May, 1866, Mr. George Dobson, Govern


ment Engineer, proceeded down the Arnold River, and would
have gone on by boat to Greymouth, but lie had to inspect the
track leading from Brunnerto'n to Greymoutb. Here he was
met by the Burgess and Kelly gang (who mistook him for Mr.
Fox, a well-known gold-buyer, who went by boat from Maori
Gully), and brutally murdered. Ilis body was not found for a
fortnight after, as it had been buried in the side of a small
creek, but was only partially covered over. The deceased was
buried in the Grey Cemetery beside the gftives of two other
public servants—Townshend and Whitcombe —and a large stone
slab now marks the place where lie was murdered, close to
Brunnerton.
The year 18GG —perhaps the most prosperous of the West
Coast golden era—did not commence so auspiciously as the
preceding year. The rush to Lake Brunner, for a time, turned
oll t a failure, and about one thousand diggers were wending tlieir
wa y southwards, with loud imprecations against Albert Hunt,
G>e prospector, who bad led them on wliat was then believed to
Be a wild-goose cliase. Hunt and bis mates bolted : tlic diggers’
fell upon the unfortunate storekeeper, who was given twelve
ours to clear out: the store was ransacked and its contents
'Med amongst the infuriated erowd, who considered themselves
e dupes of Hunt and the storekeeper. It was easier, however,
0 reach the scene of the rush than to return. Meanwhile, the
creeks and rivers were flooded ; scores of men had to take to the
rees for safety ; boatmen were said to have earned £IOO a day
of diggers across the lake, and upwards of two hundred
th 6111 Were 011 a P' ecc °i' flax-swamp, from which, whilst
bei Coll ii llu ed, they had no means of egress, their misery
heightened by the general want of food. There were
d°°ds in many parts of the Coast, caused by tlic melting of
Hoj_ Snow 011 the mountains, and much damage was done at
ha Scarcely a day passed that one or more of the
Sa r a( lvcnturers who had flocked to the West Coast did not
torr C ° lc * r l' V( ‘ s in vain endeavours to ford the mountain-
dr 6^ S ’ lcrc were hopeful signs in spite of these great
r e ac^s - The beaeli-diggings near Okarito were yielding
pract' an d many parties, notwithstanding the im-
lcablc nature of the country, were prospecting towards the


ranges, where coarser and heavier specimens were invariably
found by the more persevering of the diggers. In February the
steamer “ Bruce ” (which ought to have been as profitable as a
gold-mine to her owners) brought up 5,0000 z. of gold to
Hokitika, and took down hundreds of diggers to Okarito. Ia
March the holders of claims on the Five-mile, south of Okarito,
were doing exceedingly well, and many parties were getting gold
by the pound weight every week, whilst the more fortunate
were reported to Ire panning off that quantity almost daily.
At Bruce Bay men were making .£1 per day, and it was
noticed that the miners there had universally discarded the
cradle and adopted sluicing instead. There were good reports
from many localities, rushes set in in various directions, and
gold was got throughout an extended area.
Albert Hunt, who had so mysteriously disappeared, again
turned up, and various were the rumours and speculations as to
his whereabouts. Towards the end of March he and his brother
applied to Mr. Matthew Brice, the Warden at Okarito, for *
prospectors’ claim on the Oinemaka River, about five miles
south of Bruce Bay, nine miles inland from the sea-beach.
He reported that 4gr. to the dish could he easily obtained on
the terrace, 'where the sinking was only 4ft. to Bft., and that
2gr. to the dish could he washed in the bed of the creek. Every
movement of Hunt rvas closely watched, as if he had been the
possessor of a magic-wand or a divining-rod, and when he set
out upon his journey he was followed by hundreds of digg ers '
In a short time Okarito was nearly deserted, and three to f our
thousand men were congregated on what has since been known
as Hunt’s Beach. Claims were pegged out for eight fflil eS
along the beach, which for miles to the south of Bruce Bay, f roin
Paringa Bluff to the Oinemaka River, swarmed with digg ers >
who formed a, black line along the coast. Mr. Keogh was ap
pointed Warden, a police' camp was formed, and all necessary
preparations were made; but the rush, like that to Eak e
Brunner earlier in the year, completely collapsed, and neifh e *
Hunt nor his reported goldfield could be found. Mr. K e °o
returned by steamer to Hokitika in May, leaving only one
hundred men on the field, and half that number intended t°
tramp back overland. Many of the men were glad to return f°


the claims which they had so hastily abandoned at Okarito and
other places.
In April a rush set in behind the scrub at Gillespie’s Beach,
about midway between Bruce Bay and Okarito. Prospects vary-
ing from 4gr. to Ggr. to the shovelful were easily obtainable, and
the earnings averaged from ,£lO to £2O per week for each digger.
Fifteen hundred men were soon afterwards at work in that
locality. All the parties at the Five-mile Beach, south of
Okarito, were doing exceedingly well, and the first week in May
the “ Bruce ” took away from Okarito to Hokitika 4,0820 z. of
gold. From the 23rd February to the 19th May the gold
export from Okarito was as follows :
Oz.
February 23.. . - • • ■ • 4,000
March 9 .. .. • • • • 1,750
March 19 .. .. • • 3,430
March 2G .. • • .. 1,350
April 1 .. ' .. .. .. 2,573
April 8 .. .. . • • • 2,000
April 18 .. .. .. .. 5,267
May 2 .. .. .. .. 4,082
May 13 ... .. .. .. 3,613
May 19 .. .. ... .. 1,000
This gave a total export for about three months of over
~9;000oz. of gold, independent of considerable quantities which
Were taken away privately by the miners.
R the Hokitika district extensive w r ater-raccs w'ere con-
tracted, and there were evident signs of permanent occupation.
At the Waimea, Boyle and party finished towards the end of
P r d a race two to three miles in length, which had taken them
twelve months to complete. Some of the country through which
e face passed was extremely rugged, and a great deal of
®mg was required. Other parties were also engaged in
rwgmg i n extensive water-races to work their ground. At the
a ara t Rush, near the Waimea road, the prospectors got 4dwt.
0 to the dish, and the bottom of their shaft, where the
was Ift. to 3ft. in thickness, yielded 13bz. At the
the^ 011 the gold was traced in three distinct leads,
. , l lnairi one running up the creek for a distance of two miles,
the others branched off in the. direction of Tucker Flat.


In several shafts prospects of 3dwt. to sdwt. to the dish were
obtained. The gold was found on a sandstone bottom, the wash
varying from 12in. to 18in. Tunnels were driven into the faces
of the terraces, and .£l6 to .£2O per week for each miner was said
to be about the average return. One party were said to be
making Boz. to lOoz. daily; a party of Canadians were each
making £8 to £ls per week; and in one claim, where £3so was
paid for a half-share, the lucky purchaser was said to have recouped
half the amount hv his first week’s labour. Fourteen claims were
at work in the hill, where the sinking ranged from 40ft. to 120 ft.
The population at the Ilouhou in May was stated at three thousand.
At the Kanieri, mining operations were carried on very exten-
sively : five steam-engines were at work on Commissioner’s Flat;
and water was brought on to the terraces behind the township
from a distance of nine miles. It xvas estimated in May that
two thousand five hundred miners w-ere working on Commis-
sioner’s Flat, Tucker Flat, Woodstock, and the vicinity. Towards
the end of hi ay a new r lead w r as discovered in the direction of
Tucker Flat, and miners were working on the lead for a distance
of three miles. Prospects of 3dw r t. to the dish were obtained
from the wash : the sinking was from 70ft. to 100 ft.
Equally satisfactory was the news from the Grey, -where works
of a permanent character were going on, and tailings were re-
worked from many of the so-called w-orked-out claims. The
debris and tailings from the terraces -were said to have yielded
as much as £lO per week to each man. The Grey became
famous for its nuggets. In some parcels that were brought
down from Moonlight Gully one nugget weighed 790 z. 18dwt.»
and another 78oz. 17dw-t.; whilst the smaller ones varied from
2dwt. to 9oz. Out of one claim two nuggets, weighing 440 z. an
470 z., w-ere taken. The 440 z. nugget was about the size an
shape of a man’s fist, and the gold was of a deep rich colour; lC
small portions of quartz with which itw-as impregnated w r cre of 3
rose tint. In March a rush set in to the Little Grey. For a tin l ®
the statements published in the Grey River Argus created a g re
deal of excitement, and a large crowd flocked to the scene of ie
reputed discoveries. The field did not just then fulfil cxpt‘
tions, and at an indignation meeting of the returned dig» crs
Greymoutli a resolution w-as passed demanding that the ed>t° r


of the Argus should pay £IOO to the Greymouth Hospital as a
public restitution for the misleading statements published in his
newspaper. The after-events, however, justified the editor.
By the end of May one thousand men were reported to he at work
on the field so hastily pronounced a duffer, and a large quantity
of gold was sent down. One party of three men w r ere said to
have sold no less than 300 oz. of gold, the product of three
months’ work, to the Bank of New South A Vales. The gold
was one of the finest samples yet seen on the Coast, the whole of
it being composed of heavy nuggets. Fifty weighed over 2oz.
each, one weighed 120 z., and others varied from Goz. to Boz.
each. The nuggets were slightly mixed with rose-coloured
quartz, and the gold was dark and heavy. Another party,
working in an adjoining claim, were reported to have got 500 oz.
for three months’ work : the gold was also nuggety and heavy.
Several parties of diggers were nearly as fortunate, though they
did not care to publish their gains.
Daring the months of April and May there was a very large
gold-export from the AVest Coast. Besides several smaller ship-
ments, nearly 90,0000 z. were sent by the hanks to Melbourne
end Sydney during a period of five weeks. On the 3rd April
the steamer “ Barwon ” cleared for Sydney with 23,1G00z.; on
fte 15th of that month the “ Gothenburg ” steamed for Mel-
bourne with 25,98 loz.; on the 4 th. May the “Lord Ashley”
|°ok away 16,8500 z. for Sydney; and on the 12th May the
Gothenburg ” departed for Melbourne with 22,0000 z. In
commenting on its first anniversary the West Coast Times
(’which was started on the 3rd May, 1865) stated that the AVest-
hnd goldfields, with a population of twenty-five to thirty thou-
San d, had a gold export which rivalled the Colony of Victoria,
an d there were indications of a permanent and prosperous
future.
Tlie winter of 18G6 proved exceptionally fine, being a great
contrast to the winter preceding, and, as vessels were able to
discharge cargoes at all available places along the coast, pro-
tons were plentiful and tolerably cheap. A visitor from Dun-
edm wrote back that he could buy nearly everything much cheaper
a | Hokitika than at Dunedin, as vessels were coming in daily from
Hhoarne, Sydney, and other commercial centres. In many


places, where water was scarce, enterprising men set to work to
bring it in from long distances : with such golden prospects
nothing daunted them. All over the Coast the cradle was flung
aside, sluicing was substituted, and larger operations were begun
wherever water was available. Old ground was readily turned
over, and .€5 to €lO a man per week was easily obtainable with
the new and better appliances. Extended claims were taken up
at Ross* and other places for the purpose of working the flats
and terraces to greater advantage. Some of the terraces border-
ing on the coast proved extraordinarily rich. The prospectors
on the terrace running parallel with the Auckland Lead, and
separated from the latter by a swamp, obtained over l,ooooz,
from their claim. One party of six on the Darkies’ Terrace
divided 148 oz. for ten days’ work. At the Five-mile, south of
Okarito, one fortunate party cleared out with about .€I,OOO
per man, and another party were said to have made €1,700
each during two or three months’ work on the beach. The
gold shipped at Hokitika from the 12th May to the 10th June
was 41,9770 z., the greater portion of which came from Kanieri
and the Houhou: Okarito, Waimea, and ltoss ranked next.
From the Ist June to the 16th July, 50,4870 z. were shipped
from Hokitika. For the quarter ending 30th June the export
from the West Coast was as follows :
Oz.
Hokitika .. .. .. 52,755
Greymouth .. .. .. 50,381
Okarito .. .. .. 30,648
For the year ending 30th June, 1866, the export from the
West Canterbury goldfields showed an increase on the preced-
ing year of 308,1080 z., of the value of €1,203,446. During
the same period there was shipped from Greymouth, the produce
of the Nelson South-west goldfields, 71,6000 z., of the value of
about £280,000.
Between the Grey and Hokitika there was a scattered
population, which occupied every available and likely-looking s P ot
on the beaches. Though the cream had been extracted, manf
parties were still able to make good wages, and were in a position
* Eoss was generally known as Jones’s Creek in the early days, and V 8,5
often spoken of as tlio Totara.


to save considerable sums after paying all expenses. The
beaches north and south of Okarito, which had been declared a
port of entry, continued to yield steadily, and the first week in
June the “ Bruce ” took 9,4340 z. to Hokitika, and ll,ooooz.
from the 3rd to the 23rd June. At the Waimea three thousand
miners were located, nearly all of whom were engaged in
sluicing, and steady labour was fairly remunerated. At the
Ballarat Lead, where the wash-dirt in the best claims consisted
of black cement and gravel, which had to be burnt and crushed
before the gold could be extracted, and where the depth of
sinking varied from loft, to 70ft., some of the claims were
yielding as high as £SO pier man weekly, £7 to £2O per week
being about the average wages. Early in August three new
rushes set in—one about a mile to the south of the TV aimea
Creek, where prospects of ldwt. to 2dwt. to the dish were
washed from a layer of black sand at a depth of 14ft.; another
about a mile from Stafford Town, where the sinking was GOft.,
and ldwt. to the dish was panned off; and the third about a
mile from the Auckland Lead, about fifty yards through the
hush from the beach, where ligr. to the dish was obtained.
Tie rush to the New River, on a terrace between the Salt-
water and Teremakau, proved very successful, and the field was
considered one of the best on the West Coast. The prospects
averaged from |dwt. to 2dwt. to the dish.
As the spring approached it became evident that the popu-
lation was becoming more settled, and many of those who came
| ro ® the Australian Colonies were joined by their wives and
amilics. There was telegraphic communication between Clirist-
ch '»ch and Hokitika, and a railway was talked of; whilst a Bill
as Passed by the General Assembly authorizing the Nelson
ro 'incial Council to give grants of ten thousand acres of land
or every mile of railway to any public company undertaking
he construction of a line to the Buller. The tramway was
peued to ICanicri, and it was contemplated to run it from
to Greymouth. Attention was more directed towards
G country where the quartz reefs were generally believed to
c as specimens "were constantly found in tlie rivers and
ee ts. Prom one piece, "weighing 10oz., found at the Grey,
of pure gold was extracted. Though thousands of men
10


kept a sharp look-out for quartz reefs, the impenetrable nature
of the country proved a great drawback for some time. Then
came the report of the discovery of a diamond, said to have been
picked up at the foot of Mount Cook. The story ran that Mr.
Blake, of the Grey, purchased it for £l, and that he afterwards
refused „£IOO from a jeweller in Melbourne. Like a snowball,'its
supposed value increased as the diamond or the story travelled,
until at length it was stated in the papers that it was worth
87,000. No wonder that excitement ensued, and that there
were prognostications that the diamond-mines might even eclipse
the gold-mines of the West Coast. It was, however, afterwards
ascertained that the value of the diamond had been greatly over-
stated, and many persons doubted whether it had ever been
picked up, as alleged, at the foot of Mount Cook. Taking ui
the whole extent of country from the sea to the terraces, and
from the Buller River in the north to a point several miles
below Jackson’s Bay southwards, the reports from all the work-
ings were such as to warrant the idea that the diggings would
take years to work out, and there was little doubt that fresh
discoveries would he made from time to time. In the Buller
District the gold was traced up the Inangahua River towards
the saddle separating that river from the sources of the Little
Grey. A heavy rush set in to neiv ground opened in the vicinity
of the saddle, and gold was struck in several places; but, though
rich enough to pay in ordinary localities, it did not satisfy the
diggers, as supplies could only be brought up by means of rapi a
and dangerous rivers. The majority left in consequence; hut a
small population remained, and the workings were gradually e *
tended. Westport, at the mouth of the Buller River, nhic
had been for some time in a languishing condition, was impr° T
ing very much, and was likely to be a competitor for the ”
Coast trade with Hokitika and Greymouth, the bar of
Buller River offering greater facilities to vessels than those
the Grey and Hokitika Rivers. Over 1,5000 z. of gold had bee®
sent away from Westport during the months of July and AuS
At the Mokihinui, a river flowing into the sea twenty-
miles north-east of the Buller, parties were at work a dista
of fifteen miles from the mouth of the river, and making 8°
wages. On a creek running into the Mokihinui men carDe


£lO to £ls per week; but the country was very inaccessible,
and it was a matter of extreme difficulty and uncertainty
to get provisions conveyed there. Sixty miles up tlic Karamca,
which Hows into the sea about twenty miles to the nortu-east of
the Mokihinui, a party of Greeks were reported to have been
working in a secluded spot, and making £lB each per week ; but
there was the insuperable difficulty of obtaining - provisions at
such a long distance from the sea-shore in an unknown and
almost inaccessible country.
In September an extensive rush set in on a terrace about
four miles up the northern bank of the Tcremakau, at a
place called Candlelight, so termed because the gold was said
to have been found at night. Three thousand people were on
the ground in a short time. The prospects averaged from
idwt. to ldwt. of gold to-the disli. At No Name, eight miles
U P Maori Creek, three storekeepers brought down in one
day over 1,5000 z. At Okarito a noted fossickcr sold to one
°f the banks a pound weight of gold of a rough description,
several nuggets being the size of Trench beans, which he
obtained in a very short time seven or eight miles up the W ailio
ftiver. A new goldfield was discovered between the Tcremakau
aod the Aliaura, not far from Lake 13runner : towards the end of
October, two prospectors who had been working there for
some time brought to the Grey OOoz. of gold, and made appli-
oatiou for a prospectors’ claim. Trom the Pakilii (or Charleston)
d'ggings, twenty miles south of the Duller, very encouraging ac-
counts were received. Twelve hundred diggers were on the field
% the end of October, and their numbers were increasing daily.
On the richest spots idwt. to ldwt. of gold to the dish could be
0 kined, and half that average in less-favoured places. As the
sod increased in warmth the rivers became flooded, and several
Pities were jammed between them, unable to push forward or
re heat: many were lost in the bush in their haste to get to the
field: many were drowned whilst vainly endeavouring to
across the rivers. Claims yielded from £7 to £l2 per
ee k, and provisions were tolerably cheap. The rush which
°°' c place to the Pakilii Plain led to further prospecting in the
koie quarter, and gold was found in paying quantities in a small
re am running into the sea about fifteen miles further south.


This stream, named after its discoverer, was called Fox’s River.
There one of the largest rushes set in that had as yet taken
place on the West Coast. Every steamer on the Coast was in
request to convey thither thousands of impatient gold-seekers
from Okarito, Greymouth, and Hokitika; while every road by
which the scene of the new rush could be reached on foot was
thronged with pedestrians. Within a few weeks about five
thousand persons had congregated where previously there had
been neither a Maori nor a European residing. The township
of Brighton was laid off, and soon assumed large proportions,
the main street being nearly one mile in length. Gold was
found in nearly every shaft bottomed, whilst there were several
pile-claims. In some shafts the wash-dirt averaged from sft. to
9ft., with lgr. to 2gr. to the shovelful. The gold was so widely
distributed that some of the claims were expected to last two
years.
In December a new rush commenced to a place four miles
south of Fox’s, the prospects of which were equally as good.
Claims were marked off on a line of terraces similar to those at
Fox’s and those on the north beach of the Grey. “ They are all
pile-claims,” said a correspondent of the Grey River Argus.
“ Every claim bottomed has struck rich gold.” Rushes to various
other places in the vicinity of Fox’s River were constantly taking
place. Fox gave it as his opinion that there was one con-
tinuous line of auriferous country to within fourteen miles of
the Grey River; and towards the close of the year Mr. Warden
Price stated that he had no hesitation in saying that most of
the beaches between Okarito and Cook’s River would maintain
a large population if the miners were satisfied with ,£5 or £G p er
week, but that was not a sufficient inducement to keep raen
stationary. Wherever the ranges about Okarito had been p l ' o '
spec ted, good samples of heavy, coarse gold had invariably been
found. Indeed, such were the accounts from all parts of th e
Coast. It was no uncommon thing to find men throwing U P
claims that were yielding .€8 to .Cl 2 per week to each of tb e
holders, and travelling hurriedly in search of richer fields.
was thus that a good deal of valuable time, money, and fives
were wasted. W here the poorest might in a short time be 011 ®
par with the richest, it was not to be wondered at that al


hastened to grow rich, and that all ordinary barriers were over-
leaped in the mad pursuit. On Tuesday, the 25th December, the
Nelson Examiner* which was at that time one of the best news-
papers in New Zealand, wrote : “ When we remember that it was
only two years ago on Thursday last that the steamer ‘ Nelson,’
acting as the pioneer to the West Coast goldfields, was the first
vessel to cross the Hokitika bar, and that there were not more,
probably, than twenty persons south of the Duller, it is really
marvellous to note the change that has taken place in the district
within so short a time. What the population of the West Coast
may be at this moment we have no means of accurately ascertain-
ing, but we suppose it must be considerably" over thirty" thousand
souls, producing an export of the value of nearly £2,500,000
annually. Hokitika has its daily morning and evening journals ;
and there arc newspapers at Greymouth, Okarito, Fox’s, and the
Buller.” What the discoveries on the West Coast meant to the
hade and commerce of the colony may" best be gathered from
the following figures, showing tlic gold export from the West
boast and Nelson (in the latter place most of the gold was ob-
tained in its South-west goldfields) for a period of ten }"ears: —
Year.
Nelson.
West Coast.
1S64
I860
1866
1867
1868
I860
1870
1871
1872
1873
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
14,410
12,137
£55,841
47,030
1,4G3
2S9,S97
£5,500
1,127,370
7,050
29,043
552,572
2,140,940
9,123
35,91S
511,974
2,018,874
5,999
38,390
405,702
1,008,844
10,031
42,524
317,109
1,209,004
12,244
48,G92
230,008
1,121,525
10,014
40,050
232,882
931,52S
8,175
13,097
32,700
172,574
090,290
51,780
188,501
750,442
104,080
■ £425,5SG
2,952,SG2
£11,071,049
seen that tlic West Coast, during its first decade, gave
ele" ncarl y ircc million ounces of gold, and added over
jj. Ve millions and a half sterling to tlic wealth of the colony.
* continues to yield steadily; many discoveries have been
fich tlom me mc ’ an( t i s not improbable that its alluvial
reef S more than eclipsed by the yields from its quartz
of which have already proved enormously rich.
* Tlie Examiner ceased publication many years ago.


JACKSON’S BAY AND OKARITO WARDEN’S
DISTRICT
From the Big Wanganui, in the north, to Big Bav, in the
soutli, the indications of mineral deposits arc apparent in every
river-bed, creek, beach, and bluff in the district; hut, in con-
sequence of the rugged and broken nature of the country, and
the foothills and Hats being so densely wooded, only a mere
fringe along the coast-line is at all known. High above the
snow-line on the Southern Alps, rich patches of gold have been
found, notably in the Waiho and Cook’s Rivers. Gold of the
same kind has been found on many of the hills and in the
creeks on the coast-range : in McDonnell’s Creek, near Lake
Mapourika; in the ranges behind Okarito; in the Waikukupa
Range; at the Abbey Rocks; in the Bullock Creek Ranges; in
the Stafford River Ranges; and in the ranges and creeks from
Barn Bay to Big Bay. All carry the same character of g°W>
and miners are working at various places along the whole of
this extensive coast-line. The greater portion of the gold has
been obtained from the beaches or black-sand workings. An
immense quantity of gold was obtained in some places, and l al 'o e
numbers of miners found profitable employment for many years-
The celebrated Five-mile Beach, near Okarito, was a notable
instance. The beaches from the Big Wanganui River to
Bay have been worked with varying success for the last twenty
years, and the beach-leads, especially the rich ones, such as to
found at the Five-mile Beach, might be profitably re-worked i
dredging-machines similar to those in use at the Clutlia R 1
were substituted for hand-labour. There is an abundant suppb
of water for motive-power, and, as payable gold Was left by
first workers under the water-level, dredging-machines, with
necessary alterations to suit local circumstances, would pfooa i
give good returns. The expenses, with the exception of the
of the dredge and the pipes for the water-supply, would
small, and when once fairly in motion the cost of working
dredges would be trifling compared witli the returns. The b
sand beaches which are to be found along the coast in e
direction could then be profitably worked.


With the exception of a schistose-quartz reef found on a
tributary of the Jackson River, no payable reefs have as yet been
discovered in this long stretch of mineral country. This is, how-
ever, no proof of their non-existence •, on the contrary, evidence
is furnished that they exist by the presence of what is known as
“specimen gold” in nearly every gully and range in which
coarse gold has been found, the want of success in tracing
reefs to their source being due to the difficulty of getting at the
lodes in situ, owing to the almost tropical nature of the vege-
tation with which the country is covered, and from the lack of
prospectors, arising from the sparseness of population. The reef
referred to, which is a well-defined lode, showing distinct dip
and strike, occurs in the mctamorphic slates, and is in close
proximity to the great mineral dike known as the Olivine
Range. In 1880 half a ton of stone was sent to Professor J.
D. Kirkland, of Melbourne, from this reef to he tested for
‘gold, and the analysis gave Gdwt. 12gr. of gold to the ton. Mr.
Kirkland in his report advised sinking, as the indications were
most promising j but, owing to the want of capital, nothing
further was done. The reef can he cut by running a low-level
a( Kt, at a cost of j£2oo, by which means large quantities of
stone could he obtained at trifling cost.
■K copper-lode was discovered some time ago near the
Huust River. The ore, which is the yellow sulphide, gave by a
laboratory test 35 per cent, of copper. The outcrop shows on
Ihe face of the Okura-Matakitaki Range, and is about 2ft.
thick. Several leases were taken up on this lode; hut the low
P R ce of copper, coupled with the want of capital, prevented its
development. A low-level tunnel, to cut the lode at
a h°ut 200 ft. below the outcrop, could he put in for about .£5OO,
and a thorough test could then he made. The lode is easily
ac cessible, being within one mile of the South Road. Its close
Proximity to the coal and limestone which have been found in
. ®' nc ’ghbourliood will, if the lode turns out as satisfactorily as
11 routed by the laboratory test, render this a most valuable pro-
It is certainly worthy of some attention from capitalists.
Outcrops of an extensive scam of bituminous coal have been
® Ulld °u the Bald Hills, near the Ilaast River. The scam is
Qu f' 20ft, thick, with from 10ft. to 12ft. of good coal; but as


yet nothing has been done to open it out. The coal is con-
sidered equal to that obtained at Brunncrton, a sample that was
sent to the Melbourne Exhibition having been awarded second
prize. The feearn could be easily worked by an open adit, and
there is plenty of first-class mining-timber on the ground. The
only drawback would be the cost of haulage to the port of ship-
ment (Jackson’s Bay), which is distant about thirty miles.
The ITaast River is available for small steamers, but, being a
bar-harbour, would not be suitable for coal-export. There would
be no difficulty, however, in making a railway, as the country is
level. Copper was discovered within five or six miles of the
place where the coal cropped out, and there is plenty of lime-
stone in the neighbourhood.
Lithographic stone has been found at the Abbey Rocks, and
a lease is held by a company at Hokitika. A considerable
amount of labour was expended in opening it out; but for some
time past operations have been suspended.
The mineral belt known as the Olivine Range, commencing
near the Jackson River, and extending to the head of the Holly-
ford, near Lake "Wakatipu, is now claiming the attention of pro-
spectors. Several important discoveries have been made: lodes
of chrome, stibnite, and nickel ores have been located; and
there is every probability that lodes of the other metals —'uz.,
gold, platinum, tin, galena, and copper —that have been found
in the river-gravels may reward a systematic search. The fol-
lowing is a table of the minerals which have been found, with
approximate dates of discovery : —■
Name of Mineral.
Place where found.
Year.
Gold
All over the district ..
Early in l s6 °
Coal
Paringa
1869
„ . . . ,
Bald Hills .. .. ..
1872
Stibnite
Paringa
1S7G
Chrome-ore
Olivine Range
1886
1876
Nickel (Awaruite) ..
Cascado River
1870
„ /, ore
Gorge Iliver ..
18S5
„ „ ore
Olivine Range
18S6
Quartz containing gold
iron-pyrites
and
Tributary of Jackson River
1S80
Galena
Paringa
1870
Argentiferous galena
. ,
Jackson River
1SS0
„ „
, .
Waipara River
18So
Copper-ore ..
Okura-Matakitaki Range
1882
Native copper
••
Olivine Range .. .
1880


DIST AN CE S.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Hokitika to Okarito (by sea).. .. •• 50
Hokitika to Bruce Bay (by sea) .. .. 70
Hokitika to Paringa (by sea).. .. .. 7 5
Hokitika to Haast River (by sea) .. .. 120
Hokitika to Jackson’s Bay (by sea) .. .. 140
Hokitika to Big Bay (by sea) .. .. 180
Hokitika to Ross (by land) .. .. • • 22
Hokitika to Okarito (by land) .. .. 02
Hokitika to Gillespie’s Beach (by land) .. 114
Hokitika to Bruce Bay (by land) .. .. 120
Hokitika to Paringa River (by land).. .. 140
Hokitika to Ilaast River (by land) .. .. 180
Hokitika to Jackson’s Bay (by land) .. 205
Jackson’s Bay to the mouth of the Pvkc River 50
(by land)
Jackson’s Bay to Lake Wakatipu (by land).. 00
Jackson’s Bay to mouth of Haast River (by 25
land)
Jackson’s Bay to junction of Landsborough 52
River (by land)
Jackson’s Bay to head of Lake Wanaka (by 77
land)
Jackson’s Bay to Pembroke (by land) .. 117
Jackson’s Bay to Cromwell (by land) .. 157
A subsidized steamer leaves Hokitika for Jackson’s Bay,
Callln S at intermediate ports, on the 26th of every alternate
commencing in January. In ordinary weather the run
is made in eighteen hours. The Government steamer
Stella” calls at Dusky and Milford Sounds, Martin’s Bay, Big
a J’ Jackson’s Bay, Paringa, and Bruce Bay, every three
youths, commencing in the beginning of January. Commu-
Jation 1)y knd
is by dray and horse-track from the Big
a "ganui (the northern boundary of the Warden’s district) to
g thence by sea-beacli, via Gillespie’s Beach, to Bruce
, r^le Main South Road, now under construction, crosses
River about two miles below the foot of the Francis
Se Ph Glacier; but, as this road is not yet available for traffic,
e line via Okarito is used instead,
j,. * r ° m the Paringa to the mouth of the Maori (or Waita)
ITe b a distance of thirty-five miles, the road has been formed


and metalled, and lias been tlie means of opening np a good deal
of country. From the Waita River to Jackson’s Bay the sca-
bcacli is again made use of. From the mouth of the Haast
River a horse-track leads over the Haast Saddle into Canterbury
and Otago. This road is fairly passable from Lake AYanaka to
the Clarke River; but between the river and the sea-beach im-
provements are badly wanted. From Jackson’s Bay south a
beginning has been made on tlie Main South Road towards the
Cascade A alley, and there are very strong reasons for pushing
on this work and completing the connection between this place
and the head of Lake AYakatipu. This road will skirt the
Olivine Range, running into Otago, and will facilitate prospect-
ing in that district, which, from the want of a track, is at
present almost unapproachable. Ferry-boats are to be found
on all the principal rivers, and accommodation-liouscs at con-
venient distances north of Jackson’s Bav; but from Jacksons
Bay south to the head of Lake AVakatipu parties travelling must
provide their own accommodation.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
The AA arden for the district is Mr. D. Macfarlane, R.M-,
Jackson’s Bay. Receivers of Gold Revenue : Jackson’s Bay, Ah'
D. Macfarlane; Okarito, Air. M. Donovan. Sittings of the
AA arden’s Court arc held quarterly at Jackson’s Bay and Okarito,
where miners’ rights are issued and registrations can
effected.


HOKITIKA WARDEN'S DISTRICT.
This district extends from tlie Tcrcmakan River southward to
the Big 'Wanganui. The digging centres passed on tlie main
road going southward are Kumara, Goldshorougli, Stafford,
Kanicri, Rimu, Ross, Donogliue’s, and Duffer’s Creek. Off the
main road, besides innumerable creeks, gullies, terraces, &c.,
throughout the length and breadth of the district, may he men-
tioned the old centres of Rig Paddock, llouhou, and Blue Spur,
leading to the later and larger workings at Humphrey’s Gully.
Gold was first discovered at Waimca and Kanicri in 18(54; at
Jones’s Creek (or Ross) in 18G5 ; at Taipo (auriferous quartz) in
1874; at Kumara in 187.1; and at Rimu in 1882. The total
quantity of gold exported from Ilokitika up to the 30tli June,
1880, has been 1,923,2030 z., worth about .67,300,000. Silver
T,as found at Rangitoto in 1872, and coal at Kanicri in 1871;
but neither the coal nor silver is at present being worked.
There has been a very large expenditure (nearly .6150,000)
incurred by miners in the district in the construction of water-
Ta ces, tail-races, dams, and reservoirs, independent of the large
irorks constructed by Government.
The ordinary alluvial diggings throughout the whole of the
TT i * v uo o O
OKitika District, unless new leads are found or new modes of
forking are adopted, arc destined, in all probability after a few
more years, to lose some of their population. The diggings
WI U then assume the character of old workings; hut from the
'' a - v i ll 'which, in various parts of Westland, these old work-
continue to pay wages, they appear to he almost incxliaust-
-1 e v The special features which at.present seem to promise
P er iuanency and employment for an increased number of hands
are *"bc following : At Kelly’s Terrace, near Stafford, by working
0n burger scale and taking up extended areas of ground,
cen Gone by the Kelly’s Terrace Company and the
eel of Fortune Company, just below; at Humphrey’s Gully,
f large water-race and extensive workings of the Ilum-
reys Gully United Company; at Ross, by the large and im-
* an t deep drainage and pumping operations carried on in the
by the Ross United Company; at Cedar Creek and Taipo,


by the probable development of the quartz reefs; and at Kanicri,
by the working of the coal-seams. Taking all these tilings
into account, there appears to be no reason why the district
should not merely hold its own, but also improve in material
prosperity, for many years to come. Here, as in every other
part of the colony, capital is required to aid in the development
of the mineral resources of the district.
Quartz reefs have been known to exist for some time past at
Taipo; but, owing to the inaccessible nature of the ground, the
yield of gold did not adequately compensate for the outlay in-
curred in working them. An expenditure of a few thousand
pounds in prospecting in that locality, as well as at Cedar Creek,
would probably give good results. Copper and cinnabar have
been found on the Pass River; but thirteen miles of road ivih
be necessary to give access for working these minerals. At
the Rangitoto and "Wanganui Rivers galena has been found,
though not as yet in payable quantities. Coal, iron, chrome,
copper, and silver are all known to exist in river-beds in the
district ; but sufficient attention has not yet been paid to these
minerals or the exploration of the river-beds.
KUMARA.
Kumara lias the reputation of being the best and most
prosperous alluvial field in the colony. A party of miner s
(Cashman and party) for some time worked a profitable claim
not far from the present Dillman’s Town road ; but when some
knowledge of their success got abroad their solitude was soon
invaded, and in the year 1870 Kumara took its place as a nel'-
established goldfield. The township of Kumara, with its broad,
quiet streets, gives little idea of a busy digging-town; but th e
mining population is to be found a mile or two away, at lh
man’s Town, and the operations are carried on in the neighbo ur
hood of that centre, and at Larrikins’, Dunedin Flat, and other
localities thereabout. Before Kumara became a goldfield on e
thousand acres of land had been set aside as an education
+ rl6
reserve. Like too many other endowment reserves on
West Coast, this area of primeval forest appeared likely
remain a thing of beauty rather than of profit for some g
tions to come, but the discovery of gold soon caused it


become an exception to tlie general rule. A large part of the
Tom of Kumara was built upon it, and a considerable revenue
was derived by the Education Board and its successors, the
School Commissioners, from the rents derived from building-
leases and mining-privileges granted over the reserve. It was
Dot long before the rents which in the heyday of the first
excitement were readily offered for building-leases began to
prove too onerous for the quieter course of business which
supervened, and much agitation and negotiation followed for
the purpose of procuring a modification of the terms on which
the leases were held. The question was at length set at rest
by the Kumara Education Reserve Act of 1879, which brought
the reserve under the operation of the mining laws and regula-
tions, subject only to a scale of fees payable to the School
Commissioners. The Act gave a power of sale under which
®ost of the leaseholds have been converted into freeholds, and
almost all the valuable or revenue-producing part of the reserve
has now passed out of the hands of the School Commissioners.
But the Kumara Education Reserve holds a pore-eminent posi-
tlon amongst endowments in Westland, as being perhaps the
°uly one that has yielded substantial returns for the advance-
ttent of the purposes for which it was reserved. Whatever
Prosperity may attend the destined High Schools of Hokitika
ail( l Grcymouth, they will owe the origin of their resources to
|he nucleus formed by the partition between them of the funds
111 the hands of the School Commissioners obtained from the
Sa j e °h allotments at Kumara. The Town of Kumara was con-
stituted a borough in 1877, and in subsequent years most of
e occupied sections of land were sold by the Westland Land
oar< ', so that the greater part of the town is now held under
recliold title. At Dillman’s Town the business sites are still
under the old tenure of business licenses; but the holders
0 these sites have now obtained, under the authority of a
hold' 6 ' n Act of 1885, the right to leases of their
m S s , with a power of purchase if the ground should not
Te aur iferous. The so-called sludge-channel at Kumara has
( j. C ° tnc j pretty familiar to the prablic, in consequence of various
Sc Ussions in Parliament, consequent upon difficulties which
Ve from time to time arisen in connection with it. Yet there


arc probably few public works in tlie colony which can show
so satisfactoiy a record of substantial industry promoted by
their means as the Ivumara Sludge-channel. This channel
is, in fact, a main tail-race, discharging into the Teremakan
Hivcr, and was made for the purpose of receiving the contents
of a number of private tail-races which would otherwise have
had to be severally extended to the Teremakau. The experi-
ment was new', and much had to be learned by experience. The
best mode of paving the channel, the number of tail-races that
might be permitted to open into it, the grade of each, and the
angle of junction, could not be accurately laid down beforehand,
and all these points became in turn sources of trouble. These
difficulties have now for the most part been obviated by the
construction of a second channel, which is formed as a branch
of the first, and relieves the main channel of some ten or twelve
of the tail-races which had been discharging into it, and thus
prevents the frequent choking-up of the channel, which had
been the cause of so much loss of time and hindrance to work.
The second channel was constructed with aid from the Govern-
ment, and is now vested in trustees representing the claim-
owners who make use of it, and it is managed by them, subject
to a code of regulations filed in the Warden’s office. A neces-
sary part of the sludge-channel scheme is the supply of water
from the Government race, without which the channel would not
be workable, inasmuch as it is necessary, not only that the
whole concern should be under the management of the paw
who has the control of the water-supply, but that there shou
be a flow of water through the channel besides the stream 5
brought into it by means of the separate tail-races. Thus
sludge-channel and Government water-supply aid and supple ol .
each other, furnishing the miners with an outlet for the di s
charge of their tailings, and with the water by which alone
outlet can be made available.
WAIMEA (GOLDSBOROUGH AND STANFORD)-
The Waimca Creek and some of its branches were prospcc
in 18G1, and towards the end of that year and the bcginnU'S
18G5 a large rush set in to that locality, in and about
population of several thousand miners soon collected.


early workings consisted of cradling and box-sluicing of a very
primitive description, a log of wood hollowed by the axe, and
paved with pebbles and moss, serving for a tail-box. Sawn
timber was difficult to get, and £2 10s. per 100 ft. was known
to be paid for the timber for fluming. In process of time the
diggings extended into a large number of sub-centres—German
dully, Fox’s, Big Dam, Maori Gully, Callaghan’s, Bed Jack’s,
Greek’s, Pretty Woman’s Gully, Liverpool Bill’s, Piper’s Flat,
and Auckland Beach. Tunnelling was afterwards carried on at
Tunnel Terrace, Chapel Terrace, Scandinavian and Ballarat
Hills, and Lamplough. Some of these diggings proved exceed-
ingly rich, especially the Scandinavian Hill and Ballarat Hill.
On these terraces there were lower or secondary leads, such as
Fenian Terrace and Finn’s Lead : the latter proved very rich,
and carries a small population to this day. Referring to
the Auckland Lead, Air. R. C. Reid, in his “ Rambles on the
Golden Coast,” says : “At this rush a ‘ wages claim ’ usually
b°re the interpretation of .€8 to .£lO per man per week. From
one of the rich claims as high as Gloz. were obtained in one day,
Pid for several weeks Bill Hyde and his mates obtained 80oz.
lOOoz. per week from their claim. The names of numbers
°f daim-holders at the Kanicri, the Auckland Rush, and at the
could be given, who cleared from £SOO to £6OO per
® au ia a few weeks, and the final division, in one or two
instances, after some six months’ work, amounted to as much
18 £1,500 per man.” Whatever may have been the past
Stories of the Waimca District, gold-digging operations have
oa S since settled down into quiet and steady working for
in most of the old creeks and terraces which recognize
as their centre the little townships of Goldsborough and Stafford
les Pectively. Some notion of the amount of work done in the
a °nrse of years may be formed from the extent to which the
of the Waimca Creek has been raised above its old level by
constant deposit of tailings brought down by its waters.
ls Process, which has at times caused much complication
adverse mining-rights, has proved a fertile source of
Ration, and it continues to form a difficulty in the raain-
a Pnce of the- main-road, which, near Stafford Town, is in
sta nt danger of being converted into a river-bed. Steady


work seems likely to go on for an indefinite period, and at
some localities very fairly payable claims appear still to lie
found. An instance of tliis may be seen at Tunnel Terrace,
on which a good deal of active enterprise in tbe way of tun-
nelling and other considerable works has been manifested during
tbe last few years. There has been increased activity in the
neighbourhood of Stafford Town, through the opening of large
claims by the Kelly’s Terrace and Wheel of Fortune Companies.
The former company was formed for the purpose of fairly
testing the auriferous strata at Kelly’s Terrace, the payable
character of which was firmly believed in by those who had in
earlier years sunk shafts upon the terrace, but who had been
compelled to relinquish operations through inability to keep
their workings clear of water. The present company has
carried a drainage-tunnel into the terrace, and is now about
to begin active operations in sinking and prospecting. Th c
Wheel of Fortune Company occupies the ground below Kellys
Terrace, with a fall through an old watercourse into the
Waimca Creek. Up this watercourse it is proposed to bring
a large tail-race, which is to be tunnelled a part of the way, with
the view of sluicing on a considerable scale. The success of these
two companies would doubtless lead to further enterprises of the
same kind, and would give a more active, as well as a more per-
manent, character to gold-mining in that locality. The Wainrea
Water-race (which really forms a portion of the Wainiea-
Kumara Water-race) was constructed by the Government at a
cost of nearly .€120,000, and supplies water to the principal
claims. In 1808, when most of the fields were in full work,
the population was estimated at fully seven thousand. Nearly
all the leads have been worked three times—in the first pilace,
by driving out the best and lower layers; secondly, on the out-
side of the leads and headings; and, thirdly, by sluicing.
latter process is likely to continue for many years to come.
HUMPHREY’S GULLY.
In this gully, which is near the Arahura River, and about
eleven miles from Hokitika, the operations of the eelebra
Hunrphrcy’s Gully United Company arc carried on on a large sea
The company holds mining-leases comprising an area of about two


hundred acres in one block. It forms a triangle in the junction
of two tributary valleys to the Arahura River, so that it lies
favourably for getting rid of the tailings, which is a most im-
portant element in the success of a large sluicing-claim. The
thickness of the gravel is from 150 ft. to 500 ft. From tests
made two or three years ago, Dr. Hector roughly calculated that
gold to the value of £3,000,000 might be obtained from the area
owned hy the company. The works throughout are of a most
substantial character, and have been well and carefully con-
structed. In order to conduct mining operations on an extensive
scale, this company has brought in the largest water-race in
the colony, but now finds it will have to be extended to the
different tributaries of the Arahura River, and probably to the
riter itself, before a sufficient supply of water can be ob-
tained. The present supply is taken from Granite Creek and
several tributaries of the Arahura River; but the supply thus
obtained is not sufficient for permanent sluicing in very dry
father. A portion of the creek has been dammed by means
°i an earthwork embankment about 3 chains long on the
to P and 35ft. deep, having a puddle-trench in the centre.
14ft. wide at the bottom and Gft. at the top; the total width of
the embankment on the top being 12ft. It has a slope of lin 3
°0 the breast or inner side, which is covered with broken metal;
the outside or back slope is lin 2. An outlet-tunnel is
ooustructcd on one end of the embankment through solid rock,
a sluice-gate fixed at the intake-end, the frame for which
18 set in concrete. The sluice-gate is constructed with planks
® n ' in thickness, covered with boiler-plate on the side next the
ace of tunnel, and slides on the face of iron rails, which are
uded into the concrete. The main sluice-gate is sft. high and
''vide, and has a relief-gate, 27in. by 12in., in the centre,
oth of these gates are lifted with geared pinions and screws,
ben the main sluice-gate was first constructed it was found
at one man could not raise it with the gearing, and this led to
e r elicf-gate being constructed, in order to lessen the pressure
the main gate, which is equal to about twenty tons when the
j arQ is full. The dam is capable of holding 6,281,000 cubic
et °f water, or about forty-five sluice-heads for four working
°f nine hours each. The water is carried from the dam
11


in an open conduit for 40 chains; then there is a flume con-
structed 59 chains in length, having a maximum height of 45ft.
The flume is sft. 4in. wide and 4ft. deep, having a fait of 33ft.
per mile. At the lower end of the flume there is an open con-
duit and several short tunnels, 6ft. wide at the bottom and sft,
deep, constructed on a grade of 1 in 660, their total length being
about three and a half miles. The water is taken through a
high range by a tunnel 60 chains in length, which took three
years to construct, owing to blue reef, or what is termed pug,
having been met with, which time after time filled up the tunnel
for 6 chains in length, causing deviations to be made from the
straight line to try and cut through better ground. This tunnel,
which under ordinary circumstances ought to have heen con-
structed for £6,000, cost about £II,OOO. The total length of
the water-race as constructed is eleven to twelve miles, and the
company is now devising a further extension, in order to sup-
plement the present water-supply. Judging from the area of the
watershed of the creeks from which the water will be brought in
when this extension is completed, there will not be a permanent
supply to fill the race, which is capable of carrying one hundred
sluice-lieads of water; but this can be obtained by a still further
extension of about four miles to the Arahura River.
The ground is worked from two faces, in hotli of which there
are two 6-inch nozzles, working under a head of 220 ft. Tfc
tail-race from the face where the two nozzles are at work is 3ft-
wide in the bottom and about 2ft. deep, while the other tail-race
is only 2ft. wide; both are paved, partly with wooden blocks
12in. thick, and partly with old iron rails and hematite-iron
blocks. Both tail-races have grizzles at the sides, covered with
coir matting, for saving the fine gold. The faces of the work-
ings are about 300 ft. high, and have a little gold distributed all
through the dirt. With a large supply of water, and taking
the quantity of gold that is being obtained at present, the ground
ought to be made to pay handsome dividends.
The present company was re-formed whilst the works were
in course of construction, the first company having expende
£14,415. The nominal capital of the company is £150,000, j®
150,000 shares of £1 each, of which 77,000 were declared p
up and allotted to the original proprietors for their interest *®


tie property. Of the balance, 63,000 contributing were also
allotted to the original shareholders, and 10,000 were held in
reserve; so that it may be said that the real capital is £77,415,
of which £72,692 is paid up. The present company com-
menced mining operations in June, 1885, and up to the end of
December, 1886, obtained gold to the value of £6,368, while
the expenditure for wages on the mine, including the cost of
opening out and constructing tail-races, has been £2,864, which
slows a very satisfactory result, considering the limited supply
of water. The gold obtained by the old company was 620 z.
lOdwt., representing a value of £240, thus making the total
value of gold obtained from the mine £6,608. One washing-up
gave as much as 300 oz. There are about sixteen men employed,
working, when there is a sufficient supply of water, in two
slifts of nine hours each. When a permanent supply is avail-
able, the directors contemplate using the electric light, which
will enable the claim to be worked continuously day and night.
The scene of this company’s operations is an old digging
locality. Humphrey’s and Macdonald’s Gullies, Greek’s No.
3, and other spots in that neighbourhood, have been known to
m mers for many years, and the creek-bed at the outlet of
Humphrey’s Gully was so raised by the tailings deposited that a
sna all bridge, under which a horse and dray used to pass with
ease , had its span at length entirely filled up. If the company
continues its operations on the increased scale intended, it will,
a Pparently, not be many years before Humphrey’s and Mac-
donald's Gullies are obliterated.
KANIERI.
Returning from Humphrey’s Gully, the old diggings of
me Spur, Houhou, and Big Paddock are passed, at all of which
B °me digging operations are still carried on ; and next in order
c °mes the township of Kanieri, formerly the centre of a rich
crowded goldfield. In the immediate neighbourhood of
anieri the operations are not very extensive, but up the Kanieri
IVer and about the Porks there is now a good deal of activity,
a j*d a considerable number of claims are being worked on and
. 01 d the river-banks. Many years ago a large water-right was
glTen to a company to bring in water from the Kanieri Lake,


and the work was subsidized by the Government; but the
undertaking was not a success, and the race became dilapidated.
Lately this speculation has been revived by Owens and party,
who have obtained in the Warden’s Court a decree o£ abandon-
ment as regards the old race, and a grant of the water-right for
themselves. This enterprise, if successful, may have a favour-
able and important influence in developing and maintaining
gold-mining in the Kanicri District.
WOODSTOCK.
Crossing the Hokitika River, the next diggings met with are
at Brighton Terrace, Woodstock, and, nearer to the river than
the course of the main road, Back Creek. The diggings at
Woodstock arc of old date, hut it does not appear to be very
easy to work the ground out, for a good many claims are still
giving employment along the roadside, and quite lately shafts
have been sunk and excavations made; whilst tunnels have
been driven under, and tramways constructed over, the road, for
the conveyance of tailings to the river-side.
RIMD.
Since the Ivumara rush, the most noticeable event which oc-
curred in the Hokitika District was the sudden formation, m
1882, of a township, now called Rimu, upon the main south road,
immediately beyond Woodstock Hill. It is significant, and no
without encouragement for the future, that the Rimu diggin»*'
so close to the old-established workings at and about Woodstoc
should have remained so long quite unknown. The workings
in this locality have all been carried on by sinking shafts an
lifting the dirt to the surface, this mode of working being h cS
adapted to the circumstances, as well from the more define
position of the wash-dirt as from the want of water and ot e
facilities for ground-sluicing. Although the Rimu digg lD »
have considerably fallen off since their first commencement, 1 1°
have proved very serviceable to the district. Situated as t e
are on the main road, provisions arc always readily accessi >
and the claims can consequently he worked upon smaller
than w r ould otherwise he the case.


EOSS.
The Town of Ross has been, ever since the year 1865, the
centre of various diggings, once very rich, and of a mining
population at one period very numerous. In 1865 ground was
■worked in the neighbourhood of the Totara River, and in the
same year the rush to Donoghuc’s took place, followed by that
to Jones’s Creek (the present Town of Ross). The prospects at
Donoghue’s Creek were very rich, and it is said that the claim
of the prospector (Michael Donoghue) yielded for some time as
much as £6O a man per week. In 1866 a rush took place to
Redman’s, where a township, long since deserted, soon sprang
up. At Jones’s Creek the gold was first got in the bed of the
creek, but was soon followed to the gullies, terraces, and flats
adjacent. Upon the fiat good returns w y cre got from the more
superficial levels, hut the water effectually prevented the deeper
ones from being worked. Companies were therefore formed and
leases of the ground obtained; hut their appliances also proved
unequal to the work, and the next step w T as the formation of a
Drainage Company to drain the flat, which received a money
contribution from those claims which were kept dry by this
means. The task, however, proved too much, even for this
company, and on the cessation of its work the claims were
abandoned. Upon this flat was situated the famous Cassius’s
claim, which was abandoned some years ago rvhen rich wash-
dirt was actually being taken out, owing to the enormous
quantity of water in the deep levels, which the machinery
then in use was not able to cope with. The ground is now
being worked by the Ross United Company, full particulars of
operations are appended. Notwithstanding the failure of
these attempts to drain the flat, a good many claims continued
to be profitably "worked in the gullies and on the hill-sides ad-
jacent, Conspicuous amongst these was the Mont d’Or claim,
which has been established many years, and is now working the
ground formerly held by the Mount Greenland Company. This
®cmpany is employing about thirty-five men, and is paying good
ly idends. Its water-power and the extent of its sluicing-opera-
10ns ar e excelled in "Westland by the Humphrey’s Gully Com-
P a uy alone. Another claim which for many years yielded steady,
n °t exceedingly rich, returns, was the one at Jones’s Creek


known as the Turbine, and held by Martcnson and party. This
claim, within the last two or three years, has passed into the
hands of the Ross United Company, whose drain age-tunnel
enables the ground to be worked to a much greater depth than
formerly; but it does not appear that this claim has yet
adequately responded to the greatly-increased outlay which has
been incurred. The want of a plentiful and continuous water-
supply has always been much felt in the Ross District. The
largest supply yet brought in is by the race formerly held by
the Totara and Jones’s Creek Water-race Company. This race,
which was constructed in the year 1866, is now the property of
the Ross United Company. A scheme has long been on foot
for bringing in a large supply of water from the Mikonui River,
and a portion of the tunnel required for the purpose has been
constructed; but the great cost of the undertaking has hitherto
precluded it 3 completion.
ROSS UNITED COMPANY.
This company holds an area of two hundred acres on Ross
Flat, comprising almost the whole of the old workings. In the
early days rich deposits of gold were found in this ground on
different bottoms, and the gold-bearing layers were driven out,
leaving the ground standing on timber and the stones that were
taken out of the wasli-dirt. These different gold-bearing layers
were in many places difficult to follow, owing to the bottom on
which they were formed. In some instances the bottom re-
sembled the wash-dirt; and when a poor patch occurred m
these layers it was considered that the bottom had not been
followed -. therefore, in many instances, the gold-bearing layer
was left sometimes under-foot and sometimes over-head the
ground that was blocked out. Although the ground above
water-level was then supposed to be worked out, it has since
been proved that sufficient gold was left to make it worth while
to work the whole of the old workings in a face. Since the stop-
page of the drainage-engine in 1872 private parties have been work-
ing in this old ground by carrying an inclined tramway down to
water-level, hauling the whole of the dirt up to the surfac e
by reversible overshot water-wheels, and putting the whole of
through a sluice-box. The large quantity of water in the deep


SECTION OF
MAIN SHAFT
ROSS UNITED SOLD MINING COX




levels prevented any work being carried on here without the aid
0 f heavy pumping-machinery to drain the ground. Five or six
, s ago a large company was formed to work the deep levels,
and a lease of one hundred acres was granted on consideration of
heavy machinery being erected to drain the water. The first com-
nv expended all its capital without getting any gold. The com-
any was then re-formed under the title of the Ross United Gold-
mining Company, with a nominal capital of €150,000. Of this
amount £103,500 has been declared paid up, leaving the actual
capital £46,500, of which £44,148 has been paid up. The
actual expenditure in working the mine, up to 31st March, 1886,
ffas £37,370, and the value of gold obtained £IO,IOB. This
company has bought out all the private claims on Ross
Flat; so that it now holds the whole of the ground where
the rich leads of gold have hitherto been found, comprising an
area of about two hundred acres. In order to drain as much of
the ground as possible, a tail-race was cut from the sea-beach,
which is about 90ft. below the level of the original surface of
the ground on the flat; and after completing this tail-race the
company commenced sinking a shaft on the terrace, in order to
avoid what was then considered the wet ground, their object
being, when the shaft was down sufficiently deep, to drive out
into the flat, and work the deep levels, as it was found, when
the deep ground was formerly worked, that there was scarcely
any water below 160 ft. The first shaft was finally aban-
doned and another was sunk at the bottom of the terrace on the
flat, which is now down to a depth of about 400 ft. In sink-
ing this shaft seven different gold-hearing layers were gone
through, hut none of these proved profitable to open out on.
The company, having abandoned the deep workings for a time,
turned its attention to the upper workings, above the level of the
tail-race, and erected elevators for lifting the tailings to a
height of 60ft., and then hy an inclined tramway to a further
height of 120 ft. The inclined tramway runs under a shoot
where the elevators’ buckets empty, and the door on this shoot
is worked by hydraulic gear, which raises and shuts it when
the truck is full. The company is now working the whole flat
on a face by hydraulic sluicing, allowing the muddy water to
pass into the undei’ground tail-race, taking the tailings and


stones up to the surface by elevators and tramway. In adopt-
ing this system a large paddock has to be made before there
is space for a sufficient length of sluice-boxes to be placed in
the bottom, and room to stack the stones; therefore a long
time must elapse before the full benefit of this system can he
obtained, as the large stones have now to be broken up and sent
to the surface, whereas they can be stacked in the bottom when
the paddock is sufficiently large. This will likewise enable the
elevators to lift more of the fine tailings, and consequently the
ground can be washed more rapidly. The quantity of stuff
washed in the paddock is limited to the amount of tailings and
stones that the elevators and trucks on the inclined tramway
can take up. According to data supplied by the manager, the
greatest quantity of stuff lifted by the elevators and trucks is
about 19 cubic feet per minute. When the trucks are at the
top of the incline they run into kick-ups, and are emptied on to
an iron grating made of iron rails. The fine stuff falls into a
sluice-box, and is carried away by a stream of water to Don-
nelly’s Creek, while the stones fall into trucks, -which are run out
and emptied over a tip-head. This mode of working has not, so
far, been remunerative to the shareholders; and this appears to
have induced them again to open out in the deep shaft, to try
and find the bottom Mr. Cassius was working on previous to
the stoppage of the drainage-engine in 1872. They therefore
opened out at 315 ft., 350 ft., and 380 ft., and drives were con-
tinued in various directions from the shaft, one going across
the flat for a distance of 400 ft.; but no payable ground was
found. A jump-up, 30ft. in height, ivas constructed at the end
of the drive, but it did not touch payable wash : then a monkey'
shaft was sunk 10ft. below the level of the tunnel, with the
result that payable gold was struck. The wash-dirt, the
colour of which is similar to what Mr. Cassius worked, is about
sft. Gin. in thickness, and, from the prospects, ° U S III
to pay handsomely for working. From the monkey-shaft
which is about Gft. Gin. x 4ft., 2oz. Bdwt. of gold t 0
the set was obtained, which is equal to about 9dwt. P er
cubic yard. A chamber has been opened out on the 350ft-
level, and a drive was put in under the point -where gold wa s
found. The golden wash is, however, worked on a highc r


Ross United Gold Mining Coy.
sketch or
ELEVATOR FOR LIFTING TAILINGS.


level, but in the intervening space shoots and feeders to
fill the tracks can he placed. The company has two
hydraulic engines, 18in. cylinders, with Oft. stroke, which are
working under a head of 314 ft. of water, and are placed in a
chamber in the shaft on a level with the tail-race. Each of
these engines works two columns of pumps, 15in. in diameter.
One of them works one column 135 ft., and another 86ft. The
other engine works one column 207 ft., and another 86ft., work-
ing eight strokes per minute, with about Oft. stroke ; or, in
other words, the engines arc nearly working up to their full
power.
The Prince of Wales Company’s property now belongs to the
koss United Company. It consists of a mining-lease of sixty
acres, elevating - machinery, with head- and tail - race. The
ground, previous to the formation of the Prince of Wales Corn-
Pony, was held in small-claims, which paid the shareholders good
Ira gcs for working. These claims were all purchased, and a
company was formed to work them on a more extensive scale.
A tail-race was constructed from the occan-bcach for 33 chains
111 length, having a fall of 3in. to the chain, which enabled the
company to drain the ground 40ft. under the level of the surface
a t the workings. The tail-race is used in carrying away the
Va ter from the hydraulic-sluicing operations which are. carried
011 a t this level. The whole of the tailings from the sluice-box
pass * u to a well about 6ft. deeper than the tail-race, and from
ls w ell the tailings arc lifted to a height of 77ft. with elevators,
l PPed on to a screen which separates the stones from the fine
? a terial and enables them to be run away in trucks, while the
e stuff falls i n to a sluice-box and is carried away with water
11 *"° l e flat. The elevating-machinery is driven by a turbine
a er-wheel constructed on the Whitlaw principle, placed under
Ca d of water 37ft. 6in. in height; but it is only in wet
o j, er that sluicing operations can be carried on, as tlie quantity
in r t6r ava^a hle is not nearly sufficient to work the machinery
ext ne . Wca ther. An ample supply can, however, be obtained by
w ln o the head-race to the Mikonui Itivcr, at an csti-
a cd cost of about ,€I,OOO.
a the elevator portion of the claim the Gulchcr system
e cti’ic lighting was introduced, and has proved very


valuable, as it enabled the company to carry on work at night
with the same facility as during the daytime. There are two
arc-lamps, of 1,000- and 2,000-candle power respectively, and
a sufficient number of incandescent lamps to light up the
various sheds where the elevating-machinery is located. The
electric-lighting plant is also connected with the workshop and
buildings at the main shaft, at a distance of about half a mile
from the dynamo.
EANGITOTO COMPANY’S MINE.
This mine is situated at the side of Mine Creek, about 1,700 ft.
above sea-level, on the Mount Rangitoto Range, eighteen miles
by road from Ross. The ore was first discovered in the side and
bottom of the creek, where rich silver specimens were found and
reported on at the time by Professor Kirkland, of the Melbourne
University, who obtained assays up to 800 oz. of silver to the ton.
Several assays which were made in the colonies and in England
gave an average of 2oz. of gold to the ton; and ninety bags of
the ore, treated at Swansea, yielded that return, irrespective of
silver. The outcrop of the lode, as now seen on the side of the
creek, does not, however, contain a large percentage of silver: d
is from 3in. to Gin. in thickness, of solid iron-pyrites, containing
gold, silver, galena, and zinc-blcnde, with a large proportion of
arsenic and sulphur; but the lode widened out to about 3ft. 111
thickness. A great deal of work has been done in this mine,
and several tunnels were constructed; but there seems to have
been no systematic mode adopted for cither working the mine or
treating the ore after it was taken out. The lode or vein of im®'
pyrites is dipping on an angle of about 20° to 25°, having bar
metamorphic clay-slate on top and bottom. In some places*
where the lode is exposed in one of the tunnels, the pyrites * s
decomposed, and it appears as a vein of red oxide of iron wise
with soft quartz. It is about eight years since any work was
done at this mine. The ore as it was then treated did not pi°' e
payable for working, the principle adopted being similar
what is generally used for extracting gold from quartz. A crllS
ing-battery of three heads of stamps, an amalgamating-ba rr >
and two small buddies are still on the ground; but it app^ s
that very little gold or silver could be got by this process.


company subsequently erected an open roasting-pan, made of
■wrought iron, about lGft. long and Bft. wide, to calcine the ore
before crushing; but the machinery and process of treatment
adopted were totally unsuitable for the class of ore found in the
mine.
Mr. H. A. Gordon, Inspecting Engineer, from whose annual
report most of the above particulars are taleen, says :
“ From what I have seen of the ore, and the thickness of lode
as represented to me by Mr. James Bevan, I think it is of a payable
character for working. Mr. McLymont, assistant to Professor
black, accompanied me to the mine, and made several chemical
tests of the ore, which showed it to have about two parts of gold to
one of silver, with traces of galena and zinc-blende. I examined
the tailings lying around the battery, and was surprised to find
them full of quicksilver. On washing some in an old fry-
mg-pan I collected in a short time about 201 b. of quicksilver,
a "d from Gdwt. to Bdwt. of gold and silver; so that, judging
from the appearance of the material treated, the company
could never have taken a great deal of gold and silver from
the ore: whatever there was still remains to a great extent in
the tailings.
“About 20 chains higher up Aline Creek there is a quartz
l2ft. to 16ft. wide cropping out, but it appears to be
? a barren character. It is full of mica, very little iron-pyrites
ein g discernible. Air. Bevan took me over the top of the
fountain to see another outcrop, which is known as Linemann’s
Q^ ase> atl( l was represented as having given 2oz. of gold per ton.
getting there we were greatly disappointed : scarcely any
1 had been done, and the only thing that could be seen was
T6 * n iron -Pyritcs, about three-quarters of an inch in
c Bess. This portion of the country is well worthy of being
as .it is a locality where gold, silver, tin, zinc, and
Per may l )c f oun( j. The Silurian rocks adjoin the granite at
ree k, in the Rangitoto Company’s ground, on the side
the ° River; and the granite is again found on
S ° of the AVaitaha River.”


DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Christchurch to Hokitika .. .. .. 120
Hokitika to Kanieri.. .. .. .. 3
Hokitika to Stafford.. . . .. ..
Hokitika to Goldsborough .. .. .. 10J
Hokitika to Kumara .. .. .. 19
Hokitika to Itoss .. .. .. .. 20
Hokitika to Greymouth .. .. .. 52
A good main road runs through the district from Kumara to
Boss. There is communication between Kumara and Greymoutl
twice daily; and by main road more inland through Marsden.
The main road goes through Goldsborough, Stafford, Hokitika,
Kanieri, and Rimu. From Ross there is only a bridle-tract
southwards. There is a good road from Hokitika to the Han-
Hau and Blue Spur, crossing the Arahura River by a g°°i
bridge, called the “ Upper Crossing,” and continuing by a nofl
somewhat neglected road to the junction at Harris’s of the oil
Christchurch and Kumara road. There is also the loop-h®
connecting the Hokitika and Kumara road with the old Christ-
church road. There are various foot- and pack-tracks in differ®*
parts of the district. Generally speaking, the roads and tract*
in the district arc kept in very fair repair.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.
Warden, Air. J. Giles, R.AI.; Hokitika and Kanieri, Air-
South, Clerk of Court; Ross, Air. C. A. Barton, Clerk of Court-
Stafford, Air. D. Hannan, Clerk of Court; Goldsborough al
Kumara, Air. J. AlcEnnis, Clerk of Court; Kumara Watei'-r
Air. J. Dand, manager. Wardens’ Courts are held at Hok> 1
every AYednesday, at Kanieri on alternate Alondays, nt
on alternate Saturdays, at Stafford and Goldsborough on 3
nate Thursdays, and at Kumara on alternate Fridays.


ItEOrgr-EKEP Mi mug Companies in the Hokitika Warden's District actually in operation on tho Slst December, 1885.
Kamo of Company.
S3
1 S3
p*
Bn
I<?
/ Capital
1 declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters'
Shares.
1
Total Value ol
Total
f
1 Capital
Actually
lleceived
from Calls.
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Mine.
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid by
Com-
pany.
Date of Last
Dividend.
Amount
of Last
Dividend.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
fl
® o
Hokitika.
Humphrey's Gully United
150,000
£
150,000
£
77,000
£
41,458
£
2,300
£
£
Oct. 10,1881
Alluvial
20*
(Limited)
Totara.
Mount d’Or (Limited) ..
12,000
12,000
10,800
4,050
20,000
12,000
Jan., 1886
GOO
1882
35
Mount Greenland (Lim’d)
2,400
12,000
10,000
13,000
6,480
Jan., 1880
480
1875
f
Ross United (Limited) ..
150,000
150,000
103,500
12,000
41,495
10,108
, f
1880
40
William Tell (Limited) ..
24,000
24,000
1,200
100
• •
1883
Quartz
4
Staffobd.
Kelly’s Terrace Water-
15,000
15,000
3,000
1,216
Alluvial
12
race and Gold - mining
Company (Limited)
Kumaha.
Kumara Long Tunnel
16,000
16,000
14,533
5,360
2,452
700
Jan., 1885
100
May 16,
10
(Limited)
1882
* Besides contractors.
t Not working; property leased.


XO
co
CO
tH
u
o
a
o
o
CJ
fi
05
t-H
CO
o
-*->
£
o
FH
cj
M
«
EH
CO
p
V
W
fi
Ph
Es
a
H
B
o
K
©
.a
2
P G>
,3
o
A 3
ph
o
fs
co
w
J 25
i-H
3
N
Ph
-<
fc>
C 3
Name of Company or Owner.
Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital.
Date when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
©02
S-'S
H <1
S-^
«■* O
£ m2
o o 5 ®
p ■ £■*■
»-j
0*3
« ©
S3 “
o a o
111
0-3 fc"
S3 m ®
p S (j
rt
ci g .3
i o s'
£ o
to
Crushing-
plant :
Number of
TTrtrt rid nf
Gold-saving Appliances:
IlUUjUd Ui
Stampers,
Stonebreakers
Hollers,
Quicksilver, Tables
with Copper-plates, or
Blanket-tables.
Berdans, or
Concentrators
O o
0) ,5h
5 a .
So®
o2
Totaea.
£
£
A. R. P.
£
William Toll* ..
24,000
12,000
1883
11 3 10
Totara
At work
Hand
Water
* *
Quicksilver, tables
with copper-plates
100
* Four men prospecting.


Gold-mikhio Leases and Special Claims held in the Hokitika Waeden’s
, DiStbict on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
o
SC'S
a c3
< 2
Hokitika.
A. E. P.
£ s.
James Clarkef
July 1, 1883
GO 0 0
Aug. 28, 1883
Humphrey’s
Gully United
+
+
John Maherf..
G. M. Co.
Fob. 11, 1884
100 0 0
..
+
+
Kauieri.
Samuel Williams and
party*
John Roberts and party*
John O’Regan & party*
Juno 4, 1878
1G 2 4
. .
. .
17 0
Juno 4, 1878
1G 2 4
17 0
Aug. 13, 1878
14 1 28
..
15 0
Totara.
Comiskeyf..
Dec. 2, 1880
100 0 0
Sep. 20, 1882
Ross United
+
James A. Bonar,. P. Co-
ajskey, J as . Clarkef
AbelWebberf
Aug. 30, 1882
GO 0 0
Aug. 15, 1883
G. M. Co.
Ditto
+
+
Mar. 1, 1883
Mar. 1, 1883
40 0 0
57 2 25
May 2*3, 1883
Donnelly’s
+
+
+
P. Comiskeyf..
Mar. 1, 1883
GO 0 0
Feb. 19, 1884
Cr’lcG.M. Co.
Prince of
+
®osa No. 2 Gold-mining-
, bompanyf 6
ing r d '° r Gol< J-min-
T l n S Companyf
Sept. 1, 1883
81 2 14
Wales G.M.C.
+
+
Mar. 1, 1884
Mar. 1, 1884
50 0 0
54 3 15
May 2G, 1885
Donnelly’s
+
+
+
Companyf
May 1, 1884
45 0 3
••
Cr’kG.M.Co.
+
+
M rr ® tait ord.
M-Soulahan*
W. Griffith.*
Jan. 28, 1872
10 0
5 0
May 11, 1877
16 2 0
Jan. 2*4*, 1879
Taipo Quartz
83 4
Heni y Young*
Feb. 4, 1878
400 by
Mining Co.
17 0
Owen te° n ‘ h : ••
Mar. 13, 1878
200 yds.
Ditto
17 0
■ttenry G °'* • •
Mar. 25, 1878
Ditto
17 0
J. / ■‘■“omas and Co.*
April 2, 1878
Ditto
17 0
T %on s f rne and B -
Sop. 28, 1883
50 0 0
Mar. 7, 1884
Kelly’s Ter-
7 10
6111681Iar pByand Co.f
Juno 8, 1885
28 0 0
race Co.
1 8
W.s
Wara 611 '? 6 ' Party*
B. J SS? 800^
Bobn e r? a ° n . M. D.
ettt
Jan. 1, 1883
10 0 0
10 0
July 1, 18S3
10 0 0
••
••
10 0
Jan. 1, 1883
50 0 0
Juno 19, 1885
Kumara L’ng
T’nol G.M.C.
§
We??* ?*nt on S n„„ !ol A Special claim. _ .
i tl . c ie f or , ccla l claims is from Is. to ss. per acre for the first term of fivo years;
year f ?m emaiain g y°ar-
aaaum,' Ws.; second, £5; third, £7105.; fourth, £10; fifth, £12105.; afterwards,


THE GREY WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The first discovery of gold took place at the Greenstone in 1864,
and towards the close of that year at Red Jack’s. Then
followed the discoveries on the sea-beach north and south
of the Grey River, at Marsden, Maori Creek, Arnold, Grey-
moutli, and Moonlight, the most valuable quality being found at
the latter place. Although a large quantity of gold has been
won by the sturdy miners, who have had to contend with great
difficulties, owing to the densely-wooded nature of the country
and the absence of roads, there still remains a large area un-
worked, and to a great extent unprospected. Considerable areas
have been tested, and would prove payable if the ground could
be sluiced; but at present they arc unworked. Gold has been
found in all the tributaries of the Bald Range; but the Black-
ball and Moonlight, on the northern bank of the Grey River,
have not been in much favour with the miners, as other places
offered greater advantages in the way of roads, stores, &c. There
is a large area of country at River View, on the Ahaura River,
which is know r n to be payable, but it must remain unworked until
water can be brought to it; and miners are hopeful that the hel-
son Creek "Water-race will be extended in that direction, as there is
at present no water within reach of the ordinary miner’s means.
There has been a very large expenditure in the past in brings
in water, about .£lOO,OOO having been spent by miners in
construction of water-races, tail-races, and dams in different
parts of the district; whilst £90,000 was expended by Govern-
ment on the Nelson Creek Water-race.
A large area of likely-looking country remains still nn
touched. Gold has been found in the Clarke and Nancy Ri' ers ’
and at Granite Creek; and during the construction of the tra
from Marsden to Lake Brunner very good gold was found q
recently on one of the contracts. There are indications
quartz reefs at Moonlight, and especially at Slaty Creek; B
nothing has yet been done to thoroughly test them. . . ,
In the Grey District the almost universal method of mb 1111 ®
adopted is that of hydraulic and ground-sluicing: the i Ol
predominates. For successful hydraulic operations cei’tm 11


sentials are indispensable : the miner must command a ready
supply of water in liis head-race to give the requisite force, and
suitable elevation to insure this, whilst he must have sufficient
fall to enable the debris to run through his tail-race boxes with
a certain velocity, so as to carry in its course the immense
quantity of stuff which he gets rid of by this means only.
After the preliminary clearing of -whatever timber may encumber
the claim, the work of excavation is carried on by the force of
the head-water alone, the miner relieving his tail-boxes of all
the heavy work as much as possible, by removing the larger
stones and boulders as they arc dislodged from the face. It will
thus be seen that a great deal depends upon the altitude or
volume of the supply of the head-water. This force is generally
augmented, when necessary, by the storage of the head-
water in large dams, from wdiich it is of late years conveyed
to the mine by means of large iron pipes (which arc more
convenient and economical than the canvas hose formerly used),
terminating in a nozzle with a discharge-aperture of about lin.
0 3in., the last length of piping having a universal joint,
enabling the miner to direct upon any portion of the face a
powerful stream of enormous pressure, which tears away all
ore it in its resistless course. From this point all earth,
oes, & c ., are earned ])y their own gravitation, by aid of the
the S 6( AVatei ’ J the upper mouth of the tail-race, down which
c stuff runs. These tail-races arc made by excavations in the
rac ’ a care f u llv-calculated decline to the end of the tail-
sometimes two or three miles in length. All the materials
of v lc head-water pass down the tail-race, the sides
ston 1C * usuall y lined, with great labour, by the small
of tff S C ° IICCtC(I ' U cll tting. This is necessarily the first work
j ncu muicr : before lie commences opening out his claim it is
ent on him to cut his tail-race, and water is generally the
her f SCt ‘ ddlc bottom of the main tail-race, which is to be used
Wsuall 6r r 1C savin S °f the gold, is paved with blocks of wood,
i- a ken' V 2' ddc ''i I ' m b 2ft. in width by 4in. thick, with the angles
batten ’ AV^lcn pk K ‘ c< l together, and kept in position by
left bet Baded a l° n o the tail-race on cither side, interstices are
a wrife WCen lc blocks, into which, by their own gravitation, the
r ° Us particles fall during their rapid progress, while the less
12


valuable portions o£ the sluiced materials go down the tail-race.
However long this tail-race may be, or however great the fall,
and consequently the increased velocity, of the water, 75 per
cent, of the gold recovered is found within a short distance of
the place of entry into the tail-race. The 75 per cent, does not,
it is to he feared, mean 75 per cent, of the whole of the gold
which has been washed out of the claim ; for, whatever length the
tail-race may be, traces of very fine gold arc to be found amongst
the sludge at its terminal point, and it is possible that the
assistance the miner obtains from a good fall may be dearly
purchased by the loss of a considerable portion of the fine gold,
which consists very often of thin, light scales, and, their weight
being disproportionate to their surface, they are carried away
readily by the swift-running tail-water. In sluicing down from
the claim the earlier portion of what is opened out, before
the wash-dirt is reached, little care is taken with the tail-boxes;
but when the work is sufficiently advanced, and the ground
stripped down to the wash-dirt, more caution is observed, and
after working a certain time, according to the nature of the
ground, the water is turned off and cleaning-up begins. F° r
this purpose the bottoms arc taken out of the tail-race, and all
the wash-dirt collected in the spaces left between the bottoms is
carefully scraped, collected, and washed up. The bottoms are
cut transversely from the log, so as to afford the greatest re-
sistance to the immense wear and tear caused by the tons o
tailings which pass so swiftly over them; hut the attrition s 0
great that they quickly become thin and hollowed, and have
he frequently replaced. They cost in this district £5 per 10 '
Besides the tail-race described, which is a tail-race fo l '
saving of gold, it is necessary in this and other districts liable ®
heavy rainfalls to have auxiliary tail - races for the P ur P^ e
of running down storm-water; and these are used also f° r
purpose of getting rid of the worthless debris in which d 1
known no auriferous deposits are present, when clearing
fresh portion of the ground for new work. It will thus he
that the work in connection with a sluicing-claim is
with a great deal of preliminary expenditure of time, labour*
money. In the first place, the water-right for the heat -
has to be secured, and the race has often to be cut many m


in length, necessitating no little engineering skill. The race
has in many instances to be conducted round precipitous country,
to be flutned across depressions in its route, and to be tunnelled
through obstacles that cannot be otherwise avoided. Then the
tail-race has to be laid out so that its terminal point, whence
the tailings have to be discharged, shall be free of all chance of
damaging the property of others, and, above all, so as to secure
sufficient fall. These works being costly, it is very desirable for
the miner to be able to look forward to turning over ground in
the neighbourhood of his claim which can be commanded by his
head-race and worked by the same tail-race.
Of this class of claims in the Grey Warden’s District, that
hnoirn as the Brian Boru, situated in German Gully, near
Ahaura, owned by Gough and party, is the most extensive and
■worthy of notice. The claim is held under lease, which has
still eight years to run. The water is derived from the Nelson
Creek Water-race, the branch-race constructed by the party
being 75 chains in length, and capable of carrying 15 heads of
water. This was made at a great cost of time and labour, and
resulted in the death of one of the partners, who w’as killed by
a of earth when engaged in constructing a portion of this
ra ce round a precipitous face in German Gully. Their tail-race,
v bich is constructed of sawn timber, is not in deep ground, its
greatest depth being only 25ft. It is three-quarters of a mile
1U en gth, with a fall of only 18in. to the chain. The debris
passes into German Gully, and the tail-water, with the finer
ge, flows into Nelson Creek, thence into the Grey River,
and Water ' race commands an area of about four hundred acres,
' fbould expectations be realized by the result of the working
“is claim, more ground in the neighbourhood can be taken
the hmu'back to the successful working of the locality is
— aS & reat an cssent ' a l for sluicing as a supply of
a ad i' Ta * :er ' Gough and party have been working three years,
ave expended over ,£2,000; but their prospects are very
real They may hardly be said to have yet commenced the
he °h their claim ; but, the preliminary operations having
onl niß tscd, it will be continuous productive work in the future,
|j e y SUs Pended by chance accidents to their races, such as may
Cause d by storms or floods. The claim was only worked


about a month last year, when operations had to he suspended
to make the present improved tail-race ; hut during that time
the party obtained 2510 z. of gold (the amount paid to the Nelson
Creek Water-race for five heads being iifiO), and during the con-
struction of the new tail-race they secured 84oz. from the earth
removed in the process.
Up at Half-ounce (Granville), and the district known as
Noble’s, between Orwell Creek and the Little Grey, there is an
extensive country which is well known to be auriferous, and it is
only kept in the background for want of a water-supply. The
workings are mostly carried on by means of tunnels, the dirt being
washed in sluice-boxes. The rainfall of the district could k
conserved in dams if the contour of the country admitted of
their construction; but the ground is for the most part hilly,
and flat lands suitable for dams are at a distance which renders
them useless for such a purpose. Water secured by this meansis
more valuable than a ceaseless running supply, and must k
under the immediate control of the miners using it. atcr
from a head-race of an ordinary kind, the property of the nuntfi
and not hired from any other person, when not in use is turn
off and runs away down the tail-race ; but when stored in da®
it is too costly to be thus wasted. The only supply of
derived from storage in the special drainage-areas granted, a ”
abandoned tunnels arc made use of as dams; but the snpf
thus obtained is totally inadequate to requirements,
much to be regretted that no permanent supply is availa >
this country, which has been thoroughly tested, is undou
highly auriferous, and would give employment to large nnm
It is believed that the waters of Itandcll Creek, a
the Aliaura River, could be made to give a small but cons
supply to work this large area; but the work would en a
expenditure of capital beyond the means of the miners m
locality. _
Another method besides sluicing has prevailed for so®
past at Orwell Creek, where the wash-dirt is only to be
at a great depth in the valley of the creek. A number o
have been taken up from time to time and successfully
the most important at present being the claim known
Napoleon Hill, owned by Mr. George Erickson and P


As their water-supply was limited, they had to devise other means
besides sluicing. Tlieir first large work was a tunnel tail-race,
about a mile in length, running up the centre valley, commenc-
ing underneath their claim, about 30ft. below the surface.
Their main shaft was sunk from this spot, and the wash-dirt was
raised to the surface by a simple but effective process. The
shaft is divided in the centre. In one division a small tank is
filled with water from the race, and "when ready is lowered into
the shaft, and by its weight brings up in the other division of the
shaft a truck of wash-dirt, which is then removed to the paddock
for washing, and the truck replaced empty in the shaft. The
water is released from the tank by means of a valve, and runs
down the tail-race; and the wasli-dirt tnick, by its own weight,
n gs up the empty water-tank. The outlay on this tunnel
tail-race is said to have been about 125,000. This expenditure
was not, however, borne by one party : the tail-race was con-
structed, and is maintained, hv joint contributions. The claim,
which still yields handsome returns to its shareholders, derives
lts name from some high ground in the locality, which has been
■Worked in times past by the tunnelling process, and which
would still pay well for sluicing hut for the common want —a
sufficient water-supply. Randell Creek could he made effective
01 locality also.
. kelson Creek a considerable amount of gold was obtained
' a P ast times. At Try Again Terrace very large quantities were
° UI1( > au< l the hare rock is now exposed where the best returns
Tere secur ed. There is reason to believe that any prospectors
otl ld now be richly rewarded who would sink through this
° m > as > from the contour of the country, it is very probable
a t this shallow reef is not the natural bottom. Timber is
P ros P ec ti n g- s haft or two would soon determine
in I' who have been spoken to On tlie subject arc
c uied to agree with—or, at all events, have nothing to urge
’this theory; but the old objection is “ the want of
the 10u ld rich dirt be found, it would pay well to haul it to
it by the ordinary process in long-tom
iu S a ttcmpts have been made at Nelson Creek to put
at the hydraulic lifting process which was first adopted
8 Uc Spur, Lawrence : but the efforts have not been
® Cc essful.


Besides the modes described, there arc no other means
adopted in the Grey District for gold-mining except the old,
bcach-combing, desultory efforts on the sea-beach between Grev-
moutli and Barrytown. There are only two companies working
throughout the district —one at Nelson Creek, whose operations
have been suspended during the past year owing to an unfortu-
nate failure of the machinery; and a company which was
established in Victoria for the working of the deep tailings at
Arnold (Maori Gully). AVith these exceptions, the whole of the
claims arc held by parties of individual miners, and there are
no extensive co-operative workings.
OTHER MINERALS.
Stream-tin has been found in Canoe Creek and at Clarke
River, and tin-crystals at Slaty Creek and in the vicinity of
Lake Brunner. The quantity did not justify the prospectors ®
going to much expense, and beyond the mere discovery nothing
has been done.
Antimony was discovered at Blackball, and may in course o
time he profitably worked. A lode Avas found in the claim o
the Langdon’s Quartz-mining Company. Two large P arce
were sent away for analysis, the first of which w r as favouia }
reported on, hut the second parcel did not turn out quit
well. The company ceased operations soon afterwards, and e
ground was abandoned for some time, hut is now rcoccupicd a*
a special claim. It is thought that the company relaxed i
efforts prematurely, and that in the hands of energetic proprid 01
better results may be looked for. , ,
Copper has been found at Blackball, but not in
quantities to pay, and as early as 1860 a discovery of c 0
Avas made on the Paparoa Range, leading towards the coast a
Razorback.
Argentiferous galena has been found at Blackball and x 0
light; but the lode Avas not traced, the dense bush
prospectors from prosecuting their discovery. Even the
Hills are coimred Avitli moss, so that many indications ■"
might be detected by the experienced miner lie hidden from
most indefatigable prospector. a j e
There are indications of iron at the Brunner, and carbon
of iron is said to have been found at Greymouth.


The coal-mining industry is making great progress, tlie total
output from the Brunner, Coalpit Heath, and Wallsend mines,
up to the end of 1885, being considerably more than half a
million tons. Some time ago a scam of bituminous coal of
very superior quality was found at Blackball, and steps will
shortly be taken to work it, as the prospectors have secured the
assistance of capitalists. A large deposit of bituminous coal
has also been found at Coal Creek, but, owing to its being so
inaccessible, the provisional company formed to work it has so
far been unable to do anything.
PRICE OF GOLD.
The average price of gold is .£3 10s. per ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS-of COURT.
The Warden for the district is Mr. Jackson Kcddcll, Resi-
dent Magistrate, Greymoutli. Mr. AV. A. Barton, Grcymouth,
K Receiver of Gold Revenue for Grcymouth, Dunganville, and
Arnold: he visits Dunganville every alternate month, and
Arnold quarterly. Air. Ibbetson, Aliaura, is Receiver of Gold
Revenue for Aliaura, Nelson Creek, and No Town : he visits
Relson Creek and No Town fortnightly. Air. AlcEnnis,
is the Receiver of Gold Revenue at Kumara, visits
Greenstone weekly. Sittings of the AVardcn’s Court arc held
Greymoutli weekly; at Aliaura, the first Friday and Satur-
al in each month; at Nelson Creek, the first Thursday in
month; at No Town, the third Friday in each month; at
reenstone, the third AVednesday in each month; at Dungan-
e > every alternate month; and at Arnold quarterly, on such
a I s as may suit other engagements, of which information can
e Stained* at Greymoutli.
DISTANCES.—COAIAIUNICATION.
Miles.
n estport to Grcymouth .. .. .. 103
Greymoutli to Hokitika .. .. .. 42
Grcymouth to Aliaura .. .. .. 24*
Greymoutli to Nelson Creek .. .. .. 20
Greymoutli to Arnold .. .. .. 16
Greymoutli to Dunganville .. .. .. 16


Milos.
Greyraouth to No Town .. .. .. 16
Greymouth to Greenstone .. .. .. 20
Grevmontli to Barrytown .. .. .. 22
Greymouth to Moonlight .. .. .. 28
Greymouth to Marsden .. .. .. 10
Greymouth to Kumara .. .. .. 20
Besides the main roads in the district—Greymouth through
Brunner to Aliaura and liecfton, and from Greymouth through
Marsden to Kumara and Greenstone, and their branches to
No Town, Arnold, and Maori Creek (Dunganville), and along
the North Beach to'Barrytown cm route to Charleston and
Westport—the Grey County Council has constructed a large
number of horse- and pack-tracks. In the Aliaura sub-district
five miles have been made from Waipuna to the Clarke River,
opening up. communication with the Nancy Itiver and with Mr.
Graham Flowers’s run, and thus to the trunk-road to Canterbury.
A prospecting-track has been made between Orwell Creek and
Brandy Jack’s, and from Nelson Creek towards Ilaupin.
From Brunncrton to Moonlight, a distance of twenty-eight
miles, there is a good track. At Nelson Creek tracks have
been made from Hatter’s Terrace to Kangaroo and B
Hill; thence to Lake Brunner a track is in course of con-
struction. A track has been completed for a distance of F ve
and a half miles from Hatter’s Terrace to Blackwater and R
Jack’s, and there is also a track from Deep Creek to No Town.
A branch of the main road runs from Marsden to Maori Creek
(Dunganville), and a track is now being made from the latter
place to Limestone. A track is in course of construction be-
tween Irishman’s (Marsden) and Lake Brunner, a distance of
twelve miles, the greater portion of which has been finished.
This track will prove of great assistance to prospectors. It rullS
through country which has remained unprospected up to the
present, and hopes are entertained of its turning out well, as
good gold was found in one part of the road by the contractors.
All the main and branch roads are available for wheels
traffic. There is regular communication by steamer bet wed 1
Greymouth, Wellington, Nelson, Lyttelton, and Dunedin. I®'
portant works for the improvement of the port are now 111
progress.


Registered Mining Company in the Grey Warden’s District actually in.
operation on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company.
a s s-2
3.5 2?
* o o
Capital
Actually
lieceivod
from Calls.
Total Value of
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals,
taken from
Company’s
Mine.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
©
°o
©3*
■2 a
sa
3^
&
Ahaura.
£
£
£
Band oi Hope Water-
race and Gold-mining
Company, Nelson
Creek (Limited)
3,200
3,200
2,87G
8GG
May, 18S2
Alluvial
8
Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Grey Warden’s
District on the Ist July, 18SG.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
~ o
s o a
<
mi Gkeymoutii.
A. R. P.
£
■Laomas Flanagan* ..
Oct. 23, 18S2
4 0 0
July 27,
1835
Clioki Yung
4
t t. Town.
Jolm Rasmussen*
Hay and
Jan.
1, 1878
10 0 0
others
10
t i Aiuuiu.
o°™ B «ter and party*
Gilmer*
R,ch^Plulpottand3
others*
Smnottf
Mar.
July
Oct.
1, 1875
1, 1877
1, 1880
0 2 35
10 0 0
2 1 1G
Sep. 24,
1S79
T. H. Garth
10
10
3
July
1, 1832
20 0 23
July 28, 1883
Baudot Hope
30
James $ an<1 5 ot,lers *
W. R. and G.
'SL Company
July
1, 18S4
9 3 5
10
araes hmnott*
Larkins* "
July
July
1, 1884
1, 1834
2 2 22
5 15
3
G
Q -Jamm Gough* ..
Jackson and 11
* kn °' vn as the
WerD 0^™00^
Samuel T| Harpei '* • •
others^ 1 ° Wer and 2
July
April
Jan.
1, 18S4
1, 1S84
1, 1885
5 0 0
37 0 5
4 0 0
5
19
4
Jan.
1, 18S5
10 0 0
Oct. 8, 1S85
J. A. Hurley
10
(Thrower’s
j 0 T be « Carso*
R -Wf ncUothers * : '
and 5 others*
Jan.
1. 138G
9 3 3S
interest)
10
Jan.
1, 18SG
9 3 5
. ,
. .
10
July
1, 18SG
9 2 17
* *
10
* Lease.
I Special claim.


INANGAHUA WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
Gold was discovered in tlie Inangahua District about twenty
years ago. llccfton is tlie centre of a large area of mineral
country, which is known to contain, in addition to immense
quantities of gold-bearing quartz, coal, antimony, and other
minerals. Alluvial gold has been found throughout the district,
although there arc no extensive workings ; but Todd and party,
who have taken up a lease of ten acres close to the Golden Point
Special Claim, Soldier’s Creek, with a view to working for allu-
vial gold, have constructed a tunnel and tail-race, over I,oooft.
of which has been finished, and they have still another I,oooft.
to drive before they can commence operations. It is not easy to
arrive at an estimate of the yield of alluvial gold, but it has
probably been worth at least £500,000 : from the Ist April,
1879, to the 31st March, 1886, the yield was over 40,0000 z.,
of the value of nearly £160,000. The large area of country in
which auriferous quartz has been found justifies the belief gene-
rally held by residents in the Inangaliua District that it is des-
tined to become one of the largest and most permanent goldfields
in the colony. Independent of private ventures, the registered
quartz-mining companies have won over a million pounds’ worth
of gold, one-third of which lias been disbursed amongst the
shareholders in dividends. The Welcome Company, at Boat-
man’s, whose shareholders only subscribed .£3,750, received
£110,250 in dividends up to the 30tli September, 1886-
The Keep It Dark Company, at Murray Creek, which
has been at work about ten years, lias distributed over
£BO,OOO in dividends, £14,500 of which was paid during
the year ending 31st March, 1886. The Hopeful Company,
at Boatman’s, obtained over eighty thousand pounds’ worth of
gold, and paid half that amount in dividends. The Wealth of
Nations Company-, at Murray- Creek, won over one hundred
thousand pounds’ worth of gold, and paid £35,000 in dividends'
The Golden Fleece Company, at Murray Creek, distribute
£55,000, or about half the value of the gold obtained, amongst
its shareholders. The Energetic Company-, at Murray Creek,
which won nearly one hundred and twenty thousand pounds




GROUND SYNCING


■worth of gold, distributed nearly £22,000 amongst shareholders.
Several other companies, such as the Just In Time and Fiery
Cross, have returned handsome dividends compared with their
outlay.
The first quartz-claim in the district was taken up early in
the year 1870 by Mr. Westfield, who applied for some ground at
Murray Creel;. His right to the ground was disputed by Mr.
Kelly, to whom, after some litigation, a large portion of the
ground was awarded. The reef was named after Kelly, and a
large number of claims were applied lor on the line, amongst
the best known being the United Band of Hope, Golden Hill,
Westland, All Nations, Victoria, Phoenix, and Dan O’Connell.
These companies made a rigorous start, and all of them suc-
ceeded in getting stone. The Westland Company put up a
fifteen-head battery; but the first crushing turned out badly,
only 4-ooz. of trold haviiur been obtained from 100 tons of stone.
A somewhat exaggerated idea of the quality' of the stone having
been formed, there was great disappointment, and in conse-
quence many of the claims on that line of reef were abandoned.
In October, 1870, Anderson’s line of reef was discovered.
The prospectors’ claim was known as the Anderson’s Creek,
®nd the owners obtained the first special claim in this part of the
district. The company' found a large body of stone, and erected
flushing-machinery; hut, after winning about twenty thousand
Pounds’ worth of gold, the stone ran out. The Invincible,
■Newington, Scandinavian, and other claims were taken up on
this line of reef, but the Invincible was the only company that
obtained gold.
In November, 1870, Shicl’s line of reef was opened up,
prospecting-claim being known as the Ajax. The stone
Was found to be of excellent quality, and in the face of
fldraordinary difficulties a fifteen-head battery was erected, a
faraway was laid down, and other work done, at a cost of
10,000; hut the enterprising company managed in a few
Jflns to pay off all liabilities and to declare dividends. The
a nd of Hope, Golden Crown, North British, Golden Fleece,
an( l other claims were taken up on this line of reef. The
3 a * and Golden Fleece were afterwards amalgamated, and for
some years the operations of the company were very successful.


After working out the original block of stone, nothing of im-
portance was found in the mine, although work was carried on
continually till about two years ago. The claim is now held
under protection, and there is a probability of the company
being reconstituted, with the view of further prospecting the
ground. All the workings arc in good order, and the plant is
one of the most complete in the district.
The next discovery was Adam Smith’s line of reef, the
prospector’s claim being appropriately termed the Wealth of
Nations. Many thousands of tons of stone were profitably
raised from this mine, and a large amount was paid in divi-
dends ; but five or six years ago the block of stone that was
first struck got worked out, and no defined reef has been dis-
covered since. Whilst prospecting, some stone of fair quality
was struck. It was traced for some distance, but was found to
be of a broken character. It is thought that this stone will
hecome more solid at a lower level, and the company is now
sinking a main shaft in the low-level tunnel. This will be
carried down about 200 ft. In the Energetic claim an immense
block of stone was discovered, and a battery of thirty head of
stampers was kept profitably employed for some years. When
the block was worked out, the company unsuccessfully P ro "
spected for some years, until its capital was exhausted. Opera-
tions were then suspended, and the battery was sold to the
Venus Extended Company.
In January, 1872, auriferous quartz was found at Boatmans
Creek, amongst the earliest of the claims taken up being the
Just In Time, Fiery Cross, and El Dorado ; and later on the H°P e "
ful, Alexandra, and Welcome. The Just In Time, Fiery Cross,
Hopeful, and Welcome mines are still in existence. Each of
these claims yielded large quantities of gold, the Welcome
jiroving exceedingly rich.
Towards the close of 1873 mining matters were at a very
low ebb; but a fresh impetus was given by the first crushing ol
the Just In Time Company, which obtained 1,G310z. of gold from
308 tons of stone, or over soz. per ton. Air-compressors, rock-
boring drills, and the latest labour-saving and scientific improve"
ments have since been introduced into the district, so that any
new discoveries are likely to prove more remunerative in ie




WEALTH OF NAVAHO'S BATTERY CRUSITINGTON.


future tlian those rich blocks of quartz which have been the
means of bringing the Reef ton reefs so prominently into favour
■with investors.
The Rainy Creek reefs were opened out in February, 1872,
Mr. Adams being the first discoverer. The Rainy Creek Com-
pany’s reef was of very large dimensions, and was commonly
spoken of as a mountain of quartz. A fifteen-head battery was
erected; but, the first crushing having turned out poor, the
effect was disastrous, and the company was wound up. Messrs.
Graham and Allan, who purchased the mine and machinery,
worked it for some time afterwards, but with no better results.
The Inkerman Company, which took up ground at Rainy Creek,
had a few crushings at the Rainy Creek battery, but, finding the
cost of crushing too great, decided to erect machinery about
three years ago. The company has now the most powerful
battery (thirty heads) on the field.
Auriferous stone was discovered in Larry’s Creek in March,
1872. The gold was of a heavier description than was found
in other parts of the district. In the Caledonian tire stone
averaged -loz. per ton, and one crushing yielded as high as 9oz.
to the ton; but the stone gave out, and for a long time no work
of any consequence has been done at Larry’s Creek.
The first lease in the Devil’s Creek was taken up by the
Union Company in January, 1876; and the Oriental claim was
taken up some time afterwards. The trial-crushing of 600 tons
from the former claim gave only G loz., and, the stone in the latter
claim proving at that time unremuncrative, the company sus-
pended operations. The Globe reef was discovered early in 1882.
Extensive machinery was erected on the banks of the Inangaliua
Eiver, a little above Crushington, the battery being connected
'"’dh the mine by an aerial tramway —the first erected in the
district. The reef proved to be a large one, and twelve
thousand pounds’ worth of gold was obtained from the first
| eve l; but the whole of it was absorbed by the liabilities
nicurred in the erection of machinery and the cost of raising the
stone. At the next level the quartz did not prove payable,
aR d the company set to work prospecting. In September,
a call was made to defray the expenses of a couple of
111(111 who were employed in prospecting, and it was intended


that another call should he made before the end of the month
in order to piy off all the liahilitics of the company preparatory
to winding up. The reef was, however, discovered before the
end of the month, and has since been traced along the surface
for a distance of over 1,003 ft. A trial-crushing of 83 tons
yielded 2oz. to the ton. Shares, -which were unsaleable a few
weeks before, rose rapidly, and early in November had reached
£1 10s., or a total value of £51,000. This shows the necessity
for steady, persevering work. Extraordinary developments
frequently take place when least expected. Some time ago Mr.
Perotti purchased the Oriental Company’s battery, and took up
one of the Oriental learns; but nothing further was done until
the Globe Reef was discovered. Mr. Perotti then applied for
some ground adjoining the Globe Company’s property, and a
new Company (the lb-ogress) was formed to work it. After
prospecting for some time, an east-and-west reef, about Bft.
wide, was struck, and is thought to be a continuation of the
Globe Reef. After bring driven on 4.2 ft., the reef narrowed to
sft., but showed goo! gild. When the Oriental Company was
first started stone was obtained which yielded 17dwt. to the
ton, and the Progress Company is now driving with a view of
getting a continuation of that reef. Further developments may
be expected at any moment in the Devil’s Creek District.
Reefs have been discovered in several other places in the
district, hut, owing to the inaccessible nature of the country,
and the cost of taking supplies and machinery on to rough
ground, very little work has been done. The County Engineer
has lately' surveyed a track from Larry’s towards the Lyelb
This is an important work, as it will facilitate the prospecting
of a part of the district which has not been hitherto much ex-
plored.
QUARTZ CRUSHED, YIELD OF GOLD, AND DIVIDENDS-
The following statement shows the quantity of quartz
crushed, yield of gold, and the dividends declared by companies
in the Inangahua District from its first opening up to the
31st March, 1830 :


BOATMAN’S.
Name.
Tons.
Oz.
Value.
Dividends.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
Welcome ..
22,413
54,003
212,778
2
4
103,500
0
0
Hopeful ..
12,703
20,732
80,408
4
7
40,425
0
0
Just In Time
7.1G8
10,227
39,022
0
0
10,0GG
0
0
Fiery Cross
13,320
15,507
00,591
2
*7
13,200
0
0
El Dorado*
478
G53
2,530
7
0
Boatman’s Creek* ..
138
122
472
15
0
Alexandra*
304
108
051
0
0
Italian Gully*
897
512
1,984
0
0
140
0
0
Golden. Arch*
149
139
538
12
6
Pactolus*
108
498
1,929
15
0
i,oo6
0
0
Lady of the Lake*..
10
3
11
2
6
Southern Cross* ..
21
43
1GG
12
0
Imperial*
811
408
1,813
10
0
Specimen Hill
1,940
SCO
3,803
14
6
Beform ..
109
107
420
11
5
CO,059
104,711
407,221 10
5
108,337
0
0
MURRAY CREEK..
Anderson’s Creek*..
6,791
5
,363
20,781
12
6
475
0
0
Westland*
150
40
155
0
0
Golden Hill*
526
192
744
0
0
612
10
0
"Victoria* ..
1,422
717
2,778
7
G
Ajax*
Evincible* ” ’ ’
Vulcan* ..
6,890
6
441
24,958
17
0
2
504
0
0
564
657
2,545
17
G
1
050
0
0
919
536
2,077
0
0
400
0
0
G°Hen Ledge* ..
■Hercules*
Independent* !! !
Inglewood* .. . ’
and North
star*
Inglewood Extended
dauntless
e nus Company* ..
••
Wealth of Nations
ibffinix
rl Isetk ' ■■ ■■
Golden Fleece .
Keep It D ar ] c .. .]
G°Wen Treasure ..
Bans'! Band of Hope*
5 a ndofHope* ..
*orseveranco*
1,831
552
2,139
0
0
G59
790
3,061
5
0
1
400
0
0
2,345
1,005
1
179
561
4,5G8
2,173
12
17
6
G
1,591
3,313
2
821
371
3,181
8,795
7
14
0
9
1
200
0
0
400
44
170
10
0
2,101
618
1
215
453
4,708
1,744
2
8
G
8
GOO
0
0
47,700
28
4G5
110,267
2
5
35
100
0
0
2,190
2
918
11,272
ii
10
4
533
6
0
59,080
30
811
119,322
7
8
21
900
0
0
24,877
31
371
121,542
12
0
55
000
0
0
72,104
41
221
159,842
0
5
74
083
0
0
7,571
4
820
18,703
18
6
2
400
0
0
160
49
189
17
6
390
25
96
5
0
57
19
73
12
6
v lctory* ..
Lan? eS p eranc I um •• 1-
donkey’s Creek* ..
1,155
905
3,506
17
6
4,231
2
,247
8,702
15
0
680
73
277
19
3
251,3S0
164
,851
638,381
19
0
201
257
16
0
gro u j£ e Com Panie3 marked thus (*) have ceased operations, but in many instances the
u " as been taken up by claims now in existence.


LARRY'S CREEK.
Name.
Tons.
Oz.
Value.
Dividends.
Caledonian*
Ko. 2 South Larry’s*
54C 2,052
7,514 1 4,129
£ s. d.
7,951 10 0
13,999 17 G
£ s. a.
2,250 0 0
8,060 6,181
21,951 7 G
2,250 0 0
DEVIL’S CHEEK.
Union*
GOO
G4
248 0 0
Oriental ..
3,3G0
1,190
4,603 2 G
Globo
10,250
3,104
12,132 2 7
Heather Bell*
GO
10
38 17 G
14,270
4,3G8
17,022 2 7
RAINY CREEK.
Rainy Creek
Inkerman
1,782
20,470
200
5,008
809 17 6
22,000 19 9
22,252
5,907
22,810 17 3
SOLDIER’S CHEEK.
Golden Point
1,002
207
1,151 8 10
1,002
297
1,151 8 10
______
SUMMAHY.
Totals from each Sub-Distbict.
Boatman’s Creek ..
00,059
104,711
407,221 10 5
108,337 0 0
Muitav Creek
251,380
104,851
038,381 19 0
201,257 10 ”
Larrv’s Creek
8,000
0,181
21,951 7 0
2,250 0 u
Devil’s Creek
14,270
4,308
17,022 2 7
Kainy Creek
22,252
5,907
22,810 17 3
Soldier’s Creek
1,002
297
1,151 8 10
—-
357,G23
280,315
1,108,539 5 7
371,S44 10 0
The number o£ years during -which the principal comp 3ll1 ®*
now in existence have been prospecting or at work may
approximately set down as follows:
* The companies marked thus (*) have ceased operations, but i»
instances the ground has been taken up by claims now in existence.


Name of Company. No. of Years at Work.
Dauntless .. • • • •
Energetic .. •. • • .. 15
Fiery Cross .. .. • • .. 14<
Globe.. .. •• •• •• 5
Golden Fleece .. • • • • .. 15
Golden Point .. .. • • • • ®
Golden Treasure .. • • .. 12
Hopeful .. • • • - .. 14
Inglewood .. • • • • .. 13
Inkerman .. •• •• ..11
Just In Time .. . • • • .. 15
Keep It Dark .. . • - • .. 14
Nil Desperandum .. •. • • 9
Oriental .. • • • • .. 10
Phoenix .. .. • • .. 13
Rainy Creek .. .. • • .. 15
Reform .. .. • • • • 5
Specimen Hill .. .. • • .. 15
Venus .. .. •. ..11
Wealth of Nations •• •• ..15
Welcome .. ■ • ■ • .. 13
FUTURE PROSPECTS.
The future prospects of the district are very hopeful, espe-
cially at Boatman’s, where the lodes have been proved to a great
depth. At Murray Creek the majority of the old claims have
worked out the reefs which were at first discovered: much, there-
fore, depends on whether these reefs will make again at a lower
level, as hi Victoria ; and it was to set this question at rest that
tte low-level tunnel at Black’s Point was started. This tunnel
has now been driven over 2,000 ft. without striking the reef;
there is no reason to despair, as there is still a long distance
to drive before some of the lines of reefs found on the surface are
The discovery of payable stone in the low level of the
of Nations would give great encouragement to other
claims at Murray Creek to prospect in a similar manner. The
ee P It Dark Company is at present working about 250 ft.
e W the level of the Inangahua lliver, and stone has been
followed down 100 ft. below that point. Some of the quartz
* ee fs in Victoria have been profitably worked for some time past
l ’°°oft. to 2,000 ft. below the sea-level, and as years roll on we
13


may expect to hear of good results from the deeper levels in the
Inangahua and other districts in this colony. Antimony lias
been found in several mines, and a -well-defined lode of good
quality has been discovered in the Souvenir lease at Rainy
Creek; hut nothing is likely to he done until there are better
means of communication and cheaper carriage to the seaboard.
Mr. Caples, of Rccfton, who has spent many years in prospecting
the mineral lodes of the colony, has found argentiferous galena,
particles of stream-tin, and zinc-blende. Coal of good quality
has been worked throughout the district; hut the consumption
is at present confined to local requirements.
WELCOME COMPANY’S MINE, BOATMAN’S.
The Welcome Company incurred a large outlay in erecting
underground steam winding and compressed-air machinery. A
tunnel has been driven 2,Gooft. into the hill, at the end of which
a chamber has been cut out, and poppet-heads, winding, and
compressed-air machinery erected. From this chamber there is
a shaft or air-way to the surface, about 800 ft. in length. The
timbering in this chamber has been executed with considerable
skill. The walls are vertical for about 15ft., with a Gothic
arch, having the timber adzed and fitted into the exact curve of
the roof. A shaft has been sunk 350 ft. below the level of this
chamber, and divided into three compartments —viz., two wind-
ing-shafts and one ladder-way. The shaft is now being
deepened, and the company intend sinking it another 150 ft.
to work the No. 9 Level. Winzes and tunnels have been
constructed by the aid of the compressed-air rock-drills, which
were found to effect, a great saving in cost. When the reef 13
narrow, however, the machinery cannot he worked much m° r( j
profitably than by taking out the stone by ordinary m alUia
labour; hut it assists materially in ventilating the mine. The
company has erected a plant for crushing tailings, consisting 0
fifteen berdans, and a force-pump for lifting the tailings fi’°®
the pit into boxes or shoots, which are placed above the level o
the berdans. Two of these boxes are placed alongside ea
other, so that, when the tailings-pump is filling one, the other
being emptied into the berdans by a self-feeding apparat u3 j
The plant is in every way- complete. Indeed, all the prmcip


KEEP IT DARK BATTERY REEFTON.




companies in the Inangaliua District have very superior mining
plants, and most of them use the compressed-air machinery. A
deeper level has been recently opened out in the Welcome Mine,
and the reef was struck at 210 ft. from the shaft. The stone
looks equally as promising as that found in the upper levels, the
crushings from which yielded so well that the company was able
to pay over .£IOO,OOO in dividends. This reef is about 2ft.
thick, and is expected to give an average of 2oz. to 3oz. to the
ton: 535 tons gave a yield of 1,0120 z. From the opening of
the mine till the 31st March, 188 G, the company crushed 22,413
tons of stone, which yielded 54,6030 z. of gold, valued at
£212,778; and for the six months ending 30tli September,
1886, 1,351 tons were crushed for a yield of 3,4480 z. Up to
that date the total value of the gold obtained from the com-
pany’s mine was £226,424, nearly half of which has been paid
m dividends to the shareholders.
KEEP IT DARK COMPANY’S MINE, MURE AY CREEK.
This is one of the best mines in the Inangahua District, and
its underground operations are very w r ell conducted. A crusliing-
hattery of twenty heads, adjoining the mine, is kept continually
at -work. It was driven by a 30ft. overshot water-wheel; but
the company has lately erected one of Felton’s hurdy-gurdy
ifater-wheels, which arc now coming very much into use, being
about the simplest and most effective water-wheels introduced
!nto this colony. The company has been working on the No. 2
•Lm’el for some time past, and the quartz has been stoped out
90ft. in height the whole length of the lode, which is about
fOft., leaving 80ft. of backs up to No. 1 Level. A winze lias
™en sunk from the No. 2 Level, and the lode proved down for a
distance of 100 ft., where it is Bft. in thickness. The shaft is to
sunk to a greater depth, to enable a lower level to be con-
tracted. It is expected that the new level will be in working
®der before the stone in the present one is exhausted. In the
Sectors’ report, presented at the annual meeting held at Recf-
-011 °u the 20th December, 1886, it was stated that since the
c °ttipany started crushing 80,863 tons of quartz have been
need, yielding 45,4770 z. lldwt. 3gr. melted gold, realizing
2s. 7d., of which £82,166 13s. 4d. has been paid in
Mdends, being equal to £4 2s. 2d. per share.


GLOBE COMPANY’S MINE, DEVIL’S CBEEK.
This company’s mine is situated at Devil’s Creek, about
six miles from Reefton. The company has l’ecently sunk a
shaft 2ooft. in depth, and is constructing another level. Pre-
vious to sinking this shaft two winzes were sunk, one 70ft. and
the other 120 ft. A water-wheel 38ft. in diameter has been
erected for transmitting power by means of an endless rope from
the battery to the mine, a distance of 105 chains, to connect
with the winding-gear at the main shaft. This company has a
crushing-battery of twenty heads of stamps, driven by a turbine
water-wheel, situated on the south side of the Inangahua River,
opposite Crushington; and an aerial tramway connects from the
mine to the battery, a distance of 96 chains. This tramway,
which was designed and constructed by Messrs. Kincaid and
McQueen, ironfounders, Dunedin, works, remarkably well. R
goes over two ranges between the mine and battery, one of which
is about I,looft. above the level of the stampers, the terminal
point at the mine being 900 ft. above the battery. It consists of
an endless rope, kept about 10ft. apart by pulleys fixed on trestles,
■which are fastened at certain distances on prominences along the
line. At the end next the mine there is an inclined shaft fixed
in framing at about right angles to the line of rope, and on the
top of this shaft is fastened a horizontal grooved pulley, about
10ft. in diameter, which holds the endless rope. There are two
grooved pulleys about 16in. in diameter, fastened on each of the
cap-pieces of the trestles, to carry the rope. At the end next
the battery skids are laid down on the same inclination aS
the line of rope, and on these are fixed iron rails, on which
a trolly is placed, carrying the framing, shaft, and grooved pulley
to hold the endless rope. A weighted box attached to the lower
end of this trolly keeps a steady tension on the rope, and prevents
it from unduly sagging when working. Carriers are attached to
the rope at intervals by two half-round clips bolted together,
holding the rope between them. These stand out horizontally
from the rope for about 4in., thence hang vertically; and to these
carriers the buckets are attached, which are each capable of
holding about 2cwt. of quartz. In order to set the endless rop®
in motion, the buckets are first filled on the top of the rang®)
above the battery, with mullock, and the weight of loaded


GENERAL ARRANGEMENT Of
AERIAL TRAM WAY,BATTERY VTURBINE
BY
M essRS KINCAID M C QUEENC°
VULCAN FOUNDRY :
DUNEDIN.


buckets on the rope between this point and the battery is
sufficient to set the rope in motion, after which it works auto-
matically, having a brake at each end for stopping when required.
The buckets also empty automatically by coming in contact with
an inclined bar at a point over the hopper into which the quartz
passes. This inclined bar raises a catch, which allows the buckets
to turn completely over, and when once emptied they return to
the end next the mine, where they are again righted in position,
and the catch put in its place. By an ingenious arrangement,
the buckets, which are fixed stationary on the endless rope, can
he filled whilst they are in motion. This consists of a frame,
standing on a level with the wire train way, and having an iron
har bent round somewhat in the form of an oval link, being flat
in the middle portion. From this bar is suspended a small iron
hopper, which travels on the bar by the aid of a small pulley
round'the link, made so that it can shoot the quartz into the
stationary buckets on the endless rope. The tramway is capable
°f transmitting about fifty tons of quartz to the battery in eight
to ten hours. Bor some time the company was more plucky
than fortunate: its operations were not nearly so successful as
nnticipated. Prospecting was, however, steadily carried on, with
the result that the reef was traced along the surface for over
tjOOOft. The reef is 10ft. wide, and a trial-crushing of 86 tons
fielded about 170 oz. Shares rose rapidly in consequence, and the
company's property is now looked upon as one of the best in the
district. The discovery has given a great stimulus to the mining
industry, shares having been eagerly sought after in Dunedin,
Christchurch, Wellington, and other centres of population. The
nine-manager, in view of the importance of the discovery, re-
commended taking up the spare ground between the Progress
an( l Globe leases, which was at once secured, and the company
n ° w holds a mining property of 87 acres. A winze was started
011 the stone discovered, proving a large body of liighly-payablc
fiuartz, believed to be quite equal in value if taken from wall to
that obtained from the trial-crushing. A tramway of 16
ams in length, connecting with the aerial line rcceiving-
pddock, was expeditiously constructed, and a tunnel of 210 ft.
now being pushed ahead to connect with bottom of winze,
c h will give 130 ft. of backs to operate upon. As soon as


this tunnel is in, the whole of the twenty heads at the battery
will he fully employed, and it may possibly he necessary to erect
one or more extra batteries. A body of surface-stone, 270 ft.
east from winze (and on the line of tramway), is now being
opened out upon, proving to he Oft. in width, and estimated by
the mine-manager, from present appearances, to go 12dwt. to
the ton.
The Venus Company, Murray Creek, has erected a tramway
of the same description as the one put up by the Globe Com-
pany : it was purchased from the Energetic Company. A
sketch is appended.
PEICE OF GOLD.
The price of alluvial gold is £3 16s. per ounce. The gold
obtained from quartz-mines varies in price, according to assay,
from £3 17s. 3d. to £4 Os. 2d. per ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
The Warden for the Inangaliua District is Air. F. Bird,
11.A1., Westport. Air. IT. Lucas, the Receiver of Gold Revenue
and Alining Registrar at Reefton, receives applications for
miners’ rights, leases, &c. Sittings of the Warden’s Court are
held at Reefton every alternate Thursday, at 11 a.m., and, if
necessary, arc continued the following day.
DISTANCES.—COAIAIUNICATION.
Miles.
Nelson to Reefton .. .. .. 135
Greymouth to Reefton .. .. 49
Reefton to Westport .. .. .. 4B
Reefton to Alaruia .. .. 30
Reefton to Owen River .. .. .. 65
Reefton to Boatman’s .. .. 11
Reefton to Alurray Creek .. .. 5
Reefton to Rainy Creek .. .. .. 7
Reefton to Larry’s Creek .. .. 16
Reefton to Soldier’s Creek .. .. 2^
Reefton to Devil’s Creek .. .. .. 4i
Devil’s Creek to Big River .. . . Itj
There is coach-communication on alternate days between
Nelson and Reefton, the principal town in the Inangaliua D' s '


trict. There is a daily coacli from Reefton to Greymouth, and
also to AVestport. From Iteefton to tlic head of Murray Creek,
a distance of five miles, there is a good dray-road all the way, and
also to Rainy Creek. The roads to Boatman’s, and from that
township to the principal mines, are in fair order. There is a
horse-track from Rcefton to Boatman’s, which shortens the
journey hy four miles. There is a good dray-road up Soldier’s
Creek to Devil’s Creek, and a liorse-track from Devil’s Creek
to Big River. The General Government is constructing a
road up the Owen River, so as to enable machinery to he
taken on to the Reefs. This is a mountainous part of the
colony, covered, as a rule, with dense forest of hlack- and red-
birch (Fa(jus fusca and Far/us solandri ); also with other valuable
timbers, such as red-pine and totara (Dacnydimn atprcssinmn and
Podocarpus totara) . The greater portion of the land is only
suitable for mining and pastoral purposes; but to carry on
mining satisfactorily in a rough, broken country like this, a
l ar ge number of roads and tracks is required. Some of these
are constructed wholly by Government, some arc subsidized, and
others are constructed out of the revenues of the County Councils.
The local dray-roads and tracks are, generally speaking, in fairly
good order; but, owing to the dray-roads being narrow, and
the traffic heavy, it is almost impossible to keep them in
a passable condition in winter. They fare better during the
summer and autumn months.


Registered Mining Companies in the Inangahua Warden’s District actually in operation on the
31st December, 1885.
Name of Company.
© g
•S S
+2*3
B'S
aJa
SCQ
co
o
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
Total Value of
Total
Capital
Actually
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
Amount
of Divi-
Date of Com-
mencing
fromCalls*
taken from
Company’s
Mine.*
paid by
Com-
pany.*
Operations.
Cl
Q)
S'S
2°
« p<
fa
ga
£
£
£
£
£
£
Bannockburn (Limited) ..
24,000
12,000
136
46
June 17,1882
..
Big River Extended (Limited)
24,000
24,000
3,550
3,203
’l70
Nov. 15,1881
0
Dauntless Extended (Limited)
24,000
24,000
19,200
3,000
ioo
Nov. 17, 1873
i
Eclipse (Limited)
24,000
12,000
350
300
110*322
July 2, 1883
..
Energetic Extended (Limited)
24,000
24,000
23,700
21,900
Dee. 23, 1871
• •
Eureka Extended (Limited) ..
24,000
24,000
18,000
6,595
Oct. 7, 1870
30
Eiery Cross Extended (Limited) ..
24,000
24,000
19,400
7,400
00,591
13,200
Juno 10, 1872
Globe (Limited) ..
30,000
18,000
12,975
12,050
12,132
April 15, 1882
Golden Eleece United (Limited)t ..
48,000
48,000
34,000
6,773
121,542
55,000
Dec. 1, 1871
. .
Golden Point (Limited) ..
24,000
24,000
7,000
7,000
13,000
1,151
189
Sept. 10, 1878
*8
Golden Treasure (Limited)
48,000
12,800
. .
18,703
2,400
Deo. 21, 1874
Great Eastern (Limited) ..
24,000
12,000
1,150
1,103
, .
. .
Dec. 1, 1881
•
Happy Valley (Limited) ..
24,000
24,000
1,050
1,050
. .
. .
2
Homeward Bound Extended (Limited)
24,000
12,000
1,800
1,700
80 ’,408
i 40,425
Dee. 1, 1875
»
Hopeiul Extended (Limited)
24,75C
24.75C
2,010
1 2,000
April 12, 1872
lnanga.\vu.Q. Low-level Tunnel (Limited)^
Inglewood Extended (Limited)
lukerman (Limited)
\ 24,000 12,000
24,000l 12,000
\ 20,000\ 20,0001
3, GOO
3,500
11,083
1 3,405
\ 10*922
14’,150
1 22,000
I L20O
Nov. 18, 1873
Jan. 8,187 G
20
20


Just In Time (Limited) ..
/ 28,0001 28,0001 13,702
1 O, 451
39,022
10,060
Feb.
29, 1872
li.eep 1 1 UarJc (Limi ted) .. .. ..
/ 20,000 20,000 12,025
2,025
159,842
74,083
July
25, 1872
44
Larnach (Liinited) ..
/ 24,000
24,000
12,000
' 590
. .
Oct.
7, 1885
. .
Lord Edward (Limited) ..
[ 24,000
24,000
250
190
L>ec.
5, 1881
Nil Dcspevandum (Limited)
23,000
11,500
6,905
6,708
8,702
7
No. 2 South Keep It Dark (Limited)
24,000
12,000
700
685
2
Occidental (Limited)
Oriental (Limited)
24,000
12,000
1,300
1,115
Sept.
13, 1877
..
24,000
24,000
8,550
7,814
4,003
May
23, 1870
..
Phoenix Extended (Limited)
10,000
10,000
5,400
5,339
11,272
4,533
Nov.
19, 1873
..
Rainy Creek Extended (Limited) ..
24,000
12,000
0,000
0,339
809
Mar.
12, 1872
Reform (No liability)
24,000
12,000
1,200
1,890
420
Sept.
5, 1881
Result (Limited)
0,000
0,000
3,300
. .
Aug.
3, 1881
i
South Hopeful (Limited) ..
30,000
18,000
2,300
2,315
Sept.
7, 1877
. .
Specimen Hill United (Limited) . .
20,000
20,000
5,500
4,134
3,303
Mar.
23, 1872
• .
Venus Extended (Limited)
24,000
12,000
900
900
4,708
000
Dec.
0, 1875
15
Walhalla Extended (Limited)
24,000
24,000
1,100
987
Juno
20, 1872
. .
Wealth of Nations Extended (Limited)
32,500
32,500
10,150
12,350
111,002
34,125
Feb.
13, 1872
15
Welcome (Limited)
15,000
15,000
3,750
3,750
212,778
103,500
Sept.
17, 1873
50
* Up to 31st March, 1880. t Company being reorganized. * Receiving subsidy from Government.
Note. —All the above companies were formed for the purpose of working quartz-mines. In companies having the word “Extended” or “ United,”
the figures as to tlio gold obtained and dividends doclared belong to the present companies and those of which they are re-formations. *


Quartz-mines at work or held in]the Inakgahua Warden’s District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital,
to March 31,18815.
Dato when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
At
Section
and
Block.
Survey
District.
Work
or under
Trotec-
tion.
.*• w .
u 3 W
.2 u .2-
«3
u
'S 1?
i^ tc n
O C °
3 a .2
s°i*
O S3
.©£ d
SK
PH ®
x/1
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Tables with
Stampers,
Stonebroakcrs
Copper-plates,
Rollers,
or Blanket-
Rcrdans, or
Concentrators
tables.
Total Valuo of
Plant.
Total Value of
Gold taken from
Mine to March 31,
I860.
Total Dividends
paid to March 31,
16SG.
£
£
A. B. P.
£
£
£
Bannockburn Company ..
12,000
136 Jun. 17,
15 3 28
Sec. 27,
Reefton
Not at
,,
..
t %
1882
B. XIV.
work
10 2 10
Sec. 0,
B. X.
Big River Extended Com-
24,000
3,550
Nov. -i
10 2 7
Sec. 29,
B. X.
Sec. 18,
»Waita-
At work
pany
15, ’81
10 2 17
liu
\
B. X.
j
Dauntless Extended Com-
24,000
22,200 Nov. 17,
29 2 0
Sec. 70,
Reefton
f
,,
Water
15 stampers,
Copper-
7,120
170
pany*
1873
B. XIV.
1 berdan
plates
Eclipse Company
12,000
350 July 2,
16 2 0
Sec. 78,
„
, ,
,.
, ,
1883
B. XIV.
Energetic Extended Com-
24,000
23,700 Dec. 23,
23 2 13
Sec. 75,
„
Not at
Steam
Steam
30 stampers,
Copper-
12240
119,322
21,900
panyf
1871
B. XIV.
work
2 berdans
plates
Eureka Extended Com-
24,00018,000. Oct. 7,
23 0 30
Sec. G3,
#/
n
u
,,
2,000
pany}
1870
B. XI.
Eicry Cross Extended
24,00019, 400 Jun. 10,
25 2 21
Sec. 70,
„
At work
Water
Water
§
Blankets
§
00,591
13,200
Company
1872
52 2 12
B. XI.
Globo Company
18,00012,975 A pi. 15,
Sec. 15,
Waitahu
„
20 stampers,
Copper-
7; 900
12,132
1882
,35 3 38
llG2
B. II.
Sec. 29,
1 B. XIV.
1 berdan
plates
Golden. “Fleeco “Extended
\48,000.34 000\ T> eo. 4
M Sec. 121,
\ B. XIV.
8\Scc. 120
V Ti. 'XIV
ylteeitonl Pro-
ISteam
Steam
15 stampers
11740
121,542
55,000
ComptaiyW
\
VI, ’71
UlB 2 2
\ tectcd
2 berdans


Golden Point Company*
Golden Treasure Company
* 124,000119, OOOlAug.lC
/ 1878
12,800 .. Oct. 21
1874
,180 2 111 See. 19,
/ / 13. XIII.
50 3 - 4 Sec. 40,
B. XIV.
j Iteelton
'
| 27ot at
I work
[ At work
Water
Steam
10 stampers
15 stampers,
2 berdans
Copper-
plates.
2,500
7,040
1,151
18,703
2,400
Great Eastern Company,.
12,000 1,150 Apl. 5,
1882
32 3 21
1 Sec. 59,
B. XI.
*
16 2 4
Sec. 8,
B. VI.
Sec. 5,
B. VI.
)
Happy Valley Company ..
24,000
1,050
Dec. -
1, ’81 ,
13 1 12
[ Wai-
taliu.
• •
190
Homeward Bound Ex-
12,000
1,800
Dec. 1,
10 0 28
Sec. 7,
Eccfton
••
••
* *
tended Companyff
1875
34 2 38
102 2 38
B. XI.
At work
80,408
40,425
Hopeful Extended Com-
pany
Inangahua Low-level Tun-
24,750
12,000
2,010
3,000
A pi. 12,
1872
Sec. 92,
B. XI.
Sec. 139,
B. XIV.
Sec. 18,
B. II.
, ,
. .
• •
nel Company JI
Inkerman Company
20,00011,083
Jan. 8,
1870
Nov.13,
1873
Feb. 29,
1872
33 0 0
Waitaliu
"
••
Steam
30 stampers,
8 berdans
Copper-
plates
0,700
22,000
..
1,200
Inglewood Extended Com-
12,000
3,500
33 0 35
Sec. 1,
XV
Recfton
»
••
"
10 stampers,
2 berdans
3,0C0
14,150
pany
Just in Time Company§§
28,000
13,702
21 2 37
Sec. 44,
B. XI.
"
"
Water
Water
25 stampers,
5 berdans
tt
8,7G0
39,022
10 , CMJti
f
21 1 30
Sec. 14,
)
Keep It Dark Company i|||
20,000
12,025
July |
34 3 38
B. XIV.
Sec. 105,
•
■'
tt
"
20 stampers,
1 berdan
•
9,100
159,842
74,083
2u,’72 1
B. XIV.
J
C. Kelly (for Caples Creek
Company)
Lord Edward Company
24,000
250
Apl. 15,
18S4
Dec. 5,
1881
10 1 21
10 2 0
Sec. 57,
B. XI.
Sec. 28,
1 B. X.
//
Waitaliu
Not at
work
••
••
••
••
* Protected for two years,
t Battery sold to Venus Extended Company.
+ Protected for two months. Hock-borer at work.
§ See Just in Time Company. ....
|| Other machinery: Hock-borer, diamond-drill, air-winch, and lathe.
** Protected for six months. Battery since sold to Big Biver Extended
Company.
ft Protected for three months.
Jt Receiving subsidy from Government.
§§ Fifteen heads belong to Just in Time, and ten heads to Fiery Cross
Company.
|]J| Hock-borer at work.


Nominal Capital.
Paid-up Capital,
to March 31,1880.
Date when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
At
Section
and
Block.
Survey
District.
Work
or under
Pro-
tection.
o'* 3
O 0
■3. :<
siTS tc
o a
* S 5^
?3 o
> S a
S *+i
O -*H
b4
feW''.
§2.3
*=S3
C0 M
Xfl
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables with
Stone breakers
Copper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
o
?2j3
,5.»
.5 e b .
!2 5 .„-
e3 fl
> «3
*3^«
d Oh
P 0»H
Erl
B o'S
E-f ft
£
£
A. It, P.
£
£
£
J. McGregor (for Lucid
# ,
•July 14,
3 2 13
Sec. 140,
Reefton
Not at
, .
..
, .
Company)
1884
B. XIV.
work
J. McQuilian (for Bendigo
. ,
April 8,
16 2 4
Sec. 10,
Wait ahu
„
. .
. .
. .
. .
Company)
1884
B. X.
Nil Desperandum Com-
11,500
6,995
Sep. 10,
16 2 0
Sec. 15,
Reefton
Water
525
8,702
. .
pany
1877
B. XIV.
No. 2 South Keep It Dark
12,000
700
16 1 27
See. G8,
„
At work
. ,
. .
. .
Company
B. XIV.
Occidental Company
12,000
1,300
Sep. 13,
15 3 30
Sec. 6,
„
Not at
. .
• .
1877
(
16 1 4
B. XI.
Sec. 3,
\
work
Oriental Company
24,000
8,550
May (
23,’76 1
16 2 4
B. II.
Sec. 35,
B. II.
l Wai-
j tabu
\)
"
••
Steam
10 stampers
Copper-
plates
3,500
4,603
(
13 1 33
Sec. 11,
Bliomix Extended Com-
116,000
5,400
Nov. -
13. XIV.
10 1 33 Sec. 1,
11 Reefton
••
11272
4,533
pany
\ 19,*73
B. XIV.
809
TteAtw Greek ‘Ei'x.tcrvled. \l2 ,OOQ\ G,GOO wlar. 18 ,\12 0 Sl\ Bee. 8,
\ »
\ Kot at ..
\Steom\ 15 stampers
l Copper-
7,000
Company
\ 1872
\ 13. IX.
1 work 1 1 1


/ / / f 18 1
01 Sec. 45,
/)
1
I
1
420
Reform Company ..
Result Company
12,000 1,200 Sept. J / 1Q
6,000 3,300 Aug. 3, 25 3 0
1831 I
/ 13. XI.
) Sec . 40,
I B. XI.
Sec. 44,
B. XIV.
h
f At work
Water
••
150
••
f 15 1 28
Sec. 52,
South Hopeful Company..
Specimen Hill United
Company*
18,000 2,300 Sept. L Q lg
7, ’77 [|
20,000 5,500 Mar.25, 43 1 15
1872 1
B. XI.
Sec. 20,
B. XI.
Secs. 4, 8,
and 9,
B. XI.
)
Not at
work
Pro-
tected
• •
Water
15 stampers,
2 berdans
Copper-
plates
3,740
2,000
3,303
4,708
GOO
Yenus Extended Com-
1.2,000 900Dec. 6,25 3 14
Sec. 28,
"
• ■
* *
pany
Walhalla Extended Com-
4.875 |
24,000. l,100Jun.20,' 8 19
13. XIV.
Sec. 43,
„
. •
••
••
••
pany
Wealth of Nations Ex-
| J872 |
32,500.29, 006 Jan. 23, 03 1 13
B. XI.
Sec. 79,
B. XIV.
Sec. 103,
B. XI.
At work
Water
Water
20 stampers,
Copper-
plates
7,480
110,207
35,100
tended Company
Welcome Companyt
1 | 1872
15,000 3,750 Sep. 17, ; 29 0 14
| 1873
"
»
Steam
"
10 stampers,
15 berdans
Blankets
9,000212,778103,500
* Protected for four months.
t Kock-borer at work.


Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Inangahua Warden’s
Distp.ict on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of
Kamo of Lessee.
Date -when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
0
lii
SoS
<£ rt
<
Boatman’s Cheek.
a. n. p
£ s.
(«)H. Caplin* ..
•Jan. 1, 1873
4 3 28
Aug. 1, 1874
Hopeful Co.
12 10
(''jit. Thomas and others*
Jan. 1, 1873
G 2 22
Dec. 30, 1873
Fiery Cross
17 10
Co.
( c )It. Gross and others* ..
Jan. 1, 1873
2 1 33
Walballa Co.
b 5
( d )T. Brown and others*
July 1, 1873
8 3 32
July 1, 1874
Alexandra
22 10
Co.
Sept. 24,1880
Fiery Cross
Co.
33 15
( e )Littlc Boatman’s Creek
July 1, 1873
13 0 34
Company*
(')Just in Time Company*
Jan. 1, 1874
12 1 1
.
Welcome Co.
31 o
( [ )P. Brennan and others*
April 1, 1874
1G 2 0
33 0
(e)Boatman’s Creek Com-
April 1, 1874
4 0 20
Feb. 4, 1882
Just in Time
9 9
pany*
Hopeful Company*
July 1, 1875
13 3 32
..
Co.
28 0
10 o
( f )Just in Time Company*
April 1, 187C
4 2 0
. .
Homeward
L. Davies*
Jan. 1, 1878
1G 0 28
July 28, 1880
17 u
(Aug. 25,
Bound Co.
Specimen \
1879
Hill Co.
( f )G. Wise*
Jan. 1,1878
14 0 33
•
April 27,
Specimen )-
15 u
1881
Hill Ex-
tended Co.)
( f )M. Fitzgerald (Cleo-
Jan. 1, 1878
12 2 14
Sept. 29,1878
Welcome Co.
lo u
patra)*
Oct. 1, 1878
Jan. 1, 1878
30 0
7 0
17 0
16 0
Welcome Coropanyf
( f )F. Walker and others*
29 0 14
G 2 33
Oet. 15, 1884
Eureka Co.
South Hopeful Company*
( f )Just in Time Company*
Jan. 1,1879
1G 0 18
Jan. 1, 1880
15 1 18
. .
Specimen
Hill Ex-
tended Co.
16 0
14 0
]6 0
( f )Little Boatman’s Creek
Company*
Jan. 1,1879
15 3 22
April 27, 1881
( h )Occidcntal Company*
Jan. 1, 1879
13 3 17
. .
( f ) Hopeful Company* ..
Jan. 1, 1879
15 0 26
Eicry Cross
11 0
( f ) J. S. Wilson (Long
Jan. 1, 18S0
10 1 35
July 25, 1881
Drive)*
Co.
* Lease. + Special claim.
(“) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Hopeful onl^, oDl .
( b ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Fiery Cress
puny.
(') Surrendered, and included in new lease granted to company. -grj er y
( d ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to purchasers oi
Cross Company. moony-
' ( e ) Surrendered, and included in special claim of Specimen Hill Comp
( f ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to company.
(s) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Just in Tim
puny.
( h ) Surrendered, and included in new lease.


Name of Lessee.
Date when
Area.
Date when
Name of
Person or
Company to
granted.
transferred.
whom
transferred.
hO
= s-s
~ P o
SOri
< s
<
Boatman's Creek— contd.
A. E. P.
£
5.
Hopeful Company!
Tan.
1, 1881
34 1 38
. ,
Specimen
35
0
Specimen Hill Extended
Jan.
1, 1881
43 1 15
Sept. 18,1835
44
0
Company!
Hill United
Co.
John B. Bcechef
April
1, 1881
1 0 1
Nov. 27, 1884
Nat’n’l Bank
2
0
(*)Thomas Lee (Great
Jan.
1, 1882
10 2 3
, .
17
0
Eastern Company) *
r)Eureka Company*
Jan.
1, 1882
1G 2 27
17
0
Occidental Companv* ..
Jan.
1, 1882
15 3 20
1G
0
Walhalla Company*
Jan.
1, 1882
8 19
9
0
O. Perotti (Imperial Com-
Jan.
1, 1882
13 1 G
Nov. 2G, 1884
W. G. Col-
14
0
pany)*
lings and W.
C. Kennedy
South Hopeful Company*
Just in Time Company!..
July
1,1882
15 1 28
1G
0
Jan.
1, 1882
21 2 27
. .
22
0
imperial Company* * ..
July
1, 1882
10 2 0
Nov. 26, 1884
W. G. Col-
lings and W.
11
0
Great Eastern Company f
Hopeful Extended Co.1 ..
ier y Cross Extended
July
July
1, 1882
1, 18S3
32 3 21
34 2 38
••
C. Kennedy
33
17
0
10
July
1, 1883
25 2 21
. ,
13
0
Company!
Weka Company!
• (Caples’ Creek
Company)*
Jan.
1, 1884
23 0 3G
17
0
July
1, 1884
1G 1 21
* *
* *
17
0
Mp„f' A 1 EIlY ’ s Creek.
Jan.
July
Jan.
1, 1874
1, 1874
1,1878
5 1 23
8 0 8
14 1 32
••
13
18
15
15
0
0
April 1, 1872
17 2 3C
April 9, 1877
Golden
45
0
i')Enero P r S 1 0 Company*..
Fleece Co.
Oct.
1, 1872
3 1 8
.
8 15
r)VulMn n Uom P an y* • •
Oot.
1, 1872
7 0 21
.
17
10
Mwi Company*
W Vealthof Nations Co.*
Oct.
1, 1872
6 1 2C
.
1G
5
Oct.
1, 1872
8 1 26
..
21
5
„ * Lease. t Special claim.
Coß ipany^ CrBa ' lerea > an<i included in special claim granted to Great Eastern
0 Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to company.
(“1 c ' len< iered, and applied for under special claim by company.
L, to, and applied for in special claim by, Caledonian Company.
In p : ‘Tendered, and included in new special claim held by company.
sp ec f a i^i“ r . cllas cd by Wealth of Nations Company, and now held by it under
j') Lease surrendered, and now held by same company under special claim.
'' bu «endered, and included in new lease granted to company.


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
0
93-gj
2§a
0 g ffl
c 2a
<
Mukeay Creek— contd.
A. R. P.
£ s.
(“)Golden Fleece Co.* ..
Oct. 1, 1872
5 0 17
. .
.
12 10
( b )J. Brennan and others*
Oct. 1, 1872
8 1 21
. .
Independent
21 5
Co.
( b )J. Gill and others*
Jan. 1, 1873
4 3 23
, ,
Keep It Dari
12 10
Co.
Phcenix Company*
July 1, 1874
13 1 33
. .
.
14 0
( c )Inglewood Company*..
■July 1, 1874
9 2 30
. .
•
20 0
( d )Hercules Company* ..
Jan. 1, 1874
9 3
G
. .
.
25 0
( e )P. Brennan and others*
Jan. 1, 1875
13 0
)
.
26 0
(»)M. Byrne* ..
July 1, 1875
15 0 0
May 7, 1880
Golden
30 0
Treasure Co
(
Aug. 1G, 1877
R. W.
Raithby
Oct. 10, 1S79
A. A. S.
( f )Defiance Company* ..
Jan. 1, 187G
1G 2 0-<
Menteatli f
34 0
Oct. 30, 1879
Victory Co.
Nov. G, 1880
W. J. Shaw
Feb. 11, 1881
Result Co.
(s)C. Marks* ..
Jan. 1, 187G
15 2 0
32 0
( b ) Wealth of Nations Co.*
Jan. 1, 187G
G 1 15
14 u
( b )Energetic Company* ..
April 1, 187G
3 17
. .
. .
8 u
(e)Chesterman and Ash-
July 1, 1870
13 1
)
. .
. •
ton*
( b )Golden Fleece Co.* ..
July 1, 187G
15 0 23
. .
32 u
( h )Vulcan Company*.
July 1, 187G
10 0 3G
Jan. 28, 1880
Wealth of
Nations Co.
Company*
July 1, 187G
5 0 5
12 u
( b )Venus Company*
July 1, 187G
1G 2 0
Energetic Company!
April 1, 1877
23 2 13
Dauntless Extended Co.f
April 1, 1878
29 2 0
Nil Dcsperandum Co.* ..
Jan. 1, 1878
1G 2 0
1*
Phcenix Company*
July 1, 1879
10 1 33
( b )Wealth of Nations Co.*
Jan. 1, 1880
7 1 36
( b )Ne\v Independent Co.f
Jan. 1, 1880
29 2 20
Feb. 23, 1881
Wealth of
Nations Co.
* Lease. I Special claim.
( a ) Surrendered, and included in fresh lease.
( b ) Lease surrendered, and included in special claim granted to company.,
( c ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to New Ingle"
Company. , uin
( J ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Nil Dcsperau
Company. - —j.
(°) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Dauntless L
( f ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Result Compaq,
(g) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Energetic
( h ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to Wealth of
Company.


Name of
Name of Lessee..
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
«*»
_ o
Annuf
mount
lieut,
Morray Creek— contd.
A. It. P.
£
8.
(*)Comstock Company* ..
Jan.
1, 1881
1G 1 37
June 27,1881
Golden Trea-
17
0
Jari.
1, 1878
21 1 36
sure Co.
22
0
Keep it Dark C.omnanvt
United Inglewood and
Jan.
1, 1878
33 0 35
Nov. 29, 1883
Inglewood
17
0
North Star Co.f
Venus Companyt
Jan.
1, 1881
25 3 14
Extended Co.
17
0
Golden Treasure Co.f
Jan.
1, 1881
18 2 31
, ,
19
0
Golden Fleece Extended
April 1, 1881
35 3 38
Aug. 29, 1884
Gld’n Fleece
18
0
Companyt
Result Companyf
July
1, 1881
25 3 0
United Co.
2G
0
..
Golden Treasure Co.f ..
Julv
1, 1881
50- 3 4
. .
51
0
Wealth of Nations Co.t*.
Jan.
1, 1883
G3 1 13
32
0
Andrew King (Bannock-
Jan.
1, 1883
15 3 28
m .
. .
1G
0
burn Company)*
Golden Fleece Extended
July
1, 1883
1G 2 3
Aug. 29, 1884
Gld’n Fleece
17
0
„ .Company*
United Co.
Golden Fleece Extended
July
1, 1883
13 3 28
Aug. 29, 1884
Gld’n Fleece
14
0
Company*
G.Muldoon (Reefton Co.)*
e ep It Dark Companyt
Kolipse Company!
uangahua Low - level
July
1, 1883
1G 2 3
United Co.
17
0
July
1, 1883
34 3 38
, .
# ,
35
0
Jan.
1, 1884
1G 2 0
, ,
17
0
Jan.
1, 1S84
102 2 38
12/17/0
r Companyt
J * McGregor (Lucid Co.)*
Jan.
1, 1885
3 2 13
* *
* *
4
0
Cb EEK.
(*)M. Byrne*
July
1, 1879
1G 2 4
July 8, 1880
Golden Point
17
0
Ia ttes Nasmyth (Royal
Company)*
WGolden Point Companyt
Jan.
July
1, 1882
1, 1882
1G 1 0
80 2 11
Jan. 3,1882
Co.
Royal Co.
17
40
0
0
„ . Deti L ’ s Creek.
«St52 y r ::
Jan.
Jan.
1, 1881
1, 1882
16 1 4
52 2 12
••
••
17 0
26 10
Greek.
WG.wie*° ek Com P an y*-
Jan.
1,1873
12 0 30
. .
..
31
5
Jan.
1, 1878
1G 2 12
Feb. 18,1881
Inkerman Co
17
0
ise (Souvenir
wg w“ pa fy)‘
Inkerrn' Se (Souvenir Co.)*
Jan.
Jan.
1,1880
1, 1880
1G 2 2
14 0 35
* *
* *
17
15
0
0
“lAn Company!
Jan.
1, 1883
33 0 0
••
••
33
0
/a) c * Lease. t Special claim.
W Jjjjttendcred, and included in special claim granted to company.
Etantefl * s P ec >al claim was surrendered, and one containing forty acres was
(e)o° company. .
[a! s utren dered, and included in special claim granted to new company.
' / utrendcred, and new lease issued.
14


Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
P-‘°
Sflfl
ss$
P 0£
<S H
<
Merrijigs.
A. It. P.
'
£ s.
Daniel and Thos. McGee
July 1, 1883
9 2 35
•
10 o
(Merrijigs SluicingCo.)*
17 0.
Daniel McGee (Happy
Valley Company)*
July 1,1883
16 2 4
Sept. 18,1885
Happy Valley
Co.
Charles Fraser (Welling-
ton Company)*
July 1, 1884
13 1 12
Sept. 18,1885
HappyValley
Co.
14 0
Italian Gully.
( a )Erema Causis Company*
July 1,1874
6 2 0
Sept.26,1876
Italian Gully
Co.
14 0
Painkiller.
17 0
( b )Gladstone Company*..
Big River.
Jan. 1, 1882
16 i 17
• *
* *
Hugh Duggan (Pioneer
Company)*
July 1, 1883
10 2 16
June 23,1885
Big River
Extended Co.
11 o
P. Brennan (Big River
• Company) *
July 1,1883
16 2 7
June 23, 1885
Big River
Extended Co.
17 0
17 0
Lord Edward Company*
July 1,1883
16 2 0
. .
Big River Extended Co.*
July 1, 1884
10 2 17
t ,
..
11 0
17 0
John McQuillan (Bendigo
Company)*
July 1, 1884
16 2 4
••
•*
* Lease.
( a ) Surrendered, and included in fresh lease to Italian Gully Company.
( b ) Surrendered, and included in special claim granted to company.


THE BULLER WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
By the discovery of gold in the Buller District, more than a
quarter of a century ago, the West Coast goldfields may he said
to have been opened up. The first gold found in the Buller
River was obtained by a party of miners 'who, some time prior
to the year 1860, had made their way oyer from Nelson to the
Buller Valley; hut Mr. J. Roclifort’s survey-party, composed of
Maoris, are said to have made a discovery a short time previous
at a place known as the “ Old Diggings,” on the eastern hank
of the Buller River, about twenty-five miles from the sea.
Gold-mining has been extensively carried on throughout the
district up to the present time, and the Buller has proved to he
oiie of the richest fields in the colony. It has been roughly cal-
culated that, of the gold, worth over £42,000,000, exported from
the colony, the Buller District has contributed about one-twelfth
of the total quantity. The yearly export from Westport is
now about 20,0000 z., independent of the gold sent by way of
Reefton to Greymouth and Nelson. During the early days
mining was confined to the beaches and hanks of the Buller and
ds tributaries, and some of the smaller rivers. Gold was
quickly obtained in those days, often in large quantities, and
with hut little preliminary labour or outlay. As soon as what
was deemed the best of the gold was won in any one place, and
heavy labour became necessary to get more, the miners quickly
shifted camp and went in search of easier finds. Fresh dis-
coveries were thus continually made, and hence the rushes of
hundreds— sometimes even of thousands —of miners which were
so common in those days. The beaches and banks of the Bul-
er turned out to be very rich, and a few years after the first
'scovery thousands of miners were attracted to the - fields. The
tte thod adopted for saving the gold, which was for the most
P ar t of a flaky description, was very simple, and required but
1 tie apparatus and preliminary labour. The miners pegged
°ut their claims on the river-banks or beaches where they had
tamed a good prospect, and where water £ or a head-race was
Within easy distance. The race was brought on to the ground


by means of trenches and ■wooden burning, and when a sluice-
box was constructed and fixed in position the miners were ready
to commence operations. This preliminary work occupied hut
a few days, or weeks at most; for at that period, rather than
expend much time on what was termed “dead labour,” the
ground would be abandoned. The gold being of a coarse or
flaky description, most of it could he saved in false bottoms or
Venetian ripples placed in the sluice-box. By these simple
means the gold was obtained for a few years after the field was
proclaimed, and even to this day the same plan of working may
still be seen, though, as a rule, plush and blankets are used in
place of false bottoms and Venetian ripples for saving the fine
gold. Though all the precious metal which was most easily
obtainable has long since been won, numbers of miners may still
be found working here and there on the Buller and other rivers
in the district; but they have frequently to tunnel some dis-
tance from the river-bank through alluvial formation to reach
the gold-bearing deposits. The gold is. found interspersed
through the coarse gravel, though hardly payable until the bed:
rock is reached, which consists of a soft argillaceous slate, in the
crevices of which the richest deposits of gold are found. The
bed-rock is generally picked over and washed to the depth of
at least a foot. The average earnings arc small, compared with
the large returns of former days; but, on the whole, fair wages
are obtained, and for many years to come miners will be found
gaining a livelihood by working on these rivers.
It was not until about the year 1865 that the discovery was
made of what may be termed the beach-leads of gold, as they lie
in a beach-formation within a mile or so of the ocean. These
have been for the past twenty years the principal mainstay of
the district. The first discoveries were made at Charleston and
Brighton. Within the.next two years similar discoveries were
made at Addison’s Flat, a few miles to the south, and
Caledonian, German, Giles, and Rochfort Terraces, a few miles
to the north, of the Buller, and shortly afterwards at the mouth
of the Mokihinui River. These leads were found to be exceed-
ingly rich, and such extensive rushes set in that within two or
three years after the first discoveries there were about twenty
thousand miners on the field, and many small fortunes were


made in a short space of- time. But, as the shallow ground got
worked out, the' population steadily dwindled away, until only
about five hundred miners were left on the alluvial ground.
A brief description of the general appearance and formation
of the country along the coast to the north and south of the
Buller, where these rich leads were found, may not be out of
place. Running parallel with the ocean-beach is a mountain-
range, the base of which was formerly washed by the ocean, and
is in some portions even to the present day. Along the greater
part of the coast the land has made seawards, until a narrow belt
of country, varying in width from a few chains to two or three
miles, was formed between the sea and the mountains. . This belt
is nearly level, except at the foot of the mountains, where the
ocean deposits have been thrown up against the solid formation
to the height of a few hundred feet. The level country consists
chiefly of pakihis or low-lying plains, with a thick cement under
the top stratum, which prevents the surface-water soaking away,
la the terraces thus formed at the foot of the hills, and in the
pakihis, the leads were discovered, all running about parallel with
the present coast-line. They may be described as layers of heavy
s and containing gold, varying considerably in length, depth, and
Breadth, but otherwise preserving a regular and even formation.
These auriferous deposits are the result of the action of the waves,
the tendency of which is to sift out and sweep back the lighter,
atl d leave behind the heavier, material cast up. In process of
time this resulted in the formation of layers or leads of the
heaviest sediment washed up by the waves—viz., black sand,
r uhy sand, and fine gold : —which were deposited parallel with the
r °U of the waves, just above what was at the time high-water
mark. As the land made seawards the lead was covered over by
s trata of lighter sediment, and in course of time similar deposits
0 heavy sand and gold have been made, parallel with the first
a nd with each other. In the terraces formed at the foot of the
mountain-range a few leads have been found on the original rock,
_ most of them lie between it and the present surface, on sea-
covering the rock. Some of these terrace-leads were
close to the surface, while others have been so covered
U P hy subsequent deposits that the miners have had to tunnel
hundred feet into the side of the hill in order to strike


them. On the level country between the foot of the ranges and
the sea the leads have been found at varying depths, some quite
close to the surface, and others with as much as 30ft. or 40ft. of
deposit above them. This same process of formation may lie
seen going on to this day oh the Westport, Charleston, and
Brighton beaches, where .a number of miners make a fair living
by working the leads of gold-bearing sand just below high-water
mark; as soon as they are cast up by the waves. The beach im-
mediately to the north of Charleston is especially rich, and there
are several valuable claims 'in that locality.
The question is often asked—and it is one of great interest- —
“ W r hence all this gold in the ocean on this coast, which the
waves have been for ages and arc still casting up ? ” Much of
it has certainly been brought down by rivers travelling through
auriferous country; but many shrewd, practical miners, who
have watched and studied the ebb and flow of these golden
sands for years, are of opinion that a portion of the gold must
come from quartz reefs which lie in the bed of the ocean; that
they are always in course of disintegration, being ultimately
cast up in the shape of golden sands, and washed on to the
beach.*
During and subsequent to the terrace formations at the foot
of the mountain-range, torrents have washed ravines through
them, and sometimes have cut deeply into the original rock. f n
some places these ravines have been filled up again by subsequent
ocean-deposits, which accounts for the breaks found in the leads,
and more than I,oooft. in from the present surface traces haw
been found of a mountain-stream which has thus been covered
over. In other places the ravines have not been filled up, hnt
have been washed broader and deeper, till they have becom e
broad valleys. It was through these ravines that the leads were
discovered. The gold washed away from them travelled down
the belt of level country, and the prospector was led hack by
the colour to the spot in the ravine whence the gold was waste
down, and thus discovered the exposed ends or outcrops of tb e
* The gold-drifts on the West Coast, in the majority of instances, rest on
surface of the most recent marine Tertiary rocks in New Zealand, havingi
fact, been carried out from the mountains by the rivers, and deposited 0
gradually-changing coast-line.—Dr. Hector, u Abstract Iteport on the Prog*
of the Geological Survey of New Zealand, 18GG-G7.”


leads. The gold in these hcach-leads is exceedingly fine —so
much so that the miners, who-had been used to the flaky and
coarse gold found in rivers, hardly thought at first that it would
pay to work these leads; but with the improved methods for
saving the gold which were quickly brought into general use
they were soon proved to be highly payable, though, doubt-
less, at the outset a considerable percentage of the gold was
lost. -
A few years after these ocean-formed leads were discovered
in the gullies and ravines, the adjacent terraces were found to
contain rich leads of auriferous sand, one layer being on top of
another in. many places, and were in some instances worked
by tunnels; but ground-sluicing is now more generally adopted,
unless where the ground is very deep. The sand is usually
washed over wide sluice-boxes, covered with different materials,
such as plush, green baize, coir matting, and copper-plates
coated with quicksilver, which catch the fine gold, while the
lighter particles float away. 'Whenever practicable, tunnelling is
.stdl adopted; but it is often a very heavy undertaking before the
lead is struck. Instead of getting at it by a tunnel a few yards
iu length, .the miner may now have to drive I,oooft. or 2,000 ft.,
an d, as the tunnel does not go through solid ground, it is neces-
sary to have it timbered. On the flat ground between the foot
°f the mountain-range and the ocean, where it was impossible to
put in tunnels, shafts had to be sunk on the leads and the sands
ra ised through them. Where the leads were close to the surface
Ibis plan answered well enough; but it was found impossible to
to any depth on account of the great inflow of water. The
surface-leads were soon worked out, and it became necessary to
® °pt the system of ground-sluicing with a drainage tail-race.
n the level ground a few miles north of the I3uller it has not
eeu Possible to construct tail-races, on account of insufficient
> and somewhat elaborate methods were therefore tried for
a ln g the water out of deep shafts, but without success; con-
a large area of ground which gave good prospects had
0 be abandoned.
Ground-sluicing has been generally found to pay well
r °ughout the district; but it often involves a vast amount of
eav y preliminary labour before any gold can be obtained :


consequently, after the surface-leads were worked out, only
those resolute miners who were willing to settle down to hard
and regular work, with the prospect of nothing better than fair
remuneration for their labour, remained in the district to engage
in this system of mining. Of late years nearly all the largest
claims in Brighton, Charleston, Addison’s Flat, and other parts
of the Buller goldfields have. been worked on the ground-
sluicing. plan, and in many instances the preliminary work has
been of a very arduous and costly nature, involving an outlay
equivalent to several thousand pounds. Head-races two or
three miles in length have been brought through rough coun-
try on to the claims, and it has often been found necessary to
construct tail-races of almost equal length in order to get suffi-
cient fall. Iron piping has been extensively used in head-races,
and tail-races have often been brought through tunnels several
hundred, and sometimes even a few thousand, feet in length.
On Addison’s Flat, where, as a general rule, the tail-races have
had to be tunnelled, upwards of 50,000 ft. have been driven in
the aggregate. There, and in other flat and low-lying country,
it has been found impossible, with any length of tail-race, to get
sufficient fall for the water to carry away anything but fine
sand, and other means have had to be devised for getting rid
of the stone and coarse gravel found in the face. This has
been effected by means of iron hopper-plates fixed at the head of
the tail-race, and double-incline self-acting tramways (generally
known on the goldfields as “ water-balance lifts ”). The head-
race carries the stuff from the face over the hopper-plates that
screen off the stone, which is raised up the incline and deposite
on the surface. Hundreds of thousands of tons of stone raise
in this manner may be seen lying on the surface in the vicinity
of large ground-sluicing claims. All this preliminary work m
connection with ground-sluicing has necessitated not only labour
and capital, but also a considerable amount of engineering >
to get the claim into good working order. ■ A few miles f rolll
Westport a party of five men have been steadily engaged during
the last five or . six years in making the necessary preparation 3
to work a large ground-sluicing claim, and are only now begin
ning to get a return from their arduous undertaking. -A- *al-
race has been brought up for a mile and a half, and water con


ducted on to the claim by a head-race more than two miles in
length. There are at least twenty tunnels in the head- and tail-
races, three of which are each about I,oooft. in length, taken
through country in places difficult and dangerous to work.
Another tunnel, nearly 2,000 ft. in length, has been taken through
a hill. "Without the aid of an engineer or surveyor these
enterprising miners started the tunnel on either side of the
range, and met fairly in the centre. This is but one instance
out of many on the Buller goldfields of the skill and indomitable
energy which are necessary in these days to bring mining
enterprises to a’ successful issue. As a rule, fair wages are
earned by those engaged in ground-sluicing, but, except in odd
instances, not sufficient to compensate for the large preliminary
outlay.
A considerable number of miners arc still able to gain a
livelihood with but little preliminary outlay by working with
flood-machines in streams into which the tail-races from the
ground-sluicing claims are emptied, or on the sca-bcaches
between Brighton and Mokihinui. About one hundred and fifty
men are at work on these beaches, and wash the gold-bearing
send thrown up by the waves by means of a simple and inoxpen-
Slve apparatus, consisting of an iron lioppcr-platc fixed over a
eepper-plate coated with quicksilver, on which the fine gold is
caught and saved. The beaches, which are always better after
ro ugh weather at spring-tides, have now been worked for many
years, hut the yields are not so good as they were in the early
a y s ; still, the “ beach-combers ” make fair wages. Their out-
ay for tools and appliances costs only a mere trifle compared
what others engaged in gold-mining have to expend. The
eac h-combers, and also other miners throughout the district,
combine agricultural and pastoral pursuits with gold-mining, and
comfortable homesteads, with well-stocked orchards and cleared
a ud cultivated land, are no uncommon sight. In some parts of
e duller District there is good land suitable for settlement by
fl 'bo have claims in the vicinity, and they always appear
ea o e r to avail themselves of it.
. is quite possible that new fields may yet be discovered, as,
to the impossibility of carrying provisions through rough
08 'Country till tracks are made, much likely-looking ground


remains unexplored, especially between the Lyell and the head-
waters of the Mokihinui, and from there northwards through the
Karamea Hiding towards Collingwood. New discoveries have
been made quite recently near the Karamea Settlement, and
hopes arc entertained that these may lead to the development of
a payable field. About thirty men are at work, making fair
wages.
An interesting experiment is now being tried in connection
with the working of some low leads at Fail-down, between the
Bullcr and Waimangaroa Rivers, where there is a stretch of flat
country not much above the sea-level, about six miles in length
and two miles in breadth, between the ocean and the mountain-
range. On the Giles, Rochfort, and Christmas Terraces, at the
foot of which this flat country lies, rich leads were discovered,
and several hundred miners once worked with good results. It
was evident that some of these leads ran out into the fiat ground,
and about twenty years ago a number of miners endeavoured to
work them with shafts and tunnels. Three distinct leads were
found near the foot of the terraces, showing a. very good pro-
spect ; but with their meagre appliances for baling out the
water the miners could not make, headway, and were re luctantly
compelled to abandon the ground. Since that time nothing was
done until about a year ago, when an intelligent mirier conceived
an idea of ground-sluicing, hitherto unknown in the district,
by which he thought those leads could be worked. He con-
veyed water from the adjacent bills through iron pipes into *
paddock, where the lead had been bottomed at a depth of about
15ft. The water was then passed through a short hose an
nozzle attached to the bottom pipe, where the pressure was con
sidcrable, into another pipe inclined upwards at an angle of 45 •
At the bottom of the latter pipe was a well, into which the san
and gravel were sluiced, and carried by the force of water up & e
pipe, and discharged at its mouth a few feet above the surface o
the ground, where the stuff could be washed over tables and
gold saved as in the case of ordinary ground-sluicing. 1
experiment has been successful in so far as it enabled the invento r
to prove that he could raise sand, gravel, and fair-sized stones in
10ft. for every hundred feet of pressure, and that the continn
rush of water up the discharge-pipe acted like a syphon in


ing the paddock well drained. He prospected one black-sand
lead with satisfactory results, but found that, in order to carry
on further operations, it would be necessary to replace the light
galvanized pipes with strong black-iron pipes, and in conse-
quence he sold out to tlie Fairdown Gold-mining Company,
retaining an interest equal to one-fifth of the whole. This com-
pany has since secured valuable water-rights and the lease of
eighty-nine acres of land where tlie leads are believed to run.
It has also further prospected one lead, which gives every
promise of paying well, and has had one water-race surveyed.
The pipes will be laid and the water brought in at once, and,
doubtless, in a short time this field will be the scene of active
operations. The system of hydraulic sluicing which Mr.
Thomas Sherlock introduced is precisely similar to that which
had been adopted by Mr. Perry at Gabriel’s Gully, Otago,
though Mr. Sherlock was not aware of Mr. Perry’s important
discovery till after his own invention had been perfected. Two
an( l a half tons of stuff can be removed per minute with a
100 ft. head of water at Gabriel’s Gully, and there does not
a Ppear to be any reason why the system should not be applied
with equal success at Fairdown. As this flat country is of
rece nt and precisely similar formation throughout, and a good
fead has been found close to the present sea-beach, where the
waves have encroached, it is probable that leads as rich as any
yet discovered will be found to exist right across the flat. The
sinking at the edge of the flat, underneath the high ground, is
about 16ft., at which depth the bottom, or sea-floor, is reached.
ben the first paddock was opened out, a thickness of Gft. of
“ ne gravel and black-sand was found intermixed, lying on the
°ttom, and carrying gold throughout. When the iron piping
“connected 'with the works, the fall obtainable from the
areatea Creek, which is distant a mile and a half, will give
a Pressure of 270 ft. This, it is estimat.cd, will be ample to
? ove the extent of the gold-bearing ground. The Fairdown
oropany can command any portion of the flat with its water,
311 operations will be watched with great interest. If suc-
essftil, efforts will, no doubt, be made to work other low-lying
ground i n the same way- This will be a new departure in the
lst °ry of gold-mining in the Puller District.


QUARTZ-BEEFING.
Of the 15 tiller quartz reefs, excepting those at Lycll, which
for some years past have been profitably worked, it is prema-
ture to speak with any degree of certainty. Hitherto but little
success has attended the efforts which have been made to
■ develop them, and so far this branch of mining industry is only
in its infancy. About fifteen years ago quartz reefs were dis-
covered at Waimangaroa and at the head of the Mokihinui
River. At each place a crushing-battery was erected, but in
both instances the enterprise failed. At 'VVaimangaroa the stone
soon ran out, no further prospecting was done, and the battery
was sold. At Mokihinui the quartz yielded about loz. per ton;
but, owing to the rough and inaccessible nature of the country,
and the narrowness of the reef, the cost of taking out and
crushing the stone was greater than the return obtained. After
an outlay of nearly .£lO,OOO this enterprise was also abandoned.
But during the last few years another effort has been made.to
develop these districts. Fresh reefs have been discovered at
Mokihinui, a good pack-track has been made to them from the
mouth of the river, and the battery has been again put in work-
ing order. The companies at work here have been ill
rewarded for their outlay, but two claims on the southern side
of the river (the Red Queen and Southern Light) give f air
promise for the future. What appears to be a payable reef has
also been discovered at Rough-and-Tumble, a tributary of the
Mokihinui. A pack-track is now being made to this reef, aD
when finished the locality will be well prospected. About thiee
year’s ago some blocks of rich-looking stone were discovered 111
4/0 . ° rPliis
the Great Republic Company’s lease at Waimangaroa. 1
company, believing that there was a solid reef to work upt®>
erected a battery, which was connected with the workings y
an aerial tramway 120 chains in length. After 1,500 tons
stone, averaging loz. to the ton, had been crushed, the reef ra f
out, and crushing has since been .discontinued. It is now
dent that these blocks were brought into their present position
a slip; but the main reef is not likely to be far from them,
company has employed men to prospect for it, and, if success
the property will probably be a valuable one. It would a


lead to further prospecting and the development of other reefs,
which are believed to exist in the locality. Though quartz-reef-
ing at Mokihinui and Waimangaroa has been in the past rather
a failure, it is quite possible that each of these places may yet
become mining centres of considerable importance. The latter
is so close to the Westport—Ngakawau Railway that operations
could be carried on at comparatively small cost.
OTHER MINERALS.
Copper-ore was found in the Nine-mile Hill, about ten miles
from Westport, a dozen years ago. Samples sent to Melbourne
for analysis gave a return of 37 per cent, of copper. The dis-
coverers, after searching for the lode for a week or two, did not
succeed in finding it, and proceeded no further. Another
discovery has been lately reported. It is said that a copper-lode
bas been found up the Buller road, fourteen miles from West-
Port, and that the prospector has taken steps to test its value.
deposit of coarse stream-tin has been recently discovered at
j e o °t °f the Mount William Range by Dr. Gaze and Mr. J.
• Clark, and samples of the ore analysed' appeared to be of
excellent quality. Tin-stone was found by two Germans, who
some samples to Wellington for analysis, which , gave
P er cent, of tin. Eor the past year or two reports have been
that extensive tin-sand deposits had been found at
aifl ea and Mokihinui, but the samples examined have not
a out so satisfactory as expected. Several deposits of
Hhrf aneSC ac k oxide) are known to exist up the Buller
la/ 61 * tbeir extent lias not been ascertained. There are
foiuid <^OS^S iron-sand, and various iron-ores have bear
blokih' n * n S rea t quantities. Alum-shale exists near
jj ave ,! nu h und.it is probable that there are other minerals which
wher esca pod notice. With such an extensive country,
p 0 ma ny various rocks of all ages occur, the mineral
Vdro p leS are VCI 7 great, especially as there are so many
r °cks 6riUa eruptive rocks, extensive tracts of metamorphic
hfer * a exten h °f slate rocks of different ages. Argen-
be e* S ena should be found, and a discovery of zinc-ores may
q Ua e d- Antimony has already been taken out in some
1 les up the Inangahua, a tributary of the Buller. So far,


gold and coal have almost solely occupied the attention of
miners in the district. It is a matter for regret that, as a
general rule, the prospector for gold, has hut one string to his
bow, and may in ignorance, while searching for this ore, pass by
other minerals of great value. But this evil is likely to he soon
remedied. The establishment of Schools of Mines on the gold-
fields must tend in time to convert the ordinary miner into an
intelligent prospector. These Schools will certainly aid the de-
velopment of the natural resources of the country, and their
establishment on the goldfields is considered by the more in-
telligent miners to be almost as important as the construction of
roads and bridges. The outcome of the School of Mines at
Westport will, doubtless, be the discovery ere long of fresh
mineral wealth in the Euller District.
ADDISON’S FLAT.
Addison, a coloured man, found gold in May, 1867; hut a
few parties of miners w r ere getting a little gold some months pre-
viously on the Cement Lead. After Addison’s discovery a rus
set in, and about 8,000 people flocked to the Flat. A large num-
ber had to prospect, as the available ground was quickly taken
up, and several leads were discovered in quick succession-
Shamrock, to the south; Gallagher’s, to the north; and Caro me
Terrace, to the east. Leads were also found in several ot e
places, but they were more limited. A large quantity of
was obtained from the ordinary claims held under miners’ rig
during the first two years; after that time the populah
gradually dwindled down until only about sixty adult males
left on the Flat. Mining is now carried on in an open P
about 60ft. above the sea-level, and five to six miles back
the sea. The area of this field is ten miles in length by *
miles in width. The gold is obtained from 10ft. to 70ft. e
the surface, in layers of black sand and gravel. Several P a J a
leads arc known to exist between the present workings an
sea, and three miles of road have lately been constructed tO .
access to them. There are at present seven joint-stock
panics, who hold mining-leases for ground-sluicing as follows-
(1.) Neill and party, or the Rise and Shine Gold-® 11 J
Company.—This party consists of seven men, holding a l ea


ten acres. They commenced operations in 1868, and obtained
a large quantity of gold. It is probable they will continue to
do so for some years.
(2.) Halligan and party, or the Rip and Tear Gold-mining
Company.— This party consists of nine men, holding a special
claim of eighteen acres on the Cement Lead. This claim has
been the richest on the field. Operations were commenced in
1868. The party drove a tunnel 2,000 ft., timbered it through-
out, pnt down new tables for saving gold, and erected new
machinery, & c ., at a cost of £1,100; but this amount does not
mclude the cost of water-races or of opening out the claim.
Vhen, m working order the average outlay is £25 per month,
exclusive of wages. A share in this claim was sold by auction
last year for £4OO.
(3.) Carmody and party, or the Fanny Parnell Gold-mining
ompany.—This party, consisting of eight men, hold two leases
rpj, 611 , aCres and fivc acres, which they took up about 1870.
o j 6Se C aims have been very expensive to work, and a large sum
war. 1107 , 11 " 11 t 0 bC CXpCndc<l in P rocu rmg a good supply of
tin/i j they davc Proved highly remunerative, and will con-
® o do so for a number of years.
Q ola and party, or the Great Extended Gold-mining
c o jr y T Tllis pai "'ho IxofG a lease for seventeen acres,
year s S-S , , four mcn - Th ey started in 1874, and spent four
supnlv ll , dms dam > &c 4 but they have still a very inadequate
tailing 0t + , Water - Witll a bett cr supply, and a fall for the
owners ’ thlS Claim V()uld P rove ver f remunerative, and the
(5 . a !f of opinion that it would be the best in the district.
c °mpan ° ld and or tlle Great Western Gold -mining
ten aer e y ’~^ IliS P art y/ consisting of four men, hold a lease for
and h n , Tlle claim ; udiich was opened up in 1875, pays well,
(6 /h yto d ° S ° r man y years.
Pany.-lp! eirnc and P art y, or the Bonanza Gold-mining Corn-
Well. ae y bold a lease for ten acres, and have been doing very
and party, or the Maid of Erin Gold-mining
of t en ; " Tllis P art y consists of six men, who hold a lease
near the Black Ball Creek. Though work was
t 862, they have only lately succeeded in getting into


face-working order; but, judging from present appearances, the
claim is likely to turn out well.
Although these claims have times of depression, owing to
the nature of the ground, as wliat are termed bars or falls
occur, they have, as a whole, proved highly payable, and shares
frequently change hands at from .£250 to .£4OO.
. To the east of Addison’s there lies a wide field for prospect-
ing. There are several quartz lodes—in fact, dykes of quartz —
standing some feet above the surface ; hut nothing has ever been
done to prove whether they are auriferous or not. To the west
gold lias hcen discovered in payable quantities in several places;
but, having been worked in a very primitive style, and being
dependent on the caprice of the weather for a supply of water,
claims were soon abandoned. It requires capital and perseverance
to develop the resources of the place. The natural features of the
country are all against the miner, inasmuch as long tunnels have
to be constructed for sluicing purposes. The length of those
already constructed varies from 2,000 ft. to over 5,000 ft. The
water-supply within the reach of the individual miner is fully
occupied, and the nearest water now available for other ventures
would have to be brought in from the Nine-mile Creek, which
flows into the Duller River. The probable cost of a race from
that stream, would be about £2,000.
CHARLESTON AND BRIGHTON.
This portion of the district extends along the sea-coast fr°m
the Totara River southwards to Deadman’s Creek, near Ra zor '
back, for a distance of about thirty miles. Payable gold waS
first discovered at the Charleston basin by Linahan and party m
the month of August, 1866, and shortly after at Welshmans
Terrace, Brighton, by a party of Welshmen. ' Croninville was
opened in April, 1878, hy Mr. Cornelius Cronin. The gold is
found in leads varying in altitude from the present high-wah r
mark to 400 ft. or 500 ft. above the sea-level. That the gold camel 11
the first instance from the lofty mountain-ranges is attested by
fact that gold-bearing quartz has been found in the various streams;
and that reefs have been successfully worked for many
The gold is very fine—in fact, almost as fine as flour —and, 1
consequence, is difficult to save. It has been found in diftei


kinds of wash-dirt, some of which required special treatment.
Several of the leads were composed of hard cement, and had to
be pulverised before the gold could he extracted. This was
done in the first instance in a very primitive fashion : some used
to burn the cement and then pound it with heavy wooden
beaters; then horse-machines, with wooden stampers shod with
iron, were introduced; and at length crushing-batteries, driven
by water- and in a few instances by steam-pow'er, were erected.
Some of the gold w r as found in black sand, some in gravel, some
on the sea-beaclies, and in a number of places in the surface-
soil. In the sea-beacli workings the gold is saved by prepared
copper-plates laid on boxes about 12ft. long and 3ft. wide, on
which quicksilver is spread, and the black sand which contains
the gold is fed on to a perforated sheet of iron, and sluiced over
the prepared plates, when the gold becomes incorporated with
the quicksilver. The other kinds of wash-dirt were sluiced over
baize, or blankets, and in several instances flour-sacks
were used. "With the exception of the sea-beach workings,
ground-sluicing is now almost universally adopted. At first
Charleston and Brighton carried a large population, probably
n °t less than ten thousand, composed of very different elements
uud. races. The present population is about eight hundred,
85 pe r cent. 0 f t j ie a( ] u ]t population being miners. Since
the first discovery it has been calculated that about 300,0000 z.,
°f the value of upwards of .€1,000,000, have been obtained. Of
lute, mining matters have been rather dull, which has been due,
to a great extent, to the scarcity and dearness of water. The
es t country having been worked first, it follows that the avail-
ahle ground is constantly becoming poorer, and, in order to keep)
”P the returns to a payable point, a greater quantity of wasli-
ut must be operated upon, which can only be done by means
?. a lurger and cheaper supply of water. As a rule, the pre-
icanary expenses are very heavy, as long and deep tail-races
av e to be constructed in order to procure the necessary fall or
,?Piession to carry away the tailings. This, together with the
*®h price charged for water, practically debars the miners from
-i»g into new ground. It is considered that, if water could
cad in larger quantities and at a reduced rate, the district
dd again revive and afford remunerative employment to a
15


considerable population. Very little exploration has been done
outside of the narrow strip of land which lies between the sea-
beach and the low limestone range immediately at the back.
The gold-workings have been confined to a narrow strip along
the sea-coast, varying in width from one to three or four miles.
About ten miles from the coast, and running parallel with it,
are the lofty Paparoa Ranges, which are practically unprospected.
From their slate formation and other indications, such as ruby
sand in the rivers, there is every reason to believe that the
ranges contain gold-bearing quartz reefs, and it is thought by
many experienced miners that rich alluvial workings will
eventually be discovered further inland, near the foot of the
ranges.
LYELL.
This goldfield, which is forty miles inland from Westport,
was opened in 1862. The diggings are principally situated on
the watershed of the Lycll Creek, a small river that joins the
Buller from the north, forty miles from the sea. Very rich
parcels of gold were obtained from the bed and banks of
the creek and its tributaries. The field, which is from 400 ft.
to 1,600 ft. above the sea-level, is seven miles long by one
mile broad; but it is being gradually opened northwards
into the valley of the Mokiliinui. The enormously rich finds
of alluvial gold led to the supposition that quartz reefs existed
in the vicinity; but it was not until 1869 or 1870 that quartz-
mining attained any importance. Some of the quartz-mines have
proved highly remunerative. The United Alpine Company paid
£36,000 in dividends, .017,000 of which w r as distributed amongst
the shareholders in eight or nine monthly payments last ye ar:
the value of the gold won has been about .£120,000, whilst the
capital actually subscribed by shareholders has not amounted to
£20,000. The Break o’ Day Company, in the course of three
years, paid upwards of £lO,OOO in dividends. The company
crushed 872 tons of quartz, wdiich yielded 4,6100 z. of gold, or
at the rate of over oioz. per ton. This claim, though not m
ilic same place as the Tyrconnel Company’s ground, is n 0""
worked by that company, which has found some very rich leaders,
a crushing from 46* tons of stone having yielded 6850 z. °
retorted gold.


It has been proved beyond doubt that the Lycll district
is impregnated in various directions with payable reefs; but,
owing to the inaccessible nature of the country, and the
capital required to develop them not being forthcoming, they
are still left untouched. It' is expected that the horse-track
now in course of construction between the Lyell and Mokihinui
will be the means of opening up a large tract of auriferous
country. The mode of working is by tunnelling on the sidlings
and hills, and the quartz is run down by shoots to the creeks,
where the crushing-batteries have been placed. Along the
hanks of the creeks hydraulic sluicing is still carried on, the
beds of the creeks being diverted from one side to the other,
an d the bottoms sluiced. There are about one hundred and fifty
miners on the field.
At the New Creek diggings, five miles up the New Creek—
a s mall river which comes in from the north and joins the
Buller two and a half miles below the Lyell —the bed and banks
°f the creek are ground-sluiced. Quartz reefs have lately been
found on the west bank of the creek, which until quite recently
had been inaccessible owing to the want of roads; but three
mi^cs of a pack-road, lately formed up the creek, will be the
means of having it more thoroughly prospected.
The United Alpine Company possesses the best-paving
me im the Lyell District. The company was formed in
ctober, 1874, with a capital of .£32,000 in 32,000 shares, with
, s ' P er share declared paid up. The company opened up the
trillle > erected a battery at a cost of about .£7,000, and had paid
“ earl y £15,000 in dividends Avhcn the stone ran out in their
0 Level. It was then found necessary to call up the
a ance of the capital to complete No. G Level, which had
a( lv been commenced, and had been driven a distance of
1,200 ft. The capital was increased 10s. per share, with the
c ° nsen t of all the shareholders, in August, 1883; the total
of the company being .£IB,OOO. Under this new ar-
<]r; L only took Is. Id. per share to complete the
Vln g of No. G Level. Since then, crushing operations have
Carric( l on continuously upon the stone taken from this
' A distance of 290 ft. intervenes between the No. 5 and
°' 6 Levels. From August, 1883, the company recommenced


paying dividends, and continued to do so up to October, 1886,
having paid during that time the sum of ,£24,800. The
motive-power for driving the battery of twenty heads of 8001 b.
stampers, and four berdans, was originally provided hv means
of an overshot 40ft. water-wheel, which was in 1884 super-
seded by the erection of one of Pelton’s water-wheels, which
has given entire satisfaction. The company has now started
the No. 7 Level, which it is estimated w'ilL cost from £5,000
to £6,000 before stone is met with. An agreement has been
entered into with Mr. Walter Prince, electrical engineer,
Dunedin, for the supply of electrical machinery, to work
rock-borers, also to light the mine and battery with the
electric light. The company gives employment to about sixty or
seventy hands altogether. There is a very passable dray-road
from the Lyell Township to the mine and battery, which are
situated about three miles up the Lyell Creek from the town-
ship. The reef in this mine, which is very irregular, and ranges
from 2ft. to 50ft. in thickness, has averaged from 16dwt. to
19dw r t. to the ton.
THE OWEN EIVEE EEEFS.
An important discovery has lately been made at the Owen
River by Messrs. Byrne and Bulmcr, wiio pierced into the heart
of a very inaccessible tract of country, and found several quartz
reefs cropping out on the surface. Fourteen leases have already
been taken up, and one or two of the companies have done a
considerable amount of work. Mr. W. C. Wright, an ex-
perienced mining surveyor, made a survey of the ground in M a y
last, and speaks favourably of its future prospects. The area on
w'hich he reported is in the watershed of the Owen River and i s
tributaries, and is twelve miles in length by eight miles > u
width. It is enclosed on the north, east, and w r cst by lofty' inoun
tains, and on the south by' the Bullcr River. The Owen j unC
tions with the Bullcr River at a point on the coach-road fr°®
Nelson to Reef ton about sixty miles from the latter and
six miles from the former place. The leased ground is s^ua^ c
from eight to ten miles above the junction of the Owen with
Buller River, and nine of the leases are on the Bulmer line of ree
The Ow r en River is a receptacle for all the rocks and mineia


the district. Blocks of granite, quartz, limestone, sandstone,
slate, marble, and iron-ore, with garnets and some gold, are to
be found in it; also indications of coal, galena, and antimony.
The gold lias been worked to some extent; but the immense
boulders of granite which exist all along the river-bed have
proved a great impediment to its being profitably worked. An
abundance of timber for mining purposes is to be found on the
bills, and, as the rivers send down a constant and very consider-
able supply of water, which will give the necessary motive-power
for crushing, there will be no necessity for steam-power.
There is a good fall, being 3ft. per chain in the vicinity of the
mines, and there is no lack of machine-sites. The hills are very
steep, and in all the claims taken up 700 ft. or 800 ft. of backs
can be had to the mines, with the exception of the Enterprise
Reef, which would give about 300 ft. on the northern boundary.
The quartz lodes, which are found cropping to the surface in
huge bodies at almost every spur, are frequently exposed by the
creeks and rivers, and are in systems of parallel reefs. The
strike of the strata is nearly north-west, and the dip south-west,
the angle of dip being about 50°. The hanging-walls arc well
Refined, with a strong selvage of a greyish slate. Their strike is
shout 33°N.W., and their underlie nearly conforms with the dip
the strata. The foot-walls vary in strike and underlie, in
some places bearing nearly north and south, and standing almost
''ertieal. The hanging -walls appear to be richer in gold than
an y other parts of the reefs, the quartz on the foot-walls being
® ore hard and massive, and containing less gold. Mr. Wright
made several rough tests on the ground of parcels weighing from
four to ten pounds, the results being very satisfactory, varying
r °m s|dwt. to 19oz. 13dwt. Ggr. per ton. A road is now in
course of formation, and a site for a township has been laid
Before many years shall have elapsed important results
may be expected from the opening-up of the Owen ltivcr Reefs,
ail fi an extension of the field may be looked for.
PRICE OF GOLD.
The average price of gold in the Buller Warden’s District is
per ounce.


GOLDFIELD OFFICEES—SITTINGS OF COUET.
The Warden for the district is Mr. E. Bird, R.M., Westport.
Mr. E. C. Kelling is Clerk of Court and Receiver of Gold
Revenue at Westport; Bailiff, Mr. G. Carruthers. Mr. A.
Winterburn (Postmaster) acts as Clerk of the Court and Re-
ceiver of Gold Revenue at Charleston; and Mr. A. A. Cor-
field at Lyell and Murchison, the latter place being visited once
a month.
Sittings of the Warden’s Court are held at Westport every
alternate Tuesday, at 11 a.m.; at Lyell the fourth Wednesday
in each month, at 11 a.m.; at Charleston the fourth Thursday
in each month, at 11 a.m.; and at Murchison the first Tuesday
in January, April, July, and October.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Nelson to Westport .. .. .. 145
Greymouth to Westport (by beach) .. 70
Westport to Addison’s .. .. .. 8
Addison’s to Croniuville .. .. .. 4
Croninville to Nine-mile .. .. .. 2£
Nine-mile to Charleston .. .. .. 2
Charleston to Six-mile .. .. .. 0
Six-mile to Brighton .. .. .. 4
Westport to Lyell .. .. .. .. 40
Lyell to New Creek .. .. .. 5
Lyell to Mokihinui.. .. .. .. 1(5
Lyell to Owen Reefs .. .. .. 47
Mokihinui to Rough-and-Tumble.. .. 9
Mokihinui to Scatonville .. .. .. 14
Westport to North Beach .. .. .. .3
Westport to North Terraces .. .. 5
Westport to Waimangaroa .. .. 10
Waimangaroa to Cedar Creek .. .. G
Westport to Mokihinui .. .. .. 26
Westport to Karamea .. .. .. 50
There is regular communication hv sea between all lC
principal ports in the colony and Westport, where exten-
sive harbour works are now in course of construction, ® n
there is overland communication on alternate days between
Nelson and the' Lyell. There is a fair dray-road connecting


Addison’s, Croninville, Nine-mile Beach, and Charleston with
Westport. The road is 10ft. wide, and a contract is let annually
for its maintenance. Three miles of road have lately been con-
structed between Addison’s and the sea, to give access to the
leads which are known to exist seawards of the present workings.
Brighton is connected w r ith Charleston by a pack-track Oft. wide,
which is kept in good repair by the Buller County Council.
The road to Lycll, which is forty miles irdand from Westport,
is vid theNelson-Westport coach-road : it is in a bad condition,
and is considered a great drawback to the prosperity of the Lyell
% the residents in that locality. The gold-workings are con-
nected with the Lyell township by ten miles of roads—six miles
of dray-roads and four miles of pack-tracks. The North Beach
workings are connected with Westport by dray-road and pack-
track for most of the distance. The North Terrace workings
are connected with Westport by a drav-road and branch pack-
track. Waimangaroa is connected with Westport by railway,
a od Cedar Creek with Waimangaroa by a foot-track to Dennis-
thence by the new pack-track which is in course of forma-
tion between Dcnniston and the Cedar Creek gold-workings.
e township of Mokihinui is connected with Westport by rail-
Wa ' r (nineteen miles) and dray-road (seven miles). The latter
is for the greater distance along the beach, and can only be
ravelled when the tide is out. Mokihinui and the inland
sgmgs are connected by a dray-road for one mile, thence by
j,?°°d pack-road, which has been completed along the Mokihinui
eij l!a Seatonville, for a distance of eighteen miles, and is
Present being pushed further up the Mokihinui Valley to join
i s ° that is being made from the Lyell goldfield. There
so a branch road seven miles up the Rough-and-Tumble
e - v > which is now being pushed forward towards the Karamca
e ®ent and gold-workings. As yet, the Ivaramea is only
J™uccted with Mokihinui by a foot-track along the beach, but
rough horse-road will be opened during the next twelve
bv f S ’ 1C diggings at Oporara are connected with Karamca
hy ? r °f pack-road from the settlement outwards, thence
a j e a °°t-track. The new gold-workings at the Promised Land
p ac ] olll y connected with the roads there by a foot-track, but a
v track will soon be laid off. The construction of roads and


tracks further into the interior of the country, hy affording
hotter facilities to prospectors for the transport of provisions,
&c., would materially aid in the development of the resources of
the district. The horse-track now in course of construction
between the Lyell and Mokihinui will he the means of opening
up a large tract of auriferous country.


Registered Mixing Companies in the Buller Warden’s District actually in operation on the 31sfc December, 1885.
Xame of Company.
u «
•s'3
■2S
SSI
§§•
SJl
so
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
Capital
Actually
Received
from Calls.
Total Value of
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Mine.
Total
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid by
Com-
pany.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
0
«
«_ ©
2°
© &
■gs
§H
£
Waimangaboa.
Fairdown (Limited)
5,000
£
2,500
£
£
235
£
£
Sept.,
1885
Alluvial
4
Great Republic (Limited)
38,000
24,000
38,000
19,000
9,341
5,590
1,900
Sept.,
1882
Quartz
30
Smile of Fortune (Limited)
24,000
12,000
448
Jan.,
1885
"
6
Mokihixui.
1882
28
Red Queen (Limited)
48 ,COO
48,000
24,000
4,900
0,992
2,400
Nov.,
Southern Light (Limited)
24,000
30,000
24,000
12,000
250
May,
1885
4
South Pacific;(Limited)..
30,000
18,000
848
Oct. 20,
1882
2
Lyell.
Manuka Flat (Limited) ..
32,000
10,000
8,200
200
Aug.,
1SS5
Alluvial
3
Tyreonnel (Limited) .. ..
24,000
24,000
13,150
1,150
2,714
1,800
Sept.,
1882
Quartz
9
United Alpine (Limited)
32,000
48,000
33,733
17,733
120,000
3G,000
Oct.,
1874
"
05
Note. —The Waimangaroa and Mokihinui returns are up to the 31st December, 1885; those from the L} t cll are up to the 31st March, 188 C.


Quartz mines at work or held in the Duller Warden’s District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company or Owner.
Nominal Capital.
raid-up Capita],
to March 31,1880.
Date when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
U1
o 2 8-
P-C'O
2cg
BT 0
r‘°
&■<<
At
Work
or unde
i Protec
! tion.
. ©
ist:
© s- a
<2
<U • ■
>,t£i
OS©
d ©
&la
cT’tf 3
©s^
S'® -
d a .£
o d
©t «'
boa
Ov-. cs
M ©
C/2
Crushing-
Gold-saving
plant:
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Stampers,
Stonebreakers
Quicksilver,
Tables with
Copper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
Concentrators
tables.
Total Value of
Plant.
Total Value of
Gold taken from
Mine to March 31,
188G.
Total Dividends
paid to March 31,
1880.
T
. Lyell.
Crcesus Company
£ £ ! 1 a. n. r.
18,00016,500 Aug. 17, 15 0 20
Sec. 53,
Lvell
At work
!
Water 10 stampers,
Quicksilver
£
2,500
£
2,856
£
Lyell Creek Extended
24,000 4,200
1881
May,
1 B. I.
57 3 32 See. 38,
4 berdans
tables
150
Company
Manuka Flat Company*..
1
16,000 0,033
1881
July 4,
3,000 0 0
B. IX.
Sec.
30
Maruia Company!
24,000* ..
1885
1872
14 2 0
B.
Sec. 36,
150
745
Tyrconnel Company
1
24,00013,600
Sep. 25,
15 0 21
B. IX.
Sec. 43,
B. IX.
Sec.
150
3,958
2,600
United Alpine Company..
1 '
48,000 33,733
1882
Oct. 31,
43 0 0
Water
20 stampers,
Quicksilver
7,250
102,689
32,066
United Italy Company ..
! 1874 | B.
24,000 15,450Mar.24, 15 3 16: Sec. 57,
4 berdans
5 stampers
tables
Quicksilver
500
20,176
900
Victor Emmanuel Com-
| | 1882 j
24,00014,100 Mar.13, 50 0 0
B. XIII.
Sec. 77,
tables
50
pany
i i
| 1682
i
B. XIII.
1
* Prospecting area, f In liquidation ; lease at present worked by a party of miners.


Gold*mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Buller Warden’s
District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
.
o
ei j
S ST?
3 32
«< 2~
<
Westport.
a. n. p.
£
s.
W. Hassan and party*..
Feb. 28, 1878
1G 2 0
Aug.
7, 1882
Guiding Star
1G
10
Mar. 10, 1881
8 2 8
G.M.Co.
9
0
T, rJeill and party*
I 1 .J.De Souza & party*
April 24, 1880
9 1 21
. .
10
0
T. Muckle and party* ..
April 13, 1880
7 1 32
. .
8
0
H. Uarmody and party *
April 28, 1881
10 0 0
. .
10
0
W. Juillikin and partvf..
Jan. 19, 1882
17 0 0
. .
17
0
C, Schwerer and partv+
July 1, 1882
18 0 0
. .
18
0
J. Garvey and party* ..
P. Kay* ..
June 11, 1882
10 0 0
10
0
April 5, 1883
5 3 1G
Feb.
25,1885
Red Queen
G
0
Q. M.Co.
Ditto* ..
April 5, 1883
5 3 21
Fob.
25, 1885
Ditto
6
0
Ditto* ..
April 5, 1883
April 5, 1883
8 1 19
Feb.
25, 1885
Ditto
9
0
J. Campbell*..
8 1 29
Nov. 24, 1884
South Pacific
9
0
Ditto* ..
Ex. G. M. Co.
April 5, 1883
5 3 12
Nov.
24, 1884
Ditto
G
0
J-*Bailie and party*
April 5, 1883
1G 2 0
Feb.
25, 1885
Mokihinui
G. M.Co.
17
0
E K. Grant*.
April 6, 1883
112
2
0
Ditto* ..
April 6, 1883
9 2 15
10
0
pi: Jones and party*..
Golden Crown Gold-min-
April 5, 1883
July 2G, 1883
8 0 9
9
0
14 1 10
15
0
0
tt g Company*
, Ditto* ..
“■Syron*
“• Moran* 1 ’
i idi ”S Star Gold-min-
p^Company*
Bepublio Gold-
July 26, 1883
14 0 0
. .
14
Aug. 30, 1883
Nov. 29, 1883
1G 1 15
10 0 0
17
10
0
0
Nov. 29, 1883
3 10
4
12
0
0
Mar. 25, 1884
11 0 33
May 17, 1884
99 0 0
99
17
0
0
pTj- ngCompanyt
* ■ WcLean and party*
Deo. 24, 1885
1G 2 0
••
••
Dated Alpine Quartz-
p.C* Compauyt
Jan. 1,1877
42 3 4
••
Captain Cook
43
9
0
0
July 1, 1878
8 1 24
Deo. 20, 1883
J °otV, and
Feb. 24, 1881
14 2 G
Feb.
27, 188G
Q.-M.Co.
J. Hart and
15
0
others*
Kelly & others* ..
Oct. 1, 1881
15 0 21
Feb.
23, 1885
A. IdcCioy
Tyrconnel
1G
0
P tec ' c Extended
'•isSFWu.
»S?, c =r’p,,
o!i P ree k Extended
Victor^' minin g Co -‘
min- n ’ manue l Q’rtz-
-52“£Coinpanv*
May 11, 1881
Doc. 30, 1882
57 3 32
15 3 1G
••
Q. M. Co.
14 10
1G 0
5 0 0
July
7, 1884
Morris trans.
5
0
July 1, 1882
to N. Cacace
Nov. G, 18S2
1G 0 C
, .
1G
0
Jan. 1, 1883
1G 2 C
••
17
0
* Lease.
+ Special claim.


Gold-mining Leases, &c., held in the Buller Warden’s District— contd.
Name of
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
Date when
transferred.
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
_ 0
c3 -P.J
s e *
fi So
C 0*3
<
Morciiison.
A. It. P.
£ s.
•ti. Bunn and J. Phillipsf
May 9, 1882
1G 2 3
17 0
Alfred Smithf
May 9, 1882
11 3 17
. .
12 0
Dittof
May 9, 1882
11 .3 15
12 0
Charles Bulmer*
Mar. 2, 1882
15 2 6
Mar. 5, 188G
BulmerCreek
G. M. Co.
16 0
Joseph Gibbs*
Mar. 2, 1882
15 2 22
May 13, 188G
Wakatu
G. M. Co.
16 0
List of all Gold-jiining Leases Applied for, Granted, and Pending in the
Owen Kiver District.
Name of Applicant.
Name of Lease.
Date of
Grant, &c.
A. Smith and B. H. Delano
Maria Louisa Quartz-mining Co. ..
No record)
E. Bunn, J. Phillips, and S.
Oxnam
Morning Star Gold-mining Co.
May 9, 1882)
Alfred Smith
Natal Quartz-mining Company ..
May
A. Smith and B. H. Delano
Chance It
May 9,1882*
Charles Bulmer ..
Bulmer Creek Gold-mining Co.
May 2,1882
Joseph Gibbs
Bulmer Creek Extd. Q.M. Co. —now
May 2,1882
C. Bulmer and J. Gibbs
Wakatu G.M. Company (Limited)
Bulmer Creek S. Extended Co.
May 9,1882*
T. J. Clavering, J. Moutray,
Southern Star Quartz-mining Co.
Aug. 3, I860!)
and J. J\lci)oweIl
Aug. 3, 18S6§
Au|- 3,18SGS
Aug. 3,18®
J. McDowell and J. Moutray
Uno Quartz-mining Company
It. Watson and H. Whiting
Comstock Quartz-mining Company
James Kibet and others
Golden Fleece Quartz-mining Co.
Mathew Byrne
Golden Point Gold-mining Co.
Aug- 3,18bC5j
Au! 3,18®
Ditto
Golden Crown „ „
S. J. Reeves
Bonanza „ „
Aug. 3 -?S
Mathew Byrne
Ditto
Enterprise „ „
Broken Kill „ „
Aug. 3,18®
Aug. 3,188C§
S. J. Reeves
Zealandia „ „
Pending
Edward Carroll ..
Lyell „ „
Aug. 3,1836§
James Inglis
Owen Quartz-mining Company ..
Mathew Byrne
Golden Hill Gold-mining Co.
Ponding
James Inglis
Ditto
Empire Quartz-mining Company..
Advance „ „
//
John Phillips
Eureka Gold-mining Company
//
J. Phillips, E. Bunn, and E.
Excelsior „ „
„
Carroll
C. Fellows and D. Faulkner
Better Times Quartz-mining Co. ..
m
Mathew Byrne
Progress Gold-mining Company ..
n
James Inglis
Surprise Quartz-mining Company
tt
Wakatu United G.M. Co. (Ld)
Special claim ..
n
Mathew Byrne
Enterprise G.M. Co. (special claim)
»
S. Roach and S. Oxnam ..
Reefton Quartz-mining Company
n
* Lease.
I These leases were cancelled, but have since been re-apP l * *
t Cancelled. § Recommended.


NELSON.
EARLY GOLD DISCOVERIES.
Gold was found at the Moutere and along the shores of
Massacre Bay soon after the discoveries at Coromandel in 1853.
Two or three years afterwards Mr. W. T. L. Travers, E.L.S.,
the well-known barrister, who resided for many years in Nelson,
made an exploratory trip to the Takaka, and brought back some
auriferous-quartz specimens • but they did not cause much
excitement at the time. In 1854 or 1855 two settlers named
Duncan, who resided on their land at Onakaka, Massacre Bay,
and who had been at the diggings in Australia, found gold in a
small creek running through their property, which caused some
excitement at the time amongst the Maoris in the neighbourhood.
Mhen the Duncans commenced sinking holes, the Natives in-
Buired the reason, and w y ere told that it -was with the view of
Procuring a supply of good water; but the only conclusion the
Maoris could come to was that the Duncans must he mad, see-
lng that they had a stream of water running quite close to where
jtay were sinking. Towards the close of the year 1856 two
> whilst digging in a garden, were reported to have found
S°M at Massacre Bay. Mr. "VV. Hough, a member of the
.°n Provincial Council, who was firmly convinced that gold
ex 'sted, made several trips to the Aorere in 1855, but ill-health
oompelled him to return home. In December, 1856, Mr. G. W.
. 'jhtband, who had gained some experience in Victoria, was
ocecl to accompany him, and they took some Maoris with
mm. Air. John Ellis and Air. John James claimed to have
ound gold a (; the Aorere in October, 1856, and it was some
before the merit of the discovery was set at rest. The Gold
o °Uus Committee, wdio had offered a bonus for the discovery
* P a yable goldfield, appointed referees, who, after taking
1 en cc, decided that Alessrs. Ellis and James were the dis


coverers, but that the merit of developing the goldfield be-
longed to Mr. G. W. Liglitband. Many citizens were,
however, well satisfied in their own minds that Mr. Hough
deserved most of the credit, and they presented him with a
substantial testimonial. After Messrs. Hough and Liglitband
had set to work, another experienced miner, Mr. Donald
McGregor, went to the Aorerc; and in a letter to the ■Nel-
son Examiner, dated the 27th January, 1857, he stated that
he had washed over 3oz. of light scaly gold in four days, about
eight miles up the left-hand side of the Aorerc River. He found
that the gold was heavier near the surface than on the bottom,
and expressed an opinion that the country was well worth pro-
specting. The first sale of gold recorded in Nelson was on the
9th February, 1857, when Messrs. Fell Bros, put up to public
■competition soz. from the new diggings near Massacre Bay* and
2oz. obtained at the Mouterc. Three and a half ounces fetched
C 3 18s. per ounce, and one ounce and a half went as high as
ss. per ounce : the two ounces from Moutcrc were sold for
.£B. This sale proved indisputably that gold existed, and accord-
ingly many persons proceeded from Nelson to the Aorere, in
order to ascertain whether there was really a payable field. On
the 12th February Mr. Edward Thomas wrote to Mr. Lockhart,
Nelson, stating that there were sixteen men at work —one party
of six, and two parties of five each. The prospects were favour-
able, but provisions were very scarce. On the 13th February
the Gold Bonus Committee voted £3O to assist Mr. McGregoi
and two others to prospect at the foot of the Quartz Ranges, and
an additional bonus of £l5O was promised, provided that a
second available goldfield was discovered. About the middle 0
February Mr. T. P. Caldwell, who bad returned to Nelson from
the Aorerc diggings, stated that 10s. to 15s. per day was the
utmost that could be realized, and this was confirmed by a lettei
from Mr. Liglitband to his father; but old diggers were o
opinion that considerably more could be got if long-toms nere
used. Mr. LightbaiuFs party —the only one that had settler
down to steady work—were washing with a long-tom; but 1
thought more fine gold could be saved by either cradling or
* Variously known as Massacre Bay and Golden Bay.


sluicing. The weather being fine, a dray could get to within
three miles of the diggings. On Saturday, the 21st February,
the “Australian Maid” arrived from Golden Bay with intelli-
gence that sixty men were at work; that the prospects of the
field had improved; and that the average earnings were 15s. per
day. On the 22nd February Air. Lightband wrote to his brother,
stating that a great change had taken place for the better,
though his own party had not been very successful. Towards
the end of February Air. G. Hidings brought to Nelson 17oz.
sdwt. of gold, which he had purchased from Bray and party,
Lightband and party (who had already sent soz. to Nelson),
IVoodhousc and party, Adam, and Hcarle. Several parties
Tould not sell their gold, as they were afraid of attracting too
mail y people to the field. The sinking averaged about -Ift.
There were no police ori the ground, and at the request of the
diggers Air. Lightband drew up a code of regulations, which
sufficed to keep things in order for a considerable time. In
Alarch two hundred men were reported to be on the field. The
schooner “ Annie ” took away 500 z., and it was calculated that
ffiute as much remained in the hands of the diggers. From a
gully on the dividing range, near Alotucka, at the place where
ne urst indications of gold were met with in the Nelson Pro-
vmce, 18dwt. ■were sent in. A few grains were also brought down
r °ffl the Takaka, and a party had gone out to prospect that part
uf the country. As the diggers approached nearer to the Quartz
an ges, the particles of gold were found to be much larger and
ar ker in colour. On the 11 th Alarcli Air. Lightband stated to his
r °ther that the yield had then exceeded lOOoz.: the diggings
" Cre s t>H improving, and he and liis mate were getting an
juuice per d a y Some diggers had, however, broken up their
n ?-toms and gone away disgusted, although one claim in Light-
s dully gave .£6B for a week’s work, and in Appoo’s Gully*
UU' claims were yielding gold to the value of £1 10s. a man
P er day. On the 15th Alarch Air. AlcGrcgor, who had pro-
p e< l a couple of miles away from the diggings towards the
ara para, reported that gold existed all over the country; but
as fiuite different from Australia, as the gold could always be
* So termed after a Cingalese, who first got gold there.


found here on the surface, hut not on the bottom. Mr. Hough
stated that lie had spent some time in prospecting for gold back
towards the great spinal range of mountains which traverses the
Middle Island ; that he had found gold everywhere; hut, as he
left the lower valleys, the gold became more nuggety. Experi-
enced diggers were of opinion that the average earnings were
higher than on the Australian goldfields. Towards the end
of March there were about four hundred diggers on the
field, and many were so well satisfied with their prospects that
they had commenced building houses for the winter. Five men
were reported to have washed 30oz. in one week; one party
averaged £l7 10s. per week each; and another party washed
Boz. in three weeks. In four days 143|0z. were brought to
Nelson, and it -was calculated that 700 oz. remained in the hands
of the diggers. At the beginning of April it was estimated that
six hundred men -were at work, and that the yield of gold had
reached 1,4000 z. About that period four vessels were adver-
tised to leave Wellington for Golden Bay, and twenty diggers
sailed in a vessel called the “ Harry : ” they were the first who
had left Wellington to try their luck at the diggings. Towards
the end of April one thousand men were reported to he on the
field, four hundred and fifty of whom were stated to he working
in Appoo’s Gully. Good accounts were received from all P
of the field. One party accumulated lOOoz. during eight weeks
work; two men got 20oz. in five weeks; and one party obtainc
Boz. in four days. In Bedstead Gully the gold was coarse, an
not in the least water-worn : it was as rugged as if it had been
dropped from the rock into the position in which it was iou •
In May Mr. McGregor reported that he and his party ha
found payable ground between the second and third branch rn ers
of the Aorcrc, twenty or thirty miles from the Port of Colh n o
wood, and that the indications all round were very good.
David Clark, one of the prospecting party sent out by the
mea South Gold Prospecting Committee, returned with 2%0z. ®
gold, which he had obtained in three days. He stated that
party had explored seven miles of country, and that gold in
able quantities could be found in every place they had prospcc
In June Mr. James Mackay, who returned from a gold-exp
ing expedition to the Quartz Ranges, reported that his party


been very fortunate: they had discovered a field about three
miles square, and had found gold in every gully. The new dig-
gings were going on steadily, and new gullies were being opened
out every day. There was a rush to the Slate River, where three
hundred men had set to work. Large-sized gold, mixed with
the river-gravel, was generally found under the large boulders.
The old ground continued to yield steadily, and some parties in
Appoo’s Gully were reported to he making 2oz. and 3oz. daily.
Miners had begun sinking on the hills, and some of the deserted
ground was being sluiced on an extensive scale. One party who
had been exploring towards the Quartz Ranges had picked up
7oz. on the surface, by merely turning over some large blocks of
quartz. A party of four men obtained 690 z. in three weeks; a
party of five men, 17oz. in one week; a man and a hoy, 14-oz. in
five days; a party of five men, 18oz. in four days; a party of
two men, 17oz. in one week; and another party of two men,
15oz, in one week. Men who were not so fortunate were offered
per day and “ tucker ”by the holders of good claims. At the
Slate River one party of three young men obtained 48oz. in four
and Ellis and party, working with a cradle and two long-
t°ms, got 108 oz. in one day. At what was called the Dry River,
la the course of a week one party of three men obtained 3Goz.
pP to the first week in August the total value of the gold sold
w Nelson was upwards of .£IO,OOO, and in ten days 1,2000 z. were
sold/irrespective of the quantities taken away privately by parties
to other places. On Saturday, the Bth August, the “ Tasmanian
Maid” arrived in Nelson with 5000 z., 1440 z. of which belonged
t° one party. On Wednesday, the 19tli August, the “Louis
au fi Miriam” sailed for Sydney, and took away over 1,7000 z.
of gold.
In the spring new houses, cottages, stores, and tents were to
e seen in all directions. Diggers were constantly coming and
t>° ln g. and Collingwood looked very busy: many persons
bought that it might become a rival to Nelson. It was calcu-
ate<l that upwards of five hundred diggers remained on the
during the winter of 1857, and in September the number
Was estimated at more than a thousand. One party of two
tuen were reported to have made 1920 z. in a week, and one
■ part y °f three men 48oz. each in four days. In October a party
16


started out to prospect the Wangapeka, and sent back favourable
accounts. During that month it was reported that gold had
been found at the back of the hills above Dodson’s Valley, Waka-
puaka. Constable Taylor, writing on the 14th October from the
Takaka Valley, stated that a veritable golden river had been
found in that locality; but the Natives had secured most of the
payable claims along the river, and, as there were no regulations,
troubles were feared. Large numbers of men from Wellington
were flocking to the goldfields every week, and on the 29th
October the “ Wonga Wonga ” brought from Melbourne fifty
diggers, who had come to Wellington by the brig “ Drover,”
several of them being accompanied by their families. The
yields continued steadily increasing, and on the 24th October
the “ Ocean Queen ” sailed for Sydney with nearly 2,5000 z.
of gold. Soon afterwards some gold was brought down from
Takaka, and there were predictions that the field would prove a
more extensive one than the Aorere. A Maori called Mason
came in with 200 z., the result of six days’ work- by four men,
and some of the Natives were said to be making 3oz. per day.
Large numbers of Maoris were attracted to the diggings from
different parts of the colony, and were fast acquiring a practical
knowledge of gold-mining. Towards the close of the year there
was a constant influx of diggers to the various fields: th e
arrivals at Collingwood were numerous, and each vessel brought
passengers as well as cargo. Accounts from the Slate R
were satisfactory: half a chain frontage to the river was so
for £4OO. Large quantities of gold were found in the bed o
the Takaka, in a bar of which river Mr. James Main and two
others panned off 9oz. in three days with tin-dislies. Two
hundred and fifty Europeans and one hundred Maoris were
work at Cairn’s Point, on the Anatoki River, and its neighbour
hood, and doing -well. The year 1857 was one of considera e
promise for the Nelson goldfields.
At the beginning of the following year (1858) there was a
rush to Golden Gully, a dry gully which had been tried
abandoned some months previously, but which now yielded g°°
returns of fine drift gold : Mr. Chapman was said to have g
18oz. in one day. Rushes also took place to the sout e*
branch of the Slate River, near the head of the Little Boul er


At the Quartz Ranges several parties had abandoned tbeir
claims owing to scarcity of water; but some who remained
were so confident of success that they bad commenced garden-
ing, and had sent to Nelson for seed-potatoes. The number of
diggers at the Aorere had dwindled down to five hundred.
Many of those who rushed there in October and November were
unable to prosecute their work. Owing to the Alpine nature
of the country, the melting of the snow caused the waters
to rush down the streams in torrents. The floods broke away
dams, carrying off long-toms and tools of all descriptions, and
the main river rose 28ft. The only boat in the place, the pro-
perty of Mr. Waslibourne, was swept away; but,wfitlicharacter-
istic energy, a new one was built in two days to take its place.
Many farmers who had gone to try their luck at the Aorere dig-
gings were compelled to return home for harvesting operations;
hut the miners who remained were reported to be doing exceed-
lngly well. One man, after an absence of three months,
returned to Nelson with 1750 z., and a party of four men
brought in 6840 z. Gold was found in the Riwaka Valley,
Motucka, and at the Parapara, Massacre Bay, thus proving
ihat the precious metal was "widely disseminated throughout
*he Nelson Province. Parties were engaged at the Aorere,
a te, and Boulder Rivers, in diverting those streams, with
the view of extracting the gold from the river-beds. At
the Boulder River two men got in two hours. Some
* a °ris, who were working up to their waists in the Aorere,
s bing out the gold with their shovels, got a pennyweight of
Sold to the shovelful: one Native dived, and in a short time
rought up an ounce of gold in a bucket. A party of four
1 a °ris took away about 130 oz. Gold of a very heavy character
' Was found at the Upper Anatoki, and many parties were re-
Ported to be doinm well. James Main and three others panned
•off R . °
°°z. in two days with a tin-dish, and Carrick’s party of nine
* en B°t lGoz. in one week. The Takaka diggings continued
lln prove, and parties working at Salisbury Creek and the
ttar tz Ranges were well satisfied with their prospects.
the 17th April, 1858, the Nelson Examiner announced
discovery of gold at the Buller, in the south-western portion
be Nelson Province. A West Coast chief named Tarapuhi,


and his brother, Tainui, returned to Canterbury with Mr. Lee,
who had taken up the first run on the West Coast. They
brought specimens of small scaly gold with them, stating that
the gold had been brought down in great quantities from a hill
called Whakapoi, on the north side of the Duller River, and that
it could be found in abundance. That gold existed over a large
part of the Nelson Province was thus conclusively proved.
A new rush set in to the forks of the Slate River in April,
1858: it was principally caused by the success of one or
two parties who had obtained some splendid samples of gold by
merely fossicking with a knife. The gold was called “ kidney-
bean,” from its close resemblance in formation to that vegetable.
There was no dust, and all the gold was nuggety, some pieces
weighing nine or ten pennyweights. A party of thirty men, who
were at work in one of the branches of the Slate River, and who
had dammed a portion of it, had taken out 14oz. in one day from
what they considered a poor patch. The “Island” party, eleven
in number, who were working on a bar of the Slate River, ob-
tained l,ooooz. in a short time. The first week after their ope-
rations were completed for diverting the stream they got 990 z.,
and their weekly average was said to be GOoz. to 70oz. Four of
the party arrived in Nelson with 480 oz. a few weeks after the
work was begun. At the Parapara a Maori got two nuggets,
weighing 4oz. 12dwt., within a mile of the sea-beach. In con '
sequence of the rich finds at the Slate and Parapara Rivers some
of the gullies were quite deserted, and there was a tendency on
the part of the diggers to move into the interior, where heavier
gold was generally found. The Examiner estimated that, from
April, 1857, to May, 1858,17,0000 z. to 18,000 oz. of gold, worth
about .£70,000, had been obtained in the Nelson goldfields,
and the result was considered highly satisfactory, considering
the small number of men engaged in mining*
During the winter favourable accounts were received fro®
the Slate, Anatoki, Rocky, and Parapara Rivers. Heavy go
was obtained in some places at the forks of the Slate River ;
fossicking in the cracks and fissures of the slate rocks. ® ne
* Tho estimate was probably too high. The total quantity entered
export at the Nelson Customhouse during the years 1857 and 1858 was
23,9710 z.


party of four men got 9oz. in two days. At the Anatoki,
Cameron, and party of five men washed Boz. in one day. At the
Parapara a party of Natives were said to have collected 6oz. before
dinner. At the Quartz Ranges the prospects were considered so
good that sluicing operations on a large scale were carried on.
But the most favourable news came from the Rocky River, where
one party of two men obtained 240 z. for a fortnight's work;
Clark’s party got 30oz. in one week; three Natives left for
Wellington with GOoz., the result of three weeks’ work; and
Sheet’s party were getting l|oz. per day. The gold was heavy
and nuggety: one piece turned the scale at 12oz. The country
■was very difficult to explore, there being neither roads nor tracks,
and provisions were very dear. Flour sold at .C l per 1001 b. hag,
and the journey for supplies took at least eight days, with the loss
of boots and clothes each trip. Mr. Ibbitson, a settler in the
Takaka Valley, told Constable Taylor that it was the most rug-
ged, break-neck country he had ever beheld, and that it eclipsed
the roughest parts of the overland journey across the Rocky
Mountains to California. In consequence, an ounce per day for
a small party was not considered payable. In spite of all
obstacles the gold-miners pursued their adventurous explorations,
and work was carried on with splendid results in many cases,
burner’s party, being afraid of a flood taking away a portion
°f their claim, set to work for an hour or two at night, and
took out lloz. by candle-light; Edwin Wilson and two Natives
obtained 17oz. for a fortnight’s work; and Lindsay and party
Panned off lloz. in an hour on a bar of the river. The ship-
ttents from Collingwood during the winter averaged about
IjOOOoz. per montli.
Mining operations were carried on vigorously during the
apnng months. At the Parapara men were washing dirt that
ad been thrown away as useless, and were making good wages,
he Rocky River became more famous for its rich nuggets.
te phen Kirk and party unearthed one nugget, in shape very
hk e a double row of sovereigns, weighing Boz. lddwt.,
hout 40yd. from the river-bank; and another, weighing
° z, j was found close by. Five Maoris brought to Nelson
0z -j the gold being of a flat, nuggety character, the pieces
Tar ying f rom Gdwt. to 25dwt. each. A party of five men, with


very rude appliances, were said to be washing out gold at aa
average of 4dwt. to the bucket, and twenty buckets to the hour,
or at the rate of 4oz. of gold per hour. A party of Maoris, not
many yards distant, were getting about lOgr. of gold to the pan
from a heap of dirt, and the bed of the river was far richer.
The gold export from the Port of Collingwood for the quarter
ending the 30th September, 1858, was about 3,0000 z., and the
yield continued steadily increasing to the end of the year. The
largest export of gold from Nelson, up to the period of the
rich discoveries along the West Coast of the Canterbury and
Nelson Provinces, was in the year 1858 ; but there were some im-
portant discoveries during the following year. In March, 1859,
Mr. G. Taylor, District Constable at Takaka, in a report to the
Superintendent (Mr. Robinson), stated that gold had been found
along the bed of the Main gar o'" River for a distance of nearly
twenty miles, by Sir. Lindsay and others. Most of the settlers
in the Takaka Valley had caught the gold-fever, and were off to
Eldorado. Mr. Lindsay told Constable Taylor that in their
first trial with a tin-dish, upon a goodly-looking bar, they
panned off lioz. within the hour. Other discoveries were
made during the same year ; but the inaccessible nature of the
country deterred many from remaining for the winter, and
the population and yield of gold steadily dwindled down. Still,
considering the small number of men who persistently followed
gold-mining, the average yields were large, and attained a value
in seven years of nearly a quarter of a million sterling, as will he
seen from the appended table :
Year.
Ounces.
Value.
1857 ...
10,437
£
40,422
1858...
13,226
51,272
1859...
7,336
28,427
1860...
4,538
17,585
1861
6,335
24,552
1862...
10,422
40,386
1863
9,580
37,120^
' 61,874
“£239/764'
* In the Nelson Examiner it was called the Waikaro, which was also
way in which it was generally pronounced.


As these returns do not take into account the gold which was
taken away privately, the total yield was probably not less than
70,0000 z., or an average of 10,000 oz. per annum.
Dr. Ferdinand von Hochstetter, who visited the Nelson
goldfields, at the request of the Superintendent, in August,
1859, at which time there were only 250 men at work, after-
wards stated, in his valuable work on New Zealand,* that the
produce of the goldfields was then estimated at .€150,000. In
the work referred to, Dr. Hochstetter stated, —
“ The mode of occurrence of gold in the Province of Nelson
is quite different from that in the Colony of Victoria. The
Australian gold was originally derived from quartz reefs passing
through fossiliferous strata of Silurian age, which are but very
little metamorphosed ; and the gold is obtained partly as alluvial
gold from deposits of gold drift ( ‘ wash-dirt’ of the miner), partly
from the quartz veins themselves, by crushing the quartz, and by
subsequent washing and amalgamating processes
Upon the Nelson goldfields the gold has been originally derived
from quartz veins, which occur in non-fossiliferous crystalline
(°r metamorpliic) schists The mica-schist and
c %-slate zone which, in a breadth of fifteen to twenty
m iles, includes principally the Anatoki and Haupiri Hanges—
contains in its quartz veins and beds the matrix of the gold.
gradual denudation of the mountains, continued through
countless ages, lias produced masses of detritus, which were
deposited on the declivities of the mountains in the shape of
Con glomerates, and in the river-valleys in the shape of gravel
uud sand. In this process of deposition, carried on under the
wfluence of running waters, Nature herself has effected a
Ashing operation during which the heavier particles of gold
®°utained in the mountain-detritus collected themselves at the
ftom of the deposits and close to their source, so that they
Can 11 be obtained by digging and washing. The conglome-
*ates accumulated on the slopes of the mountains are the proper
e d for the ‘ dry diggings,’ while from the gravel and sand of
j- New Zealand: its Physical Geography, Geology, and Natural History.”
4*- Ferdinand von Hoclistetter, Professor of Mineralogy and Geology at the
ytechnic Institution of Vienna; late member of the Austrian “ Novara” Ex-
hon; President of the J. It. Geographical Society of Vienna, &c.


the beds of rivers and smaller streams the gold is obtained
by ‘ wet diggings/ The latter were those first worked.
Nearly all the rivers and creeks running from the Anatoki and
Haupiri Ranges, either east to the Takaka Valley or west to the
Aorere Valley, or, like the Parapara, towards the north into
Golden Bay, have been found to be more or less auriferous.
The Aorere diggings are situated partly in the main valley
itself, partly in the numerous side valleys intersecting deeply
the slate rock, at a distance of five to twenty miles from Colling-
wood. The gold is scaly, with rounded particles, which prove
that it has been exposed to the action of running water, and
brought thither from a greater or less distance. Yet nearly
every valley and every creek contains gold of somewhat different
appearance. While most of the gold is very pure, that of the
Slate River, for example, has always a brown ferruginous coat.
On Appoo’s River the gold is accompanied by crystals of
iron pyrites, which remain behind in the process of washing;
in other places magnetic iron or titaniferous iron is found in
company with gold. The fact that the heaviest gold is found
in the upper parts of the streams points clearly to the moun-
tains as the original source of the reefs. But it would he
improper to speak of an Aorere Goldfield if the gold were con-
fined to the deep and narrow gorges of the streams, cut doun
into the clay-slate rocks. The whole region of the eastern side of
the Aorere Valley, rising from the river-beds towards the steep
sides of the mountains at an inclination of about B°, and occu-
pying, from the Clark River, in the south, to the Parapara,
the north, a superficial extent of about forty English miles, is a
goldfield. Throughout this whole district, on the foot of the range,
we find a conglomerate deposited on the top of the slate rocks,
attaining in some places a thickness of 20ft. Pieces of drift-^ 00
changed into brown coal, as well as the partial covering oi 1
conglomerate with Tertiary limestones and sandstones at Wash-
bourne’s Flat, indicate a probable Tertiary age of this congl°
merate formation. Where a ferruginous cement hinds th e
boulders and the gravels together, this conglomerate is compac ,
in other places, only fine sand lies between the larger stones.
Quartz and clay-slate boulders are the most commonly met wi
This conglomerate formation is not only cut through by t


deep gullies of the larger streams, but in some places washed by
the more superficial action of water, and is thus divided into
parallel and rounded ridges, of which that portion of the district
called the Quartz Ranges is a characteristic example. This
conglomerate formation must be regarded as the real goldfield,
prepared in a gigantic manner by the hand of Nature from the
detritus of the mountains for the more detailed and minute
operations of man. While the less extensive, but generally
richer, river-diggings afford better prospect of gain to the indi-
vidual digger, the dry diggings in the conglomerate will afford
remunerative returns to associations of individuals who will work
with a combination of labour and capital. Mr. Washbournc
was the first person who proved the value of the dry diggings in
the Quartz Ranges, and he has demonstrated the fact that gold
exists in remunerative quantities in the conglomerate. lam
indebted to Mr. Waslibourne for the following interesting
details: ‘ln the drifts into the conglomerate of the Quartz
ltangcs, the average thickness of dirt washed is about 2ft. from
the base rock, and the gold produced from one cubic yard of
such earth would be, as nearly as I can calculate, worth from
ss. to £1 10s. This includes large boulders; so that a
c uhic yard of earth, as it goes through the sluice, is of course
worth more, as the boulders form a large proportion of the
whole. When the whole of the earth from the surface to the
r °ok is washed the value per cubic yard is much less—not more,
P e Aaps, than from 3s. to 6s. per yard; but it would pay very
well at that.’ These are the words of one of the most expert
kelson diggers, who paid his men 10s. to 12s. a day, and still
uiade a considerable profit for himself. With these data, while
Nelson, I ventured to make the following calculation, in order
encourage the public to a more extensive enterprise in the
working 0 f the goldfields. If we reckon the superficial extent
the Nelson goldfield at thirty square miles, the average
lc kness of the gold-bearing conglomerate at one yard, and the
of gold in each cubic yard of conglomerate at 55., the
, ota l value of the Aorcre Goldfield amounts to £22,500,000; or,
otll er words, each square mile of the goldfield contains gold
0 value of £750,000.
The Parapara diggings are the northern continuation of


the Aorere Goldfield at the mouth of the Parapara River, four
miles east of Collingwood, on the shores of Golden Bay. A
striking phenomenon at the Parapara Harbour is the large
mass of iron-ore* protruding from the white qnartz-boulders in
the form of rugged rocks of a dark-brown appearance, and giving
rise, from their striking resemblance to volcanic scoria, to the
erroneous supposition that volcanic forces had been active on the
Parapara. On the eastern slope of the Haupiri and Anatoki
Ranges it is principally the Anatoki, the Waikaro (or Waingaro),
the Waituhi, and the Waikoromumu, branches of the Takaka
River, as well as the Upper Takaka Valley itself, that arc
found to be gold-hearing : those together constitute the area
of the Takaka diggings. Of professional diggers I met but
* Dr. Hector, in a letter to the Colonial Secretary dated the 2nd Septem-
ber, 1573, stated that a rough estimate made on the spot gave the quantity of
ore available by mere surface-excavations as at least 15,000,000 tons. Mr.
Geo. J. Binns, P.G.S., estimated the total quantity available at upwards of
50,000,000 tons. Mr. E. W. Mills, who was for many years proprietorof the Lion
Foundry, Wellington, produced a piece of wrought-iron ore, and stated to the
Colonial Industries Committee in 1873 that ho considered it of first-rate quality-
An analysis of some iron, produced in Melbourne in 1873 from the Parapara ore,
gave the following results: —
Iron .. .. .. .. .. 97'GG8
Manganese .. .. .. .. -268
Carbon, combined .. .. .. .. ’542
Carbon, free (graphite) .. .. .. '2OB
Silicon, with titanium traces .. .. .. I'oo4
Phosphorus .. .. .. .. -041
Sulphur .. .. .. .. .. -2G9
100000
The following analysis of Parapara hematito is from the report on the Phil*'
delphia Exhibition of 187 G
Protoxide of iron .. .. .. .. 35'23
Sesquioxide of iron .. .. .. .. 25'77
Oxide of manganese .. .. .. I’oo
Alumina .. .. .. .. 2-11
Magnesia .. .. .. .. 1'94
Lime .. .. . .. .. ‘7l
Silica .. .. .. .. .. - 90
Sulphuric acid .. .. .. .. Traces
Carbonic acid .. .. .. .. 2P12
Phosphoric acid .. .. .. ..Notdct.
Sulphide of iron .. .. .. .. "41
Water .. .. .. .. .. P 96
Organic matter .. .. .. .. 5'72
Silicates undecomposed by acids .. .. 3'03
10000
Geological Survey Reports,” 1878-79, pages 59-G4.


few in those parts ; but farmers and wood-cutters settled
in the Takaka Valley, finding markets bad, occasionally ex-
changed their usual avocations for gold-digging, thus find-
ing among the wildernesses of their mountain-heights a sure
source of gain in ‘hard times.’ Mr. S., one of these
farmers, settled upon the fertile, wooded, alluvial plains of
the Takaka Valley, in whose house I found hospitable quarters,
was in the habit, whenever he projected a trip to town for the
purpose of making purchases, of sending his sons for a few days
previous into the mountains to wash for gold, and they would
always return with their pockets filled : the heaviest nuggets were
found in the Waituhi River, which takes its rise from the Mount
Arthur Range. A characteristic feature of the Takaka diggings
13 the occurrence of osmiridium and platiniridium, which is
washed out with the gold in small grains of a whitish tin colour;
likewise grains of titanifcrous iron, magnetic iron, and very
numerous garnets (not rubies, as the diggers generally thought)
are found here. On the southern slope of the Mount Arthur
on the sources of the Tadmor, Wangapeka, and Baton,*
tributaries of the Motueka, very promising traces of gold were
found. .... Farther explorations towards the south
confirmed the supposition that the auriferous formations continue
111 that direction. Dr. Ilaast, in his expedition to the West
found traces of gold in the rivers forming the outlets of
Roto-iti and Rotoroa, and also in the Owen and Lyell
Bivers”
As Dr. Hochstetter remarked, the Nelson goldfields were
OaUy eclipsed by the surprising discoveries and splendid results
°. rifled on the Otago goldfields, and, later on, by the exceeding
er ° were also important discoveries at tho Buller, on the
s cutk-wcstcrn borders of tlie Nelson Province, a few years
atte rwards.
Silver, copper, lead, zinc, antimony, manganese, plumbago,
j valuable coal-seams have been discovered in the Nelson
J^" nc ial District, and there is an abundance of limestone in
i ec -fbo gold on tho Baton River, near Wangapeka, is said to originate from
gnu Posed hornblende-granite, and to bo found in small grains of tho size of
v wder, thus differing from tho leaf-gold coming from the slate mountains.’*


close proximity to the immense deposits of hematite found at the
Parapara. The judicious investment of capital is all that is re-
quired to make Nelson one of the most productive mineral
districts in Australasia.
COLLINGWOOD WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The gold-mining district of Collingwood, which is about seventy-
five miles from the City of Nelson, forms the southern, western,
and north-western shores of Golden Bay (known in the early
days as Massacre Bay), the eastern boundary being Farewell
Spit, extending from Cape Farewell, in the north, for a distance
of about twenty miles in a southerly direction. This, with the
high range of mountains on the south, west, and north, forms
the bay into an almost land-locked harbour. Good anchorage
is obtained at any point in the bay for vessels of deep draught,
whilst the Ta-ta Islands, which lie off the southern shore, afford
protection against heavy southerly winds. The facilities naturally
afforded for shipping at Golden Bay must have an important
bearing on the development of the mineral resources which are
known to exist in the surrounding country. Gold w r as discovere
in 1856 at Lightband’s Gully, seven miles from the Port of Co -
lingwood. Soon afterwards there were fresh discoveries at He
stead Gully, Golden Gully, Slate River, and Doctor’s Cree,.
Although at one period a thousand miners found employing
at good wages on the field, at the present time there arc on y
about one hundred men at work. There are still large l
of auriferous country which have been scarcely tested, al!
in the opinion of some of the miners there are quite as
patches yet to be ■worked as those which gave employment
such a large number of men in 1857, 1858, and 1859. Mit
the last six months a nugget weighing 12oz. lldwt. was to
at Rocky River, eighteen miles from Collingw'ood, and a coll
of years previously two nuggets—one weighing over 1/oz-,
the other over soz. were found in the same locality,
pcrienccd miners are under the impression, judging from
nature of the gold, that some rich reefs are likely to be discovei
close to where these nuuuets were found. The discoveries v ’
it is to be hoped, lead to a thorough prospecting of that pot


of the district. Mining lias been carried on for many years at
the Quartz Ranges, which are about twenty miles from Colling-
Tvood in a westerly direction. Although the yields have not
been large during late years, good wages were made in times
past, and the few men who are still at work have faith in the
auriferous nature of the country. From the fact that the gold
found was largely impregnated with quartz, it is believed that
there are some good reefs in that locality. Druggan’s Flat,
comprising an area of thirty acres of tahle-land, has been worked
during the past three years hy a number of men, holding ex-
tended claims, good wages being made in every instance. Prac-
tical miners are of opinion that if water could be brought on to-
the large tract of level country contiguous to the Town of Col-
liugwood, comprising an area of eight hundred acres, profitable
employment would be afforded to a large number of men, as the
country is similar to Druggan’s Flat. There is, however, a
serious obstacle, as the land referred to is private property. At
the present time the yearly export of gold from the Collingwood
District is about 1,2000 z., principally obtained at Druggan’s
®at, Doctor’s Creek, and the Quartz Ranges.
In the Takaka District, twenty-five to thirty miners are em-
ployed at the Anatoki River, at the Waikoromumu, and at the
The miners are doing fairly well, the average yield
gold being about 3500 z. per annum. When the road up
4e Anatoki River is completed that part of the district will
Probably receive a larger share of attention from miners than
has hitherto been the case, as better communication invariably
ohcapens the cost of living, whilst the necessaiy tools and
ttmterials can be taken on to the claims at much less cost,
“hough operations have ceased at the reefs at Mount Arthur,
“ e country tested gives fair grounds for hoping that, when
.ter means of access are opened up, a large reefing-district
be thrown open to miners.
COPPER.
-A- claim, situate near Bedstead Gully, which was taken up
y the Pioneer Company in 1870, and which had a small amount
ex P e nded upon it, was inspected by the late Mr. E. 11. Davis,
°> in his official report (which appeared in the General Go


vernment Gazette of the 20th December, 1870), wrote of the
prospects in the following terms : “ There is one claim worthy
of particular notice, as having been taken np to work for copper-
ore. The lode is situated about half way between Appoo’s and
Bedstead Gullies, and may be traced on the outcrop for a con-
siderable distance. A shaft has been sunk to a depth of 60ft.,
and now the funds are exhausted and the work at a standstill.
■This is very much to he regretted, as the lode contains some
fine specimens of chalcopyrite; and, although the matrix is not
such as usually carries ores of that class, it is remarkably pro-
mising, as the character of the lode is uniform, and as long as
such is the case a rich course of ore might be cut at any
moment. If this sett was in England or any other real mining
country, it would not be allowed to remain idle for a single day.
No metalliferous lodes are uniform: for a few fathoms no ore
is found; then a rich course is cut ; and so on. The manner
in which the ore occurs in this lode gives every hope that it will
make into bunches in different places, though where it is im-
possible to indicate.” Mr. Davis recommended the Pioneer
Gompany to do certain mining work towards further developing
the mine—which, even if successful, might involve a further
large outlay and be beyond the shareholders’ means. They there-
fore decided not to expend any further money without obtaining
foreign capital; but this they did not succeed in obtaining.
Consequently, the lode has remained unworked to this day.
IKON.
Large deposits of iron-ore exist in the immediate vicinity
of the Port of Collingwood. A company was started to work
the iron from the Parapara in conjunction with the Ferntown
Colliery; but, after spending the whole of its capital in tk e
erection of a wharf, buildings, and a costly cement flooring f° r
the smelting of the iron, the company had to suspend opera'
tions. The ore is now extensively used for the manufacture of
hematite paint. This industry has been carried on during the
past seven years, compact works and the necessary machinery
having been erected for the purpose; and the owners turn out
400 to 500 tons of paint per annum. As the deposit of ore i s
■very extensive, and as coal and limestone abound in the immediate


vicinity, all that is wanted is a sufficient amount of capital to
develop the immense deposits of iron-ore which are to be found
in the mountains, and which have been favourably reported on
from time to time.
PLUMBAGO.
Plumbago exists in considerable quantities on the Pakawau
side of the Aorere River. In 1857 a small company was formed
to work the deposit, and several tons were forwarded to London ;
hat, owing to the imperfect way in which the export had been
prepared, or the want of discrimination in selecting the best kind
of ore available, or from some other cause, the shipment did not
prove remunerative, and could not compete with the article sent
from the Continent. The deposit is again receiving attention, a
sample of a few tons having been lately obtained for export.
CEMENT.
Four years ago a gentleman was so well satisfied that cement
oould he profitably manufactured that he put the whole of his
oapital into the venture. After thoroughly satisfying himself that
sll the necessary materials for producing an article equal to the
Sported cement could be readily obtained, he erected, at consider-
? “Outlay, compact buildings, containing all the latest appliances,
machinery, crushers, hoppers, distributors, kilns, &c.,
ich are still in position, and ready for use at any moment,
the necessary clay, coal, and limestone lie within a radius of
a mile from the works, it is anticipated that an enterprising
Company will be found to take them over. Tests made upon
n ckets manufactured from a small quantity of the cement
e d out at the works gave results equal to those obtained
r ®m hrickets made with Portland cement. It is thought that
judicious expenditure of about £2,000 would put the w r orks in
011 and place a supply of cement on the market.
RICHMOND HILL SILVER-MINE.
TV .
ms mine is situated nine miles from the Port of Colling-
cn +•' is a fair dray-road for four miles, and it could be
] Q( j ltlllC( h to the mine at no great cost. In February, 1875, the
ftive T ' aS “ cropping out in the bed of the Parapara
> below a gorge formed in hard gneissic rocks


which pass farther to the eastward into an irregular belt of
steatite, while to the westward they pass into slates and lime-
stones. These rocks rise to form the rugged mountainous
country which surrounds the course of the Parapara, striking
north and south, and standing almost vertical, with, however, a
slight dip to the eastward ; the lode itself corresponding in
strike with the rocks, and also underlying slightly to the east.
The width of the lode, where first discovered, was about 2ft., and
it consisted of decomposed micaceous rock, with a hand of the
rich falilerz about lin. in width; and, as this outcrop was sunk
upon in the No. 2 Shaft, the lode was carried to a depth of
20ft., the bottom of the shaft, with strings of ore from 3in. to
7in. in thickness, and yielding on assay from 21oz. to 1,7000 z.
of silver to the ton. The main shaft was sunk at a point about
40ft. S. 20° E. of the original outcrop on the lode, no rich ore
being met with till a depth of 56ft. was reached, where a further
deposit was found, and 5 tons were taken out, yielding from
40oz. to 300 oz. per ton; and drives were continued to the north-
ward on the course of the lode without proving it to contain any
more of the rich ore, and, moreover, passing below the small
No. 2 Shaft last mentioned. About the 56ft. level the lode>
which had hitherto been traced all the way in the shaft, passed
out of it to the eastward, and the shaft was carried down for
another 50ft. vertical, and then a short cross-cut was put m,
intersecting the lode at a few feet. At this point the lode tras
'well defined, and had w'idened out to about sft. to the north-
ward, being split by a horse. Thirty-five feet only were drive 11
at this level, 23ft. being to the north and 12ft. to the south,
the ore in these drives yielding from 220 z. to 51oz. of silver p er
ton. A few feet were sunk as a sump at the bottom of lC
shaft, and from this ore yielding 85oz. to llOoz. of silver n aS
obtained. This represents the whole of the work which was done
on the lode itself, but, besides this, some cross-cuts -were driven
the 56ft. level to intersect parallel lodes in the vicinity, one
these being cut to the eastward, but not carrying any
Several parallel lodes have been found on the surface, and in olie
of these, which consists of pyrrhotine, 2’98 per cent, of nickel v' B "’
shown to exist. Dr. Hector, in his report on this mine, A
January, 1878, says, ‘I am inclined to hold for the present t a


the rich shoot carrying the cupreous silver-ore dips at less than
1 in 1 to the south, and that it is underlaid hy the argentiferous
galena, which again passes into iron-pyrites: ’ and the work which
has been done appears to bear out this theory as far as the upper
shoot of ore is concerned. Seeing, however, that the lode from
the 56ft. level to the 106 ft. level is utterly unknown, and
that also south of the shaft no work at all has been carried on,
it yet remains to he shown that there is not more than one shoot,
more especially as in the No. 2 Shaft the f falilcrz/ or ‘ rich-
mondite/ changed to an argentiferous galena, and then below this
again the richest specimens of fahlcrz found in the mine oc-
curred. The original company which was started to work this
mine has, as I before stated, ceased to exist; hut it is to he
hoped that a mine having such a rich ore will not he allowed to
stand idle. The principal difficulties which the former company
had to contend with were the hardness of the ground and the
patchy nature of the ore; hut, when it is considered that the
w hole of the sinking and driving was performed hy means of
hand-drills, &c., I think it will he apparent that the first diffi-
culty could he overcome. With regard to the patchy nature of
the ore, nothing else could he anticipated, as it is hardly to he
ex pected that a continuous shoot of ore, carrying the extraordi-
nary quantity of silver which the assays show, would be found on
the surface. To the southward of the outcrop of ore a very
targe quartz reef, which appears to he striking about north-cast,
°ccurs, with thin veins of galena and pyrites, and it is probable
that where these junction a rich patch may be found; but this
Ca b only he proved hy driving.”*
Hector states that a sample of the ore analyzed at the
°i°nial Laboratory was found to he a form of tetrahedrite, a
ore containing antimony, zinc, bismuth, and copper, the
Ver being at the rate of from 20oz. to 1,7920 z. per ton. The
0 owing is an analysis of the ore, which has been called rich-
mondite, after the locality in which it is found :
Sulphide of lead .. .. .. 3G - 12
„ antimony .. .. 22'20
„ bismuth.. .. .. Traces
17
‘“Geological Reports,” 1881, pp. 13-10: S. Herbert Cox, F.C.S., F.G.S.


Sulphide of copper .. .. .. 19-31
„ iron .. .. .. 13-59
„ zinc .. .. .. 5-87
~ silver .. .. .. 2 - 39
Oxide of manganese .. .. .. -52
The company which was formed to work the lode, after an
expenditure of .£5,250, ceased operations owing to exhaustion of
capital. A lease of 320 acres is held from the Crown at a rental
of £l6 per annum: it has still nine years to run, with the right
of renewal for twenty-one years. Good water-power is available,
and there is plenty of timber suitable for mining in the imme-
diate vicinity of the lease. Negotiations are now pending in
London for the formation of a company with a nominal capital
of £60,000 or £70,000, so as to he in a position to thoroughly
test the mine, and to erect smelting-works, should the further
development of the company’s property justify the expendi-
ture. Water-jacket furnaces will probably he found suitable, as
coke can be easily obtained from the Wallsend Mine, at Colling-
wood, and the necessary fluxes can be got near at hand.
FUTUEE PEOSPECTS.
Although a promising lode of copper has been found,* and
indications of tin and other minerals are not wanting, the district
will have to depend principally upon its gold, silver, iron, and
coal. Capital is required to develop these minerals, and a little
judicious aid from the Government or local bodies towards
prospecting would probably assist in attracting the attention of
capitalists to the undeveloped resources of the district. The old
miners are averse to leaving places where they can make fair
wages to prospect new ground ; yet the discoveries at Druggan s
Flat, which remained untouched till about four years ago, go f ar
to prove that there must be a good deal of rich country un-
worked. In fact, there arc thousands of acres of likely-looking
country which have not yet been touched with the miner’s pic
or shovel. The only registered company at present working in fk e
district is the Johnston’s United Company, at Bedstead Gully;
miles from Collingwood. The present average yield is about na
* The late Dr. Hochstetter told Mr. Gibbs, the Warden of the ColbaS.
District, that there was a probability of a true lode of copper being found, J
ing by the geological formation of the Gollingwood country.


an ounce to the ton, which pays well, owing to the economical
manner of working, and an improvement is expected as the
drives are carried further in. The Red Hill Company, which
put in a low-level tunnel of 600 ft., did not strike anything at
that depth, hut obtained some rich specimens from leaders near
the surface. Operations have been suspended for the present,
pending the formation of a company which the promoters are
endeavouring to float in London to work their lease and two or
three other adjoining leases. With the exception of these com-
panies, the whole of the mining in the Collingwood District is
alluvial, and is carried on by means of tunnelling and sluicing.
Several companies were formed in the early days, hut had to
cease operations owing to the exhaustion or want of capital.
PRICE OF GOLD.
The price obtained for Collingwood gold is U 3 13s. per ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
Warden for the Collingwood District, Mr. W. Gibbs, R.M.,
Totaranui; Receiver of Gold Revenue and Mining Registrar at
Collingwood, Mr. A. T. Maginnity; Clerk of R.M. Court at
Takaka, Mr. F. T. Hicks. Sittings of the Warden’s Court are
held at Takaka the first Tuesday in every month, and at Colling-
T °od the following Thursday.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Nelson to Collingwood (by road) .. .. 75
Collingwood to Takaka .. .. ..20
Collingwood to Pakawau .. .. .. 8
Collingwood to Bedstead Gully .. 10
Collingwood to Rocky River .. .. 18
Collingwood to Quartz Ranges .. .. 20
Collingwood to West Wanganui .. 28
Collingwood can he reached from Nelson by coach as far as
°* ; ueka; thence on horseback or by steamer. There is a
overland mail service, and two steamers run between
Gson, Takaka, and Collingwood. There is an excellent coach-
r °ad from Nelson to Motueka ; thence to Takaka and Colling-
a good liorsc-track, the main coach-road being at present
construction; and when it is finished, and the main road


from Onehau to the Parapara is constructed, there will he
through-communication by coach with Nelson. Within 'the
mining district the roads and tracks are for the most part in
good order, and are fairly well maintained; hut goods have to
he packed to the most populous parts of the goldfield. A bridge
now in course of construction across the Aorere River will
prove a great convenience. A subsidy for the construction of a
bridge w r hich is now being erected across Salisbury Creek has been
granted by the Government: this will give access to the Quartz
Ranges. The proposed track to the Karamea, when completed,
will be the means of opening up a large area of auriferous and
agricultural land. The road from Collingwood to West Wanga-
nui follows the sea-beacli northwards as far as Pakawau —for
a distance of eight miles—and then turns to the westward to the
Pakawau Bush, through which a road, fairly passable in summer
time, has been formed. After the bush has been passed, six
miles of mud-flats have to be traversed, the remainder of the
distance being over unformed tracks.
Registered Mining Compant in tlio Collingwood Warden’s District actually
in operation on the 31st December, 1885.
Name
of
Company.
■2 3
3
25*
3 -J1
ao
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Pro-
moters'
Sharos.
Capital
actually
received
from Calls.
TotalValuooi
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Mine.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Mining.
cs
<H 9
u ,9
fa
12
Johnston’s
United (Ltd.)
20,000
£
20,000
£
9,000
£
7,375
£
3,081
Juno 27,
1881.
Quartz
Gold-mining Leases and Special Claims held in the Collingwood
Warden’s District on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Lessee.
Date when
Area.
Date when
Name of
Person or
Company to
granted.
transferred.
whom
transferred.
tM
0
Sgl
4s°«
<
COLLINGWOOD.
John Ross and others*..
John Ross*
Johnston’s United Co.*
E. O’H. Canavan*
James Russell*
Oct., 1871
Oct., 1871
July, 1881
Jan., 1885
Jan., 1885
A. n. r.
9 0 0
1G 2 4
16 2 0
12 2 14
15 2 0
Juno, 1883
April, 1884
£
Jos. Malone 9
and others
J. H. Keep 1U
and party
13
;; io
* Lease.


WEST WANGANUI DISTRICT.
The West Wanganui Goldfield is about twenty-eiglit miles
north-west by road from Collingwood. There is also communi-
cation by sea, and vessels drawing 12ft. of water may enter the
Inlet with safety at high-water spring-tides. The land com-
prising the goldfield belonged to the Natives, and was under the
jurisdiction of the Warden of the Collingwood Goldfield till
about two years ago, when a small company purchased it. Gold
was discovered at West Wanganui as far back as 1868, and for
some years a considerable number of miners found employment at
good wages in working the various creeks. Reefs were found in
1874, and several registered companies were started to work
them; but the only companies now in existence are the Golden
Ridge (which has obtained gold since it first started, up to
May, 1885, to the value of .£22,700) and the Great Northern,
the latter being only prospecting. In the Golden Ridge claim
the gold was found chiefly in the cement-wash, the reef, owing
to the want of systematic working, not having been struck
for several years; but of late the system of management
aud the style of working have been altered. What is considered
to be a well-defined gold-bearing reef has been driven on, and
a battery of five heads is now kept constantly going. “ The
Golden Ridge Company was originally started to work some
auriferous cements composed of angular fragments of, slate,
Mudstone, and quartz, frequently cemented with oxide of iron,
"'vhich occur resting on slates and sandstones close to the main
drive on the reef in the original Golden Ridge Mine. The
ce fflent appears to be an old slope-deposit, derived from the reef
the de gradation and wearing-away of the rocks of the hill,
de gold never occurs in it in a free state —that is to say, if a
ls h of the cement were washed without crushing very little gold
w °uld be obtained; but all the gold— and the cements were
rich—was contained in quartz, which had to be crushed
e * ore any good returns could be made. The reef itself was dis-
c°vered bv careful prospecting in the cements, and was followed
dP % shode stones from the creek to the outcrop, it being found
a i the greater quantity of auriferous quartz followed a
la gonal line through the cements. . . . The reef was


found in the old Golden Ridge claim; it occurred in a soft
slate, striking E.—W., and underlying south at angles varying
from nearly flat to 45°, and carried a little gold throughout.
The main reef consists of a fissure varying greatly in width, at
times being as much as 20ft. between the walls. This fissure
lias to a large extent been filled with blocks of slate which
have fallen in and been subsequently cemented by the auriferous
quartz which traverses the reef in all directions. A hanging-
wall leader has been struck at a certain distance in: it came in
nearly vertical, then opened up to a chamber nearly 20ft. high,
and subsequently dipped at an angle of 45°. This leader was
followed w'hen struck, and a great deal of gold was taken out;
hut it eventually became poor, and no further work appears to
have been done on it. The main reef has not been prospected
at all in a systematic manner, for whenever a patch of gold was
struck the whole number of men were put on to work it out,
which, as might be supposed, has resulted in the closing of the old
mine. When the reef w r as abandoned the shareholders returned
to the cements, but eventually became possessed of the Morning
Star ground, which adjoins their original claim, and, taking ad-
vantage of three years’ work which had been expended by the
former company with no results, started to work the reef, and
have had some very good gold from it.”*
Of the five leases in existence at the time the land v r as pur-
chased from the Natives, only one other company —the Great
Northern —has done anything in the shape of practical work.
This company put in a drive of 300 ft. without striking the reef;
but the indications were favourable. The whole of the creeks
are auriferous, and the few alluvial miners who are still at work
are making fair wages. Prospectors have been looking for reefs
for some time past, and are hopeful of making new discoveries.
If the w'orkings of the Golden Ridge and Great Northern Com-
panies turn out satisfactory, attention will be directed to the
reefs at West Wanganui, which are favourably spoken of
some practical miners who have visited and worked in that
locality.
* “ Geological Reports,” 1883,' pages GB, G 9: S. Herbert Cox, F.C-S-'
F.G.S., Assistant Geologist.


Registered Mining Company in the West Wanganui District actually in opera-
tion on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company.
u «j
■g «3
b jr*
3 02
So
o
Capital
declared
paid-up,
ncluding
Capital
actually
Date of Com-
mencing
Pro-
moters’
Shares.
from Calls.
Operations.
Quartz, Alluvial,
or other Process
of Mining.
[Number of Men
1 employed. .
Extended Golden Kidge
Gold-mining Company
(Limited)
15,000
£
15,000
£
8,746
£
1,246
Sept., 1885
Quartz
9
—
Quartz-mine at work at West Wanganui on the 31st December, 1885.
Name of Company.
Nominal
Capital.
Paid-up Capital.
Date when first
opened.
Lease or Claim.
Survey
District.
fd
<0 .
>>to
o a
s.3
C W
a a
Q) £
©
o**-*
pH
Crushing
Gold-saving
Plant.
Appliances.
a
cd
£
O
a
c3
>
Eitadca Golden
£
15,000
£ 8
8.74G 14
Sept.,
A. R. P.
2G 2 27
Anatori,
Water
5 heads re-
Copp.-plates
£
BOO
. “!®5 e Gold-
“‘Une Com-
P^dimiteS
1885
West
volving
and blanket*
Wanga-
nui
stamps
tables
WANGAPEKA WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
Amongst the earliest gold-discoveries in New Zealand was that
°f the Wangapcka Goldfield, which comprised the valleys drained
% the Wangapelca and its tributaries, the Rolling River and
and the Tadmor and Baton Valievs, lying on either side
the Wangapeka River. The goldfield is now mainly occupied
% small dairy-farmers, who put in their spare time at mining,
are about four hundred people on the field, hut of that
number only a dozen persons are engaged exclusively in mining;
consequently the yield of gold is small, ranging from about
40t>oz. to 700 oz. per annum. The more easily-worked parts of
*ta field have been exhausted, and long water-races and tail-
races are now necessary. The miners were in many instances
a dracted away from their own uncertain occupation, small con-
tacts at road-work being preferred, at which good wages were
generally obtainable. In spite of drawbacks, fresh discoveries


are made from time to time, and some valuable deposits of gold
have been found. A horse-track is now being laid off up the
Wangapeka to the head-waters of the Karamea, Little Wanga-
nui, and Mokihinui Rivers. All that country is known to he
auriferous. Each summer the miners at Wangapeka have been
in the habit of going over, and they have invariably returned
with parcels of gold; but they were unable to remain for any
length of time, owing to the difficulty of taking sufficient sup-
plies with them. The track now in course of construction will
remedy that, and, in the opinion of many practical miners, the
result will be that a new goldfield will be opened up in that
direction.
Seventeen or eighteen years ago quartz reefs were discovered
at Rolling River, but after some prospecting they were aban-
doned. Eurther tests would have been made, but it was found
impossible to trace the lodes, owing to the broken nature of the
country, although it is expected that in the higher mountains at
the back more solid country may be met with. Silver and lead
ore is frequently found, sometimes in large blocks, in the wash
of the Rolling River; but, though no lode has yet been dis-
covered equal in size to the lumps of ore found, it is probable
that a valuable deposit of these metals will some day be
brought to light.
ANISEED VALLEY COPPER-MINES.
The Champion Copper-mine, and the United Copper-mine,
which was some time ago amalgamated with it, are situated
on a branch of the Roding River, distant about fifteen miles by
horse-track from Nelson, or twenty-four miles by rail and road
via Richmond. The United lease (350 acres) adjoins the
Champion lease (850 acres) on the north-east. There has been
an expenditure of about £34,000 in connection with the two
mines; but, owing to the steadily-decreasing price of copp cr
in the English market, the company was unsuccessful, and the
property is now in the hands of liquidators. The average yield
of the ore treated (including the native copper) has been P er
cent., and the estimated cost of production at the works £2B to
£29 per ton of fine copper, the value of which in the London
market has lately been £35 to £4O per ton. The machinery


for reducing the ore is a Fraser and Chalmers (Chicago) 30-ton
water-jacket furnace; and, owing to the refractory character of
the ores, Mr. Carl Henrich, the late mine-manager, recom-
mended that four kilns of a suitable pattern should he erected
for calcining purposes. The original outcrop upon which opera-
tions were commenced at the Champion Mine was found by Mr.
Fred. Stratford in January, 1881; hut it was not until April,
1883, that a small company was formed to undertake its deve-
lopment. Operations were so far successful that at the end of
tie year a larger company was floated, with a capital of ,£50,000,
£20,000 being given to the holders of the Champion lease, and
tie owners of the United lease got shares paid up to £l2
(covering an amount of £6,000) for their interest, they being
liable for the balance. The first difficulty which had to be
overcome was the construction of a road, and the Govern-
ment agreed to a grant of two-thirds of the amount re-
quired, on condition that the company subscribed one-third,
lu April, 1884, a contract was let for four and a half miles,
followed later on by further contracts for a distance of twelve
miles, thus establishing good communication with the United
®ue, and passing through the smelting-site, This road gives
oomparatively easy access to what is known as the “ Mineral
Belt,” where, in addition to the copper, there are evidences of
ar ?e deposits of chrome-ore, assays of which have given from
to 70 per cent.
Mm S. H. Cox, F.G.S.,* reported on the United Mine a few
fears ago : “ Considering the small amount of work expended, the
P r °spects of the mine, both as regards what can he seen on the
s urface and the natural facilities which exist for the exploita-
hon 0 f fjyj orCj arc exceptionally good. The original lode
consists of a series of outcrops, which may be traced from the
°f the creek to nearly the summit of the hill which divides
e Champion and United Alines: these are supposed to be the
Continuation of the Doctor’s outcrop in the Champion’s lease.
fte y consist only of silicates of copper, with a little cuprite and
Co Pper-glance, and hut little work has been expended on them,
s ° that I need not further refer to them. Lying to the north-
gist t ox > now res '^ es > n Sydney, was for some time Assistant Geolo-
-0 the New Zealand Government.


west of this line of outcrop, at a distance of between 100 ft. and
200 ft., a lode has been struck which consists chiefly of copper-
pyrites, but has, of course, on the surface a large quantity of
gossan and silicates mixed with it. This has been opened by
cuttings and small drives for a vertical height of 120 ft., and the
lowest point yet exposed is situated about 550 ft. above the level
of the creek. The width of the lode can hardly be determined
with any accuracy at present, since it is making a turn just at
its upper outcrop, and in the lowest one has been so covered by
a slip of hard green serpentine, which forms the foot-wall of
the lode, that it is only partially exposed : the thickness is, how-
ever, at least 4ft., and at places would appear to be nearer 12ft.
Its course is N. 45° E. approximately. At a short distance
above the creek an outcrop has been found on the course of the
copper-pyrites lode, which it resembles in character, and contains
a little copper as silicates, but no sulphide at the outcrop;
while on the north-eastern continuation outcrops have been
discovered nearly at the summit of the hill to the north of
the creek, in which yellow sulphides occur. The country con-
sists of a harder class of serpentine than that at the Champion,
and corresponds closely with the rock at Wooded Peak; while
the lower cross-drive is through a rock at its entrance (which I
have no doubt belongs to the Maitai series), but passes through it
into the hard green serpentine which forms the western wall of
the copper-pyrites lode, where this has been exposed. This lode
is situated in the hush, and very near the junction of the Maitai
scries with the serpentine, so that it is more than likely, if us
itself does not run into a contact deposit, that such a one also
exists. It is the first instance in which the yellow ore has been
discovered in the district. The lode is well defined, and has
been traced for 120 ft. vertical. Pully 700 ft. of backs could be
worked level-free, and the position of the mine is not diffi
of access ; add to this that both at the Champion Mine and here
the water-power is fully sufficient for the requirements o
the mine, and we may conclude that the prospects of the com-
pany are at least very bright. I have said enough to show the
importance I attach to the discovery of this lode of copp cr "
pyrites, and must now point out how- extremely important it i®
that this lode should be driven on at once, so as to place beyon
doubt the value of the mine.”


Mr. Hcnricli, the late manager of the mine, in a report to the
directors of the Champion Copper-mining Company, dated 26th
May, 1886, stated : “ The main source of smelting-ore is to he
found in the ore-bodies of the United Mine. There is con-
siderable ore to be derived yet from the upper workings of the
Champion Mine, but the main value of this mine is a prospec-
tive one. Any large and regular supply of ore from this mine
will have to come from the as-yet-unexplored extension of the
ore-body below the level of the Doctor main tunnel. The new
working-shaft has reached a depth of 20ft. below this tunnel,
and should be sunk 30ft. farther before the 50ft. level should be
driven to the eastward, to intersect the black serpentine lode, on
whose contacts with the grey serpentine the native copper and
pyrites ores of the Champion Aline are found. The United lode
is ready for stoping down to Level 4, which means that a
triangular piece of the lode about 500 ft. long and 200 ft. high is
available for ore-extraction, or an area of 50,000 square feet
°f the lode With an extraction of 24 tons
°f ore per day, there would be a supply for 250 days, or
nearly ten months, counting the month at twenty-six working-
or a product of 45 tons of metallic copper per month
f° r ten months. Levels 5 and 6 are in progress, and the
bottom of the new working-shaft is about 10ft. below Level 6.
these two levels have advanced under the last known ore-
to the south, they will have opened an additional ore-
earing area 0 f the lode about 600 ft. in length by 110 ft. in
Ue Pth, or an area 0 f 06,000 square feet. This area is not all
opened as yet, and therefore no thickness of the ore-bodies is
1101711 ; nor can, the richer or poorer quality of the ore be
estimated To secure the future of the United
lne , the present working-shaft should be sunk without interrup-
and new levels opened at every 50ft. additional depth. By
ln g this, the mine could easily be kept in trim for a regular and
Coll tinuous supply of from 24 to 30 tons of ore as long as the
Present-known ore-bodies continued in depth, which, considering
eruptive nature of the rock in which these ore-deposits are
j s a i mos t beyond a reasonable doubt. At present 24 tons
ni ted Min c . The balance of the 30 tons of ore per working


day required for the continuous running of the works would
have to come from the ore f at grass ’ and from the Champion
Mine.. The Champion Mine ought to he worked in a small
w r ay in its old working, and in a vigorous way (by con-
tract) in sinking the shaft and exploring the deeper portions of
the black serpentine lode mentioned above. There exists here a
very good chance of striking one of those large pockets of rich
ore or native copper which have been the basis of astonishing
dividends to other copper companies. The United Mine may be
looked on to make both ends meet, and to supply the funds for
exploration works and small profits; while the Champion Mine
may be regarded as that factor in the enterprise which may
at any time allow of big dividends and a corresponding in-
ciease in the value of the stock of the company. The
above-mentioned 30 tons of copper-ore per working-day will give
26 tons per day during the entire month, or enough to keep the
one furnace of the company running continuously. Seven
hundred and eighty tons of 72-per-cent, ore would produce 55
tons of metallic copper, which ought to be worth, in the form
■of 40- to 60-per-ccnt. regulus, about £35 per ton of metallic
copper at the works, or, say, £1,925 per month. The cost of
mining, roasting, and smelting the 780 tons of ore is estimated
nt £1,600. This would leave a margin of about £3OO for
profit.”
The cost of transit from the w r orks to London is said to
be about £1 14s. 6d. per ton, made up as follows : Cartage to
Richmond, £1 per ton; railage to Port Nelson, 3s. 6d. p er
ton; freight to Wellington, 7s. 6d. per ton; freight to London
(sailing vessels principally for ballasting purposes), 3s. Cd. P er
ton. There is plenty of wood and an abundant supply of water.
PRICE OF GOLD.
The price of gold in the Wangapeka Warden’s District is
£3 15s. per ounce.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—-SITTINGS OF COURT.
Mr. Oswald Curtis, R.M., Nelson, is Warden, and r ‘
C. 11. W. Bowen, Nelson, Receiver of Gold Revenue. Sittings
of the Warden’s Court arc held when required.


MARLBOROUGH.
Gold was first discovered in Marlborougli in 1860, but the gold-
field was not proclaimed for three or four years afterwards. Iron
to found in 1870, antimony in 1876, and coal in 1880. There
to also indications of lead, silver, and copper. The Walcamarina
TO, for its size, one of the richest goldfields in the colony.
Miners were attracted to it from all parts of New Zealand, and
many came from the Australian Colonies. In June, 1864, the
"City of Hobart,” “ Otago,” and “ Albion” took from Picton
®)3930z. of gold ; in July the “Auckland ” took away 2,2560 z.;
®din September the “ Claud Hamilton” shipped 9610 z. These
shipments do not by any means represent the quantity of gold
was got during that short period, as many of the miners
TOt to Wellington and other places, taking their gold with
them. In 1864 the total export was 24,8380 z., of the value of
Bear ly £100,000; and in 1865 about 8,0000 z., valued at over
£30,000. As the alluvial ground got worked out, the miners
gradually drifted away to the West Coast and other fields; but
seme enterprising men remained in the district. The llavenscliff
Company, which started work in 1883 with a twelve-horse-power
Portable engine, a set of water elevators, an undershot water-
’ll, and two Californian pumps, constructed a flood-race,
5( ? 0f t. in length, and a dam, 65ft. in length by 12ft. in depth,
the view of controlling the waters of the IVakamarina, in
Cr to work the river-bed below it. Mr. M. Leahy spent
® ee years in cutting a tail-race, 550 ft. in length, on wdiich he
° 2, Other parties have also expended capital and labour in
Cll deavouring to get at the deeper ground.
. thirty-two -water-races, forty-two miles in length, giving
Slxt y-one sluice-heads of water, have been constructed in the


Pelorus Valley, at a cost of £4,500; eighteen tail-races were
cut, at a cost of £1,500; and. sixteen dams and six reservoirs
were excavated, at a cost of £7OO. In the Wairau, seven miles
of water-races, giving thirty-six sluice-heads, were constructed,
at a cost of £7OO, and six tail-races were cut, at a cost of £4OO.
There is a large area of rough, bush-covered mountains and
gullies, showing positive indications of auriferous reefs and alluvial
country; hut it cannot he properly prospected until tracks are
opened up. Gold-hearing quartz specimens have been picked
up in several watercourses, and alluvial gold has been found in
nearly every gully on both sides of the high ranges which divide
the Wakamarina from the Wairau Valley.
Rich as the alluvial workings have been in the Wakamarina,
many practical miners acquainted with the district are of opinion
that the reefs, when properly opened out, will yield far larger
returns. The Golden Bar Company, which took up a reefing-
claim a few years ago, had to give up work owing to want of
capital, although there were good indications of gold. Tk e
lease, which was cancelled, has been lately applied for by another
company, and a low-level tunnel will probably he put in. K
this company succeeds in striking payable stone, an impetus
will he given to quartz-mining in Marlborough. Most of the
work connected with gold-mining has been done hitherto by
private individuals and small parties.
In addition to the indications of lead, silver, and copper
which have been found in Marlborough, it is thought that there
is a probability of precious stones being found, and there is noff
a considerable export of antimony from Endeavour Inlet.
ENDEAVOUR INLET ANTIMONY MINE.
The Endeavour Inlet Antimony Company has secured a lease
of 500 acres of ground for a period of thirty years, between the
head of Endeavour Inlet and Port Gore, with the view of work-
ing the antimony-lodes that arc known to exist in that locality-
The antimony was first discovered several years ago in loose de-
tached blocks on the side of the range facing Queen Charlotte
Sound, and also in the beds of the creeks and watercouise®
coming out of the range; and a lode was afterwards discovere
running in a northerly-and-southcrly direction across the range


from the head of the Inlet towards Port Gore. This lode has
been worked near the top of the range, which is 1,600 ft. above
sea-level. About 3,000 tons of ore have been taken from the
lode, some of the best of which was sent to England, and realized
in its raw state .£lO per ton. A tunnel has been constructed
through the range 275 ft. below the level of the crown, and the lode
from this to the surface has been pretty well stoped out. The ore
near the crown of the range, and also for a certain distance in
from the side, occurs in the form of valcntinite; hut towards the
centre of the range, and for about 100 ft. above the level of the
tunnel, the ore is in the form of stibnite. This tunnel carried
the lode right through the hill, and by continuing further along
the range the lode has been proved along its lateral course or
strike for over I,oooft. At this level, where the lode is left
underfoot, it is getting into settled country, and the valentinite
m the lode is, to a great extent, replaced by rich stibnite ore.
The company has recently opened a drive 175 ft. lower down,
snd reached the reef, which at the point of intersection showed
Ter y rich ore. This will give an additional length of about
1,000 ft., as compared with the upper drive; so that the company’s
prospects are very good on this lower level.
A considerable distance further down the range, about 600 ft.
vertical below the present workings, and 500 ft. above the sea-
level, the company has commenced to open on a quantity of
broken ore. The ore, which is found in large loose blocks, and
18 apparently a slip from a lode in the range, is very good; and
Ihe company is now working the slip and taking out the ore for
sn >elting. The manager has carried in a drive 80ft., showing a
reef of high-class ore through that distance; hut, the reef
aving been displaced, and rising rapidly, a level tunnel, to inter-
sect it in a vertical position, will he necessary. Small quan-
tities of gold and silver arc found in the ore at this level,
of gold p Cr ton having been got from specimens forwarded
some time ago to the Colonial Laboratory. At Jackson Head,
dose to the company’s workings, a reef was found containing
§°H and antimony, and gold to the value of £B,OOO is said to
Ve teen taken from it, though there was very little work of a
systematic character done. A tramway has been constructed
°y the company from the tunnel down the side of the range to


tlie flat near the head of Endeavour. Inlet, where the dressing-
machinery and smelting-works have been erected. In bringing
this tramway down the range, which is very steep, there are
three separate inclines, each of which is worked by a brake con-
structed w r ith two pulleys working vertically and one horizontally.
The full truck going down brings up the empty one, the speed
of the trucks being regulated by a double-hand brake, which is
worked with a long lever.
The ore which has been hitherto obtained is of good quality,
and gives a high percentage of antimony. Where the ore is not
rich, it is taken to the dressing-works, and, after being sorted, is put
through a Blake-Marsden stone-breaker, and afterwards through
a Frisbce-Lucop patent pulverizer, which reduces it so that it
will pass through a screen of sixty meshes to the square inch,
after which it is carried in shoots to jiggers, and the gangue sepa-
rated from the metallic mineral. Two of the jiggers, which are
on a new principle, and are the invention of the company’s
manager, Mr. J. E. Wcarne, are self-acting and continuous, and
separate the ore from the gangue very effectively. The ore is
separated into different grades, the first going at once to the
smelting-works, hut the second requires further dressing. AH
the ore from the mine is brought in large trucks to the dressing-
sheds, where it is tipped on to a large floor, and is then well
washed with a hose connected with a 14in. pipe under a 75ft-
head, which conveys the water to the motor. The best ore is
picked out by hand, and put through the stone-breaker: it r e '
quires no further dressing, and is at once delivered to the smelt-
ing-works. The poorer ores are crushed much finer, and then
go through the process of dressing by jiggers, &c. At the
smclting-worlcs the different ores are mixed, then weight
quantities from 301 b. to 401 b. being put into the crucibles with the
fluxes, and then into the furnaces. The.company has three f ur "
naces, two being for the crucibles; one is fired with coke, and
one with -wood. A crude furnace has just been completed: A
is an ordinary reverberatory furnace, in which it is intended to
treat the ore in large quantities in the first process of smelting;
which is called singling. The metal is again smelted, and pi -0 '
duces doubles or howl metal. The third and finishing process,
known as Frenching, produces the star metal, so named from th e




ANITMONY COMPANY [?]TING WORKD.


beautiful crystallization the metal takes after this process. The
more varied and beautiful these crystals are, the better price the
metal will fetch in the market. The company has a very good
dressing- and smelting-plant, and all appliances are now in such a
position that the metal can he turned out ready for shipment to
the English market. With the plant at present in use viz. r
one coke furnace with twelve fires, one wood furnace with six-
teen openings for crucibles, and two furnaces on a new principle
for manufacturing crude ore —18 tons per week, or 900 tons
per annum, can he produced, the value of which may be roughly
stated, according to the rates ruling for some time past, at
125,000 to £30,000.
Cottages have been erected on the ground for the whole of
the workmen, who at the present time number fifty. The
company has also constructed a wharf at the head of the Inlet,
where steamers drawing from Bft. to Oft. of water can lie along-
side. There are 50,000 shares of £1 each in the company, and
Us. 9d. per share has been paid up. Some of the money went
fo purchase the interest of the old company who first took the-
ground up, and about £25,000 has been expended on the mine
®d plant. The shares in the company are held principally by ten
Persons resident in Wellington; but there are altogether fifteen
shareholders connected with the company. They deserve great
credit for the pluck and energy they have displayed in erecting
such extensive works, and in prosecuting this branch of mining
011 so large a scale, with the difficulties that had to be en-
countered. AVorkmen had to be brought from England to
carry on the smelting operations, with the result that the metal
®°w turned out at Endeavour Inlet is equal in quality to that
from the reduction-works in London. Messrs. AA r . Cowan and
of London and Glasgow, who are large manufacturers of
Plants for gasworks, have been so well satisfied with some trials
the metal, that they have expressed their intention of giving
the preference in future.
PEICE OF GOLD.
The price of gold in the Marlborough Warden’s District is-
12s. Gd. per ounce.
18


GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
Warden, Mr. J. Allen, 11. M., Blenlieim; Receiver of Gold
Revenue and Clerk of Court at Havelock (tlie principal Warden’s
Office), Mr. F. O’Donovan. Sittings of the Warden’s Court
arc held at Havelock once a montli (the dates being fixed at
every sitting of the Court), or fortnightly if required. The
Warden attends at Deep Creek and Blenheim whenever there is
any business to be transacted.
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
Miles.
Wellington to Blenlieim .. .. 80
Wellington to Picton .. .. .. 80
Wellington to Endeavour*lnlet .. .. 80
Blenheim to Havelock .. .. .. 28
Blenheim to Wakamarina .. .. 37
Blenheim to Wairau Valley .. .. 37
Steamers run to Blenheim and Picton frequently, and to
Endeavour Inlet occasionally. There is coach-communication
with the "Wakamarina, and a portion of the way to the Wairau.
The roads leading to the Wakamarina are in fair condition, but
the latter portion of the journey to the Wairau has to be done
through blind tracks, and the river is not safe for crossing nt
all times.
Gold-mininc. Lease held ir. the Marlbokougii District on tho 31st
December, 1885.
Name of Lessee.
'Date ■when
granted.
Area.
Date ■when
transferred.
Name of
Person or
Company to
whom
transferred.
f _'o
p ag
q gg
<a
<
A. I*. P.
4 2 11
—
Pfxonus.
W. H. Lambert*
April 19,18S2
May 8,
1882
Dee. 12,
1885
£
Wakamarina \
Gorge G.M.
Co. f J
0. H. Turner
♦Lease.


WELLINGTON.
For at least a quarter of a century gold has heen known to
exist in the neighbourhood of Cape Tcrawhiti. At the Exhibi-
tion held in London in 1862 specimens of gold from Tcrawhiti
and AVaiariki were shown, and auriferous-quartz specimens have
been frequently found in creeks and watercourses. The late Mr.
George Hunter (for many years M.H.R. for Wellington), the
late Mr. Philip Moeller, Mr. C. E. W. Willcston, and a few
other gentlemen paid men for several years to prospect the
ranges near Tcraxvhiti, hut without satisfactory results. Mr.
J- F. E. Wright also aided a party of men, who obtained 420 z.
alluvial gold from the bed of the Waiariki Stream, which
lakes its rise in Mr. McMenamin’s property. In the upper
Part of the valley of the Kaiwarra Stream, near Baker’s Hill,
and in close proximity to the Polhill Gully Reservoir, gold-
raining operations were carried on in 1869, and a small quantity
°f alluvial gold was obtained. Mr. J. C. Crawford, F.G.S., in
a paper read before the Wellington Philosophical Society on the
Ifth July, 1869, stated: “ Having visited the operations at
Present going on in the upper part of the valley of the Kaiwarra
Stream, I find in that narrow valley a greater quantity of gold
hashed out than could have been reasonably expected from the
limited area from which it must have been derived.” Traces
°f alluvial gold have been found in the Tinakori Road, near
tbe site of the Botanical Gardens, and in several places in the
Wellington Provincial District; whilst quite recently very fine
gold was found at Marton, at a depth of about 40ft. Some years
a S° a quartz reef was opened out at Tcrawhiti, and was worked
0r a period by a company, but was finally abandoned, as
ibe stone did not prove payable. What may be termed the
Principal rush to Tcrawhiti took place in the early part of 1883,


when auriferous quartz was discovered on Mr. McMenamin’s
property, near Cape Terawhiti, and a company was formed to
work the reef, which was afterwards known as the Albion
Claim. Some rich specimens were found on the cap of the
reef, on the surface, which caused great excitement, and led to
the whole of the available ground on the supposed line of reef
westward of a line drawn between Oterongo and Ohau bays
being leased in mining claims by the proprietors of the land.
The reef in the Albion Claim averaged from 2ft. to 2ft. 6in.
in width. It was proved down to a depth of 140 ft., and
found to continue for about 150 ft. in length. Although rich
specimens were got on the cap of the reef, the'stone, as it went
down, showed very little gold; still, those who had charge of the
work at that time considered that the ore was payable. A
battery of ten heads of stampers was erected, and a tramway
from the mine to the battery was constructed; hut after
crushing a large parcel of stone it was found that there was
scarcely enough gold to pay for crushing. After this reef was
discovered, gold was found further to the westward than the
Albion Claim by the Golden Crown Company, in a decomposed
quartz lode of from lOin. to 12in. in thickness, which was
traced down for some distance and found to contain gold of a
payable character; hut on driving on the lode it was found to be
a detached block, and not a continuous reef. About 50 tons of
the quartz crushed from the Golden Crown claim yielded 15dwt.
of gold per ton. The first block discovered seemed to run com-
pletely out, causing active operations to be for a time suspended,
and further prospecting continued. A low-level tunnel was
constructed to try and cut the reef at a lower level, but without
success. Subsequently another auriferous-quartz block was
found in this company’s ground, which led the shareholders to
believe that they had come upon the main reef. They therefore
made arrangements for the purchase of the Albion Company s
battery, and commenced again in earnest to work their mine;
but after a time the supposed main reef only proved to be an
isolated block of quartz. As soon as it was worked out they
could not find any further blocks that would pay for working?
and consequently operations -were suspended. A great deal o
prospecting has been done in the various leases that were taken


up, but nothing was found of a payable character. It is possible
that at greater depths the main reef may he found. Quiet,
persevering effort is what is required. Half the amount ex-
pended in the floating of companies during the excitement in
1883, if judiciously spent, would have tested the ground to a
depth of I,oooft. or 1,500 ft. That would give a real test of the
value of the ground. There is nothing more calculated to do
harm to legitimate mining enterprise than spasmodic efforts and
the floating of bubble companies, many of which, like Micawber,
are always “waiting for something to turn up” on their
neighbours’ claims. Slips and faults may not unnaturally be
expected, as it must have been a great fracture which opened
out Cook Strait, The Terawhiti reefing country lies on the
edge of it, and it is possible, if sinking were carried to a con-
siderable depth, that settled country might he reached. When
the deep alluvial ground was getting worked out on Ballarat, an
association, principally composed of the business people, was
formed for the purpose of testing the quartz-reefs at Golden
Point to a depth of I,oooft. A similar association in Welling-
ton would he better able to thoroughly test the country at
Terawhiti than dozens of companies, as the money could he
expended directly, instead of being frittered aw'ay indirectly,
as too frequently happens.
Prospecting was carried on for some time in the ranges near
Peatherston, and lately there has been a discovery of gold in the
ranges near Woodville. Some excitement was caused in the
Manawatu recently, owing to the discovery of what was believed
to be a silver-hearing lode at the Pohangina, a tributary of the
Manawatu lliver. Though several claims were pegged out and
some work was done, nothing has so far been discovered to justify
the sanguine expectations formed as to the nature of the countiy.
The only mineral lease held at the end of the year 18SG was
one granted to Mr. J. R. Anderson on the 2nd December, 1885,
h's lease comprising 16i acres, at a rent of £l7 per annum.


AUCKLAND.
THE EAELY GOLD-DISCOVEKIES.*
The discovery of gold by Mr. Hargreaves in 1851 on tlie banks
of Summer Hill Creek, near Batliurst, New South Wales, gave
an impetus not alone to the opening-up of the Ballarat and
Bendigo Goldfields, but also to gold-mining in New Zealand.
The following year —in October, 1852—Mr. Charles Ring ob-
tained auriferous quartz and some fine gold from the Kapanga
Stream, at Coromandel, and applied for the reward of £SOO
which had been offered by a committee in Auckland for the dis-
covery of a goldfield. About three thousand miners were at-
tracted to the field, Colonel Wynyard, who was then Lieutenant-
Governor, having arranged with the Native owners to permit
the search for gold between Cape Colville and Kauaerangaf (or
Shortland, as it was afterwards called) on the following terms:
Payments to be made for any number under 500, £600; from
500 to 1,000, £900; from 1,000 to 1,500, £1,200 ; from 1,500
to 2,000, £1,500. In addition, 2s. was to be paid to the Na-
tives for every license issued, and other arrangements were made
in connection with the leasing of township-areas, cutting timber,
&c. The discoveries of alluvial deposits at Collingwood in 18a<
by Mr. William Liglitband, at the Buller River in 1859—60 by
Mr. John Rochfort, and at Tuapcka in 1861 by Mr. Gabriel
Read, proved so attractive that for many years Coromandel was
abandoned and neglected; but nine years after Mr. Ring’s dis-
covery a reaction took place, and in October, 1861, Coromandel
again became the scene of mining operations. On the 28th
June, 1862, Coromandel was proclaimed a goldfield, Mr. H. N-
Turton being appointed Commissioner. There were about three
hundred miners on the field at that period, who reported moie
* This sketch of the early gold-discoveries is principally abridged from ■
James Mackay’s report on the Thames Goldfields, “ Appendix to Journa .
House of Representatives,” 1809. .p
t The original spelling was Kaiwhakarunga, hut since the advent of
peans it has been generally spelled as printed. The Maoris also seem to p re
the modern way.


favourably than those who went there at the first rush as to the
payable character of the ground. Mr. W. G. Brackcnbury, who
had. been Goldfields Commissioner in Victoria, inspected the field
in 1861, and reported: “ The external features of the country
are very similar to those exhibited by the most auriferous parts
of Victoria —viz., Ballarat, Buninyong, Castlemainc, and Ben-
digo.” Mr. Brackcnbury, who could not understand the apathy
displayed by the Auckland merchants, pointed out that in
Victoria, in addition to the encouragement held out by the Go-
vernment, the merchants in Melbourne frequently united for
the purpose of defraying the expenses of sending strong pro-
specting parties to fields at a great distance from the metropolis.
The feeling of insecurity prevented any large influx of miners,
aud the breaking-out of hostilities in the year 1863 again caused
the field to be deserted. Early in 1864 Colonel Chesney, R.E.,
reported that he had found alluvial gold at Te Aroha, and it
was proposed that Mr. James Mackay, who had been appointed
Civil Commissioner for the Hauraki District in May, 1864, should
head a prospecting party; but the disturbed state of the country
caused that idea to be abandoned. After the cessation of
hostilities miners gradually returned to Coromandel, and Mr.
Mackay lost no opportunity of urging upon the Natives all over
the district the advantages to be derived through the leasing of
their auriferous lands. Those who belonged to what was then
termed the Land League party were strongly averse to anything
being done, the only chief who appeared really anxious to open up
his land being Hauauru (or Wirope Hoterene) Taipari (afterwards
known as Willoughby Shortland Taipari), who contended for a
longtime against the whole of the Ngatimaru, of whom his father
was chief. After prospecting had gone on for some months on
Taipari’s land gold was found on the south bank of the Karaka
Stream by two Natives named Paratene Whakautu and Hamiora
Kewa.- the former had been a miner in the Nelson District.
The gold having been taken to Auckland by Taipari and
hfr. Rogan, Judge of the Native Land Court, residents in
that city, which was then in a very depressed condition,
owing to the removal of the seat of Government and the
Withdrawal of the Imperial troops, became hopeful and ex-
C) ted; hut it was only after lengthened negotiations that the


Hon. Dr. Pollen, who was at that time General Government
Agent at Auckland, and Mr. Mackay obtained the consent of
the Natives to allow mining on that portion of their lands
bounded by the Kuranui Stream on the north and by the Kaka-
ramata on the south. A large portion of the Moanataiari and
the whole of the "VVaiotahi lands were, however, excluded from
this arrangement, owing to the opposition of the Ngatimaru.
It was agreed to give the Natives £1 for each miner’s right
issued for the block, £1 ss. to be paid in addition for each
kauri-tree used by the miners. The arrangements were con-
cluded on the 27th July, 1867, and on the 30th of that month
the lands were proclaimed a goldfield. Dr. Pollen having
requested Mr. Mackay to proceed to Kauaeranga, he left Auck-
land in the paddle-steamer “Enterprise,” on the Ist August,
1867, accompanied by Mr. Alan Baillie, who had acted as
Warden at Coromandel, forty pioneers, and two policemen.
The search was principally for alluvial gold, very little of which
was found. On the 10th August Messrs. Hunt, White, Clark-
son, and Cobley discovered a very valuable gold-bearing leader
in the Kuranui Stream; but it was thought that it would not
pay to work, as the gold was of rather poor quality. The first
miners’ rights were issued on the 12tli August, two days after
the find, and the Kuranui was rushed; but at mid-day many of
those who had gone off so excitedly returned dissatisfied, and
some even demanded the money they had paid for their miners
rights. The stone having been tested with favourable results,
several claims were immediately pegged out at the Kuranui, and
Mr. Daniel Tookcy, who had been prospecting in the district
previously, marked out a valuable claim near the mouth of the
Moanataiari Stream. The importance of these discoveries to
the Province of Auckland and to the colony generally may be
gathered from the fact that between the months of August,
1867, and the 30th June, 1869, duty was paid at Auckland on
129,2110 z. of gold, the value of which was set down at £264, 420-
There was a great deal of agitation amongst the miners for the
opening-up of Oliinemuri, which, like other forbidden or far-off
fields, was reported to be fabulously rich; but, owing to the op-
position of the Natives, it was not thrown open till 1875, when
many sanguine expectations were doomed to disappointment. 1°


MAP OF THE
NHHISMIJ,
ma zimmi.
indie ating extent of
MINERAL WORKINGS.
1886. ’
Lithographed at the General Survey office, Wellington. N.Z. February. 1886.


April, 1875, gold was found at Tairua; and in August, 1880,
traces of the precious metal were again found at Te Aroha,
which was thrown open about three months afterwards.
HAURAKI WARDEN’S DISTRICT.
The goldfields, which extend from Cape Colville to Tc Arolia,
comprising an area of about one hundred miles in length, are
known as the Hauraki Gold-mining District (North and South).
It has been pretty accurately described as “ a grand mineral
country, and a place of astounding mineral wealth.” That it
has not been in any way overrated may be gathered from the
fact that up to the end of 1885 over 2,000,0000 z. of gold were
exported, the yields from various parts of the district being ap-
proximately as follows :
Oz.
Thames 1,733,716
Coromandel .. .. .. .. 240,671
Ohinemuri .. .. .. .. 40,200
Tapu 35,000
Te Aroha .. .. .. .. 18,155
Total 2,067,742
' During the first decade of the Thames Goldfield, the follow-
lnK were the quantities and value of the gold entered for
ex Portation at Auckland :
Year.
Number of Ounces.
Value.
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
53,060
£
168,874
132,451
434,687
85,534
319,146
330,326
1,188,708
104,890
369,341
119,449
437,123
76,910
305,068
69,485
262,156
56,057
221,905
99,081
403,627
.Totals
1,127,843
4,110,635


In 18G7, there was an export of 6,G370z., valued at over
.£IB,OOO. These returns do not take into account the quantities
of gold used locally by jewellers, dentists, and others —probably
not less than 5,0000 z. per annum. That would bring the total
value of the gold obtained during ten years up to to about four
and a quarter millions sterling.
A vast extent of country, extending from Coromandel, in
the north, to Te Aroha, in the south, is known to be auriferous,
but is as yet undeveloped. No systematic work has heen done
in the extensive tract of back country, though here and there,
in isolated places, prospecting has been carried on, and with
results that should have justified more systematic working, as
evidenced by the recent discoveries at Waikawau and Waiomo
on the West Coast, and Parakawai on the East Coast.
Other minerals besides gold have been discovered all over the
peninsula. Silver, mercury, lead, tin, copper, antimony, cinnabar,
zinc, manganese, and iron (which, in the form of hematite, i>
used in the manufacture of paint and as a flux for smelting ores)
have been found at the Thames; antimony, arsenic, and coal
at Coromandel; silver, mercury, iron, copper, and coal at
Ohincmuri; silver, mercury, iron, copper, antimony, zi nc >
tellurium (in conjunction with gold and silver), and manganese
at Tc Aroha. The minerals enumerated have been found at
various intervals during the last dozen years, but it was not
until 1885 that silver was known to exist in the form of
sulphides, chlorides, and tellurides.
The future development of the Ilauraki Peninsula must de-
pend largely upon the introduction of capital and the adaptation
of some more scientific methods for extracting and saving the
gold. There are extensive districts—such as Waihi, Karanga-
hake, and Tc Aroha—containing mineral lodes of known and
proved richness and extent, which may be said to be almost
closed, as the lodes cannot be advantageously or profitably
worked with the quicksilver appliances generally in use. The shod
time during which the La Monte smelting-furnace was at v'orl
went far to prove the richness of the extraordinary
lodes found in those places; whilst the results of the sample
tested at the New Era Reduction Works and Aroha UatterV
Company’s Works, at Waiorongomai, and at Railey’s Battci'p


Karangaliake, amply demonstrated tlie necessity for the most im-
proved scientific apparatus for treating the ores. The exceptional
quality and value of the lodes may he judged from the following
facts: At Tui Creek, in one reef of an average thickness of 7ft.,
gold, silver, lead (carbonate of lead in solid lumps), cinnabar, hema-
tite, and zinc-blende have been found. The returns from three
parcels sent for treatment to California gave respectively : No. 1
parcel, 4ioz. of gold and 1390 z. of silver (valued at £5 7 per
ton); No. 2 parcel, loz. lOdwt. of gold and 940 z. of silver
(worth £52 ss. per ton) ; No. 3 parcel (a sample of the car-
bonate of lead) gave 15aOz. of silver and 50 per cent, of lead
(the latter being valued at £9 per ton). At the La Monte
furnace prices varying from £6 to £IOO per ton were given for
parcels ranging from five to twenty tons. These ores vary so
much in the minerals they contain —even in the same mine—
that no one method of treatment is likely to suffice. Smelt-
rag might be more advantageous with one class of ores;
while crushing, with the use of the pans, might be the
more preferable way of dealing with other others. As
these methods were not available until quite recently in
this colony, some of the miners sent consignments of ores
varying from five to one hundred tons to Swansea (South
and Freiburg (Germany) for treatment, hoping that the
results might have the effect of directing attention to the
mineral resources of the district, and of inducing capitalists to
Bssis i ; in the erection of the machinery required for the proper
treatment of the ores. Miners now understand the necessity for
carefully assorting and classifying the ores, and the School of
lines recently established at the Thames, with its various
ranches, will enlarge the miners’ knowledge, whilst practical
'attraction will enable them to turn it to account. There is
certainly a wide field of usefulness for these technical schools,
vvhich wifi he the means of preparing the way for more scientific
aiethods of extracting the gold, silver, and other minerals from
the ores.
BIG BEEFS.
The future prospects of the Ilauraki District must depend
r S e ly upon the utilization of those enormous reefs or lodes—


popularly termed barren or buck reefs—which exist in many
places between Coromandel and Te Aroha. These so-called
barren reefs will yield from 3dwt. to Bdwt. of gold to the ton,
with the possibility of opening up some rich leaders, such as those
which have in the past been found in the neighbourhood of the
Great Tokatea Reef, at Coromandel, and elsewhere.
The New Find Reef, Waiorongomai, which runs through the
New Find, Canadian, Colonist, and Premier Companies’ ground,
is a very large body of quartz, and shows its outcrop every few
chains from the New Find Company’s lease up to and through
the Premier lease—for a distance of about one mile. The offi-
cial returns from this reef justify the belief that highly satis-
factory results would follow the energetic and systematic
developing of all the ground which the reef traverses. The
Aroha Battery Company’s forty-stamper mill has been em-
ployed for the last three years reducing ore from this reef
with profitable returns, although it is a well-known fact
that only a small percentage of the bullion contained m
the quartz can be saved by the ordinary battery process. As
a rule, the gold in these buck reefs is very fine and somewhat
difficult to save, and requires special treatment. But the day
cannot be far distant when thousands of men will be profitably
employed in working these large reefs. Cheaper crushing-power,
such as has lately been introduced in Nevada, with more
economical methods of raising and sending the stone to the
mill, would tend to solve the problem as to how these so-called
barren reefs arc to be profitably worked.
In the great mining centres in Victoria so much attention
has been paid to these details that large reefs, such as the Black
Hill and Llanbcris, at Ballarat, have been constantly worked
for a quarter of a century, though the average yields do n°t
exceed those which might be obtained from many of the hig
reefs in the Hauraki District. During the first quarter of th®
year 1886 the Llanbcris (which takes rank amongst the divi'
dend-paying companies) crushed 1,182 tons of quartz for 2320*-
lOdwt. 16gr. of gold, or an average of less than 4dwt. per ton-
During the same period the Black Hill Company crushed I,OOG
tons of quartz for 2710 z. Bdwt. 13gr., or an average of sdfft-
OAgr. per ton. In Clunes, another quartz-reefing district, about


twenty miles from Ballarat, the Port Phillip Company (the shares
in which are principally held in England) crushed 2,512 tons of
quartz for 5220 z. Bdwt. 12gr., or an average of 4£dwt. per
ton; the New North Clunes Company crushed 2,119 tons for
7090 z. 9dwt., or an average of less than 7dwt. per ton;
the South Clunes United Company crushed 3,383 tons for
1,0250 z. 14dwt., or an average of over 6dwt. per ton. At
Smythesdale, which is on the other side of Ballarat, 3,294 tons
of quartz were crushed for 8760 z. sdwt. 12gr., or an average of
sHwt. per ton. In the Sandhurst District, the Garden Gully
United, one of the oldest and most prosperous companies,
crushed 3,684 tons of quartz for 1,1690 z. 12dwt., or an average
of 6|dwt.; the New Chum and Victoria, 2,454 tons for 7610 z.
lldwt. 6gr., or an average of 6jdwt.; the Ellesmere, 887 tons
for 311 oz. 13dwt., or an average of 7dwt. per ton : the average
for the whole of the Sandhurst District during the first quarter
of 1886 being less than lOdwt. per ton. At Eaglehawk, a few
miles beyond Sandhurst, 50,336 tons of quartz gave an average
of less than 9dwt. per ton; at Castlemaine, 6,221 tons were
crushed for an average of less than sdwt. per ton; at Fryer’s
Creek, 771 tons were crushed for less than sld\vt. per ton; and
at Daylesford, 7,895 tons were crushed for 6jdwt. per ton. The
average yield from all the quartz-reefing districts in Victoria gave
ess than lOdwt. to the ton for the years 1884—85, and the
average for the first quarter of 1886 did not exceed lOdwt.
In considering the value of the so-called barren reefs in the
Hauraki District these facts should not he overlooked.
GREAT LOSS OF GOLD.
Another matter that should receive earnest attention is the
S re at loss of gold now permitted to run to waste in the tailings
Ir°m the batteries. Before the necessary steps were taken at
e Aroha to preserve the tailings, the lowest estimate of the
ai ®ual loss was 7,0000 z., or, in round numbers, about twenty
thousand pounds’ worth, per annum. At the Thames the loss
ls incalculable. At Waihi, where special pits were made to
®ave the tailings from forty-five tons of stone from the Silvcrton
lne ) the quantity thus saved proved to be worth £ls per ton.


Yet neither at Waihi nor at Karangahake have any steps been
taken to prevent the waste going on, though it is almost certain
that the first cost of preventing this waste would be more than
recouped by the gold saved. “ Indeed, it may yet become a
question whether the State—the ultimate loser—should not take
steps to prevent this wanton waste.” So thought the late Mr.
Warden Kenrick, who had given the subject a great deal of
■careful attention.
SCIENTIFIC TREATMENT OF OEES.
The silver and other mineral lodes discovered at Waihi,
Karangahake, and Tc Aroha must remain undeveloped until
proper methods of treatment are available. The establishment
of furnaces, &c., in a central position, where these ores would
find a ready market, on a similar principle to those maintained
by the State at Freiburg, in Germany, or supported by private
enterprise, as at Swansea, in South Wales, appears to offer the
best solution of the question as to how these ores may he profit-
ably worked. The initiation of works of a similar kind in New
Zealand would revolutionize the mining industry in the Ilauraki
Peninsula and in other parts of the colony. In Victoria there
arc thirty-two pyrites works, Avliick afford employment to 164
men, and the value of the machinery in connection with them is
set down at £34,280. In 1884 the quantity operated upon rvas
upwards of 7,000 tons. The total yield of gold was 15,667 jOZ-j
of the value of about £60,000. There are also six smelting'
Avorks in that colony, employing 187 men and five steam-
engines.
DEEP SINKING.
At the Thames there are tAvcnty different mines at work m
the area drained by the “ Big Pump ; ” but their operations are
now chiefly confined to surface-blocks, and not to a greater
depth than 400 ft. beloAv the sill of the “ Big Pump ” shaft-
Past operations have proved that the reefs are remunerative at a
greater depth, as payable quartz was worked in the Prince
Imperial Mine at 500 ft., and in the Deep Level Cross Mine at
about the same depth. The Queen of Beauty shaft at Waio*




GRAHAMS TOWN
Ficth of Thames. N.Z.


Icaraka (which is now flooded) was sunk to a depth of 748 ft.,
and good prospects were obtained from tlie reefs cut at the
low-level. Payable quartz was also workel at the level 677 ft.
from the surface. It is probable that the reefs in this locality
would be found remunerative if sinking were carried on to a
depth of I,oooft. or more. The history of the operations
at the Queen of Beauty Mine (in which gold has been found
at a greater depth than in any other mine in the Hauraki Dis-
trict) illustrates the manner in which the gold is affected by the
class of country in which the reefs occur. Prom the surface to
a depth of 350 ft. the whole length of the different reefs was
gold-hearing, enabling the company to pay large dividends.
Though at times gold-bearing, the reefs then became poorer,
and continued of the same character for 150 ft. further down,
the strata of the rocks not being such as arc, in the experience
of miners, favourable for gold. At the eighth level, or
537 ft. from the surface, the reefs proved as rich—perhaps even
richer— than near the surface, and so continued to a depth of
677 ft., when they again became poor. Sinking was then con-
tinued to No. 10 Level, 748 ft. from the surface, where two new
reefs were cut, both being gold-bearing. Little work was,
however, done on them, an accident to the pumping machinery
necessitating a large outlay for repairs, or for its replacement
hy better pumping and winding-machinery. As the company
nonld not raise the required capital for the erection of these
expensive works, the directors and shareholders were reluctantly
compelled to suspend operations, and the mine was abandoned.
135,8870 z. of gold were obtained from this mine, valued at
■£667,973 ; and there is very little doubt that if the ncccs-
sary capital could be obtained to erect suitable winding and
Pumping machinery, and to meet other incidental expenses,
*he mine would again rank among the gold-producers of the
Strict.
It is the opinion of many of the most experienced miners of
e district (and in this they arc supported by Dr. Hector and
1 r - S. H. Cox) that at a greater depth the present tufaceous
s midstone rock, in which the gold is now found, will cease, and
at a slate formation will then be penetrated, in which, in all
Probability, the gold will be found more evenly distributed, and


that the reef system will be more definite, and of greater extent.*
Here, again, though there is no similarity in the character of
the reefing country, the experience of Victoria may prove valu-
able, as showing the quality of quartz taken from the deeper
levels. In the official reports of the Mining Registrars of
that colony for the first quarter of the year 1880 the following
particulars are furnished :
District.
Name of Company.
Tons of
Quartz
Crushed.
Depth of Shafts
in Feet.
Average Yield
per Ton.
Oz. dwt.
gr.
Ballarat
Band of Iiopo and Al-
bion Consols
3,442
1,090
0
19
11-05
Clunes
New North Clunes ..
2,119
1,105 to 1,305
0
6
16-70
Sandhurst ..
Eureka Extended
1,344
1,740
1,200 to 1,280.
1
9
15-78
m . ,
Shenandoah
1,312 to 1,492
0
13
3-78
*
Ellesmere ..
837
1,320 and up-
wards
0
7
0-64
New Chum Consoli-
dated
581
1,340
0
10
1-08
„ . .
Now Chum Railway..
3,822
1,400
0
7
1-81
ft
Lansell’s (No. 220) ..
1,123
840 to 1,300..
0
11
11-17
ft • •
Old Chum ..
1,269
1,400
0
5
15-13
»
New Chum and Vic-
toria
2,454
51,500 and 1,600
0
6
4-90
ft • •
North Old Chum • ..
1,758
1,550 and 1,650
0
4
16-73
ft • •
Victory and Pandora..
1,072
1,860
0
G
1907
ft • •
Unity
457
800 to 1,300..
0
5
22-73
ft • ♦
Lansell’s (No. 180) ..
3,956
1,600 and 1,800
1
1
2-42
it • •
Catherine Reef United
871
1,000
0
10
17-33
-
York and Durham . .
370
900
0
13
1007
Large areas have been occupied at the Thames at different
periods by companies and parties of miners, who have in turn
surrendered or given up their holdings, owing to various causes,
* Mr. Cox, who visited the district in 1882, concluded his report: “ Nothin?
I have seen tends in any way to limit the occurrence of gold in depth, but rather
should I expect that quite as rich deposits as have yet been found will again
occur in the deeper workings. Moreover, the evidence I have been able to gather
leads me to suppose that the occurrence of auriferous rooks in depths will not ‘ , ®.
limited by the boundary of what is now known as the auriferous formation, hut
that they will be traced down into the slates at places where the phj'sical cha-
racters of these rocks are favourable for the formation of reefs, and for the occur-
rence of gold.”—“ Geological Reports,” 1883, p. 45. .
In commenting on Mr. Cox’s report, Dr. Hector remarked: “ The genera
result of his work has confirmed my opinion that there is no reason to apprehend
any falling-off in the productiveness of the reefs in the deep levels; but thatr
subject to the foregoing conditions, in all probability, they will continue to prove
auriferous to as great depths as it will be practicable to work them.”—lntroduc-
tion, “ Geological Reports,” p. xv., 18G3.


but chiefly through exhaustion of capital. Prom the Ist January,
1872, to the 31st December, 1885, there were about 280 sur-
renders or lapses. The areas now occupied are worked, with
very few exceptions, from tunnels; and, though not equal to the
Thames golden era, there is still a considerable yield of the
precious metal. Very few of the mines have been prospected
to any great depth, and low levels are not likely to he put in
for many years to come, unless concerted action is taken by the
owners of adjoining mines. The extension of the Moanataiari
tunnel would prove the reefs towards Punga Plat, at a depth of
900 ft. to 1,500 ft. below the surface; hut that cannot he effected
unless capitalists take it up, as the cost of driving has been
estimated at not less than £2 per foot. A shaft sunk on the
hilly portion of the Township of Shortland, known as Block
XXVII., would prove the reefs running through the Una,
Murphy’s Hill, and Hape Creek; and it is probable that this
work will be undertaken, as endeavours are being made to float
a company in England for that purpose. The Dart and other
mines at Hape Creek have ceased operations owing to the heavy
cost of pumping and consequent exhaustion of capital; hut
should a pumping-shaft he sunk on Block XXVII., all the Hape
Creek claims would he drained, and work could then he resumed.
The mines at Ohinemuri and Te Aroha are chiefly worked
from tunnels. There does not appear to he any present need
for deeper sinking, unless at Waihi, where the lodes will shortly
f* worked at lower levels than can he drained from tunnels.
PROSPECTING.—EOADS AND TRACKS.
Prospecting might he advantageously carried on by the use
°f rock-drills in all parts of the Hauraki District; hut the most
valuable assistance which can be rendered to the mining industry
is by putting the roads and tracks into good order, and by
cutting fresh tracks. A great deal has already been done in
fiat direction, though with every fresh development there are
further needs. In the Counties of Coromandel, Thames, Ohine-
BaUr i, and Piako, £28,872 was expended during the four years
en( % the 31st March, 1886, in the construction of roads and
fracks. Of that amount the Government contributed £19,182,
ail d the local bodies the remainder.
19


DIVIDEND-PAYING MINES.
The ores found in the Thames Peninsula have been exceed-
ingly rich. Hunt’s Shotover claim gave such large returns that
the four men -who originally held it—Messrs. Hunt, Cobley,
White, and Clarkson—are said to have netted ,£40,000 apiece;
■whilst the shareholders in the company subsequently formed re-
ceived £15,120 in dividends. The Long Drive Company paid
the fortunate shareholders (amongst whom was PI.R.H. the Duke
of Edinburgh) £82,000 in a few years. The Manukau Company,
■which had one of the richest shoots of gold recorded in the
annals of quartz-mining, paid £15,750. The Golden Crown
Company, irrespective of the large amount divided by the original
shareholders, paid £141,904. The Caledonian Company paid
about £500,000 during the first year of its existence. , The
Moanataiari Company, from whose mine over 10,000 oz. of gold
were got in one week, paid £117,993; Nonpareil Company,
£14,670; Kuranui Company, £41,277; All Nations Company,
£41,445; Old Whau Company, £11,650; Cure Company,
£17,000. In the golden era of the Thames, when 15,000
miners were scattered all over the hills and gullies, there were
many other rich mines, such as the Alburnia, Dixon’s, and
Middle Star (in the Monataiari and Punga Flat District), and
the Queen of Beauty, City of London, Queen of the May, Bird
In Hand, and Bright Smile (in the Waio—karaka District),
which paid large dividends, of which there are no records. In
later times the New Prince Imperial Company paid £60,750 m
dividends in three years. The claim had been allowed to remain
idle for several years, and was sacrificed by the original owners
for £Boo—the value of the plant. The new company had only
expended £450 when a rich run of gold was met with, and
followed to a depth of 500 ft. The Waiotalii Company, though
it has had no brilliant returns like some of the other mines, has
paid £IB,OOO in dividends. The Cambria Company', whose mine
is now looked upon as one of the principal mainstays of the
Thames, started in December, 1884, on what was practically virgin
ground, and paid £48,825 in dividends in one year, the lucky
shareholders receiving £1 11s. per share in dividends for an out-
lay of Is. 2d. per share. The average yield was about 3oz. p er
ton. The Waitekauri Company, at Ohinemuri, came on a very


rich piece of ground (still remembered in tbe district as tlie “ big
blow”), and in a short time paid over £4,000 in dividends.
QUARTZ CRUSHED AND YIELD OF GOLD.
The following tables furnish some interesting statistics as
to the yield of gold at Coromandel, Thames, and Te Aroha:
Coromandel.
Year.
Quartz Crushed.*
Yield of Gold.*
Tons.
Oz.
1878-79
2,785
9,071
1879-80
1,296
5,190
1880-81
720
4,9G0
1881-82 ..
3,447
7 y
1882-83
2,907
7,577
1883-84
1,042
4,018
1884-85
456
3, UUi
1885-86
550
3,382
Totals ..
••
13,203
44,747
Principal Mines at Coromandel.
Name of Company.
Time at Work.
Quartz
Crushed.
Yield
of Gold.
Value.
Dividends.
Tons.
Ounces.
£
£
Kapanga
Jan. 1, 1872, to
Dec. 31, 1885
4,564
6,124
17,050
1,575
Success
June 12, 1880, to
Deo. 31, 1885
21
900
2,200
Telephone ..
Nov. 1, 1875, to
Dec. 31, 1885
5,050
20,364
01,092
21,245
Tokatea
Jan. 1, 1880, to
Dec. 31, 1885
4,012
10,046
28,034
18,500
Thames.
Year.
Quartz Crushed *
Tailings Treated.*
Yield of Gold.*
1878-
1879-
1880-
1881-82
1882-
1883-
1884-
1885- ;;
Totals ■..
Tons cwt. lb.
41,917 G 71
33,017 3 99
32,404 14 105
30,098 0 91
25,867 2 58
34,228 0 41
31,495 17 33
35,998 2 4G
Tons cwt. lb.
10,278 8 86
10,135 15 58
13,128 7 32
12,900 5 3
7,185 10 28
0,832 8 17
4,501 3 0
5,241 17 10
Oz. dwt. gr.
57,200 17 3
59,575 10 0
53,154 2 5
45,803 19 0
43,310 12 4
54,873 14 8
37,705 1 7
01,539 14 0
205,445 8 90
82,209 15 10
205,445 8 90
347,715 4 0
413,109 10 15
* o 31st March, 1860.


Te Aroha.
Company.
No. of
Years at
Work.
Quartz
Crushed.*
Yield of Gold.t
Canadian
4
Tons.
883
Oz. dwt. gr.
345 0 0
Colonist
4
7,493
3,947 6 0
Inverness
3
251
202 7 0
May Queen ..
4
10G
244 14 0
New Kind
4
12,289
10,204 4 0
Premier
4
1,333
1,115 5 0
Weraliiko
4
450
376 11 0
Waiorongomai
3
313
273 17 0
Totals ..
••
23,118
1G,709 3 0
* To 31st December, 188 G.
LATE YIELDS.
The yields during the past two years, though not as rich as
formerly, have been very good, as will be seen from the follow-
ing returns :
District.
Year 1884-85.
Year 1885-8G.
Tons of Quartz.
Yield in Ounces.
Tons of Quartz.
Yield
in Ounces.
3,382
61,539
4,489
Coromandel
Thames
Te Aroha ..
Totals..
456
31,496
11,041
3,201
37,715
9,50G
550
35,998
6,552
42,993
50,422
43,100
69,410
COMPLEX MINERALS.
The follawing extracts are taken from Professor Blacks
report of his visit to the Hauraki Peninsula :
“ The silver in the silver-hearing stone of Waihi and Karanga-
liake does not exist in the stone in the state of metallic silver;
hut chiefly as the greyish-black sulphide and variously-coloure
chloride, and in these states of combination is not visible at a
as silver. Most of the gold in the silver-bearing ore exists as a
blackish sulphide of gold, probably in combination with the
sulphide of silver, and thus escapes the notice of the miner who
is prospecting on the old lines. It is only when the gold an
silver are brought out either by the fire-assay process or by t
wet chemical processes that the value of the stone is know 11.


Much stone on the Waihi and Karangahake, containing gold and
silver worth from <6lO to JOIOO per ton of stone, has heen over-
looked for years. . . . The quartz at ICarangahake has a
structural peculiarity, which leads me to think that most of the
silver-hearing stone is of hot-water origin.
“While staying in the Te Arolia District I visited the prin-
cipal mines in the neighbourhood, including the New hind, the
New Era, the Galena, at Waiorongomai; and the Champion lode,
at the head of the Tui Creek, and about 2,000 ft. above sea-level.
In the Champion Mine I saw stone carrying gold, silver, mercury,
copper, lead, iron, and zinc, the gold chiefly in the free state, the
other metals being all combined with sulphur as sulphides, with
part of the lead also as sulphate. The mercury sulphide was in
this lode a little apart from the other metallic sulphides, and was
of a light porous texture: it was mixed with a good deal of oxide
of iron, and had the appearance of having heen formed by the
agency of water, probably at a high temperature, and carrying up
sulphuretted hydrogen, which, acting on mercury in any form,
would convert that metal into the cinnabar which we saw here.
Mr. Cornes and the other members of the party were much
interested in the simple tests by which these metals can be dis-
tinguished side by side in such complex ores. It is the abund-
ance of such complex minerals on the whole of the Thames
Peninsula that makes the establishment of a thorough-going and
properly-equipped school of mines so great a necessity on the
Thames. Without some technical instruction in the methods of
testing these minerals, and of extracting the useful metals from
them, the miners and prospectors arc working in the dark, as the
Petals cannot he seen by the naked eye and cannot be saved by
the usual battery processes. Every variety and mixture of ore
re fluires to be treated according to its composition, and a process
that is well enough suited for extracting gold from clean milling
fluartz will not reach the gold or silver hound up as we found
them here and at Karangaliake. We also visited the plant which
Messrs. Fraser and Ferguson were erecting for the extraction of
the gold and silver of the metallic sulphides of the district,
plant is on an American principle for dealing with silver
or es similar to those to be operated on here. The stone is to
crushed by Fraser and Tinne’s patent rollers. The crushed


materials are then admitted into Maekay’s patent cast-iron pans,
where, after undergoing various grinding, rubbing, separating,
and concentrating operations with hot water, mercury, common
salt, and other inexpensive chemicals, the silver and gold are-
found in the form of an amalgam with the mercury, which is
retorted in the usual way. The process is a modification of one
that, with several others, has been successfully at work for years
in Nevada.
“At Waiorongomai Mr. H. Adams took me through what is
undoubtedly the best quartz-crushing battery and tailings-plant
I have seen in the colony. It is a splendidly-housed forty-head
stamper-battery, furnished in all its details with the most ap-
proved appliances for quartz-crushing and gold-saving of the
present day. It is a self-feeding battery. When the stone is
low in the boxes the disc affixed to the stamper-rod, in its de-
scent, gives a blow to the top of an upright, that in its turn
communicates motion to the board that shuts off the stuff, and
thus admits more materials into the battery-boxes. The ma-
chinery is driven by a splendid supply of water, and the stampers
are, by special mechanical contrivances which I have not seen
elsewhere, kept under easy and perfect control throughout their
whole extent. There are about twenty berdans at work in the
battery itself, besides thirty-two others at a lower level in the
tailings-plant, situated about five chains from the battery. The
tailings-plant being conveniently situated at a level lower than
that of the battery, there is no difficulty in conveying the tail-
ings by water down an open sluice to the lower berdans. The
self-feeding contrivances, as seen in operation at the Waiorongo-
mai battery, were such that one boy could manage the whole of
this part of the work, which otherwise would require the constant
attention of several men. The stone is broken up and passed
through screens before being admitted into the feeders, so as to
reduce it to a suitable size. This battery, like all of its kind, is
admirably suited for extracting the gold from clean milli n o
quartz comparatively free from complex metallic sulphides. I*
is, however, in my opinion, not capable of extracting all the gold
or much of the silver of the rich gold- and silver-bearing stone
found in some parts of the Waihi, Karangahake, and Tc Aroka;
and hence the necessity of importing into the colony processes for


dealing with these minerals which have been found efficient in
treating similar minerals in other countries —Nevada, Mexico,
Spain, Saxony, New South Wales, &c.
“ During my stay at Coromandel I visited the Success Mine,
on the Tokatea, and was taken through the workings by Mr. P.
Beid, the manager. A striking peculiarity of this among paying
mines is the narrowness of the reef. The width where I saw it
varied from a quarter of an inch up to four or five inches. It
is also remarkable for the large proportion of carbonate of lime
in the stone, the reef in some places being, indeed, nothing else
than pure crystallized Iceland spar, of a very clean character,
and containing thin plates of gold imbedded in the crystals.
The formation was such as I had never seen before, and the
occurrence of gold in calcspar crystals I had not even heard of.
Mr. Reid showed me depressions in the walls of the reef, from
which he informed me large plates of gold had been taken.
The Tokatea Mine is about five miles from Coromandel. The
tunnel is about 2,000 ft. in length, passing partly through hard
slate, to drive through which cost in some places as much as £6
Per foot. In the mine—which is in one place about 850 ft.
under the surface—we saw large patches of splendid sparkling
crystals of clear quartz, as well as some fine specimens of crys-
tallized calcspar. All the quartz that I saw in the Coromandel
District contains a good deal of arsenic, chiefly combined with
non and sulphur as arsenical pyrites, but occasionally large
pieces of the metal itself, weighing several ounces, are met with.
One piece of metallic arsenicum which I received from a miner
weighed about two pounds. In the Thames and Reef ton
Districts, although there is a good deal of arsenic in the stone,
antimony is, I believe, more troublesome. At Recfton the diffi-
culty is met by crushing the stone without the use of mercury
ln the battery and tables, and catching the gold on the blanket-
boxes.”
TOKATEA MINE, COROMANDEL.
The Tokatea Company commenced operations in May, 1870,
with a capital of £IOO,OOO in 20,000 shares of £5 each. No
calls were made until May, 1878; but dividends amounting to
3s. 7*d. per share were paid. Since 1878 capital amounting


to 10s. per share has been called up, the cost of putting in the
long low-level tunnel exceeding the amount won from the mine.
The mine is now operated upon from a tunnel upwards of
3,000 ft. in length, which opens up the reef from the outcrop on
the top of the main range to a depth of 800 ft. To work this
drive the company imported two of the National Rock Com-
pany’s drills, at a cost, including erection at the mine, of £BOO.
The motive-power used was compressed air, the engine at-
tached to the company’s fourteen-stamper battery, situated at
the mouth of the tunnel, being used to drive the compressor,
no quartz having been crushed during the prosecution of this
undertaking. This tunnel has cost the company upwards of'
£6,000, and is known as the No. 7 Level. No less than six other
tunnels have been put in—200 ft., 340 ft., 480 ft., 800 ft., 950 ft.,
and 1,500 ft. respectively. A very ingenious contrivance was
used for raising quartz from the No. 4 Level to the company’s
hopper, a distance of about 200 ft. The water flowing from the
No. 3 Level was used for the purpose of filling a tank w r hich ran
on a steeply-inclined endless-w r ire tramway. When full this
tank was released and by its weight brought up an empty tank,
to which was attached a truck full of quartz. The first tank
was then emptied and the process repeated as the work
proceeded.
KAPANGA MINE, COROMANDEL.
In 1862 a claim was taken up at Coromandel by Robert
Kelly and party. After working the ground on shares for some
time a company was formed, one or two adjoining holdings
being taken in, and the whole area became known as the
Kapanga Mine. It was successfully worked for five years, large
dividends were paid, and the shaft was sunk to a depth of 170 ft.
It was then found necessary to either erect more powerful
machinery or devise some other means for further sinking on
the run of gold. Accordingly, a small engine was erected at
the bottom of the shaft, and a winze was sunk on the
gold-bearing leader to a depth of 40ft. Everything looked
prosperous until one day the small engine broke down and the
winze had to be abandoned. This was in 1868, just after the
opening of the Thames Goldfield, and, as the prospects there






seemed so good, the mine was abandoned and the machinery was
sold and removed to the Thames. In 1871 an English com-
pany, under the local management of Mr. James Thomas, took
up the mine, erected powerful machinery, sank a new shaft, and
the mine has heen working almost continuously ever since,
nearly £IOO,OOO having heen expended in work and machinery
by this company, whilst only about £16,000 has heen won.
The company having expended all its capital, it was re-formed, and
the mine has heen placed under the management of Mr. Erancis
Hodge, who has started work with fresh capital. The engine-
shaft is now down 427 ft. from the surface, and is 14ft. long by
Bft. wide. The mine is drained by a 24in.-cylinder 10ft.-
stroke rotary Cornish engine. The shaft is sunk so as to in-
tersect the rich Kapanga Reef 70ft. from the present bottom, and
a very rich leader known as Scotty’s at a further depth of 110 ft.
The hearing of the reefs is about north and south, with a
westerly underlie of about lin 1. A steam-power battery of
ten head of stampers, with the necessary berdans, quicksilver-
tables, blanket-strakes, &c., is erected and owned by the com-
pany; and, should the reefs when cut at the intended low levels
—namely, 497 ft. and 607 ft. respectively—give anything like
their former rich returns, outside capital will again flow into the
district.
SOUTH KAPANGA MINE, COROMANDEL.
A new company has been formed to work the old Yon
Tempsky Mine, and has started vigorously. It is putting down
an engine-shaft in hope of cutting the old White Swan leader,
from which in the early days of the field rich specimens were
taken; but the ground had to be abandoned on account of there
being too much water. It is hoped that the pumping-machinery
t° he erected by this new company will enable the mine to be
forked profitably.
SUCCESS MINE, COROMANDEL.
The Success Mine is situated on the main range, about two
toiles farther south than the Tokatea. Operations were com-
menced in June, 1880, and £1,575 has been paid in dividends.
“ e mine is worked from four drives or levels, the lowest of


■which—2soft. from the top of the range—is 750 ft. long, 250 ft.
of which is driven on the reef. The country is very hard sand-
stone rock. Gold is found in a carbonate-of-lime formation in
solid leaf, but only occasionally in ordinary quartz specimens,
some of which, however, contained one-half gold. The leader
is very small and patchy. Twenty-one tons of dirt were crushed
for gold to the value of £2,200.
TELEPHONE MINE, COROMANDEL.
The Telephone Company’s mine is situated on the low hills
on the shore of the Coromandel Harbour. The mine is better
known as the Beach, and includes the old Green Harp, Golden
Pah, and Venus ground. It is worked to a depth of 180 ft.
from a small shaft just below high-water mark. Large quan-
tities of gold were taken from the mine by former owners —in
all, worth about £BO,OO0 —and £32,000 was paid in dividends.
The mine was first opened in 1871, and lias been continuously
worked with more or less vigour ever since; but nothing has
been done below water-level during the last two years, the mine
being worked by small parties of tributors only. A very good
pumping- and crushing-plant is on the ground, but, owing to the
smallness of the shaft, has not been used for some time. A
larger shaft being necessary to work the property, and the local
owners not being able to raise the required capital in Auckland,
a company has been formed in London, and, after prolonged
negotiations, the mine and plant are to be handed over. Work
will be carried on in an energetic manner by the new pro-
prietary, under the title of the Coromandel Gold Company, and
with every prospect of success.
ROYAL OAK MINE, COROMANDEL.
The Royal Oak Company commenced operations on the 7th
September, 1871, and has been continuously working ever since.
Dividends to the amount of £G,210 have been paid, the calls
made amounting to £5,325. The mine adjoins the Tokatea, and
is worked in much the same manner, by a series of drives. The
company docs not possess a plant, the quartz obtained from the
mine being crushed at the Tokatea Company’s battery, or sent
down the hill to the Arrow crushing-plant.


[?] UNION BEACH MINE COROMANDEL




MOANATAIAEI MINE, THAMES.
The Moanataiari Company occupies the largest area of land
owned by one company in the Hauraki Mining District. It
consists of a number of smaller claims, originally worked under
different owners, hut which have been gradually acquired by this
company and incorporated with its holding. Among the best-
known of these small claims were the Nonpareil, Waitemata,
Morning Star, Heldt’s, Pai-Mariri, Homeward Bound, Eureka,
Point Russell, Dawn of Hope, Red White and Blue, Messenger’s,
and Golden Age, all of which, in the early days of the goldfield,
yielded large quantities of gold, each claim being worked from
its own shaft or tunnel. As the gold most easily obtainable
became exhausted, this disconnected and expensive mode of
working the ground proved unprofitable, and had to give way to
a more systematic and comprehensive system, by which large
areas of land could he worked from one common or central shaft
or tunnel. This was gradually effected by the various mines
becoming one by one absorbed into the larger and more power-
ful company. A main tunnel, Bft. by 6ft. 6in., was commenced
by the company, in conjunction with a few adjoining mines, at
a point near the beach, about 22ft. above the sea-level, and 1,500 ft.
distant from the boundary of Moanataiari Mine, several claims
being opened up by it before it reached the company’s mine,
tunnel, which is now solely the property of the Moanataiari
Company, was driven for the purpose of forming a main
' adit, from which cross-cuts could be entered to intersect
ibe numerous lodes in the company’s property. The tunnel
bas been extended a distance of 2,800 ft. in a direct line,
an d numerous cross-cuts have been driven from it. The
Principal ones are: (Ist.) The Nonpareil Cross-cut (south-
aasterly), a distance of 1,200 ft., which enabled portions of
*be company’s mine, known as the Morning Star, Redan,
Nonpareil, and Waitemata sections, to be worked; and con-
nections were made from this cross-cut with the upper work-
lnSs - The reefs met with were the All Nations, No. 9 (very
*ch), Wallace’s, Heldt’s, Morning Star, and Nonpareil—varying
b) thickness from Ift. to sft., and all payable. (2nd.) The
riorth-west Cross-cut, about 300 ft. in length, intersecting No. 3,
2, and No. 1 Reefs; besides various branch veins. These


reefs have been worked with payable results from the tunnel-
level to the surface—an average height of 250 ft. The tunnel
was then continued a long distance without a cross-cut being
driven, mainly by the use of the rock-drill. A cross-cut, 426 ft.
in length, was driven south-easterly from the far end of the
tunnel, intersecting the Point Russell, Golden Age, and Waiotalii
main reefs. A connection was then made with the old work-
ings of the Point Russell Mine by means of a rise from the
tunnel and by a winze in the Point Russell Reef—a distance,
vertically, of nearly 300 ft. The Golden Age and Waiotalii Reefs
remain still unprospected at this level. A most extensive
system of drives and stopes is in existence at this portion of the
mine, by means of which the reefs and leaders have been followed
up and taken out. Prom the floor of the tunnel a shaft was sunk
218 ft., and a connection from the same point made with the sur-
face, 172 ft. above. The winding through the shaft is done by
means of a steam-engine at the surface. Three levels have been
opened out from this shaft below the tunnel-level—viz., 80ft.,
150 ft., and 210 ft. In cross-cutting south-east on the 80ft. level,
No. 9 Reef was cut, and was comparatively poor where intersected.
Driving was continued north-cast on the reef, and it gradually
increased in thickness and richness, culminating in what was
known as the " Moanataiari rich patch; ” and in a fortnight
specimens that were obtained, weighing less than 2h tons, yielded
14,6000 z. of gold. A cross-cut was also driven north-west, and
the leaders met with in the North-west Cross-cut in the tunnel-
level were intersected, and yielded fair returns. The turn lower
levels have not been prospected so thoroughly as the upper levels*
nor have they, so far, proved as payable. Water is at this depth
a serious obstacle, there being no pumping-gear in connection
with the shaft, and the Big Pump appears to only partially
drain the ground, there being no direct communication.
The tribute system is carried on to a very large extent m
this mine, and numerous parties of men have from time to time
met with considerable success in working small leaders which
the company did not deem of sufficient importance to work on its
own account. The company’s present operations are limited to
prospecting in the foot-wall, or eastern side, of No. 9 Reef-
The celebrated Cambria Reef dips into the Nonpareil section o


the company’s mine, but has only been prospected to a limited
extent, as at the level opened the sinuous course of the reef, which
is sometimes on one side and sometimes on the other side of the
company’s boundary, impedes the work. At a deeper level it is
expected that the reef will be entirely in the company’s ground;
but until that is reached prospecting cannot be done to any ex-
tent. The company possesses a battery of forty stampers, a single
stamp for crushing specimens, a full complement of berdans, and
other gold-saving appliances. The battery was formerly worked
by steam-power, but a few years since a change was effected by
which water was applied, a Pelton wheel, driven by water supplied
from the county race, furnishing the motive-power.
THE BIG PUMP.
The “ Big Pump ” is the name given to the drainage-works
carried on by the Thames Drainage Board. The pumping-
engine is what is known as a bull engine, and is a 250-horse-
power single direct-acting low-pressure pumping-engine, work-
ing at a stroke of Bft. The cylinder is 82in. in diameter, and
is fixed directly over the shaft, the piston-rod being connected
to the top end of the massive pump-rods. The valves of the
engine are actuated by tappets and levers, receiving their
motion through plug-rods connected with the main beam of the
balance-bob, the speed of the engine being regulated by two
cataracts. The pit or shaft is 650 ft. deep, the size at the top is
12ft. by Bft., and the lowest level is at a depth of 640 ft. The
Pumps are of the Cornish type, and consist of two plunger-
PUmps, each 24in. in diameter, and two draw-lifts, each 25in.
m diameter, all fitted with the ordinary Cornish clack-valves.
The lowest draw-lift pumps the water from the bottom of the
shaft and discharges it into a cistern at the 500 ft. level; the
aext draw-lift pumps from the cistern at this level, and dis-
charges into a cistern at the 400 ft. level. At this level a plunger-
Pump 24in. in diameter is fixed, and pumps the water into a
mstern at the 200 ft. level; here another plunger the same size
ls fixed, and lifts the water from this cistern to the surface,
whence it is discharged and flows into the sea. Where the
plungers are fixed the shaft is widened out to 22ft. by 12ft. to
room for the massive timbers and pit-work. The pump


rods are 20in. square, held together by strong iron strapping-
plates and bolts. A large chamber is cut out of the rock, 300 ft.
down the shaft, to make room for a massive balance-bob
(similar to the one on the surface, hut more massive and
stronger) : this is connected to the pump-rods, and works there.
At the 100 ft. level a powerful hydraulic ram is fixed for lifting
the heavy pump columns or rods when required. The pumps
are capable of lifting 84,000 gallons per hour, hut at the present
time are only required to deliver 33,600 gallons per hour. The
machinery on the surface consists, besides the pumping-engine,
of one 204 m .-diameter-cylinder high-pressure horizontal winding-
engine, 4ft. Gin. stroke, with the necessary winding-gear and two
6in. flat ropes; one lOin.-cylinder 2ft.-stroke horizontal high-
pressure capstan-engine, with powerful capstan-gear, and a 15in.
round rope, used for drawing the pump-rods when changing
buckets, and any other heavy lifting in the shaft; a 7in.-
cylinder vertical high-pressure engine for working the hydraulic,
driving fans, &c. Steam is supplied from five Cornish boilers,
three of which are 30ft. long and 6ft. Gin. in diameter; the other
two are 20ft. long and 6ft. in diameter.
DEEP LEVEL CEOSS MINE, THAMES.
The Deep Level Cross Company’s property comprises 34
acres, situated at Grahamstown, extending from high-water mark
on the west to the base of the hills on the east, and takes in
the land formerly held and worked in smaller claims by the
Tookey, Imperial Crown, Golden Gate, and other companies,
all of which yielded a considerable quantity of gold from their
upper levels. Owing to the great expense involved in drain-
ing these mines, each of which owned a pumping-plant and
shaft of its own, the smaller mines were eventually forced to
suspend operations, and the various claims, one by one, fell int°
the .hands of the Imperial Crown Company, which sunk the
Big Pump Shaft, and erected the pumping- and winding-
machinery. But this company, while draining its own mine, had
also to drain all the surrounding claims, and exhausted d s
capital before it had to any great extent prospected its ground at
the lower levels. Eventually operations ceased, and the com-
pany’s property was transferred to the Southern Cross Company*


which has since become absorbed in the present Deep Level Cross
Company. From the Big Pump shaft (sunk to a depth of
650 ft.) the 640£t. level has been opened out, and a large amount
of driving has been done from time to time during the last
eighteen years. The south tunnel at this level is in a distance
of 1,350 ft., and is connected near the end of the tunnel by a
winze with the company’s former workings at the 450 ft. level of
the new Prince Imperial Mine. Payable gold was obtained at
this level in the Prince Imperial reefs, but nothing payable has
been found below this in the Deep Level Cross Company’s mine,
although some of the reefs cut through at the 640 ft. level still
continue strong, going down; and colours of gold were seen in
the Prince Imperial No. 2 Reef at this level. Other drives have
been put in from the 64-oft. level of the Big Pump Shaft—one
northwards about 1,300 ft., and one east 800 ft., and one to the
■west 300 ft. —but no discoveries of importance were made in any
of them. Several reefs and leaders have been intersected at
this level, but have not been driven on to any great extent.
The class of country at this level, in this part of the field, is
not considered by practical men to be favourable for rich
deposits of gold; but, in the opinion of many who ought to
be qualified to judge, by further sinking the shaft a few
hundred feet, gold-bearing strata would in all probability be
reached. The company has spent a large amount of capital
ln developing the mine, but, unfortunately, so far, has been
unsuccessful in discovering any reefs of a permanently payable
oharacter. Calls could only, in consequence, be collected wdth
great difficulty, and the directors were reluctantly compelled to
suspend some of their prospecting-operations and reduce the
Uumber of men at work. During the past year eighteen men
have been regularly employed in the mine, eight of whom
''rere tributors. The reefs and leaders worked by the tri-
butors varied in thickness from 2in. to 18in., and the mode of
forking has been by the usual process of driving and stoping.
The following figures will show that the quartz crushed from this
recently gave a high percentage of gold; but this fact does
n °t establish the payable character of the reefs or leaders,- as a
great deal depends on their size and the facility or otherwise
With which the quartz can be broken out. During the year


1886 the company crushed 392 tons of quartz for a return of
5780 z. of gold, the value of -which was £1,582; and the tri-
hutors crushed 127 tons for 232|0z. of gold, valued at £625.
OLD CALEDONIAN MINE,' THAMES.
The mine now held and worked by this company was taken
up as a claim in 1867, immediately after the field was thrown
open for gold-mining. It then consisted of about two acres of
land; hut the area has been increased from time to time by the
acquisition of adjoining claims, notably the Otago and Red
Queen, and now contains about nine acres. In 1868 the owners
formed themselves into a registered company, called the Cale-
donian Company, which continued to work the claim till the
year 1879, when the mine was sold by order of the Thames
County Council for the sum of £2,000; hut it was bought in
by the same proprietors, who have since carried on operations
under the name of the Old Caledonian Company (capital, £12,000,
in 12,000 £1 shares). In the year 1875 the Government ad-
vanced £50,000 to the companies concerned in the main drainage
scheme, for draining, by means of the Big Pump, the principal
mines in the vicinity of the Thames foreshore. Some of the
companies interested (of which the Caledonian was one) became
security for the repayment of the money, and mortgaged their
holdings to the Government. On the abolition of the provinces
in 1877, and the election of the Thames County Council, the
Government handed over to that body the securities held by
them; and the Council, about two years subsequently, sold,
under its powers of sale as mortgagee, this company’s claim,
as well as the other claims similarly held as security—viz., the
Golden Crown, Tookey, and Imperial Crown. For some time
after operations were commenced much difficulty was experienced
in contending with the large quantity of water that was en-
countered in sinking the shaft, and which was not successfully
overcome till the erection of the Big Pump in 1870. There are
two main reefs running through the company’s ground, their
general course being east and west. There are large numbers
of leaders branching out from both walls of these reefs, and
good gold is generally obtained where these branches intersect
the main reefs. In 1870 rich gold was struck in the adjoining


mine, the Golden Crown, on No. 1 Reef, at the No. 1 or 203 ft.
Level. The point at which it was met with was within 10ft. of the
Caledonian boundary. On being followed up into the latter claim
it proved exceedingly rich, and within twelve months £553,410 was.
paid in dividends by the company. Some of the leaders recently
worked have proved very profitable, 125 loads of quartz from a
leader known as Rickard’s leader having yielded 3700 z. of gold,
and 390 loads of quartz from another portion of the same leader
gave 5410 z. of gold. The mine is worked from a main shaft,
from which also several of the adjoining claims are worked—viz.,
the Larnach, the Kurunui, and portions of the Moanataiari and
the Toolcey section of the Deep Level Cross Mine. The sill of
the shaft is about 90ft. above high-water mark, its total depth
being 474 ft. There are four levels opened out from the shaft,
viz.: No. 1, at 203 ft.; No. 2, at 259 ft.; No. 3, at 347 ft.; and
No. 4, at 474 ft. from the sill of the shaft. Steam-power is used
for winding, the cylinder of the engine being 12in., with 3ft..
stroke, and the Cornish boiler is 30ft. in length and sft. Gin. in
diameter. A very large amount of work has been done in the
mine, and the ground is well opened up hy drives and cross-cuts,
especially at No. 3 Level, where a cross-cut has been driven
towards the Shotover shaft a distance of 1,500 ft., and another
eross-cut branching off from this in an easterly direction, towards
the Larnach claim, is 800 ft. in length. Another extends in a
south-easterly direction, towards the Red Queen and old Central
Italy claims; while another starts from the shaft in a southerly
direction, towards the Cure, Manukau, and Waiotahi Mines, the
length of which is about 800 ft. The total length driven in the
various cross-cuts and main levels at the No. 3 Level is about
d,500ft. ; but at the No. 4 or lowest level only about 500 ft. of
driving has been done.
WAIOTAHI MINE, THAMES.
This mine is situated near the Thames foreshore, in the
ce ntre of the gold-producing mines in that locality. In the
days of the field it was considered quite an outside mine,
an d- was off anything like payable gold for years, at a time
vvhen most of the adjoining mines on the north, such as the
Golden Crown, Caledonian’, Shotover, and others, were obtaining
20


yery rich gold. In 1873 the present management commenced
operations on the surface, and has followed and traced the gold
to the present workings, 300 ft. below the sea-level. Up to that
date, however, horse-power was used for winding, and a whip for
hauling the dirt. A donkey-engine was then erected, and was
used until the No. 1 Level (which was 100 ft. below the creek-
level) was worked out in the year 1875 •, and to sink for another
level it became necessary to get a new and more powerful winding-
plant. This was done, and the present machinery, costing over
£I,OOO, was erected. Sinking was again started, and the No. 2
Level was opened up. In September, 1877, the first dividend was
paid, and from that year to the present time the company has
been one of the most regular gold-producing and small-dividend
paying mines on the field. The area of the ground is 15f
acres, and forty men are constantly employed, the working-
expenses averaging £SOO per month. There are four shafts —
one main or working-shaft, and three air-shafts. The main
workings are at No. 3 Level. The No. 4 Level is just now being
opened up, and payable quartz has been found in No. 5 Keef
and in various leaders. Upwards of 22,000 tons of quartz have
been raised and crushed at the company’s battery, yielding nearly
30,0000 z. of gold, valued at £81,821, of which £18,750 has been
paid in dividends since 1877. The company has two sixteen-
horse-power engines, supplied with steam by a boiler 30ft. long
and 6ft. in diameter. One engine drives the crushing-plant
(twenty-one heads of stampers and berdans), and the other
the winding-plant.
The following extract from the report of Mr. Herbert Cox,
F.C.S., F.G.S., on the goldfields of the Cape Colville Peninsula
in 1882, accurately describes the peculiar features of the Waio-
tahi Mine : “ In the Waiotalii Mine the reefs have generally a
N.E.—SAV. strike, with a NAY. underlie, and the main reef,
known as No. 5, has been continuous from the upper level to the
present one, about 300 ft. below the surface. The other reefs
which have been worked are chiefly foot-wall leaders or droppers?
which traverse the country more vertically than the main reef, and
these are the ones which have proved the most remunerative.
There are many points of interest in connection with this mine
which the mining manager, Mr. 'Smith, has been at some


trouble to point out to me. First o£ all, Mr. Smitli is working
numerous small veins which range from one-sixteenth of an inch
to half an inch in thickness, and these are at times exceedingly
rich. They are chiefly foot-wall leaders from other reefs, the
whole forming a network of veins, which are in one way or
other attached to the No. 5 Reef previously mentioned. These
veins are subjected to numerous movements, caused chiefly by
the intersection of small clay heads or slides, which are met with
at places every sft. or 6ft. Along these slides, and close to
them, gold is very frequently obtained. The class of rock in
which these leaders occur is also very potent in governing the
yield of gold. A fairly-hard compact rock is the one in which
the greatest quantity of gold is found, and where the black
veins are most plentiful the richest gold generally occurs.
There is a notable point, however, in the working of this mine
■which we have no account of elsewhere; and that is, that in
many cases—indeed, almost always —Mr. Smith crushes these
small black veins themselves, and finds that they arc remunera-
tive. This has never been done on any other part of the field,
far as I can judge, although all notice that where they join
the leaders the richest patches of covintry are met with.”*
CAMBRIA MINE, THAMES.
The Cambria Company’s property is situated at Waiotahi
Creek, and is held as a licensed holding. The ground was
several times occupied by previous owners and abandoned, and it
% idle for some time, not being considered of any value. In
1883 the Darwin Company took up the adjoining claim, and
whilst sinking a shaft a reef was cut at a depth of 150 ft., and
gold obtained. This led to the adjoining land being again taken
U P) and the Cambria Company, with 31,500 shares, was
formed. Work was at once commenced from the Darwin shaft,
a od the Darwin reef was cut, very satisfactory crushings being
obtained. In driving on this reef, between Nos. 2 and 3 Levels,
a cross-reef was met with, from which very rich gold was
Stained, and hauls of from 2cwt. to scwt. of rich specimens
Were frequent, as much as9cwt. being got at one breaking-down.
Some of these specimens were found to contain 2oz. of gold
* “ Geological Reports,” 1883, p. 31.


to the pound of stone, and the average was about l|oz. to
the pound. This rich quartz was obtained, between Nos. 2 and 3
Levels, from the cross-reef, which averaged 2ft. in width; but
in some places it attained a width of Gft. The richest quartz
was got from a vein about Ift. wide. During the year 1885,
13,416 tons of general quartz and 14,6001 b. of specimens were
crushed for 31,1240 z. of gold. When the reef was almost
exhausted at No. 3 Level, a winze was sunk upon it at a point
where gold was showing in the floor of the drive, in order to
meet the cross-cut then being put in from No. 4 Level, the
shaft having in the meantime been sunk to another level. The
gold, however, only continued down some 20ft., and gradually
ran out. The reef, when cut in No. 4 Level, did not prove
payable. The shaft is now down a depth of 344 ft., and a great
deal of driving has been done in the claim. At the No. 1
Level the reef was driven on a distance of 140 ft., and a cross-
cut was put in at No. 2 Level, 150 ft. in length, for the purpose
of cutting the reef, which, when intersected, was driven on
for 350 ft. At No. 3 Level the cross-cut put in from the
shaft to cut the reef extended a distance of 235 ft., and 400 ft.
was driven along the course of the reef. At the No. 4
Level ljllSft. of driving has been done, a National rock-drill
being used. By this means the progress has been much greater
than could have been accomplished by liand-lahour during the
same time, as the reef averages 9ft. in width. Altogether 14,000
loads (equal to 21,000 tons) of quartz and 14,9511 b. of speci-
mens have been crushed for a yield of 37,6590 z. of gold, and
dividends to the amount of .£69,300 have been paid. Recently
the Cambria has amalgamated with the adjoining company, the
Darwin, and the shares have been increased from 31,500 to
44,700. Latterly work has been confined to prospecting, and
a short time ago a new reef was cut in the Darwin portion of
the mine at the No. 2 Level, from which 226 loads of quartz
and 1551 b. of specimens have been crushed for a yield of 6320 z.
of gold. Stoping is now proceeding on this reef. The amalga-
mated companies possess a complete steam-winding plant at their
shaft, and own a quartz-crushing battery of twenty stampers an
five berdans. The motive-power used at the battery is water,
which is supplied from the county water-race.


SAXON MINE, THAMES.
The Saxon Company’s property is hounded on the north hy
the New Prince Imperial, south hy the Queen of Beauty, east
hy the Trenton, and west hy the Deep Level Cross Company,
and contains 17 acres, held as a licensed holding. There are
five lodes, varying from Ift. to 4ft. in thickness, running through
the mine, besides several small leaders yet unprospected. The
shaft, which is sunk to a depth of 4Glft., is divided into three
compartments, two for cages and one for a ladder-way,
the whole being drained hy the Big Pump. Levels are opened
from the shaft at the following depths from the surface, viz.:
No. 1,116 ft.; No. 2,179 ft.; No. 3,274 ft.; No. 4,317 ft.;
No. 5,386 ft.; and No. 6,461 ft. During the present company’s
tenure about 700 loads of quartz have been crushed for 9300 z.
melted gold. The company has driven a level on one of the
main lodes in an easterly direction, w r itli very good results,
gold having been seen the entire distance, and quartz is now
being broken which averages from 3oz. to soz. of gold to the
load. The mine was very successfully worked in the early days
of the field hy the Crown Princess Company, which obtained some
thousands of ounces of gold from the Nos. 1 and 2 Levels; hut,
on account of a stoppage of the Big Pump, that company had to
oease operations, and the ground was, after lying unworked for
a considerable time, sold to, and is now held hy, the Saxon Com-
ply. Considering the position of the mine, the very good
prospects now being obtained, and the large amount of ground
yet unworked, it may be considered one of the best properties
°n the field. The company owns a tubular boiler and winding-
engine, with the necessary buildings, mine-office, and black-
smith’s shop.
THAMES GOLDEN CROWN MINE.
The land comprised in this company’s claim, which was
°riginally held and worked by the Golden Crown Company from
1868 to 1880, consisted of about two and a half acres, or eight
toen’s ground. • A large quantity of gold was obtained, and in
°ne year no less than .£200,000 was paid in dividends. In 1880
*be company was reformed and amalgamated with the Cure
a nd Mary Ann Companies, the ground owned by the former


having previously yielded a large quantity of gold. The claim
was thus increased to nineteen men’s ground, or six acres. Up
to the end of the year 1885 work was carried on by means of
the Golden Crown old shaft, situated on the western boundary.
Two levels were opened up at depths of 90ft. and 170 ft., and
1,500 ft. to 2,000 ft. was driven at each level. Five different
reefs, varying from 2ft. to 12ft. in thickness, were successfully
worked by a large staff of men, and dividends were paid during
the five years 1880 to 1885. As the reefs at the lower or
170 ft. level appeared to have become poorer, it was then deemed
advisable to try some of the reefs on the eastern portion of the
mine, in the vicinity of the Waiotahi and Cambria claims; and
more vigorous operations were commenced in January, 1885, when
the company started a new shaft on the eastern boundary of the
mine. Suitable winding-engine and gear were erected, and the
shaft, which is 10ft. by 4ft., and is in three compartments, has
been sunk to a depth of 370 ft. Three different levels were
opened up. No. 1 Level has been driven on reef and cross-cuts
4G9ft.; No. 2 Level has been driven on reef and cross-cuts
041 ft.; No. 3 Level has been driven on reef and cross-cuts
270 ft. From one reef at No. 2 Level 3,500 tons of quartz hare
been crushed during the past twelve months for a yield of
1,3230 z. of gold, and upwards of 500 oz. were obtained hv
tributors in other portions of the mine.
Besides expending the amount of the gold won, the company
lias been at a large outlay in opening up the mine by the above
new works. There is a twenty-head stamper-battery, driven by
water-power by means of a Felton wheel, connected with the
mine by a ground tramway, 900 ft. in length. The battery
crushes for the company’s tributors and the public. The mine
is well opened up, and there is every facility for carrying on
works on a large scale. There are numerous reefs running
through the company’s ground, varying from Ift. to Bft. llfl
thickness. At present little work is being carried out on the
company’s account; but operations will shortly be resumed. The
Nos. 1 and 2 Levels are at present worked by tributors, who
number thirty-two men, a fair proportion of whom are making
good wages. The capital of the company is 25,000 shares of
each, of which 6s. per share has been called up.


PRINCE IMPERIAL MINE, THAMES.




NEW PEINCE IMPERIAL MINE, THAMES.
The New Prince Imperial holding, which is situated at the
base of the hills fronting the Thames foreshore, comprises
7l acres. The mine was bought by the present company five or
six years ago for the small sum of £250. Operations had been
carried on in the mine since the opening of the field in 1867,
but until the present manager took charge in January, 1881, none
of the works were profitable. Since that time 31,806 tons of
quartz have been raised and crushed for a yield of 43,0910 z.
15dwt. melted gold, valued at £119,315. Of this amount there
has been paid in dividends £3 7s. 6d. per share on 18,000
shares, or a total of £60,750. The capital of the company is
18,000 shares of £1 each, of which only Is. per share has been
called up. There are three shafts in the mine—viz., the
winding-shaft and two air-shafts. The winding-shaft is
down to a depth of 562 ft. below the surface, which is only
slightly above the sea-level. The air-shafts are 200 ft. and
90ft. deep respectively, and from the bottom of these shafts
there are winzes on the several reefs connecting with each
°f the levels from the main shaft. These shafts thoroughly
ventilate the mine, and keep it almost clear of the large quantities
°f carbonic-acid gas which rise very rapidly in close weather.
The winding-shaft is 10ft. by 3ft. 6in., and is divided into three
compartments, two for winding, and one for a travelling-way.
There are several reefs and leaders in this mine, the principal of
which are known as the Mariner’s, or No. 1 Reef, and the No. 2
Reef. The former averages from 2ft. to 20ft. in thickness, and
as yielded large quantities of gold. No. 2is a smaller reef,
averaging from 6in. to 2ft. in thickness, and has been exceed-
Wgly rich. The greater part of the gold which enabled this
co ®pany to pay away such large sums in dividends during the
past few years was mainly derived from this reef. The belt of
sa "(lstone country through which the reef runs is from 60ft. to
in thickness, and is underlying at an angle of 45° betwen
tw ° bars of hard dioritic rock, which dip at the same angle as the
Co untry. The bar of rock on the foot-wall is 50ft. in thickness,
wl ‘ile that on the hanging-wall is fully 60ft. These hard bars
r ock are believed to have had a good deal to do with the making
the gold, as the sandstone country was probably supplied from


them with all the minerals. The following is the amount of
driving done on the various reefs at the different levels, exclusive
of stoping and winzes :
Feet.
No. 1 or 90ft. level .. .. 1,210
No. 2 or 146 ft. level .. .. 880
No. 3 or 243 ft. level .. .. 1,650
No. 4or 333 ft. level .. ■ .. 1,400
No. 5 or 420 ft. level .. .. 1,320
No. 6 or 492 ft. level .. .. 540
No. 7 or 562 ft. level .. .. 290
Total .. .. .. 7,290
The four upper levels are still being worked, and are all in
good order, hut the three bottom levels are flooded with water,
through the stoppage of the pumping-operations from the 640 ft.
level of the Big Pump shaft. The company possesses a battery
of twenty heads of stampers. The motive-power consists of a
Pelton wheel, driven by water supplied from the county water-
race. The battery is thoroughly equipped with berdans, retorts,
and other gold-saving appliances.
QUEEN OF BEAUTY EXTENDED MINE, THAMES.
This mine is situated at Waio-karaka, and comprises the
ground formerly held and worked by the Queen of Beauty,
Queen of the May, City of London, Piako, and Bird In
Hand Mines, and is about 47 acres in extent. The mines
formerly held in this area were very rich gold-producers.
135,8870 z. of gold, valued at £367,973, were purchased by the
Bank of New Zealand, besides large parcels sold to other banks
and the Sydney Mint, of which no record has been kept; and
this quantity has been raised since 1869. From the surface
down to a depth of 350 ft. the reefs were worked by the various
companies, and handsome dividends were paid for years ; hut at
this point (about 350 ft. from the surface) the • reefs became
poorer, in consequence of being in a different strata of rock, not
so favourable for gold. However, on sinking the shaft to a
depth of 537 ft., the reefs at No. 8 Level were cut and found as
rich as they had been above. A run of gold on one of the
reefs was worked for a depth of three levels, or to 677 ft. from
the surface, when it became poorer. The extra expense oi


pumping water and sinking the shaft did not admit of very
large profits. The shaft was sunk to a greater depth, and as the
country improved in the shaft immediately under No. 10 Level,
anew level (No. 11) was opened at a depth of 748 ft. from the
surface, and two new reefs were cut in the western cross-cuts,
which were both gold-hearing ; hut very little work was done on
these reefs, owing to an accident which happened to the machinery
causing the stoppage of the pumps. The Queen of Beauty Ex-
tended Company ceased operations for want of funds, and the
ground has been lying idle for some time; hut efforts are again
being made to raise capital to work the mine.
WAITEKAURI MINE, OHINEMURI.
This claim, consisting of nine acres of land, is situated at
Waitekauri, in the Oliinemuri District, and was originally held
as a number of small claims, which were transferred to one
proprietary and amalgamated as the AVaitekauri claim —The
property of the AYaitekauri Company. Payable reefs, varying in
thickness from sft. to 25ft., have been worked in this mine almost
from the commencement. One of the first things undertaken hv
fire company was the erection of a battery —a work of no small
difficulty, considering the roughness of the country and the
absence of roads. As the first few crusliings more than
realized expectations, a brilliant career appeared to he in store
for the company, hut gradually the returns decreased, and the
oompany, being saddled with the expense of the battery (about
£18,000), was compelled to suspend operations. By the terms
of an agreement made with them, the battery fell into the hands
°f Messrs. Brown and Bleazard, by whom it was erected. They
a lso acquired the mine from the company, and have for many
years past continued to work it, chiefly by means of tributors.
k°me of these tribute-parties have been very successful, notably
Sutler and party and Hollis and party, who from their respective
tribute-sections in one year obtained gold worth nearly .€20,000.
f-he lode from which this rich quartz w r as obtained averaged
a Wt 4ft. in width, running nearly parallel with and -west of
tbe main lode. Some portions were exceedingly rich: one
parcel of several hundred tons yielded an average return of lloz.
t° the ton. The mine has bec 1 ’ worked by means of tunnels in


four main levels, all connected by passes and branch-lines with
the tramway which runs from the battery to the mine. This
tramway, which is three-quarters of a mile in length, is partly on
an incline and partly level. A portion of it is worked by horses,
and a portion is self-acting. The mine is GOOft. above the
battery. The latter, which consists of forty-one head of stampers
and ten berdans, is worked by water-power, being driven by an
overshot water-wheel 45ft. in diameter. The mine is at present
being worked by a party of tributors for remunerative returns,
but the best blocks above the company’s old levels arc exhausted,
and capital is required to open up new ground. In all, gold to
the value of about £BO,OOO has been obtained from this mine.
WAIHI MINES.
The features in the reef-system of this district are different
from any others that have been as yet found on the Hauraki
Peninsula: a series of nearly conical hills surrounded by
swampy plains, each hill containing a reef or reefs which
apparently run out or cut off as the hill descends to the plain.
The largest reef, and the only one on which any considerable
amount of work has been done, is in the Martha Extended
Company’s mine. This reef forms the backbone, as it were, of a
hill about 20 chains long by a few chains wide, running north-east
by south-west, and is along the outcrop about 200 ft. above the
plains. There are no surface-indications of its existence any-
where away from the hill. The reef is up to 50ft. thick of solid
quartz, cased within regular well-defined w r alls, with an easterly
underlie of about lin 6. It maintains its size in the north-east
direction until it runs out as the hill drops to the level of the
plain. In the south-west direction the ground does not fall s 0
abruptly, and the reef splits up into numerous branches, from a
few inches up to 10ft. in width, widening out from each other
something like the outstretched fingers of a man’s hand. This
reef has been worked continuously during the last four years.
Over 30,000 tons of quartz have been reduced by the ordinary
stamp-battery, the all-round returns being under sdwt. of gold
per ton. The value of the gold averages about £2 18s. p er
ounce, whilst on the surface it was worth as much as £3 10s. p er
ounce; but it kept lowering in value as a greater depth was


attained. The depth of the present workings does not exceed
200 ft. from the crown of the hill. In no place throughout the
mine has the whole width of the reef heen taken for crushing,
the foot-wall generally being the basis from which the reef is
broken to a width of from 10ft. to 25ft. The reef, generally
speaking, is of a friable nature, easily won, explosives being only
occasionally required, and is what is known amongst miners as
good, safe, standing country. There is a thirty-stamper mill,
with the usual appliances, belonging to the company, water being
the motive-power. A horse-grade tramway, over a mile in
length, connects the mine and battery, the cost of transit being
under Is. per ton. Less than sdwt. per ton has paid all
expenses and left a fair margin of profit throughout.
What is known as the Itoscmont Hill is situated about half a
unle east of the above. It is something of the same dimensions,
ls nearly parallel with it, and answers the same description in
almost every particular. It is occupied by the Amaranth, Union,
and Rosemont holdings ; but so little work has been done on the
main reef that little is known of its value. Most of the mining
operations on this hill have been confined to a branch reef tra-
psing the two last-mentioned claims. This reef averages about
sft. in width, but is very variable, sometimes pinching in to a
ffw inches, and in other places widening out to 7ft. or Bft. It
Is cased in a brown tufa formation, and is full of black
Manganese veins. The quartz, which is mostly of a friable nature,
18 easily worked, and is of a light-brown colour, interspersed with
veins, and is rich in sulphides as well as metallic silver
an d gold; consequently the bullion, as saved by the battery pro-
cess > is of low value (only about £2 Bs. per ounce). Selected
Parcels of quartz from this reef, amounting to about 30 tons,
are been sent to Swansea and to California for trial by the dif-
er ent processes, and are reported to be of exceedingly high value,
aree hundred tons, from which the parcels were selected,
ave teen passed through the battery, and gave a return of nearly
° z - to the ton. The workings are confined to a low level, which
give about 100 ft. of backs. With the exception of sundry
Mrrface-scratchings, this is all the work that has been done,
e owners naturally holding back to see which will be the best
of extracting the metals from the ore, as it is generally


believed that not more than 30 per cent, is saved hy the
ordinary battery treatment.
The reef in the Silverton Mine is, like the others, situated iu
an isolated bill, about 500 yd. north-east of the Itosemont, and
is running across the course of the latter, and at right angles
with all the other reefs in the district, its course being north-west
by south-east. It outcrops along the summit of the hill in the
shape of large disturbed boulders, and underground averages about
12ft. in thickness, with solid, well-defined walls. It has pro-
duced the richest stone yet found in Waihi. Quite recently
a crushing of 150 tons gave about 3oz. per ton, the value of
the gold being .£2 IBs. per ounce. Gold occurs in nearly per-
pendicular runs, as at the Thames and elsewhere, and in this
reef is most plentiful on the hanging-wall. The run at present
being worked was discovered in sinking a winze at about 25ft.
from the surface, and w r as only about 9ft. long, but widened
out till at 60ft. (at which depth it was intersected by a level) it
was over 40ft. long, and appeared to be widening and getting
richer as it went down. A winze now being sunk below the level
mentioned has attained a depth of 40ft., gold being still visible
at every breaking • so that there is a good chance of its being a
large and valuable deposit.
There is every probability of these reefs existing at a depth
in the level country between the hills ; but, as the plains are
covered with a heavy deposit of what was originally volcanic
mud, but which is now turned into hard rock, prospecting f° r
them would be nearly impossible ■without the aid of machinery;
which, up to the present, has not been placed on the ground.
WOODSTOCK MINE, KARANGAHAKE. ■
•The Woodstock Mine, which embraces an area of eleven
acres, is situated on a bald bluff standing out prominently on th e
western bank of the Waitawheta River, and the configuration of
the country is such as to afford fully 500 ft. of backs for tunnel'
ling purposes. There are two well-defined distinct lodes, ave-
raging 3ft. and 6ft. in thickness respectively, running almost
parallel throughout the whole length of the ground; and both °
these have already had a considerable amount of work done upon
'them. On the Maria, or No. 1 Reef, averaging 3ft. in thick"


ness, two levels have heen driven for a distance of 120 ft. each.
These levels are 50ft. apart, and are connected by means of a
winze, which is useful for ventilation purposes, and serves as a
basis for stoping operations throughout the whole of the work-
ings. This reef carries both gold and silver, the latter, which
occurs' chiefly in the form of a chloride, predominating, and
strong colours of gold are also frequently visible. From this
reef twenty-eight loads of quartz were broken out and passed
through the company’s water-jacket smelter, with which the mine
is connected by means of a complete system of tramways, capable
of transmitting from point to point about 35 tons of quartz
per day. This parcel w'as first passed through the stonebreaker,
thoroughly mixed, sampled; and its assay-value, after making a
deduction of 15 per cent, for ordinary loss and moisture, w'as
£196. The amount of bullion saved was GOOoz., chiefly sil-
ver, which, at 9s. 6d. per ounce, realized .€285, showing a loss
of nearly 50 per cent, on the assay-value of the ore as treated by
the smelting process; hut, against that loss, it was estimated
that there was fully one hundred pounds’ worth of bullion in the
flag, flue-dust, and furnace-trimmings, which have all been saved
tor future treatment. A large percentage of the loss may also
accounted for hv the fact that the interstices of the brick
lining inside the furnace arc filled with lead bullion, tbe floor, as
well as the run of the crucible or furnace-well, being also lined
with a pretty thick coating of the same substance. About one
hundred loads of stone from the reef were passed through the
Ivanhoe Battery for an average return of loz. per ton, which was
not payable, owing to the low price obtained for the bullion—
Vlz -, €1 ss. per ounce. Average samples of the tailings, being
ilic residue of the last-mentioned parcel, were assayed repeatedly,
showing the loss to be more than 50 per cent, of the full value
°f the ore ; and then no account was taken of the float loss,
which must have heen considerable. The No. 2 Reef is situated
west of, and runs almost parallel with, the No. 1 Reef. It has
heen driven upon for 250 ft., and maintained an average thick-
ness of 6ft. for the whole of that distance. About 1,000
tons of quartz have been broken out from this lode, and 300
tons were subjected to battery treatment for returns varying
from loz. to 3oz. per ton, the average value of the bullion being


£1 7s. Gd. per ounce. This was not considered to he more
than payable, and the balance of the stone —about 6,000 tons
—is now lying stacked at the mouth of the level pending the
introduction of some process that can be worked cheaply, and
will save a larger percentage of the metal. Some of the stone
broken out from this lode shows strong colours of gold; and it
also contains a large percentage of sulphide of silver, which is
easily distinguished by the dark-blue seams that traverse the
•quartz in every direction. Quite recently some ore treated at
Hailey’s Battery yielded 340 z. to the ton, the value of the
bullion being about 10s. per ounce. At present there is no
work going on in the mine, and it is probable that the company
will shortly be wound up and re-formed with sufficient capital to
thoroughly develop the whole property.
CROWN MINE, KARANGAHAKE.
This mine is situated on the up-hill side of, and 14 chains
distant in a southerly direction from, Railey’s new Quartz
Reduction Works, with which it can be connected by means of a
self-acting tramway at a very trifling cost. There is a perfect
network of reefs running throughout the whole length of the
ground, which rises so abruptly (going from the northern
towards the southern boundary) as to afford fully 600 ft. of
backs. The first reef opened up was the No. 1, which has been
driven upon at the intermediate level for a distance of 147 ft.,
maintaining an average thickness of 4ft. throughout. Several
parcels of stone from this lode have been already subjected to
the battery process, with results varying from loz. to 14oz. of
gold per ton. A second level, 100 ft. lower down the spur,
has been driven along the course of this lode for a distance of
200 ft. Here there is but little difference to notice in its size,
character, or quality, all three being about the same as in the
level above. As the result of the operations that have been
carried out upon this lode, there are now to grass about 200
tons of general quartz, of which a fair proportion carries a high
percentage of the precious metals. The No. 2 Reef is situated a
short distance west of, and runs almost parallel with, the one
described. It is about 3ft. thick, and a low level has been driven
along its course for a distance of 170 ft. Between this level an


the intermediate workings there is an intervening space of 100 ft.,
where a considerable amount of stoping-out has been done. It
was from this point that a 50-ton parcel of quartz, which was
sold to the La Monte Smelting Company, Thames, at £8 10s.
per ton, was obtained. In the quartz-paddock at the mouth of
this level there are now stacked about 25 tons of No. 1 grade
quartz and about 300 tons of ordinary quartz. A very high
value is placed on the No. 1 quartz, which is exceedingly rich in
both gold and silver, and, no matter what the process of reduc-
tion may be, the return obtainable therefrom should be a very
handsome one. The next reef of importance in this mine is
known as the Silver Lode, so called from the fact that the stone
contains a very high percentage of that metal, which occurs
chiefly in the form of a sulphide. This lode has been opened up
in various places at intervals of several chains apart along its
line, and it maintains an average thickness of 9in. A level
has also been driven along its course for a distance of 36ft.,
an d from here alone about eight tons of first-class silver-
hearing stone were brought to grass. At present work is con-
fined to opening up the mine, which is now in a position to
furnish Railey’s new plant with a large amount of payable
quartz.
RAILEY’S BATTERY AND REDUCTION-WORKS,
KARANGAHAKE.
Hr. Railey’s battery has been recently erected, at a cost of
£3,000. There are ten stampers, two separators, and four
ai ualgamating-pans, which grind and amalgamate, this being the
last process the quartz passes through before the gold is extracted,
fhe water is at a temperature of from 190° to 200°. One hun-
fired and fifty tons which were treated in the course of about
months after the works were erected gave a net yield of
IjOOOoz. The quartz was sent from the Rose, Crown, Sutro,
Comstock, and a few other mines. Some ore from the Wood-
st°ck Ali ne yielded 340 z. to the ton, the bullion being worth
per ounce. Mr. Railey, who is the patentee of the pan-pro-
Cess ) and works the battery, gained his experience principally on
Ihe g r eat Comstock Lode, in Nevada. His plan of treating
quartz is rapidly gaining in favour, and his experiments have


already proved that he can extract 75 per cent, of the gold and
silver from ore which only yielded 40 per cent, by the ordinary
battery-process. The greatest distance from any present work-
ings to the battery is about 120 chains. The motive-power is ob-
tained from the Waitawhcta, which is a branch of the Ohinemuri
River. A gigantic dam, with slabbed wooden retaining-walls,
has been erected at a cost of .€7OO, including the racc-fluming
which connects w'ith the machine-house. There is a plentiful
supply of water, and the dam is capable of holding millions of
gallons. Mr. Railey, who intends spending €1,400 in erecting
more pans and machinery, is convinced that a great deal of the
ore which has passed through the battery contains silver in pay-
able quantities. He holds the "Wolscley Claim, containing eight
acres, which lie intends working in connection with the battery.
There is a dray-road within 17 chains, and a telegraph-office
within a mile and a half, of the battery. There is river-steamer
traffic at Paeroa, distant about five miles, and there will be a
railway-station at Paeroa when the Thames—Te Aroha Railway
is completed.
The Ohinemuri County Council, assisted by various mining
companies, is now constructing a tramway, at a cost of about
€4OO, w'hich will be a connecting-link between the mine and Mr.
Railey’s battery. This tramway will tend to solve the problem
as to how the quartz is to be conveyed to the battery from the
mines situated high on the mountain. The pluck and en-
durance displayed by the miners in the construction of tracks
around the most precipitous places in the vicinity of their
claims can only be appreciated by those who have visited the
district-.
ADELINE MINE, KARANGAHAKE.
This mine, which was discovered in 1885, is situated on the
eastern side of the Karangahakc Range, and is one of the richest
claims in that neighbourhood. Up to a recent date 185 tons of
quartz were crushed for a yield of l,Boooz. of gold. The
average size of the lode, -which produces gold only, and runs
N. i E., is about Ift. All the quartz which has been treate
had to be sent to the Thames, the freight costing €2 2s. 6d. P er
ton, and crushing Gs. per ton. The reef has been hitherto


worked by tunnels and winzes, the longest tunnel, which
has been timbered tbroughout, being 200 ft., and the deepest
winze 70ft. There are 20,000 shares of €1 each in the
company, but only Id. per share has been called up. Dur-
ing the year 1886 there was an expenditure of .£3,000 in con-
nection with the mine, the average number of men employed
being eleven. The company intends sending the quartz to
the Thames for some time to come, preferring the extra ex-
pense, until the mine has been further developed, to the risk
of erecting battery and smelting-works. The reef has been
traced through the claim for a distance of 475 ft., and so far as
it has been tested (180 ft.) it has maintained its thickness. There
is abundance of timber at hand to secure the workings. All
the wages-men live on or in the neighbourhood of the claim,
and the provisions are packed from Paeroa, a distance of about
six miles.
The Mary Jane, Rose, and Diamond Claims are all marked
out on the same lode, and are at present being actively worked.
The quartz from these claims is being sent to Railcy’s Battery,
■which has been recently erected in this neighbourhood. Mr. J.
T. Hall, who is manager for the Adeline and Rose Companies,
a lso superintends the work at the other claims.
CHAMPION LODE MINES, TUI CREEK, TE AROHA.
The original Champion Lode claims (Nos. 1,2, and 3) con-
ned of five acres each, or fifteen acres altogether, with three
f eefs running through them. After a year’s diligent search in
111 almost inaccessible country, and after much privation and
suffering, Mr. C. A. Cornes, the prospector, discovered two
se paratc lodes running parallel with each other, bearing about
Sorth-east, and varying in thickness from Bft. to 14ft. Since
licenses were granted twelve men have been continually
employed in opening out the lodes. A drive of GOft. has been
P'R through solid rock, a winze GOft. in depth has heen sunk,
arif l 100 tons of quartz have been brought to grass. Two tons
" ere purchased by the Thames Furnace Company at .€22 10s.
P er ton, and later on Mr. Cornes sold 25 tons of the quartz at
21


■forwarded to England for treatment, and Mr. Cornes Las
received advices by cable as to tlie value of 75 tons which had
been treated: “Value, Ell 10s. to £l2 10s. per ton; gold,
silver, and other metals.” The cost of transmission to England
from the No. 3 Claim at Tu.i Creek, with the expenses of treat-
ment added, has been estimated by Mr. Cornes at about 50 per
cent, of the ore. Up to the present time work has been carried
on in a rather primitive fashion—namely, tunnelling, stoping to
a small extent, stripping the naked reef, and surface-work. The
country being densely timbered and precipitous, the quartz had
to be conveyed one mile down a steep, rugged, and dangerous
track, the gradient being about 1 in 4; and from the base of
the mountain the quartz had to be conveyed one mile over a
fair dray-road to Te Aroha Railway-station, thence to Auckland,
a distance of 116 miles. As there is no battery or furnace in
connection with the mines, Mr. Comes has been compelled to
send the quartz either to the Thames (a distance of thirty-six
miles by river-steamer) or to Auckland. Mr. Erice-Williams,
an English engineer of considerable eminence, who has lately
visited the colony on behalf of English capitalists, during a late
tour of the district, expressed an opinion that there was no
longer any necessity for sending the ores to England or Germany
for treatment, as the best methods discovered for their scientific
treatment are now provided at the Aroha Battery works, Wai-
orongomai, where, by a gradual process of roasting, 85 to 90 pet
cent, of assay is said to have been realized, instead of 00 p er
cent., as was formerly the case. But, in order to conect the
Champion Lode mines with the Aroha Battery, it would l> e
necessary to construct an incline-tramway, about six miles i®
length, along the sideling of the Karangahake Range and Te
Aroha Mountain.
The Champion Lode prospecting-claim is about 2,400ft*
above the level of the sea, on the main Karangahake Range*
and is within two and a half miles of Te Aroha, with a water
shed on both sides of the range. Water-power could be made
available from the Waitawheta Creek, on the cast side of
range; but, considering the broken nature of the country
through which a race would have to be cut and flumed, ft 19
probable that steam-power would be found cheaper.




HEW ERA BATTERY.
Waictongomai-Te Aroba.


Since Mr. Cornes made known tlic results of liis discoveries,
otter mines have been opened up, and are now being assidu-
ously worked. The Government and County Council have
expended £2OO in constructing a mountain-track to the claims
for temporary use, and Mr. Cornes has given labour to the value
pf about £IOO in improving it. In addition to gold and silver,
galena and cinnabar have also been found.
NEW EEA REDUCTION WORKS, WAIORONGOMAI.
These works were erected by Messrs. Fraser and Ferguson,
with the object of saving a much larger percentage of the pre-
cious metals which have been pi roved to exist in the Waioro-
ngomai reefs, but which had, to a great extent, been lost with
the ordinary battery treatment. The erection of the plant and
battery, which cost £IO,OOO, took a year and eight months
to complete. The quartz is delivered by the tramway, which
cost £2,400, into a large hopper; thence it passes into a
large vertical caleining-fnrnacc, similar to a limekiln, where
both the quartz and loose mullock are burned and made
•ouch easier for reduction. From the furnace it passes into a
large revolving-pan, with two rollers, each weighing 24 tons,
011 the principle of the Chilian mill. This pan has a perforated
bottom, through which the ground quartz passes, and from it
Iberc is a continuous stream of quartz ground to the fineness of
°atmeal. If the ore treating is what is termed “ free milling,”
*1 can be at once taken to the grinding- and amalgamating-pans.
There are eight of these, each capable of reducing 15cwt. at a
charge, which takes from four to five hours to complete, in-
cluding the amalgamating with quicksilver ; during the latter,
beat by steam and chemicals arc applied. When completed, the
charges are run off into large settler-pans, which are fitted with
ar ®s, and on each arm shoes are attached, traversing and rub-
bing every inch of the bottom surface at a slow speed. A large
Quantity of clean water is poured into this pan about an hour
offer the charge is put in, and working is continued for about
ail hour and a half longer, when the amalgamation is completed,
an< l the quicksilver settled on the bottom. The tailings are
bept in suspense, and arc washed out of the pan by a continual


rush of clean water passing into a concentrator, which catches
any quicksilver that may escape.
Each settler is provided with a syphon, through which the
quicksilver containing the bullion runs into buckets, and is then
retorted in the usual way. The quartz at Waiorongomai has
been proved to contain plenty of silver, hut it is so combined
with sulphur, and tellurium that it has been found necessary
to prepare the ground quartz for pan-amalgamation by roast-
ing. Messrs. Fraser and Sons, engineers, Auckland, erected
last year an experimental plant similar to the one used
at the New Era Works, and have gone through the whole
operation with great success. They have a reverberatory fur-
nace capable of roasting a charge of 8001 b., and have overcome
the difficulty of dealing with the refractory ores. Tests made
gave the following results : 8001 b. of burnt ore from the
New Find Reef, Waiorongomai, gave 18dwt. of gold, of the
value of £3 125., and 12dwt. of silver, of the value of 2s. 4fd.,
being at the rate of £lO Bs. per ton; or 65 per cent, of
fire-assay. GOOlh. of ore from the big reef on the Premier lease,
Waiorongomai (almost worthless under the ordinary battery
process), gave a return at the rate of £1 2s. 9d. per ton; and
2501 b. of ore from the same reef gave a return at the rate of
£1 18s. Bd. per ton. 7401 b. of ore from the Union Company’s
reef, Waihi, gave a return at the rate of £4l 17s. 4d. per ton,
or 80 per cent, of fire-assay. 1,4001 b. from the Rosemont Com-
pany’s reef, Waihi, gave at the rate of £6 15s. 7d. per ton, or
70 per cent, of fire-assay. Steps are being taken to enable the
New Era Reduction Works to cope with the difficulty in the
same satisfactory manner by the erection on a large scale of
reverberatory furnaces at their works, which are exceedingly 'well
suited for an introductory plant of the kind, sixty horse-powei
being procurable by a Pelton wheel nine months in the year, and
never less than twenty horse-power during summer. Fircwoo
is plentiful; so that the cost of treatment even bv steam-p° ff ® r
would be reduced to a minimum. Three claims arc worked
connection with the New Era Eattery and Reduction Works '
the New Era, Premier, and Inverness. They contain throe
separate lodes, and about £SOO has been expended in developing
them, but they have not been found payable as hitherto worked-


The total quantity of quartz treated has been 140 tons, yielding
84oz. of retorted gold and 12oz. of silver.
A main reef, locally known as the “ Buck,” exists at Wai-
rongomai, and there are several lateral leaders branching from
it. Some of these branch reefs have been tested with good re-
sults. One hundred tons from the F Beef yielded loz. to the
ton. Crushings from the Moa No. 1 Reef gave about 15dwt.
per ton; Vermont Reef, loz. per ton; Inverness, 15dwt. per
ton; and Phoenix, loz. to 2oz. par ton. Capital is, however,
required for their systematic and proper development.
NEW FIND MINE, TE AROHA. '
This mine comprises nine acres of land situated on the
eastern slope of a range along which a large reef crops out in
various places, its course being 10° west of north. This reef
runs through the whole length of the New Find Mine. Gold
was first discovered in a portion of the reef standing high up
above the surrounding surface; and towards the northern
boundary of the mine a run of gold, a continuation of the first
discovery, has been traced and worked to a depth of 320 ft.,
and extending along the reef to a width of about 180 ft. Another
run of gold was found near the southern boundary in the out-
crop of a large reef on the western side of the main reef,
running in a north-easterly direction, and joining the main reef.
This run has been worked to a depth of 185 ft., and extends
along the branch and also the main reef for a distance of 150 ft.
A- portion of the main reef between the two runs of gold, which
extends for a distance of about 200 ft., is not payable. The mine
18 worked from three levels—one at the northern end, and
another near the southern end, of the mine; wdiile the third,
0r low level, has been driven near the southern end im-
xxxediately below the other, and has been continued along the
c °urse of the reef connecting the workings on both runs of
B°ld. Quartz from all parts of the mine is conveyed through
tbe low-level tunnel and passed down a shoot connecting with a
bopper, from which it is loaded into the trucks on the main
and conveyed to the battery, a distance of about two
ail( l a half miles.


The portions of the reef which have been stoped out have
generally consisted of quartz of a hard nature, and the walls of
the reef are also hard rock. This has entailed considerable
expense, as the whole must be blasted, for which purpose
dynamite is chiefly used, it being found more economical than
powder. The walls are so solid that it is an easy matter to
secure the workings ; stulls are placed where required. Another
level, to work the mine to a further depth of 100 ft., may be
driven, the estimated distance being about 320 ft.; and, as the
runs of gold appear still to continue downwards, the future
prospects of the mine arc very encouraging.
The gold contained in the quartz is mostly free, but of a
very fine description, and a large proportion is lost in the
treatment of the quartz. The mine has been fairly worked,
the full number of men who could be profitably employed
having been kept constantly at work.
TE AEOHA BATTERY AND REDUCTION-WORKS.
The Battery Company has ten acres of land near the May
Queen spur. A line of reef runs through it, and produces gold
mixed with silver in payable quantities. The reef has been
worked about eighteen months. The company has a battery of
forty stampers and fifty-nine berdans, erected for the purpose
of crushing for the public, and 46 tons can be reduced
daily. Seventeen hands (equal to twelve men) arc continuously
employed. The company’s mine has been hitherto worked by
driving (650 ft., exclusive of stoping-drivc), and one-fourth of the
batterv-wages has been paid for the company’s own crushing®-
A hopper has been built at a cost of £6O, a small shoot at »
cost of £35, and two tramways at a cost of about £BO. The
county tramway' —which was constructed at a cost of £20,000,
the Government contributing £12,000, and the Piako County
Council £B,OO0 —is also used by the Battery Company for convey-
ing quartz to the battery, at a cost of 4s. 6d. per truck (one ton
and a third). The company, which has been one of the principal
means of enabling quartz-mining to be carried on in Tc Aroh»
Goldfield, purchased about a quarter of the shares in the whole
of the mines carrying on operations there. The battery, her


dans, races, &c., have cost about .€20,000, and there has been a
further expenditure o£ £20,000. Altogether, 20,000 tons of
quartz have been crushed, yielding about 15,0000 z. of gold, of
the average value of .€2 14s. per ounce. The company, in
which Mr. J. C. Firth, one of the most enterprising men
iu New Zealand, is a large shareholder, proposes, in the
event of negotiations which are now pending with an English
syndicate being successful, to construct a main tunnel, to be
driven by means of air-compressors; and when in full working
order it will be necessary to keep one hundred men continually
employed. The appliances necessary for working these reefs
are so expensive that it seems almost impossible for men with
small means to work their holdings to advantage. Capitalists
who are prepared to expend large sums of money in erecting
machinery, constructing tramways, shoots, and easements, have a
much better chance of succeeding, so far as can be judged from
tie present development of the field. The principal reason
for Te Aroha retrograding instead of advancing has, to
a great extent, been due to the fact that individual miners
We been unable to perform work requiring considerable
capital.
PRICE OF GOLD.
Per Ounce.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Thames .. .. 212 6 to 3 2 6
Coromandel .. .. 210 0 to 3 16
Oliinemuri .. .. 2 110 to 215 0
Tapu 3 0 0
Te Aroha .. .. 216 0 to 315 0
DISTANCES.—COMMUNICATION.
The following are the distances from the Borough of
Thames ; —
Southwards.
Miles.
Paeroa .. .. .. •. . • •. 22
Karaugahake .. .. .. .. •. 28
Waihi .. .. .. .. • • »■ 36


Miles.
Waitckauri .. .. .. .. .. 36
Te Aroha .. .. .. .. .. 36
Waiorongomai.. .. .. .. .. 39
Northwards.
Waiomo .. .. .. .. .. 8
Tapu .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Coromandel .. .. .. .. .. 40
The easiest mode of communication to all the places men-
tioned, except Coromandel, is by coach or on horseback. From
the Thames to Coromandel there is regular communication by
steamer, via Auckland, which is preferable to travelling overland
by the track, the latter being dangerous in wet weather. To Paeroa
and Te Aroha there is a daily coach, but the road in some places
is in a very bad state for winter traffic, though it does not pre-
vent the coach running regularly. There is also communication
by steamer on the Thames River three times a week. From
Paeroa to Waihi there is a coach-road, which is impassable m
winter. The road from Paeroa to Karangahake is equally
bad in winter time. There is a dray-track to Waitekauri,
but it is almost impassable in winter. From the Thames
to Waiomo there is a coach-road, which gets into a bad
state in winter; and from Waiomo to Tapu there is a bridle-
track. Between Tapu and Coromandel there is a passable
bridle-track in summer, but it is difficult after rains, and
dangerous in winter.
GOLDFIELD OFFICERS.—SITTINGS OF COURT.
Warden for the district, 11. A. Stratford, R.M. Coromandel:
Mining Registrar and Clerk of Court, J. B. Gatland. Thames:
Receiver of Gold Revenue, Mining Registrar, Clerk of Warden’s
and Resident Magistrate’s Courts, F. J. Burgess; Assistant-
Clerk, T. M. Lawlor; Inspector of Mines, J. M. McLaren;
Bailiff, J. Lloyd. Paeroa : Clerk of Court, A. T. Mitchell-
Te Aroha: Receiver of Gold Revenue, Mining Registrar, I n "
spector of Mines, and Clerk of Court, G. Wilson;
A. Menzies.


Sittings of the Warden’s Court are held at Coromandel, on
Thursday, in the third week in each month; at the Thames, on
Thursday, in the first, second, and fourth week in each month;
at Te Aroha, on Tuesday, in the second and fourth week in
each month; and at Paeroa, on Monday, in the second week in
each month.


Registered Mining Companies in tlio Haueaki Warden's Disteict actually in operation on tlie 31st December, 1885.
Nunie of Company.
Number of
Shares.
Amount of
Capital.
Capital
declared
paid-up,
including
Promoters’
Shares.
Total Value of
Total
Capital
actually
received
from Calls.
Gold, Silver,
Antimony, or
other Metals
taken from
Company’s
Amount
of Divi-
dends
paid
by Com-
Date of Last
Dividend.
Amount
of Last
Dividend.
Date of Com-
mencing
Operations.
Quartz,
Alluvial,
or other
Process of
Milling,
Mine.
pany.
a
©
IH O
g 3
*A
Coromandel.
Kapanga (Limited)
180, CCO
£
180,000
£
157,000
£
£
17,000
£
£
July 12,1871
Quartz
22
Iioyal Oak (Limited)
18,000.34,500
24,CCO
• 4,120
22,903
6,210
April 9,1875
1,500
Sept. 7,1871
6
Success (Limited)
11,000111,000
900
1,500
2,200
1,575
Oet. 3, 1884
500
June-12, 1880
5
Telephone (Limited)
50,000
25,000
1,573
154
May 30,1885
8
Tokatea (Limited)
20,000
100,000
80,000
8,532
150,286
03,625
Jan. 1, 1875
2,500
Sep.30, 1869
/,
18
Thames.
Blanche (Limited)
50,000
25,000
381
341
Mar., 1885
4
Bright Smile (Limited)
20,000
10,000
742
742
5,344
990
Dec. 1,1883
495
Sept., 1882
7
Cambria (Limited)
31,500
31,500
1,181
1,181
88,646
61,425
Deo. 14,1885
12,000
Dec., 1S84
100
Crown (Limited)*
20,000
10,000
1,500
Nov. 2, 1882
G
Dart (Limited) ..
10,000
16,000
5,200
4,472
6,982
2,919
800
Feb. 9, 1884
800
Deo., 1882
20
Darwin (Limited)
13,200
13,200
2,926
2,392
Oct., 1884
18
Devon (Limited)..
15,000
15,000
750
750
Hand of friendship (Ld.)..
15,000
15,000
937
937
15
Nov., 1882
6
Lord Wolselcy (Limited) ..
50,000
25,000
422
122
Dee., 1884
7
Kurunui Hill United (Ld.)
30,000
30,000
13,000
13,000
2,204f
May, 1876
{52
Magnolia (Limited)
15,000
15,000
525
343
170
Mar.31,lS83
4
Moanataiari (Limited)
13,500
133,000
135,000
3,375
373,403
121,365
Nov. 2, 1880
1,G87
Sep. 19,1868
33
Moanataiari Extended (Ld.)
00,000
30,000
8,000
8,000
15
Oet., 18.83
8
New Eureka (Limited)
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
June 2.1SS2
10
New Manukau (Limited) ..
30,000
30,000
1,500
1,500
i ,418
Feb. 10,1883
5
New Princo Imperial (Ld.)
18,000
18,000
450
450
114,828
60,750
Dcc.22,1884
2,250
Feb., 1882
70
Old Caledonian (Limited)§
12,000
12,200
7,800
7,800
3,799
May 3, 1880
14
Oriental (Limited)
30,000 30,000
1,500
1,500
Aug. 10,1882
10
Pinaioro (Limited) -
25,000 25,000
500
••
197
Aug., 1882
7
Bocky Point (Limited)
20,00010,000
750
750
1,418
Mar., 1884
20
Reuben Parr (Limited)
9,000 9,000 5,400
2,938
876
..
June 2,1880
4
Saxon (Limited)
\50,000\25, 000\ 3,437
\ 2,G87
1,127
••
Dec., 1884
8
Thames "Deep Level (Ld.).
\100,000\50 ,000\ G ,797
\ G,4G4
\ 14,822
\ ..
'l
Jan., 1883
11


Thames Golden Crown (Ld.) 123,000123,0001 7,000
/ 3,300
/ 23,353
/ 2,BOO
jNov.l 7,1882
I 2,BOO
MaySl, 1680
’irenton (l^nnited)
30,00018,000 087
/
/
/ -•
1 ..
Aug., 1885
8
Waiofcahi (Limited)
/ G,OOC
'18,000 15,000
/ 3,000
( 72,628
18,000
Aug.12,1886
750
Aug. 1, 1871
"
38
OlIINEMUIlI.
Adeline (Limited)*
20,000
10,000
83
83
Oct., 1885
5
Amaranth (Limited)
15,000
40,000
Sept.', 1885
„
. .
Antiquary (Limited)*
20,000
250
. .
„
3
Argentine (Limited)*
20,400
13,200
101
1G1
Sept., 1885
„
4
Dubbo (Limited)*
50,000
25,000
300
Dec., 1885
„
3
Gladys (Limited)*
23,200
24,000
11,000
84
84
Dec., 1885
4
Imperial (Limited)*
12,000
250
Sept., 1885
„
4
Ivanhoe (Limited)*
25,000
25,000
1,875
1,875
1,250
Jan. 12,1885
1,250
June, 1883
„
24
Kenilworth (Limited)*
25,000
12,500
468
4G8
134
Oct., 1885
„
8
Martha Extended (Limited)
50,000
50,000
G33
G33
11,401
Mar.31,1883
„
24
Peveril of tlio Peak (Ld.)||
20,00010,000
180
Nov., 1885
„
3
Kose (Limited)* ..
Rosemont (Limited)*
20,000:10,000
250
250
15G
Nov., 1885
„
G
25,00012,500
Sept. 9,1885
„
6
Scott (Limited) ..
40,00040,000
20,000
333
2,100
500
Dec., 1884
GOO
Dee.,' 1885
July 11,1885
„
8
Silverton (Limited)*
24,00012,000
25,00012,500
250
„
6
Sutro (Limited)*
40G
40G
58
„
3
Talisman (Limited)*
40,000 20,000
250
, ,
July, 1885
„
G
Union (Limited)*
30,00015,000
Oct., 1885
8
Welcome (Limited)*
24,000
12,000
237
237
. .
Aug., 1885
G
Welcome Extended (Ld.) ..
, .
Nov.,’ 1885
12
Woodstock (Limited)*
36,000
30,000
450
450
"
Te Ahoha.
Canadian (Limited)
20,000
20,000
1,892
892
91G
Aug., 1882
6
Colonist (Limited)
20,000
20,000
995
995
11,3SG
497
April 3,1884
497
June, 1882
„
12
Inverness (Limited)
25,000 25,000
550
550
5G8
.
Aug., 1883
„
4
Hay Queen (Limited)
20,000
20,000
394
394
328
Sept., 1883
4
New Kind (Limited)
20,000
20,000
2,0G7
GG7
28,126
3,960
Dec.29,1884
990
Feb., 1882
„
38
Premier (Limited)
20,000
20,000
3,2G0
1,2G0
552
2,574
Mar., 1882
„
4
Wcrahiko (Limited) i|
30,000
30,000
G25
835
. ,
, .
, .
July, 1882
„
7
Waiorongomai (Limited) ..
50,000
50,000
9G7
922
8G2
••
Juno, 1883
"
5
Gold- and silver-mining carried on. t Since April, 18S3; no record of previous yields. J Tributors. § Must not be confounded with famous
Caledonian Mino. 1! Ceased operations.
Note. —The quantity of gold from each mine given in these returns is not to bo taken as the entire yield from the claims since their first occupation,
but only as that obtained by tho present owners, the books of the former proprietors not being accessible.


Quartz-mines at work or held in the Hauraki Warden's District on tlio 31st December, 1885.
Name of Mine and Owner.
Date when
first opened.
a
c3
O
O
<s
a
£
Survey
District.
At
Work
or under
Pro-
tection.
u
«H< O •
H O
O ID
%..<
33 Q> rj
© 0.3
d *2
>>t£H
o a o
’q.*2 h"
|®s
*3 ° s
-*e © a
Og.«
H.S M
S S a
®K
go a
O aj
Eh
m
55
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Total
Stampers,
Tables with
Value
Stonebrcakers
Copper-plates,
of
Rollers,
or Blanket-
Plant.
Berdans, or
Concentrators
tables.
o!
B a .
>-|§
Tokatea.
Bachelor (C. H. Bennett) ..
Nov. 18, 1883
A. It. P.
2 0 0
Tokatea
At work
£
10
£
600
Erin’s Hope (J. Sullivan) ..
Feb. 21, 1885
1860
1 1 17
„
5
Kapanga Company..
30 0 0
„
Protect-
9 months
Steam
Steam
10 stampers,
All
3,000
120,000
Kaipawa (E. Woollams) ..
Feb. 21, 1882
2 0 10
[ed
At work
2 berdans
40
7,540
McLean’s (A. McLean)
June 2, 1885
0 3 20
, ,
, *
5
Ness-side (A. McLean)
Juno 12, 1885
2 0 17
fp
fP
t #
20
60
.Nordenfeldfc (G. McFarlane)
Jan. 10,1884
Nov. 18, 1883
1 3 30
10
Bob Boy (J. Mayn)
0 2 20
„
n
Water
2 stampers,
t f
950
520
Boyal Oak Company
Sept. 7, 1871
4 0 27
3 berdans
100
22,963
Success Company ..
June 12, 1880
5 0 0
50
2,200
Tokatea Company ..
Sept. 30, 1869
12 0 0
„
14 stampers,
All
3,000
150, 28G
Welcome (Alex. McNeil) ..
Sept. 9, 1885
1 2 10
2 berdans
20
1,200
Young Oak (J. MoGivinoy)
Sept. 9, 1885
1 0 37
■■
*
••
• •
•*
10
36
Kauki.
Beach (Telephone Company)
Aug. 5, 1872
40 0 0
Kauri ..
. ,
Steam
Steam
15 stampers,
All
2,000
80,000
3 berdans
Tiki.
Castle Bock (J. Vizard)
Aug. 15, 1880
5 0 0
Tiki ..
10
640
Golden Belt (C. W. Gale) (»)
1885
4 3 15
5
60
Matawai (J. Yauglian)
Nov. 10,1880
rf
1 month
30
1,600
■Mullins’s (J. Mullins)
\ June 30,1885
1 1319
1
..
..
. .
5
15


Nelson (J. Ecclestone)
/ Juno SO, 188S
j 1 O 1TI „
1
i
I
/
5
87
Perseverance (T. McDonald) ( a ) 1885
3 0 17 „
~
••
••
5
Tiem an's (C. Gibbs) (*)
Manaia.
1685
Freeholc
•
* *
* *
10
300
A1 (C. F. Lloyd) ..
Jan. 10, 1885
2 1 16
Manaia
, .
5
,,
Manaia (P. H. Blackmon;)
Feb. 10, 1885
18 1 3
, ,
,,
, ,
, ,
10
180
Prince Imperial (F. O’Dowd)
Juno 30, 1885
4 1 30
„
„
5
’’go
Victoria (J. Lynch)
Tapu.
July 20, 1885
5 0 0
"
"
• •
* *
* *
20
Bullion (It. Harrison)
July 28, 1885
10 3
Hastings
„
Hand
. .
. .
..
Everton (T. Dunlop)
Nov. 7, 1885
8 2 0
"
'•
6 months :
condit’nal
"
**
* *
• •
Fiery Cross (J. Pepper) ..
Sept. 11, 1885
10 0
"
Not
at work
•*
*•
• •
Silver Hill (J. Pepper)
Aug. 11, 1885
10 0 0
, p
,,
, ,
Hand
, .
, .
. ,
..
Silver Crown (J. Chambers,
T. Clayton, and others)
Thames.
Sept. 25, 1885
13 3 0
At work
Adelaide (G. \Y. Bull and
others)
Argyle (A. Mackay)
Aug. 29,1882
3 2 19
Thames
At work
••
Hand
••
••
••
••
Dec. 21, 1885
5 0 0
"
Not at
work
••
••
••
••
••
••
• •
Arrow (A. T. Douglas)
Feb’. 19, 1885
2 0 0
At work
5 months
Hand
, .
. *
. .
. .
..
Auckland (P. C. Hansen
and others) ( b )
Sept. 14, 1885
10 1 12
"
"
* *
*
••
* '
* *
38
Bismarck (J. S. White)
. ,
, .
. .
. ,
. .
. .
Bright Smile Company
Sept., 1882
5 2 36
M
At work
Hand
. ,
. ,
. .
, .
5,344
Blanche Gold-mining Co...
Mar. 19, 1885
9 3 6
, ,
'
, ,
, ,
, ,
Bow Bells (G. Peploe)
Mar. 20, 1884
1 0 20
n
, .
. ,
. ,
. .
. .
Bonanza King (J. C. Wil-
liams and others)
Nov. 13, 1885
12 3 0
"
2 months:
partial
»
* *
Balmoral (J. H. Smith) ( c )..
Dec. 14, 1885
6 3 0
3 months:
partial
"
* •
' *
* *
* *
( a ) Situate on private land.
( b ) Old mine reopened.
( c ) Working iron-pyrites for shipment to England.


Name of Mine and Owner.
Date when first
opened.
a
js
s
u
o
<o
w
a
o
Sc
JT <
2 ®
r*
o
O *“S **
OH -
Total Length of
Time of Protection
since first held.
Steam-, Water-, or
Hand-power used
in Winding.
Power employed
for Crushing:
Steam,Water, or Air.
Crushing-
plant :
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables with
Stone breakers
Coppor-plates,
Boilers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
•gS
V
oS fl
c a
*3^
•3 -2^
§
Ph o
Thames— continued.
Bound to Win (G. Gardener)
Dec.
5, 1885
A.
3
R. pJ
0 0
Thames
Not at
Hand
£
£
City of Manchester (J. Scott
May
18, 1878
0
3 28
work
At work
and W. Taylor)
City of Glasgow (H. Skid-
Nov.
29, 1884
0
2 0
„
„
„
,.
. .
,,
. ,
more)
Comet Gold-mining Co. ..
Aug.
31, 1882
4
0 21
„
,,
. .
, .
..
, ,
Comet (A. McD. Scott) ..
Nov.
24, 1885
18
1 0
,,
Cambria Company
Dec.
10,1884
5
0 33
,,
Steam
Water
21 stampers,
All
740
88,046
Claremont (G. Briant)
July
SO, 1883
0
3 28
Hand
Hand
15 berdans,
1 berdan
25
1,000
Coliban (J. H. Hunter) ( a )
May
28, 1880
7
3 27
„
,,
n
, ,
Commercial (James Agnew)
Oct.
9, 1885
20, 1885
0
2 0
„
Cornhill No. 1 (D. H.
Aug.
30
0 0
Not at
4 months
, ,
Bayldon)
Cornhill No. 2 (Philip Hore)
Aug.
21, 1885
30
0 0
work
3 months
Cornhill No. 3. (H. Tapp) ..
Aug.
20, 1885
20, 1885
30
0 0
f
n
..
Cornhill No. 4 (D. H.
Aug.
30
0 0
Bayldon)
Dixon’s No. 1 (E. Waite)
Sept.
14, 1885
1
3 10
n
At work
Don Pedro (J. W. Walker)
July
21, 1872
1
0 0
t
t ,
Hand
# ,
Dart Gold-mining Co. ( b ) ..
Dec.
2,1882
25
2 15
Sus-
, ,
Steam
. ,
1^921
0^982
Devon Gold-mining Co. ;.
\ Jan.
24,1878
4
1 29
pended
1 At work
..
Darwin Gold-mining Co. ..
\ Oct.
31, 1884
1 9
2 31
i
1
Steam
1 ..
509
2,920


Day Dream (James Agnew)
E. and AT. (John JoJinson)
First Demon (Jas. Goodwin)
j July 23, 1885
/ Dec . 18, 1885
Oot. 8, 1883
?
2 21
1 1
0 0
:
..
..
Hand
..
r ::
Fearnought (jas. Bums) ..
Nov. 24, 1881
1
0 0
% t
. .
"300
Great Nevada (G. F. Mor-
Dec. 15, 1885
2
0 0
H
rison)
Gordon (T. Bennett)
Aug. 3, 1885
i
0 0
•
Hand of Friendship Gold-
Nov., 1882
2
1 15
"
Steam
, ,
, ,
mining Company
Hurdy-gurdy (J. F. Heigh-
Dec. 12, 18S5
6
3 0
„
3 months:
Hand
,.
way) («)
Hokianga (R. Jenkin)
Oct. 25, 1881
2
0 36
partial
Water
6 stampers,
Copp.-plates,
150
Interlocutor (Geo. Rayner)
July 11, 1885
i
0 0
3 berdans
blankets
Juno (Fred. R. Hunter) ..
Nov. 13, 1885
0
2 0
Hand
, t
, ,
Kiwi (C. Gallagher)
Oct. 10, 1885
10
0 0
n
Lincoln Castle (J. Me-
Oct. 26, 1885
1
1 0
Donald
Kurunui Hill United Gold-
May 26, 1876
38
15 0
n
Steam
Steam
41 stampers,
All
800
Mining Company
Loyalty (E. Thomas) ( d ) ..
Dec. 5, 1885
6
2 0
3 months:
Hand
13 berdans
Lone Hand (Thomas Bar-
Aug. 14, 1884
3
0 12
partial
clay) («)
Leadville (W. S. Greenville)
Sept. 25, 1885
Nov. 20, 1885
13
3 2
Little Helen Extended (A.
io-
0 0
tr
Hand
McD. Scott)
Lord \Y olseley Gold-mining
Dec. 16, 1884
7
1 10
, ,
M
f ,
, ,
Company
Little Bertha (Wm. Vercoe)
ilarch, 1880
0
3 0
n
, t
, ,
Little Nelly (N. Al. Fearce)
June 11, 1883
0
1 0
# 4
. .
Little Maggie (Wm. Me-
June 23, 1883
1
0 0
4 ,
, ,
Curdy)
(“) Previously held as Coliban licensed holding, but forfeited
February 12, 1880.
( b ) Includes three licensed holdings.
( c ) Working calcspar for flux at furnace.
(>') Working iron-pyrites for shipment to England.
( c ) Previously worked as Little Lizzie Claim, from 13tli July, 1875.


Name of Mine and Owner.
Date when first
opened.
£
eJ
6
S-*
o
o
If}
ed
<a
At
Survey
District.
Work
or under
Pro-
tection.
Total Length of
Time of Protection
since first held.
Steam*, Water*, or
Hand-power used
in Winding.
Power employed
for Crushing;
Steam, Water, or Air.
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables with
Stone breakers
Copper-plates,
Boilers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
*, s
o
o o
0)
<»<3
«3 £3
■3*
*\ <*!?
EH
tj o
Little David (T. Dunlop) ..
April 6, 1885
A. R. P.
10 0
Thames
At work
3 months
Hand
&
&
500
Magnolia Gold-mining Co. («)
May 31, 1883
7 2 30
n
1,700
Maldon {J. McDermott) ..
Nov. 29, 1885
G 3 19
n
Not at
, #
Mary (H. Beitman)
Sept. 9, 1884
0 2 0
work
At work
Moanataiari Gold - mining
Sept. 19, 1803
71 2 5
„
Steam
Water
41 stampers,
All
10,000
373,403
Company^)
Moanataiari Extended Gold-
October, 1883
12 1 39
21 berdans
2,130
15
mining Company) 1 )
New Albumin. Gold-mining
August, 1885
7 1 7
Hand
1,268
Company
New Lead (D. W. Pitkethly)
Sept. 30, 1885
6 2 0
n
M
. ,
New Manukau Gold-mining
Feb. 10, 1883
0 3 10
H
, ,
1,418
Company
New Prince Imperial Co. ..
Feb., 1882
7 1 20
Steam
Water
22 stampers
All
1,500 114,628
New Whau Gold-mining Co.
Nov. 28, 1873
1 2 33
H
Old Caledonian Gold-min-
May 3, 1880
6 2 2
lt
Steam
2^050
3,800
ing Company (”)
Oriental Gold-mining Co.( ft )
Aug. 10,1882
20 2 14
...
Old Morning Bell (J. Me-
June 24, 1884
110
M
Not at
, ,
Cormick)
Pinafore Gold-mining Co.(“)
Aug. 24, 1882
4 2 24
work
Hand
197
Privateer (W. Bird)
Oct. 30,1885
110
At work
6 months
* ,
. .
. .
"Pride oi ’K.o.'Ctxks, (E,. Hoa-
ljuiy 9,1882
, 1 1 20
, ,
. ,
"kVrvs)
\
\


Portia (G. \V. Clark)
f Dec. 21,1883
/ °
3
0
,
Not at
work
Queen of Beauty (T. Bad-
Aug., 1885
1
O
0
„
At work
„
ford)
Queen (J. W. Walker)
Nov. 12, 1883
20
0
0
-
-
4 months:
-
••
condit’nal
Bed, White, and Blue (Jas.
Oct. 3, 1S85
0
2
0
„
„
3 months
„
•*
••
Wilson)
Beuben Parr Gold-mining
June 2, 18S0
6
2
17
..
„
. ,
. .
. .
876
Company (“)
March, 1SS4
0
1,418
Kocky Point Gold - mining
Company
Eising Sun (John Burke)..
15
0
"
»
* ‘
"
* *
* *
* *
Aug. 28, 1885
1
1
0
3 months
Steam
. .
• •
liooo
1,127
Saxon Gold-mining Co. ..
Dec., 1884
Sept. 14, 1885
17
1
21
„
Silver King (W. S. Green-
13
3
2
„
„
. •
Hand
• •
* '
* ■
* •
ville) ( c )
Silver Crown (W. S. Green-
Sept. 1, 1885
13
3
2
..
.
, .
. .
. .
ville) ( c )
Silver Cloud (B. WolfI) ( c )
Sept. 1, 1885
10
0
0
3 months :
„
..
. .
Shamrock Lead (W. H. i'ai-
Dec. 18, 1885
3
1
0
„
„
„
. .
• •
• '
pari)
Summerhill (T. Fogarty) ..
Aug. 1, 1885
0
2
0
partial
;
• .
, .
. .
Surprise (T. Whitaker)
Oct. 10, 1885
2
0
10
„
„
. •
* *
Surprise No. 2 (T. Whitaker)
Oct. 10, 18S5
0
2
0
„
. .
„
• .
All ..
l]028
28 ]358
Thames Golden Crown Gold-
May 31, 1880
G
1
1G
At work
Steam
Water
20 stampers,
mining Company
Thames Deep-level Gold-
January, 18S3
34
3
25
9 berdans
, .
13,620
14,322
mining Company ( d )
3 months
Hand
Third Venture (Jas. Morrow)
Jan. 16,1885
1
0
0
Not at
• •
• •
•
* •
work
True Briton (W. S. Green-
Feb. 9, 1885
1
0
0
„
*
•
•
ville)
Triumph (James Morton) ..
July G, 1885
0
2
0
„
At work
..
Steam
,
.
'ioc
. .
Trenton Gold-mining Co...
Aug. 28, 1885
22
1
1G
"
’
(") Includes two licensed holdings.
( b j Includes ten licensed holdings.
( c ) Working galena and silver ore.
( J ) Includes three licensed holdings.
22


Name of Mine and Owner.
Date when first
opened.
a
<3
©
O
<D
o3
►3
At
Survey
District.
Work
or under
Pro-
tection.
Total Length of
Time of Protection
since first held.
Steam-, Water-, or
Hand-power used
in Winding.
Power employed
for Crushing:
Steam,Water, or Air.
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers,
Tables with
Stone breakers
Copper-plates,
Rollers,
Berdans, or
or Blanket-
tables.
Concentrators
~s
O o
©£
3 ..
Sad
p> 3
Thames — continued.
Two Brothers (A. Mellett)
Sept. 14, 1885
A.
0
R,
2
p.
0
Thames
At work
Hand
£
£
Victory (T. Johnson and
Sept. 3, 1872
2
i
20
u
Not at
. .
„
Water
8 stampers,
Copp.-plates,
*200
others) (“)
Victory (C. Berry) ,( b )
Oct. 6, 1884
0
2
0
work
At work
2 berdans
blankets'
500
Waiotahi Gold-miningCo.( c )
Aug. 1, 1871
15
2 34
„
„
. .
Steam
Water
21 stampers,
All
2,478
72,828
Welcome (J. A. S. Wilson)
Oct. 21, 1885
5
0
0
Not at
3 months
Hand
3 berdans
Wild Duck (Alex. Bruce) ..
May 9, 1885
Sept. 25, 1873
1
0
0
work
At work
4 months
West Coast (J. Northey) ..
6
2
0
„
, ,
, ,
. .
Weymouth (James Wallis)
Aug. 18, 1885
2
2
0
„
. .
„
, ,
• •
..
Young Australian (S. Ensor
Sept. 21, 1885
2
0
0
„
Not .at
, .
, ,
, ,
# 4
and others)
work
' Taip.ua.
Master Charley (F. Me-
Oct. 10, 1885
0
2
0
Waihou
At work
, ,
Hand
, f
t t
Liver)
OniNEMURI.
•
Adeline Gold-mining Co. ..
Oct. 5, 1885
5
0
0
Ohino-
„
, .
, ,
Advance (R. McD. Scott) ..
Nov. 10,1885
9
3
0
muri
Argentine Gold-mining Co.
Sept., 1885
10
3
32
„
„
Hand
Antiquary Gold-mining, Co.
\ Sept. 2, 1885
10
0
0
\ "
„
Heaconsfi.e\& (G. Haxcourt')
\ Sopt. 25, 1885
\io
0
c
l
„
.
..
. .
. .
. .


Bismarck (J. S. White)
1 Oct. 10, 188S
/ 5
1 38
1
• •
••
Bon Lomond ( James Top-
Sept. 9 , 1885
5
O 0
tt
Not at
• •
* *
* *
work
City of Auckland (H. Dal-
Nov. 10, 1885
10
1 0
"
»
• •
* *
ton)
Crown Gold-mining Co.f' 1 )..
Nov. 2, 1882
15
3 21
H
At work
Hand
••
359
Dubbo Gold-mining Co. ..
Dec. 7, 1885
15
2 22
tt
tt
«
* ‘
Egmont (R. Clements)
Oct. 2G, 1885
10
2 0
tt
H
* *
* *
* *
* ‘
Gehenna (C. McLean)
Sept. 14, 1885
14
1 9
"
Not at
work
* *
Gladys Gold-mining Co. ..
October, 1885
9
3 31
„
Hand
••
••
Golden Roint (J. ±i. i ioil-
man)
Hidden Treasure (James
Nov. 10, 1885
11
1 16
"
"
* *
Oct. 2G, 1885
10
0 0
j,
,t
••
••
Craig)
10
26
Imperial Gold-mining Co.
Ivanhoe Gold-mining Co. ..
Sept., 1885
June, 1883
2 4
1 7
»
"
Water
16 stampers,
4 berdans,
All ..
i|ooo
••
1 set Mac-
kay pans
134
Kenilworth Gold-mining Co.
October, 1885
14
1 32
„
At work
//
* •
* •
• •
Melrose (C. McLean)
Oct. 10, 1885
10
0 0
„
• •
Hand
* *
* *
• *
• *
Mint Gold-mining Company
Dec. 11, 1885
1
0 0
tt
»
• •
• •
* ‘
* *
* •
Musket (J. H. Walsh)
Dec. 14, 1885
10
0 0
tt
Not
at work
* *
"
* *
Peveril of the Peak Gold-
Nov., 1885
G
3 0
tt
At work
* *
* •
• *
• •
* *
mining Company
Rose Gold-mining Company
Nov., 1885
5
0 16
. .
Hand
. -
• •
• •
156
Royal (E. Rogers and
others)
Shamrock (J. Murray)
Nov. 10, 1883
13
3 0
"
"
* *
* *
Nov. 24, 1885
10
0 0
Not
at work
••
' *
• •
* *
Silver Mint (W. S. Mit-
Sept. 26, 1885
4
1 36
.
"
• *
•
• •
chell)
-Specimen Hill (W. Dunkin)
Sept. 29,1885
6
3 18
At work
- ••
Hand 1
••
••
*
(°) Licensed holding.
( b ) Ordinary claim.
( c ) Includes threo licensed holdings.
( 4 ) Includes two licensed holdings.


Name of Mine and Owner.
Date wlien first
opened.
s
d
3
n
o
o
w
c3
©
2®
in £
S
At
Wor!
r und
Pro-
ectio
B off
H
Total Length of
Time of Protection
since first hclcK
Steam-, Water-, or
Hand-power used
in Winding.
Power employed
for Crushing:
Steam, Water, or Air.
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Appliances:
Heads of
Quicksilver,
Stampers
Tables
Stone breakers
Copper-plates,
Hollers,
or Blanket-
Berdans, or
tables.
Concentrators
«*H 3
o
o o
ffl
3 -J
2 a d
>^.3
EH
Ohinemori — continued.
A.
r. r.
S,
£
Sutro Gold- and Silver-min-
July 11, 1SS5
13
3 0
Oliine-
At work
Hand
112
' 58
ing Company
muri
Sultana (A. Walker)
Try Again (W. C. Porter) ..
Sept. 25, 1885
3
1 28
"
Not
at work
••
*•
••
••
Sept. 1, 1885
5
0 0
u
, ,
Talisman Gold-mining Co.
Sept. 2, 1885
13
3 0
n
At work
Hand
Victoria (H. Cumming) ..
Victory (Jas. Stevenson) ..
Nov. 21, 1885
5
0 0
»
Not
at work
3 months
••
Nov. 19, 1885
8
1 0
"
At work
6 months:
partial
Hand
Welcome Gold-mining Com-
August, 1885
4
3 37
»
»
- pany
Welcome Extended Gold-
May 26, 1877
3
0 13
mining Company
Woodbine (T. Snodgrass) ..
Oct. 26, 1S85
8
2 7
Woodstock Gold and Silver
Nov., 18S5
14
0 36
Hand
Water
1 stone-
Smelting-
4,000
Mining and Smelting Co.
breaker
furnace
Waiiii.
Amaranth Gold-mining Co.
Oet. 1, 1885
28
2 1
Ivatikati
Amaranth (Thomas Ste-
Oct. 1, 1885
28
2 1
phenson)
Hero (Thomas Hollis)
Oct. 7, 1885
9
2 15
„
,,
Hand
..
Just in Time (Martha Ex-
|Ang. 31,1885
1
1 0
Not
6 months
tended Gold-mining Co.)
1 "
at work


Martha. Extended Gold-
/ Mar. 31, 1883
i O
O 171
1 At work
i
I Hand
Wator
30 stampers
All
1,500
11,401
mining Company (*)
Nil Desperandum (A. Bur-
'Oct. 7,1885 13
3 10
4 berdans
cliell and others)
Pacific (0. F. Mitchell) ..
Sept. 18, 18S5
15
2 0
Not
3 months
Rosemont Gold-milling Co.
Sept. 10, 1885
20
1 0
at work
At work
Hand
Silver Eagle (James Erater)
Oct. 10, 1885
7
3 0
„
„
. .
Silver City (James Erater)
Oct. 10, 1885
16
3 0
„
„
Hand
, .
Silverton Gold-mining Co.
Dec., 1885
10
0 0
„
„
,.
,,
,,
Union Gold-mining Co. ..
Oct. 27, 1885
14
3 0
„
„
Wananga (G. Gage)
Dec, 23, 1885
30
0 0
„
„
„
..
. ,
yellow Jacket (K. K. Me-
Oct. 7, 1885
9
2 20
t
„
„
,,
, ,
Gregor and others)
Tf, Aboha.
Albion (E. Cameron)
Nov. 10, 18S5
4
1 25
To Aroha
„
„
. .
Canadian (Canadian Co.) ..
Feb. 1, 1882
8
0 G
„
Water
916
Colonist (Colonist Co.) (*) ..
Dec. C, 1881
10
0 0
„
„
„
14,386
Champion Lode (C. A.
Nov. 10, 1885
14
0 20
„
„
„
Comes) ( b )
Champion Lode No. 4 (D.
Nov. 10, 1885
2
2 8
„
rr
H. Bayltlon)
Dawn of Hope (R. Burke)
Dec. 22, 1885
5
0 0
„
*
Galena (Battery Co.) ( c ) ..
Nov. 10, 18S5
10
0 0
r/
„
„
Water
75
Grand Junction (John
Deo. 23, 1885
5
0 0
„
„
„
. .
Saunders)
Gladstone (J. A. Dobson)..
Nov. 10, 1885
5
0 0
Hold Fast (John Golds-
Deo. 8, 1885
5
0 0
„
„
. . .
worthy)
Inverness (Inverness Co.) (“)
Sept. 1, 18S1
6
2 29
Not
//
Water
508
Keep It Dark (D. J. Frazer)
Nov. 10, 1885
4
1 21
at work
At work
..
Langtry (George Robson)..
Nov. 10„ 1885
4
3 22
„
„
„
. .
Laura (George Robson)
Nov. 10, 1883
5
0 0
"
" .
"
* *
(») Includes two licensed holdings.
(’>) Three licensed holdings.
( c ) Ono licensed holding and one claim.


Nam© of ilfn© and Owner.
Date when
first opened.
a
c3
o
o
©
<§
3
gs
*7 5
o tii
At
Work
r unde
Pro-
ection,
Total Length of
Time of Protection
since first held.
Steam-, Water-, or
Hand-power used
in Winding.
Power employed
for Crushing:
Steam, Water, or Air.
Crushing-
plant:
Gold-saving
Number of
Heads of
Appliances:
Quicksilver,
Total
Stampers,
Tables with
Value
Stonebreakers
Copper-plates,
of
Kollers,
or Blanket-
Plant.
Berdans, or
Concentrators
tables.
si
«3 © ©
a
S2
Te Akoha — continued .
Lone Hand (\V. F. Firth)..
May 5, 1884
A. R. P.
4 3 20
Te Aroka
At work
Hand
Water
&
£
Hark Aloon (Henry Brett)
Dec. 22, 1885
5 0 0
May Queen (May Queen
Dec. 23, 1881
5 0 0
.
328
Company)
New Era (Peter Ferguson)
Nov. 10, 1885
4 2 22
Water
15,000
JN ew Find (New Find Co.) (»)
Premier (Premier Company)
Dec. 23, 1881
Dec. 23, 1881
19 1 20
5 0 0
•
«
•
"
28,126
2,574
Purotarau (Thomas Gavin)
Silver King (H. McLiver)..
Nov. 10, 1885
Nov. 11, 1885
5 0 0
2 3 0
»
»
"
••
Silver Queen (Battery Co.)
Nov. 10, 1885
5 0 0
Tui (A. F. James) ..
Waiorongomai (Waiorongo-
Nov. 10, 1885
June 6, 1882
3 0 32
18 2 17
»
'■
-
Water
'862
• mai Company) (»)
Werahiko (Werakiko Co.)..
Jan. 25, 1882
5 0 0
"
••
"
»
••
••
••
835
(“) Includes two licensed holdings.
Note.— -The quantity of gold from each mine is not to be taken as the entire yield from the claim since its first occupation, but only
as that obtained by the present owners, the books of the former proprietors not being accessible. The returns do not, except in a few
instances, supply the amount of gold obtained from claims worked by private parties, who are generally averso to publishing the information,
and there are no records from which the particulars could be gathered.


Gold-mining Leases held in the Hauraki Warden’s District on the
31st December, 1885.
Name of Lessee.
Date when
granted.
Area.
o
a a£
0 3 o
S3 2a
Coromandel.
A. R. P.
£
James Vizard
Aug. 15, 1882
5 O' 0
15
Kapanga Gold-mining Company (Limited) ..
Nov. 14, 1882
30 0 0
88
John Vaughan
Nov. 16,1882
10 0 0
30
Henry French
July 1, 1884
2 0 20
6
John Mayn
Nov. 18, 1884
0 2 20
2
0. H. Bennett
Nov. 18, 1884
2 0 6
6
Royal Oak Gold-mining Company (Limited)..
Mar. 10, 1885
4 0 27
12
Tokatea Gold-mining Company (Limited)
Feb'. 10, 1885
12 2 21
36
Philip H. Blackmore
Feb. 10, 1885
18 1 32
53
Francis O’Dovvd .. .. ...
June 30, 1885
4 1 30
13
Telephone Gold-mining Company (Limited) ..
Aug. 7, 1885
30 0 0
88
Telephone Gold-mining Company (Limited) ..
Aug. 7, 1885
10 0 30
30
John Lynch .. - • • - •
July 29, 1885
5 0 0
15
'V. D. H. H. Dick
Sept. 22, 1885
10 3
5


ECONOMIC MINERALS.
IRON ORES.
No iron, mines are at present worked, though almost every
known variety of iron ore has been discovered in the country;
the workings being limited to the black sands, which occur
plentifully on the coasts. There are also few soils or stream*
gravels that will not yield a considerable quantity when washed.
The chief deposits arc, however, on the sea-shore of the west
coast of both Islands, the best known being that at Taranaki.
Several companies have been formed both in England and
the colony to manufacture steel direct from this ironsand. They
have not, however, succeeded, but a partial success was attained
by smelting, in furnaces, bricks formed of the ore with cal-
careous clay and carbonaceous matter, and recently the sand has
been treated by a continuous cementation process that produces
puddled blooms. It remains to be proved, however, if it can be
profitably treated in large quantities by this or any other
process. A company called the New Zealand Iron and Steel
Company, Limited, worked at Onehunga, for the purpose of
making bar iron from the ironsand by a direct process; but it
did not prove successful. The following are the chief localities
in which the ore is found :
Brown Hematite Ore. —Parapara, Nelson. Immense quanti-
ties of brown hematite ore occur on the surface of the ground.
Some of this was converted into iron at Melbourne in 1873, and
gave, on analysis—lron, 97'GG8 ; manganese, '2GB; carbon
combined, ‘542; carbon free (graphite) ‘208; silicon, with
titanium traces, l'OOl; phosphorus, ‘041; sulphur, '269 :
total, IGO‘OOO. This iron has the following characters : Colour
uniform, approaching white; structure homogeneous, and finely
granular, hard, brittle. It is therefore the variety called white
iron. A further valuable deposit of brown hematite has been
discovered by an officer of the Geological Survey Department on
* Republished, with slight additions and alterations, from Dr. Hectors
Handbook of New Zealand,” 18SG.


the west side of Mount Peel, where the deposit is about GOft.
thick. The ore contains 56 per cent, of metallic iron, and has
been traced. for a distance of three miles, beyond which point it
is reported to swell out to as much as a mile in width.
Specular Iron Ore. —Dun Mountain, Nelson. Occurs in
irregular veins, in greenstone rocks; contains 63 per cent, of
metallic iron.
Specular Iron Ore. —Maori Point, Shotovcr, Otago. A 6-ft.
vein in mica-schist, equally rich with the above; extent unknown.
Compact Iron Ore. —D’Urville Island, Nelson. Vein, thick-
ness unknown, in diorite slate, with serpentine and chrome;
yields 63 per cent, of iron.
Magnetic Iron Ore. —This valuable ore, though occurring
chiefly as black sand, is found in several parts of the colony in
the massive form.
Magnetic Iron Ore. —Dun Mountain, Nelson. In a vein
16in. thick in serpentinous slates.
Magnetic Iron Ore. —Wakatipu Lake, Otago. In a vein in
mica-schist.
Magnetic Iron Ore. —Maramarua, Pritli of Thames. From a
vein in ferriferous slates; contains only oxides of titanium and
manganese.
Black Ironsand. — From beach at Taranaki.
Iron-band Ore. —Contains TO per cent, of iron. Occurs at
llivcr, Otago, and Manukau, Auckland; formed by
Mack-sand layers becoming cemented with hematite. This
would he a most valuable ore if obtained in large quantities.
Brown Hematite (or hydrous oxide) also occurs in Amuri in
S re at quantity.
Reniform Iron Ore. —Mangonui.
Bog Iron Ore. —Spring Swamp, Auckland. Forms thick layers
the bottom of swamps. Though rich in iron, the ore is inferior
011 account of tlip sulphur and phosphorus it usually contains. •
Hematite. —An analysis of this ore, from Raglan, gave—
of iron, 72 - 69; oxide of manganese, '3l ; alumina,
~02 ; magnesia, - G9 ; lime, -58; phosphoric acid, not estimated ;
mdphidc of iron, ’ll; hygroscopic water, 4 - Gl; constitutional
Water, 13’02; silicates undccomposed by acids, 5'97: total,
i.oo-000.


IRONSANDS.
The following tabular statement gives a particular account of
ironsands :
IBON3ANDS OF NEW ZEALAND.
Locality.
Matrix whence probably derived.
■ Mag-
netite.
Hema-
tite.
Titan-
ite.
Per-
centage of
Iron.
Other Minerals
present.
Upper Buller River, Nelson'
Hornblende rocks ..
87-5
9-4
70-2
Lower Buller River, Nelson
Tertiary gold-drift of diorite slate ..
54-0
42-3
590
Upper Clutha River, Otago
Mica-schist
82-7
9-7
659
Lower Clutha River, Otago
Mica-schist and Tertiary strata
74-4
••
2-5
58-7
Auriferous and
with 12 per cent.
Mountain stream, Canterbury ..
Palaeozoic slates ..
62-7
37-2
G6-2
of glauconite.
Mountain stream, Otago
Paljeozoic slates ..
86'1
10-5
58-5
Tuapeka, Otago
Old gold-drift
2-2
92-8
G38
Wakatipu, Otago ..
Mica-schist
80-0
7-G
52-9
Auriferous.
Mataura River (Upper)
Diorite slate
9-8
70-9
41*2
Mataura River
Old gold-drift
G3-5
16-1
8-0
GO-6
Stewart Island
Granitic rocks with greenstone dykes
77-8
20-1
57-3
Auriferous. •
Stewart Island
Hornblende rocks..
71-5
20-0
8-2
70T
Anatoke, Nelson
Granite and hornblende
79-8
7-7
3-4
GO-2
Mahinapua Lake (old channel of
Hokitika)
River-drift from diorite rocks
58-0
29-1
Auriferous, with
garnets, topaz,
Sea-beach, Hokitika ..
Sea-sand drift
75-0
540
Motueka River, Nelson
Tertiary strata and granite
330
32-5
420
Auriferous.
Wairau River, Marlborough
Tertiary strata and granite-schist ..
210
48-4
38-9
Auriferous.
Wanganui River, Nelson
Granite and Tertiary
54-0
130
43-2
Auriferous.
Saddle Hill, Otago
Basaltic
58-3
25-6
52-9
Green Island, Otago ..
Basaltic or sea-beach
53-3
29-6
50-3
Hooper Inlet
Basaltic or sea-beach
20-0
74-2
53-0
West Bluff, Southland, Foveaux
Strait
Diorite or sea-beach
12-2
40-G
28-6
Auriferous and pla-
D’Urville Island, Nelson
Diabase and granite
78-6
57-4
Clirome iron.
Taranaki beach
Trachyte
91-9
6-2
70-1
Taranaki beach '
Trachyte
710
••
80
5G1
Olivine and horn-
blende.
Tauranga. beabh
\ Trachyte
87'4
1 8*6
68*0


MASSIVE IRON ORES, OXIDES, AND TITANITES.
The composition of the chief massive ores of iron may be
illustrated by the following analyses :
Variety.
Locality.
Centesimal Composition.
6
©
©
o
*2 d
w .
3 m
o
5 ©
©
•*-»
fcj)
ci
s
a
©
a
S3
£
o
©
tc .
d JJ
a 2
©»-•
©
Jh
©
Ph
Impure magnetite
Manukau, Auck-
land
Dunstan Gorge,
Otago
Dunstan, Otago
60-20
37-90
Traces
1-90
70 06
Magnetic
86-32
*
13-68
••
63-60
Hematite
96-11
..
3-89
, .
68-30
Magnetite
Dun Mountain,
Nelson
90-62
**
7-60
1-80
63-40
Mixed magnetite
hematite
Maramarua,
Auckland
2-24
87-10
Traces
10-66
* *
62-30
Hog iron ore
Spring Swamp,
Auckland
••
73-17
13-83
1300
51-22
Brown iron ore ..
Raglan
72-69
. .
9-68
17-60
50-88
Brown iron ore*..
Kawau
67-98
. .
19-65
12-37
47-58
hydrous hema-
Parapara, Nel-
son
••
62-68
24-08
13-24
43-87
hydrous hema-
tite
Mount Poel,
Nelson
* *
5600
* Manganese oxide, I*3B.
t Contains a little manganese.
Spathic Iron Ore. —This occurs in considerable quantity in
fte Collingwood District, in most cases more or less oxidized;
°fle form of this ore, known as black-band, is one of the most
Suable kinds known, and alternates with the coal-seams in
Collingwood. A specimen of a siliceous and spathic iron ore
from Otamataura Gully is constituted approximately as follows :
Carbonate of iron, 56'9; carbonate of lime and magnesia, 2'B;
s 'liceous matters, 40'3 : total, IOO'O. The iron amounts to
a tout 27 per cent. Other large deposits of spathic iron ore
We been found at Foote’s Coal-mine, at the Miranda Redoubt,
W Jenkins’s Coal-mine, Nelson. They contain 40 and 41 per
ce& t. of iron respectively.


BLACK-BANDS, OR SPATHIC IRON ORES.
Variety.
Locality.
Protoxide
of Iron.
Sesqui-
oxide
of
Iron.
Carbonic
Acid.
Silicates.
Per-
centage
of
Iron.
Black-band..
Collingwood, Nelson
35-23
-
25-77
21-12
3-93
4G-06
Black-band..
Collingwood, Nelson
40-38
5-2G
21-97
1G-G9 .
35-12
Spathic
Miranda, Auckland
4008
Spathic
Jenkins’s Mine,
Nelson
* *
41-00
Analysis op Two Specimens.
Spathic Iron Qres.
Malvern Hills.
Collingwood.
Protoxide of iron ..
Cl-2
35-23
•Sesquioxidc of iron ..
25-77
Oxide of magnesia ..
•8
i-oo-
Alumina
1*8
2-11
Magnesia ..
*4
1-94
Lime
■3
•71
Silica
13-G
•90 '
Sulphuric Acid
Traces
Carbonic acid
l 31-2 {
21-12
Phosphoric acid
Not determine 11
•Sulphide of iron
•41
Water
■7
1-90
Organic matter
5-72
Silicates undecomposed by acids
••
303
1000 .
99-90
Hematite containing about 40 per cent, of iron, occurs inter-
mixed. with quartz pebbles, in a stratum 100 ft. thick exposed
over several acres, at Parapara, Nelson, and from it an excel-
lent paint is manufactured, which, being a pure peroxide of h° n >
is the best preservative for that metal. Wood coated with this
paint is comparatively non-inflammable, and it is therefore much
used in painting wooden buildings.
CHROME ORE.
This ore, which is a mixture of chromic iron and alumina; lS
chiefly associated with magnesian rock, resembling olivine i"
composition, named Dunite by Dr. Ilochstetter. It occurs m
veins often 12ft. in thickness, and sometimes contains as nm c


as 80 per cent. o£ chrome ore. This ore has heen largely ex-
ported from Nelson, and is used for the manufacture of salts of
chromic acid, possessing the properties of brilliant dyes. The
pure ore contains 50 per cent, of the chrome oxide, and is worth
lllto £2O per ton, according to the state of the market. The
exports of this ore since 1853 amount to 5,306 tons, valued at
£37,367, but since 1866 no shipments have heen made.
COPPEE OEE.
Copper mines have heen worked in Auckland on Great Bar-
rier Island and Kawau Island, and to a small extent in Doubt-
less Bay. It has heen found associated with the mctamplioric
rocks in Otago and at Waipori, where a 4-ft. sulphide of copper
(pyrites) lode exists. An attempt to trace this lode was made
for a short time and then abandoned.
A carbonate of copper is found in the same locality, hut
only-in rolled fragments.
Copper has also been found in the form of cuprite and
oopper-glance in the Dun Mountain, Nelson,- and a few miles
to the south in Aniseed Valley extensive works have been com-
menced by the Champion Mining Company; and on D’Urville
Island, at which latter place the ore has been traced to a depth
°f 100 ft., some of the better samples from this place yielding as
much as 45 per cent, of copper.
A lode of copper-pyrites mixed with pyrrliotinc has also been
discovered in Dusky Sound, Otago, and an attempt has been
made to open up a mine at that place.
An interesting occurrence of native copper disseminated as.
fine grains through a granular serpentinous rock should also he
Ooted. The extent of the ore is as yet unknown, hut it occurs
m the serpentine mineral belt of Nelson.
Cupreous iron ore in serpentine has heen found at Dun
fountain. It is interesting from its being slightly auriferous.
Copper-pyrites is present in a lode 3ft. to sft. thick in mica-
s°hist, at Moke Creek, Wakatipu. Lake: it is associated with
Ca rbonatc and native copper. The ore contains the high pro-
P° r tion of 11 to 55 per cent, of metallic copper, the usual
av erage of Cornish ore being only 5 per cent. There is lime-
sh>ne in close vicinity to the lode, so that there would he no


difficulty in reducing the ore to a “ rcgulus,” in which state it
would save cost in shipment.
Near Collingwood, Nelson, a lode has been opened up, and
contains 22 to 25 per cent, of metallic copper.
Grey sulphide , found at Wangapeka, Nelson, contains 55 per
cent, of copper, together with a little silver and gold.
In Kawau Island, Auckland, the lode first produced 16 per
cent, of copper, and then fell off to 8 per cent., and at the
bottom of the workings to about 5 per cent. The width of the
lode was Bft. The workings were discontinued chiefly on
account of the high price of coal consequent on the gold-dis-
coveries.
In Great Barrier Island the ore (pyrites) occurs in a quartz
matrix. A fair sample of the mixed specimen afforded 26*62
per cent, of copper. The Aotea Copper-mining Company worked
this pyrites ore to a considerable extent.
LEAD ORES.
Lead occurs as galena in the District of Nelson, at Rangi-
toto Mountain, in Westland, and also at the Thames Goldfield.
It invariably contains silver to a considerable amount. The
following localities may be mentioned : -
Galena, Bedstead Gully, Collingwood.
Galena and zinc-blende, Parapara Valley.
Argentiferous lead-ore, Richmond Hill, Parapara; value
£oo per ton.
Galena, Wangapeka, Nelson. Sulphide of lead, with quartz
that contains also sulphides of iron, and antimony with gold, i»
veins in felspathic schist. The galena contains 260 z. of silver
per ton, while the gold is only in those parts of the ore that
contain iron-pyrites.
Galena with zinc-blende, Perseverance Mine, Collingwood,
Nelson. Occurs in a band, 2ft. to sft. thick, parallel with
auriferous quartz veins; the galena and blende are both p« re >
but so intermixed in the lode that they could not be reduced
separately.
Argentiferous galena is also a common associate with tb e
auriferous lodes of the Cape Colville Peninsula and Te Aroh»
districts.


ZINC OEES.
Zinc ore occurs at the Perseverance Mine, Collingwood,
Nelson, and in small quantity in Tararua Creek, Thames, where
it is found in white cement with auriferous veins. It contains
60 per cent, of metallic zinc, which is worth about £l5 per ton.
It is also found in the following localities :
Zinc-hlende and galena, Bedstead Gully, Collingwood.
Zinc, as yellow or honey blende, Perseverance Mine, Colling-
wood, Nelson.
Zinc-hlende with galena and pyrites, the former having about
4oz. of silver, and the latter about soz. of gold, per ton, Mount
Rangitoto, Westland.
ANTIMONY OEES.
Stihnite lodes were discovered in 1873 near the coast of
Queen Charlotte Sound, Marlborough, and proved to contain
from 51T2 to 69‘40 per cent, of antimony, the matrix being
quartz. Similar lodes have been known for many years in the
Shotover District, at Ilindon, at Waipori, in the Carrick
Mountains, and other places in Otago.
A sulphide-of-antimony lode occurs some miles' south of
Collingwood, containing no less than ’757 per cent, of silver,
which is equal to 185 - 88 troy ounces per ton.
Besides these localities, antimony ores are found at the
Thames and at Reefton, associated with gold; and also at
hangdon’s Reef, near Greymouth.
At Endeavour Inlet, Cook Strait, antimony ore is being
mined, smelting-furnaces have been erected near the
and star antimony is now being regularly shipped to
England.
In 1883 a bonus of £5OO was offered for the production of
the first 250 tons of antimony regulus to he sold in a foreign
Market at a fair market price, but no application was made for
dj arid it lapsed.
MANGANESE OEES.
These ores are useful for generation of chlorine for bleaching
Purposes, also for calico-printing, &c. The values of these
c °mmon ores are from £3 to £4 per ton, and the following
Masses of them have been found:—


Rhodonite (silicate of manganese), at Dunstan, Otago, as
rolled masses ; percentage of manganese about 40. •
Wad (hydrous oxide), at Port Hardy, D’Urville Island,
Nelson; percentage of manganese about 45.
Brannite, or manganese oxide, on Malvern Hills, Canterbury.
Ores are also found at Whangarci, in Auckland; at Oliariu,
near Wellington; and in Napier: the latter contains 44 per
cent, of manganese oxide, the remainder being mostly clay.
The same ore, although of better quality, is at present being
successfully worked in the Bay of Islands. The shipments for
the year 1879 amounted to 2,140 tons, valued at .£8,338. In
1881 the shipments were 1,271 tons, valued at .£3,283; in
1884 they amounted to 318 tons, valued at ,£BO9 ; and in 1885,
002 tons, valued at .61,716, were exported. Altogether, upwards
■ of 12,000 tons, valued at over £40,000, were exported, up to the
31st Dccemher, 1885.
In 1883 a bonus of £5OO was offered for the production of
the first £2,500 worth of either manganeisen or manganese
bronze, sold at a fair market price in a foreign market, hut it
lapsed without application having been made.
MINERAL OILS.
In 1866 attention was first directed to the occurrence in the
colony of petroleum, and some very fine oils have since then
been found. There are three principal localities, and these pr°"
ducc each a distinct kind of oil: 1. The Sugarloaves, in the
Taranaki Provincial District; 2. Poverty Bay, on the cast coast
of the Provincial District of Auckland ; 3. Manutahi, Waiapu,
East Cape.
The oil from the first has a very high specific gravity, '960 t°
‘964 at 60° Falir. (water at 1). It has thus too much carbon in
its composition for its commercial success as an illuminating
oil, hut is capable of affording a valuable lubricating oil.
resembles oil occurring in Santa Barbara County, California.
The second kind, from Waiapu, Poverty Bay, is a true
paraffin oil resembling the Canadian oil. By three successor
distillations, and treatment with acids and alkalies, about 65 p er
cent, of a good illuminating oil is obtainable, with a specif
gravity of 818.


The third produces a pale-brown oil, nearly or quite trans-
parent, specific gravity '829 at 60° Fahr.; burns well in a kero-
sene lamp for some time, and is therefore of a very superior
class; it contains only traces of paraffin, and produces 84 per
cent, of an illuminating oil, fit for use in kerosene lamps, by
means of a single distillation. By two more distillations 66 jicr
cent, of the crude oil has a specific gravity of ’Bll, which is
that of common kerosene.
At Sugarloaf Point, Taranaki, the petroleum (rock oil)
oozes from cracks in trachyte-breccia. Wells have been bored
to the depth of many hundred feet, but no steady supply of oil
has been obtained.
A bonus of 6d. per gallon for the production of kerosene up
to 50,000 gallons, in quantities of not less than 10,000 gallons
at a time, was offered in 1874 and 1885; hut no applications
w cre received for the same.
OIL SHALES.
Petroleum Oil Shales. Pyroscliist, or bituminous shale,
occurs to a small extent in the upper portion of the coal forma-
* lon - Specimens have been examined from D’Urville Island, in
Strait; Mangonui and Waiapu, in Auckland; Kaikorai
a ml Blueskin, in Otago; and at Orepulci, in Southland. A
pod variety of oil-producing shale is obtained from the Chat-
am Islands; hut it contains traces of sulphuretted hydrogen.,
hese shales have been distilled for oil, those from Mangonui i
the Chatham Islands producing the following excellenfc
results
Locality.
Centesimal Composition.
. © 03
u
3
t; ©
cj £5
&
u
©
A
A
Ot
O
is
<
3
XJ1
Relative
Relative
Percentage
Percen/taf
of
of
Volatile
Fixed
Matter.
Car bo
Ln tVllle Island
81-79
7-98
•69
9-54
Traces
91-11
8
«° aUi ”
75-20
9-30
1-80
13-70
88-99
r
TK 11 111 Islands
66-43
20-41
4-61
8-55
76-49
?
Viliam Islands ..
64-67
19-87
7-13
8-33
-
76-49
23


GEAPHITB.
The mineralized substance known as graphite—plumbago—
black lead—consists of carbon in mechanical admixture with
siliceous matter, as clay, sand, or limestone, and in varying
proportions, and is the ultimate product of vegetable remains,
mineralized to the highest degree. It has been found at Paka-
wau; in the vicinity of Wellington; and in the pure state
imbedded in marbles from the West Coast. The pure amorphous
vai-iety is used for the manufacture of pencils, and for lubricants
for machinery, while the impure siliceous or argillaceous graphites
find extensive employment in the manufacture of crucibles, and
for polishing-material for ironwork.
Graphite of the first quality has not been found yet in any
quantity in New Zealand, but there is an abundance of the less
pure varieties. It has been found in greater quantity in the
District of Nelson than elsewhere, but still many other localities
yield this mineral in various states of purity, as at Malvern
Hills, Canterbury, and Dunstan, Otago, where it is of fair
average quality.
A valuable sample of graphite has lately been reported from
Waiokura Creek, Waimatc Plains, although the mineral has not
yet been found in sit'd. The following are analyses of two
samples—
a. b.
Fixed carbon ... 8(19 ... 92‘5
•Volatile matter ... 6 - G ...
Ash ... ... 6-5 ... 30
100-0 100-0
This apccimen is of a very homogeneous character, and if, aS
is probable, large bands should be found, the discovery may
prove of great value. The colour of the ash is reddish-wliite.


NEW ZEALAND GOLD.
ITS COMPOSITION AND ASSAY.
The following information respecting the composition and assay
of the gold found in New Zealand has been furnished by Dr.
Hector: “ The general average assay of the gold obtained from
the quartz reefs that intersect schistose rocks, produced by re-
gional metamorphism, in the South Island, such as the gold-
fields of Otago and Westland, is: Gold, 9G'2~; silver, 3‘G3;
copper, ‘lO. On the other hand, the gold which is obtained
from the lodes that intersect rocks altered by local volcanic
inetamorpliism, as, for instance, in Cape Colville Peninsula,
Auckland, is : Gold, Go-Go ; silver, 33‘90; copper, -do. Refined
gold, as exported from New Zealand by the Bank of New Zea-
land, after being submitted to the chlorine process, averages :
Gold, 99'42; silver, ‘5B. The following table gives the most
divergent results of several of the assays which have been
performed in the laboratory of the Geological Survey Depart-
ment :
Locality.
Gold.
Silver.
Loss, &c..
!■ Coromandel, Auckland
75-00
24-50
Loss and copper, -50
2- Coromandel, Auckland
54-60
45-00
Copper -40
3- Rimutaka, Wellington
4- Rimutaka, Wellington
09-50
81-04
30-5
18-75
Copper -21
5 - Terawliiti, Wellington
90-39
9-49
„ "12
Terawliiti, Wellington
89-92
9-90
„ "12
'■ Makara, Wellington ..
73-05
20-24.
„ *15
Lyell, Nelson ...
93-87
002
Copper, trace, loss, -11
Wangapeka, Nelson ..
p Taylor’s Creek, Southland
94-38
5-00
Loss and copper, -02
85-48
14-41
Loss, -11
Jl. Longwood, Southland
85-00
14-34
Copper, traces.”
THE MARKET PRICE.
In August, 1880, tlic following reply to a departmental
c °fflmunication asking for information was received from the
Manager of the Bank of New Zealand, Dunedin:—


“ I beg to state that the price which this hank (in common
with the other hanks having agencies on the Otago goldfields)
gives for parcels of alluvial gold, well-cleaned, offered for sale
at all branches and agencies of the bank within the Provincial
District of Otago, is at present £3 15s. per ounce. The only
exception worth noting is that of the gold raised on Mount
Criffcl, in the Cromwell District, for which, owing to the larger
proportion of silver contained in it, the price is .£3 7s. Gd. per
ounce. Gold the produce of the various quartz mines within
the district, which comes to the hanks in the shape of retorted
cakes or bar, is almost invariably purchased on the varying assay
of the bars after melting at its full mint value, less 4s. per
ounce to cover expenses (duty, freight, insurance, escort charges,
&c.) ; and I may mention here that the above figure of £3 15s.
per ounce, as well as this subtractive amount of 4s. per ounce,
have been fixed by the hanks from considerations altogether apart
from the intrinsic value of the gold in any particular district,
the principal being the varying loss in melting and the amount
of the export duty 2s. per ounce; other items being freight to
port of destination, insurance, and expenses of escort to Dunedin;
and these being liable to vary to a greater or less extent, as by
legislative enactment altering or altogether abolishing the duty,
or war risk increasing insurance premiums, the present prices
for gold would immediately follow suit.
“ In Southland prices vary considerably owing to the greater
range of quality in the gold of that district. Subjoined is a list
of the prices lately quoted to us by our Manager at Invercargill
for gold from the under-mentioned places in Southland, viz.:
Merivale, £3 2s. per ounce; Waiau, £3 6s. per ounce; Nevis,
£3 12s. per ounce ; Paddy’s Alley, £3 13s. 6d. per ounce ; Bushy
Point, £3 14s. 6d. per ounce; Athol, £3 15s. per ounce;
Waikawa, £3 16s. per ounce. These prices arc also liable to
alteration in proportion from considerations before enumerated.


GOED TtECICOJSTEH,
BY which tjiu vakuk of any in'c/mber of ounces, pennyweights, and grains may be readily CAr.cur.ATKl>.
Ounces.
Pennyweights.
Grains.
At per
Ounce.
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
G
8
10
1
2
3
4
Ounce.
£
s.
a.
£
s.
a.
£
s.
a.
£
s.
a.
s.
a.
S.
a.
S.
a.
S.
a.
£
s.
a.
£
S.
a.
£
s.
a.
a.
a.
a.
a.
£ s.
a.
2
10
0
5
0
0
7
10
0
10
0
0
2
6
5
0
7
G
10
0
0
15
0
1
0
0
1
5
0
il
24
33
5
2 10
0
2
12
G
5
5
0
7
17
G
10
10
0
2
71
5
3 i
7
103
10
G
0
15
93
1
l
1
1
G
3
ii
21
-*•1
33
5
2 12
0
2
15
0
5
10
0
8
5
0
11
0
0
o
9
5
G
8
3
11
0
0
1G
G
1
2
0
1
7
G
ii
24
33
5
2 15
0
2
17
G
5
15
0
8
12
G
11
10
0
2
101
5
9
8
74
11
6
0
17
3
1
3
0
1
8
9
ii
24
33
5
2 17
6
3
0
0
G
0
0
9
0
0
12
0
0
3
0
0
0
9
0
12
0
0
18
0
1
4
0
1
10
0
14
3
4
G
3 0
0
3
12
0
7
4
0
10
1G
0
14
8
0
3
7
7
21
3
10
9i
14
42
1
1
7
1
8
94
1
16
0
15
34
Si
7
3 12
0
3
12
G
7
5
0
10
17
G
11
10
0
3
71
7
10 10.1
14
G
1
1
9
1
9
0
1
1G
3
13
34
Si
7i
3 12
G
3
13
0
7
G
0
10
19
0
14
12
0
3
73
7
31
10 111
14
7
1
i 103
1
9
2-4
1
1G
G
13
34
Si
V-i
3 13
0
3
15
0
7
10
0
11
5
0
15
0
0
3
9
7
G
11
3
15
0
1
2
G
1
10
0
1
17
G
ii
33
541 74
3 15
0
3
15
3
7
10
G
11
5
9
15
1
0
3
9
7
«i
11
3*
15
oj
1
2
os
1
10
1
1
17
74
ii
33
54
74
3 15
3
3
15
G
7
11
0
11
G
G
15
2
0
3
Oi
7
Cl
11
3S
15
1
1
2
7J
1
10
2i
1
17
9
ii
54
74
3 ID
G
a
9
7
11
G
11
7
3
15
3
0
3
«i
7
0}
11
41
15
ii
1
2
84
1
40
34
1
17 10i
13
33
54
74
3 15
9
3 10
0
7
12
0
11
8
0
15
4
0
3
91
7
7
11
n
15
2±
1
2
oi
1
10
43
1
18
0
13
33
54
74
3 10
0
3
1G
3
7
12
G
11
8
9
15
5
0
3
o:j
7
71
11
Si
15
3
1
o
i»i
1
10
G
1
18
14
15
33
54
74
3 1G
3
3
1G
G
7
13
0
11
9
G
15
0
0
3
9S
7
73
11
54
15
34
1
2
lli
1
10
7
1
18
3
13
33
54
74
3 10
G
3
1G
9
7
13
G
11
10
3
15
7
0
3
10
7
8
11
G
15
4
1
3
Oi
1
10
8i
1
18
44
ii
33
53
74
3 1G
9
3
17
0
7
14
0
11
11
0
15
8
0
3
10
7
31
11
Gi
15
1.5
1
3
1 ■
1
10
94
1
18
G
13
33
53
74
74
3 17
0
3
17
3
7
14
G
11
11
9
15
9
0
3 10i
7
81
11
7
15
s.t
1
3
2
1
10
103
1
18
7*
13
3-3
S3
3 17
3
3
17
G
7
15
0
11
12
G
15
10
0
3 10J
7
9
11
Vi
15
G
1
3
3
1
11
0
1
18
9
13
33
S3
73
3 17
G
3
17
104
7
15
9
11
13
71
15
11
G
3
101
7
21
11
8
15
1
3
11
1
11
15
1
18 1H
13
35
53
73
3 17
104
3
18
0
7
1G
0
11
14
0
15
12
0
3
10, 1
7
91
11
Si
15
7
1
Q
43
1
11
2i
1
19
0
13
33
53
73
3 18
0
3
18
3
7
10
G
11
14
9
15
13
0
3
10S
7
9i
11
83
15
Vi
1
3
54
1
11
3.4
1
19
14
13
33
53
73
3 18
3
3
18
G
7
17
0
11
15
G
15
14
0
3
11
7
10
11
9i
15
3i
1
3
84
1
11
43
1
19
3
13
33
53
7:3
3 18
G
3
18
9
7
17
G
11
1G
3
15
15
0
3 11J
7
101
11
9 3
15
9
1
3
74
1
11
G
1
19
44
ii
33
53
73
3 18
9
3
19
0
T
18
0
11
17
0
15
1G
0
3
111
7
10J
11
10
15
94
1
3
«i
1
11
7
1
19
0
13
33
S3
73
3 19
0
3
19
3
7
18
G
11
17
9
15
17
0
3
11.1
7
11
11
104
15
10
1
3
91
1
11
8i
1
19
74
13
33
53
<4
3 19
3
3
19
G
7
19
0
11
18
G
15
18
0
3 114
7
111
11
11
15
103
1
3
10
1
11
94
1
19
9
13
33
75
3 19
G
3
19
9
7
19
G
11
19
3
15
19
0
3 ns
7
111
ii iii
15
lli
1
3
11
1
11
103
1
19 10i
13
33
53
75
3 19
9
4
0
0
8
0
0
12
0
0
1G
0
0
4
0
8
0
12
0
1G
0
1
4
0
1
12
0
2
0
0
2
4
G
8
4 0
0
Note.— £3175. Iosd. is the standard prico for British gold.


HINTS TO PROSPECTORS.
(BY JOHN A. MILLER, PRACTICAL MINER, ARROW, OTAGO.)
FACILITIES FOR PROSPECTING.
The physical peculiarities of New Zealand offer unrivalled facilities
for prospecting. Streams, mountains, and precipices disclose the
geological and metalliferous character of a country, and, as these
abound in New Zealand, the prospector is here met half-way in his
search for metals by Nature. Whenever a stream is found to
contain gold, silver, tin, copper, &c., or only a trace of any metal,
no matter how diminutive the quantity, it may be safely inferred
that the mountains from which the stream and its branches take
their rise contain these metals in lodes, and are well worth the
prospector’s attention.
Next to running streams, all valley-like depressions, whether
they contain a running stream or not, should be closely inspected
as to the sand, gravel, and stones —which together are called in
mining parlance “ wash ” —and also the broken pieces of rock, they
may contain. It is true that every mining district has its own
peculiar characteristics, but there are leading features which to
the experienced miner are an unmistakable guide in his search.
Unfortunately, this kind of knowledge can only be acquired from
experience, and cannot be taught in or learned from books or
verbal description.
A secondary indication of metals is—to the prospector, at least
—the nature; and description of the rocks of a locality. Any p cr '
son who has visited any of the New Zealand goldfields must have
been struck with the laminated appearance of the rocks that met
his eye in every direction.
Mica-sciiist —the blue-slate rock of the miners—in Otago, and
sandstone rocks in Westland, are the most prevalent upon the
goldfields in the parts mentioned, and seem to be especially favour-
able to gold.
Quartz, in angular pieces, is above all other indications the
best and most encouraging of the jirosencc of gold, silver, and
copper in the neighbourhood.


Granite is exceptionally favourable to the existence of tin.
Fluorspar is indicative of lead, copper, and silver. Fluor-
spar is of much rarer occurrence than quartz. It is generally purple
in colour, but also white, yellow, or green, and sometimes blue.
Heated, it gives out a phosphorescent light in a dark place. Fluor-
spar may be mistaken for a precious stone; but is soft, and can be
scratched with a knife.
Calcspaii, or carbonate of lime, is favourable to the existence of
lead and silver, which very often occur together, both in payable
quantities.
Common Limestone, above any other rock, is the mother of
iron.
Valuable as a knowledge of these rocks may be to the pro-
spector as a guide in his search, it should not be depended
upon too much in pronouncing against the metalliferous character
of any locality, for recent explorations in New Zealand, as avell as
in many other parts of the world, have proved that gold and other
metals exist in highly payable quantities in places where, accord-
ing to the teachings of geology, they w'ere not expected. It will
therefore be safe for the prospector to give only a secondary con-
sideration to the geological formation of a district, and, when he
has proved the presence of gold or any other metal, to persist in
his search, in spite of a mere unfavourable appearance of the
rocks, leaving to the scientific geologist the solution of a problem
of his own raising.
Of all the metals which are likely to repay the prospector for
his trouble there are none to excel gold and' silver, not only
because of their intrinsic value, but also because they are easier
discovered, and more readily made marketable when found than
a uy other metal. Gold and silver in their native states are im-
mediately recognizable to the naked eve, and when any doubt
exists as to their identity it can be easily and conclusively settled
by the simplest tests.
Gold in this respect offers hardly any difficulty. It effectually
resists the action of the atmosphere, temperature, and other cor-
roding influences. It always appears in a pure metallic form, and
may he tested by simply cutting it with a knife or biting it with
Ihe teeth, either of which will at once set at rest its metallic
uature. The only substance in Nature which approaches gold in
a Ppearance is mica, which flics into grit under the above treat-
ment.
Silver is much more difficult to detect, because it becomes
famished much easier than gold, and exists under conditions in
yhich it is recognizable only to the most experienced expert, and
l fs actual value in such conditions as a mine-product can only be


ascertained after exhaustive laboratory tests. Silver-glance, coarse-
and fine-grained galena, &c., often contain silver in great quan-
tities without the presence of the metal being detected by the
naked eye. Frequently silver, as well as many other metals, occur
in chlorides, silicates, and carbonates, which are to all appearance
perfectly unmetallic, yet may be very rich in lead or silver,
or in both. The immense deposits of chloride of silver, which
have made Colorado famous all the world over, were neglected as
worthless for many years; and the carbonate of lead at Leadville
remained unsuspected of any commercial value until assayed,
and found to be rich in silver, whereupon the insignificant village
grew into a city of thirty-five thousand inhabitants within the
short space of five years. These are a few of the illustrations of
the different forms under which silver exists without its presence
being suspected.
.Regarding the less valuable metals, such as CorrEii, Zinc,
Lead, Iron, &c., their presence is often indicated by various
shades or stains upon the rocks which originally contained the
metals. These stains are grey, brown, and sometimes purple,
with hardly a trace of the metals themselves. In these cases
recourse must be had to careful analysis, as some of these metals
appear in forms quite deceiving, resembling more closely, in some
instances, decaying wood than metal.
PROSPECTING QUARTZ REEFS.
As a rule, all New Zealand quartz reefs run east and west, or
nearly so, and in strike and dip cross the country, dipping north.
When reefs conform to all these conditions they are called true
reefs. The most permanent reefs in New Zealand are dis-
tinguished by these conditions. The gold in the reefs occurs in
bands or shoots, from a few feet to several hundreds of feet in
width, divided from each other by barren places. These shoots all
dip west, but at very diverse angles, sometimes running almost
flat or horizontally, sometimes dipping perpendicularly.
The distribution of gold in quartz reefs is now beginning to be
better understood. It has become a generally - recognized fact
that quartz reefs, as well as other metallic lodes, vary in their rich-
ness, as also in many of their leading characteristics, as they pass
through different strata. The cleavage of the quartz, to which
miners as a rule pay far too little attention, is freer, sharper, and
better defined in the gold-bearing portions of a lode than is the
case in the barren parts. Iron pyrites is generally a good indica-
tion of the presence of gold. A nice mellow clay, resembling fid
to the touch, generally flanks the lode in its gold-bearing portions.
These are a few general indications of gold in lodes; there are,


besides, many minor evidences of its presence, which, however,
vary much, even in the same claim.
In prospecting for lodes or quartz reefs in New Zealand, the
first places which should receive attention are the mountain-spurs;
and where there are no outcrops of quartz —which are not very
frequent in this colony, on account of the softness of the quartz
here—the streak-like depressions upon the faces of the spurs
should he closely examined, for reefs are very often found in
them. The first operation should he to wash out some of the
decaying surface-rock; and, if only the trace of quartz-gold is
obtained, a reef is likely to exist in the neighbourhood, and trench-
ing should at once be undertaken, and systematically followed up.
The selection of the site of these trenches must be left to the
intelligence and judgment of the prospector, who, moreover, must
be guided by a general knowledge of the country lie is engaged
upon. It may, however, be mentioned that when reefs are found
to cross each other at right angles, those running east and west
are much more likely to contain gold iu payable quantity than
those running north and south, independent of size and other
recommendations in their favour.
The gold in the New Zealand quartz reefs is found chiefly on
one wall of the reef or on the other —seldom all through the stone.
It has already been pointed out that quartz-gold occurs iu shoots,
with blank spaces intervening. If a quartz reef has been dis-
covered, but no gold found in the stone, the prospector need
not therefore feel disheartened, but should try the same
reef in different places, and success may in the end reward his
search.
When this has happened the prospector must guard against
being over-sanguine, and ought to carefully consider the probable
cost of working the mine, and the surrounding facilities. Before
be begins to build castles in the air he should take out about
bfty to sixty tons, or more, from different parts of the lode, and
bare the parcels crushed separately, taking care not to deceive
bimself bv sending only the best stone, judging by appearance, to
fbe mill, and rejecting the, in his opinion, poorer stone; for it is by
110 means an uncommon occurrence that stone which shows little or
n P Sold yields much better than that in which the metal is plainly
wisible. In any case it is his duty to thoroughly ascertain the
v alue of his discovery before he enlists the assistance of outside
Ca pital or spends his money on machinery. It has been estimated
fbat of every ten mining companies started only one has proved a
success ; it is therefore highly desirable not to increase the propor-
I'on on the wrong side. While every assistance and encourage-
ment should be given to the mining industry, great care should be


taken to guard against failures of the nature indicated, which are
always sure to react upon the industry with a damning effect.
Much as has been said upon, and much as is expected from,
the encouragement of prospecting, there is a phase of the subject
which is almost entirely lost sight of, and that is prospecting in
mines which have been worked and yielded gold for a number of
years and then left, and prospecting in those that have been
abandoned as unprofitable. No greater mistake could possibly be
committed than to condemn these mines as either worked out or
worthless. Evidence continues to be furnished by every goldfield
of the colony that the mines referred to have not been half-
prospected, and numerous cases in point may be quoted to illus-
trate and support this assertion. Taking the oldest reefing-
district in New Zealand—namely, Coromandel, North Island —it
must be admitted that mining matters look quite as healthy there
as they do on many of the newer fields ; or, referring to individual
mines, there is the reassuring fact that the first quartz-mine opened
in the Middle Island—the Phccnix Mine, at Skipper's —is now,
after having been worked for nearly twenty-three years, perhaps the
most prosperous in the colony. During the time of its existence
it has seen many vicissitudes. It has often changed hands; it
has more than once been pronounced as worked out or as worth-
less ; it has for a number of years been worked at a loss to the
present owners, Messrs. G. F. and F. Bullen, of Marlborough, who
have sunk £50,000 in the venture : yet at the present time dis-
covery after discovery of payable stone is making the mine, if not
the most, at least one of the most, valuable mining properties
in the colony.
As the history of this mine unfolds a talc and points a moral
of vital importance to the mining industry, and will prove of great
assistance to the prospector, it may be sketched bore in a fe ff
words. The early explorations in the mine, owing to the boun-
daries of the claim, were confined to high levels. The reef, or
rather reefs, were traced for considerable distances, and so far as
could be judged from the work done, formed an irregular network
of reefs, the stone giving out, setting in again, and taking
sorts of conceivable directions. Gold was occasionally met with,
but in disconnected patches only, one of which yielded, however,
3,()00oz. of gold. Ultimately, an adjoining claim being abandonee
below the Phccnix, allowed its manager, Mr. Fred. Evans, to
approach and open the Phoenix Mine at a much lower level, thus
leading to the present prosperous state of the mine. Explorations
at this lower level disclosed what formerly appeared as an irregul ar
network of reefs to be four well-defined reefs, running in t^ e
same main direction, converging and diverging in a rather eccentric


manner, yet never merging one into the other. It was also found
that many of the valuable shoots of stone that were met with did
not rise to the level of the old workings, and further search has-
established the fact that these shoots increase in value as they
descend to lower depths. Thus, after the mine had been pro-
spected for many years at a loss to the owners, its prospects have
changed to the brightest, promising to reward a hundred-fold their
perseverance and pluck.
Another instance of a similar nature, which also furnishes a
striking case in point, is reported from the same locality—viz.,
Skipper’s Reefs. A company, long known as the Nugget and
Cornish Company, had been working a reef with varying success.
When one shoot of payable stone was taken out, the mine was con-
sidered as completely “worked out,” and, along with a plant, com-
prising a valuable u'atcr-right, and a crushing machine of four
batteries, of four stamps each, was sold for a mere trifle to an
adjoining company—the Gallant Tipperary. The main adit of the
Nugget and Cornish Mine was 800 ft. long, near the end of which the
shoot of stone ceased. About 30ft. were driven beyond the shoot
of stone, but, no quartz being found, the mine was condemned as
"worked out,” and disposed of as described. The manager of
the Gallant Tipperary, Mr. John Trip, recently entered a branch
drive at the end of the main adit of the Nugget and Cornish
Mine, and when he had driven 20ft. discovered what to all appear-
ances is a new reef, lift, wide, 4ft. of which is of a highly payable
character; and the abandoned and worthless mine is now, atter a
few days’ labour, in a healthier and more prosperous condition
than it occupied in its palmiest days.
These instances prove what has been asserted above—namely,,
that it would be a very great mistake to pronounce any of the
'nines at present abandoned, and in which gold has been found, as
being worked out, and consequently worthless. In fact, the ad-
jutages offered, in the shape of roads and tracks through many
°f the goldfields, should hold out inducements to prospectors
which entirely new country, cut off from communication, does
not afford. A systematic course of cross-driving in many of the
abandoned mines might lead to better results than are to be
gamed by prospecting new ground.
New Zealand miners, as a rule, are far too chary of cross-
driving their quartz-claims. In most other reefing countries cross-
drives are put in upon a systematic plan, and these drives are then
connected by rises, so as to preclude all chance of missing even
fbc faintest leader of quartz, which, when found, is often of great
Va lue. Nor is this system so expensive as would appear upon the
face of it, for the valueless stuff excavated is used for “ filling in’ r


stopes, and thus two purposes are served by tlie one operation—
namely, prospecting the claim and obtaining refuse for “ filling
in.”
It is by no means an uncommon occurrence that where cross-
driving is systematically followed more gold is obtained from
leaders outside the reef proper than the quantity yielded by the
main reef. In this manner the fact is explained how gold-bearing
quartz reefs have been worked for five and seven hundred years, as,
for instance, in Saxony, in Germany, and in Hungary ; and for a
hundred years, as in Brazil. Though it is perhaps true that the
holdings in these countries are much larger than colonial claims,
it must also be considered that operations are carried on on
a much more extensive scale than in the Australasian
Colonies. It is safe to state that ten men arc employed for
every one in the colonies in those large and extensive mines,
and that the machinery and apparatus is in proportion to the in-
creased activity with which work in the mines is prosecuted. Even
Californian experts admit that the apparatus and system of work
which obtains in the Moro Vclho Gold-mines in ISrazil—now in
work for more than a hundred years—are the most perfect in the
world. If the minimum amount of gold which pays working ex-
penses and something over be taken as a criterion of perfection,
both in apparatus and system, the gold-mines of the Continent of
Europe must also be placed in the foremost rank for complete-
ness. In Europe and Brazil, but especially in Europe,
scientific attention, directed by Government authority, and
supported by the public purse, has been busied with improve-
ments for raising and treatment of the ores, and waste of every
description has been reduced to a minimum. By such aids the
annual output and treatment of quartz, as compared with the
quantity raised and reduced in these colonies, is so prodigious as to
sound almost incredible to colonial ears—and this vast quantity ot
quartz must be obtained from somewhere. If a corresponding
amount of stone to that crushed annually at the Moro Velho
Mines—estimated at 100,000 tons per year —were raised upon the
system now generally in vogue in New Zealand, not only a com-
plete line of reefs, but a whole goldfield, would be exhausted in »
few years ; yet this immense output has been maintained in Brazil
for about a century, and in Europe for a number of centuries;
but it is only maintained by the system of prospecting adopted i’ l
these countries. Let the New Zealand miner therefore take heart-
and consider the above examples before he pronounces a mine as
worthless and “ worked out.” The chances are that a century
hence one hundred tons of quartz will be raised, and made to pay>
In New Zealand for every ton at present brought to grass.


An additional incentive to the prospector turning his attention
to some of our local quartz-mines at present abandoned is the
introduction of electricity as a motive power for mining-machinery,
which cannot fail to work a complete revolution in the industry.
In a great number of quartz-mines at present abandoned as un-
profitable, the cost of conveying the quartz to a crushing-mill was
too great to afford a profit, though with facilities in this respect they
would have left a fair surplus over and above working expenses.
Electricity having now stood the test of several months’ severe
application at the Phoenix Aline, at Skippers, no further
doubt need he entertained about its efficiency. An apparatus,
capable of delivering thirty horse-power at a distance of two miles
from the generators or dynamos, has been erected at Skippers
at a cost of between £4,00*0 and £5,000. However, this amount
was greatly increased by the difficulties of transport in the absence
of a passable track; and since the erection of the electric apparatus
in February last improvements have been made in the application
of electricity as a motive-power, reducing the cost of the apparatus,
while at the same time increasing its efficiency.
The advantages of electricity are, that the machinery gene-
rating the motive force may be placed wherever a cheap motor,
such as water-power, can be obtained. The effective power can
thence be conducted to any required point, quite irrespective of
levels, turns, or any other obstacle, by a wire. Next, there is the
saving in working expenses, which, after the first outlay, are almost
nil where water-power can be obtained to drive the generators.
With such facilities many mines which would not pay working
a few years ago may be made to yield handsome dividends,
and upon the introduction of electricity chiefly depends the
development of the quartz mining industry in many parts of New
Zealand.
Another feature, peculiar to New Zealand, may be pointed out
as affording a great inducement to prospectors —namely, the re-
£ e nt discoveries of gold in highly-payable quantities in certain
hands of slate-rock, divided from the rock in which they are
enclosed by walls which are equally as well defined as those which
enclose quartz reefs. Mr. W. Green made the first discovery of
this nature, more than a year ago, at the Ophir (or Black’s)
diggings, in Otago, where, in close proximity to what has been
known for many years as “ The Captain’s Iteef,” a great deal of
Prospecting was done. Air. Green found very rich gold in the
slate rock adjoining the Captain’s Reef, and by the aid of a common
®radle washed out as much as one pound weight of gold per week.
About the same time, Mr. A. Southberg found gold in pure
laminated slate-rock in his claim at Skipper’s, the British North


American. In connection with this may also.he mentioned the
success of the Maori Point Reefing Company, which, it is
reported, has obtained at the rate of 12oz. of gold per ton from
what cannot he termed anything else but a slate-reef. As in all
these cases the discoveries were made by the merest accident, the
attention of prospectors may well be turned to similar bands of
slate rock, which are likely to reward them for their trouble.
PROSPECTING FOR ALLUVIAL GOLD.
Turning now to prospecting in alluvial country, the subject may
be considered under the three heads into which it naturally divides
itself—namely, stream and creek prospecting, terrace prospecting,
and high table-land prospecting.
Stream and Creek Prospecting scarcely requires detailed dis-
cussion so far as practical miners are concerned; but, as this volume
may find its way into the hands of those who are not practical
miners, but who, either by chance or from inclination, mav be in-
•duced to undertake prospecting, a few of the distinguishing
characteristics of this class of gold-mining will be of use.
As a rule, those streams which cross the laminations of the reefs
at right angles, or nearly so, are the richest. Gold is found
very rarely in those parts of the streams where the current
has been the strongest, but generally in the lee or under the
shelter of projecting points of rock, where beaches are usually
formed; and wherever such beaches exist there also mav gold he
looked for with fair chances of success. But the straight courses
of streams, especially when they cross the laminations of the bed-
rock at right angles, are also often very rich in gold. As a rule,
the gold in streams is deposited in the'crevices of the bed-rock,
which must be laid as dry as possible, and picked up to such depths
as the sand descends between its laminations. Very rarely is the
gold found mixed up in the gravel lying in the beds of streams.
Terrace Prospecting requires more experience, labour, perse-
verance, and, consequently, more time than creek prospecting-
Terraces are those shelf-like excavations upon the hill-slopes flank-
ing valleys and lakes, and are the remains of old river-beds; so that
the rules above laid down for the deposition of gold in streams apply
also to terraces. Sometimes a ridge of rock divides a terrace from
the newer river-channel, but this is not always the case. The first
thing to do in prospecting a terrace is to discover its inlet, and next
to find its outlet. This found, the “ wash ” should be carefully
examined for the prevailing indications of gold peculiar to the
locality in which the terrace occurs, and also for gold. The whole
width of the channel of the terrace from the edge to the high or
back reef must be carefully prospected, both along the bed-rock,


and also through the whole depth of the ‘-'wash,” from the
surface down; for the terrace “ wash/' being often deposited at
different geological times, not unfrequently contains gold in layers
one above the other. These terraces are very numerous in New
Zealand; and a study of the river systems of the present, as well as
of the preceding geological ages, will assist the prospector greatly
in his choice of a likely spot where to set in. There is a general
fall in the country lying along the main directions of the present
streams, which indicates the leading course upon which all alluvial
gold has been deposited, the consideration of which is often a
reliable guide to the level of terraces which are covered up com-
pletely by landslips, or in which either the inlet or the outlet is hid
from view. In New Zealand large fortunes lie buried in many
locations thus hid, and require a great amount of prospecting to
unearth; so that prospectors have an extensive field before them in
this direction.
Table-land Prospecting.— This is rather a new departure in
gold-mining, and, so far as it is known, is confined to Otago. By
the term “table-land diggings” such deposits as have been found
at Campbells, Mount Buster, Mount Pisa, and recently at Mount
Criffel—all in Otago—are meant. In these localities exceedingly
rich deposits of gold were discovered by accident. Table-land pro-
specting is therefore an entirely new departure for the enterprise of
the prospector, for it would be nothing short of folly to expect
that all the pay ably-auriferous table-lands in New Zealand have
been discovered. Against this one-sided opinion it may be ad-
vanced that the gold found at these elevations belongs to a different
geological age to the gold generally obtained in New Zealand.
This opinion is supported by the nature of the wash in which the
table-land gold is found, nothing like it being met with on lower
levels.
In looking for new deposits of this description, the prospector
should not be deterred by the elevation of any table-land, for gold
in really astonishing quantities has been got at Mount Criffel, up-
wards of 4,000 ft., and at Mount Pisa, nearly 6,000 ft., above sea-
level. Nor need much attention be paid to the “wash” in these
places; and, indeed, its total absence does not necessarily imply the
übsence of gold. As a rule, the sinking upon these table-lands is
shallow and easy, and often the gold is distributed evenly through-
out the body of the “ wash,” or else occurs in layers one above the
other, as well as upon the bed-rock. So far as discovered, these
deposits occur upon mountain-tops bordering the principal Otago
goldfields, rather than upon those in their midst, the gold being
found deposited in a somewhat erratic manner.
The wealth that awaits the prospector in this direction is


shown by the workings of some lucky miners at Mount Criffel,
where the prospectors washed out during one summer about
1,2000 z. of gold in a fortnight, and where a man and his son
netted an average of 1,5000 z. of gold for a season's work
(about seven months) several years in succession. This class of
mining resembles what is known in California as “ pocketing,”
and is in New Zealand only in its infancy, holding out, however,
great chances of success to the gold-digger.
Beacii-woukings may receive a passing notice, as the ocean-
beaches of the Middle Island have contributed considerable
quantities of gold to the total yield of the colony. And the
same may be said of dredging the larger rivers—an enterprise
often highly remunerative. Both descriptions of gold-raising are
capable of much extension and improvement.
Regarding the localities where New Alluvial Goldfields may
be looked for, Fiord and Southland Counties, as well as the whole
of the West Coast ranges of the Middle Island, and many extensive
tracts in the North Island, maybe pointed out; also Stewart's
Island, where both alluvial and quartz gold have been found. Any
place, in fact, in New Zealand may be suspected to contain gold
in less or more quantities; but it is only actual prospecting that
sets at rest the question whether or not it is present in payable
quantities.


IMPROVED MINING APPLIANCES.
CRUSHING-MACHINERY.
(BY MR. H. A. GORDON, F.G.S., INSPECTING ENGINEER, MINES
DEPARTMENT, NEW ZEALAND.)
There is nothing connected •with mining deserving of more
attention than machinery for the reduction of ores, not only in
this colony, hut in every country where metalliferous lodes exist.
The rich lodes which have heen found in New Zealand, and for
many years worked advantageously, arc getting gradually poorer,
and require a cheaper method to he employed than that adopted
at the present time for reducing the ores, namely, by means of
cumbersome and expensive stamping-batteries.
In this colony there are many large lodes of low-grade
auriferous quartz which cannot he worked profitably with the
Present method of reduction, and there is no instance that
stands out more prominently than the mining district of
Tc Arolia, where a large quartz lode is known to extend for
two to three miles, and in certain places has given as much as
~°z. of gold per ton; hut when the yield is less than 15dwt. per
. t°n the quartz cannot he profitably worked. On this field there
13 one of the best stamping-batteries in the colony. No expense
been spared to make it as complete as this class of machinery
can he made; yet the working expenses and wear and tear are
So costly that low-grade quartz cannot he profitably worked with
Present appliances.
The prosperity and greatness of any country, and none more
s ° than Great Britain, are due in a great measure to the mineral
Wealth it contains ■ and it may truly he said that the future
greatness of New Zealand must depend in a large measure on an
energetic and systematic development of her mineral resources,
rich agricultural lands are confined to valleys, plains, and
24


low undulating country; but there is a large percentage of high
mountain-land that is only suitable for pastoral purposes, unless
it contains mineral wealth. Fortunately, nature has so formed
this colony that the metalliferous deposits arc chiefly confined to
the high lands; hut, unless machinery of a more improved
character he introduced to reduce the various ores at a much
cheaper rate, and these deposits he worked remuneratively, they
will fail to add to the permanent wealth of the colony.
Until lately mining in this colony has been chiefly confined
to gold and coal; hut, recently, attention has been directed to
argentiferous lodes, which exist at Karangahake and Waihi, in
the Ohincmuri district, and smelting-furnaces for the reduction of
this class of ore have been erected. So far these furnaces have
not proved a success, owing to the class of ore not being of a
suitable character for smelting at a cheap rate. The smelting-
furnaces erected at Karangahake and the Thames are specially
adapted for smelting argentiferous and auriferous ores contain-
ing a large percentage of galena and iron, as these minerals are
specially required as fluxes, in conjunction with lime, to make
the silica run freely ; hut where the ore is deficient of either
galena or iron, the cost of fluxes to smelt the silica is so great
that it requires ore of a high grade to pay for its manipulation.
Different classes of argentiferous ores require different treatment.
Those containing galena and iron are specially adapted for
smelting, while ores containing chlorides and chloro-bromides of
silver can he manipulated far more advantageously and econo-
mically by chlorination and amalgamation. Therefore the
same class of machinery that is suitable for the reduction of
auriferous quartz is also adapted for the reduction of many kinds
of argentiferous ores.
In introducing new crushing-machinery there arc three
essential things to consider—viz., (1) the cost of the plant and
the number of working-parts subject to wear and tear; (2) a
compact and portable machine, so. as to get over the difficulty oi
transit in a mountainous country; (3) a machine that will
reduce the ore at a much less cost than by a stamping'
battery.
There will be a difficulty at first to contend against i®
introducing new machinery to supersede the stamping-battery;


which has heretofore been recognized in this colony as the best
method for reducing auriferous quartz. Although the mining
community is very intelligent, it is also very conservative, and
looks -with suspicion on any improvements in mining-machinery
until they are thoroughly tested; and even then some arc very
loth to adopt them. It must, however, be patent to any person
that, unless a better class of machinery is employed in the
reduction of auriferous quartz, many of the mines at present
worked must either suspend operations or continue working from
hand to mouth, without giving the shareholders that remuneration
they are entitled to for the outlay of their capital. This subject
has lately been well ventilated in California, and different
machines have been constructed for reducing ores, amongst which
are machines constructed on the stone-breaking principle, and
with steel rolls, the latter being now deemed the most effective.
In 1882 the Bertrand Mill-owners, in Nevada, introduced steel
rolls for crushing, and were so successful with their machines'
that the dictum which had hitherto prevailed —that stamping-
hatteries w r ere the most efficient method for reducing ores —
was shown to be a fallacy; for not only are the rolls much
cheaper in the first instance, but, having fewer wearing parts,
their maintenance is but trifling compared to stamps. The
quantity and fineness of the material crushed is also far greater
than by a stamping-battery, in proportion to the power em-
ployed for working the machinery.
On examination of the principle of crushing-machines, the
quantity of material crushed must be in proportion to the area
°f the crushing-surface, whether it be by pressure or w'cight.
Therefore the area of the surface of a stamping-battery is
in proportion to the number of stamps employed and the speed
a t which they arc driven.
To analyse the crushing effects of rolls against stamps, it will
ho necessary to take into account the crushing-surfaces of both.
Taking the average of stamps at Bin. in diameter, making 75
blows per minute, and steel rolls 2Gin. in diameter and 15in.
lo ng, making 100 revolutions per minute the area of stamp-
head, being 50’2G square inches, multiplied by the number of
blows per minute, gives o,7G9T> square inches of crushing-surface
f°r each stamp used. The rolls being covered with steel tires


22in. in thickness, to get the average crushing-surface during
the time the tires last, the rolls have to he taken at 24in. in
diameter, or 24 by 3'1414 hy 15 by 100 —equal to 113,0904
square inches ; which, if divided hy the crushing-surface of each
stamp per minute, shows the rolls to be capable of crushing as
much as a stamping-battery of 30 heads; hut were the speed of
the rolls increased to 150 revolutions per minute, then they
would be equal to 45 heads of stamps.
In conducting experiments on the percentage given with the
different classes of water-wheels at the Thames, I found that
the best-constructed Leffel turbine only gave 67 per cent, of the
power due to the head of water, whereas these wheels are
guaranteed to give from 77 to 80 per cent, with a brake; thus
showing that a large amount of power was expended in over-
coming the friction of a stamping-battery. Indeed, it can he
seen at a glance that the amount of friction in lifting the stamps
from a state of repose each time, causing them by friction to
revolve, must be very considerable. It may be adduced in
favour of stamps that the sudden drop gives an impact to the
blow, which it may do to some extent; but this can be entirely
discarded, as it is more than balanced by the extra amount of
material that there is in the stamping-mortar over that between
rolls, which causes the stamps in many instances to cushion, and
therefore destroys the effect of the blow. The duty done by
stamps cannot be calculated on the same principle as a ram
falling on the head of a pile, because the quantity of loose ma-
terial that lies in the mortar entirely alters the condition of
the blow. The stamp has not only to crush the material, but
likewise has to force it through the grating, which must be
taken as power wasted. Whatever system is adopted in feeding
stamps, there can never be the uniformity there is with rolls;
neither can the particles or grains of the crushed material be so
uniform in character. To take everything into account, even
the greatest advocates for stamps must admit there is much
useless power expended in reducing ore by this method. Stamp s
have a maximum of velocity, which can be soon reached, beyond
which the fall is reduced; but with rolls held rigidly together
the action is constant at any given time. The greater the
velocity of the rolls the greater the crushing-power, as the


crushed material must be in proportion to the area of the
crushing-surface.
No better criterion can he given for the necessity of im-
proved crushing-machinery than that of the great expenditure
entailed in crushing the auriferous quartz at Te Aroha. There
the quartz has to he conveyed from some of the mines to the
crushing-battery for nearly two miles on a tramway which has
several steep grades, and these grades are fitted with brakes for
lowering the trucks, which entails a deal of manual labour,
thereby increasing the cost of haulage to a considerable extent.
But the crushing-battery, although one of the best in the colony,
is very imperfect.- After the crushed material has passed
through the gratings over the quicksilver and blanket-tables, the
residue contains about as much gold, if not more, than is ex-
tracted from it. This has been satisfactorily proved by the
tailings crushed in berdans, and after leaving the first sets of
these berdans they were operated on a second time, and still
found to contain sufficient gold to pay for manipulation. The
character of the gold on this field is extremely fine, and requires
a different system of treatment from that adopted in any of the
Australasian Colonies. This is a field where there is ample
room for great improvements to be made, and fortunes can be
realized by employing improved machinery for crushing and
saving the gold.
Since the Bertrand Mill-owners have adopted rolls, others
have followed in their footsteps; and the results have been so
satisfactory that there is no room for doubt as to the superiority
of rolls, compared with stamps. The short time that rolls have
Been in use has not enabled the quantity they are capable of
crushing to be accurately determined, as the quantity is limited
to the area of the screens that have been attached to them; but
enough is known respecting their capabilities to recommend
them for general use. It has been found that two sets of rolls
loin, long and 2Gin. in diameter, travelling at a velocity of 100
revolutions per minute, are equal in efficiency to a crusliing-
hattery with 50 heads of stamps, 7cwt. each, having lOin. drop,
a nd making 75 blows per minute. To enable a comparison to
Be made between the cost of a stamping-battery of 50 heads and
sets of rolls, the number of working-parts must be taken


into consideration, as each part contributes to the wear and tear
and cost of maintenance. The following will show the different
pieces of each of the systems :
Crushing-battery : Bearings on intermediate shaft, 6; bear-
ings on cam-shaft, 11; plummcr-blocks for intermediate and
cam-shafts, 17; stamp-shanks, 50; stamp-licad bosses, 50;
shoes for stamps, 50 ; false bottoms for stamps, 50; cams for
lifting stamps, 50; dies on stamp-shanks, 50 ; guides for stamp-
shanks, 100 : total number of working-parts, 434.
Two Sets of Rolls: Bearings on shafts of rolls, 4;
plummcr-blocks for same, 4; crushing-rolls tires, 4; side-
plates, 4; wearing surfaces for each two sets of rolls, 13: total
number of working-parts, 28.
The working-parts of the stamping-battery are subject to
rapid wear, and many of them are liable to break, but most of
them can be easily replaced; still, the large number of working-
parts, although many of them are small, require constant care
and attention to keep them in a proper state of repair so as to
prevent a stoppage of the machine. Stamps and shanks are
very liable to break; and, although they arc readily replaced,
the time employed in doing so in course of a year is consider-
able. The screens have not been taken into account, as they
are common to both machines; although the wear and tear on
the gratings of the stamp-mortar must be greater than that for
the rolls, as the stamps thrust the crushed material with con-
siderable force against the gratings, whereas the crushed ma-
terial from the rolls is taken off by gravitation.
The wear in rolls is almost exclusively confined to steel tires
and check-pieces. • Of the steel tires, 80 per cent, can be safely
used in crushing before it is necessary to replace them ; whereas
it is not generally safe to wear more than GO per cent, of the
shoes and false bottoms of the stamping-battery. The statistics
of the wear and tear on rolls arc as yet confined to the Bertrand
Mill, where two sets of rolls crushed 20,000 tons of ore in about
250 days. This time is estimated, as the rolls now are crushing
about 100 tons per day; but when first starting they did not put
through so large a quantity. During the time they were at work
two new sets of tires and check-pieces, which they got from Neff
York, were used. The cost will be as follows : Two sets of steel


tires, at foundry, .£153; cheek-pieces, £6O; freight on same,
allowing ample margin, £100: total, £313. The wear and tear
in twenty-four hours would therefore be, including labour in
effecting repairs, about £1 10s.
Mr. T. Eglcston, Ph.D., writing on this subject in Engineer-
ing of the 13th and 20tli November, 1885, says : “ These rolls
are now in successful operation at the Bertrand Mill and Cory
Mill, Nevada, and the Haile Mine, in South Carolina. It has
been shown recently that two sets of 26in. rolls at the Bertrand
Mill can easily crush 150 tons of hard ore in twenty-four hours
so as to pass through a No. 16 screen. llow much more they
can do is not known, as they have never had full screen and
elevator capacity. The Mount Cory Mill has crushed, in the
same time, 50 tons through a No. 30 screen. The usual capacity
for the hest stamps on the same kind of ore is 2 tons per stamp,
Much makes the rolls equal to a 50-stamp mill. At the Ber-
trand Mill 9,000 tons of ore were crushed without paying a
dollar for repairs, with the expenditure of less than one-lialf the
power required to do the same amount of work in a stamp-mill;
while the total repairs up to date have been only about one-
•piartcr cost of the stamp-mill repairs. At this mill 15,000 tons
of ore passed through the fine-crushing rolls before new tires
were necessary. After crushing 20,000 tons the coarsc-crusliing
tires were still good for two months’ wear. It is considered that
each set of rolls, with a set of repair-linings of composition
metal, would be capable of crushing 20,000 tons, the only ex-
pense for repairs being tires and clicek-picces. The cost for
renewals for a set of 26in. rolls during 1885 will be: Two sets
°f tires, §530; freight on 3,2011 b., at '3 cents, §9B ; composition
lining s for journals and chcck-pieces, §100; total, §728 —say,
tfllo. Eor comparison of expenses, wc will assume that two
Bets of 26-in. rolls are equal to a 30- and not a 50-stamp mill,
58 has been shown by actual experiments, and the 30 heads of
stamps, weighing each 8501 b. to 9001 b., dropping 80 to 85 drops
per minute, with a fall from 7in. to 9in. It has been found at
the Bertrand Mill that two sets of 26in. rolls, with a consump-
tion of four cords of firewood, will crush 100 tons of moderately
bard quartz or other ore in twenty-four hours, so that it will
passthrough a No. 16 screen. A 30-stamp mill, to do the same


amount of work, will consume six cords of firewood; thus
showing that the rolls only take two-thirds of the power to do
the same amount of work as a stamping-battery. To take the
first cost of the plants (as shown in ‘ The Production of Gold and
Silver in the United States/ Washington, 1883), a 30-stamp
mill will cost as follows, erected at Nevada: Plant at foundry,
Chicago, §5,850; freight to locality, $2,718; lumber in erec-
tion, §1,800; cost of erection, §4,000; cost of buildings in
excess over a building for rolls, $1,500; cost of engine-boilers,
excess over rolls, §1,250: total, $17,118. The cost of two sets
of 2Gin. rolls in New York, §4,500; and the weight, 28,4381 b.
These require an automatic feeder, weighing 2,0001 b., costing
§2OO. The cost, therefore, is as follows : Cost of two sets of
2Gin. rolls, and one automatic feeder, §4,700; freight to locality,
§780; cost of setting-up, including lumber, $700: total,
$G,180; or a saving of §10,938 against stamps.”
These figures are taken from calculations made of the cost
of the different classes of machines in the United States ; and I
see no reason to doubt their correctness. In any case the dif-
ference is so great that, admitting the first cost of rolls to be
half the cost of a stamping-battery of equal power, and working
expenses one-third less than that of the stamp-mill, even then
there is a great saving; hut that is not all, for the cost of wear
and tear in a stamp-mill, to do the same amount of work as two
sets of 26in. rolls, would be at least one-half more, or, to put d
in round numbers, the total saving by adopting rolls would be at
least £5 per day. Plan and sections of S. R. Krom’s steel
crushing-rolls can be seen in the Engineering and Mining Journal,
New York, of the 10th October, 1885. I have no doubt that
machines on this principle will soon supersede the old-fashione
stamping method of reducing ores and quartz. In adopting
steel rolls, the ore must first he operated on by a pulverizer to
reduce it to somewhat uniform size before the rolls are effective-
This may also be said with regard to stamps. It has heel*
found at Clunes, in Victoria, that the quantity of quartz crushe
by the stamping-batteries was greatly increased when a stone
breaker was used in the first instance to reduce the quartz-
The increase of work done by stamps more than compensated f° r
the cost of using the stone-breaker. With regard to the fineness


of crushed material, the steel rolls are proposed to be adopted in
some parts of California to crush the tailings from a stamping-
battery : this is a reversal of all former ideas on the subject.
There is, no doubt, a great deal to learn with regard to the
most economical method of reducing ores, judging by what I have
seen and read about recent improvements in crushing-machinery
in other countries'. The systems adopted in America are appli-
cable here; and any improved appliance that lessens the cost of
labour, or the cost of reducing ores, or which tends to a greater
saving of gold and silver, will materially assist in making the
poor-grade quartz lodes in many parts of the colony remunera-
tive for working.
ROCK-BORING DRILLS.
Mr. Q. Caples, of Reefton, who visited some of the principal
quartz-mines in Victoria a few years ago, furnished the follow-
ing particulars to the Inangahua Times in reference to the use of
rock-boring drills, which have since been successfully introduced
in many of the leading mines in this colony:—
“Within the last few years great improvements have been
made in the portability and efficiency of rock-boring drills
specially adapted for the opening and working of quartz-mines.
They are now widely distributed throughout the principal mining
claims in Victoria, and no well-established mining company
is without one or more of these effective machines. Those hav-
ing the control and management of quartz-mines cannot fail to
see an easy, rapid, and economic system of mining within their
teach that can reduce the working expenses one-lialf and time one-
fourth, as compared with the ordinary hammer-and-drill labour.
Rock-drills, as a rule, create labour, for some mines are now
being worked by rock-drills that would not otherwise pay. In
ordinary tunnel-work, if the power-drill is constantly employed,
two men are required to work it, and one man to remove the
stuff and prepare to timber up. Driving, at this rate, would en-
tirely depend upon the nature of the ground whether 40ft., 60ft.,
or more he driven for a week’s work. It is not so easy to ealeu


late with any degree of certainty the amount of benefit derived
by workmen employed in a mine where a rock-drill is at work,
from the constant supply of pure dry air circulating through the
mine. This dry air removes powcler-smoke, counteracts damp-
ness, and draughts of damp air can be closed up—all of which so
readily attack the strongest constitution. An ordinary observer,
seeing these little giants at work, boring drill-holes at a rate of
eight hundred strokes per minute, and each stroke a quarter of
a ton, would naturally say man was never intended to use up his
puny strength battering up a drill-head. A person interested in
a speedy method of developing or working a quartz-mine, seeing
the amount of work performed by a power-drill, cannot fail to
notice the wonderful difference when compared with the present
slow system of manual labour. The same remarks may he ap-
plied with respect to the diamond-drill, as a prospector and
explorer, with a percussive drill—a host of miners in itself —
to follow any discovery made by its fellow-worker with the.
diamond crown. This plan has been successfully followed
at Stawell. Another success can he recorded from that
district in favour of the rock-drill, now working a mine
with profit which was before then closed on account of the
stone being so poor that it would not pay the ordinary ex-
penses of raising and crushing. At the Great Northern Mine,
Stawell, we went down the shaft to see the rock-drill at work.
The drill was working on the flat-reef stope, boring through a
very solid mass of quartz. It was taken down and again fixed
for another box, the time in doing so not being more than a
few minutes. The time taken to bore 3ft. was twenty minutes,
not including two minutes for changing drills; one drill being
used on all occasions to start the bore,- and, after this, two
ordinary mining-drills bored the distance. Two miners, I was
told, could not bore the depth in four hours. The rock-borer
was a 3i‘ National; hut the manager informed me that a2i
would he found more suitable for general mining purposes. Mr.
David. Whyte, one of the directors of the mine, stated ‘ that
the mine had been idle for a considerable time, not being able
to pay current expenses for raising and crushing the stone. The
National drill was sent for as a test, and had then been working
six months. Two thousand tons of quartz were broken down and


crashed during that time, "which cleared off all liability on the
mine, including the cost of rock-drill and air-compressor. We
have a small balance on hand, and have sent for another rock-
drill.’
“In the selection of percussive power-drills by those who
desire economic and progressive mining, a few facts will be found
useful to follow. The construction should be simple, with the
fewest number of parts consistent with efficiency. The material
should be of the best, especially so for the inner parts, exposed
to such enormous friction. The weight of rock-borer should be
portable, for a workman to carry to any part of a mine, and set
it to work, or take it down in a few minutes and bore with case
at any angle directed by a miner. Rapidity of action is not so
necessary as to have all the working parts remaining constantly
m working order, and not liable to go out of repair.
“ The National Rock-drill. —This borer is more extensively
used than all others. It is well spoken of for all kinds of
mining work, and was employed in seven of the mines visited by
me. It weighs lGBlb., is in eighty parts, and costs £125.
“ Mitchell’s Rock-drill. —This drill is one of the latest addi-
tions to a numerous class already seeking public patronage.
Mr. Mitchell is a Sandhurst engineer, and brought his drill for
a trial down the Extended Hustler’s Mine. The place selected
Wa s a cross-cut drive, on a hard, close-grained, thick-bedded
slate rock. The machine was fixed to work in a few minutes.
A start being made, I took the following time: lGin. wqre bored
m four minutes and three-quarters; 22in. in five minutes and a
half; 25in .in six minutes. Our Stawell friends being quite
satisfied, I asked Mr. Mitchell what headway could the machine
make with blunt or badly-pointed drills. From a number of
drills one was selected, blunt, with one of the corners broken off.
f’his drill bored 23in. in seven minutes, without water. I left
perfectly satisfied with the work performed by this little stranger.
M this rock-drill can bore equally well in quartz, I make no
doubt of it being far superior to all others. If the following
Points of difference supplied to me by Mr. Mitchell be correct,
* great deal can be said in its favour : ‘ The weight of my rock-
Wer is about 1451 b.; the jacket is cast in that expensive and
durable metal called phosphor-bronze ; and the cost, with 30ft. of


tubing, is only £BS. The pressure used is 501 b. for lin. con-
nection, and 601 b. for -Jin. With this pressure it bores one-
third faster than most of the other drills. The construction is
simple, with fewer number of parts and no valve, so objection-
able in others. The most inattentive workman cannot put it
out of repair ; careless feeding, or a drill breaking or bending,
will cause it to stop—a sufficient cause to put other drills out of
repair.’ ”
In his exhaustive report on the various systems of mining
and machinery in use in Victoria and New South Wales, Mr. 11.
A. Gordon, Inspecting Engineer, New Zealand Mines Depart-
ment, states that the drills are used to a great extent by nearly
every company iu Victoria. The North Cross Reef Company,
Stawcll, had four in use—the National, the Eclipse, and two
Wayman and Kay’s. Mr. Troutbeclc, the company’s engineer,
was instructed to keep an accurate account of the cost of keep-
ing the drills in repair, and Mr. Gordon was furnished with the
following particulars :
Name of Drill.
Number of
Days at Work.
Cost.
£
National ...
682
138
Eclipse ...
325
73
Wayman and Kay (No. 1) ...
732
105
Wayman and Kay (No. 2) ...
724
97
According to Mr. Gordon, the unanimous opinion of mine-
managers and others interested in mining in Victoria and New
South Wales was, that the saving effected in the cost of candles,
steel, charcoal, and blacksmith’s time in sharpening drills more
than compensated for the cost of the fuel used in compressing
the air and the wear and tear of the rock-boring plant. Some
of the managers at Stawell stated that the cost of sharpening
tools, added to the price of coal, amounted to about 2s. Cd. f° r
every ton of stone raised; since the drills had been in use the
cost had been reduced to Cd. per ton. The rock-drills which
Mr. Gordon found most in use were the National, IngersollV
Eclipse, Mitchell’s, Naylor and Thornton’s, and Wayman m'd


Ball Dredger for Gold Mining
IN THE PIRANCA RIVER BRAZIL..
BARGE 30F T x lOr T X SF* BIN. DRAFT I F T BIN.
ENGINES 20 H P. I . SIZE OF PIPES 7IN.


Kay’s. From what lie saw in both colonies, Naylor and Thorn-
ton’s and Wayman and Kay’s drills seemed to give great satis-
faction. Naylor and Thornton’s drill was found to be lighter
than any of the others, whilst at the same time combining'
strength and simplicity of construction. There was very little
friction, and the whole of the power could be concentrated on
the main piston, which worked the drill.
THE BALL DREDGER.
This system of dredging has been chiefly employed in harbour
and canal works, upwards of 130 dredgers having been already
delivered, or being now in course of construction. They are
used, among others, in the following public works : Panama
Canal works, Corinth Canal works, Durban Harbour works
(Natal), Tancarvillc Canal works (Havre), River Tyne Har-
bour works, Prench Government works (Cherbourg), Great
Eastern Railway Company’s works (Lowestoft), Smyrna Har-
bour works, river harbour works at Le Mans (France), canal
"'orks at Fos (near Marseilles), harbour works at Haavesnet
(Norway), &c.
As a means of working the alluvial deposits of gold in rivers,
lakes, or beaches, it is claimed that the Ball dredger offers the fol-
lowing advantages : The first cost is considerably less than that
a bucket dredger, and wear and tear arc also very small. It
Squires no special form of craft to carry the dredging ma-
chinery, which may be placed cither on a raft, hulk, or pontoon,
"s most convenient, or it may be erected on land, and the pipes
led Into the desired position at a considerable distance from the
Pump. Dredgers have been built drawing only 14in., and they
c an be made to work at any depth, even to 100 ft. and upwards.
The material raised can be delivered to long distances (say, two
°r three hundred yards) by the force of the pump, thereby
enabling the sluicing operations to be carried on where most
convenient. The material is also well pounded and broken
'luring its passage through the pump, and is delivered mixed


with water in such proportion as the operator may desire. A
very small number of hands is required to work the plant, which
is consequently capable of performing the maximum amount of
work at a minimum of cost. The dredgers have been supplied
for gold-mining to companies in French Guiana, on the Gold
Coast, in Brazil, in Sumatra, and other places.
In a pamphlet which has been issued by the inventor (Mr.
Charles Ball, C.E., London) it is stated: “ The essential
feature of the dredger [of which a sketch is appended] is the
use of a patented centrifugal pump with a self-ad justing
fan, partly made of metal, and partly of indiarubber or other
yielding material, which accommodates itself to the presence of
any amount of grit, gravel, or stones in the material to he
dredged, without showing any appreciable amount of wear.
The pump is so constructed as to pass stones of any size that
will find their way through the pipes : for instance, a small
plant, with 2|in. suction- and delivery-pipe, passed a stone 3iin.
by 1 Jin.; and a plant with 7in. piping raised a lump of quart!
Bin. by Gin. by sin. from a depth of Gft., through 50ft. of piping)
and delivered it to a height of 10ft. above the level of the pump>
In another instance a railway-chair was passed through, affording
a striking proof of thepporerw r er of the pump to deal with solid
material. The connection between the pump and the ground
to be dredged is made by iron or steel pipes, with a sufficient
number of lengths of indiarubber piping to give flexibility to
the apparatus and enable the nozzle to be moved from point to
point, while the pump remains stationary, or to allow the
dredger itself to pitch and roll without interfering with the
working of the nozzle. Various descriptions of nozzle are m
use, the latest form for breaking up hard ground being a very
ingenious contrivance of revolving cutting-points, driven by con-
necting-rods from the engine. These cutting-points, on meeting
with any obstruction, are automatically raised and caused to
descend with a smashing force, thereby breaking up the obstruc-
tion, unless of such a nature as solid rocks or boulders ; and the
nozzle in practical working has been found equal to going
through stiff, compact mud, and such harder formation aS
may be represented by a brick wall, with perfect case. Choking
of the pipes, when working in sand, is completely avoided by


means of special vacuum- and pressure-gauges, and relief safety-
valves working automatically. Tlie pump is fitted with a steam
air-ejector, by means of which it can he started in thirty seconds,
avoiding the necessity of a foot-valve, which could not work
in grit or stones; and, hy a novel arrangement of the shape of
the delivery-pipe, it remains charged after stopping, ready for
a new start. The fan of the pump is driven at a high rate of
speed hy a belt from the engine, this arrangement acting as a
safety-valve, as, directly the pump shows a tendency to choke,
the belt slips, instead of the machinery breaking.”
The amount of work of which the Ball dredger is capable,
and the moderate cost of same, may he estimated hy the follow-
ing extract from a paper by Mr. A. A. Langley, Engincer-in-
Cliief of the Great Eastern llailway Company, on the work done
hy him at Lowestoft. This paper was read at the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, London, in January, 1882. (See “ Pro-
ceedings Inst. Mech. Engineers, 1882,” pp. 101—104) : “ The
fan makes 350 revolutions per minute, and at that speed is
capable of raising 400 tons of sand, gravel, and stones per hour;
hut the average in actual work may he taken at 200 tons per
hour. This is with a ten-liorse-power engine, and working in a
depth of water varying from 7ft. to 25ft. The figures for cost
with this dredger are as follow : Cost of dredger, say, £2,000;
nominal horse-power, 10; depth at which it excavates, 25ft.;
Quantity excavated per annum, 200,000 tons; labour for dredg-
ing, lead (two miles), and discharging, 2'125d. per ton; coal and
other stores, 0 - 375 d. per ton; repairs (total, £GO), 0'072d. per
ton; total working cost, 2’572d. per ton; add 10 per cent,
mterest on capital, o'2lod. per ton : total cost, including interest
°u capital, 2'812d. per ton. The consumption of coal is about
one ton per 1,000 tons of sand dredged.”
The dredger indicated had pipes of 12in. diameter, and the
material dredged was of a very favourable character, so that the
quantity which it would he possible to raise in other places
n'ould have to he reduced in proportion to the adverse nature of
the material. The following, however, may he taken as fair
estimates of the capabilities of the pumps of various sizes,
forking in moderately loose stuff, the dredging-machinery being
either carried on a pontoon or barge afloat upon the water


covering the material to be dredged, or fixed on land at an
equivalent height above the level of the water: —
Size of Pipe. Tons of Solid
r per Hour.
5 in. ... ... 15
Gin. ... ... ... 25
7in. ... ... ... 35
Bin. ... ... ... 45
lOin. ... ... ... 70
12in. ... ... ... 100
This estimate is made upon the basis of ■ a lift from any
ordinary depth—say, 30ft.—from level of pump, and a delivery,
through not over 100 ft. of horizontal piping, to a height of 10ft.
above the level of the water.


GOLD EXPORTED FROM NEW ZEALAND.
Total Quantity and Value of Gold entered for Duty for Exportation from the Ist January, 1857, to the 31st December, 1886. (This return shows the produce
of the various goldfields. Gold entered at Nelson from Hokitika, Greymouth, and Westport is put under the head of “West Coast, and from Invercargill and
Biverton under the head of “ Otago.”)
Year.
Auckland.
Nelson.
Marlborough.
West Coast.
Otago.
Wellington.
Canterbury.
Tot
al.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Value.
Oz.
Valuo.
1857
S8
39
Sffl
an
3G2
%
;;
39s
i?
Stj
1869
Ho
Hi
s? ::
H3
lifj
Hs
Ho
H, ••
H8
H 9 ••
'■Ho
Hi
%
% ••
% ’•
%
totals..
”308
i j 230
4,483
3,448
5,440
5,814
G,G37
53,CGO
132,451
85,534
330,32G
104,890
119,440
70,910
G9,485
50,057
90,081
55,982
37,901
42,720
35,51G
33,059
41,291
3G,087
42,989
32,271
£
i j 192
4 \ 098
13,853
10,552
17,090
17,403
18,277
108,874
434,087
319.140
1,188,708
309,341
437,123
305,0G8
202,150
221,905
403,G27
220,454
154,295
170,410
141,320
131,007
103,018
143,504
170,410
128.140
10,437
13,220
7,330
4,538
0,335
10,422
9,580
14,410
12,137
7,050
9,123
5,999
10,031
12,244
10,014
8,175
13,097
5,G42
4,577
14,018
5,3G7
4,403
2,993
3,222
3,453
3,2S9
2,004
2,159
2,798
4,078
£
40,422
51,272
28,427
17,585
24,552
40,380
37,120
55,841
47,030
29,643
35,918
38,390
42,524
48,G92
40,050
32,700
54,780
22,158
17,800
55,802
21,092
17.223
11,424
12.223
13,039
12,494
7,724
8,002
10,337
15,8G8
24^838
7,952
409
501
404
006
1,852
1,867
2,057
1,274
1,198
1,159
450
870
404
879
1,550
1,378
1,352
630
1,079
540
399
£
95 , - 231
30,814
1,818
1,978
1,010
2,004
7,408
7,408
8,228
5,050
4,748
4,030
1,796
3,197
1,017
3,460
5,050
4,531
5,400
2,524
4,306
2,100
1,430
■ i * 4G3
289,897
552,572
511,974
405,762
317,109
280,008
232,882
172,574
188,501
157,531
158,678
133,014
153,198
144,034
142,822
144,090
127,544
130,048
110,905
111,686
117,861
111,175
£
5,5C0
1,127,370
2,140,940
2,018,874
1,008,844
1,209,604
1,121,525
931,528
GOO,296
756,442
631,203
035,480
531,274
012,823
578,508
571,061
575,258
509,971
519,978
467,152
446,517
471,325
440,399
187,096
399,201
614,387
436,012
259,139
168,871
158.670
171,049
153,364
165,152
154,940
157,074
182,416
135,107
121,423
118,477
113,169
105,003
102,8G9
113,066
102.670
83,446
87,478
78,810
73,183
79,104
£
727]321
1,546,905
2,380,750
1,089,053
1,004,103
654,G47
023,815
686,596
013,45G
060,694
019,700
030,096
734,024
542,154
487,632
473,491
455,341
422,277
407,868
457,705
411,923
333,804
352,334
318,932
294,378
317,543
30
io
161
52
£
120
37
3S0
189
24
£
96
10,437
13,534
7,33G
4,538
194,031
410,802
028,450
480,171
574,574
735,376
086,905
037,474
014,281
544,8S0
730,029
445.370
505,337
376,388
355,322
322,016
371,685
310,486
287,464
305,248
270,561
251,204
248,374
229,946
237.371
227,079
£
40,422
52,404
28,427
17,585
751,873
1,591,389
2,431,723
1,856,837
2,226,474
2,844,517
2,698,862
2,504,326
2,362,995
2,157,585
2,787,520
1,731,261
1,987,425
1,505,331
1,407,770
1,284,328
1,490,080
1,240,079
1,148,108
1,227,252
1,080,790
1,002,720
993,352
921,797
948,015
903,569
1,513,037
5,022,402
224,077
890,GG2
53,774
207,730
4,702,048
18,601,998
4,523,570
17,847,862
193
726
24
96
11,016,729
43,231,476
25


MINERAL ORES EXPORTED FROM NEW ZEALAND.
Total Quantity of Mineral Okes, the Product of Mines other than Gold, Exported from the Colony up to 31st December, 1885.
Year.
Silver.
Copper Ore.
Chrome Ore.
Antimony Ore.
Manganese Ore.
Hematite Ore.
Mixed Mineral Ore.
Coal.
Coke.
Kauri Gum.
Totals.
0 z.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Tons.
Value.
Ounces
and Tons.
Value.
1853
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
830
£
15,972
830
&
15,072
1854
1,001
28,864
1,601
28,864
1855
355
4,514
355
4,514
185G
1,440
18,591
1,440
18,591
1S57
2,522
35,251
2,522
35,251
1858
351
5,000
3
25
o
4
1,811
20,037
2,107
25,one
1859
245
2,005
8
120
2,010
20,776
2,263
23,501
18G0
137
1,590
11G
1,440
i
2
1,040
9,851
1,300
12,383
18G1
110
1,300
52
520
850
9,SSS
1,018
11,708
1802
51
1,024
3,843 24,719
1,103
11,107
4,997
3O.S50
18G3
595
4,318
1,400
27,020
1,995
31,344
18G4
708
4,910
2,228
GO,590
2,990
05,500
18G5
1,SG7
4G,0G0
1,807
46,060
72,287
81,419
74,6S0
115,100
188,082
192,715
164,992
96,321
91,951
149,272
139,372
137,711
154,687
168,001
275,799
07I 633
2S1.010
350,090
353,03^
302,779
18GG
281
1,315
261
400
2,535
70,572
3,077
18G7
. ,
24G
2,700
973
1,228
2,G85
77,491
3,904
18G8
84
977
1,027
1,210
2,090
72,493
3,801
18G9
li,0G3
2,993
750
800
2,850
111,307
14,003
1870
37,123
11,380
7
120
1,072
1,508
4,391
175,074
43,193
1871
80,272
23,145
1,C9G
1,G12
5,054
107,958
87,022
1872
37,004
9,910
990
855
21
50
4,811
154,107
42,880
1873
30,187
9,850! ..
724
055
2,834
85,810
39,745
1874
40,5GG
10,380: ..
1,4G3
1,303
87
998
2,5G9
79,9SG
44,085
1875
29,085
7,509!
3,385
3,129
15
51
2,231
138,523
34,716
187G
12,083
3,171
3, ISO
14,824
1,854
1,954
2,071
53
189
2,888
109,234
20,058
1877
33,893
7,550
2,510
2,140
2,011
1,271
2,181
384
318
002
10,416
2,306
9,GG4
2,G58
251
72
3,633
118,348
42,575§
1878
23,019
5,755
C
115
4
102
2
8
G,3G2
5,139
85
177
3,445
132,975
35,439
1879
20,G45
4,512 ! 55
1,105
' 012
8,338
7,144
0,187
154
324
3,229
147,535
38,3G7
1880
20,005
4,500!
00
10,423
2,074
11,335
7,020
5,977
87
135
4,725
242,817
- 37,182
1881
18,885
4,230; 5
30
O
24
3,283
1,955
4,303
6,021
5,010
993
353
5,401
253,788
34,323
1882
5,094
1,280
9
41
30
900
0,963
2,784
8,597
3,207
2,380
275
480
5,533
200,309
19,713
1883
16,820
3,785
4G
G78
31
804
1,155
1
12
22
110
0,522
4,879
1,430
2,057
0,518
336,GOG
31,779 j
1884
24,914
5,125 20
10G
5 j 2S9
809
0,104
4,401
230
372
G,393
342,151
37,9S5
18S5
10,024
3,109
606
■1,716
m
208
114
993
43,893
51,257
207
385
5,875J
299,702
G8,092J
Totals
404,548
118,322
1,372
17,397
5,000
37,307
793
7,731
12,023
43,103
51
220
13,097
49,834
104,329
102,G81
2,9581
4,873
99,479*
3,085,499
704,317J
4,067,027
•*—"""


\ \'< J I { /V m cjc> D* r t-i'r: / f i tc :~ i j z is> < .-> jv cj ororomrsioio h.
Tot.Hj Value of Works constructed under the Direction of the Don. the -Minister of Mines, since the "Votes
were placed under the Control of the Department,* for the Development of tlio Mineral Resources of the
Colony, either wholly undertaken by the Mines Department or by Subsidies to Local Bodies and Mining
Companies; Amount Expended by Mines Department; and Liability on same.
Nature of Work.
Total Cost of Con-
struction or
Amount authorized
to bo expended.
Expenditure by
way of Subsidy or
otherwise by
Mines Department.
Amouut of Liability
by Mines Depart-
ment on Works
in Progress.
Up to Years 1SS2-S3 axu 18S3-S4.
n
s.
fl.
£
R.
d.
£
s.
<1.
Water-races
29,25:2
1
11
14,853
9
5
14,398
11
0
Roads on goldfields
21,437
11
2
13,089
10
0
8,347
15
2
Roads and tracks undertaken bv County Councils, subsidized by Mines Dept. ..
52,841
17
0
21,844
10
7
10,207
15
9
Works undertaken by prospecting associations, subsidized by Mines Department
13,210
13
4
3,350
0
0
3,400
0
0
Construction of drainage- and sludgc-clianncls, subsidized by Mines Department
5,750
0
0
2,408
15
4
781
4
8
Totals
122,498
3
5
55,000
17
4
37,135
7
1
18S4-S5.
Watcr-raccs
4,840
1
9
14,590
o
9
4,048
ii
G
Roads on goldfields
13,007
10
1
9,030
9
G
12,384
15
9
Roads and tracks undertaken bv County Councils, subsidized by Mines Dept. ..
13,500
14
1
0,293
10
0
12,739
17
0
Roads to mines, other than gold, subsidized by Mines Department
4,594
10
0
111
19
0
2,888
1
0
Works undertaken by prospecting associations, subsidized bv Mines Department
850
0
0
108
0
0
3,092
0
0
Construction of drainage- and sludge-clianncls, subsidized by Mines Department
4,050
0
0
1,050
0
0
1,931
4
8
Diamond and other drills ..
3,000
0
0
1,858
0
0
Totals
45,174
15
11
33,048
7
9
38,284
10
5
1885-80.
Water-races
10,428
14
7
6,003
2
3
0,904
4
4
Roads on goldfields .. .. .. .. ..
27,543
18
8
12,300
14
9
27,507
19
8
Roads undertaken by County Councils, subsidized by Mines Department
14,773
2
3
13,043
15
9
12,477
9
2
Roads to mines, other than gold, subsidized by Mines Department
1,738
13
G
4,327
0
10
490
12
8
Works undertaken by prospecting associations, subsidized by Mines Department
11,800
18
0
1,999
5
7
0,389
5
9
Construction of drainage- and sludgc-cliannels, subsidized by Mines Department
10,459
1
9
3,994
10
0
0,995
9
9
Totals
70,804
8
9
41,788
15
8
00,885
1
4
SUMMARY.
Water-races .. .. .. .. .. .. — • •
44,520
18
3
35
,512
14
5
G,9G4
4
4
Ronds on goldfields .. .. .. .. .. .. . ■ ■
02,G48
19
11
So
,031
0
3
27,507
19
8
Roads and tracks undertaken by County Councils, subsidized by Mines Dept. .. ;
81,181
13
4
41
182
8
10
12,477
9
2
Roads to mines, other than gold, subsidized by Mines Department .. .. j
0,333
3
0
4
433
19
10
490
12
8
Works undertaken by prospecting associations and companies, subsidized by :
0,3S9
Mines Department .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
25,927
11
4
5
,457
5
7
5
9
Construction of drainage- and sludge-channels, subsidized by Mines Department 1
20,259
1
9
7
,513
11
10
0,995
9
9
Diamond and other drills .. .. .. .. .. .. .. j
3,000
0
0
i
,858
0
0
Totals .. .. .. .. .. .. !
244,477
8
1
131
,044
0
9
00,885
1
4
* From Ist April, 1882.
GOVERNMENT WATER-RACES ON GOLDFIELDS.
-J-J
w
I—l
CO
a
-M
o
-+-)
&
C/3
w
o
P
H
<1
£
E-t
55
H
r 5
55
5
H
5>
O
O
6
r* O
o CO
.2 co
■s^
CD „
S
8S
CJ
p
p
o
O
«-»-*
o
p
p
p
t>
Ti
S
p
«
D
H
i—i
Q
55
K
P
K
03
H
P
3
H
P 3
Name of Water-race.
Receipts.
Expenditure.
Profits or Loss
oil Working.
1
V *0
A cj
o
5 O rg
.S"S2§
Sa
P OCO-S
°
Value of Gold
obtained.
Value of
Duty re-
ceived Oil
Gold
obtained.
Total Profits
or Losses and
Value of Dutj*.
Total Cost of
Construction.
Waimea-Kumara Water - race
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
P.
cl.
Oz.
£
s. cl.
£
B.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
and Sludqc-channcl.
Seven years ending Mch. 31,1885
45,83'J
3
0
33,741
6
3
12,097
16
9
406
123,485
472,330
2 G
178,U'(G
1
7
Year ending March 31,1886 ..
14,498
7
2
8,802 10
6
5,695 1C
8
343
17,376
60,020
3 0
Totals
60,337
10
2
42,543
16
9
17,793
13
5
451
140,861
538,359
5 6
14,086
O
31,879 15
5
173,076
10
7
Kelson Creek Water-race.
Seven years ending Meli. 31,1885
12,640
0
7
8,429
2
4
4,216
IS
3
59
23,983
91,734
19 6
89,833
19
7
Year ending March 31, 1880 ..
1,073
14
2
. 1,104
13
4
*30
19
2
64
2,358
9,019
7 0
51 (
19
G
Totals
13,719
14
9
9,533
15
8
4,185
19
1
CO
26,341
100,754
6 C
2,634
2
6,820
i
1
90,151
19
i
Argute Water-race.
Seven years ending Mch. 31,1885
3,093
16
2
2,826
13
3
267
2
11
10
5,014
19,178
11 0
12,743
1G
9
Year ending March 31, 1886 ..
435
2
8
391
17
8
43
5
0
21
464
1,774
16 0
1,449
1
2
Totals
3,528
18
10
3,218
10
11
310
7
11
17
5,478
20,953
7 0
547
16
858
3
11
14,192
17
ii
Mount Ida Water-race.
Seven years ending Dec. 31,1884
10,821
14
S
13,217 11
5
*2,395
16
9
81
14,319
54,770
0 0
U5 f U0b
3
8
Year ending Dee. 31, 18S5
893
6
5
1,338
2
5
*444
16
0
130
3,392
12,723
0 0
700
0
0
Totals
11,715
1
1
14,55<_)
13
10
*2,840
12
9
87
17,711
G7,493
0 0
1,771
2
*1,CG9
.
10
9
G5 7 GG
3
8
Grand totals
89,301
4
10
69,851
17
2
19,449
7
8
G15190,391
1
727,559
19 O'19, 039
i
233,488
1
9
8
343,187
11
3
* Loss is shown.


WATER-RACES CONSTRUCTED BY MINERS.
Number, Description, and Value (approximately) of Water-races, Tail-races, Dams, Reser-
voirs, and Ground-sluices in Operation during the Year ending 31st March, 1886.
Mining District.
Water-race*.
Tail-races.
Dams.
Reservoirs.
Ground-slaices.
No.
Length
in
Miles.
No. of
Sluice-
heads.
Approxi-
mate
Cost.
No.
Approxi-
mate
Cost.
No.
Approxi-
mate
Cost.
No.
Approxi-
mate
Cost.
lio.
Approxi-
- mate
Cost.
Auckland —
£
£
£
£
£
Hauraki North ..
ii
8
35
20,000
Hauraki South ..
26
204
103
85,000
i
80
i
GO
i
G00
To Aroha
4
2
14
7,500
Maulbokocgh —
Pelorus ..
32
42
61
4,500
18
1,500
16
400
G
300
Wairau ..
7
7
36
700
G
400
3
GO
Nelson and West Coast —
Wangapeka
4
3
7
50
5
100
3
*
Collingwood
54
01*
130
4,180
29
585
38
1,190
Inangahua
144
123
853
29,205
244
12,709
295
9,073
Charleston
245
135
287
22,300
187
G,762
417
9, GOO
1
3,000
70
3,000
Westport
204
182
824*
13,G28
55
G,900
112
3,518
Lyell
48
3GJ
213
G,500
18
1,G37
33
2,045
15
1,500
Murchison
49
40
148
4,000
12
420
13
G27
33
3|l00
Ahaura ..
Westland —
43
15J
124
1,782
38
9,102
30
1,329
••
350
12,000
Totara ..
GO
50
150
80,000
90
7,000
40
1,500
10
1,000
40
400
Hokitika and Kanieri
237
135
225
14,000
147
1,400
13G
1,250
Kumara..
112
70
530
14,300
125
15,000
20
2,000
11
7,500
20
200
Greymoutli
184
152}
445*
24,000
100
2,205
9G
2,310
G5
1,900
Maori Gully (Arnold)
215
208
361
10,350
220
3,725
242
3,110
Okarito ..
23
25
220
1,500
2
30
7
70
Greenstone
100
50
200
,10,000
40
2,000
35
2,500
Stafford and Goldsborougli
380
2G0
700
22,000
450
7,000
510
G,000
180
2,500
300
3,700
Hindon ..
20
32
3G
3,320
8
125
29
GOO
12
80
Tuapeka
331
1,073
1,132
21,4G0
683
9,200
25G
7,900
t
f
+
+
Clyde
3G
118}
84*
8,858
28
G75
20
430
t
t
+
+
Black’s ..
61
297
245
22,892
78
14,700
54
11,350
f
f
+
+
Queenstown
96
157
334*
10,000
150
4,000
40
1,700
11
550
+
Alexandra
44
229*
151
15,845
38
1,775
42
1,000
t
t
+
+
Roxburgh
GO
140}
222
15,201
G8
12,250
33
1.G75
t
f
+
+
Cromwell
179
719
G55
8G,280
200
§
GO
§
t
f
+
+
Waikaia..
71
249
236
4,900
242
3,140
135
3,931
f
t
30
*160
Orepuki and Longwood
125
130
300
18,000
52
2,300
54
500
Arrow
110
151
213
9,000
180
4,750
30
1,800
30
700
+
+
Naseby ..
90
230
255
27,500
120
10,000
G8
7,000
+
+
Kyebum and Clarke's
73
218
240
10,200
45
2,500
20
1,500
Hamilton’s and Sowbum ..
31
10G
80
5,500
25
2,000
1,000
Hyde and Fullerton’s ' ..
18
90
G4
10,150
15
3,000
10
500
Macrae's, Strath-Taieri, and
26
42
43
4,000
20
400
18
1,200
Shag Valley
Serpentine
3G
88
93
5,000
25
2,000
7
400
Maerewlienua
18
1G8J
44*
14,735
20
78G
25
1,547
St. Bathan’s and Ida Valley
72
293
309
30,200
45
1,200
8
1,300
• ‘
Totals .. ..
3,082 G, 179
!
10,404* G98,GCG
1
3,851 153, 35G '2,971
! 1
91,975
250
1G,150
1
935
2G,040
* Not known.
i Included in dams.
X Included in tail-races.
S No record.


MINING MACHINERY.
Number of Machines employed in Alluvial and Quartz-mining and the Value thereof, for the
Year ending 31st March, .1886.
Machinery employed in Alluvial Mining.
Machinery employed in Quartz-mining.
g
£.
3’
era
5
Oj’
►T
o
ruddling Machines.
Whims.
Whips or Pulleys.
Sluices, Toms, and
Sluice-boxes.
"Water-wheels.
Hydraulic Hose.
Pumps.
Dredges.
Quicksilver and
Compound Cradles.
Derricks.
Stamp-heads crush-
ing Cement.
Boring Machines.
Stoam-
ongines
omployed
winding,
crushing,
&c.
No.
Aggro-
gato
h.p.
;n
05
a
us
2
©
*3
o
d
in
cn
*3
©
m
*5
rt
©
Ch
to
a
o
A
&S
»-<
o
so
o
05
3
(A
0
ft
a
a
d
a
2
w
ft
2
o
1
1
o
5
PS
i?
o
Approxi-
mate
Value of
all
Mining
Plant
included
in this
Return.
Auckland —
_
£
25
600
22
458
23
208
105,000
8
210
7
65
3
30,000
1
20
2
EH?
4
76
18,000
Marlborough —
130
0
4
1
12
1,546
Nelson and West
Coast —
47
1
3
1
4
1
t t
1
5
1
2,500
Inangahua
12
228
18
2S5
15
2
3
. .
55
124,580
SO
g
70
50
13
3,000
T.v^ll
23
14
1
4
45
3
11,000
45
07
1,200
46
0
27
2
20
2
7,000
500
0
350
1
3
6,800
Westland —
Waimea and Staf-
, .
1
1,000
2
230
1
4,000
ford
8
40
3
40
G
5
220
14,000
O
40
70
30
2,500
nicri
1 800
1
350
or i
40
8
5,000
2,596
889,
G
118
1
3
33
8
on
70
0
55
|
5,000
1 ooo
34
|
1,500
50
3
3
1
Otago —
9
1
1
20
2
2C
1
4,000
500
1 *
10
30
3
125
20
4
1
12,000
Clyde, Itoxburgh,
5
4
c
300
IS
4,000
10
7
30
4
..
1
12
2
8
1
21,700
Alexandra, and
Black’s
410
i
60
£
24
4,480
Iftf
Q£
1,700
70
18
480
Clarke’s
40
25
400
Sowburn
15
10
200
ton’s
50
12
150
Taieri, and Sliag
Valley
3£
300
20
1
5
1
600
00
40
1
1G
1
10
2,500
Valley, and
other localities
Arrow
200
t
70
1
5
45
5
2
1
10
15,000
300
50
b
9(
. .
24,000
Totals
2
14
72
8,CG3
no
5,870
78
15
123
7'ISS 1 0
61
1,395
77
1,170
60
7
3
' 1
349
432,732
SUMMARY.
|
34
830 31
573
30
.. 284
153,000
ISO
o
4 1
|
1
12: ..
1
1,54G
Nelson and West' ..
741
52
448 1 2
.. 53
3 13
12
. 228' 2G
359
22
2
3
55
156,080
Coast 1
i
!
1
j
i
Westland .. ..
10
GO
4,912
17
8G3 35
l! 40
9
8
253 ..
. .
. .
34,59G
Otago .. .. j 2
4
3
2,280
30
4,555 41
14 30
4125
6.
72: 20
i
288
5
* *
i io
87,510
Totals ; 2
14
72
8,0G3jll0
5,870' 78
15123
7138
9
G1
1
l,395j 77
1,170
GG 1
1
7
3
1349
1
432,732


MINERS EMPLOYED ON GOLDFIELDS.
Number of Miners employed during the Year ending 31st March, 1886.
Mining District.
Alluvial Miners.
Quartz-miners.
Totals.
Grand
European.
Chinese.
European.
Chinese.
European.
Chinese.
Totals.
Auckland —
North Hauraki
145
145
145
South Hauraki
900
900
900
Te Arolia
95
95
95
Maulborougii — ■
Pelorus
100
G
10G
10G
Wairau and Queen Charlotte Sound
50
2
52
52
Nelson and West Coast —
Wangapeka
13
13
13
Collingwood, Takaka, and West Wanganui
118
32
150
150
Inangahua
11G
240
300
41G
240
G5G
Ahaura
350
233
350
233
583
Charleston
220
220
220
Westport, including Addison’s, ' Northern
Terraces, Waimangaroa, North Beach,
Mokihinui, Karamoa, and Lower Buller
157
5
45
202
5
207
Valley
Lyell
50
30
130
180
30
210
Murchison
120
8
20
140
8
148
Westland —
Waimea and Stafford
375
205
375
205
5S0
Totara
329
81
C
335
81
416
Hokitika and Kanieri ..
47G
124
47G
124
GOO
Kumara
400
25
4U0
25
425
Greymouth
322
2G8
322
2G8
590
Arnold
450
95
450
95
545
Greenstone
100
50
100
50
150
Okarito
Go
05
65
Jackson’s Bay ..
54
54
54
Otago —
Hindon
35
4
8
43
4
47
Tuapeka
430
380
10
440
380
820
Clyde ..
40
15
40
15
55
Cromwell
330
120
40
370
120
490
Alexandra
115
70
10
125
70
195
Itoxburgli
130
G5
G
130
G5
201
Black’s
125
55
125
55
180
Waikaia, Upper Waikaia, Nokomai, Wai-
107
114
107
114
221
kaka, and Waikawa
Orepuki and Longwood ..
180
200
180
200
380
Wakatipu Goldfields — Arrow, Macetown,
Cardrona, Kawarau, Bracken’s, and Mo-
tatapu
1G3
32
GO
9,9.3
32
255
Naseby
1G5
95
250
1G5
95
2G0
Queenstown
175
75
425
75
500
Kyeburn and Clarke’s ..
45
100
45
100
145
Hamilton, Sowburn, A'c.
55
15
55
15
70
Hyde and Fullerton’s
40
7
40
7
47
Serpentine ..
Macrae’s, Stratli-Taieri, and Shag Valley
15
10
30
45
10
55
55
85
55
85
140
Maerewlienua ..
42
42
42
St. Batlian’s and Ida Valley
135
20
io
145
20
1G5
SUMMARY.
Auckland
Marlborough
Nelson and West Coast
Westland
Otago
150
1,144
2,571
2,382
516
848
1,462
1,140
8
527
6
424
1,140
158
1,671
2,577
2,806
516
848
1,462
1,140
158
2,187
3,425
4,268 '
Totals
6,247
2,826
2,105
8,352
2,826
11,178


THE RATE OF WAGES ON GOLDFIELDS.
Average Eate of Wages per Week for the Year ending 31st March, 1886.
Mining District.
General
Managers.
Legal
Managers.
Mining
Managers.
Engineers.
Engine-
drivers.
Stokers.
Blacksmiths.
Carpenters.
Miners.
Labourers.
Boys.
Chinese.
Agricultural
Labourers.
Domestic
Servants.
Auckland —
£
s.
a.
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
£
s.
d.
£
s. d.
£
s.
a.
£
s. d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
a.
£ s. a.
£ s. a.
£ s. a.
8/ to 12/
Te Aroha
1 0
0
£4 to £5
3
16 0
3
G
0
2
8
0
2
2
0
20/to 25/
..
20/ to 30/
North Hauraki ..
£4 to £5
£1 to £2
£4 to £5
£3 to £5
£2 10/ to £3
2
8
0
£210/to £3
£210/to £3
2
8
0
2
2
0
15/ to 20/
2 2 0
10/ to 18/
South Hauraki ..
1 0
0
£4 to £G
6
0
0
£210/to £3
2
10
0
£2 10/to £3
£3 to £312/
£2 2/ to £2 8/
1
1G
0
15/ to 20/
8/ to 12/
JIaelboiiougii—
3
10/to 20/
Wairau
0
0
2
8
0
• .
Pclorus
4
0
0
G
0
0
3
0 0
3
0 0
3
0
0
2
8
0
10/to 20/
Queen Charlotte Sound ..
Nelson and West Coast —
4 0 0
4
0
0
3
0 0
3
0
14
0
2
8
0
30/to 42/
V
Wangapoka i ..
3
0 0
2
8
0
2
0
2
2
0
0 12 0
1 0
0
5 0 0
3
0
0
2
8 0
2
8
0
2
14 0
48/ to
54/
2
8
0
20/ to 30/
10/ to 12/
7
0
0
£1 to £3
£5 to £G
£410/to £5
o
o
10 0
3
0
0
£410/to £5
£410/to £5
3
0
0
3
0
0
2 0 0
1 10 0
20/
5 0 0
3
10 0
A
10
0
3
0
0
£2 to £3
20/ to 40/
15 0
10/ to 15/
Westport
Lyell and !Murcliison
Ahaura
1 0
0
5 0 0
3
15 0
3
0
0
4
4 0
4
4
0
3
0
0
2
10
0
5/ to 20/
25/ to 30/
10/ to 20/
G
0
0
1 10
0
GOO
G
6
0
5
0 0
3
10
0
3
3
0
3
0
0
2 0 0
2 0 0
20/
1 10
0
GOO
£310/to £4
£310/ to £4
3
0
0
£2 81 to £3
0 15 0
2 10 0
15/ to 20/ ■
Westland—
Waimca and Stafford
2 0 0
£4 to £410/
£4 to £410/
£2 10/
to
£3
1
10
0
l’io o
l io o
3 0 0
10/to 20/
G
0
0
i io
0
4 10 0
5
6
0
3
0 0
4
0 0
4
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
20/
Hokitika and Ivanieri
£3 to £4
1 0
0
£4 to £5
5
0
0
4
0 0
3
0
0
3
0 0
4
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
1 10 0
1 10 0
10 0
10/to 15/
5
0
0
2 0
0
4 0 0
4
0 0
4
10 0
4
10
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
1 10 0
1 10 0
10/ to 20/
Grcymoutli
Okarito and Jackson’s Bay
1 0
0
GOO
£4 to
£5
£3 to £310/
3
0
0
4
3
0 0
12 0
4
3
16
12
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
£2 14/ to £3
3 0 0
0 15 0
1 10 0
1 10 0
15 0
15/ to 20/
10/ to 15/
Maori Gully (Arnold)
Greenstone
Goldsborough and Stafford
4
0
0
• •
5 0 0
2 0 0
4
0
0
4 0 0
£4 to £410/
4
4
4
0
10
10
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 0 0
3 0 0
£2 14/ to £3
20/ to 30/
1 10 0
15/ to 20/
2 0 0
1 10 0
l’io 0
30/ to 40/
15/
15/
20/
Otago —
Hindon
3
0 0
3
0
0
42/to 55/
2
2
0
10/to 20/
£45 to £50
£30 to £35
per annum
per annum
Tuapeka
£3 to £4
£20 to £50
£310/to £5
£3 to £3 5/
55/to G3 /
50/
to 63/;
£3 to £310/
42/ to 48/
3G/ to 42/
15/to 20/
15/to 20/
5/ to 12/
Cromwell
5
0
0
per annum
10 0
5 0 0
4
10
0
3
12 0
3
0
0
4
0 0
3
12
0
£2 10/ to £3
48/ to 5
4/
15/to 25/
30/ to 40/
£1 & rations
10/to 20/
Clyde. . .. 1
Alexandra .. 1
Black’s . • |
G
0
0
i i
0
5 0 0
4
0
0
£110/ to £4
2
2
0
4
0 0
4
0
0
3
0
0
2
8
0
10/to 20/
2 0 0
10 0
10/to 15/
Koxburgh .. J
3
0 0
3
12
0
2
8
0
i
15
0
0 15 0
15 0
10 0
15/
Orepuki and Longwood ..
Arrow (Wakatipu Gold-
G
0
0
l"o
0
5 0 0
4
0
0
3
6 0
2
10
0
4
'6 0
3
4
0
10
0
0
2
3
8
0
0
0
2
3
2
0
0
0
10 0
10/to 15/
1 10 0
20/ to 30/
2 2 0
20/to 25/
15/
12/6 to 15/
fields)
Mount Ida
3 10 0
3
10 0
3
12
0
2
8
0
i
5
0
10 0
42/ to 48/ '
£45 to £50
£30
per annum
per annum
Maerewlienua ..
3
0 0
3
0
0
2 10
0
2
10
0
0 10 0
12/ to 10/
with rations
14/


PRICES OF PROVISIONS AND LIVE STOCK ON GOLDFIELDS.
Average Prices of Provisions and Live Stock for the Year ending 31st March, 1886.
Mining District.
*-»
T3
c
4I
ll
k'
i
u
h
IS
u
<b
at
-w f+
*5 «t
a”
o
a
o
5 55
a
«
n
cq
M
O
O
tM
o*
Live Stock.
Meat.
'T3
■
1 g
® O
«
m
a
o
«.
o
o
rti
o
cJ
o
©
o
a
0/
.a
02
a
*£
CO
Beef.
”3
bH
f=i
O
e.
Milk,
o
S
Salt.
rt
fcfl
3 •
CQ
Tea.
«
,£>
o
EH
§
£
Per. hhd.
Per gall.
Per lb.
Per lb.
Per lb.
Per lb.
Per lb.
Per
1001b.
Per Im.
bushel.
Per
head. •
Per
head.
Per
head.
Per
head.
Per
head.
Per
lb.
Per
lb.
Per
lb.
—
Per
qt.
Per
lb.
Per
lb.
Per
lb.
Per lb.
Per lb.
Per
gallon.
Auckland—■
d.
£
£
d.
a.
d.
a.
a.
a.
d
North Hauraki ..
90/
25/
2
1/0
1/3
/10
2/
13/
5-15
12/—20/
5-50
10/—20/
20/-100/
7
0
7
0
3
1-2
6
2/0—4/0
0/0
20/—25/
South Hauraki ..
88/—100/
30/—35/
2
1/0
1/-1/3
/8-1/
1/9
14/
5/
5i
. .
5-20
8/—12/
15/—00/
5
4
0
4
.3
11
4
2/-3/
<v
1G/-40/
Te Arolia
Marlborough—
100/
25/
2
1/0
1/3
/8—1/
2/
13/
5/
5-9
*>/
5-50
8/-12/
15/-35/
3-6
5
0
4
4
1
3J-6
2/—3/6
6/
40/
Pelorus
150/
4
1/
1/
1/
2/
18/
0-8
10/.
13/.
5
4
0
4
4
1
6
3/
6/
Wairau
. ,
4
1/
1/
1/
2/
18/
. .
0-8
. .
13/
, ,
5
3J
0
4
4
1
0
3/
6/
Nelson and West Coast—
Wangapeka
3
/9
/9
/9
1/9
14/
5
. .
12-20
G/-9/
8/
2J
2
4
5
11
5
2/6
0/
Collingwood
100/
33/
2
1/
/7
/8
2/
15/
5/6
3-7
5-15
3/
15/
5
4
0
4
6
1
51
2/6
6/
20/
Inangaliua
130/
25/
21
1/9
1/3
1/
2/
21/
7/0
0-9
30/
10-35
20/
60/-/80
8
7
10
6
5
3
0
3/6
8/
20/
Lyell and Murchison
150/
28/
4
2/
1/0
1/
2/
20/
12/
10
30/
15
10/
80/
0
6
9
9
5
4
6
3/0
7/6
20/
Westport
120/
21/—25/
3-3i
1/
/10
/G-/8
l/G-2/3
9/-10/
3/0
4J-12
15/—20/
0-40
15/—18/
8/—GO/
6
0
6
0
3
1
3-5
1/6-3/6
6/
15/
Charleston
130/
20/
1/0
1/3
/10
2/
10/
5/0
7-10
20/
10-25
15/
20/—40/
0
5
8
0
5
2
5
3/6
0/0 '
10/
Ahaura
Westland—
120/-140/
25/
2
1/3-2/
1/3-2/
/*>
1/9
15/
0/
5-9
20/
5-20
15/
00/
4
4
0
8
4
2
5
3/
0/
15/
Waimea
120/
25/—28/
2
2/
1/0
1/-1/3
2/
15/—25/
6/
0-15
20/
10-50
15/-22/
40/—00/
0-7
0
0-9
0
4
2-3
0
3/
G/-8 /
20/—30/
Totara
110/
20/
2
2/
1/0
/o
2/
10/
5 /
10
10/
20
15/
40/
0
0
8
5
4
2
5
3/
7/
10/
Hokitika and Kanieri
100/
25/
2
2/
1/6
1/
2/
15/—20/
5/0
10
15/
10-20
15/—20/
20/—GO/
0-8
0
8
0
4
2
0
3/
0/-7/ ■
25/
Okarito
30/
1/0
1/0
1/
1/
25/
7/
2-12
20/
5-25
20/
20/—GO/
5
0
0
1/
0
2
0
2/0
7/ ■
Kumara
120/
23/0
2
2/
1/0
1/3
1/9
25/
6/
10-15
30/
10-40
20/
80/—120/
0
0
10
0
4
3
0
3/
G/-8 /
22/
Groymouth
100/—130/
24/—28/
2
1/3-2/
i/—I/O
1/-1/G
1/9
10/—18/
6/
5-12
10/-/15
20-00
14/—1G/
60/-120/
5-0
5-0
7-8
0
3
2
0
3/-3/G
0/-G/G
12/—50/
Arnold
120/—140/
22/—28/
2J-2J
1/0-2/
1/3-1/G
1/-2/
l/G-1/9
20/—22/
6/—7/
7-11
20/
12-30
15/—20/
55/—00/
5
5
8-10
0-9
4-5
2-3
0
3/’
' 0/'
10/—20/
Jackson’s Bay ..
1/
1/0
1/
1/10
10/—22/
4
4
6
0
0
2
0
2/0-3/
G/-7 /
Greenstone
Otago—
120/
25/
3
2/
1/0
1/3
2/
25/
7/
8-10
20/
10-50
15/-22 /
40/—100/
7
7
10
9
4
3
0
3/6 ;
0/-8/
20/—30/
Hindon
120/
25/
2
1/3
1/3
/10
1/9
15/
. .
0-40
9/
5
4
0
3
2
0
3/
0/0
Tuapeka
Cromwell ..
110/—140/
25/—27/
11
1/
1/
/8
1/0
9/
3/—3/9
4-7J
••
3-28
3/-8/G
51-55/
4-5
2-4
4-6
4
3
1
4
1/0-3/
5/-8/
IS/—30/
Clyde
Alexandra
Black’s
' 120/
30/
21
1/0
1/-1/3
/9
1/9
15/
5/0
2-5
• ••
0-25
3/—10/
45/
6
5
8
5-6
5
2
41-0
3/
7/
18/—25/
Roxburgh
Arrow (Wakatipu Gold-
field)
120/
30/
2
1/3
1/3
/10
2/
13/—15/
3/0
5-10
15/
15-35
5/-15/
20/-100/
7
5
8
6
4
2
5-GJ
3/
6/
16/-30/
Queenstown
110/
28/
2
1/3
• 1/3
/9
2/
10/—14/
3/
5-10
5/—20/
10-30
5/—15/
20/—100/
7
5
8
0
3
2
5-01
3/
6/
16/—30/
Mount Ida
80/—120/
27/
2
1/3
1/
/9
1/9
13/
4/0
8
15/
15
2/6
00/
0
4
6
4
5
2
5
3/
7/
16/
Maerewhenua ..
100/
20/
H
/10
/10
/7
1/0
10/
3/0
4J-G
0-20
5/
25/—60/
4-7
3*
4
6
4
1
41
2/0-3/
6/
24/
Waikaia
180/
30/
If
1/
/10
/10
1/10
13/
4/
3J-G
. .
12
10/6
40/
5
4
41
4
4
2
41
3/
6/0
23/
Orepuki and Longwood ..
80/ '
24/
1*
/9
/9
/7
1/9
9/0
3/0
3
10/
10
9/
20/
5
5
7
3
4
11
4
2/6
0/
20/
