

ASbEL
from London to Brisbane
THREE PENCE
_
1879-80
H. Gay & Co, Printers.
Brighton.
'it 'V Jlwfc, .K . . ■ , 1 ‘ J .■ , v - ‘ ~.
, % - ......
s




THE VOYAGE
of the
“ASSEL”
from London to Brisbane
1879-80
' *f.
If Cray & Co. Printers
Brighton.


AYOV 3HT
Jill MO
*JBB3A **
ofiiuft iiJI ot (Kibmvi iiio'i i
■i i ■
fl S ! ' : i *1 ■'' • V 1
... % ■


of tbe JMsrl.
Sailed from the East India Docks Docomder 17, 1879.
EXTRACT FROM DAIRY.
Thursday, 18 12 79. Y\ ent on board the “Ass el” hound from
London [East India Docks] to Brisbane Australia.at 2 p,m
We were towed out of the Docks about 4 p.m., a number of
people stood on the quay waving adieus amohg whom was
my Cousin Charles Burton. As wo were going down the-riv-
er I introduced myself to the Captain and found to my groat
joy that lie was a Christian nlan. Ho told mo that ho had
prayed that a Christian might bo among his passengers.
I told him that I too had prayed that there might be some
Christians on boaid. Hero was an answer to both our pray-
ers. Hp also told mo that the “Assel” was a Temperance Sh-
ip these facts convinced mo more fully than ever that I was
taking a wise step and that Cod was leading me. After tea p
stood on the hoop with some of the passengers, it was truly
a lovely night but very cold. Several large steamers pamed
us some going up the river and some down. The different
coloured lights along the shore and suspended to the varying
Crafts on the water made a lovely pictuie. We reached Grav-
esend about 8 p.m. and sorely against the Captains wish were
obliged to anchor as the steam tug had not suffiennt coals to
proceed furthur. Went to bed about 9 and slept fairly well.


Friday 18 12 79 Beautiful morning but very cold. The an-
chor was weighed about 5 a.m. consequently by the time I
was up we were some distance below Gravesend. It was
very nice during the early morning but as we neared the sea
|ho motion gradually increased till at h ngth I was obliged
to beat a retreat . It was rather rough getting i mind the mouth
of the Thames to the English Channel us the wind was agai-
nst ns. Win n wp wore in the Channel it was smoother for
the next few days I sutb rod fn m Rea Richness but not m ar-
ly to the extent I had uiitieipat. <1 n«.r did it Lave any ill *fi-
eet on me. The only symptoms aft. r unpleasant two hours
on Friday evening w -re giddiuess w. aha**** and loss of app-
etite. We hud rather a rough time of it in the Channel an
i? r- r \ t
many of the pas-vuger* wore unwell for some days but I am
thankfull to say that cm Xiim* day I wu* quite noil.
Thursday 25 12 79 Xm«R day nie« day fair wind modt rally
smooth bos. Several flying round the Ship.
We made an attempt to .flee orate ilio silooa with Ritne holly
; ■ ,
leaves and bonnes but did not a any great things
•as the Ship was rolling a j*ood deal and most of passengers
were to unwell to takq any interest in the proceedings.
OurChrstmns dinner consisted cf Boot Fork and Plum Pud-
ding. We nearly lost our Xmas pudding as the Steward had
brought some brandy • n board with him and on Xmas mor-
' ning he was to tipsy to do anything; «o when dinner time came
there was no pudding as our fip>o* were hngthoning conside.
’rably at the discovery one of the lady passengers went to her
2


cabin and produced a large pudding this she kindly put on
the table for the public good. The pudding I must add-wash
made in England but it tasted none the worse for that.
We are now abreast of the Bay of Biscay the Captain docs
not intend to go through it. Early to bod.
Saturday 27 12 79 the roughest day wc have had yet. Wind
blowing hard tight in nrl eth I hal to kneel down to wash
ns the ship wa* pitching so violently that I could not stand, - s
a-; my cabin is in the house on dock I havo to walk nearly
the length of the Ship to meals and in such weather as this;.
is it is no easy tank h<w ver hy clinging to the ropes and
bulwarks 1 ma.iag -d t > reach the saloon in safty. After bre-
akfast not wi-hii g t«> jms-i the day in tho saloon I scrambled
back to my ctbut 1 hiring the morning I stood with
my bach to tV galley watch a * the sou it was a magnilicant
sight grvat h ig*j wavt<s came rolling toword* ns like green
mountains c **«tcd with nn w b*«iitifnl however «s was the
sight it had an unpleasant cide for ocoasionally a wave would
brook right over ns and as I had no desire to got drenched I
beat a retr- at to my cabin when I reached that harbour of
refuge I found boots, bn;s c-imby wash basin’*, etc. etc.
flying about in wild confusion having secured these articles
1 proceeded to secure myself up in a corner with some boxes
spent the remainder of the morning doing a little needlework
[a shocking bod job I made of it] and reading during tho
morning my position changed for the worse hitherto I had
been on the lee or sheltered side but the Ship be>ng put about
3


I was on the weather side that is the side from which the
wind blows. The consequence was that I had to keep the door
and port hole shut or I shook) have had the water in, when I
weut in or out 1 had to nin the risk of a drenching; I mana-
ged to scramble to the saloon and back at dinner and tea time
iu safty and without got ;ing w*t but when I retur n d from
tea I found that my cahin had sprung rJeak and the carpet
was wet through fortunately I had noli lug on the lloor to
hurt so there was nothing beyond th» inconvenience, I foon
succeeded in sloping the leak and at 8 I we* t to bf d
Sunday 28 12 79 Another rough dry s'ri.ng head vivd v:i;.h
a heavy sea. During them- ruing a largo ftemmn Skip pass-
ed close undvr our stem. APor dinner we had .-<ervico in th ti
saloon. We opened with a hymn alt r which the G>ij tam lod
in prayer and alter another hymn be r ad the 103rd. Psalm
with a few remarks; after another hymn i c oeed with Pa.y-
er I enjoyed the service very tnneh. As must of the Pat*eh-
gers are now omvalasant we have moning end evming
prayers daily. After breakfast the Captain r« adsa chapter and
offers up a Prayer alter dinner he reads a chapter aft« r tea
we sing a hymn and at 7 30 we have evening prayers. Most
of the passengers are usually present at evening prayers and
some of the crew. The average attendance is eighteen.
Evening Prayers I may say consisted of hymns, a few verses
of Scripture with comments from the Captain and Prayers.
Wednesday 31 12 79 A lovely day with fair wind, beau tiful
4


iue sky. We are now off Portugal there is now a manifest
ifference in the temperature. I. could not leelp thinking
aat a few days like this would make up for the past wet sum
ier at home. During the day it was agreed that wo should
leet together at 11. 40. p. m.to see the old year out and new
ie in accordingly at the appointed time most of the passengers
dyome of row mot in lhcs«oon f r Prayer, aVo had a truly
ojoyablo time it was my privilcdgo as the clock ftuck twelve
) be leading in Prayer I no d scarcly say I that thought of
e dear friends at honu. Shortly aft .-) twi Ive after wishing
r ery on© a happy new Ywir 1 wvnt to bed.
'hursday 1.1. 80. Beautifully mild day but shown ry. Wind
as again headed ns but it is very light several ships near us
uring the day, one largo goh on« r pisf-ed close under our bow
luring the afternoon wo overtook and passed a barque the
aig Nair of Liverpool bound from London k. Valparaiso.
70rage temperature during the day CO" Lat. 30. 45. N. Long
3. 24. W. Distance travelled during the past 24 hours 122
inday 4. 1. 80. Beautiful warm day fair wind blowing du-
Xg the morning. I went up to tho forcasllo and distributed
fhe of the books*and tracts I had brought with mo among th Q
icn. They were thankfully receiyod. After dinner as it was
mewhat warm in tho saloon we had Service on deck, A
imoss cask covered with a flog was the pulpit some planks
sting oa,buckets were tho {tows and passengers and crew


were the congregation. After hymns end prayer the Capt;
read St. Jobn ill. and spoke very nicely on it I enjoyed i
service very much, it seemed so improve in the open e
Passed the remainder of day with thy Captain. L»t. 35 51
11. 54. W
Monday 5. !. 80. L< yely morning beautifully warm with(
being unpleasantly hot. Or eof (he passengers Mr Me Ilv
atbe has asked me to act as schoolmaster to his children d
ring the voyage. T 3 is T readily con -on'ed to do, as it pass
away the time pie s .nfly and u>ef dly. Acordingly Ita
the two youngest from iO till 12 in the morning and instn
them in Scripture Beadiug Arithmetic Dictation etc. a
from 2 till 3in the after no «in Geography and Engli
Oraminer. I also have the two eldest f>r an hour in the aft.(
noon three times a week and instruct them in Chastain e\
deuces and Scripture Histo'y (Acts ov thk Arorfose) I £
now feeling much bettor than when I loft home. Avora
temperature during the day 70° Lat. 34. 26. N. 13. 25. T
Distance irave'led di:ring the past 24 hours S 7 miles.
Tuesday 6. I. 80. Beautiful day a little overcast in theme
ning but about noon it clean! op. It is getting much warm
now most of the c,n\v and some of the } ounger passenger j
barefooted. During the aft-rooon we overtook a good sizi
brig when she was within quarter of a mile we signalled b
she proved to be on Italian Ship bound from Berlin a seap:
in Italy, to Buenos Ayres. The sign ailing ie carried on 1
6


T . ~ ' j:
moans of the- international system, every cons;mant its repre-
sented by a flag ol a rentain colour and shape and a combi-
nation of these ffiagsp hoisted to the peak asks or answers a
question. By means of flags a groat variety of questions can
Be asked and answered. $f course every Captain hts to cur-
ry a*l ook which gives him the meanings of thed i oient com-
binations of flags. 1 1 clear days the flags can be made out
at a distance of seven miles. While were signal ng a medi*
um sized whale passed between uk an I the ttdiar, outing
at inteivals. I saw its bick, fins and tail quite pla n when it
spouts it looks as if an <xplosion had take i jdaco under the
water and casued a cloud of spray to rise. Dur ng the, eve-
ning we lost sight of the Italian. Lat. 33. 13. N. Long. 14.
02. W. Milos travelled 88.- Average temperature 68°
Wednesday Jan. 7 1880. Beautiful day lig.it wind a large
steamer pussod'hs early in the morning but dal not speak.
During the day the C iptain ni . cted my atten ion to a cl aid
form right away <.a horison, it was so faint that I should not
have noticed it myself this ho told me was the Island of Ma-
dcria. Ho would have taken us nearer that we might have
had a better view of it but the wind would not allow him
Lat. 31. 3u. N. Long. 15. 24. W. Distance travelled 120
miles.
Thursday 8. 1. 80. Fine day stiff breeze. Wo are going
quicker to day than we have done since we started, while we
arc are rejoicing at this our joy is not quite unraixed as af-


ter the long calm tho increase of m ition has camel several
of Urn passengers to have a fresh attack of seasickness, I am
very thaukfull that I seem thoroughly used to it au 1 am not
among the sufferers. About 9a. ra. wo passed tbe island of
Puiinji the westernmost of the Canary group. Its great height
rendered it plainly visible although it was at some div.anc®
Iroin us, It vaa too fir however for me to give au nc junto
dihcriplion of it the only thing I can compare it to is a huge
i Otidou coulomvd cloud standing out in marked contrast to
the bright blue sky. I had expected to ha%e aeon a bright
vordue clad island and I must say 1 was somewhat dlsappoic.
tod. During the af-omoou large quauti i scf a species of pum-
ice stum, branches of trees aid vego able pub tsuCcs floated
hy us some of which wo sudboetldd in getting with a not.
Lat. 20. 19. N. Long. 18. 17. W. Miles travelled 181.
Average temperature 85”.
Sunday 11. 1. 1880. Beautiful morning with a fair wind
we entered the tropics to day but it not ao hot as wo antiei-
pated. Service on deck in the aftesnoon good attendance the
Captain spoke very nicely from Isaiah 55th. After service I
distributed booics 6tc. among the crew. Lat. 23. 24. N. Long
22. 17. W. Miloi tmvoile I 197.
Wcdn ’.sthiy 14- 1. 80, Sk o e.-ca.d and cloudy a sul ry op_
press! vo day soVcial sno ds of flying fish passed close to us se-
veral of them wore cuu-lit,. When tiny fly they do not rise
more than tw > i r throe f rot above the water but they fly a
8


considerably distance. They are usually pursued by ravenous
enemies she principle being the Benito a good sized fish
which greedily devoures them, several of them in th. ir eager
ness to escape from the bcito’s flew right over the bulwarks
on to our docks and were caught by the sailors. When cook,
ed they i re delicious eating, in appearance they are like a hoi-
ring with a pair of silvery gauze win«P. Abont 9a. m. we
passed San Antonio the westernmost of the Capo Void Is*
lan K It is a large rock rising gradually but unevenly from
the nort) ward till it attains an attitude of 3000 foot, it then
docenda abruptly in to the sea. Tire south side forms a bay
of horn shoo shape. It is a barren uuhospitablo looking place
nearly <’o titute of vegetat.cn and intersected by numerous
deep gullio.aud lavinos. I conducted the Service this ovouiiw
as it to squally for the Ca: tain too come down. Lut. 16. u 2.
N. Long 25. 36. W. Milos travelled 153.
Saturday Jan 17th. 1880. Lovely morning I was up at 6 and
had a sea bath. When I speak of a sea bath you must no*
think that it is enjoyed iu a bath room fitted up with all th 0
conventional appliances, bu those who partake of it on board
ship get up before any of the lady passengers are astir go to
tho forward pumps strip and throw buckets of water over
one another the water in tho tropics is always warm and a
bath like this is very refreshing. In consequence of tho heat
an awning is now erected extending from the bridge a to th e
mizen mast. It is to hot too bo about tho deck without shelter
of some sort. In the morning we saw two ships a long die*
9


tance from us signalling one another but tin y were too far
off for us to make out what they said. In the evening a large
bird known as a Booby perched upon the main top gallant
yard doubtless intending to pass the night then', the second
mate however thought differently and when it was dark he
climbed the rigging gripped the Booby by the neck and in
spite of its clamorous outcries and vigmrous je istanco ho
1 rm«ht it down safely. It wis a splendid larg* bird with, a
long powerful bill which it was by no means si >w in using
hut i s chii f peculiarity was it; enormous wings those seenud
altogether disproportionate to the size of its bo iy so long
were they that when it was stood upon the deck their very
length prevented it from rising without assistance. The body
was s .mewhat larger than that,of a goose and the plumage
of a dark brown colour it was not a goo 1 enough specimen to
3 i uf '
be worth stuffing as several of its tail feathers were missing
9) we gave it its liberty. Lat. 7. 53. N. Long. 25. 06. W.
Distance travelled 131 Milos
Sunday Jan. 18th. 1881 Beautiful day hut int nsely hot the
thermometer standing as high as 120 "in the sun. During the
morning wo overtook the barque Edwin of Cardiff bound to
Monte Video. We were signalling for some time as her Cap-
tain wished to compare his chrouonut r with ours. Divine
Service under the awning in the aftern mu, the Captain spoke
from Heb. 111. 1. JQi,ffhe evening I jjave-'Some books and
tracts to the men. About 5 30 p. m. it rained tremendously-
We are now in that part of ocean known among sailors as the
10


Doldrums:- Lat. 5. 16. N. Lmg 21. 43. W. Miles 129.
Monday Jan. 19th. Lovoly day bit intensely hbt. Had a
hath before breakfast and after breakfast performed the us-
ual scholastic exercises. About 12 a large shark came along-
side accompanied by its pilot fish. \ho Shark was an unus-
ually large one and I must say )hat a more spiteful vicious
looking creature I never saw. It swam slowly round the ship
two or three times uccasionally knocking its tail against the
side. The sailors never show sharks mercy and no sooner did
'they hear that one was alongside than they put a paieo of
pork on a largo hook and heaved it overbear I in hopes of
catching it but he was not hungry for ho went away without
attempting to take it, Thojilot fish that was with it was
ready a beautiful creature about the size and shape of a
mackerel and striped like a tiger. Some porpoises were play-
ing near us but these were no novelty as for tl e fir t fortnight
after leaving home scarcely a day pa sod without shoals of
them playing round us. In the evening saw a small water-
spout not far from us* Lat. 4. 37. N. Long, 24. 32. W.
M ies 69.
Sunday 25. 1. 80. Fine morning but hot the sea was quite
oaJm till about 11 30 whoa a squall aroro.au l .iu leas than ten
minutes the s-a was very roug u We had a tropical shower
riicso I must tell y>u are very different to English ones.
The heaviest rain I have seen in England is nothing cornpa-
lis ui to what we have hero. It seems to come down as if a
11


reresvoir over head had burst and in a very few-minutes the
water is rushing off the decks hit >ih scuppers. This the men
collect in buckets and put in tanks and it is considered their
peculiar property and is used by f ieni for clothes washing
etc. During the few days we wore in the rainy nci”hourhood
t k y collected about 150 gallons. If we in d 'no pain there
w >ul 1 he little if any clothes washed as the water is
too precious for the purpose and silt water will not answer.
After a rainy day you may see the men sitting about the
deck bus}' washing clothes and the rigging presents the up
pCiirance of a laundresses yard, shirts, socks and other ar'L,
roes of dress being hung out to dry. ‘ Aiiother phenomenon
soon in the tropics is that of,a ivy shower about 50
yards off’, at that distance it can jbe plainly-seen raining heavi-
ly and we may be quite dry, jcu musT not imagine that the
clothes washing drying etc takes place on a Sunday although
I have described it on a Sunday but it seemed to fit in here
b st. After dinner we had Service in the Saloon but a sudden
squall compelled the Captain to go upstairs and he left me
to finish. In the evening I tookthe Service as it was still
too squally for the Captain, 1 read the evening Prayers from
the Church of England Service and Luke 15th. there was a
full attendance and all present joined in responses heartily.
Lut. 1. 05, N. Long- 29. 32. W. Miles 105,
Monday 26. 1. 80. Fine day we crossed the line about 8, a - In.
During the day several P ortngese men of war or Nautillus
ea sailed quite close to"to ns. they are very beautiful little
12


things with a white triangular shaped sail with delicate pink
edges. It is a really pretty sight to see them sailing away
over the waves. In the evening we had a visit from Father
Neptune accompanied by his wife and hairdresser the three
ship boys and such of the passengers as saw fit to undergo the
ordeal were shaved but I declined to go through the process
as the lather looked very uninviting. Lat, 00. 16. S. 29. 51-
W. Miles 84.
i? riday 30. 1. 80. Beautiful day. The past few days have
been somewhat squally and we have had sane sail carried a-
way. Tbo wind has carried us within a c>>iuparitively short dis-
tance of the South American Coast The C\.tjiu told me that-
jf we went much further in the same direction we should
sight the the Brazils. Towards evening we saw iwo small sails
right away on the horizon these the C iptain thought to JjJ
Brazilian fishing bouts. Lat. 7. 30. B. 33 40 W. 150 Miles
Thursday 5. 2. 80. Beautiful day the Captain asked Mr Mc-
liuraith and myself if we would like to tike • turns with him
giving a short address every evening, this 1 gladly consent-
ed to do ao the Services have bee i arranged as follows;
Kvery evening there is an address of 15 minutes duration at
Evening Prayers and on a unday there are two extra ones in
the afternoon and another in the early part of the evening in
l he forecastle especally for the crew, this makes nine address-
es in the week which gives us just three each. I spoke this
evening from “By thier fruits ye shall know them. ” In the
13


afternoon I copied out some bills of lading for the Captain. A
lovely tropical sunset. We see some glorious sunsets in these
regions, the sky is one mass of firery red and its reflection
just tinges the sea with the same hue. The sun however sets
very quickly and there is little if no twilight. The nights al-
so are very beautiful the heavens being literally crowded with
stars, amongst ethers we saw the Magellan clouds and the
Southern Cross, the Magellan clquds have the the appearance
of a while cloud in the sky they are. compos <1 of numerous
small stars and have something of the appearance! of th e
Milkey Way. The Southern Cross is compose . ot four star g
in the shape of a cross, it answers the same purpose in the
Southern latitude as the Polar Star docs in the Northern.
When it is first seen in the evening it is lying horizontally and
it gradually -arrises assuming as it does so a more erect posi-
tion, till just belbre day break whin it is quite perjieudiculur.
Lat. 21 16. S. Long. 64. 10. W. 173 Miles.
Friday 6. 2. 80. Beautiful morning with fair wind hpt th e
night had been squally, in the morning wo met and signaled
a three masted schooner theLynwood.of Swansea bound from
Rio Jancsrio to St. Thomas. In tho afternoon had a public
examination of my pupils and I must say they passed very
creditably. Another glorious evening, we saw a comet but it
was neither very Lrge nor brilliant. Passed out of the tropics
to day. Lat. 24. 04, S. Long. 33. 17. W. Miles 176.
Sunday 8. 1. 80. Beautiful day. In the afternoon we had
14


Service on deck the Captain spoke from “ How shall we ee-
Ciipe if we neglect so great a salvation”. In t ie evening Mr.
Me Hwraith spoke in the forecastle from toe healing Barti-
maeus and in the evening I spoke in the saloon from “Abide
in me”. One of the happiest Sundays I have spent since leave-
ing home. It stenud more like a Biighton Sunday without
St Margarets and the Mission Hall. After the Service in the
forecastle I distributed some books tracts etc. among the men
is usual, they are always well rocieved as they have very lit-
do with them worth reading. Lot. 39. 40. S. Long. 30. 54.
V. 188 Miles.
Wednesday 11.2. 60. Strange wild looking morning calm
sea very light wind but favourable, about noon however it
suddenly veered round and commenced to blow tremendous-
ly right in our teeth- In a very short time there was a hea-
vv sea nuining and the great waves would com© rolling along
strike over our bows and send the spray right over the fore-
castle as far as the mainmast nearly all the sails were furled
but we had the outer jib split all to peices before we could
get it in, vwy rough night.. Lat. 85. 34. S. Long 32. S 3;
W. 116 Miles.
Thursday 12. 2. 80. to Tuesday 23. 3. 80. For some time
now the passage was somewhat monotonous we gradually got
into colder weather, it never was so cold as it was when we
left England but coming out of the tropics I felt it very much*
but God was very merciful to me for I did not have a single
15


days illness nor did my cou«h •»*&»«■ and although 1 did noi
feel perfectly well and strong yet 1 could run about the deck,
in a way that would astonish you. I’he most Southern lati
tude we reached was 468. The Wo athej going round the Cap(
and indeed ail the way was-unus dly model ate and tire dls
from off the Cape of Good Hope to Capo Leeuwui tht
most westerly point of Australia was done iu very short tinu
the average distance travelled daily being 200'miles, we had
fair wind all the way generally so a ewhat strong with a mod
erate sea but on three occasions the wind increased to a modi
erate gale, on neither of these occasions did the gale last lent
nor was there any serious damage done, one or two of tin
smaller sails weio carried away, one of men bad his hami
jamed in a pully hut the hurt was not sufficiently bad to in.
capacitate him from hie duty and the second mate had a nar
row escape < f being washed overboar at these tunes ther
was a very hwivy sea running and the waves would dash uj
against our sides and fend the sj ray all over the decks. Some*
limes I have seen water on the decks < n «he lee side to a deptl
of four fee. I ue*d rcace’y ray that on th so toca-dons the pite
ing and tossing was tremendous. If 1 wished to go from on,
end of the ship to the other I was obliged to hang on to th|
ropes, spars or anything I could lay my hands on. We hac
very little sickness on board one of the lady passengers took
seriously ill somewhat suddenly but recovered in a few day;
another lady had a slight attack of hemorrhage from the lungs
but she too speedily recovered, two of the sailors were ill on*
with rhumatics and the otter with and ague, the latte.
16


was so ill that at ono time it was thought that he could not
live through the night. 1 went and talked with them some-
times by myself and sometimes with the Captain hilling them
the old old story, at the time I write both of the men arc
better and seem on a fair way to reooveiy. From the Cap
to Tasmania we were followed by numerous Albatrosses, Mol-
lihawks, Cape Pigeons and Stormy Petrels. The Albatrosses
are splendid birds with beautiful white breasts and dark
wings one of them was caught and I measured it and found
it to be 9ft, 9in. between the tips of the wings T.'ie Moll.haw
are somewhat smaller, some of thorn being quite white and
others a dark brown, several of them wore caught. They ure
caught by baiting a sail hook with a peico of pork it is then
attached tolongpeice of string and thrown into the water the
birds come down to pick up the pork and the hook catches in
their bills which have a curve like a hook at the end they arc
then hauled in. Many of them howiver succeed in shaking
off the hook and go l ting away. AVo also saw some whales one
of which evidently a young one passed within a few yards of
us. Time did not hang at all heavy wi'h me us I have alrea-
dy mentioned three hours a day were divoted to teaching tho
children then I had three adresses in a week to prepare and
my diary to keep written, these occupations took up tho prin-
ciple part of the day any spare time being devoted to reading
or an occasional romp with tho children. One privilege I had
and which I valued most highly was the use of Captain’s Cu*
bin. He of course has a good sized room nicely tilted up with
a sofa and Various other conveniences for own his private use
17


but he kindly allowed me the free Use of it and anytime when
I wished to be quiet or do a little reading or writing I oould
shut myself in. Many happy and I trust profitable hours have
.1 spent therein Every night too after Prayers unless the wea-
ther compelled him to be on deck I would go with the Cap-
tain to his own room and stay there sometimes till past 10
o’clock reading and talking. I feel that I can never be suffici-
ently thankful to God for bringing mo on board the Assel for
had I spent months going round the docks and making my-
se'f acquainted with the Captains of different ships I could
not have selected one on which I should have been more com-
fortable or more happy. Not only was the voyage abundant-
ly blessed to me as far as my body was concerned but! shall
over look back to it as a season in which God do fit very mer-
cifully and lovingly with my soul, as I have said before the
Captain was a thorough gob nine man of God and as far as I
oould judge the theme ever uppemost in his mind was the re-
deeming love of Christ. I attained to my 24th. birthday on
Saturday March the 6th. and I passed a very happy day en-
joying much of the fellowship with the Father and with'Je-
ns Christ His Son. I had a present of a nice handkerchief
from one of my pupils. A voyage is a wonderful thing to
make one useful during the passage I did nearly all my own
washing and I think I may say without boasting that I made
a very .good job of it I cannot say so much however for what-
> ver needlework 1 did as I could not get the stitches even.
Since I wrote about the Albatrosses another has been caught
measuring lift, between the-tips of its wings.
ij\ J ' J
18


Tuesday 23. 3. 80. Fine day with fair wind. For the last two
days the Captain has been anxiously looking for land as for
the past few days the sky has been clouded so that he has
been unable to get an observation of the sun. It is by obser-
vations of the sun that he is enabled to ascertain the position
of the ship and when it is cloudy or foggy ho has to find it out
by what is termed ‘-Dead Beckoning” and this is not so accur
ate this made him anxious lest in the fog wes hould get to nea
the land unknowingly. This afternoon however the fog lifte '
and to our great delight we could see Tasmania. After being
so long without seeing land it seems to send a thrill of plea
sure through one to see it again. It is a large Island and is to
mething like the Isle of Wight is to England we
rounded it during the evening.
Wednesday 24. 3.80. Fine day with splendid wind Mowing,
We are new qui*e clear of Tasmania and rapidly drawing near
to our jonneys end. During the night the wind increased to *
gale and we had the roughest night of the whole passage, there
was a tremendously high head sea running and all night long
the water was dashing over ns, the Captain told me that seve-
ral tons of water came over during the night hut lam thank,
ful to be able to say that we sustained no damage whatever.
Thusday 2.*). 3. 80. to 6. 4. 80. During these days we were
drawing near to Brisbane hut we were rather longer than us-
ustial ahont it as we had a sucession of light baffling winds
at one time we were becalmed with a tremendous swell from
19


tiie Eastward and on lint day the rolling was tremendous.
The men were all busy getting the anchors ready painting,
and cleaning the ship etc., at this kind of work I was very
glad-to lend a hand, as we were getting the anchors ready the
first mate had a narrow escape of being knocked overboard,
the ship gave a heavy lurch and the anchor slipped
from the,lashing he just managed to jump over it or lie mus£
1 ave gone overboard. Spent a quiet happy Grood Friday and
Easter Sunday we had no special Service on Grood Friday as
die Captain and most of the passengers are Scotch and they
do not observe the day as wo do. I spoke on Easter Sunday
evening from St Matthews account of the Resurrection. Sevo.
ral land birds came Hying round us and among others some
Boatswain birds. On Tuesday 30fch we had our first glimpse
of Australia the part we saw was New South Wales and from
then to the end of the passage with the exception of one day
we, did not loose sight of it. During this time the weather with
the exception of an occasional heavy shower was delightful
the sky was a lovely light blue and the air delightfully warm
end mild the nights to were beautiful with a lovely moon and
the skies crowded with stars.
Tuesday G. 4. 80. After several days baffling we have at
length reached Mortons Bay, we had it in sight for some days
but,contrary winds have prevented us from entering. The
weather however has boon lovely and the sea calm so there
has been nothing to complain of. Tins morning at 6 we were
right at the entrance and at 7 30 the pilot came on board.


[e brought several newspapers with him which we were ve-
r glad of after having been three months without any news
le sight of a strange face too was a novelty at which the
js on board barked vociferously. The bay is formed by an
,nd (Morton Island ) on the south and the mainland on
\o north. Tho island is very pretty being covered with thick
;rub and the hill side's are thickly wooded. Close' to the
lore were some small bouses with a building that looked
ko a small Church but which the pilot told mo was a school
le land seemed to me to smell beautifully sweet and fresh.
)no can scarcely imagine the pleasure that the sight of land
ivea after three months on the sra. The mainland on the
orth is very hilly at one part of it several largo rocks look
ke pyramids in the distance; these are the Glass house rocks
must say that my first impressions of my future home were
ery favourable, 1 liked the appearance of the country and
he weather is delightful the air being soft and warm without
eiiig too hot. The sun risings and settings are far more beau.
ful than I have ever seen before. The distance from the en»
nee of tho bay to the mouth of the Brisbane rivor is about
mileh'hut as the wind .was very light and the tide strong
r c did not reach it during tho day and about 10 p. m. wo let
o the anchor. Tho bay literally smarming with sharks; when
went on the forecastle just before tea time and saw no less
tan six swimming round our bows at the same time. We
mid also see them at night gliding about in tho water. A.
it 6 p. m. a small coasting steamer bound to North Queens-
d passed us, at 7 30 we had prayers as usual I spoke from
21


Casting all jour cares upon Him for He carj.4li'for you. 1
am feeling better than I have done since the bcgiuing-.Qf mv
illness.
Wednesday 7. 4. 80. Lovely day -with very little wind the an-
chor was weighed at 4 this morning and we are gradually
nearing the mouth of the Brisbane river about 10. a. m. we
had a visit from the custom house officers, they sealed up alj
the hatches etc.‘took down all our names and what we intend
ed doing and then loft us. During the aftorooon 1 had an op
portunity of looking more closely at the bay, it was a lovely
scene there are a number of islands in the bay all highly el-
vated and there is a little town lying amidst the trees. Seve >
ral lovely butterflies came flying round us and we ,also saw
some strange birds. Tho weather was simply delightful and
the sea as calm us a lake.
Thursday 8. 4. 80. Another lovely day wo are all anxiously
expecting a tug to take us up the river, about 10. m. a tug
the “Boho” came dovn to us but it was only to tell us that
there was not sufficient depth of water for us to go up. Seve-
ral of the passengers and the Captain however went up with
her, she brought us down some fresh meat, vegetables and
fruit which after our long existance on salt and preserved
meats which were however all of the very best, were much
enjoyed. Several sharks swimming round us, several'ccasting
steamers pgssed us during the day .


Vi lay 9. 4. 80. Beautiful day spout the morning; trying to
Cat?.h sharks but cli 1 not succeed, About 3pm tbo government
steamor came down and took off those of the passengers who
chose to go and also told us that our tug would be down for
us in the evening when it was expected there would be suf-
hccnt water to go up. I waited to go up with our ovn ship
and about 6 p. m. the tug came alongside and at 8 p. m. we
started up the river to the town a distance of about 26 miles
It was too dark for me to be able to give any description of
of the scene however 1 sat up and to my great delight
midnight wo were safetly moored alongside the wharf at Bris
bane.
23


