





THE
OBRAON OCCASIONAL.
PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE
“SOBRAON” i
DURING HER
OUTWARD VOYAGE TO MELBOURNE,
FROM
October jth to December 26th , 1875.


LIST OF
OFFICERS, CREW, AND PASSENGERS
On board the “Sobraon,”
On her Voyage from London to Melbourne , 1875.
Commander.—Lieutenant J. A. Elmslie, R.N.R.
Chief Officer.—S. Richards, Esq.
Second Officer.—F. Northey, Esq.
Third Officer.—R. Hoare, Esq.
Fourth Officer.—J. H. Richards, Esq.
Surgeon.—Dr. W. Y. Turner,
Midshipmen.—Messrs. Worsley, Winder, Bastard, Warren, Hodgens, Gace.
Chief Steward. —Mr. Weetch.
Assistant Stewards.—A. Goater, Albert Israel, S. Priggen, E. Wilson,
E. Potter, G. Levetus, B. Finenberg.
Cook, Baker, Butcher, Butcher’s Mate, Sculleryman, Storekeeper.
Carpenter, Engineer, Sailmaker, Boatswain, two Boatswain’s Mates, four
Quartermasters, twenty Able Seamen, one Ordinary Seaman, three Boys.
Saloon Passengers.—Mrs. J. W. Allin, Mr. Ash, Mr. Baines, Mr. Bassano,
Mr. R. C. Bond, Mr. C. Bond, Mr. Boissier, Miss Bally, Mr. Blyth, Mrs. Blyth,
and three children ; Mr. T. G. Carter, Mr. Gaunter, Mr. Dakin, Mr. Davy, Mr.
Edeson, Mrs. Edeson, and five children ; Mrs. Fraser, Mrs. Frew, Mr. Fletcher,
Mrs. Graham, Mrs. Huybers, Miss Huybers, Miss E. Huybers, Mr. J. Huybers,
and Mr. F. Huybers, Mr. Hurditch, Mr. Heath, Mrs. Heath, Miss Jardine, Mr.
Lake, Mrs. Lake, Mr. Le Cren, Rev. A. Moffat, Mr. Millidge, Mrs. Mayne, Miss
Mayne, Miss E, Mayne, Miss A. Mayne, Master Mayne, Mrs. M*Gee, Mr. O’Hea,
Mr. Ritchie, Mr. Slater, Dr. Turner, Mrs. Turner, Mr. Tuke, Mr. Wardell, Mr.
Wedmore, and Mr. Wilson.
Second Class Passengers.—Mr. Allen, Mr. and Mrs. Alren, three chil-
dren, and nurse; Mr. and Mrs. Bedwell, Miss Bohain, Mr. Bosomworth, Mr.
Clough, Mr. Delay, M. De la Charterie, Messrs. Fonseca and Oliver, Mr. Gaskell,
Mr. Gobby, Mr. and Mrs. Henry and child, Mr. Harris, Mr. Jamrack, Mr. Moles,
Mr. J. Merrifield, Mr, Merry, Mr. Popstring, Mr. and Mrs. Rutter, Mr. Van der
Poorten, Mrs. Watson, Mr. Wallis, Mr. Wright, Mr. Wieprecht, and Mr. Yates.
Third Glass Passengers. —Messrs. R. and W. Dunell, Mrs. Fynch and
child, Mr. and Mrs. Frampton and infant, Mr. and Mrs. Holyoak and child, Mr.
Mitchell, Mrs. M‘Cartney, Mr. J. M. Parsons, Mr. J. Swallow, Mr. J. Scott, and
Mr. Young.


THE
rtjf. V/'■ 1 1 11/;/,
CCASIONAL,
r i
SOBRAON
OCTOBER
23RD, 1875.
On board the “ Sobraon,” October, 1875.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Sobraon Occasional looks towards you, and also bows.
Its aim in life is simple. It wishes to encourage the fine arts of
sea-life —arts of killing time, of grumbling, of gossiping, of chaffing.
As a newspaper, it is without principles. It recognises no law but
that of its own spasmodic existence, which is that it should appear
in public whenever it feels so disposed. It has no great cause at
heart. It does not care what Party is in. It deals impartially
with Tory, Liberal, and Radical. It means no offence, and takes
none. Serious families may read it with a clear conscience.
Families who must have their joke can apply within. Having no
principles, and thus appealing to the majority of mankind, it expects
to be liberally supported. All contributions thankfully received. No
questions asked. No explanations given. It has one principle,
however, just one, for which it craves forgiveness —good nature.
It never treads on corns, except it finds them sprawling all over the
deck. Its criticisms are friendly. It gives advice gratis, but leaves
the patient to apply it as he will.
Contributors, step this way. Poet, here is your corner. Novelist,
produce your thrilling romance. Grumbler, growl your best, and
trot out your grievance. Correspondents, make known your
troubles. Ladies and Gentlemen all, try the only Paper in the
world worth reading, and you will be happy.


lOvc <§obmmi (Occasional.
YKMMlg'i'frrA ' ! ' '1 i, ! f
No. 1. Saturday, October 23rd, 1875.
SAMUEL SCROOP’S REMINISCENCES.
Erom my earliest childhood I have looked at the life around me through
a pair of green goggles. “ Samuel’s eyes will never hold out,” an old
oculist said with all the authority of a man who had gouged-out eyes in
his time, “ unless you make him purblind at once.” So they encased my
weak and blinking orbs in what looked like the tops of two champagne
bottles, and thenceforth I looked out —not upon your world, a world of
dancing lights and shades, of hazy blue skies and sparkling waters, of
peach-coloured cheeks and white skins—but upon Samuel Scroop’s world,
a world in which grey and green men and women moved sombrely about,
and in which murky skies were reflected in mud-coloured seas.
If, in consequence of this, my views of character are somewhat distorted,
if my people overtop their fellows or grovel below them, please remember
that the medium through which I have seen them may have affected my
mental as well as my physical sight, and say—“ It is all the fault of
Samuel’s spectacles.” I wish with all my heart that it were so, and that
when the glasses are blurred (since these struggling eyes behold through
them a share of the turmoil which makes life not always a comic affair) a
little polishing up would set matters straight and clear away the
cause along with the effect. But this is a dismal reflection, and
melancholy was never a failing of the Scroop family. When my grandfather
lost his right leg, he used to hop for hours at a time on his left one; and
when my elder brother’s face was paralysed, he made up for it by using
the only available corner of his mouth, and laughed when others would
have cried. In fact, he owed his entire rise in life to this knack he had of
laughing in the wrong place. He was not a young man whom it would be
easy to describe. He had no deep-set eyes, no commanding front, no
square-set jaw, no particular wrinkle denoting a particular train of
thought. On the contrary, he had a pair of streaky, greenish-blim eyes,
just like anybody else’s, a nose like most other noses, with a hillock in the
middle and a broad base, a mouth made after the fashion of most every-
day mouths, with a moustache which failed to assert itself, and a beard
which gave promise of better things.
He and I and a sort of mixed company were on board ship at the time
I am speaking of, and among the passengers was an old gentleman we used
to call Polypus because of an infinitesimal wart on the extreme tip of his
nose. Polypus would stump up and down the deck and lay hold of the
first person who came within easy range of his little finger—captain,
steward, cook’s mate (he wasn’t particular to a shade) —and set off with
these exact words :—“ I mind me, when I was a lad, I used to set all the
fellows in a roar.” The steward, who was a vulgar man, used to bustle up


whenever he heard Polypus call, and say—“ Oh yes, sir ! you mind you,
when you was a lad, you used to set all the fellows in a roar,” whereat
Polypus would shake his head drearily and give vent to an abortive
chuckle. I heard him tell his story fifty-six times. I have no recollec-
tion of it now. At the close, he used to say triumphantly—“ So, you see,
I took the wind out of his sails !” This was the point at which you ought
to have laughed, but nobody seemed to know it hitherto.
We were getting to the end of our voyage. We had been through the
whole programme. We had seen the sky all aflame when the sun went
down in the tropics; we had seen the moon, in a white heat, rise like a ball
of luminous gold in the opposite direction. This was the sort of thing I
used to hear about. For me, rose-tipped clouds with silver back-grounds
and orange stripes running across patches of blue were all besmudged and
besmeared. I raised my goggles once, and some beneficent rays shot a
perception of the glory straight into my heart, where the recollection of it
has remained since and helped to keep the glasses bright. We had
tumbled about to the usual extent in the usual number of gales, and
looked dolefully out at seething grey waves sending their frothy tops over
our dirty decks. We had exhausted sea-sights, sea-weeds, sea-rubbish of
all descriptions. We had pumped each other, and run each other dry,
and now we were nearing the end of our journey, when it was as much as
a man’s life was worth to hazard a remark at the dinner-table. It would
have been quite a trifle, in comparison, to enter into a discussion upon the
raising of hemp in a family where father, mother, aunts, and cousins had
all been hanged in a lump. You thought twice before venturing to
commit yourself to the assertion that it was a fine day, because your next
neighbour might take it as an insult, and ask you what he was to under-
stand by it.
So at dinner every one held his tongue until such time as the wine
unloosed it. One day, when the dreary meal was nearly at an end. a
doleful voice broke out at the top of the table—“l mind me, when I was
a lad, I used to set all the fellows in a roar.” By-and bye, the monotone
changed into—“So you see,” &c. Nobody cared by that time out of
w r hose sails the wind had been taken, and nobody would have been the
worse for Polypus’s story, if, by the most wonderful chance in the world,
my brother had not been seized by an aggravated form of his particular
attack at the very moment when this windy climax was reached. Most
likely he had been turning over in his mind some event of the year
before last, the funny point- of which had dawned upon him for
the first time. Therefore, he laughed out loud, and never thought
of giving in. * Meanwhile a sudden and wonderful change illumined
Polypus’s whole face. His very being was irradiated. He came round to
where my brother was sitting, and took him solemnly by the hand. “ I
know lots more of them stories,” he said huskity, and then he sat down
and wiped his eyes. It would have been all up with my brother thnt
time if somebody had not said, “ Land !” It was said quite inadvertently,
and with reference to nothing in particular ; but it was enough to save my
brother. Next day it was land ! Just before we went ashore I saw
Polypus sidle up to my brother and wedge him into a corner, “ I mind
me,” he said, “ when I was a lad, I used to set all the fellows in a roar/'
I did not stay to hear the story out on that occasion. I heard the moral
3
The Sobraon Occasional.


of it, however—“ You must come and see me at Taranaki,” he said
affectionately, as he waddled off the vessel. Polypus had influence, and
the last time I heard of my brother, he was driving his trap as a Govern-
ment scab inspector in New Zealand.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
When, on the sth of October, we came on board at Plymouth, with a
very lively perception of the rapacity of the Plymouth boatmen, our first
sensation was a horrid feeling that in the hurry of departure we had left
undone almost everything that we ought to have done—which is, we
suppose, an experience common to everyone on the day of embarkation.
This, however, was soon succeeded by the glow of that pure and Christian
happiness which arises in a virtuous mind from the contemplation, at a
safe distance, of the miseries of others. Those of our fellow-passengers
who had embarked at the Docks and Gravesend had met with bad
weather and adverse winds in the Channel, and, as we listened to their
descriptions of the discomforts and sickness they had endured, we felt
completely satisfied with ourselves, and mentally patted our own back for
our superior wisdom and discernment in embarking at Plymouth. As
there was but little wind that night, and that little contrary, the captain
decided not to start till next day, and we accordingly had time to get our
berths comfortably arranged, and to take stock of our fellow-passengers.
A pleasant lot they looked; all sorts and sizes. Australians returning
with their families from pleasure or business trips to Europe; young folks
from the old country going out to the colonies either as visitors or settlers ;
pale invalids seeking in the healthy sea breeze, and under the clear skies
of Australia, the health and spirits they had lost by over-work or
exposure to our own fickle climate, to whom the sight of the bright eyes
and healthy blooming cheeks of the Australian ladies on board must have
seemed a happy omen. Young men and maidens, old men and children,
even the inevitable grumbler, all were there, with characteristics as yet
latent, but, as far as we could judge from the outside, promising to form a
happy commonwealth.
Next morning, the wind being still light and adverse, we remained at
anchor, but at three o’clock in the afternoon we were towed out beyond the
breakwater, when we made sail, and, parting from the tug, set our course
for a long leg southward. There was but little wind and not much sea, so
we were all very brave, while those who had come down the Channel, and
had already managed to learn the difference between the'stem and the
stern of a ship, began to assume the airs of ancient mariners, to indulge
in wise predictions as to wind and weather, and speculate on the number
of knots we were making. The great bulk of the passengers, however,
were to be seen till far into the night leaning against the bulwarks,
straining their yearning eyes towards the now rapidly-diminishing
land; and, we doubt not, we were not the only ones who felt
a nasty lump in our throats, as we questioned with ourselves
whether we should ever again see “the faces and the fire-
light of fond home.” That night and next day the same course
was steered, with fine weather, little wind, but quite sufficient roll
4
The Sohraon Occasional.


to cause a great many empty places at the dinner-table. Our only
excitement was the appearance of a large spar floating vertically in the
water, and drifting slowly past us. The wind dropped by degrees to a
perfect calm. The rolling of the vessel and the perpetual flapping of the
sails soon found out all those who had not acquired their sea legs, and
even our doctor, who had been distinguishing himself by his activity and
energy in athletic sports on deck as much as by the care and kindness
with which he attended to the sick, and who, from his having resisted all
the bad weather in the Channel, was supposed to be quite an old sailor,
now caved in, and disappeared for some days. Next day was much the
same —nothing but rolling, and the creaking and flapping of sails —till
about five o’clock, when a squall suddenly came up from the N.W. which
enabled us to steer our proper course, and all night we bowled along
merrily enough in spite of occasional showers. Day after day the same
favourable wind carried us on, so that by noon of the 14th we had
accomplished 1304 miles of our journey, and all hoped that we were about
to make a rapid passage. There were still many poor sufferers who could
not trust themselves at table, and our kind-hearted doctor had for several
days been so ill that it must have been with great difficulty he could attend
to the sufferings of others. But now the wind and sea began to drop, and
by the afternoon we were not doing above four or five knots ; moreover, the
condenser had got out of order, and, in spite of all the efforts of the
engineer, refused to do its work; some imperfection, it was evident,
existed in the suction-pipes, and search was made for the flaw, but for a time
with no success. We must confess that our sorrow at this bad news was
not quite without alloy. If we went to any port for repairs we might be
allowed to go ashore, and the thought of a ramble on land—especially if
we could return with a good basket of fresh fruit—seemed to us very
attractive just then. Captain Elmslie, however, did not seem to see it
in quite the same light, and the search for the flaw was still continued,
the wind and sea falling, and most of the sea-sick managing to crawl on
deck to enjoy the sunset.
Under the influence of the balmy air and gradually falling wind and
sea, the absent places at our dinner-table have been tilled up; even the
doctor, whose illness had, since our departure from Plymouth, been so
continuous that it was currently believed he must have been trying the
strength and effect of the various drugs in the ship’s stores on himself
(oblivious of the old maxim so long known to the disciples of Esculapius
—“Fiat experimentum in corpora vile” i.e., the patient) —even he once
more took his place at the dinner-table, though hardly without some
subsequent internal misgivings. The condenser, too, whose failure had on
the previous evening raised in our bosom wild hopes (never, alas! to be
gratified) that we might have to put in at Madeira for water, and thus
get a ramble on shore and some fresh fruit, had now been so far repaired
that it was enabled in a somewhat asthmatical way to resume work with
one pump, while the defect in the suction-pipe of the other was sought
for. The smiles had again returned to the countenance of our jolly old
engineer, who had during the previous day been visibly melting away
under the combined influence of heat and anxiety. The wind had shifted
in the morning to N.E., and wiseacres who had crossed the line before
talked mysteriously of trade winds, and recounted anecdotes, more or less
5
The Sobraon Occasional.


apocryphal, of the various high latitudes in which they had previously met
with them. People all at once began to wake up to the fact that they
were now on their ninth day from land, drawing near to the region of
calms, and must at once set to work in good earnest to make arrangements
for such amusements as might serve to while away the tedium of our
long voyage. Accordingly, a meeting was held in the saloon, where Mr.
Slater, who had been unanimously elected chairman, after a few sensible
remarks on the desirability of unanimity, good-feeling, and mutual for-
bearance in whatever might be attempted, proposed that the following
gentlemen should be appointed as an Amusement Committee :—Rev. A.
Moffat, and Messrs. Ash, Gaunter, Carter, Dakin, Edeson, Lake, Slater,
Tuke, with Mr. T. Hurditch as Secretary.
These gentlemen, having been unanimously elected, immediately held a
meeting, at which it was arranged that Messrs. Carter, Slater, Ash, and
Tuke should undertake the management of dramatic and other in-door
amusements, except music, which Messrs. Edeson, Gaunter, and Dakin
were appointed to undertake ; while the Rev. A. Moffat and Mr. Lake
were to preside over all amusements on deck. Forthwith, old quoits were
sought out, new ones manufactured, and before long the decks were covered
with eager players. The poor pianoforte, too, through the whole of the
next day had a hard time of it, while Mr. Edeson, backed by his plucky
little wife, was drilling into shape a number of willing volunteers. A choir
was formed, which on Sunday last gave us a first specimen of its powers.
It would be invidious to criticise a first performance, but we feel sure that
none would be more ready than the members of the choir to admit that in
this case “ vaulting ambition had overleaped itself, and fallen on the other
side.” If they will only keep to simple chants and hymns till they feel
sure of their legs, we have no doubt that they will hereafter do great things.
In the evening, Dr. Turner, who combines in his own person the functions
of curer both of souls and bodies, gave us a most excellent sermon on the
text, Romans xiv, 7, delivered in a simple, earnest, straightforward way,
which must have appealed to the common sense of all his hearers. We
hope ere long he may give us an opportunity of hearing him again.
On Monday morning, the 17th, the programme of the “ Amusement
Committee” made its appearance and was eagerly studied. In it were
promised concerts, charades, and dramatic performances, chess tourna-
ments, dancing by moonlight, &c., &c. Let us hope that this plentiful
bill of fare may be served up successfully. The day was intensely hot,
and the wind having almost entirely fallen in the morning (the ship barely
doing two knots an hour), Captain Elmslie availed himself of the oppor-
tunity of giving some of the passengers a view of the vessel under full sail,
from his gig, manned by a crew of middies, who displayed in their rowing
a most creditable knowledge of the science of “ how not to do it.” Were
we posted up in nautical matters we might here enlarge indefinitely
on the beauty of the run and fineness of lines of the noble vessel of which
Captain Elmslie and his crew are so justly proud ; but bearing in mind
that excellent though generally neglected maxim —“JVe sutor ultra
crepedam ,” we will leave this to our nautical correspondent.
In the evening the first Concert of the voyage came off, the members of
6
The Sobraon Occasional.


the choir opening the performance with Hatton’s well-known glee,
“ Beware.’’ Mr. Edeson gave us a brilliant performance of Thalberg’s
« Home, Sweet Home,” and after this Mrs. Edeson so completely charmed
her audience by the simple yet sympathetic way in which she sang Pinsuti’s
“ I Heard a Voice,” that the demand for an encore was both enthusiastic
and unanimous. She kindly replied by singing “ The Nightingale.” Mr.
Blyth sang “ The Good Rhine Wine” with much spirit. This gentleman
has a fine voice, and will, we are sure, be a great acquisition. Dr. Turner
gave an excellent reading of the “ Jackdaw of Rheims,” and after a song,
“ When Sparrows Build,” by Miss Jardine, and the well-known duet
between Manrico and Azucena, “ Si la Stanchezza,” excellently rendered by
Mrs. Edeson and Mr. Blyth, the choir wound up the proceedings with an
exceedingly pretty glee by Arthur Sullivan, “ O, Hush Thee, my Babie.”
We hope they will give us this glee on another occasion. Its performance
on this evening, though fairly good, showed evident signs of the haste
with which everything had been got up j but a little more practice would
have made it quite the gem of the evening. The audience then joined in
a hearty “ God Save the Queen,” and repaired to the deck, where Israel
had kindly volunteered to play dance music to wind up the evening.
We are sorry to see an evident disposition on the part of the young men
to shirk their duty in the matter of dancing; we can assure them that the
ladies are by no means formidable. Don’t be shy, young men ! come
just as you are.
The Charades on Thursday night were a decided hit, and we may safely
congratulate ourselves upon the possession of considerable dramatic talent.
One or two scenes hung fire a little from the fact that they were too pro-
longed and owing to the limited space at the disposal of the actors.
Everyone rose to the occasion with great spirit. The enraged parent, the
blacksmith, the barmaid, &c., were all capitally got up.
THE “ SOBRAON” QUARTER-DECK ALPHABET.
A for Mrs. Allin stands, and also Mr. Ash—
We think the way he flits about at night is rather rash.
B for the Bonds, Bassano, Blyth, and Baines,
For Boissier and Miss Bally, both recovered from their pains.
C stands for Carter, who, we hope, will soon grow fatter,
And Gaunter, whom to beat at quoits would be no easy matter.
D for Cornish Davy stands, and also Mr. Dakin ;
If the first be not a lady’s man, the last is fascinating.
E for Captain Elmslie, and his charming little wife ;
To the notes of her guitar I could listen all my life.
And also for the Edesons, whose singing ever pleases all;
And the baby, who, we’re glad to say, is anything but musical.
E is first in Mrs. Fraser, and is also first in fun ;
You can’t help thinking of them both whene’er you think of one.
It also stands for Fletcher, and is found in Mrs. Frew.
G in Mrs. Graham, and in grandmother, too.
H is found in Huybers, in Heath and Mr, Hurditch;
We wish the latter better health and strength to speak in high pitch.
It stands, too, for Hoare, of jolly tars the best.
7
The Sohraon Occasional.


I for the Inches he measures round the chest.
J for Jardine ; in our choir she takes a leading part.
K for the Kind Thoughts that ought to reign in every heart.
L for LeCren, hearty-voiced and broad of make,
And also for the Lord and the Lady of the Lake.
M stands for Mrs. Mayne, a nurse so kind and mother-like,
For her daughter’s sickness all felt sympathy and brother-like.
It also stands for fair McGee, for Millidge, and for Moffat, too.
N stands for Northey, who ne’er rests while aught remains to do.
0 for O’Hea ; we hope he’ll soon forget the knock
He got the other night from the flapping of the staysail block.
P for the condenser Pump, which all have voted such a bore.
Q, for the Question —“ Shall we get a chance to go on shore ?”
E, stands for Ritchie, ever last to bed and first to rise;
And Richards, whose attention and good nature all the ladies prize.
S stands for Slater, and also for Tobacco Smoke ;
His appearance in his smoking-cap is really something like a joke.
T stands for Dr. Turner, and his earnest, fearless wife ;
We wish them hearty God-speed in their missionary life.
’Tis found too in Tuke, who to lose flesh can’t afford.
U for Unity, we hope will always reign on board.
V for the Variety of sports and occupations
We hope will be the aim of the committee’s operations.
W in Wardell and in Wedmore we have got,
While Wilson wags his shrimp-like tail —the last of all the lot.
The symbols are of quantities indefinite,
* So let them stand for all our food with kerosene mixed up in it.
Z
FICTION AND FACT;
OR A
ROMANCE OF THE CHANNEL.
Chapter I.
In a certain country parsonage in the south of England there lived a-
worthy parson of the name of Popkins, who had been blessed with
numerous olive-branches. These olive-branches consisted of five fair
daughters and three sons, the eldest of whom —Master Johnnie, the
subject of our brief but true history—was sixteen years of age in this year
of grace, 1875. Master Johnnie’s youth does not present many striking
events to the chronicler. He went bird-nesting, and stole his mother’s
jam, just like any other boy. He was not a prodigy of learning. Latin
grammar vexed his youthful soul. He shrank from Greek with an awful
loathing. Colenso’s arithmetic was an abomination; while MoreU’s
system of analysing his native tongue simply riled him.
At the age of five years, he could sail a small boat across the pond.
His favourite colour for a jacket was blue. At twelve he took to smokings
8
The Sobraon Occasional.


became deeply read in Captain Marryat’s novels and in sea literature
generally. Peter Simple he knew by heart; while his admiration for the
character of Mr. Midshipman Easy was overwhelming. He picked up a
sailor’s song or two, and could sing “ Tom Bowling” to the admiration of
his mother and sisters. Such was Master Johnnie Popkins.
Chapter 11.
At length arose the momentous question, “What shall we do with him?”
Johnnie’s own mind was made up, but to Mr. and Mrs. Popkins the
question of their firstborn’s future was a serious one. They thought of
the church, but that was given up, not so much on the ground of Johnnie’s
want of talent as his possible want of a patron. The army was mentioned
but Johnnie’s nature was entirely averse from the low system of com-
petitive examinations. His reasons may be gathered from Chapter I.
Commerce was suggested, but, as Johnnie pathetically observed, he hated
anything with figures in it. His genius was not mathematical. After
many consultations, the profession of the sea was adopted, much to our
hero’s delight. He would be a sailor.
Chapter 111.
Messrs. Davy, Jones and Co.—Dear Sirs —Having often heard of your
great reputation as a shipping firm, I take the liberty of addressing you on
a subject which is to me one of great importance. My eldest son, a lad of
fair abilities, is anxious to proceed to sea as a midshipman. Will you let
me know whether you can find room for him on board one of your clipper
ships 1 The boy’s mother wishes him to be well taken care of, to have
good food, and cheerful society; and hopes that the captain may be able
to improve her son’s mind by a little instruction in the art of navigation
and taking lunars.—l am &c.,
P. Popkins.
The Bev. Peter Popkins.—Sir—We beg to state for your information
that we have room for your son on board our splendid clipper ship “Stick-
in-the-Mud,” Captain Slowboy. Our premium is £lOO cash down. The
most tender interest will be taken in your son’s welfare, both physical
and moral. He will receive good food, and can obtain excellent
wines at low rates. His berth may be in the forecastle, but the men
are all refined characters, who never swear and were never known
to drink anything weaker than water. If stormy weather should
by any chance betray them into strong language, they are at once
checked by the officer on watch, who invariably carries a medal of
the “ Society for the Propagation of Mild Language.” You may assure
Mrs. Popkins, that Master Johnnie will be attended to by an excellent
nurse in case of cold or measles or any other complaint. We have only to
add that the “ Stick-in-the-Mud” carries an experienced cow and a surgeon.
—We remain, dear sir, yours very truly,
Pro Davy, Jones Co.,
Neptune Doldrum.
9
The Sohraon Occasional.


Chapter IY.
Messrs. Davy, Jones and Co.’s letter did it. Master Johnnie’s outfit
was bought, and the young man, in his blue suit, was an object of awe and
wonder to his smaller brothers.
He felt himself a hero and, when the time came for his departure, he
bore the tears and regrets of his family with the fortitude of a man made
of stern stuff. He thought of Nelson and did his duty. The Reverend
Peter sent away his first-born with his parental blessing : “My boy,” he
said, “ let me give you a piece of original advice— ‘ Be good and you will
be happy ; don’t lie, don’t swear, be a man.’ Farewell.” And Johnnie
went to the S.W.I. Docks by the next train and walked on board the
“ Stick-in-the-Mud,” bound for Melbourne, with the air of an ancient
mariner who had braved & thousand years the battle and the breeze.
Chapter V.
The voyage from the docks to Gravesend was comparatively smooth.
The “ Stick-in-the-Mud” behaved admirably and did not once get on her
beam-ends. Master Johnnie was somewhat disappointed, however, with
various details, but he kept up his courage like a man of spirit. The
captain did not show any inclination to discuss with him the adventures of
Mr. Fercival Keene , or Mr. Midshipman Easy; but he would lose his
stiffness bye-and-bye, no doubt. The officers seemed to forget they belonged
to the “ Society for the Propagation of Mild Language,” but they had
much to try their tempers. The men swore some, but that would wear off.
The dinner was—well, not so nice as the parsonage dinner. He found
himself cribbed up in a narrow berth, very unlike the comfortable bed
which he had left behind, but all great sailors had slept in such coffin-like
places in their time. The smells were tolerably strong, but the young
man lived in hope that things would come all right soon. When he turned
in, however, he thought of his mother and his quiet home, and wondered
whether a life on the ocean wave was all his fancy painted it. Just
■a shadow of a suspicion crossed his mind that his pluck had carried him too
far; but he murmured “ Avast,” and “ Belay there,” and fell asleep.
Chapter YI.
“ When the steward hastens
With the necessary basins.” —Thackeray
Gentle reader, imagine the next period of Johnnie’s existence. What pen
can describe it 1 The day broke amid mist and rain. The wind was foul.
When the “ Stick-in-the-Mud” got into the Channel, Johnnie felt as many
had felt before. His head seemed all in a whirl. His courage found its
way over the ship’s side. Life was a burden, the sea a huge mistake.
The ship lurched and pitched, and tossed madly about, as if possessed of a
thousand devils. Our hero received no sympathy. His brother heroes,
who had been to sea once before, looked on at Johnnie’s misery with a
pitying contempt, and spoke of land-lubbers, as if they had been born in a
viojent storm off Cape Horn. A good-natured quarter-master told him he
would soon be well. Such consolation Johnnie felt to be a ghastly mockery.
Existence had become a horrible nightmare. His appetite went. When he
did feel inclined to eat, his fare was not very tempting, and the gentle reader
will probably admit that biscuit and washy tea for breakfast, washy tea and
10
The Sobraon Occasional.


biscuit for supper, and salt beef and biscuit for dinner, have a tendency to
become monotonous. He went on deck when he could, but it was only to
get wet and cold, and hear the cheerful chaff of the sailors. He was asked
once or twice to strike the hour, and succeeded in producing a melancholy
funeral knell. Day followed day. It seemed an age—a century —before
Plymouth was reached. When, at length, that fair harbour was entered,
Johnnie’s mind was made up as to his future connexion with the sea. He
formed a plan.
Chapter VII.
The night is dark and dreary ; the rain falls heavily; the streets of
Plymouth"are almost deserted. Along the Barbican may be seen, walking
at a quick pace, a solitary figure not unlike that of a young sailor. As
he hurries stealthily forward, he looks on this side and that, always steer-
in a clear of the few stray policemen who turn up here and there. What
crime can he have committed ] Can one so young have killed his grand-
mother, or robbed a bank 1 Suddenly he catches sight of a tall man,
whom he evidently recognises, for he speedily takes to his heels, as if the
Arch-fiend were on his track. Tall man follows, but soon ceases the
pursuit, murmuring to himself—“ Never mind, let him go, we’ve got his
money.” The tall man was Mr. Channel Chops, agent for Messrs. Davy,
Jones and Co. The young sailor was the once gallant and spirited Master
Johnnie Popkins.
Chapter VIII.
There sits, in a certain English parsonage, a sad sad youth whom Melan-
choly has marked for her own. He never laughs. He never smiles.
His pride has left him. He shuns the choir, of which he was once an
ornament. His clothes are not of blue. His heroic character has suffered
in the eyes of his sisters and brothers. If he ever speaks to any of his
old friends, he alludes but seldom to a certain trip, he once made from
Gravesend to Plymouth “just for the fun of the thing.” But he avoids
society. Time, the Healer, may do much for him. There still remains
the question—“ What shall we do with him V But it is quite decided
that he won’t be a sailor.
ODDS AND ENDS.
What the Doctor says.— The health of all on board is excellent,
judging from the four o’clock muster. With the exception of sea-sickness
and headache, disease has not yet made its appearance to any extent.
We have, however, on our books several severe cases of sleeplessness,
principally confined to occupants of cabins in the vicinity of the stewards’
pantry. It is found that from 5 a.m. not a wink of sleep can be got on
account of the noise at morning coffee, &c. It is hoped that, for the sake
of these light-sleeping brethren, our stewards will in future do all they
can to secure quietness. Their are some threatened cases of quoit on the
brain, which may yet be checked.
Accidents. —There is not much to report under this head; one smashed
finger, and a bruised ankle (which has been left at Plymouth). The next
serious accident was that which happened to a lady who struck her funny
1 1
The Sohraon Occasional.


bone. She is slowly recovering. The lower animals have suffered most.
Two dogs paid the surgery a visit. One of the four-legged donkeys
showed symptoms of decline ; by careful nursing it is on its legs again,
and looks well. It weeps occasionally, but as its pulse is good, tongue
clean, and appetite fair, the likelihood is that its tears are prompted only
by home-sickness.
Wm. Y. Turner, M. 8., C.M.
Weights and Measures. —Since weighing anchor at Plymouth we
have been weighed twice. The scales form a pleasant variety in the day’s
pastimes and cause no small excitement. What a pity that Arthur
Orton’s yearly weight from birth had not been kept (as in the case of
one friend on board) ! What a light it would have thrown on the
Tichborne case ! and thus on light, or rather weighty, literature in
general. An analysis of the weight list shows a similarity in some
people who are not alike in anything else. From whatever cause, a
general decrease has arisen in the weight of the company; but this
has not much weight from the fact that tropical garments are lighter,
both in colour and texture, than those used in England. As to
measures, they have been much in request, both medicinally, musically,
and socially. The most popular measure has been the tax taken off
the wine and spirit list, which has given a measure of satisfaction to all.
Measures have been taken to secure some amusements during the
voyage, which no doubt will weigh largely in the enjoyment of all on
board. Avoirdupois.
How to Grumble. —Think of all the ships in which you have formerly
sailed. Choose out the best. Think of the berth you had, and the
chum. Add the fowls and the fruit and all the nicest things you had at
dinner; multiply by ten to make up for what you forget; compare the
result with your present condition, and fire away.
TELEGRAMS.
(From the Cook.)
Kerosene ile has been struck. Prompt application for shares advised.
No baker need apply.
(From the Engineer.)
Bronchial tubes of the condenser still wheezy, owing to inflammatory
action; must call in at Melbourne for repairs.
NOTICE.
“ The Sobraon Occasional” will gladly receive contributions from any
of the passengers. Papers, letters, &c., for the next number to be handed
in to Mr. T. Hurditch, Saloon Cabin No. 2, on or before Saturday, the
30 th inst.
12
The Sobraon Occasional.


Wat (Sobmoit ©ccasrional
No. 2.
Monday, November Bth, 1875.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
On Saturday, October 23rd, the company of the Theatre Royal, “Sobraon,”
gave an entertainment, comprising a comedietta, a concert, and a farce, to
a crowded audience on the main hatch. Doors opened at eight o’clock,
and as soon as the curtain rose, Mr. Moffat, coming forward to the foot-
lights, made a brief apology for the haste and incompleteness with which
the manager had been compelled to put his play upon the stage, and asked
the kind indulgence of the audience for any imperfections. The perform-
ances then opened with The Happy Pair , played by Mr, and Mrs. Rutter.
The lady showed, in the part of Mrs. Honeyton, considerable spirit, but
unhappily Mr. Rutter left most of his part to be spoken by the prompter.
After an interval of five minutes, the concert was opened with a solo on
the concertina, in which Mr. Israel gave an imitation of the peals of our
old English church bells, very clever, but scarcely suited to the peculiarities
of the instrument of which Mr. Israel is so complete a master. He was
followed by Mr. Barney, whose exceeding comic delivery of the song
“ Exceedingly Awkward for Me,” drew forth a well-merited encore. The
naturally humorous singing of Mr. Barney is much enhanced by the
elasticity of his facial muscles, which enable him, at will, to assume the
most grotesque and laughable contrasts of expression. Mrs. Bedwell like-
wise obtained the honour of a recall for her careful, quiet, and unpretentious
rendering of “ Castles in the Air f and, in response, sang “ Thy Voice is
Near Me,” which had been put down in the programme to be sung by her
later in the evening. This lady has a sweet, though not very powerful
voice, and sings with a good deal of feeling. Mr. Rutter then followed with
what the programme called a comic song —“ The Baronet”—though why
it was so-called, or where the comicality resided, is more than we can
imagine. Anything more dismally dreary than this so-called “ comic
song” we cannot conceive. No wonder people inveigh against our music-
halls if this is a sample of their produce. The spirited rendering of “Oh !
my, fie for shame,” with which Mr. Barney concluded the concert, was a
most agreeable contrast, and fairly convulsed the audience with laughter.
The whole was concluded by the laughable farce, The Troublesome Servant.
Mr. Holyoak, in the part of The Boss of the Shanty, showed considerable
talent and dramatic power, and had evidently bestowed upon his part an
amount of diligence, which is, we are sorry to say, rather too uncommon
among amateurs. The two would-be servants were played with much spirit,
though with rather too much boisterous fun, by Messrs. Coveney and Eaves,
and at the fall of the curtain the audience broke up in high good humour
with themselves and the performers, after having spent a most enjoyable
evening, notwithstanding the intense heat and closeness of the air, the
natural result of which was a strong run upon Mr. Weetch’s bar.


The Concert on Monday, the 25th, was not so successful as on a former
occasion, a fact which we may no doubt attribute to the want of energy
occasioned by the great heat. Of the first glee—“ The Maiden of tbe
Fleur-de-Lys”—we can only say that the notice, “ No Encores,” was not at
all necessary. The glee in itself is not particularly pretty, and a rendering
of it after what was evidently a hurried preparation, did not add to what
little beauty it possesses. The selection of Irish Airs by Mr. Edeson was
of course well executed. The gem of the Concert was certainly the song,
“ Children’s Voices,” by Claribel, which was sung by Mrs. Elmslie, well
assisted by Mrs. M‘Gee and Dr. Turner. The hearty applause which fol-
lowed was prompted not only by Mrs. Elmslie’s popularity on board, but
by an appreciation of the quiet and unpretending, yet most sweet and
natural way in which the song was sung. The clearness and good time of
Dr. Turner’s bass added much to the chorus. Mr. LeCren’s recitation
was given with great spirit and vigour. The other items of the programme
suffered somewhat from the heat, with the exception, perhaps, of Mr,
Bassano’s “ Wonderful Tongue,” which really seemed as if it would go on
for ever. This gentleman’s performance caused great merriment, and we
hope he may again appear in public. We would, with the utmost defer-
ence, suggest to Mr. Edeson, a little more thoroughness in his drilling. It
is, no doubt, difficult to get volunteers together sufficiently often, but an
effort in this direction is much required in the part songs.
On the evening of the 27th October we had the imposing ceremony of
the old “ Dead Horse.” Can any antiquarian on board confer a boon on
humanity by discovering the origin of this quaint practice ? About eight
o’clock in the evening the funeral chorus was heard, and everybody turned
out to watch the procession. The noble charger was marched round the
deck, and displayed considerable power and action in the kicking line.
After his qualities had been fairly tested in this way, a talented auctioneer
mounted the rostrum, and sold the gallant steed for the sum of £2 15s.
It was rather a sell for the poor old horse, for immediately afterwards he
was hauled up to the yard-arm and dropped into the waves. We can
only say that he died game. The object of this nautical festival is, we
believe, to celebrate the completion of the month, for the work of which
the sailors have had their wages paid in advance. The said wages having
been spent, the men have been working for a “ dead horse.”
Our memory of events becomes hazy. We remember consuming an
endless quantity of drinks. Just about this time, in fact, the man who
could suggest something new in the way of concocting cooling mixtures
was looked upon as a benefactor. We “mind ourselves,” however, that
on the morning of the 30th a shark was caught by the sailors. An ugly
customer it was, meaning no good to anybody who should venture
—overboard.
On the evening of Saturday, October 30th, the Christy Minstrels made
their first appearance, under the leadership of the talented Mr. Israel. Of
14
The Sobraon Occasional.


instrumental music there was only that of a concertina, which did wonder-
fully good service in furnishing accompaniments. There was a pair of
bones, by the way, which were vigorously wielded by Barney. The per-
formers were somewhat unequal, but as this was a first effort, we shall
only mention the singing of “ Molly Darling,” the solo and chorus parts
of which were both well done. The celebrated Sobraon Dwarf caused
great merriment among the younger members of the audience. Of
the Intelligence Office we cannot say much in the way of praise. It
hung fire considerably—a fact of which the actors themselves seemed con-
scious—and, moreover, we are of opinion that some of the supposed jokes
and “ hits” at passengers who sail in the “ Sobraon” were a mistake,
although we do not wish to disallow in a pure republic like our own a
fair amount of latitude in the “ funny” line. No doubt it must be
pleasant for the stewards, who are certainly hard-working, obliging
fellows, to reverse the order of things, and pass a few criticisms upon the
passengers; but we daresay that they could take their amusement in this
way in private life, which would be the more preferable plan.
On Monday, November Ist, there being no wind, and the air below
deck being exceedingly close and stuffy, instead of the usual Monday concert
in the saloon, an impromptu concert was got up on the quarter-deck, very
much to the increased comfort and delight both of performers and audience.
Mr. Dakin and Mrs. Edeson opened the proceedings with the well-known
duet, “ Huntingtower;” but, owing to their having taken up their position
too far back, were not clearly audible to the bulk of the audience. Dr.
Turner then sang with much precision and effect, “ The Path of Duty,”
for which he received a well-merited recall. Miss Jardine followed with
“ Auld Robin Gray.” Her rendering of this favourite old ballad, though
we think its simple pathos was somewhat marred by too much straining
after theatrical effect, as well as a certain want of precision in the upper
notes, was thoroughly earnest, and marked by much feeling and dramatic
force. She, moreover, had the good sense to take up a more central posi-
tion than that of those who preceded her, so that every note was heard
most clearly and distinctly. An enthusiastic encore was a matter of course.
Mr. Blyth sang “ Bonnie Dundee” with much spirit, and his singing was
thoroughly appreciated by the audience, who took up the burden
with capital effect, and apparently with great delight. Mrs. Edeson
sang “ The Minstrel Boy” with the simplicity and pathos that
always characterise her; and Mr. Bassano concluded the perform-
ance by making all of us roar with laughter at the spirited and
humorous way in which he sang and acted the “Steam Arm,” the amuse-
ment certainly not being at all lessened by the evident delight of the
singer in his own performance. We think that in this experiment the
committee have hit upon “ true grit.” Let them take a lesson from the
evident desire to hear their own voices manifested by the audience during
Mr. Blyth’s song, and give us simple old English, Scotch, and Irish
ballads, or good glees, such as the “ Chough and Crow” for instance, and
some good songs, such as “ When the Stormy Winds do Blow,” or anything
of that kind, in the chorus of which all the audience can join, and we
promise them a complete success.
15
The Sobraon Occasional.


On Tuesday, November 2nd, in the afternoon, while we were enjoying
the repose which sets in after dinner, another monster of the deep was
hooked and landed. Catching sharks is no doubt good sport, but we
must confess to a feeling of horror when we saw the poor brute, pretty
well hacked to pieces, flinging itself wildly about the deck. It is possible
to have some pity, even for a shark. Cannot the creature be despatched
with less apparent cruelty 1
On Thursday evening, November 4th, the long expected Lilliputian
Troupe made its first appearance. Mr. Richards, who is always ready
to help in our arrangements, kindly fitted up a stage on the weather
side of the quarter-deck. Shortly after the appointed hour the curtain
rose, the word chosen for the charade being “ Bandbox.” We are sorry
we cannot enter into a minute criticism, as so little of the speaking could
be heard, except by those quite near the stage, and then, as the stage was
not erected to suit the wind, the wind blew the bandbox no good, and
could hardly be expected to suit the stage. We can certainly say, however,
that all the actors —especially Master Frank and Miss Edith Huybers and
Master Willie Mayne—showed considerable talent in their respective parts,
and we hope there will be a similar performance under more favourable
circumstances. Let the young people only speak up, and remember that
the audience prefer a front to a back view of them. We may add that in
the management of Mr. Boissier’s moustache and Master Johnnie Huybers’
truly pathetic manner of embracing there was nothing to be desired.
Dramatic art can do no more. During the performance Mr. Blyth sang
two songs in his usual style, while Mrs. Edeson charmed us all by her
rendering of that exceedingly pretty ballad, “ The Wishing Gate.” We
believe our heartiest thanks are due to Mrs. Allin for the way in which
she drilled and assisted the juvenile performers in their rehearsals.
Friday, November sth, was a big day on board the “ Sobraon.”
Crossing the Line is always an interesting event, and on all ships is kept
more or less as a holiday; but it does not often happen to any one to
cross it, as we did, on Guy Fawkes’ day. No wonder, then, that as soon
as it had become tolerably certain that we should reach the equator on the
sth inst., very considerable excitement should have been felt by all on
board. Early in the morning meetings were held, money collected, and
a committee, consisting of Messrs. LeCren, Moffat, and Lake, appointed
to conduct the amusements. Mr. Richards, too, as usual, gave us all the
assistance in his power; and by his kind help, and the willing aid of the
boatswain, there was little difficulty in making arrangements for a jolly
day. At half-past ten a magnificent Guy Fawkes, brilliant with ribbons
of all the colours of the rainbow, was borne in procession round the deck,
and finally remanded to prison, there to await condign punishment in the
evening. The sailors, having rigged up a pole, then slung the monkey,
and for sometime amused themselves and the spectators by their feats of
activity. While thus engaged, one of them, we are sorry to say, got
rather a nasty knock against the steam-winch, which caused the blood to
flow somewhat freely, and must, we fear, have given him much pain; but
neither the injury nor anything else seemed to be able to disturb his
16
The iSobraon Occasional.


pluck and good temper, or prevent him from engaging, heart and soul, in
the other sports. The men then had a glass of grog, and went to dinner.
After dinner came climbing the greasy pole for prizes, in which Dunn,
Marsh, Cox, and Wensdale distinguished themselves. Wensdale, indeed,
managed, by the use of grommets, to get to the top of the pole at his first
attempt; but being disqualified by the judges, at once set to work again,
with the utmost good-nature, to try the ascent in the ordinary way. It was
most amusing to see the various shifts and expedients resorted to by the men
in their efforts to get a firm grip of the slippery surface; coal-ashes and
sand were carried in pockets, caps, and bosoms of shirts ; sacking, rope-
yarns, and all sorts of odds and ends were tied round legs and arras, but
to no purpose. In the sack-jumping, Oldham and James carried off first
and second prizes respectively. Charleston and Peacock, and Wensdale
and Leggatt came in first and second in the cat’s-meat barrow race. This
last is a most amusing performance, in which one man, holding in his
hands a wheel on a spindle, converts himself into a human barrow, and is
wheeled at a rapid pace by another man holding his legs. The egg and
spoon race, in which each competitor carries an egg in a spoon, held at
arm’s length, was won somewhat easily by Frere. Wensdale was the
winner of the next event, astonishing everyone by the ease with which he
picked up the coins with his lips from the bottom of the tubs of water.
Then came the ceremony of initiation of the lads and new chums. We all
had heard more or less wonderful accounts of this ceremony, as performed
in other ships. Neptune and his wife, we were told, would come on
board, accompanied by their court physician and barber, and these two
last would take in hand the new chum, and with bolus and lather, of
indescribable nastiness, so physic and shave him that his own mother
would not know her son again ; then the poor wretch would be asked a
series of questions, and as soon as his mouth was opened to answer, the
shaving brush, laden with its beastly lather, would be shoved into it, and,
half-choked and sickened by the nauseous mess, he would be finally upset
into a tub of water. But “ other ships, other manners,” They may do
these things on board the “ Thomas Stephens,” but on board the
“ Sobraon” we are not quite such savages. Instead of the usual brutal
horseplay we had nothing but good-natured fun, and the harmless ducking
in a tub—enjoyed, we think, almost as much by the ducked as the duckers —
was all the sign of vassalage exacted by his oceanic majesty. The sports
were then resumed. In the three-legged race, there was a close contest
between several competitors, the result being that two of the middies,
Gace and Bastard, came in first, Peacock and Dunn being second. In the
running high jump, Bastard again came to the front, jumping in capital
style. With practice, we think this youngster has form enough to do
good things at Lillie Bridge some day. Burgess, who came secon'l,
jumped well, though rather clumsily. The long jump, standing, was Ike
last event on the progamme, and was won, after a close fight, by Frere,
who just managed to beat Burgess with a good jump of eight feet. In the
evening everybody assembled on the quarter-deck to look at the sailors 5
hornpipe. The dancing was most spirited, and the get-up, attitudes, and
agility of the imaginary lady-performers most amusing. Then followed
some capital singing, everybody joining in the chorus with great spirit.
Where all did so well, it would not be fair to criticise, but we cannot help
17
The Sobraon Occasional.


singling out “ The Village Blacksmith,” sung by Beck, the sailmaker, with
excellent taste and feeling. Munro gave a recitation from Burns, and then
Mr. Hoare gave us the song of the evening, “ On board the Sobraon,” the
burden of which was taken up with the utmost zest by everybody present,
and the words of which we subjoin :
ON BOARD THE “ SOBRAON.”
If my health should break down, or my spirits should fail,
To Melbourne or Sydney I’d go for a sail;
Nor away from my friends need my heart feel forlorn,
Sailing over the ocean on board the “ Sobraon.”
CHORUS. —On the “ Sobraon,” on the “ Sobraon,”
Sailing from England from night until morn ;
On the “ Sobraon,” on the “ Sobraon,”
Of all kinds of ships, give me the “ Sobraon.”
Now some like on boating their cash to expend,
And some would for fourpence go down to Gravesend,
While others the penny steamboats take to Cremorne,
But I’d rather pay fifty to go in the “ Sobraon.”
Now some choose a ship like the “ Thermopylas,”
With her sheets and her lee-rail nicely dipped in the sea,
And others, screw-steamers ; but all these I scorn—
Of all kinds of vessels give me the “ Sobraon.”
Now some ships imagine with us they can race,
And the old “ Thomas Stephens” thinks she can give chase,
But they’d better go home, put their ships into pawn,
For there’s not one among them can touch the “ Sobraon.”
If tempests should come, and our courage should fail,
And the good ship drive madly along through the gale ;
With topsails twice reefed in the snows off Cape Horn,
My heart feels no fear when on board the “ Sobraon.”
I must offer the thanks of the whole company
To our friends who arranged these sports on the sea—
With programme as good as ever was drawn—
Oh ! we know how to do it on board the “ Sobraon.”
If I might say a word of the captain and crew,
And with them include our good officers, too ;
They’re a fine set of fellows as ever were born,
So three cheers for the sailors on board the “ Sobraon.”
Three hearty cheers were, at the conclusion of this song, given for Captain
and Mrs. Elmslie, and the officers and crew, and all dispersed for a short
time. Guy Fawkes was then again brought forth from prison, carried
twice round the deck, preceded by drum and bell; and, followed by all
the sailors singing some wild chant or dirge, put in the dock on the star-
board side of the vessel, immediately under the main yard-arm. The act
of indictment having been read aloud, he was at once set on and mobbed
by the sailors, stripped of all his finery, deluged with turpentine, fired,
and strung up from the yard-arm. Here he continued to blaze for some
time, to the great delight of the spectators, and finally dropped into the
sea, where the burning fragments might for some time be discerned rising
and falling on the waves in the wake of the vessel. The passengers then
gathered on the poop to look at some rockets which Captain Elmslie
18
The Sobraon Occasional.


had kindly directed to be fired for their amusement, and again were
three hearty cheers were given for our captain and his wife, and also
for our “ noble selves.” We then broke up, delighted with everything
and everybody on board, and with a firm conviction that our crew were
indeed a fine set of fellows, worthy of the splendid ship to which they
belonged, that nothing could exceed the courtesy, kindness, and attention
of our officers, and that we all were, to use the words of an old song,
“jolly companions every one.”
On Saturday evening, November 6th, a Concert was held on the quarter-
deck, under the management of Mr. Israel, who is to be complimented on
his always being ready at a moment’s notice to provide amusement for
the “ Sobraon” public. Dr. Turner occupied the post of chairman, and
announced the various singers. We would specially note the admirable
manner in which Mr. Israel played a selection from Offenbach’s Grand
Duchess on the concertina. Also the singing of two French songs by
Mademoiselle Blandiu, whose pretty voice and artistic style were thoroughly
appreciated by the audience. Barney, who has now become an established
favourite, was heartily welcomed and vehemently applauded at the conclu-
sion of both his comic songs. We have had occasion previously to speak of
Mrs. Bedwell’s sweet voice, and our anticipations were thoroughly realised
by the feeling and expression she threw into the “ Gipsy’s Warning,”
though we cannot but think much greater effect would have been produced
if the time had been a little quicker. Alfred, Mr. Daly, Mr. Beck, and
Mrs. Watson took part in the concert, which was wound up by the
company singing “Come where My Love lies Dreamingand thus ended
the week, so unusually fraught with striking and dashing incidents.
Shortly after the publication of our first number the heat became
intense. We suppose there must be some connexion between the two
events, though we certainly tried to avoid everything of a heating character,
except the raspberry vinegar and water with which we stimulated our
wearied editorial brains. The heat has continued and has been felt all
the more, owing to the shabby manner in which we have been treated by
the north-east trades, which have shown themselves a very poor lot indeed.
Editors and printer’s devils have, nevertheless, been quite up to their
work ; even our poet has been goaded into song by the fact that the
“ Sobraon” expects him to do his duty in all weathers. Now we are
enjoying the south-east trades, and may fairly congratulate ourselves that
to all appearances we shall have no more weather of the same trying kind
as that which we have just gone through.
The Services have been conducted as usual during the last two Sundays,
Captain Elmslie reading prayers in the morning, and Dr. Turner preaching
in the evening. At the latter the attendance has been smaller than it
would otherwise be, owing to the very hot weather, which makes even our
moderately short Service in the saloon rather trying.
b 2
19
The Sohraon Occasional.


LIFE’S COST.
I could not at the first be born
But by another’s bitter, wailing pain ;
Another’s loss must be my sweetest gain ;
And love, only to win that I might be,
Must wet her couch forlorn
With tears of blood and sweat of agony.
Since, then, I cannot live a week,
But some fair thing must leave the daisied dells,
The joy of pastures, bubbling springs and wells,
And grassy murmurs of its peaceful days
To bleed in pain, and reek,
And die, for me to tread life’s pleasant ways.
I cannot sure be warmed or lit,
But men must crouch and toil in tortuous caves,
Bowed on themselves, while day and night in waves
Of blackness wash away their sunless lives,
Or, blasted and sore hit,
Dark life to darker death the miner drives.
Naked —I cannot clothed be,
But worms must patient weave their satin shroud ;
The sheep must shiver to the April cloud,
Yielding his one white coat to keep me warm.
In shop and factory
For me must weary toiling millions swarm.
With gems I deck not brow or hand,
But through the roaring dark of cruel seas
Some wretch with shivering breath and trembling knees
Goes headlong, while the dodge his quest;
Then at my door he stands
Naked, with bleeding ears and heaving chest.
I fall not on my knees and pray,
But God must come from heaven to fetch that sigh,
And pierced hands must take it back on high ;
And through His broken heart and cloven side
Love makes an open way
For me, who could not live, but that He died.
0 awful, sweetest life of mine,
That God and man both serve in blood and tears !
O prayers I breathe not but through other prayers 1
0 breath of life compact of others’ sighs !
With this dread gift divine
Ah, whither go ? What worthily devise ?
If on myself I dare to spend
This dreadful thing, in pleasure lapped and reared,
What am I but a hideous idol smeared
With human blood, that with its carrion smile
Alike to foe and friend,
Maddens the wretch who perishes the while ?
I will away and find my God,
And what I dare not keep, ask Him to take,
And taking love’s sweet sacrifice to make ;
Then, like a wave, the sorrow and the pain
High heaven with glory flood,
For them, for me, for all, a splendid gain.
Sea Foam
20
The Sohraon Occasional.


LIST OF PASSENGERS; OR, RIDDLES FOR THE CURIOUS.
1, burned coal. 2, a worker in wood. 3, a doubtful amusement. 4, a noble
profession. 5, a piece of water. 6, Shylock’s wish. 7, the miner s eyes. 8,
a bell-flower. 9, the gay dog. 10, a Scottish Sanatorium. 11, bigamy. 12,
the wail of the fatigued. 13, a frequenter of high latitudes.
IN THE DOLDRUMS.
The day is hot, and close, and dreamy ;
The water is warm, and the air is steamy ;
The sails hang flapping against the mast,
But with every flap the breeze falls fast,
And the day is close and dreamy.
Our days are hot, and close, and dreamy,
We stew in our cabins, close and steamy ;
Our thoughts fly back to the iced champagne,
But the thought and the wish for it both are vain,
And the days are close and dreamy.
Cheer up, parched tongue, and cease repining,
For Melbourne, I’m told, is the place for dining ;
Your lot is no worse than the common lot,
In every voyage some days are hot,
Some cabins are close and steamy.
THE EFFECT OF THE LATE HOT WEATHER.
A correspondent, hailing from the Smoking-room, sent us the following
lines, which we understand were sung with great eclat by Mr. Blyth, at
the Saturday night Sing-Song.
“ THE GOOD SHIP ‘ SOBRAON.’ ”
Tune— “ The Flaunting Flag.”
See how our good ship onward tears
Across the foaming sea,
Full three times fifty souls she bears,
With hearts both light and free,
To seek a home in distant lands,
An Englishman’s just meed,
Where honest work and honest hands
Will keep a man from need.
Cho. —So sing in chorus, one and all,
And let the burden be—
God speed our ship, the swift “ Sobraon,”
That bears us o’er the sea.
When tossed upon the billows’ crest,
No care or fear we know ;
Becalmed upon the ocean’s breast,
We ne’er impatience show.
In providence we place our trust,
Whatever speed we sail,
Well knowing by its power we must
In time Australia hail.
Let’s hope the man who now commands
And guides us o’er the seas,
May sail no more for foreign stand,
But live at home at ease;
21
The Sobraon Occasional.


For he has ploughed the ocean wave
For many a tedious year.
Long may our captain, true and brave,
Live free from woe and care.
And now my lads give one loud cheer
For Eichards, tough and brave ;
Next voyage may he have to steer
Commander o’er the wave.
His manly pluck and courtesy
Have gained our right good will ;
"We wish him much prosperity,
And freedom from all ill.
Three cheers for Northey, worthy tar,
Our second mate is he ;
We hope the time may not be far
When he may top the tree.
A hardier seaman, bold and brave,
Ne’er sailed across the sea,
And when we’ve reached beyond the wave,
We’ll give him three times three.
Our third mate, too, we’ll not forget,
In this, our jovial strain ;
May Hoare promotion also get,
And wealth and power attain.
Straightforward, gentlemanly, free,
A maxim true we find—
As twig in early youth is bent,
So man’s way is inclined.
Now for our friends in England,
We’ll give a loud hurrah !
While speeding from our native land
To climes remote and far.
We’ll work, my lads, with right good force,
And quickly let them see
The reason why we came across
The deep, blue, rolling sea.
So join in chorus, one and all,
And let the burden be—
God speed our ship, the swift “ Sobraon,”
That bears us o’er the sea.
ODDS AND ENDS.
What the Doctor Says. —During the last two weeks prickly heat
has made sad ravages amongst our company, from the baby up to the
oldest salt. Fortunately no case has yet proved fatal. Excessive thirst
has also been experienced by many. As a consequence, the consumption
of refrigerants has been enormous. Rheumatics, sciatica, neuralgia, or in
the new nomenclature old-ralgia, not to speak of other minor maladies,
have also been busy at work in our ranks. Surgical. —The operating
theatre has been called into use, and three operations have been performed
most successfully. A lady ran a crochet-needle into her finger. The
finger was saved, as also the needle. With these few exceptions, the
health of our little world is wonderful, considering the temperature.
W. Y. Turner, M. 8., CAL
22
The Sobraon Occasional.


GREAT SUCCESS OF THE LILLIPUTIAN TROUPE.
In consequence of an indefinite number of special requests, the Lillipu-
tian Troupe have much pleasure in informing their patrons and the public
generally, that they will give another performance on Thursday, the 11th
instant, on the Main Hatch, Theatre Royal, “ Sobraon. 5 ’ For further
particulars see handbill on notice board.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Thomas Stephens.”—We cannot insert this letter, owing to its some-
what personal character. It is quite true that a gentleman on board once
sailed in the “ Thomas Stephens,” and we have no reason to doubt that
there were always boiled potatoes for breakfast. Passengers, however,
were not compelled to eat them.
“ Veritas.” —We have received from a correspondent, so signing himself,
two sets of verses, which contain some poetry and a little sense. The
heat has been hard upon the poet. We are sure, however, that better
things may be hoped for when the south-east trades come to revive our
drooping powers. Will “ Veritas” try again ?
DREAM LAND.
A bad beginning, is it not, Mr. Editor 1 The unreal should not be dealt
with before the positive, the fabric before the foundation. Yet, what am
Itodo ? I have rushed to the front in a moment of entrain, self-enrolled
among more able spirits, and brave enough until the time for action arrives,
when (for I must make a clean breast of it) I find my courage will not
screw to the sticking point, therefore I fear to fail. Small are my means,
slender my capacity, simple my style. Versify, I cannot; rhyme will
neither lend nor bend itself to my purpose. For fiction, I have no imagi-
native power, and fact is prosaic. “ Perplexed in the extreme” I betake
myself in search of an idea or two, to the shadow-life which we all lead
more or less when “ night draws the curtain of repose on man and beast.”
What absurd things we do dream. How wonderfully clever, or uncom-
monly stupid, or extraordinarily good, or outrageously wicked we find our-
selves, without being at all astonished at the discrepancies in the characters
in which we suddenly appear. It is impossible to say what I have done,
or not done, in dreams. I have been to heaven (a long time ago, though)
and was handed into a very respectable seat among the angels. I daresay I
may have tried the other place, but I don’t remember just now. I have been
by turns judge and criminal, master and scholar, tyrant and slave, I have
saved life and destroyed it, utterly insensible to the merit or the crime of
the act, though in the latter case I may have had an uneasy sense of the
unpleasantness of being hanged. The utter irresponsibility in questions of
moral right and wrong, of which one is sensible in dreams, would lead to
the conclusion that during the necessary repose of the system for the
restoration of the animal powers, the mental faculties have a complete
23
The Sobraon Occasional.


holiday, are out on leave, perhaps, or locked in unconsciousness. Query.
—Do the members of the spirit world stalk in and play wild-goose
chase after each other amongst those slumbering faculties % If so, they
have it all their own way, to judge by the mild absurdity of the parts
one’s being seems to enact under their influences. Yet, during the tem-
porary chaos, memory, true to her post, rouses herself, and, sitting in at-
tentive contemplation of the havoc around her, faithfully jots down the
circumstances of the time and place. By her aid alone, I suppose, it is
that I am now enabled to reveal the vagaries of these pioneers of fancy or
sprites of mischief (whichever they may be), who made, as they often do,
free use of my brain organs the other night, whether for their own or my
amusement I cannot say. Of all impossible characters for my impersona-
tion they chose for me on the above occasion that of assistant ferryman to
“ Charon,” the “ time-honoured” of mythological legend. Yes, there I
was, sure enough, whisked into my seat at the stern, working away for my
day’s hire (in what coin was not suggested to me). What a queer scene !
A semi-light, such as one never sees in real life, yet distinct to minuteness.
The water blue and placid; the banks of the river strongly marked;
scenery rather regular than wild, yet a strange look of beauty in its
absolute repose. On the far side a vast extent of country, partially visible
through openings at irregular intervals through undulating hills. But with
this it seemed I had no present concern, all my care being directed to the
due performance of the task in which I was engaged, and of which I
appeared (for, alas ! the sprites had not left my self-conceit asleep) to
acquit myself most efficiently, so that by my efforts the boat, freighted
with its representatives of human destiny, was shot backwards and for-
wards in masterly style. As I landed my last load—for the day was now
failing—l prepared to jump on shore, following in the wake of the last
passenger, a hale-looking young man, who, on stepping out of the boat,
was warmly greeted by one much older than himself, who was standing on
the bank, watching the arrivals, just as the people on a pier loiter about to
witness the coming in of the different crafts bound to their port. The
conversation which ensued between the newly-arrived and his friend of
former days arrested my attention, and was evidently the subject-matter
that had been worked up in my brain-organs by whomever or whatever it
is, or they are, that do such work. It ran somewhat as follows :
Elder Alan. ‘ f Why how now, messmate ? So soon summoned, and at
your age 1 But what of those left behind ?”
Younger Alan. “Ah ! that is the only thought that troubles me. How
will the old people get on ? If they are cared for as I feel that I am, by
the berth for which I am booked, there is nothing left for me to wish.
Of the future lam now sure, and such a future ! If those left behind
could know even the little revealed to me now.”
Elder. “ Possibly they might be tempted to take upon themselves to
hurry after us, without waiting for their notice to quit, and undo the good
intended for them. Man was ever his own marplot. But, talking of
‘ notice to quit,’ how came yours, young friend V’
Younger. “Short and sudden, unlooked for by all. A bright afternoon
in the soft early summer, the sea dancing and glittering in the sun-light;
a call to be prompt in preparing the trim little barque for a sail. My
holiday-suit donned, and my hand on the helm, scarce less happy than
2 4
The Sohraon Occasional.


those for whose especial pastime I had been summoned to exert myself—a
bride and her husband, a proud mother, a couple of fine lads, and an
elderly contented looking couple. Away we went, this way and that,
lingering about the shores of the beautiful bay, then bore off for the
fair island on the opposite side. Suddenly, in all its glory, with colours
flying and a general glitter, as of Cleopatra’s galley (the far-famed of olden
time), our Sovereign’s yacht darts along with almost impossible speed,
cleaving the waters as an arrow cleaves the air. One look, and I saw it
was all over; one pang of deadly heart-sickness, one great crash, one sad
wail, and the helm which the hand had guided so proudly was crushed
down upon the poor strong back, as the keel of the pretty little craft
turned bottom upwards, and sank with all its living load. Then came the
moment’s desperate natural struggle, and lo ! painlessly and swiftly the
brain took sudden recognition of all the past, vividly, distinctly, and
entirely, and then—and then —oh ! comrade, the fettered, eager spirit, with
all its indefinable longings and unutterable aspirations, left with a not
ungrateful farewell, the wonderous machine in which it had worked for a
space.”
Elder. “ Again I say, ‘ All hail ! brother,’ and may it be as well with
you as with me. But a question arises concerning the cause of your early
appearance here, as referred to your fellow-men. How will that question
be dealt with 1”
Younger. “As all such questions are dealt with in the world we have
left, ‘ where custom sanctifies abuse,’ where the great walk rough-shod over
the small, and where the minions of royalty, the idols of the weak, pass
gorgeously triumphant before the delighted eyes of the thoughtless, and
drag (in this instance literally) the car of Juggernaut, and carry it in its
crushing course over the bodies of its adoring votaries.”
Elder. “Aye, but the country we have left is cared for by laws, and
offences like these meet with just punishment.”
Younger. “ Provided the offence comes from the right quarter. If we
had even damaged the royal belongings, disgrace would, and perhaps
beggary might, have become our portion. Instead of damaging, the royal
party only destroyed us. What did it matter 1 There are plenty of us.
Punishment did not apply to the case. It was reported (but I think
maliciously) that the destroyers would be rewarded by a regal present, for
the gallant efforts they were said to have made to repair and modify the
mischief consequent upon their ill-advised speed, perhaps for the skill
with which they contrived to lessen the shock to the car of Juggernaut—
for Juggernaut is sacred, and may not be shaken.”
Elder. “Alas ! alas ! Well, it touches us not, and yet I mourn for the
offenders, and wonder how it will fare with them when they stand where
you will be presently. For there, oh ! ray friend, as you will soon find, it
is Man, not Monarch ; Truth, not Tradition ; Right, not Rank ; Merit, not
Money. All I say and pray is— ‘ May we hereafter share in the good
provided for all.’ ” Sphinx.
A SEA LEGEND.
There was once upon a time a small community, which prided itself on
being a very respectable and well-ordained community. It became its fate
25
The Sobraon Occasional.


for the fourth part of a year to be shut out from all other communities,
and to represent in itself an entire world ; therefore it set itself to work to
work to find out its component parts, to sort and to assimilate them, and
to bring each to the front as occasion might require. The musical parts,
and the dramatic parts, and the literary parts were all very willing to be
trotted out, and to pat each other on the back, and you would have
said that this little community had settled itself
“ Upon the spot of hallowed ground,
Where breath of scandal is not found,”
if it had been in the neighbourhood of any ground at all. But as it
was only in the neighbourhood of the salt sea, and as it never saw any-
thing in the shape of ground whatever, unless that which was contained
in seven pots with seven plants in them, we should say of it that it had
found the ‘ ‘hallowed spot of water” instead, if it had not contrived to be
in so many different spots in the course of a day. In fact it would have
considered itself an injured and long-suffering community if it had been
called upon to remain in the same spot for an hour at a time. This
community got into the way of thinking that the sea had been made
on purpose for it to travel over, and that the wind could not possibly
have the bad taste to blow from any other point of the compass than the
one which was to send it straight towards its destination. It likewise felt
that the sun had committed an oversight when it set otherwise than in a
sensational style, and that it was altogether a breach of good manners on
its part to duck down below the horizon, like a charity-girl bobbing a
curtsey, instead of bidding a grand good-night to the hemisphere at large,
and blazoning abroad in characters of crimson and gold the great mystery
of its departure. The phosphorous, moreover, did not come to the front
as it might have done. Better things had been expected of it, and the
community considered itself wounded in its most susceptible part,
when, instead of bursting into balls of parti-coloured fire, the long-looked
for phosphorous nightly sent up its feeble little sparks, like matches
which some silly mermen were trying to light under the water. All this
was no doubt very trying to the temper of the little community, but it
was nothing to what was to come.
There was a certain portion of this community which could not get
along at all without the free air of heaven blowing upon it. The sun, and
the wind, and the phosphorus might be remiss occasionally ; but, given an
aperture for the ingress of the air, not all the malice of all the elements
combined could stop the air from seeking that ingress. But, alas ! for
the weakness of human foresight. Something besides air might seek it
as well. This was how it happened :
One memorable day the aforesaid air-loving portion of the community
opened wide its particular aperture, and exposed its own sacred little
precincts to the moist warm wind, which rushed in and indiscreetly peered
about in all directions. It played games with flowing skirts hanging in
charming abandonment on little brass nails, and it made acquaintance with
all the labels on all the bottles, and went buzzing around in a generally
officious and inquisitive manner. Finally, it went out primed with secrets, and
being, as you have seen, both an inquisitive and an ill-bred wind, it is hardly
to be wondered at that it should have murmured as it swept over the sea, the
secrets which it had discovered —“Glycerine,” “Tennyson,” “Cold Cream,
26
The Sobraon Occasional.


“Thoughts on Eternity,” it said, making the most ridiculous jumble as it
rushed along. The sea —which, as you know, has so little change, that it is
sometimes obliged to work itself up into a fury—was so excited by these dis-
connected disclosures that it began to sway itself up and down in quite a
fever of impatience, and to tilt itself up towards the aperture in question,
and try to reconnoitre on its own account. Meanwhile, the confiding
portion of the little community had utterly forgotten the uncouth monster
outside, and never dreamed that it could want to come poking and prying
into what did not concern it. This too-trusting portion was smoothing
out its go-to-meeting clothes, and feeling “ right” and clean, and at peace
with all the world. Its pious air was too much for the temper of a great
obtrusive, bilious wave, which had just then leaped up to have a go-in at
the fun which the wind had chuckled over. This bilious wave made up
its mind that it would soon see what all this odour of sanctity
was worth; and without more ado it dashed its whole unwieldy body
in a great heap through the foolish little aperture, and slapped at the go-
to-meeting array right and left. The poor little air-loving portion was quite
staggered at this cruel stroke. The greatness of the catastrophe took away
its breath. All the starch went out of its things, and all the piety out of
its demeanour. In fact, it would have sworn some, if it had only known how.
It attacked smaller portions of its own little self, and called frantically for
help from the outer world. It went down on its knees, and swabbed and
perspired in a way that was pitiable to behold. In fact, its discomfiture
was great, but it learned its lesson, and now it is a sadder and wiser portion
of a community, which will profit by its experience.
NEXT NUMBER.
“ Sobraon Occasional,” No. 3. —Contributors are requested to for-
ward papers, letters, &c., on or before the 17th instant, to Mr. Hurditch,
Saloon Cabin, No. 2.
27
The Sohraon Occasional.


Uhe (Sohraon Occasional
Thursday, November 25th, 1875.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
Monday, November 7th. —We had been promised another Promenade
Concert for this evening, and a small impromptu, stage had been erected
for that purpose by our ever kind friend, Mr. Richards ; but who can
control the weather? Just as all was completed, the wind, which had
gradually fallen during the day, freshened up considerably, and there was
every indication of a squall coming on, so awnings and all other prepara-
tions had to be cleared away sharp, and the singers had to content
themselves with such light, or rather darkness made visible, as could be
obtained from a solitary lamp, whilst their voices had to contend against a
rather fresh wind. As for the squall, satisfied apparently with having
caused so much trouble and confusion, it had changed its mind and beaten
a retreat. Under these unfavourable circumstances, it was perhaps
scarcely a matter of wonder if the performances were not quite up to the
mark. Proceedings were opened with the favourite glee “ Beware.” Mrs.
Edeson then gave us “ What will you do, Love ?” We fear the winds
must have prevented this pretty song —sung with all the charm with which
Mrs. Edeson invests everything she undertakes—being heard by some of
the audience. The next song, “ The Mermaid,” was rather wanting in
spirit. What a pity it is that Mr. Dakin, who really has a good voice,
won’t let it have its head a little more. Very different was Mr. Blyth’s
singing of “ A Life on the Ocean Wave,” for which he obtained a well-
merited encore. Mrs. Huybers then recited from memory, with great
distinctness and most perfect intonation notwithstanding the strong wind,
an Oriental Tale, reminding us most strangely of the Thousand-and-one
Nights of our childhood. The “ Canadian Boat Song,” which came next,
was rather below par, but Mr. Bassano, whose memory seems to be
inexhaustible, while his volubility nearly rivals that of “ The Wonderful
Tongue” itself, made a great hit with his new version of “ Old King
Cole,” and in answer to the enthusiastic applause with which his per-
formance was greeted, gave yet another specimen of his powers. In our
schoolboy davs we remember we used to eat the pie-crust first, and leave
the plums till the last, and we suppose our musical friends must have
acted somewhat on the same principle, for “See our Oars with Feathered
Spray,” with which the concert was concluded, was certainly the gem of
the musical portion of the performances, leaving very little indeed to be
desired.
Later in the evening we were awakened from a peaceful snooze by the
sound of loud and repeated applause, and on inquiry found that the


promenaders on deck were thus expressing their thanks for the kindness
of one of the ladies who had just given them a song or two by moonlight.
We much regret the editorial eye should thus have been closed, for our
own as well as our readers’ sakes, for we understand the scene was an
exceedingly romantic one.
On the evening of the 11th the Lilliputian Troupe made a second
appearance. We could not speak very favourably of their first perform-
ance; but this was not owing to bad acting, but rather to certain
unfortunate circumstances over which the members of the troupe had
really no control. On this occasion the Charade — The Unlucky Wig
was acted, not in the teeth of a strong breeze, but below, on the Main
Hatch, and we are delighted to say that the whole affair was a perfect
success. Miss Mayne was a dignified and excellent materfamilias, while
Mr. Johnnie Huybers played his part with humour and an intelligent
appreciation of the position. His delivery of the passage in which Jack
was asked to “ take the shop” was capital. The little lady, Miss Katie-
Edeson, who acted as the bride, was in every respect satisfactory,
while Mr. Boissier did the embarrassed husband extremely well, though
the moustache was still a little troublesome. Our praise may seem mono-
tonous, but we must express our great admiration of Mr. Frank Huyber’s
acting, and also of Master Willie Mayne’s. The emphasis and delivery of
these young gentlemen were exceedingly intelligent, while the latter’s song
enlivened the Charade considerably. What shall we say of Spratt (Miss Edith
Huybers)? she is beyond all criticism. Perfection is no word for this
talented young lady. She was certainly both “ firm and attached” in the
interests of her young mistress. The remaining members of the troupe
had no very prominent parts to perform. The entertainment concluded
with a wild impromptu dance, which was evidently inspired by the strain
of Mr. Blyth’s violin. We have to express very hearty thanks to this
gentleman, whose kindness in playing added greatly to the success of the
Charade. As our line on this occasion is pure and simple yet well-merited
praise, we must not omit to mention that much of the troupe’s success was
owing to the constant help received from Mrs. Allin during the rehearsals.
The Unlucky Wig was followed, after rather a prolonged interval, by
The Slip between the Cup and the Lip , which partook of the nature
both of a charade and a theatrical. The piece, as a whole, went very
smoothly. The daughters will forgive us if we confine ourselves to the-
remark that the opening tableau was a very pretty one, and that the
acting of their talented mother was exceedingly good. Perhaps there was
a tendency to overdo the part of the Widow Demster , but notwithstanding,
much of the by-play was excellent. Dr. Turner and Mr. Dakin were very
spirited in their efforts, the former propounding his jokes and handling
his cigar with a highly comical solemnity. We hope to see these ladies-
and gentlemen appear on the stage again in a piece of greater pretensions.
On Monday, the 15th, the weather having become so much cooler, the
usual Monday Concert was again given in the saloon. We were sorry that
no glee was included in the programme, for personally we have rather
The Sohraon Occasional.


a weakness for glees, and we hope our kind friends will try to give us a
specimen on another occasion. But, glee or no glee, there is no doubt
that this Concert was a success. To begin with, we had a short melody,
played with exquisite taste , and feeling by Mr. Wedmore, who we hope
will very soon give us another proof of his metal. We need hardly say
that the new-comer was received by the audience with the most cordial
and well-merited applause. “ Home to our Mountains” was very nicely
rendered by Miss Jardine and Mr. Blyth, and the former was again heard
to great effect in “ Robin Adair.” Miss Jardine has a powerful voice, and
is always commendable for the zeal and earnestness with which she throws
herself into her part, but her singing this evening showed a very much
greater command both of voice and manner than on any previous occasion.
The aim of a vocal artiste should be absolute self-control both of voice and
person; she should be simple, yet natural in her simplicity. We con-
gratulate Miss Jardine on her marked improvement in this direction.
Mr. Dakin’s good voice was, we think, rather thrown away on such an
inane subject as “Joshua,” but a good-natured audience, thinking rather
of the singer than the song, gave both a recall. Mr. Warded gave a
reading of Ingoldsby’s well-known “Little Vulgar Boy,” which struck us
as being rather a tame and hurried. “Tell me, Mary, how to Woo
Thee,” was sung by Mr. Blyth in most admirable style. Such a deep,
rich voice as this gentleman possesses we don’t often hear, and we really
can’t think how we should get on on board the “ Sobraon” without his
kind assistance, at once so ready and so effective. Mr. Bassano secured
an encore by his humorous singing of “ Lord Lovelland, in reply to a
very general request, gave us again his version of “ King Cole.” The
singing of “ The Wreath” by Mrs. Elmslie, Mrs. M‘Gee, and Dr. Turner,
was a real treat. This and Mr. Blyth’s “ Tell me, Mary” were, we think,
the gems of the Concert, and we hardly know which the most to admire—
the sweetness and the general correctness of the one, or the vigour and
richness of tone of the other. A recall was a matter of course, and in
response we had a rendering of “ Children’s Voices,” which was so
popular on a former occasion. Mrs. Huybers and Mr. Edeson both gave
valuable assistance in the accompaniments; and to them, as well as to all
the other performers, we tender our most hearty thanks for what was, in
our opinion, the most successful entertainment of the kind we have yet
had. We congratulate the Musical Committee on their good fortune
in having secured the assistance of two such useful men as Mr. Blyth and
Mr. Wedmore.
On the 18th the “Sobraon” dramatic company gave us the long-
expected comedy Perfection. The house was crowded, and the reception
of the piece most enthusiastic. The performance, as a whole, was, for a
first representation very creditable to all concerned. Mr. Slater looked
the part of Sir Laurence perfectly, and his conception of the crusty old
bachelor was good. Perhaps in one point he imitated real life a little too
olosely. Old bachelor uncles, as we know to our cost, are often very
deficient in memory, but we could have pardoned Mr. Slater if in this
particular his representation of the character had been less faithful.
Miss Jardine as Kate O'Brien , and Mr. C. Bond as Charles Paragon , had
30
The Sobraon Occasional.


evidently devoted much care and attention to their parts, but were both
we thought a little deficient in humour. Mrs. M‘Gee made a most
charming Susan , and both looked and acted the part most admirably ;
while the make-up, gestures, attitudes, and command of features of Mr.
Tuke as Sam, were simply “perfection,” and what can we say more?
On Saturday evening, the 20th, the “ Christy Minstrels” gave an
excellent Concert on the Main Hatch. All the songs and choruses were
remarkably well rendered; but we think “ Where are my Schoolmates
Gone V’ sung with much taste and good feeling by Wilson, was perhaps
one of the best. “ Thinking of Home,” by Potter, “ Hard Times,” by
Israel, and the chorus to “Be Kind to Thy Father,” by the whole
company, were also excellent performances ; and Coveney wound up the
first part with a new song composed by himself, and called “The ‘Sobraon’
Local,” the words of which we subjoin :
THE ‘SOBRAON’ LOCAL.”
Air Whole Hog or None.”
Good evening, white folks, how d’ye do ? I’m glad to see you here ;
Sure it gives me great delight and fills my heart with cheer
To see your smiling faces in the “ Sobraon” music hall ;
If you’ll grant attention, why, I’ll try and please you all.
Cho. —Hold on, boys, I wish we’d lots of money,
Melbourne is a proper place, the folks they are so funny ;
For we all are bound to go to Melbourne, you must know,
For we all are bound to go to Melbourne, you must know,
The first time that I saw the Ship it was in London town,
Where the name of the “ Sobraon,” you know, is one of great renown;
The Captain is a proper one, of that there is no doubt,
I’m sure you’ll join me heartily, and give him a jolly shout.
While strolling about the other day upon the promenade,
I overheard a lady say that she was sore afraid
That we would not reach Melbourne, boys, in time for Christmas cheer;
Well, if we don’t, of course, you know, we will be happy here.
The other night, ’bout eight o’clock, a large shark there was seen,
But to bite at the pork that was thrown out he wasn’t quite so green ;
Next morning, why we nabbed him in a quiet sort of way,
And then we laid him on the deck, for show upon that day.
The sth day of November, the day we crossed the Line ;
Ah ! that’s a day I shan’t forget for a very long time ;
Although they didn’t shave us, as I was told that they would do,
I think they served us quite as bad by wetting us through and through.
And the 10th day of November, the year of seventy-five,
Is a day I well remember, ’twas the day poor doggy died ;
A nasty dose of medicine was mixed for him to take,
But they put in some turpentine, ’twas done by a mistake.
So now, kind friends, I think it’s time to finish up my song,
Or perhaps you might be thinking I’m detaining you too long ;
But if I’ve pleased you with my song I hope you won’t encore ,
But if you do its all the same, I can’t sing any more.
This was sung to the tune of the “ Whole Hog or Hone,” the chorus
being taken up with great spirit by the entire company, and received with
great applause by the audience, who evidently relished the allusions, and
insisted on a repetition of the last verse, which was given immediately,
31
The Sohraon Occasional.


with a neat impromptu alteration of the last line. After a short interval,
the second part was opened by the singing of the “ Marseillaise” by
Mdlle. Blandin, who, in response to a unanimous encore , repeated the last
verse with considerable increase of spirit. Coveney’s singing of “I am
so Volatile,” was full of go, and his change into the old man particularly
good. Then came a good burlesque grand scena, Israel and Alfred taking
the gentleman and lady’s part respectively. The “ get up” of the dusky
beauty, her back hair, and management both of fan and petticoat, were
all that could be desired, and the whole was carried out with plenty of
life. The Smoker Family then gave a grotesque, though somewhat noisy,
performance, and the proceedings were terminated by an excellent planta-
tion walk-round, in which parts were taken by all the performers, to
whom, and to their talented manager—Mr. Israel—our best thanks are
due for so excellent an evening’s amusement.
On the evening of Monday, the 22nd, we had another Concert in the
saloon, and our musical friends had prepared a most promising pro-
gramme. But, unfortunately, just at the last moment their plans were
deranged by the illness of Dr. Turner, who had undertaken to sing one of
the solos, “ Poor Dog Tray,” and also to take a part in the trio, “ Blow,
Gentle Gales,” with which the Concert w T as to be concluded. Even at this
short notice, however, they were equal to the emergency, for Mrs. Huybers
and Mrs. Elmslie at once came to the rescue, the former with a recitation
in place of “ Poor Dog Tray,” while the latter offered us a solo with
guitar accompaniment in lieu of the abandoned trio. The concert was
opened by an excellent duet on the pianoforte by Mrs. Huybers and Mrs.
Fraser, followed by Mr. Slater, who, in his singing of Adhemar’s
“ Brigand Calabrais,” showed us that there was “ life in the old dog yet.”
Mr. LeCren gave an excellent reading of Ingoldsby’s “ The Knight and
the Lady,” and Miss Jardine a fair rendering of Balfe’s “Daybreak.”
Then came a pianoforte solo by Mr. Wedmore, whose thoroughly artistic
execution of the andante from Haydn’s Surprise Symphony was, as it well
deserved to be, received with immense applause by the audience, and
unanimously encored , the call being responded to by Mr. Wedmore with
a repetition of the little melody played by him with such success at our
last saloon concert, which we understand is the composition of his brother.
Mrs. Huybers recited “ Ginevra” with wonderful clearness and expression,
and Mr. Blyth’s singing of “ Far, far upon the Sea,” was, as usual with
anything that gentleman undertakes, Al, and, as a matter of course,
encored. The song is a really good one, and we hope we may soon have
the pleasure of hearing it again. Mr, Blyth also took part with Miss
Jardine in the duet “ I Know a Bank,” which was very creditably sung by
both performers. Mrs. Elmslie, who had so kindly undertaken to give a
song in place of the final trio abandoned in consequence of Dr. Turner’s
illness, had, we regret to say, herself to retire through a slight indisposi-
tion, and so the Concert had to be somewhat abruptly terminated by the
singing of “ God Save the Queen.” We think it would have been better
had one of the Musical Committee announced to the audience the changes
they had been compelled to introduce after the publication of the pro-
grammes. All failings would have then been freely forgiven by an
32
Tlte Sohraon Occasional.


audience sympathising with their many and great disappointments. As
it was, and in spite of these misfortunes, they gave us a very creditable
performance, and to them, and all who took part in the Concert, our best
thanks are due for a very pleasant evening.
In another column our readers will find a letter from Mr. Edeson on
the subject of certain recent criticisms of ours. Of course we entirely
agree with the principle which Mr. Edeson lays down for the conduct and
criticism of amusements, and we are under the impression that we can
appeal both to the “ candid reader” and numerous “ indiscriminate critics”
for the confirmation of our opinion that we have carried on this journal in
the spirit of kindliness and good nature. Certainly we have not failed to
express considerable appreciation of the help which Mr. Edeson has so
kindly given in the matter of Concerts. As regards the criticism more
particularly in question, we are sorry that we cannot alter our
opinions as therein expressed. But we are glad to have an opportunity of
stating that we did not mean to reflect upon Mr. Edeson personally in
any way whatever, as we were fully aware of the difficulties he had
to encounter, and that our remarks were made rather as friendly
hints than hostile criticisms. Of Mr. Edeson’s ability and capacity
in musical matters there is and can be no question whatever, and we are
always ready to admit his enthusiasm and self-sacrifice in promoting the
general good. But he will pardon us if, while acknowledging our obliga-
tions to avoid anything at all offensive, we nevertheless claim the right of
expressing our opinions as frankly and plainly as he expresses his ; but,
as we said in our opening address, “ all in good nature.” We heartily
thank Mr. and Mrs. Edeson, and the ladies and gentlemen who have
acted along with them, for their goodness and self-denial in connexion
with the musical entertainments hitherto, and we are sorry that Mr.
Edeson should have given—what we think —a strained meaning to our
remarks, and should have thought it necessary, in consequence of them,
to retire from the position of conductor.
We have to add our regret that this trifling matter has induced one or
two people—and only one or two —to originate an agitation which must
have caused Mr. Edeson to utter the prayer —“ Save me from my friends.”
After all, it might be fair to remember that we, too, are taking a little
trouble in the way of contributing to the general amusement, and
certainly we have heard, and are constantly hearing, criticisms on our
efforts, which we think undeserved. The making of grievances is very
unprofitable work, and not always conducive to peace and good-fellowship
on board ship.
It is a melancholy duty to record that our hopes of calling at Tristan
D’Acunha were utterly disappointed. On the evening of Sunday last
the wind was blowing strong and fair, and it seemed as if land would be
sighted next morning, but early on Monday our pace began to lessen,
until it became certain that the island must be passed during night.
33
The Sobraon Occasional.


When we did pass it, the breeze had freshened considerably, but the
prospect of a few good runs was some slight consolation. We regret,
however, and that for many reasons, that the hoped-for call did not come
off. Fresh vegetables would have been acceptable, and fruit would have
added much to our happiness. Besides, our special reporter had ready a
learned article on the subject of the island, evolved we believe, purely out
of “ his own inner consciousness,” as the novelists say, and now feels very
much like the man whose joke has not been led up to.
ODDS AND ENDS.
What the Doctor Says. —lt is our melancholy duty to commence this
report by recording a death. Bob, one of our dogs, is dead ; he died on
the 10th inst. His disease and his doctor proved too much for him,
and hurried on his untimely end, for which both he and his master were
totally unprepared. It only remains to be said that his surviving sister
is now quite well. The health of the ship has not been as good as usual,
one of the Egyptian plagues having been going the round; while asthma,
bronchitis, and indigestion have each had a victim. There is so little
doing just now that even an attack of illness is embraced as an opportunity
for having a little variety. Our invalids are so well treated and have so
many nurses, that it is to be feared it will be no easy matter to make
them better, and that slight illnesses will become infectious.
W. Y. Turner, M. 8., C.M.
OUR PASSENGERS AGAIN.
1. My first is a friend of Moses ;
My second is an excavation ;
My whole , a renowned secretary.
2. My first is vanity ;
The Tories are my second ;
My whole a lady’s name.
8. My first is a disturber of the peace ;
My second a secluded valley ;
My whole is “ the vulgar little boy.”
4. My first we do in haste, but repent at leisure ;
My second is the cry of the unsatisfied ;
My whole a skilled musician.
5. My first of jam with pure delight
Will set the young folks grinning ;
My next I do at 4 each night;
My whole, a songstress winning.
Answers to Riddles for the Curious.—l, Ash. 2, Turner. 3, Bally. 4,
Carter. 5, Lake. 6, Bond. 7, Davy. 8, Heath. 9, Blyth. 10, Moffat. 11,
Wedmore. 12, O’Hea. 13, Slater.
34
The Sobraon Occasional.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of “ The Sohraon Occasional .”
Sir —In the last number of the Sohraon Occasional, I notice the
criticisms upon the Monday Concerts, particularly on Monday, 25th
October, and aS special reference was made to me, I beg to reply, that
when I acceded to the request that I should act as manager and con-
ductor of the Concerts, I did so solely with the idea of giving some little
pleasure and amusement to my fellow-passengers, looking upon them as
members of one community, where those who are willing to do their best
for the general amusement are appreciated for their good-will, rather than
their talent. I found I had not sufficient material to form a first-rate
chorus, but I did the best I could under the circumstances, as also did
those ladies and gentlemen who assisted me. Your criticism was there-
fore as unexpected as, I think, it was unnecessary; but, sir, I feel that it
was not only so ; but it was erroneous and unjust. I deny that the
Concert was less successful than the previous one; and I beg to inform
you that I bestowed a great amount of care and time upon the part-song,
“ The Maiden of the Fleur-de-Lis,” rehearsing it every day from Thurs-
day to Monday; and I maintain, and lam borne out by the opinion of
the passengers, that it was a very fair performance, and not such as you
imply. Feeling that I have not sufficient resources at my command to give
Concerts that will bear the test of indiscriminate criticism, I beg to say I
have resigned the conductorship, so that you will not again have occasion
to criticise the efforts of—Yours very truly,
J. R. Edeson.
MELBOURNE-THEN AND NOW.
When Mr. Anthony Trollope left the colonies, he bequeathed to the
Victorians, and more particularly to the people of Melbourne, a piece of
wholesome advice. “ Don’t blow,” said the great novelist, to whom the
praises of things colonial had possibly become monotonous. We don’t
know whether the legacy was thankfully received. We suspect that, like
all legacies of good advice, it was left unclaimed. For since Mr. Trollope’s
visit we have met with Melbourne men who grow pathetic over a com-
parison between their own city and any other in southern or northern
hemisphere. And after all, we must confess to great sympathy with this
feeling of pride and enthusiasm. Melbourne is a wonderful place; not
quite so big as London, perhaps, or so beautiful as Paris. Still, a very
fine place indeed. Like some of our youngsters on board, it has developed
marvellously for its age, and bids fair to fulfil in the future the promise of
its youth. We may as well confess at once that we don’t mean to take
the advice quoted above, any more than most people concerned mean to
take a somewhat similar one given by Mr. Punch several years ago ; and
in so doing we are only following the example of certain learned historians,
who, in probably a more dignified manner than that of the “ Man in the
Street” in Melbourne, have extolled the courage and energies of the Anglo-
Saxons as colonisers. Blowing, then, is our purpose—Melbourne, old and
new, our subject.
c 2
35
The Sohraon Occasional.


Not much more than a generation ago, and within the memory of men
still living, the now great colony of Victoria was a vast solitude —unin-
habited save by a few tribes of blacks, who wandered hither and thither
through the gum forests and over the plains, fulfilling a low enough
destiny in creation. No craft was to be seen on the Yarra'Yarra, save a
few bark canoes, while kangaroo and wallaby scampered over the site of
the great city, as if their possession were to be always undisturbed.
Nature held uninterrupted sway; rich pastures flourished and faded, all
unused; the sun sent forth his rays of benign influence, but there was no
hand to sow and reap, or to cultivate the bounteous mother-earth. The
great silence was unbroken.
About the beginning of the century a certain Lieutenant Murray dis-
covered Port Phillip, and twenty years afterwards Hume, the explorer,
made his way over from New South Wales. A few years more, and John
Batman appears upon the scene. This Batman—a colonist of Tasmania —
seems to have been a man with rather more than the usual amount of
English pluck and self-assertion. He had read Hume’s account of the
rich country on the other side of the Straits, and naturally wished, after
the manner of a true Anglo-Saxon, to become a possessor. Governors,
and lawyers, and red-tape, were almost too much for this worthy man;
until, taking the law into his own hand, he set sail from Tasmania to Port
Phillip, on a certain bright day in the year 1836, carrying in his small
schooner cattle, sheep, and provisions. He also bore with him a chart 'of
500,000 acres of land, including the site of Melbourne, and an elaborate
document, to which he wished the signature of any stray blacks who
might happen to turn up. He crossed the Straits in safety, and
encamped on the bank of the Yarra Yarra, where he seems to have been
welcomed by a black chief named Jaga Jaga. History says little of this
latter gentleman, but he seems to have been a person of great simplicity
of character. Mr. Batman modestly presented the agreement, Jaga Jaga
cheerfully signed it, and for the 500,000 acres of land probably received
some tobacco, a bottle of brandy, and his first lesson in writing. The
only awkward thing about the arrangement was that the land did not
belong to Jaga Jaga, but to the British Government. Batman, however,
received compensation in money, as did also a Mr. Fawkner and others,
who had not been far behind in the race for land. In this way was
formed a little community, which increased and prospered, and held on its
way by its own independent efforts. There was no convict-labour which
could be utilised, no Government money which could be spent. All that
was done was the result of individual energy, just as it has always been in
English colonisation. There was no system, no organisation. Things
were simply left “to take their swing.” We have seen a sketch of
Melbourne as it was in these early days. A humble place, truly, con-
sisting of a few wooden huts, two public-houses, and a building which
served for a church. There was a manuscript newspaper, moreover, edited
by Mr. Fawkner, though we question whether there could be found in the
township so excellent and indefatigable a publisher as Mr. Hurditch. In
a very short time the site of Melbourne was fixed upon, and laid out
according to its present plan. The news spread far and wide, and very
speedily the work of colonisation began in good earnest.
36
The Sohraon Occasional.


The scene changes. It is the year of grace, 1875. Over the waters of
Port Phillip, where forty years ago hardly a single sail had been seen, ride
the ships of every nation, bearing their merchandise to and from the ports
of the old world and the new. Along the Yarra Yarra glide the steamers
which sail between Melbourne and other colonial cities, which have risen
almost as rapidly as she. Where the few small wooden huts stood in
1838 there is now a great and fine city, which, to those who knew it in its
youth, seems to have grown up under the influence of the magician’s spell.
Most of our readers are already familiar with its present appearance ; the
rest, we hope, will soon be able to see for themselves. It is laid out on a
simple yet capital plan, by which the streets run parallel from east to west,
and similarly from north to south, the whole forming a square. Large
suburbs have grown up around, until the area covered by the whole group
of houses has become considerable —perhaps the largest space occupied by
any 200,000 inhabitants of any town in the world. But while these
200,000 people were gathering, much strange life was gone through.
Things prospered so rapidly that Victoria was independent enough to
demand separation from New South Wales, which was granted in 1851.
In the same year gold was found at Ballarat. The news spread like wild-
fire, and such a state of things occurred as we should hope for the good of
the community will not occur again. With difficulty law was executed
and order maintained. Thousands rushed to seek the precious metal—
some to be successful, most to have their hopes broken and disappointed.
When, at length, searching for gold became an organised system, such as it
now is, a new nation had been formed, and the work of colonisation began
to run in the usual grooves. Melbourne became more prosperous than
ever, until we now know it as the greatest city of the southern hemisphere.
We cannot call it beautiful, as Florence or Paris is beautiful. It still bears
traces of its rapid growth, for alongside of buildings with considerable
architectural pretensions may still be seen some of those humbler erections
which were “ rushed up” with a greater regard for the useful than the
elegant and graceful. And highly creditable and remarkable it is, that in
the midst of an eager pursuit of wealth the people of Melbourne were not
forgetful of interests higher than the merely material. A Free Public
Library has been built and filled with a goodly number of volumes. Near
it is a Picture Gallery—the nucleus of a future Royal Academy—in which
there are several famous pictures from the old world, as well as some good
specimens of colonial art. There are good public schools, moreover, and a
University, which is becoming more and more serviceable in promoting
higher education among the youth of the colony. There are various hand-
some churches, and a post-office of much architectural merit. An inte-
resting sight it is to stand upon the steps on mail-day, and watch the crowds
as they rush up to the boxes—clerks with loads of business letters, young
men and old sending home some account of how they are faring in the new
land. Some are sending remittances to the old folks at home, others are
telling the old story of disappointment and asking for further supplies —
for it is true of Melbourne, as of all other places, that fortunes are not
made there in a day, and nuggets not picked up in the streets. How the
people of this great colonial metropolis live, how they enjoy numerous
holidays, how they discuss politics and never grow weary, how proud they
37
The Sobraon Occasional.


are of their city and all things connected with it, our readers will find out
in due time. For the present, we can only hope that the wind may blow
strong, fair, and steady, so that old chum and new may reach their destina-
tion in time for the roast beef and plum pudding of a Melbourne Christmas
dinner.
A NIGHT OF TERROR.
lam going to write a simple story; only an episode in a woman’s life
not an unimportant one, however, for it tasked to the uttermost her self-
reliance and her courage.
She was quite a girl at the time my narrative begins, and kept house for
her father in one of the country districts of Tasmania. Civilised people
in those days gave Tasmanians a wide berth, and were shy of having any-
thing to say to them when they came across them in other parts of the
world. With reason, too ! The country townships (sleepy, peaceful, half-
deserted hamlets now-a-days) were mostly convict-stations in those early
times; boisterous, drunken places, where dismal scenes were enacted, all
the more dismal that they were hushed up and never came to light,
excepting through vague rumours or suppressed whispers. The settlers
sought them for protection when the natives were troublesome, or for the
purpose of obtaining stores when their own stock failed. But my heroine
lived a long way from one of these, on the banks of the Macquarie, with
her father and a younger brother called Abel. These three inhabited an
uncouth dwelling, built of wooden slabs with a shingle roof, which, like
other homesteads of the kind, was a disjointed establishment enough, with
its kitchen or cooking-hut twenty yards from the house, the men’s hut and
shearing-shed down by the river; to the right, to the left, in front and
behind, tall dreary gums, spectres of trees with lifeless, stiff branches out-
stretched, and gleaming trunks, bare and naked, shining in the moonlight.
The brother and sister were sitting together one evening in the rude
verandah in front of their house, watching some golden-tipped clouds
rising and rolling away from a bed of purple.
“ Abel,” Alice said, in a tone of voice that betrayed an uneasiness she
tried to hide, “ what was it M‘Coy said about the blacks when he came
over on Monday?”
“ Before father went away, do you mean ? Well, I’m not quite sure.
Something about ‘ mischief and black devils,’ that was all.”
“ Quite enough, too ! Where are all the rest to-night ?”
u Oh, Morris and his wife should be back by this time. They’ll be the
only people but ourselves on the place to-night, for Rowe took his gun and
said he would’nt be back till to-morrow, and Jack’s gone up with rations
to the shepherd’s hut, so he won’t turn up till Saturday, and Jim and
William are on the spree in the township.”
Having accounted for everybody, Abel went for some logs, and Alice
went in to make up their fire. It may have been the loneliness of their
situation, or some vague foreboding of impending danger may have hung
about her, but she could not shake off an unwonted feeling of depression
and uneasiness. As she knelt before the fire-place, her sleeves turned up
and her shapely white arms at work with the brush, there was a look of
38
The Sobraon Occasional.


terror in her soft brown eyes that seemed quite out of keeping with her
occupation, and her fingers trembled as she arranged the wood on the
hearth.
It was fast getting dark, and the rising wind, moaning as it swept down
the chimney, or blustering through the crevices of their ill-fitting door,
made a weird noise, which reminded her of a sobbing child. She shivered
as she lit the lamp and set it on the table. Abel came in with his logs,
and made fast the doors in front and behind. There was no passage, only
one long room, with wings on either side, which contained the bedrooms,
Abel went the round of these to make sure that all was safe. He put up
the shutters of. the front window (there were none on the one overlooking
the back), he heaped up the fire till the logs crackled, and the flame blazed
up brightly, and then looked round with an air of satisfaction at his work.
There was a low chair in the chimney-corner, which was his sister’s
favourite seat. When the evening was far advanced, and the red embers
lay glowing on the hearth, suddenly they both heard from outside a low,
prolonged howl, not a dog’s moan, or the wail of the wind ; only human
beings could produce that strange peculiar note, yet to their strained ears
there was something unearthly about it, too. It was followed by a succes-
sion of sharp hard taps on the window-pane at the back, resembling
the sound of sticks or stones rattling against it. Abel jumped up,
paralysed with fear, but Alice looked as if she were awaking from
a dream. As yet they could see nothing, for a blind covered the
window which was attacked ; they did not require to see, though, to know
that the blacks were upon them, and to remember, with that dreadful
distinctness with which one always does remember at such times, all
the tales of horror one has heard of mutilation and slaughter. But Alice
was in a measure prepared. The coming evil had cast its shadow before
it. I do not mean that she could have prophesied an attack of the
natives, or stated the shape which the evil would assume ; but she could
have told you, as she told herself a hundred times that day, that danger
and distress were at hand. So when the trial came, she made a strong
effort, and did not cry out or even fall upon her knees; there was no time
for that, but she snatched up the gun, with the powder and shot, from
the mantel-piece, and bidding Abel, in low-measured tones, get the pistol
from her father’s room, that they might each fire alternately from the
back-window, she proceeded to load, with much nerve and self-control.
Parley was useless; any attempt at it would have lost them irretrievably.
She could make no guess at the number of blacks, but she knew that in
attacking the back-window, they had found out the weak point of her
defence. When Abel returned with his pistol and ammunition she
stationed him on one side and herself on the other of the defenceless
window, and waited in silence. Presently a spear came crashing through
the glass, and there was a yell from without. She put the muzzle of her
gun through the hole thus made, and keeping as far back as she could,
fired. The blood rushed back into her heart as she heard the low snarling
moan which followed; she crouched down, however, and reloaded, while a
volley of spears came rattling on, smashing the panes, falling into the
room, and tearing the blinds to ribands. She signed quickly to Abel, who,
with ghastly face and head turned back, fired his pistol through the
39
The Sobraon Occasional,


shattered window. There was an instant’s lull, and then the desperate
encounter began. Perhaps it occupied an hour, perhaps only twenty
minutes. In seasons of great fear, when the dread of physical sufferings
almost overcomes the dread of death, and the mind is on the rack with
horror, we lose count of time, and the tardy minutes drag through their
allotted number of seconds, as if each were an eternity in itself. During
that space Alice and her brother loaded and fired in turn, amid the howls
and fierce imprecations of the blacks, who had now come to close quarters.
Some were wounded or dying, while the others, maddened with rage,
rushed fiercely to the charge after every shot, and were only unable to
make their way in through their window from the fact that they were
repulsed at every fresh attempt. But the odds against the attack were
too great. Alice was wounded in two places, and Abel, while drawing in
his hand too quickly, had cut it against the broken glass ; and, faint with
loss of blood, had already sunk on his knees. Forgetting everything else,
she clasped him to her breast, determined to defend him with her last gasp,
and, rather than leave him to the mercy of the savages outside, to put a
bullet through his head with her little remaining strength.
Even in this supreme moment I doubt whether she had time to think
of her own danger. lam sure she would have accepted death gladly to
save Abel. As he lay almost unconscious in her arms she made one
desperate appeal to heaven on his behalf, and then closed her eyes in
a sort of stupor. The yells of baffled rage outside had now given place
to fiendish howls of triumph, and she was aware that the blacks were
climbing up to the window-sill and battering through the frame. She
held him closer to her heart, when suddenly a shout reached hear ears—not
such a shout as is given by the blacks, but a hearty friendly shout —
followed by the cracking of a stock-whip, and a prolonged whistle of
dismay. Then a pistol-shot rang through the air, then another, and the
cry of the blacks changed its tone again. There was a panic among
them at this unexpected rescue, a crashing and a rushing from the window,
a picking up of wounded friends, a rout and a flight, all in the space of
three minutes or less. A man’s form appeared at the window-frame,
and scrambled over the sill into the room, while Alice, feeling that they
were saved, gave one great sob of relief, and turned her attention to
Abel. The stranger came forward to help her, “ Give me the boy,” he
said gently, “ and show me where to lay him. No one can hurt you
now; the blacks are all gone for good.” Alice, still weeping, gave up
her burden, and, rising with difficulty, led the way to her brother’s room,
where the poor boy was placed upon the bed. She leant against the wall,
scarcely able to stand, and watched the stranger bind up the cut hand
with a handkerchief. Then he dipped a towel in water, and by wetting
Abel’s face and head revived consciousness, and persuaded him to remain
quiet and try to sleep.
He then turned his attention to Alice. The poor girl had sunk to the
floor, and the blood was dribbling from a spear wound in her shoulder.
He tore a strip from the towel, and uncovering the wound with the
greatest tenderness, washed the blood away, and tied up the injured part
with the strip he had prepared for it. She was too weak to raise herself,
and was only half conscious as he lifted her from the ground; but she
40
The Sohraon Occasional.


found strength to crawl to her room. Once there she revived a little, and
having felt for the matches, lighted her candle, and set it on the dressing-
table. After she had buried her face in a basin of water, and washed out
the dreadful stains, she threw herself upon her bed, and, utterly overcome
by the fatigues of a “Night of Terror,” was soon enjoying a peaceful
sleep.
Alice was never called upon again to pass through such an ordeal as the
one I have described. Ido not think she was less womanly for having
been compelled in self-defence to shed human blood ] but it certainly
behoves all pioneers to take warning by her terrible adventure, and spare
their wives and daughters such experiences as cannot fail to darken their
future lives.
NEXT NUMBER.
“ Sobraon Occasional,” No. 4. —Contributors are requested to forward
papers, letters, &c., on or before December 7tb, to Mr. T. Hurditch, Saloon
Cabin, No. 2.
41
The Sohraon Occasional.


(Sobmoit ©ccasiomil
Saturday, December 11th, 1875.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
On the evening of Thursday, the 25th November, we had our usual
theatrical performance on the main-hatch. A theatre-loving public had
been looking forward with great interest to the appearance of the play—
His Own Enemy —and there were numerous predictions of a coming
success. And certainly, on this occasion, the prophets hit the mark, for
there can be only one opinion about the acting of Mrs. Fraser, and Messrs.
Wardell, Dakin, and Frank Huybers—that it was in almost every respect
excellent. Indeed, were we to adopt our usual standard of dramatic
criticism, we should say that it was wholly excellent; but that standard has
been fixed hitherto rather according to the circumstances in which we are
placed than according to any definite idea of what good acting ought to be.
In the present case the performance was, as a whole, so much better than
anything we had yet had, that we are compelled to adopt a very high
standard indeed, and we hope the actors will bear this in mind when
reading the following remarks.
The play opens with a long soliloquy, in which Mr. Frederick Whymper
(Mr. Wardell), who is dawdling over a late breakfast, gives vent to his
sentiments on the subject of matrimony. He has been married for a few
months, and begins to be bored by the “ billing and cooing” of a too fond
wife. He sighs, in fact, for the free bachelor life of old times, and does
not fail to say so in pretty strong terms. This soliloquy was a very trying
beginning, and Mr. Wardell hardly rose to the occasion. He did not
speak loudly enough, and his apparent nervousness made his utterances
somewhat hurried. Indeed, we may say once for all that the only weak
point in Mr. Wardell’s acting was his too rapid delivery, or a certain
“ mouthing” of his words, which occasionally obscured the meaning and
force of what he had to say ; otherwise he was simply first-rate. The
soliloquy over, Mrs. Whymper (Mrs. Fraser) appears upon the scene, and
a lively conversation follows between her and the discontented husband.
This seemed to us thoroughly good, with one single exception. Mrs.
Fraser acted capitally up to what was really the central point of the
scene. Her attempt to coax her husband into good humour, her surprise
at his notions of what was good ton in the world of fashion, and her effort
to make him feel just a little jealous, were all thoroughly fine; but surely
a Mrs Whymper in real life would have shown her feelings much more
strongly and passionately when it dawned upon her that she had lost, or
was likely to lose, her husband’s love. Mrs. Fraser spoke the passage—
“ Oh, mother, mother, I am alone in the world,” &c., in an almost care-
less monotone, although her look and manner betokened real distress.
Just a little more energy and passion would have made the scene faultless.


The bored husband, who scouts the idea of jealousy or any nonsense of
that kind, having suggested to his wife that her attentions need not be
wholly devoted to himself, but that a little harmless flirtation would be a
relief to them both, the right man appears upon the scene in a certain
Captain Douglas (Mr. Dakin). This gallant young soldier, who, though
Mr. Whymper does not know it, is the brother of Mrs. Whymper , is in a
difficult fix, in so far as he has shot his major in a duel, and has no money
wherewith to fly the country. After some manoeuvring on the part of
everybody, Captain Douglas is left alone with his sister. The interview
was given remarkably well, but again we think Mrs. Fraser missed the
true interpretation of such passages as —“ An outcast, a murderer ;oh !
Douglas, it is too horrible/’ &c. “ I thank heaven our mother is not here.”
The true ring of pathos was wanting, and there was no very serious
ciation of her brother’s most trying position, With such exceptions as
these, Mrs. Fraser’s acting was admirable throughout. Especially was it
good and spirited in the short passage at arms between her and her
husband, when she turned the tables upon him in most charming
fashion. This, in fact, was Mrs. Fraser’s greatest success. Mr.
Whymper re-appeared at an unlucky moment. Though not at all
jealous, he does not care that a dashing young officer should kiss
his wife just under his very eyes. The result is a quarrel, in which
Mr. Warded and Mr. Dakin showed great dramatic talent. Of
Mr. Wardell’s acting in this scene we cannot speak too highly.
He utterly lost his own personality in that of the jealous husband.
He stamped and raged furiously, while nothing could be finer than
his outburst of jealousy and passion as he threw himself down, the
very image of despair, after crying out —“ It is his life she would save,
even with her own. I wish I were dead.” Mr. Dakin, too, was faultless,
both here and in everything he had to do. His mixture of real concern
and military swagger—his tenderness towards the Queen Mob of olden
days—his forbearance towards the irate husband and the sense of the
mixed humour and difficulty of his position —left nothing to be desired.
He has what is a true characteristic of good acting—the power of sinking
his own individuality, and making rapid transitions from one state of
feeling to another.
The close of the play was a capital consummation to the whole thing.
Mr. Moleye (Mr. Frank Huybers)—a “downy cove” from Scotland Yard,
and a very comical character altogether—made us all roar with laughter.
In the end everything goes merry as a marriage-bell. Her Majesty does
not lose the bold Captain’s services, as the quarrelsome Major, who had
been shot at Boulogne, recovers just in the nick of time. Mr. Frederick
Whymper is cured of jealousy, and becomes a wiser and more devoted
husband, the fair Queen Mah thus enjoying the triumph she so well
deserved. When the curtain fell, the actors were recalled, and a highly-
delighted public showed its appreciation of the excellent acting by several
rounds of hearty applause.
Should this play be again presented on the stage of the “ Sobraon”
Theatre Royal, we are sure that the faults we have pointed out could very
easily be remedied. A little more feeling, a little less hurry, a more
pathetic tone in certain passages, would make Mrs. Fraser nearly perfect.
43
The Sohraon Occasional.


We are sure that Mr. Wardell would willingly shorten the opening
soliloquy, and could make his delivery more effective and distinct, now
that he knows the pitch of voice required; while Mr. Dakin and Mr.
Frank Huybers cannot do better than give a precise repetition of their
own excellent acting. We are aware that such a play as this involves con-
siderable trouble ; but we can assure the actors who have so kindly
worked for our amusement that their efforts were crowned with complete
success, and were most gratefully appreciated.
On Monday, November 29th, our kind musical friends gave us another
Concert in the saloon. Proceedings were commenced with the trio,
“ Blow, Gentle Gales,” in which Mrs, Elmslie, Mrs. M‘Gee, and Dr.
Turner took parts. We must confess that we were rather disappointed
with the execution of this piece. It certainly was not up to the standard
of their previous performances, though perhaps the admirable manner in
which the above-mentioned singers have always hitherto rendered their
part-songs had led us to expect too much of them. We did not care very
much for Mr. Blyth’s “ Emma Snow,” with violin accompaniment, and
think it would have been much more enjoyable if treated as a piece for
the violin, with pianoforte accompaniment. Blockley’s “ Only an Ivy
Leaf ” is a charming song, and assuredly lost none of its beauty when
entrusted to the sweet voice and quiet and graceful singing of Mrs.
Elmslie; and so thought the audience, who would not be satisfied till
Mrs. Elmslie had given them another song. The Bev. A. Moffat then
read “ King Robert of Sicily”—one of Longfellow’s wayside poems —in
most faultless style. Miss Jardine was not very successful in that old
favourite, Lindsay’s “ Bridgeand we thought Mr. Wedmore’s selection
was not a fortunate one, as the delicacy of expression requisite in such a
piece as the Adagio from Beethoven’s “ Moonlight Sonata” is rather thrown
away on so poor a pianoforte as ours, and is likely to be entirely lost
in so long a room as our saloon. The piece, nevertheless, was
played with much taste and feeling, while the execution was worthy,
to say the least, of a better instrument. There is, we are told,
but one step from the sublime to the ridiculous; and the transition
from the lovely Moonlight Sonata to the “ Cork Leg” did seem to us
almost a profanity. The latter, nevertheless, is of its kind a good enough
song, and was as usual recited rather than sung by Mr. Bassano with
great life and energy, and of course encored. u Little Footsteps,” which
was the last item on the programme, was excellently sung by Mr. Blyth,
but we think he would have been even more successful had he been
sufficiently familiar with the words to sing facing the audience. “ God
Save the Queen,” as usual, concluded the performances, which, while on
the whole rather inferior to those of previous concerts, were, we think, at
once creditable to all concerned in them, and productive of much pleasure
to the audience.
On Thursday evening, the 2nd inst., notwithstanding the heavy rolling
of the ship, which rendered it a matter of some difficulty to retain a
44
The Sobraon Occasional.


foot-hold of the stage, our dramatic company gave us some capital per-
formances in the Theatre Royal on the main-hatch. To begin with, there
was an excellent Charade in which Mdlles. E. Huybers and E. Mayne, and
Messrs. Frank Huybers and S. Edeson took parts, the word being
“ Nightingale.” Milton Campbell , the distracted young poet seeking
quiet for the incubation of a new poem, was excellently personated by
Mr. Frank Huybers, though we think the part was hardly the one in
which he would shine most. Miss Edith Huybers, both as the irate Mrs.
Higgs. and also as The Maid of the Inn , was simply faultless. Miss E.
Mayne in the part of Cousin Maud was scarcely sufficiently audible, and,
as we thought, rather deficient in spirit ; still, as a whole, her performance
was very fair. Mr. Sidney Edeson had but little to do, but that little was
very fairly done. The intervals between the acts were enlivened by the
kindness of Mrs. Edeson, who sang in her usual charming manner “ What
will you do, Love ?” and also Mr. Blyth, who gave us “ Emma Snow”
and another song, with violin accompaniments. The whole was an
unmistakeable success, and all the performers were called before the
curtain and most deservedly applauded. There can be no doubt as to the
dramatic talent we possess among our young folks. They tread so closely
on their seniors’ heels that the latter must look well to it if they wish to
preserve their supremacy.
After a short interval the curtain again rose on the first scene of
Whitebait at Greenwich. Two elderly people, Mr. Benjamin Buzzard (Mr.
LeCren) and Lucretia his sister (Mrs. Huybers), have each without the
knowledge of the other been married—the one to their servant Sally (Mrs.
Allin), the other to their lodger Mr. Glimmer (Mr. Carter), the cause of
this secrecy being the fact of a certain wealthy Aunt Simmons having
given out that if either of them married, all her money should go to the
single one. It turns out that each couple had also, unknown to the
other, adjourned after the ceremony to the same hotel, had dined in two
adjacent rooms, and had been attended by the same waiter. Sally is
dismissed by Miss Lucretia , while a man-servant, sent by Aunt Simmons
to take her place, turns out to be the identical waiter, John Small (Mr.
Tuke) who had served both the couples at the “ Crown and Sceptre,”
Greenwich. In the cross-purposes which arise between the different
characters —each trying to bribe or coax Small to secrecy, and in the
complete bewilderment of the latter, who in the multitude of guests has
quite forgotten their faces, and can’t for the life of him see what they are
driving at—lies the main interest of the piece, which is further complicated
by the fact that Small, like Japhet, is always in search of a father, and has
but the very slightest of clues to guide him in the search. Putting his
own construction on certain expressions of Buzzard's, he jumps to the
conclusion that he must be the long-sought parent, and hence ensues a
game of cross-purposes which serves to still farther complicate the
existing situation. In the end, all is explained; the two couples agree
that Aunt Simmons shall be kept in the dark as to their respective
marriages, and Small is left as far as ever from solving the mystery of his
paternity.
Mrs. Huybers played the part of Miss Lucretia Buzzard most
admirably. Her make-up, gestures, and attitudes were the old maiden
4 5
The Sobraon Occasional.


sister to the life, and her acting throughout, and especially we think in
the scene where she attempts to confide her situation to Small , was every-
thing that could be desired. The character of Benjamin Buzzard could
hardly have fallen into better hands than those of Mr. LeCren. Portly
in figure, and frank in manner, he took the part admirably, while his
powerful voice was capable of penetrating to the farthest corner of our
little theatre with the greatest ease. Nothing could be better than his
playing in the scene where he comes in hastily to discharge Small , and
finds to his horror that he is the waiter of the “ Crown and Sceptre,”
while his acting throughout the whole piece was as admirable as his
physical qualifications for the part. Mr. Tuke, though he has but little
flexibility of voice, had in Perfection shown us that in certain
characters he could act very well; but from his manner in that piece we
were inclined to fancy that his delineation of John Small might be a trifle
too broad ; we were, consequently, the more delighted by the complete
control exhibited by him in this part. Without missing any humorous
points, he never allowed himself to be carried by them into vulgarity either
of voice or gesture. His great defect, we think, was the want of fitting
transition, in voice and manner, from the servant to the affectionate son,
and general want of depth of feeling in the scene in which he imagines he
has discovered his father in Mr. Buzzard. With this exception, his
personation of the character was good, and the scene in which he makes
up to Miss Lucretia , could scarcely have been better done. The part of
Glimmer was well supported by Mr. Carter, who, we regret to say, was
suffering from severe indisposition, and in consequence, probably, was not
quite so audible as might have been desired. Mrs. Allin looked and
acted the part of Sally very fairly, though a little more variety both of
tones and gestures would have been an improvement. On the whole
we think we have great reason to be proud of the dramatic talent that
evidently exists among us. In His Own Enemy our theatrical friends
gave us a performance very far above the ordinary amateur level, and
both the Charade and the Farce of to-day were, we think, also of very
superior excellence, and quite sufficient of themselves to stamp our
theatricals on board as the great success they undoubtedly are.
On Monday evening, December 6th, the “ Sobraon” Variety Company
gave an entertainment on the main-hatch. Their manager’s plans had been
most sadly disarranged by the severe illness of Israel, their talented chef
d ’ orchestre, and other causes, as explained by Alfred, who, at the rise of the
curtain, begged the kindly indulgence of the audience. Perhaps it was in
consequence of these disappointments that there were no concerted pieces
in the programme, which, nevertheless, was of ample dimensions, com-
prising eleven solos for different members of the company, besides a couple
of recitations for Potter, whose “ Jealous Peterkin Peep” was, we thought,
particularly good. His song “ I guess you’ll be there,” was also very pleas-
ingly rendered. In u Old Brown’s Daughter,” which was sung with great
spirit, and vehemently applauded, Barney secured the honour of a recall.
The graceful singing of Mdlle. Blandin—especially in her second song—
was also much appreciated. Mr. Holyoak has a good tenor voice, and his
46
The Sobraon Occasional.


the & audience, and in response to the applause with which he was greeted,
he gave “ When I went bathing.” Later on, too, his “ Say a Kind Word
when you can” was also sung well. Coveney, whose lungs were evidently
in alarmingly robust health, also carried away the audience by the stento-
rian tones in which he sang, or rather shouted, “ Shabby Genteel, and in
reply gave us “ Fleet-street.” He also gave us the latest edition of the
“ Sobraon Local.” “On board the Kangaroo,” by Henry, was not a very
lively affair ] but there can be no mistake as to the success of Wilson s
“ Fifty Years Ago,” which certainly was the song of the The
make-up was simply perfection, and we think if it had not been for the
programme very few of the audience would have recognised in the bent
form, tottering gait, and quavering voice of the frosty-pated yet cheery
old singer, the presence of Mr, Weetch’s youthful assistant. God Save
the Queen” concluded the proceedings, which, we think, considering the
disappointments met with, reflected much credit on the manager and all
concerned, and w T e thank them, one and all, for their kindness in
providing us so good an evening’s amusement.
Since the cold weather set in, cabin suppers have become fashionable.
It was always the practice of a few festive spirits to do a quiet yarn, and
possibly a glass of grog, before turning in j but this idea gradually developed
into something more formidable. There have been birthday suppers and
theatrical suppers, suppers for the old, suppers for the young; ambitious
suppers, where speech and song were heard ’ modest suppers, where a little
chatting was donej substantial suppers, where eating was the main feature
and champagne flowed like water. But the supper of the voyage was that
which was given on Wednesday by the gentlemen to the ladies. This was
suggested, we believe, by Mr. LeCren, who is always ready to encourage
what is sociable. The arrangements were carried out by a small com-
mittee, and were, we believe, as satisfactory as such arrangements usually
are in this imperfect world. The proceedings began about half-past eight
o’clock, the first item on the programme being the sandwiches, which
disappeared only too rapidly. Then, like loyal Englishmen, we toasted
the Queen and the Royal family, after which Mr. Lake proposed the toast
of the evening—“ Our Guests, the Ladies” —in a very appropriate and
touching manner. Then came a variety of other toasts, which are too
numerous to mention. Unhappily, the state of the weather detained the
captain on deck, but the health of “ Captain and Mrs. Elmslie and the
Baby” was enthusiastically drunk. The Rev. A. Moffat spoke of the
Captain and his wife in very kindly and appreciative terms. The baby
was duly praised as the finest thing in babies which had ever appeared.
The reverend gentleman being a bachelor (and more’s the pity) could
hardly be expected to do this part of his toast sufficient justice, but he
did his best under the circumstances. The Captain was not present to
reply, but it was no bad response to know that he was on the poop
watching over the safety of our good ship. The proceedings were termi-
nated by “ God Save the Queen,” after the health of the chairman, Mr.
LeCren, had been proposed by the Rev. A. Moffat, who spoke of that
excellent gentleman’s kindliness and good-nature, and his readiness at all
times to promote good-fellowship. This toast was heartily responded to
47
The Sohraon Occasional.


by the ladies and gentlemen present. Daring the evening Mr. and Mrs.
Edeson, Mr. Blyth, Mr. Bassano, and Mr. Gaunter, enlivened the pro-
ceedings by various songs, &c. To them, and more particularly to Mr.
Edeson, we feel greatly indebted for their kindness.
LATEST ARRIVALS.
Our readers are aware that a small stranger has arrived in our midst, and
that one passenger more has been added to the lists. The representatives
of the press on board have seen the little lass, and beg to offer to Captain
and Mrs. Elmslie their sincere and respectful congratulations, with the
hearty wish that the new comer may prove a source of blessing and
happiness to both of them. There is the authority of the nurse and the
doctor for stating that the baby is a very fine one. Mrs. Elmslie’s
presence among us is much missed (though the youthful miss is occa-
sionally heard of), but we are very glad to learn that her recovery is going
on satisfactorily, and we sincerely hope that we may have the pleasure of
seeing her on deck before the end of the voyage.
DECEMBER 4th, 1875.
Born on the sea, and cradled on the deep,
Rock’d by the billows to her earliest sleep,
While wild Atlantic winds sang “ lullaby
A stowaway whom none have seen before,
A passenger who never left the shore,
This day has joined our little company.
A foundling on the ocean highway thrown,
She claims no earthly country for her own.
She understands no earthly nation’s speech ;
A changeling from our common home above,
Sent by our common Father in His love,
She claims the rights of sisterhood from each.
Wrapped in the all-forgetting sleep of birth,
Some angel bore her down from heaven to earth,
And placed her, slumbering, on a mother’s breast.
Now, scarce awakenened from that heavy trance,
’Midst unfamiliar sights her wandering glance
Strays here and there, and knows not where to rest.
Her little dimpled arms stretch feebly out,
Her pink-tipped fingers vaguely feel about,
And looking at them, one would almost say
That they were eking out the sight of eyes,
That, used to the pure light of Paradise,
Could hardly see in our dull earthly-day.
And now and then in those dumb questioning eyes,
A strange, bright, dreamy, far-off look will rise,
A smile of perfect happiness and love
As if, through all our gross surroundings here,
Some scatter’d echoes still could reach her ear
Of the sweet harmonies of heaven above.
Bless her, O God! and grant that through the strife
Of those few feverish years which we call life,
Such gleams from brighter worlds may often come
That she, remembering from whence she came,
May ever strive to keep her soul the same—
Spotless and pure as when she left her home.
Nemo.
48
The Sohraon Occasional.


A DREAM.
Was it a voice, or a dream, or a sigh of the wind through the gloaming
Came to my soul in its pain, soothing the sorrow to sleep i
Or was it thy spirit, mv darling, over the blue waters roaming,
Sought me, and found from afar, murmuring—“ Love, do not weep I
Why did you come to me, O my love ; were you sleeping or waking ?
How did you find me so far over the sorrowful seas 7 . . ,
Did your heart, in its loneliness, feel that my heart in its anguish, was breaking ?
Did the wings of some pitying dream waft you safe to me here on the breeze ?
I saw you not, dear, though I felt your presence around and about me,
Like a girdle of infinite calm, and your voice for a moment I heard,
Like the wail of a harp by the wind softly touched, thro’ the spell that enwound me.
In a language that souls understand, or the sweet weary song of a bird.
And over my soul there swept a measureless, infinite longing
To clasp you again to my heart, in spite of the years and of fate,
And I turned from the blaze of the sun, and saw where the shadows were thronging,
But you were not there—you were gone, and I wept, for X knew I must wait.
Ah! love, I have waited so long ! but the dawning followeth after
The darkness ; after the rain, the sunshine surely is sweet,
If never more upon earth, yet, weeping is changed into laughter
Somewhere beyond the clouds, and there at the last we shall meet.
Sea Foam.
ODDS AND ENDS.
What the Doctor Says.— The fortnight which has just closed has
been the most eventful of the voyage. Our cases have been not only
more numerous, but more interesting than any previously reported. On
the morning of the 4th inst. Mrs. Elmslie was safely delivered of a
daughter. Both mother and child are progressing favourably. Miss
Elmslie is in every respect a fine healthy child, displaying an amount of
health and bodily strength unusual in young infants. Three surgical
cases have occurred, the result of accidents; one, a fall from the
rigging, the others caused by rough games. While playing at “ Jump,
my little nagtail,” one of the sailors, who has shown himself most for-
ward in all games, fell, and sustained a Pott’s fracture of his left leg.
He lies with his leg in a splint, and is doing well. He declares this is
the worst punishment he has ever had. One of the middies got an ugly
cut with a knife on the back of his right wrist: it has been doing well, but
he has not yet recovered the use of his hand. Taylor, one of the
apprentices, fell off the cross-jack-yard into one of the boats on the lee
side, thus narrowly escaping falling overboard ; he sustained a severe scalp
wound, the culvarium being exposed. The integuments were replaced and
the wound dressed. He is doing well, and no symptoms of brain
mischief have appeared. The recent cold weather has been rather severe
upon some of our number, and we have prescribed for colds, coughs, and
chilblains. The damp and wet have caused bronchitis, asthma, rheuma-
tism, pleurisy, and oczema. On the whole, our sick-list is in a very
promising condition ; although it is longer than it has hitherto been, none
of the cases are of a serious character.
W. Y. Turner, M. 8., C.M.
49
The Sobraon Occasional.


CHARADES,
1. lam Two Words of Six and Eight Letters.
My 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, is a man’s Christian name ;
My 4,5, 6,7, is a Roman Catholic ceremony ;
My 7,8, 9, 10, is part of a stair ;
My 11, 12, 13, is a bird ;
My 14 is the sign of the plural number ;
My whole is a ship we all know.
2. I am Two Words of Four and Seven Letters.
My 1,2, 3,4, is a young lady ;
My 5,6, 7,8, are a trees ;
My 9, 10, 11, is the reverse of the truth ;
My whole is one in whom we are all interested.
3. I am Two Words of Seven Letters each.
My 1,2, 3,4, 14, we get at breakfast;
My 4,5, 6,7, is a kind of fish ;
My 8,9, 10, is a preposition ;
My 11, 12, 13, is an article of dress ;
My whole is what we now experience.
4. I am Two Words of Seven and Ten Letters.
My 1,2, 3, is an expression of deep feeling ;
My 3,5, 4, we visit once a-week ;
My 6,7, is a preposition;
My 8,9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, is a cause ;
My 16 is a letter and a word ;
My 17, 13, 14, 15, is a wild beast of prey ;
My whole is a wicked newspaper.
5, Whole, lam an animal and a mammal;
Behead me, and I am well and hearty;
Behead me again, and I am a favourite drink.
WORD SQUARES.
A Heavenly Body;
The Fleetest of the Fleet; A Fop ;
Our Response in Prayer ; A Title ;
A Parting we all dislike. To put to rest.
A Son of Adam ; What Satan dislikes ;
An Ancient God;
A kind of Grain ;
A Joint of the Body.
We here give the results of the Chess and Cribbage Tournaments that
have been played during the voyage :
CHESS.
Ist Round. —Mrs. Elmslie beat Dr. Turner, Mr. C. Bond beat Mr. Ash, Mr.
Heath beat Mr. Wedmore, Mr. Gaunter beat Mr. Bassano, Mr. LeCren beat Mrs.
M‘Gee, Mr. Dakin beat Mr. R. Bond.
2nd Round, —Mr. Bond beat Mr. LeCren, Mr. Dakin beat Mr. Gaunter, Mr.
Heath beat Mrs. Elmslie.
3rd Round. —Mr. Heath beat Mr. C. Bond and Mr. Dakin, and won the tourna-
ment.
50
The Sobraon Occasional.


CRIBBAGE.
Ist Round—Mr. LeCren beat Mr. Millidge, Mr. C. Bond beat Mr. Take, Mrs.
Allin beat Mr. Heath, Mr. Slater beat Mr. Wardell; Mr. Bassano beat Mr. Carter,
Miss Huybers beat Mr. Blyth.
2nd Round.—Mr. Allin beat Miss Huybers ; Mr. C. Bond beat Mr. Bassano,
Mr, LeCren beat Mr. Slater.
3rd Round.—Mr. LeCren beat Mrs. Allin and Mr. C. Bond, and won the
tournament.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES AND ENIGMA IN LAST NUMBER.
1, Hurditch. 2, Allin. 3, Wardell. 4, Wedmore. 5, Jardine.
A NARROW ESCAPE.
Although I love not sea-life, and cannot understand any man choosing
it as a profession, I have nevertheless been doomed at different periods of
rather a long existence to traverse the ocean in various directions. Con-
nected with one of these passages, the following episode occurs to my
remembrance: —
“ I mind me, when I was a lad,” as your worthy correspondent, Mr.
Scroop, would say, “ that I was sent from one of our colonial capitals to
another at the close of the Christmas holidays, when people were returning
from their expeditions of pleasure. My passage was to occupy a couple
of days on board our best steamer, commanded by a first-class captain,
whose sole avocation consisted in making the weekly transit between the
two cities, and who was well known to most of the people of standing in
both places. On the present occasion the number of the passengers was
larger than usual. An operatic troupe then making the tour of the
colonies were embarking for the same port as ourselves, and, having been
successful in the thriving spot they were leaving, were consequently in
good spirits, and disposed to enjoy their trip, provided it was not a rough
one. So, on a fine afternoon, every one stepped on board on apparently
good terms with themselves and each other. The wharf was soon cleared,
and we steamed down a beautiful outlet before we reached the open sea.
Being no novice (even at that age) ray attention was not arrested by the
numerous details which had absorbed it on former occasions ; therefore I
addressed myself to the task of taking note of my fellow-travellers, with
the view of amusing myself by a study of their manners and appearance.
So I walked about and passed them in review as I crossed and re-crossed
them on the deck. I was particularly impressed by the theatricals, espe-
cially the ladies, who had a free-and-easy dash about them that I really
thought very fine; also, I fancied that their eyes were very handsome or
very effective. I have seen many such since then, and my opinions are
modified.
Soon the tea-bell rang, and there was a general move downwards. Most
of the passengers had taken their seats, and I was about to follow their
example and appropriate the first vacant place, when I perceived standing
outside a cabin-door a young lady about seventeen years of age and a hand-
some, intelligent-looking boy about ten, whose hand was clasped in hers.
They seemed to be alone, and rightly divining that the young lady might
d 2
51
The Sobraon Occasional.


find some difficulty in securing a seat for herself and her little companion,
I begged her to place herself in the one I was about to take, and requesting
a portly gentleman (I think it was the first tenor) to allow us a little more
room, I managed to fit the young lad along with myself (a mere cornstalk
at this time) into the somewhat crowded seat. Then, with a rather
common-place remark about the pleasantness of a tight fit in some cases, I
proceeded to help my two companions to the fare placed before us, and
while thus engaged my remark was answered by a witty good-humoured
rejoinder from the young lady which set us all three into a giggle, for were
we not all young then 1
During tea we exchanged communications relative to ourselves and our
belongings. She was in charge of her young brother, with whom she had
been spending the Christmas holidays at the house of an old friend of
their father, where, according to the joyous version of both the young
people, they had enjoyed life as the young and healthy alone can enjoy it.
There had been riding and boating and bathing, and Mabel (I soon learned
the name of his sister from the little lad who so addressed her) had been
to her first ball, at recalling which there was so much mirth and mischief
in her eyes that I could not help fancying that the first ball had entailed
the first offer (no wonder if it had); but evidently the impression left on
the merry maiden was as of a good joke wherewith to amuse her mother.
How often that mother’s name was mentioned by the two, and how they
seemed to long to meet her!
The meal over, we sat and chatted about indifferent subjects for half an
hour, till the young girl, who seemed to exercise a maternal surveillance
over her companion, reminded him that it would be well to turn in before
it got dark and the sea became rough. The hint was immediately taken,
and the two wished me “ Good night.” The following morning dawned
beautiful and bright, as mornings do in Australian climes. I looked
eagerly for my fellow-travellers, but they did not appear at breakfast, and
it was only later in the day that I had the pleasure of discovering the
young lady seated on a camp-stool near the helmsman, while the boy,
evidently a little unpleasantly affected by the movement of the vessel,
sat at her feet on a cushion, and rested his head on her lap. It was a
charming picture, and I was not the only person who thought so. Many
of the passengers who were parading the deck, for the weather was fine,
extended their perambulations to the far end of the quarter-deck, to cast
an admiring glance at the young lady, and to mutter some half-audible
comment on the luck of the little fellow who was provided with so
pleasant a resting-place. By virtue of the half-formed acquaintance at the
tea-table on the previous evening, I ventured to seat myself near the young
lady, in the hope of renewing our former chat. As the afternoon wore on
I gathered from remarks passing around me that the captain had taken a
contrary course, the wind being favourable in that direction, and that we
should reach our destination by rounding the other side of the island we
were coasting. “All very well,” said an elderly gentleman, who was
evidently a constant passenger, “it will save us a few hours; but I wonder
what makes him (alluding to the captain) hug the shore after this
fashion; surely he knows the ugly bit we come to in a few hours, at the
rocks round W.’s land.” Then to the captain, who made his appearance
52
The Sobraon Occasional.


shortly after— 1 “ I say, old fellow, don’t you think we are rather near the
coast ? I’ve been this way before, but never had such a close look at it;
and like it none the better for seeing it the clearer.” Now, it is a known
fact that the captains of steamers, like other great authorities, brook not
the interference of the uninitiated ; so all the answer our worthy fellow-
traveller obtained from his friend was a rather sarcastic smile accompanying
a few words, of which I did not catch the import. However, as the
dignitary moved away, the other continued —“ I might as well have held
my tongue, although I consider it right to have spoken. ’ u Besides, he
said, turning to his neighbour—“ if anything should happen here, we all
know that destruction would be inevitable ; not a soul could escape. He
could not reckon on his boats ; those three cockle-shells could not carry a
handful of us in any sea.” “ I suppose he knows what he’s about,”
rejoined the person addressed; “at least we are bound to believe so from
his many years’ experience and known ability.” During these remarks
the young lady had suspended her colloquy with me. We did not allude
to the subject, but each noted it tacitly, and remembered it afterwards.
As the evening approached the wind freshened, and the motion
of the steamer becoming stronger, and the little boy (notwithstanding his
comfortable position) paler, the watchful sister deemed it advisable to get
him into his berth; and wishing me “ Good night” they retired to rest, long-
ing much for the morrow. Very soon after I turned in myself, but was at
first unsuccessful in obtaining any rest. The majority of the gentlemen
would sit drinking and card-playing in the saloon, and some were very
noisy, none the less so when one of the theatrical troupe volunteered a
song, which was vociferously encored; then some one else sang another,
but it was not lively, and during its rather monotonous refrain, my
ideas became confused, and in a kind of half persuasion that I was
amusing myself with the children’s garden-swing at home I fell asleep, I
suppose, for I remember nothing more.
Suddenly a shock more violent than I ever experienced before or since,
and I was awake, not in my berth, but on the floor, having been pretty
smartly pitched against the lower part of the opposite berth, out
of which fell almost simultaneously a fellow-passenger, with a
half-suppressed oath by way of ejaculation; then a horrible grating
and shaking, as though we were being dragged along a metal road
on huge iron gates, with jolts which sent us bobbing on the
cabin floor like parched peas in a pan ; then the whole concern (vessel
I should say) heeled over with a mighty swoop, placing the cabin-
door almost beneath our feet, while the port-hole gave us a distinct, but
not a pleasant, view of the moon, with the clouds chasing each other
rapidly, as though a brisk breeze swept them along. We are wrecked,
thought I, and the disregarded warning of the elder passenger rushed back
to my mind, while there rose to my lips a just and indignant anathema
upon the man who could thus blindly, rashly, and cruelly risk so many
lives confided to his charge. Meanwhile the unlucky vessel slowly
changed her position, as the boiling surge struck and foamed about her,
and I could now plainly behold the breakers whirling and eddying about
us. I got out of my cabin the best way I could—the others had already
preceded me—and mounting the stairs, which were again swaying to the
53
The Sobraon Occasional.


opposite side, I found myself in the midst of the terrified half-dressed
group of passengers. The faces of the men were awful to behold. Some
of the women screamed woefully, others had lost consciousness from terror
at the scene before them. It was a dreadful moment, but the captain was
there, and with his whole attention turned to the exigent requirements of
the case, he quietly ordered two of the boats to be lowered, most of the
passengers crowding to take immediate advantage of this operation. He
then gave the necessary directions for reversing the engines (though happily
we had been going only half-speed, to which precaution alone the success
of his efforts may be ascribed.) After a few minutes of skilful manoeuv-
ring, and the application of the means suggested by his well-known capa-
city and cool head, the steamer was rescued from the imminent peril in
which she stood, and we were saved !
During those few minutes, and while the people had rushed to the side
of the steamer, to be in readiness for the boats, I caught sight of a female
figure (barefooted, with long, uncoiled hair, and a scarlet cloak thrown
over the white night-dress) standing on the top of the staircase, and then
retreating after a hasty glance around; but not before I had caught the
whole expression of mingled despair and resignation on the pale face
which haunted me long afterwards. It was my newly-made friend, and
my first impulse on being assured of our safety was to go down and
re-assure her. Hastily descending into the saloon, I made for the cabin
which I knew belonged to Mabel and her brother. The door, which I
endeavoured to push open, got jammed by something behind it, and I
could not be heard in the general confusion. As I pushed more vigorously
I caught sight of the young girl seated on a low sofa, which had served
for the little boy’s bed. She held him in her lap, her arras encircling
the little form that shook with spasmodic terror. “Oh ! Mabel, dear
Mabel,” I heard him say; “ one little prayer like those you say every
night.” “ Not now, love, not now, Leslie ; we must act, not pray, at this
moment; we shall not be ready for the boats.” “Oh ! Mabel, tell me
the truth. We must die so young. Oh ! where shall we be in five
minutes ?” “ Leslie, darling, try not to shake so. I can scarcely hold
you. (Here she kissed him fervently.) Look, I have nearly got your
things on. Sit on the bed while I look for the other boot,” she continued,
as she placed the half-fainting lad on the couch, and resolutely groped
under it for the missing article. Another vigorous push, and I succeeded
in getting my head within the resisting door. “We are saved, we are
saved, thank God T “ Oh, thank God !” re-echoed the two innocents, as
they clasped each other in one long embrace, and extended a hand each to
me, which I shook, Heaven knows how heartily.
The general agitation subsided, and, peace restored, we proceeded
onwards, and on the following morning I had the satisfaction of witness-
ing the delightful meeting and joyous greeting between my new acquaint-
ances and their parents and younger brothers and sisters. And then only
the brave heart, so calm in peril, so nobly veiling her own terror, for the
sake of one so dear to her, then only the brave heart gave way, and
amid the tender greetings and warm embraces of parental fondness,
Mabel sobbed aloud as she related the night’s adventure, and, mastering
her emotion with some effort, she turned and gracefully introduced me to
her family as the friend who had kindly brought her the first news o£
our narrow escape. Sphinx.
54
The Sobraon Occasional.


SCRAPS CONCERNING HOBART TOWN.
An erewhile dissipated major, writing from Hobart Town to his friend in
England, described it somewhat shortly as a God-forsaken hole. The
major, speaking from his own particular point of view, had certainly some
grounds for his remark. A place in which you may fire straight down the
principal street six times in succession at any hour of the day or night,
with about as much chance of hitting anything as when you expend your
cartridges on the confiding Cape pigeons over a ship’s stern; a place
which boasts of one club, one hotel, one theatre (seldom open), and one
Hansom cab, could hardly, according to the major’s standard, be considered
as very highly-favoured. Whether, according to other standards than the
major’s, the fact is worth taking into consideration, that Hobart Town,
overshadowed by a grand, white-topped mountain, surrounded by scraggy
hills and splendid cliffs, washed by the waters of a bay as blue as the
Mediterranean, and breathing under its brilliant sky an atmosphere redo-
lent of fruit and flowers, of health and peace, may skill bear the impress
of the Creator’s smile, is one which can only be decided after you have
duly learned to know the place as it now exists.
In order to do this imagine yourself a tourist, in easy circumstances
(this is within the bounds of every one’s imagination), and suppose your-
self to be standing on the deck of the s.s. “ Southern Cross,” looking for
the first time on Tasmanian scenery as your steamer makes her way at
half-speed up to the wharf of Hobart Town. Of course you have chosen
the summer months as the time for your excursion, and as this is to be a
trip which leaves nothing to be desired, you must further suppose you are
arriving in the early morning towards the end of December. There still
remains the freshness of the cool night breeze in the air, and ever so fine
a mist refines and softens the harsh outlines of the dark hills which enfold
the little town. You can hardly see the dazzling clearness of the bright
blue sky overhead, but as you round the point which hides the town from
view, you can see great patches of scarlet geranium, gardens in which vegeta-
tion seems to have become quite rampant, modest houses wrapped up and
lost in the surrounding green, and, towering over all, the beautiful purple
mountain which takes just so much hold of every Tasmanian heart as to
be remembered with something like home-sickness when Hobart Town and
all its associations are forgotten.
Though the sun has barely risen you see a throng of people congregated
on the wharf. Gaze on them well! you will never see so large a crowd in
Hobart Town again—that is to say, not until the steamer you are in returns
from Melbourne a fortnight hence. In fact, the departure and arrival of
this same Melbourne steamer is the one sensational event of the week,
insomuch that those who have neither friends nor acquaintances on board
gather with praiseworthy perseverance to shout hoarsely in concert as the
“ Southern Cross” sails away or sails back. There are some whalers lying
at the wharf, some fishing-smacks, a tea-ship from China ; possibly (but
this is by no means certain) a London vessel—all these in a harbour which
might shelter the greatest fleet in the world, and up which the “ Great
Eastern” might steam safely in stately majesty.
As an unprotected tourist you are laid violent hands upon on your
55
The Sobraon Occasional.


arrival by a cabman (all drivers are cabmen in Hobart Town), and handed
into an ancient carriage, fusty but comfortable, drawn by two sleepy horses.
You think the town has been maligned at first, for there is an ingenious
contrivance about its disposition which has brought all its best points to
the front. It has one public square—this is the first object you see. One
museum—this is the second. One town hall—this is the third. One
post-office—this is the fourth. One cathedral —what is built of this is the
fifth. One bank—this is the sixth. Now you have seen all the imposing
public buildings of Hobart Town in a lump.
Landed at your hotel—the proprietor of which was, in ancient times,
flagellator to the convicts in general, and is now flagellator to his wife in
particular—we will suppose you installed in your room. This hotel,
adjoining which is the club, of which you cannot fail to be an honorary
member during your stay, is in what ought to be the business centre of
the town—if there were any business to have a centre at all. All the way
down the street the people are taking down their shutters with a sort of
nonchalance which would lead you to suppose they were doing it for the joke
of the thing, and that they had not made up their minds whether to put
them up again or not. At nine o’clock a dray passes your window. The
serious business of life has now begun. By-and-bye you make up your
mind to have a look round. Be prepared to encounter the curious and
critical eye of every inhabitant of the place. You bear the mark of the
stranger. As, however, strangers from all parts of the world throng to
Tasmania during the summer months, do not expect to be looked at with
the rapture which your appearance would excite in the month of June.
And now, having taken your look round, make up your mind that all
possible delights await you. Are you a dancing man, or a climbing man,
or a man of a scientific turn of mind ? You may waltz till daybreak, and
your partner of the night before will hop with you on the morrow over
great tracts of rocky boulders, and lead you through scrub and tangle to
the very pinnacle of the mountain before you, from which you may look
down upon ranges of sombre-coloured hills stretching away into the ocean
at your feet. Sparsely sprinkling them here and there you will see clumps
of houses and village spires, and the tortuous windings of the River
Derwent gleaming like a silver thread twisted among the dark bush it
waters. But abstain from comparisons with regard to its trees. You have
left a land of culture, where oaks and elms are like gracefully-clad magnates
in the vegetable world. The uncouth gum, rearing its inhospitable head
high into the air, with strips of tattered bark clinging to its bare trunk,
like the rags which envelope a gaunt beggar, is a type of the crudeness of
its parent soil. But the trees belie the spirit of the inhabitants. You
will find open house among all classes. I cannot enter into the details of
the history of Tasmania, which you may find elsewhere. If you want to
learn useful facts as to her government and politics, her wheat and her
wool, her oil and her society, I refer you to Mr. Trollope.
There are, however, one or two items I may add to his stock of informa-
tion. He rates the population of Hobart Town at 20,000 souls. I don’t
know whether he mentioned that of these there are three eligible bachelors,
two of them not being marrying men. With reference to the spinsters I
shall say nothing. Likewise he omitted to state that, as a rule, all children
56
The Sohraon Occasional.


born in Hobart Town are girls ; furthermore, that every male who reaches
years of discretion is draughted off to Melbourne or New Zealand. These
small items may be useful as throwing light upon some of the reasons why
men-of-wars-men, unmarried men in particular, and strangers generally, are
so enthusiastic about their reception and entertainment in Tasmania. In
drawing these haphazard remarks to a close, I would strongly advise any
one who cares for charming scenery, delightful people, world-renowned
fruit, beer, and cheese, dancing, picnicing, and oblivion for the time being
of all the ills of life, to start for Hobart Town at the earliest opportunity,
and judge for himself.
NEXT NUMBER.
Going at an alarming sacrifice ! ! ! This is positively the last appear-
ance but one of the Sohraon Occasional ! Now or never is the time for
our correspondents to achieve immortality. Let them take heart of grace
and send even their heaviest jokes. We do not promise to insert them,
unless they are better than our own, which is unlikely. We positively
must draw the line somewhere; but anyhow, let all contributions be
delivered by the 21st instant at latest. We have also to announce that
on and after the 23rd instant the goodwill and plant of this well-known
and influential newspaper will be for sale. The proprietors reserve the
right of refusing the highest, or any bidding, but are not very likely to
exercise that right. Tenders (as well as contributions) to be addressed to
Mr. T. Hurditch, Saloon Cabin, No. 2.
57
The Sohraon Occasional.


aClu' (Sobraon Occasional
No. 5.
Wednesday, December 22, 1875.
When we took up the editorial pen, more than two months ago, our
intention was to act the part of chronicler to this small community, to
record all events of interest, to develop literary talent, and to make such
criticisms upon men, women, and things as might probably do good, but could
not possibly do harm. Our work is almost over. Our pen must soon be
laid aside. The Otway light is not far off; and, though we hope that other
editors and other readers may flourish on board the “ Sobraon, ’ our
occupation, like Othello’s , is gone. We do not wish to say much about
ourselves; but our enemies, if we have any, will allow us the privilege of
a dying confession, while our friends will not object to a few words of
farewell. Whether the Sobraon Occasional has been a success, and
whether we have succeeded in fulfilling our intentions, are questions for
our readers to decide. In any case, even although good intentions are
said to pave the way to Avernus, we must run the risk of laying claim to
them. We are glad to say that we have heard few complaints. It has
indeed been asserted that we have been wanting in versatility and fun,
been more grave than gay, less lively than severe; but be it remembered,
critical readers, the literary horizon on board ship is limited, and “ fun is
apt to develop into a species of personality which would prove fatal to this
or any other journal. Besides, if our seriousness has given offence, our
fun might have led to a duel, which might have given some trouble to the
sail-maker. Our ambition has been tolerably modest. We have written
with what little wit and humour we possess. We have never, perhaps,
been quite as funny as we can be when we try hard ; but then our critics
have never come to the front with the necessary opposition or the
necessary help which we should so gladly have accepted. We have
struggled on, however, in our blundering way, and we die with a clear
conscience. We are sorry it is not in our power to mention our con-
tributors and correspondents by name; but we beg to thank most
heartily those ladies and gentlemen who have from time to time con-
tributed to our pages—for thanks are certainly due to anyone who can
manage to write amid the stir and bustle of “ Sobraon life. The work of
editing has been rendered remarkably pleasant by the very kind and ready
assistance of a few congenial friends, and will, when our pen is laid aside,
be a very pleasant memory.
Well, the voyage is almost over. Just eleven weeks ago we were
looking back wistfully and sadly upon the shores of merry England,
wondering perchance when her cliffs would meet our gaze again. We
started—all, for the most part, unknown to one another—each to take his
chance of finding congenial companions and of enjoying life at sea. And
certainly the retrospect is not unpleasant. The voyage has been an
average one in length, while in point of comfort it has been considerably


above the average. We rolled cheerfully across the Bay of Biscay, we
grumbled in the Doldrums, we concocted every variety of drinks in the
Tropics, we tossed about off the Cape ; at meal-time the roast mutton
occasionally tried to stand on its head, and the ducks to fly—but these are
but the trifling commonplaces of every-day life at sea. Of really boisterous
weather we have had none. New chums must feel thankful that their
first voyage has been so free from discomforts; old chums, that they have
once more sailed half round the world in ease and safety. In one respect
we have been most fortunate —the “ Sobraon” is happy in the possession
of excellent officers. In Captain Elmslie we have not only a gallant and
thorough seaman, but a genial, kindly gentleman, who, without any undue
interference with his passengers, has been ever ready to minister to their
well-being and comfort; and he has been well supported by Mr. Richards
and the other officers, who have made themselves deservedly liked by
everyone.
Among such a number of passengers a few must naturally come to the
front, and we may congratulate ourselves that so many have been able
to contribute something to the general good. Our theatricals, charades,
&c., have been quite up to the mark; the acting of Mrs. Huybers and the
other ladies, and of Messrs. Dakin, Tuke, Wardell, and LeCren, rising to a
very fair standard of excellence. As to concerts, we have been remarkably
fortunate. In Mr. Edeson we have a thoroughly scientific musician :
and in his wife we have a charming singer, the echo of whose sweet voice
will linger in our memories after much of our “ Sobraon” life has been
forgotten. To both of them the heartiest thanks of our community are
assuredly due. Miss Jardine, Mr. Blyth, Mr. Wedmore, and others too
numerous to mention, have also considerable claims upon our gratitude.
We must not omit to notice the performances of our juveniles, who have
displayed an unusual amount of ability and cleverness. Facile princeps
stands Miss Edith Huybers, who, whether as the attached maid, or the
landlady, or Mrs. Cluppins, showed talent of a very high order indeed;
while her brother Frank has proved himself quite worthy of her. When
we add that Dr. Turner has kindly undertaken nearly all the evening
services, while Captain Elmslie has read morning prayer, we think we have
mentioned all those to whom we are more particularly indebted. If we
have made any omission, we must again use as a shield the goodness of
our intentions.
But all things must have an end. Partings are always more or less of
a sad character, and the less said about them the better. All of us, even
those who are going to comfortable homes in Victoria, will leave the old
ship with a feeling of regret. The Sobraon Occasional will, we hope,
be remembered as a journal that tried to do its duty. Ladies and gentle-
men all, a hearty good-bye. We make our bow. The curtain falls, and
we retire behind the scenes.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
On Monday evening, December 13th, we had another Concert in the
saloon, at which Mr. Edeson and Mrs. Fraser commenced proceedings with
a very good pianoforte duet from Rossini’s “II Barbiere.” Mr. Blyth then
59
The Sobraon Occasional.


gave us Wallace’s “ Star of Love,” which, though thoroughly well executed,
was, unfortunately for many of the audience, sung in a tone of voice suited
rather to a drawing-room than to an apartment of such size and such
inferior acoustic qualities as our saloon. Mrs. Edeson’s singing of Wallace’s
" Sweet Spirit, Hear my Prayer,” of course obtained an encore, and she
then gave us Benedict’s “ Rock me to sleep.” Mr. Lake’s reading of Mrs.
Browning’s “ Cry of the Children,” was hardly as satisfactory as might
have been desired; we understand that he was suffering from a severe cold,
which may perhaps account for the inaudible manner in which the piece
was delivered. Mrs. Bedwell’s “ Half-mast High,” by Claribel, the
execution of which was very good, would have been far more enjoyable
had it been sung in a little louder tone. Mr. Gaunter showed great pluck
in tackling so difficult a song as “ Will o’ the Wisp ” must be to most
people; and though his voice is not what it once was, he thoroughly
deserved the applause and encore with which he was greeted. We would
particularly draw attention to the excellent enunciation of the words of his
song. This is a matter in which most amateurs err grievously. As a rule,
it might be so much Hindustani or Sanscrit that they are singing, so far as
their audience can tell. We heartily wish that many of them would take
a lesson from Mr. Gaunter in this respect. Mr. Wedmore’s playing is
always looked forward to as a great treat at these Concerts, and this
evening he was announced to play the “Cujus Animam,” from Rossini’s
“ Stabat Mater.” This he commenced to do, as he had often done before,
without the assistance of a book; but memory plays us sad tricks at times,
and on this occasion he had hardly played a dozen bars before he faltered,
tried again, and finally broke down altogether, very much to the sorrow of
all. “ Ring out, Wild Bells,” was excellently sung by Mr. Dakin, and the
Concert was concluded with Balfe’s duet, “ The Sailor Sighs,” sung by Mrs.
Edeson and Mr. Blyth. This, as we thought, seemed to drag a little, and
was hardly as good as we had expected from the known and oft-proved
excellence of the singers; but the audience, with whom both are most
deservedly popular, insisted on a repetition. Mr. Edeson, in addition to
the part he took in the pianoforte duet, kindly undertook the general
management of the Concert, and rendered great service by playing the
accompaniments to the various songs. To him, as well as the different
ladies and gentlemen who acted with him, our most hearty thanks are
due.
Our voyage is nearly over. We are already beginning to think of packing,
and the more sanguine among us hope that Thursday night may show
us, not the modest little stage of the “ Sobraon Theatre,” but the landing-
stage of Sandridge Pier. Be this as it may, we think it may be taken for
granted that the entertainment given by our dramatic friends on the
evening of the 16th will be the last we shall have on board the “ Sobraon.
But though the last, a second performance of His Own Enemy, and a
representation of the well-known trial scene in Pickwick, were quite suffi-
cient to render it not the least, and to give plenty of work both to stage-
managers and scene-shifters. In our examination of the merits of
the performers in His Own Enemy on its first representation, we went into
60
The Sobraon Occasional.


so much detail that very little remains to be said on the present occasion.
Mr. Wardell had very judiciously shortened the long and trying soliloquy
with which the piece commences, and his utterance of it was vastly
improved, both in tone and distinctness. Mrs. Fraser, too, while as
charming as ever in the lighter parts, put a great deal more dramatic force
into the scene where the idea that she has lost her husband’s love first
breaks upon the young wife. In the first scene between Mr. Whymper
and Captain Douglas, a slip of memory appeared to deprive Mr. Wardell
of his self-possession, and his utterance was, for the time, very hurried ;
but he soon recovered himself, and from the next scene to the end his
acting was as good as it possibly could be. Mrs. Fraser, we think, is still
rather deficient in intensity of feeling in the part where her brother
explains his unfortunate position ; but with this exception her acting was
very good indeed, and in the scene where she retaliates upon her husband,
and, throwing his own words in his teeth, taunts him to the verge of
madness, she was simply perfect. Mr. Dakin’s acting of the part of
Captain Douglas was throughout, as before, thoroughly excellent. Mr.
Frank Huybers was again a capital Moleye, and his inability to keep his
countenance when arresting the supposed Captain was quite as amusing to
the audience as if it had been part of the play.
After a short interval, the curtain rose upon a court of justice, arranged
for the trial of Bardell v. PicJcwicJc, and certainly great praise is due to
the stage-manager for the admirable manner in which the scene was set.
There, on the bench, sat his lordship the judge, in his wig and ermine ;
on his left, the counsel, duly robed; while to the right we had the highly
intelligent jury. The agonised plaintiff and her boy, the genial
defendant, the self-sufficient crier, all were there; making up a tout
ensemble as nearly perfect as their limited resources would allow. The
sketch of this famous trial, as drawn by Charles Dickens, is too well
known to need any explanation here. We shall, therefore, confine our-
selves to a brief description of the manner in which it was enacted by our
friends on the “ Sobraon.”
The leading feature of the piece is the speech of Serjeant Buzfuz ; but
we regret to state that the manner in which our old favourite—Mr.
LeCren—acted this part did not come up to our expectations. While hi&
enunciation was distinct enough to be well heard all over the theatre, it
was too apparent that he was reading, not delivering; and it was
doubtless owing to this fact that he did not give effect to many of the
points with which this speech is so replete. We missed much of the
varied facial expression and earnest appeal so freely indulged in by
popular barristers of the Buzfuz type in cases of this kind. His examina-
tion of the witnesses, however, was remarkably good. In the small part
of Snubbin , Mr. Lake was very good, and perfectly conveyed the idea of
a barrister at his usual work. We have nothing but praise for the Judge
(Rev. A. Moffat) and for Mrs. Cluppins. As to the first, we can fairly
say that he was the judge. The quick, austere manner in which he spoke to
the foreman of the jury (who, by the way, was well personated by Dr.
Turner) and to the witnesses, the sudden taking of notes of any particular
item of evidence, and the dignified manner of his summing-up, were really
excellent. In the character of Mrs. Cluppins , Miss Edith Huybers has
61
The Sohraon Occasional.


scored another success, both in her make-up and in the way in which she
answered the questions put to her by the counsel. Mr. Carter, also, was
first-rate in the character of the quiet, nervous Winkle ; while Mr. Tuke, as
Sam Weller, had a warm reception from the audience, and.did his part in
his usual excellent style. Mr. Bassano (Old Weller) deserves the greatest
praise for the trouble he took in getting himself up, as well as for the way
in which he played his part. His interruptions from the body of the
court were worthy of the bluff old coachman, and were, in fact, so life-
like, that some of the audience wished to hiss him as an intruder ; while
Mr. Richards, mistaking him for another man, was actually on the point
of taking prompt measures to have him turned out of the theatre. We
cannot close these remarks without noticing one character, who, though
she has nothing to say, is yet an important personage in the trial—viz.,
Mrs. Bar dell. Mrs. Huybers, with her usual kindness, undertook this
dummy character; but it was no dummy in her hands, and she thoroughly
proved how much depends on by-play in the art of acting. Her look of
acquiescence at several of the remarks in Sergeant Buzfuzs speech, her
expression of grief, and her display of joy at the successful issue of the
trial, were a thorough study.
In conclusion, let us express our thanks and those of the whole ship’s
company, to all those ladies and gentlemen who have so kindly contributed
to our amusement by their dramatic talent. In a few days our little com-
munity will be broken up, and its members scattered towards the four
winds of heaven ; but wherever we may go, and however we may fare, we
shall ever cherish among our happiest recollections the “jolly” evenings
spent in the “ Sobraon Theatre.” On professional boards we may no
doubt find more elaborate scenes and more cultivated acting ; on the stage
of real life, more exciting incidents—and on that stage we all must take a
part. Let us strive to do so with as much earnestness, self-abnegation,
and thoroughness of purpose as have been displayed by the actors on our
mimic stage on board; and, as years roll on, may our hearts ever be as free
from care, and the ring of our laughter as true and spontaneous as when
we chuckled over the perplexities of John Small and the Buzzard family,
or the matrimonial difficulties of Mr. and Mrs. Whymper , and fairly
roared at the night-gown and stern severity of Mrs. Higgs, the tears of
Mrs. Bardell, and the volubility of Mrs. Cluppins, in our little theatre on
the “ Sobraon.”
On the evening of Sunday last, December 19th, Dr. Turner, during
what was probably the last Service he will conduct on board the “ Sobraon,
alluded to missionary work in New Guinea, to which he and Mrs. Turner
are now en route. He gave an interesting account of the rather quaint
manners and customs of the inhabitants, and expressed the hope that
much good might yet be accomplished for them. Dr. and Mrs. Turner
are connected with the London Missionary Society, the former being a
bachelor of medicine as well as a minister of the Presbyterian Church.
We wish them both a very hearty God-speed, and great success in their
efforts. The doctor will no doubt do his best for the cause which he has
at heart, and he is highly fortunate in being accompanied by a wife whose
earnestness and sincerity of character have won for her the respect and
goodwill of all on board.
62
The Sohraon Occasional.


On the 20th we had what will probably be our last saloon Concert.
The time of commencement had been postponed for about half an hour to
suit the convenience of the promenaders, who had been induced by the
warmth and brilliancy of the evening to linger longer than usual on deck.
A selection fronT“ Robert le Diable,” very well played by Mrs. Fraser and
Mr. Edeson, made a good beginning, and was follow by “ The Angel at
the Window,” sung in her usual charming style by Mrs. Edeson. Mr.
Blyth’s “ Kathleen Mavourneen” was well sung, but would have been far
better, as would also his other song, “ Love’s Request (for which he
obtained a well-merited encore), had the enunciation of the words been
more distinct. A little more familiarity, too, with the words of his song
would enable Mr. Blyth’s fine rich voice to be heard to far greater advan-
tage. Mrs. Huybers recitation of “ The Owl’s Revenge’’ was indeed a
splendid performance, and certainly one of the most attractive items of the
entertainment. The piecff, a good one in itself, was probably new to most
of the audience, and on that account the more interesting; while the
perfection of intonation and distinctness of utterance with which it was
delivered by Mrs. Huybers was simply wonderful. It was heard most
distinctly in every part of the saloon. We need hardly say that the
audience manifested their appreciation by most cordial applause. Mr.
Bassano, too, put, if possible, more than usual energy into his “ Steam
Arm,” and would have been encored but for the evident state of breath-
lessness to which his exertions had reduced him. We did not much care
for the “ Cascade” as a piece ; but its performance by Mr. Edeson seemed
to us a marvel of execution and manual dexterity. “ Home, Sweet Home
was excellently sung by Mrs. Edeson j but we thought the beautiful
quartet, “ Farewell to the Forest,” by Mendelssohn, scarcely as good as it
might have been. The Concert was concluded, as usual, by the singing of
“ God Save the Queen,” in which the audience joined.
While we have all derived pleasure and enjoyment from the concerts
and the the theatrical performances, it is satisfactory to know that we have
at the same time been instrumental in doing some little good for a work
of charity. By the sale of the programmes, the sum of £1 19s. has been
realised, which the Secretary has from time to time handed to the Chair-
man of the Committee (Mr. Slater), who has placed the amounts in the
boxes provided by the Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
What the Doctor Says. —ln presenting my last Report on the health
of the ship’s company, I am happy to think it is the best I have been able
to give. It is pleasant that, after so long a voyage, we should arrive in
such a healthy state, bidding defiance to the most stringent rules of quaran-
tine. I have now not a single patient on board, and only two or three
convalescents. All the cases noted in the last report have recovered.
Throughout the voyage we have been singularly blessed with health, and
my work has been extremely light. At the same time, the number of little
troubles would scarcely be credited. The medicine chest bears evidence
63
The Sobraon Occasional.


of having been well used, many of the bottles being perfectly empty, and
others partly so. In looking at our passengers, we notice that many of
those who embarked as invalids will disembark much benefited by the
voyage. The climate we are now enjoying is most exhilarating, and has
had the effect of bringing on deck some faces not seen there for a long
time. In closing, I would say it is well for our profession that all places
are not as healthy as the sea, and that, as far as a good practice is concerned,
we would not choose the sea in preference to the land.
W. Y. Turner, M. 8., C.M.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES AND WORDS IN OUR LAST.
1, Thomas Stephens. 2, MissElmslie. 3, Rolling Forties. 4, Sobraon Occasional
5, Whale.
WORD SQUARES.
ABEL
BEAU
EARL
LULL
WORK
ODIN
RICE
KNEE
STAR
TIME
AMEN
RENT
LAND HO!
Hurrah ! hurrah ! the Leu win’s past, the wind blows strong and free,
Our good ship bends her to the blast and speeds across the sea ;
Full thirteen thousand miles behind we’ve left old England’s strand,
And in a day or two at most expect to see the land.
For since we passed the Cape the winds from westward have been blowing,
And the runs have been so good that, at our present rate of going,
By Friday night at latest we expect we shall be there,
In time for happy gatherings round Melbourne’s Christmas fare.
Old chums are looking forward to the meeting with their friends,
New chums are planning what to do when this long journey ends,
And hoping that in Melbourne, waiting for them, they may find
Lots of letters from the dear ones they have left at home behind.
In the smoking-room, o’er their cigars, the men their jokes are cracking ;
In their cabins all the women have begun to think of packing*-
All, save one, who in the aft-saloon sits gravely at the head
Of a table, where, from tea-time till ’tis time to go to bed,
Eight whist-players nightly shuffle, cut, and deal the cards around,
And amongst them the best players of the ship are to be found ;
There, each evening since we passed the Cape, that lady has been sitting,
Alone with those eight players and her writing or her knitting,
Looking after their behaviour, lest perchance in conversation
They might rap out, when the cards went wrong, some horrid execration,
For ears polite unfitted, such as “ Hang it,” “ Deuce,” or “ Dickens
And the little group, by all on board, is called the “ Hen and Chickens.”
In her cabin, now grown stronger, looking lovelier than before,
Mrs. Elmslie gaily carols forth some tale of nursery lore,
Leaning o’er a little cradle, while she gently rocks to sleep
The tiny little stranger who came to us on the deep.
And everyone on board is gladly thinking of the shore,
And wondering how soon our weary journey will be o’er.
Soon shall we all be parted, some to East and some to West;
Some to business, some to pleasure, some in search of health or rest ;
Dr. Turner—he is bent upon a Missionary life,
And takes with him, one loved by all—his earnest, fearless wife.
64
The Sobraon Occasional.


Mrs. Allin, when our pudding’s made, will be off in a hurry,
To eat her own at Christmas in a home beyond the Murray,
Where she won’t have to conceal it, if she does the same as “ Sally.”
There’s not a soul on board the ship who won’t regret Miss Bally.
Miss Jardine’s off to Yarra Bend, O’Hea’s to Melbourne bound,
The Huybers’ gifted family will also there be found.
The Maynes and Mrs. Graham soon in Collins-street you 11 see,
With Mrs. Fraser, Mrs. Frew, and Mrs. M‘Gee.
Heath, Fletcher, Carter, Richard Bond, and Baines will soon go back,
And carry with them, as we hope, the health that now they lack.
Bassano, too, the children’s friend, kind partner in their games,
Will soon be longing for his pretty home beside the Thames.
And Hurditch, jolly dog, whose voice and frame are now so weak,
We hope will quickly find the strength he came abroad to seek.
Though small, he has a larger heart than many bigger men,
And few are half so larky, or so clever with the pen.
Soon shall we cease to hear the sound of Wilson’s boyish chaff,
.The crack of Ash's rifle, and his curious cackling laugh ;
Wedmore’s touch on the piano, or the ringing voice of Dakin— f
The Captain Douglas whom our ladies found so captivating ; >
I wonder if, when he returns to England, he will find i
That, though he’s found an appetite, he’s left his heart behind.
Our grumbler, Gaunter, soon will find his occupation gone,
And think that, after all, things weren’t so bad on the “ Sobraon.”
Soon shall we miss Blyth’s deep, rich voice— we don’t hear many such ;
His baby’s voice, I’m bound to say, we shan’t regret so much.
No more shall we see Ritchie dance Scotch reel or Highland fling,
Nor with delight hear Edeson play, or Mrs. Edeson sing.
In sunny Adelaide we hope she’ll soon regain her health,
And all the family enjoy strength, happiness, and wealth.
Le Cren, whose voice and heart alike are big as is his build,
Will soon be back in Melbourne at a post be long has filled.
Grave Millidge, with his dry, quaint jokes, will quickly haste away,
While Slater of the endless yarns on board the ship will stay.
Charles Bond and Davy both, I hear, are going to the bush,
Wardell, too, Boissier and Tuke their fortunes hope to push.
Moffat and Lake will quickly seek Tasmania’s rocky shore,
And never criticise our plays or concerts any more.
f
******* *
Yet still, when all have reached their homes, or on their travels gone,
We oft shall think upon the days we spent on the “ Sobraon,”
And with delight recall the hours we passed in her saloon,
The evenings when we danced on deck beneath a summer moon,
Or watched the crimson sunset glowing o’er the tropic sea,
And fancied, in its gilded clouds, strange figures we could see, —
The concerts that we listened to, the rubbers that we played,
The sing-song in the smoking-room, the jokes that there we made,
The theatre wherein we watched the quarrels of the Whympers,
And laughed o’er Buzzard's misery, or Miss LucreticCs simpers.
And as we think upon the friends who gathered round us then,
How amusing all the women, how good-humoured all the men,
How well, through our long journey, without a single row
We jogged along together, we shall drink their health and vow
’Twere hard to find so good a lot, of all the men alive,
As those with whom we crossed the sea in Eighteen-seventy-five.
65
The Sohraon Occasional.


HINTS TO NEW CHUMS.
All our readers are now familiar with the phrase “ new chum.” It is
applied by colonials to recent arrivals. There is an amusing superstition
in the parts to which we are going that new comers must necessarily be
rather green ; that they have still to learn a thing or two ; and that they
have not seen life all round until they have gained “ colonial experience.”
They are consequently looked upon pretty much as the old boys at school
look upon the new ones, and treated as freshmen are treated by the under-
graduates who have seen one term or more. Now, it happens that new
chums are by no means green simply because they are new chums. We
have known them, doubtless, very verdant indeed; but we have also
known them very much the reverse. And, after all, it is natural enough
that a man should know next to nothing about places which he has never
visited—probably never thought about until circumstances forced them
upon his notice. However much we colonists may flatter ourselves that
we are, like the Yankees, a “ great people,” our history and geographical
position are not universal subjects of study in England. It is generally
supposed that Melbourne is the capital of Sydney, and Adelaide of Geelong,
while the whereabouts of such places as Perth and Brisbane are simply
beyond the limits of ordinary human ken. We need not be offended at
such want of knowledge. A time may come when colonial youth will
return the compliment, and the New Zealander take his long vacant seat
upon London Bridge, there to meditate upon the quondam ignorance ot
the fallen nation.
But to our subject. In a few days we hope to be alongside Sandndge
Pier. Then we must face the rather unwelcome questions —“ Where shall
we go ?” “ What shall we do with ourselves V There are numberless
hotels in Melbourne —some bad, some good ; but we strongly recommend
new chums to choose the best. The difference in expense is certainly far
from being greater than the difference in comfort. We believe that such
hotels as these are comfortable :—Menzies’, in Bourke-street; Scott s,
Collins-street; Port Phillip, Blind ers-street; Morton’s, Bourke-street
west; the White Hart, Bourke-street east. The Criterion is also good,
but rather noisy. There is a temperance hotel —Tankards, in Lonsdale-
street —which is moderate in charges, and quite comfortable. Those who
are to be in Melbourne for a lengthened period would do well to take up
their quarters at a boarding-house. There are several very good ones in
Fitzroy (Royal Crescent, facing Fitzroy Gardens, Nicholson-street, and
Gertrude-street). It is also within easy distance of the post-office, and
reached within ten minutes by ’bus or cab. Boarding-houses are cheaper,
than hotels, and would, in most cases, be more lively and pleasant in the
way of society. Those who have friends in Melbourne would not have
much difficulty in being made honorary members of the club for a month
or two. . . .
The new chum will doubtless buy a map, and get up his distances.
New chums always do. Melbourne cabmen are precisely like other
cabmen. They will ask for a shilling extra without blushing, so that some
knowledge of their ways is necessary in more senses than one. Omni-
buses and public cabs ply to nearly all the suburbs, the fares ranging from
66
The Sobraon Occasional.


3d. to 6d. There is very good bathing at St. Kilda, which is easily got at
during any part of the day by public cab or train. The places of interest
are not very numerous, and will be soon enough found out. In connexion
with wandering about, we may mention that a good luncheon or dinner can
be had at the Criterion, in Collins-street, or in any of the numerous
restaurants of Bourke or Collins streets.
New chums who are suffering from the chest, and whose movements
are under their own control, should remember the fact that the climate of
Melbourne is not at all good in summer, especially from about January
10th until the 20th of March. Tasmania, the summer climate of which is
exceedingly healthy, is within easy distance by steamer; and living in
Launceston or Hobart Town is cheaper, and in some respects better, than
in Melbourne. Hobart Town especially possesses many good boarding-
houses where one can live at a very moderate rate indeed, and
enjoy walking, driving, riding, boating, &c., to any extent. For an
autumn climate Melbourne is usually good, while Sydney is more preferable
during winter. The changes of temperature are not very frequent, but they
ought to be carefully guarded against. As to sight-seeing, of course Ballarat
and Sandhurst are the two great gold-digging centres. Introductions to
mining managers are not very difficult to get, and strangers are generally
treated with courtesy and civility, while their curiosity is gratified. Those
who wish to know what bush life really is should find their way to the
westward, or up to the Murray, and if possible—which in some cases it
doubtless will be—live for a short while on a station. Australian squatters
are noted for their hospitality to English visitors, but of course the neces-
sary introductions are requisite.
These hints are of a very fragmentary character, but our new chums
will have no difficulty in obtaining reliable information as soon as they
have come to anchor and delivered their introductions.
EXEUNT OMNES.
Friends and fellow-travellers, does it not seem to you that we have all
been enacting an impromptu drama for the last eleven weeks —eating and
drinking, talking and thinking, waking and winking together. And now,
after all this intimacy, good-fellowship, yarning, gossiping, hobnobbing,
and social gathering, party-giving, and party-going in each other’s cabins,
making benches of our beds, and settees of our boxes, breaking the same
biscuit, and sipping from each other’s cups, to think that we are about to
come to pieces like a large cake, which, however well kneaded, is only
put together to be subsequently divided —is it not strange 1 Stranger
still is the question, not to be solved by human ken —“ What is to become
of the fragments thrown together by the wheel of fortune in one capricious
turn, and whirled off at a tangent in the next rotation, whether we
be satisfied or not at this piecemeal arrangement 1 ?” We will pursue
the metaphor no further than to say that we are truly “ cut up” in
every sense of the word. Let us therefore shake hands upon it, and part
with a general promise of remembrance of each other, and of the voyage
in which, as the phrase goes, we all “ got on” uncommonly well together.
E 2
67
The Sohraon Occasional.


First, and mainly, we have felt ourselves well cared for and safely
watched over by our worthy chief, the soundest of seamen, the first of
gentlemen—God bless him and his ! At rest concerning our well-being,
we turned naturally to the interchange of mutual civilities and social
converse which has lightened and sweetened the tedium of the never-
varying view of sea and sky for nearly eighty long days, drawing, by tacit
consent, the veil of mutual forbearance around each other’s faults or foibles.
Whether or no A deems me pig-headed, or B considers me self-sufficient,
or C sets me down as a prig, or D votes me a bore, matters little so long
as A B C D have all been jolly and sociable, and we have enjoyed our
joke in the smoking-room and our dance on the deck. AB C D will
always be more than the every-day acquaintance to me, because I have
been daily acquainted with each, and found something attractive in all.
Wise men there are amongst us, too, from whose converse we all gleam
good; men, meritorious yet modest; firm, yet moderate; tender of our
mistakes, and truthful in detecting them ; men whose brains have aided
the struggling efforts of our own, who reason as well as write, and raise
our views and give a spur to our efforts ; to these be our thanks rather
felt than spoken.
Now turn we to the grotesque, for who amongst us will not recall the
times when the tropical sun hid his sultry gleam behind masses of black
clouds, and the beneficent torrents descended ungrudgingly upon our
grateful heads ? Out with the tubs and pans ! Off with the shoes and
stockings ! Pocket your high breeding ! Fine manners do not pay !
Who is that stalwart figure in a flannel Guernsey, rinsing and
wringing his nether garments with brawny arm in the wholesome
soapsuds, while others are making treadmills of the tubs in which
they have swamped their habiliments ? Behold another, with bare feet
and length of limb, chasing round the deck the little tom-boy, whose mass
of golden locks he immerses in the capacious bucket, administering with
both hands such a lathering and sousing as the owner of the head is
not likely to forget for many a day. Do you recognise in these the heavy
swells who make their daily appearance at the breakfast table in the cool
and elegant morning “get-up” of the Hyde Park fashionable in the
London season? Only an entr'acte! Wait a bit; they resume their
originals again at dinner, and ainsi se passe le temps. But time flies, and
the good ship, following the good example, bears us on and on, and we are
to drink the parting cup, and break (instead of the bread of fellowship)
some rare confection, over the preparation of which I see sparkling eyes,
bright smiles, and small, busy fingers working with a will. What are
they at? Making us a Christmas pudding. Such a pudding! Let us
christen it at once Al, in honour of the principal operator. Let us call
it the Parting Pudding of Peace, and may a goodly piece fall to our share,
for which we tender in advance the sincere thanks of a grateful (come,
out with it) stomach ; for alas! I blush to confess what a sure read lies
that way to the noble region above, or beyond, I don t know which. To
that region (for it is the larger by far of the two) I consign you all, more
or less, and wish you all the best you can desire for yourselves, whether
we part pleased or sorry, willingly or reluctantly, for better or for worse,
for aye or for ever. Sphinx.
68
The Sobraon Occasional.


LOG
Latitude.
Longitude.
Thermom.
Distance.
Oct. 7
49- 5 N.
5-18 W.
88 miles.
74 „
48-4. S „
7- 6 „
47* „
10- 6 „
160 ,
208 ,
252 ,
238 ,
1256 „
44* „
40*7 „
U-35 „
86-50 „
17*24 „
34-49 „
1846 „
139 „
32-40 „
20- 4 „
145 „
31* 7 „
20-40 „
75 „
30* 2 „
20-46 „
65 „
28-30 „
21* 4 „
56 „
27-34 „
20*58 „
25 - 55 „
2M6 „
100 „
23-55 „
22 28 „
137 „
22-38 „
21-54 „
83 „
20*50 „
22- 6 „
109 „
1715 „
21-30 „
218 „
u- 5 „
21* 6 „
192 „
12 00 „
20-56 „
I*7 „
1036 „
20-40 „
86 „
8*53 „
20-32 „
108 „
6-53 „
21- 6 „
84i
125 „
No Log.
5-27 N.
4-28 „
No Log.
21-25 „
21-00 „
83* 83 in 3 days
81 64 miles.
Nov. 1
83 214 in 3 days
2-25 N.
o*l6 ~
2-00 s.
510 „
8*34 „
12- 9 „
16*35 „
18-11 „
19-54 „
21-22 „
24 52 „
28-52 „
31-00 „
31- 6 ~
31- 8 „
32- „
34- „
35- „
36- 9 ..
36- „
37- „
37-37 „
37*57 „
39- „ !
40- „
4H5 „
4MI „
21-20 „
24- 8 „
83 212 miles.
25-50 „ 82* 170 „
2712 „
27- „
28- „
81* 207 „
81* 207 „
80* 219 „
28- 5 „
80£ 207 „
27*56 „
79* I 176 „
27*18 „ 75 109 „
27- „
28- „
73 89 „
71* 223 „
27-56 „
67* 241 „
29-36 „
64 I 131 „
28-40 „
63 ! 49 „
62 20 „
28-17 „
26 23 „
22-29 „
17-11 „
66* | 133 „
64 220 „
634 274 „
60 232 „
62 181 „
6l| 280 „
56* 97 „
58 72 „
56*- 254 „
12-27 „
8-49 „
33 „
I*B M
(V 23 E,
5 24 „
12-22 „
16.36 „
20-33 „
59 332 „
574 194 „
56 179 „


Latitude.
Longitude.
41*26 S.
23-42 E.
42-45 „
29-18 „
42 46 „
39 36 „
42-11 „
45-48 „
42- 8 „
50-29 „
42-31
1 56- 9 „
48-37 „
1 62-05 „
44-42 „
67-39 „
44-00 „
72-44 „
43-10
78- 9
43 29 „
83-10 „
43-30 „
88-28 „
44-00 „
95-24 „
44 00 „
101-13 „
43-37
106-30 „
43-42
111-45 „
43-36 „
118- 4 ..
43-39 „
125-28 „
4310
129-58 „
42- 4 „
130-34 „
41-38 „
132-51 „
40-32 „
137-46 .,
39-40
146-36
Off Cape Ot\7vay at 1 p.m.
Entered Hea ds at 4-30 p.m
LOG
Date.
Thermom.
Distance.
Dec. 1
144 miles.
263 „
456 in 2 days
277 miles.
209 „
6
7
8
253
272 „
250 „
224 „
243 „
221 „
232 „
304 „
229 „
229 „
275
323 „
200 „
71 „
106 „
232 „
140 „
| 250 „
13,559 Total.
70


Mason, Firth & 51‘Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders-lane West, Melbourne.






