

THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ACCOMPANIED WITH A MAP.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
PLAN OP
NORTHERN TERRITORY ANNEXED TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
t
Lying to the North of latitude 26°, and between longitudes 129° and 138° Last,
showing Routes of Exploration, See sr,
COMPILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE SURVEYOR-GENERAL, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
exploration tracks
Sbiarl
Star I
A.C. Gre<forv_
*- tS
M*Kbdav
*y
LfixJvardt -
i ; -
■%
Pnjxtrd. fh & 7**** *l^




THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ACCOMPANIED WITH A MAP.




CONTENTS.
ERRATA.
Page 18, line I—For “ later ” read “ earlier.”
Page 29, line 8- For « Long. 130 °s' ” read “Long. 132« 6’.”




CONTENTS.
Page,
Her Majesty’s Letters Patent .. • ♦ • • • • • • * •
Act of Parliament .. . • • • • • • • "
13
Proclamation of Regulations >• .• •• •• *• ••
Appointment of Officers .. .. • • • • • • • • • *
General Information respecting the climate, soil, &c 21




HER MAJESTY’S LETTERS PATENT.
Victoria by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, Queen Defender of the . Faith- —To our trusty and
well beloved Sir Dominick Daly, Knight, greeting. Whereas by an Act
passed in the Session of Parliament holden in the fifth and sixth years of
Our Reign, entitled “ An Act for the Government of New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land,” it was enacted that it should he lawful for Us
by Letters Patent, to he from time to time issued under the Great Seal of
Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, to define, as to Ls
should seem meet, the limits of the Colony of New South Wales, and to
erect into a separate Colony or Colonies any territories which then were,
or were reputed to he, or thereafter might he comprised within the said
Colony of New South Wales; and whereas, by an Act passed the Session
of Parliament holden in the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth years of Our
Reign, entitled, “ An Act to remove doubts respecting the authority of the
Legislature of Queensland, and to annex certain territories to the Colony
of South Australia, and for other purposes,” it amongst other things
provided that it should he lawful for Us, by such Letters Patent as afore-
said, to annex to any Colony which was then or which might thereafter
he established on the Continent of Australia any territories which (in the
exercise of the powers thereinbefore mentioned) might have been erected
into a separate Colony : Provided always that it should be lawful for Us,
in such Letters Patent to reserve such powers of revoking or altering the
same as to Us should seem fit, or to declare the period during which
such Letters Patent should remain in force, and also on the revocation or
other determination of such Letters Patent, again to exercise in respect
of the territories referred to therein or any part thereof, all such powers
and authority as might have been exercised if the said Letters Patent had
never been made : Now know you that We have thought fit, in pur-
suance of the powers so vested in Us, and of all other powers and autho-
rities to Us in that behalf belonging to annex, and We do hereby annex
to Our said Colony of South Australia, until We think fit to make other
disposition thereof, or of any part or parts thereof, so much of Our said
Colony of New South Wales as lies to the northward of the twenty-sixth
parallel of south latitude, and between the one hundred and twenty-ninth
and one hundred and thirty-eighth degrees of longitude, together
with the bays and gulfs therein, and all and every the islands adjacent


to any part of the mainland within such limits as aforesaid, with their
rights, members, and appurtenances; and We do hereby reserve to Us,
Our heirs and successors, full power and authority from time to time to
revoke, alter, and amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or them
shall seem fit. In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters
to be made Patent. Witness Ourself at Westminster, the sixth day of
July, in the twenty-seventh year of Our Reign.
By warrant under the Queen’s Sign Manual.
(Signed)
C. ROMILLY.
[True copy.—R. D. Ross, Acting Private Secretary.]


ANNO VICESIMO SEXTO ET VICESIMO SEPTIMO
VICTORIAE REGINA.
A.D. 1863.
No. 23.
An Act for regulating the Sale or other disposal of Waste Lands of the
Crown lately annexed to the Province of South Australia , and for
other purpose si
[Assented to, 12th November, 1863.]
Preamble.
Whereas, by certain Letters Patent, bearing date the sixth day of July,
in the twenty-seventh year of the reign of Her present Majesty, and
signed by warrant under the Queen’s Sign Manual, so much of the Colony
of New South Wales as lies to the northward of the twenty-sixth parallel
of south latitude, and between the one hundred and twenty-ninth and one
one hundred and thirty-eighth degrees of east longitude, together with the
bays and gulfs therein, and all and every the islands adjacent to any main-
land within such limits as aforesaid, with their rights, members, and ap-
purtenances, were annexed to the Colony of South Australia: And
whereas, by “The Waste Lands Act,” No. 5 of 21 Viet., and an Act No.
18 of 1858, intituled “ An Act to amend the Waste Lands Act,” it is
provided that waste lands of the Crown within the Province of South
Australia shall be disposed of in the manner and according to the regula-
tions therein provided, and not otherwise : And whereas, by “ The
Waste Lands Appropriation Act, 1862,” provision is made for the appro-
priation of the proceeds of the sale of the said waste lands, and it is ex-
pedient that the waste lands of the Crown so annexed to the said Pro-
vince, as aforesaid, shall be disposed of in the manner and according to
the regulations herein provided, and that the said Acts, so far as the same
relate to, or affect such annexed lands, shall be amended—Be it therefore
Enacted by the Governor-in-Chief of the Province of South Australia,
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and House of
Assembly of the said Province, in this present Parliament assembled, as
follows:
Act No. 37 of 1862 not to apply.
1. The Waste Lands Appropriation Act, 1862, shall not apply to the
proceeds to be derived from the sale of any waste lands within the said
territory.
600,000 acres of country land and 1,562 town lots may be sold, as after mentioned.
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the said Acts No. 5 of 21
Viet., and No. 18 of 1858, five hundred thousand acres of the waste lands


of the Crown, being country lots, and one thousand five hundred and
sixty-two town lots (such town lots to contain half an acre or thereabouts)
within the said territory, may be sold by private contract, at the prices,,
and in manner, hereinafter mentioned.
Governor to appoint officers in London and Adelaide to receive applications for purchase
of land at 7s. 6d. per acre.
3. The Governor, with the advice and consent of the Executive Coun-
cil, shall appoint an officer in London, and an officer in Adelaide, who
shall, on certain days to be fixed by the Governor, with the advice and
consent aforesaid, by Proclamation in the Government Gazette , open an
office in London and Adelaide, respectively, for the receipt of applications
from persons desirous of becoming purchasers of the lands mentioned in
the last clause, and such offices respectively, shall remain open for the
receipt of such applications as aforesaid for twenty-eight days after the
first day named for receiving such applications, subject to the list being
closed at an earlier period, in accordance with the regulations hereinafter
authorized to be made; and immediately after the expiration of such
periods such officers shall, in manner hereinafter provided, proceed to
allot to the persons applying, the land so applied for, at the rate of Seven
Shillings and Sixpence per acre ; and on compliance with the said regula-
tions, as to the terms and conditions of payment or otherwise, shall issue
to such persons preliminary land orders, which shall state the number of
acres and town lots sold, and authorized to be selected.
250,000 acres of country land and 1,562 town lots only to be allotted at 7s. 6d. per acre.
Mode of allotment.
4. The mode of allotment of lands so applied for shall be as follows :
i. One hundred and twenty-five thousand acres of country and seven
hundred and eighty-one town lots shall only be allotted by the
officer in London, and the like quantity by the officer in Adelaide,,
under clause 3.
ii. If a greater quantity of land be applied for, either in London or
Adelaide, than mentioned in last subdivision, the allotment shall
be made 'pro rata , according to the quantity applied for by each
applicant: Provided that no person shall apply for or receive
a less quantity than one hundred and sixty acres of country land and
one town lot.
m. Any portion of the two hundred and fifty thousand acres of coun-
try land undisposed of under clause 3 shall be sold at the rate of
Twelve Shillings per acre, as provided for by the next clause.
After expiration of period for applications for land under last clause, 250,000 acres
more to be offered at 12s. an acre.
5. At any time after the expiration of either of the periods mentioned
in the third clause, the said offices shall be open for the receipt of further
applications from persons desirous of purchasing lands in the said
territory, and the same shall remain open for ninety days after the first
day named for receiving such applications, subject to the list being closed
at an earlier period, in accordance with the regulations before mentioned
and, after the expiration of either of such periods, the said officers shall
proceed to allot to the persons applying, the lands so applied for, at the
price of Twelve Shillings per acre, who shall be entitled to Land Orders
therefor, which shall state the number of acres sold and authorized to be


selected : Provided that no greater quantity of land shall he sold, at the
rate of Twelve Shillings per acre, than two hundred and fifty thousand
acres, in addition to the quantity (if any), undisposed of under clause 3;
and the course prescribed in the last clause, in reference to the allotment
of lands applied, for under clause 3, shall be adopted in reference to the
allotment of lands applied for under this clause.
Land order to entitle purchaser or nominee to select land within five years.
6. Every preliminary land order, or land order issued under the pre-
ceding clause, shall entitle the purchaser, or his transferee, or nominee,
within five years from the date thereof, to select from and out of the
surveyed country lands in the said territory, the particular land whereof
he will become the purchaser, and upon such selection being notified to
the Government Resident or other officer to be appointed for that purpose,
and production of such land order, the said Resident, or such officer as
aforesaid, shall deliver to such purchaser, transferee, or nominee, a valid
grant of the fee simple of the land so selected ; Provided that all holders
of preliminary land orders, or land orders held over the aforesaid five
years, shall be entitled to tender the said preliminary land order or land
order in lieu of the amount of its original cost, in payment of the purchase
money of land within the said territory, under the Crown Lands
Regulations for the time being.
Person entitled to select one town lot for every 160 acres of first 250,000 purchased.
7. It shall not be lawful for any person to select any town lot by virtue
of any such land order as aforesaid, unless he is entitled to become the
purchaser of one hundred and sixty acres, of portion of the first two
hundred and fifty thousand acres of country land above mentioned, or a
nominee or transferee of such purchaser, and every such last mentioned
purchaser shall be entitled to select one town lot for every entire
quantity of one hundred and sixty acres of country land authorized to be
purchased as aforesaid : Provided that such selection be made at a
place within the proposed township on a day to be named by the
Government Resident, or such other officer as aforesaid.
After sale of 500,000 acres, land to he sold as directed in Act No. 5 of 21 Yict.
Upset price of town lots to be £l.
8. After the sale of five hundred thousand acres of country land and
such town lots as aforesaid, no further portion of the said waste lands of
the Crown shall be sold except in manner provided for by the said Act
No. sof 21 Viet.: Provided that no such town lots shall be sold unless
the sum of One Pound at least for each lot be then and there offered for
the same, which sum of One Pound per lot shall be the lowest upset
price of any town lot within the said territory.
Lands not to be sold of less area than 160 acres.
9. Until after the sale of such five hundred thousand acres, no person
shall be allowed to purchase any land the area of which is less than one
hundred and sixty acres.
Appropriation of proceeds.
10. The accounts of all money received from or in respect of the said
territory, whether as purchase money, rent, licence fees, customs duties,
or otherwise, and all moneys paid or expended upon or in respect of the
said territory, shall be entered and kept distinct from the General


Revenue and Expenditure of the said Province, and the said money so
received as aforesaid shall be applied to the payment of the cost of
governing the said territory, and the general improvement thereof:
Provided that a sum equal to ten per cent, on the gross amount received
shall be charged in the said accounts and be paid to the Treasurer, and
by him placed to the credit of the General Revenue of the said Province.
Governor to make rules.
11. The Governor, with the advice and consent of the Executive
Council, may, from time to time, make, vary, and alter such rules as may
be necessary for regulating the terms, period, or mode of leasing, or
occupation, or the disposal by sale of the said waste lands of the Crown,
the person or persons to whom the purchase money may be paid, the
mode and order of selecting land by persons holding land orders as
aforesaid, the mode of keeping the accounts, and when and in what
manner such accounts shall be audited, and generally make all and every
such regulations as to him may seem necessary and proper to carry out
and give effect to the provisions of this Act, and all such regulations,
when published in the Government Gazette , shall have the force of law.
Appointment of Government Resident.
12. The Governor, with the advice and consent of the Executive
Council, may, from time to time, appoint an officer to be resident in the
said territory, to be called the Government Resident, and all other
necessary and proper officers for securing the order and good government
of the said territory, and may remove such Government Resident or other
officers at discretion, and may assign and pay to them such salaries and
'emoluments as he may determine.
Powers of Government Resident.
and shall have and exercise, within the limits of the said territory, all and
every the powers and authorities which the Governor, with the advice
and consent of the Executive Council, may, by any Commission to be
issued to such Resident under the hand of the Governor, and seal of the
said Province, impose or confer upon him: Provided that such Com-
mission may, from time to time, be revoked or varied by the Governor,
with the advice and consent aforesaid.
Regulations tc be laid before Parliament.
14. A copy of all regulations made under the authority of this Act,
and also a copy of any direction issued to such Government Resident as
aforesaid, shall be laid before Parliament within fourteen days from the
publication or issuing thereof respectively, if the Parliament shall be then
sitting, and if the Parliament shall not be then sitting, then within
■fourteen days from its next sitting for the dispatch of business.
Acts No. 6 of 21 Yict. and 18 of 1858, to be construed herewith.
15. Save in so far as the same are amended by this Act. “ The Waste
Lands Act,” No. 5 of 21 Yict., and the said Act No. 18 of 1858, shall be
deemed to be incorporated herein, and shall, together with this Act, be
\xead as one Act.
Construction.
16. In the construction of this Act, unless inconsistent with the
context, the words following shall have and receive the meanings hereby


assigned to them respectively—“ Territory” shall mean all that portion
of Australia annexed to the said Province by the hereinbefore recited
Letters Patent: “ Waste Lands of the Crown,” shall comprise all lands
within the said territory which now are vested in Her Majesty, Her
heirs and successors, and which have not been already granted or lawfully
contracted to be granted to any person or persons in fee simple, or for
an estate of freehold or for a term of years, and which have not been
dedicated and set apart for public use.
Short title.
17. This Act may be cited and referred to as “ The Northern Territory
Act.”
In the name and on behalf of the Queen I hereby assent to this Act.
D. DALY, Governor.




NORTHERN TERRITORY LAND REGULATIONS.
South Australia ) Proclamation by Sir Dominick Daly, Knight ,
to wit. ) Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in and
over Her Majesty's Province of South Australia , and
fL.S.) the Dependencies thereof, and Vice-Admiral of the same,
D. Daly. £ c ., Sf C .
Whereas, by an Act of the Parliament of South Australia, passed in
the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh years of Her Majesty’s reign, in-
tituled “ An Act for regulating the Sale or other disposal of Waste Lands
of the Crown lately annexed to the Province of South Australia, and for
other purposes,” it was enacted that the Governor, with the advice and
consent of the Executive Council, might, from time to time, make, vary,
and alter such rules as might be necessary for regulating the terms,
period, or mode of leasing, or occupation, or the disposal by sale of the
said waste lands of the Crown; the person or persons to whom the pur-
chase-money might be paid; the mode and order of selecting land by
persons holding land-orders, as aforesaid; the mode of keeping the
accounts, and when and in what manner such accounts should be audited ;
and generally make all and every such regulations as to him might seem
necessary and proper to carry out and give effect to the provisions of the
said Act; and all such regulations, when published in the Government
Gazette , should have the force of law: Now, therefore, I, the said
Governor-in-Chief, under and by virtue of the powers given me by the
said Act, and of all other powers and authorities on me conferred, with
the advice and consent of the Executive Council, do hereby proclaim,
order, and direct, that the regulations hereinafter set forth shall be
regulations for the purposes declared in and by the said in part recited
Act; that is to say—
REGULATIONS under which LEASES of WASTE LANDS of the CROWN for
PASTORAL PURPOSES are to be GRANTED under the “ NORTHERN
TERRITORY ACT.”
1. Any person who shall apply for and describe to the Government
any country, within the said territory and without the settled districts,
then in his actual occupation as a run for pastoral purposes, and not pre-
viously applied for, shall be entitled to receive a lease, for any period not
exceeding fourteen years, of any portion thereof, in one block, to con-
sist of not less than twenty-five, nor more than 300 square miles in area,
at a rental, payable annually in advance, of Is. per square mile for the
first four years, 2s. 6d. per square mile for the next five years, and ss.
per square mile for the last five years ; and subject to the condition, as
to plan of run, set forth in clause 4 of these regulations.
2. Every application must be accompanied by a declaration, in the from
or to the effect contained in the Schedule hereto annexed, that the appli-
cant is actually occupying the run so applied for, by having placed upon


it, for the purpose of depasturing theron, three head of great cattle or
ten head of sheep for every square mile of country so claimed. If the
same land is applied for by two or more persons, the first bond fide occu-
pant shall be preferably entitled to the lease of such land; and if two or
more persons shall, at the same time, have stocked the same country for
which they apply, or should their boundaries overlap, preference will be
given to the claim of the first applicant.
3. Every such application shall contain a clear description of the run
applied for, and shall be entered in a book to be kept for that purpose in
the office of the Government Resident, and such book shall be signed
then and there by the applicant, or his authorized agent (such agent not
being the Government Resident or his Clerk), and any person, upon
payment of a fee of 2s. 6d., shall be entitled to inspect the said book.
4. All applications for pasturage leases must be made in writing, to
the Government Resident, at the Township or seat of Government
to be hereafter declared, accompanied by a plan of the run, draw r n to a
scale of not less than one-quarter inch to the mile, describing the position
and boundaries of the land applied for in connection, as far as practicable,
with some point laid down on the public maps of the territory in the
local Survey Office. Except in cases where the land applied for is
partially bounded by runs already leased, or where the natural features
of the country may render a regular outline impracticable, the land so
applied for shall be of rectangular form, the length of which shall not
exceed twice its breadth, except where determined otherwise by the
Government Resident.
5. If there be no objection to the application, the applicant will re-
ceive from the Government Resident an order to pay to the Treasury
the first year’s rent; and the Treasury receipt for such sum, together
with a declaration of the number and description of the stock then actually
in occupation of the said land, must be deposited in the Government
Resident’s Office, not later than the following day (Sundays and public
holidays excepted).
6. All rents must be paid annually in advance, and all leases will date
from the Ist January, Ist of April, Ist of July, and Ist October, res-
pectively, next succeeding to the date of the application under clause 1.
If the rent thereafter is not paid when due, the Treasury will be autho-
rized to receive the same during the next succeeding sixty days, with the
addition of twenty-five per cent, to the amount thereof; if the sum due
be not then paid, the lease shall, at the option of the Government, become
absolutely forfeited.
7. All waste lands having been previously occupied under lease, or
contract for a lease, but reverting to the Crown, may be let for a term
not exceeding fourteen years, at an annual rental of 2s. 6d. per square
mile for the first five years, and ss. per square mile for the last nine
years.
8. Leases will be granted subject to all taxes and assessments which
may be imposed by the Legislature, and to such conditions as the
Government shall think necessary to insert therein for the protection of
the aborigines, or for securing to the public the right of passing over
any part of the said land, and to the Government the right of searching
therein for minerals, or for any purpose of public defence, safety, im-
provement, convenience, or utility. On proof adduced to the Government


Resident that the quantity of stock required by clause 2 is not kept
on the run, the lease may, at the discretion of the Government be
forfeited.
9. The whole or any portion of any run may be reserved or resumed
for public purposes, whether for sale or otherwise, after giving six
months’ notice. In case of resumption, the proportionate rent paid or
payable for the current year in respect of the quantity of land so resumed,
will be returned or allowed to the lessee.
10. Whenever it shall be deemed expedient to resume for any public
purpose, any land included in a pasturage lease, the lessee may claim the
value of improvements effected on land so sold or resumed, if such claim
is made within two months after notice of such intended sale or resump-
tion. The lessee must name a valuer within two months after receiving;
the notice before-mentioned, who, with a valuer to be appointed by the
Government Resident, will award the amount of compensation to be
paid to the lessee for such improvements ; if the two valuers cannot agree,,
they shall have power to choose an umpire ; and if the lessee fails to
name a valuer as herein required, the Government Resident will
proceed to value the improvements, or will nominate some other person
to act in his place, which valuation shall be conclusive, and payment will;
be made to the lessee according to such valuation.
11. Whenever any such compensation is awarded in respect of land
resumed for the purpose of sale, the particular lots of land on which the
improvements have been effected will be offered for sale as “ Special
Country Lots,” the [ordinary upset price of the land being increased by
the amount of such compensation, which amount will be paid over to the-
lessee after the sale of the land, or allowed in the abatement of the
purchase-money if the land is purchased by the lessee.
12. Notice will be given at the office of the Government Resident
whenever any pasturage leases are ready for issuing ; and if any lessee-
or his representative fails to come forward and execute the lease prepared
for him, and pay up all rent that may be due under such lease, within
six months after such notification, the lease will be forfeited at the option
of the Government.
13. The settled districts include all such lands as may hereafter be
declared to be set apart as Port, Town, or Country Lots.
Schedule.
Declaration to he made hy the Applicant for a Dim that such Dun has been already stocked.
I, , being the applicant for the Run No. , do
solemnly declare that the said run was stocked hy me on the day of
,186 , and continues to be stocked, to the extent required by clause 2
of the Regulations under the Northern Territory Act.
(Signature).
Declared before me, at , this day of , 186 . J.P
RGULATIONS for the SALE of LAND under the “NORTHERN TERRITORY.
ACT.”
1. On or before the twentieth day of February, 1864, the officers
appointed for the purpose in London and Adelaide shall announce, by
public advertisement, that on the first day of March, 1864, they will be
prepared to receive applications from any persons willing to purchase
land offered for sale under the above-mentioned Act.


2. Before any application can be received each applicant shall pay a
deposit of £2O sterling, as part payment of the purchase-money for each
quantity of 160 acres of country land applied for.
3. Every such application must he for 160 acres of country land, and
one town lot, or for some multiple thereof, in the form or to the effect
set forth in the Schedule hereto annexed, marked A, to be signed by the
applicant, and accompanied by a deposit receipt for Twenty Pounds for
each and every lot of 160 acres so applied for, as part payment of the
purchase-money, and the balance must be paid within fourteen days from
the day of allotment; but if the applicant shall neglect to pay the balance
as aforesaid, his deposit shall be actually forfeited, and the land so
allotted may be resold, without notice.
4. The officer in London and the officer in Adelaide will each have
power to keep his office open daily from ten o’clock a.m. to three o’clock
p.m., for twenty-eight days after the first day of March, 1864, for re-
ceiving applications for the 125,000 acres of country land and 781 town
lots authorized to be sold under clause 3 of the Act, or to declare the list
closed at an earlier period, as soon as he shall have received applications
from 781 applicants.
5. In case the whole quantity of the first 125,000 acres of country land
and 781 town lots is not applied for either in London or Adelaide during
the time within which applications may be received, the remainder must be
withdrawn, and cannot be offered again, at less than twelve shillings per
acre, pursuant to the Act. '
6. As soon as the lists of applications for the first 125,000 acres of
country land and 781 town lots are closed, the officers shall, after giving
seven days’ notice by public advertisement, proceed, at the appointed
times and places, to allot to each applicant 160 acres of country land and
one town lot, and the remainder (if any) shall be allotted pro rata , ac-
cording to the quantity applied for by each applicant in excess of 160
acres: Provided that every such allotment, pro rata, shall be 160 acres of
country land, and one town lot, or some multiple thereof.
7. On the allotment of the land sold, under clause 3 being completed,
and the balance of the purchase-money being paid, the officers shall
respectively issue, in duplicate, “Preliminary Land Orders” to the
persons entitled to receive them, which “ Preliminary Land Orders”
shall each be for one lot of country land of 160 acres and one half-acre
block of town land.
8. In the event of the quantity of land offered at seven shillings and
sixpence per acre not being sufficient to satisfy the applications made,
the unsupplied applicants may, at their option, receive back their de-
posits, or shall, on application, be preferably entitled to have the re-
mainder of the quantity of country land which they originally applied for
allotted to them pro rata, at twelve shillings an acre, before any appli-
cations are called for by the officer for purchase of land under clause 5
of the Act: Provided, that every such allotment, pro rata, shall be 160
acres of country land, or some multiple thereof, and no such applicant
shall be entitled to any town lot.
9. In the event of any portion of the second 125,000 acres of country
land remaining unallotted after supplying the original applicants, as
provided for in the last regulation, the officers shall respectively give one
month’s public notice that, on a certain day, they will be prepared to


receive applications from persons willing to purchase the remainder at
twelve shillings per acre.
10. Every such application must be for 160 acres of country land, or
for some multiple thereof, in the form or to the effect set forth in the
Schedule hereto annexed, marked B, to be signed by the applicant, and
accompanied by a deposit receipt for Twenty Pounds for each and every
lot of 160 acres, so applied for, as part payment of the purchase-money,
and the balance must be paid within fourteen days from the day of allot-
ment ; but if the applicant shall neglect to pay the balance as aforesaid,
his deposit shall be actually forfeited, and the land so allotted may be
resold, without notice.
11. The officer in London and the officer in Adelaide will each have
power to keep his office open for applications for the sale of the land
authorized to be sold under clause 5 of the Act, or so much thereof as
shall remain unallotted to applicants who may have been preferably
entitled to allotment under Regulation 7, for ninety days after the first
day named for receiving such applications ; or to declare the list closed
at an earlier period as soon as he shall have received applications from,
as many applicants as will enable him to allot 160 acres of land to each
applicant.
12. As soon as the lists of second applications for land are closed, the
officers shall, after giving seven days’ notice by public advertisement,
proceed, at the appointed times and places, to allot to each applicant 160
acres of country land, and the remainder (if any) shall be allotted pro
rata , according to the quantity applied for by each applicant in excess of
160 acres: Provided that every such allotment pro rata, shall be 160
acres of country land, or some multiple thereof.
13. On the allotment of land sold under clause 5 being completed,
and the balance of purchase-money being paid, the officers shall respec-
tively issue, in duplicate, “ Land Orders ” to the persons entitled to
receive them, which “Land Orders” shall each he for one lot of 160
acres of country land.
14. All purchase-money payable in London under the Act, shall be
paid to the Agent-General of South Australia, or his order; and all
purchase-money payable in Adelaide under the Act, shall be payable to
the Treasurer of South Australia, or his order.
15. On the arrival of the Government Resident in the new territory,
the site of the principal town will be determined and surveyed, and the
plan of the town mapped out in half-acre lots, and exhibited for public
inspection, when a general meeting of the holders of the “ Preliminary
Land) Orders,” or their agents, shall be held at such principal town;
such meeting not to take place earlier than Ist September, 1864, and
the order in which they shall select their town land shall then be decided
by lot, and the selection shall forthwith be made under the superinten-
dence of the Government Resident, who shall, after such selection,
reserve a sufficient number of town lots to meet the requirements of the
holders of such outstanding “ Preliminary Land Orders” as shall not
have been exercised at such meeting; and from the lots thus reserved
the holders of such “ Preliminary Land Orders ” may make selection in
the order in which they may apply for the same.
16. When the surveys of country land have been completed to a suffi-
cient extent, another general meeting of the holders of the “ Preliminary


Land Orders,” or their agents, shall be held not later than the day afore-
said, when the order in which they shall select their country lands shall
be decided by lot, and the selection in the order of choice must be made
under the superintendance of the Government Resident within one
month from the date of such meeting ; and any selection not made in
the order of choice by the holders of “ Preliminary Land Orders ” within
that time, may be made at any time within five years from the date of
the “ Preliminary Land Order,” but will not be entitled to any preference
over “ Land Orders.”
17. The selection of lands under “Land Orders” may be made from
any surveyed lands open for selection after the expiration of one month
from the date of the first selection under “ Preliminary Land Orders,”
and in the order in which application is made for the same.
Schedule A.
Form of Application,
To the Officer appointed for the sale of land under “ The Northern Terri-
tory Act” of South Australia—
Sir—Having paid to the sum of ,
the receipt for which is forwarded herewith, I hereby request you will allot me
acres of country land and town lots authorized to be sold at Seven
Shillings and Sixpence per acre under clause 3 of “The Northern Territory Act” of
South Australia; and I hereby agree to accept such land pursuant to the said Act, and
the Regulations issued under the authority thereof, or any smaller quantity of land, not
being less than 160 acres and one town lot, that may be allotted to me; and I further
agree to pay the balance of purchase-money, and to conform in all respects to the
terms of the said Regulations.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signature).
Schedule B.
Form of Application.
To the Officer appointed for the sale of land under “The Northern Terri-
tory Act” of South Australia—
Sir—Haying paid to the sum of , the
receipt for which is forwarded herewith, I hereby request you will allot me
acres of country land, authorized to be sold at Twelve Shillings per acre under
clause 5 of “The Northern Territory Act” of South Australia, and I hereby agree to
accept such land pursuant to the said Act, and the Regulations issued under authority
thereof, or any smaller quantity of land, not being less than 160 acres, that may be
allotted to me; and I further agree to pay the balance of purchase-money, and to con-
form in all respects to the terms of the said Regulations.
I am, Sir,
Tour obedient Servant,
(Signature).
Given under my hand and the public seal of the said Province, at
Adelaide, this twenty-fourth day of November, in the year of
our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, and in
the twenty-seventh year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By command,
HENRY AYERS,
Chief Secretary.
God sate the Queen !


APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
Chief Secretary’s Office, Adelaide, November 24, 1863.
By virtue and in pursuance of the provisions of “The Northern Terri-
tory Act,” His Excellency the Governor-in-Chief has been pleased, by
and with the advice and consent of the Executive Council, to appoint the
undermentioned Officers to open an office in London and Adelaide
respectively on certain days, to be fixed by Proclamation in the Govern-
ment Gazette, for the receipt of applications from persons desirous of
becoming purchasers of land in the Northern Territory, and generally to
give effect to the provisions of the said Act, viz.
Officer in London.— Gregory Seale Walters, Esq., Agent-General for
South Australia in London; or, in case of his death or incapacity to act,
then Richard Francis Newland, Esq., Assistant Emigration Agent for
South Australia in London.
Officer in Adelaide. —The Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Immigration for the time being.
By command,
Henet Atees, Chief Secretary.




NORTHERN TERRITORY OE SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The territory recently annexed to the Province of South Australia, by
Commission under the Great Seal, bearing date Bth July, 1863, comprises
all the country which lies to the northward of the twenty-sixth parallel
of south latitude, and between the one hundred and twenty-ninth and
one hundred and thirty-eighth degrees of east longitude, together with
all bays, gulfs, and adjacent islands, within those limits. The eastern
boundary line of this territory cuts the coast near the mouth of the
Wentworth River on the western shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria, and
the western, near Cape Domett on Cambridge Gulf. The coast line, and
the adjacent country, are described, with sufficient accuracy for general
purposes, in the annexed extracts from Earl’s Handbook ;* and some
little light will be thrown upon the character of the interior—which is, as
yet, almost a terra incognita —by information extracted from the journals
of Stuart, Gregory, and other explorers.
EXTRACTS FROM EARL’S HANDBOOK.
VICTORIA RIVER AND DISTRICT.
The Victoria River, in the north-west, appears destined to become the
site of the first permanent settlement established on the northern coasts
of Australia. Ten years ago the chances were in favor of some port in
the Gulf of Carpentaria taking precedence on this point, a practicable
route from New South Wales having been traced by Dr. Leichardt
during his memorable overland journey from Moreton Bay to Port
Essington, which the colonists engaged in pastoral pursuits were pre-
paring to follow up by transporting their surplus horse-stock, by the
overland route to the Gulf for shipment to India; but the discovery of
gold near Bathurst put a sudden stop to the enterprise by furnishing a
far better market nearer home, which soon enabled many of the larger
stock-holders to retire with ample fortunes. The separation of the
northern or Moreton Bay district from New South Whies, and its establish-
ment as an independent Colony under the name of Queensland, which
occurred a few years afterwards, turned the attention of the older colonists
to matters more exclusively local, and the settlers in the new Colony
naturally became absorbed in extending their territory along the coast to-
wards Torres Straits, which they might claim as their own whenever a new
colony came to be opened further to the north—an event which must
inevitably happen sooner or later. The field was therefore left open to
the colonists of South Australia, who, indeed, had been first to ad-
venture upon it—the well-organized expedition under Eyre, which resulted
♦ A Handbook for Colonists in Tropical Australia; by George Windsor Earl Printed
at the Finang Gazette Press,


in the discovery of the so-called Lake Torrens, having been fitted out in
1839, only three years after the founding of the Colony. This was fol-
lowed up by the great central expedition under Captain Sturt, which may
be considered as the precursor of the late success —Mr. Stuart, the dis-
coverer of the route to the north-west coast, having been a follower of
Captain Sturt on his last expedition, and has since been almost constantly
occupied in exploration to the northward. The occupation of the country
along the line of route is already progressing, and a party has set out
with stock to traverse the route of Mr. Stuart in the endeavor to find
shipment on the Victoria River for the south of India; so that its per-
manent settlement will merely be a question of time.
Victoria River Mouth —(Lat. 14° 40' S,, long. 129° 25' E.) is up-
wards of twenty miles wide between Turtle Point and Swamp Point
which form the mouth of the river. A portion of this space is occupied
by mud and sand banks, the first lying near the coast, and the sand banks
forming long ridges towards the centre of the river, running in the
direction of the stream of tide, and bounding the central channel on
either side. This channel was discovered and surveyed by the officers
of H.M.S. Beagle in the year 1839, and named the Queen’s Channel.
The entrance from the seaward is between two sandheads, a mile and
a-half apart, which are covered at half tide—the depth in the channel being
seven and eight fathoms, which, however, decreases farther up; but as
there is still two and a-quarter fathoms at low water, and the rise and
fall of tide at full and change of the moon is twenty-four feet, there is
a depth sufficient for the largest ship. The great strength of the tide
seems likely to render this channel unpopular except under very favor-
able circumstances; the ordinary rate being five miles an hour, and the
velocity of the ebb tide must be greatly increased during the freshes.
Under these circumstances, the two eastern channels, through one of
which H.M.S. Beagle entered, are likely to be preferred; for, although
more narrow and tortuous, the tides are very strong only at certain spots
which can easily be avoided by ships requiring to anchor to stop tide.
The land at the mouth of the river is uniformly low, consisting of islands
or mud flats overgrown with mangroves and partly covered at high tide.
Point Pearce, the north extreme of the bay into which the river discharges,
is visible in clear weather from the sand-heads, distant seventeen miles,
the cliff's being eighty-five feet high. The Macadam Range, 600 feet
high, will also be visible'eighteen miles to the westward, but it is less
valuable as a leading mark for making the sand-heads than Point Pearce.
River Peak, on the north bank of the river, near the commencement of
the narrows, may also generally be seen distant twenty-five miles to the
south-west.
Point Pearce —(Lat. 14° 25' 50" S., long. 129° 21' 42" E.), which
forms the north point of the great bay into which the Victoria flows, is
a small headland composed of red sandstone cliffs, eighty-five feet high,
covered with a growth of timber, mostly white barked eucalyptus. The
cliff's rise abruptly from a shelf of rocks very little elevated above high
water mark, round which the tide rushes with great rapidity, forming a
race which extend upwards of a mile out to sea, although the depth
of water close in to the point is four fathoms, rapidly increasing to sea-
ward. The rise and fall of the tide at the springs is twenty-six feet, and
it is high water at full and change at seven o’clock. There is a bay to


the south of Point Pearce, in which a ship can anchor, out of the strength
of the tide, in five to six fathoms. Ships bound to the Victoria River
by the Queen’s Channel will have to make Point Pearce, from which they
can shape their course for the sand-heads. There will probably be a
pilot station established here when the banks of the river come to be
settled, and establishments for cutting timber are likely also to be formed,
as wood is much more abundant here than nearer the river.
The country in the neighborhood of Point Pearce is well-grassed, and
there is water for stock in lagoons a short distance inland, even in the
driest season.
Cambridge Gulf, sixty miles to the westward of Turtle Point, is a
navigable inlet penetrating inland upwards of sixty miles in a southerly
direction. It was discovered and surveyed by Capt. King, during his
first voyage in the Cumberland , cutter. The entrance between Cape
Domett on the east, and Cape Dussejour on the west, is twelve miles
wide, the centre part being occupied by a rocky, barren island, six hun-
dred feet high, and nine miles in circumferance, called Lacrosse Island,
so named by the French expedition under Capt. Baudin. The western
channel is rather more than five miles wide, but half of this space is occu-
pied by a reef extending from Cape Dussejour. The eastern channel
appeared to be clear throughout, and Capt. King had seven fathoms half
a-mile from the eastern side of the island.
Entrance Island and the Sandstone Gorge. —The low land,
mud flats, and sand-banks (at the mouth of the Victoria) terminate
suddenly at Entrance Island, thirty miles from the sand-heads, where
the river contracts to a width of less than a mile, and rushes through
a gorge in the sandstone range with a velocity that creates numerous
eddies and whirlpools which render the navigation critical, although the
depth of water is great, sometimes as much as twenty fathoms. H.M.S.
Beagle passed through this gorge, which is ten miles in length, and
anchored in
Holdfast Reach, where some wells were sunk on the north bank
of the river, and a plentiful supply of good water obtained. The Beagle
remained the whole of the month of November at this anchorage, while
the boats were exploring the upper waters of the river. Capt. Stokes says
that she might have gone seven miles further up than Holdfast Reach ;
and the Tough Tom , a schooner of 140 tons, in attendance on Mr.
Gregory’s Overland Expedition, ascended the river for 100 miles in
September, 1855, but she was so much injured by repeated groundings
on the sand-banks that she required extensive repairs before she could be
■sent to sea, and was condemned as soon as she reached a commercial
port. It is not likely, however, that vessels of burden will ascend the
river so high as Holdfast Reach, except with the aid of a powerful steam
tug, for the Beagle was turned round and round by the strength of the
eddies while passing through the narrows ; and, although the risk was
not very great in a handy vessel of 200 tons, with a numerous and disci-
plined crew, it would be otherwise in the case of a modern clipper ship,
whose length and capacity would render her unsuited for this kind of
navigation. Nor does the anchorage at Holdfast Reach present any
attractions beyond the wells of fresh water, as the two anchors with which
the Beagle was moored bit so deeply into the ground, owing to the
strength of the tide (sometimes six and a-half miles per hour), that they
'Could not be weighed, and had to be left behind with a portion of their


cables. This anchorage also seems to have been oppressively hot, pro-
bably owing to the radiation from the red sandstone ranges, as the
thermometer on board the Beagle sometimes stood at 105° in the shade.
This spot, namely the end of Sea Reach, close tip to the entrance of the
narrows, may be looked upon as the site of the future port, as it will
certainly become the anchorage for all ships of burthen frequenting the
river, that is to say unless some other spot very favorably circumstanced
happens to be discovered. Fresh water will be found in abundance below
the surface at the base of the sandstone ranges, and the supply of fuel
will come from the mangrove jungle which lies to seaward ; indeed so
scant of timber are the banks of the river further inland that, when the
population comes to be large, the mangrove wood, which furnishes fuel
of the best description, is likely to be in general use up to the head of
the navigation.
Upper Victoria River. —Above Holdfast Reach the river opens
out, and to an average width of one and a-half mile, and the tortuous
character that marks its passage through the sandstone gorge disappears,
for now there is a reach of sixteen miles in length running south, when
the river takes an abrupt turn to the eastward, and the country im-
mediately improves, the valley extending for some distance from each
bank in flats of brown loamy soil, scantily wooded with eucalyptus and
melaleuca. This easterly trend continues for twenty-five miles, when it
bends to the south-east across the Whirlwind Plains of Stokes for ten
miles, and then runs south five miles to the site of the camp established
by Mr. Gregory as a depot* while he was absent on his trip towards the
south-west to the sources of the Victoria and the Salt Lake. This may
be considered as the head of the navigation of the river, for a little be-
yond the channel is dry or nearly so at certain seasons of the year.
Above the camp, the bed of the river becomes tortuous up to a point
fifty miles due east, when it curves to the southward, and continues in
that direction up to its source, which was found in a sandstone table-
land, 1,200 feet high, in lat. 18°, long. 130° 40'. This tableland proved
to be the dividing range, running north-west and south-east. It was
subsequently crossed by Mr. Gregory and his party at a point fifty miles
to the north-east while on his journey towards the interior. The dividing
range was 1,700 feet in elevation at the second point of crossing. The
region of the Upper Victoria consists chiefly of extensive valleys of good
soil, well-grassed, the sandstone of the lower region being varied with
out-crops of basalt, limestone, and jasper. Mr. Wilson, the geologist of
the expedition, in his paper on the Physical Geography of North-western
Australia, published in the Journal of the Royal Geographical Society,
says—“ In no part of the world have I seen grass grow so luxuriantly;
and Mr. H. Gregory observed to me, during a journey of ten days, when
I accompanied him and his brother to the Upper Victoria, that he had
seen more grass land than during all his life before.” (Vol. XXVII, p.
141.) This beautiful country is, however, liable to floods, sometimes
rising to an enormous height in contracted valleys, so that settlers will
do well to examine narrowly the level of former floods before erect-
ing their stations. These floods do not appear to be caused by the regu-
lar monsoon rains, but rather by water-spouts or such like phenomena
during the periodical commotions that take place in the atmosphere of
this region.
Mr. Gregory and his party were at the Victoria River, or in the im-


mediate neighborhood from September 15th, 1855, to the end of June in
the following year—a period of more than nine months, including the
hottest season of the year. Mr. Elsey, the surgeon of the expedition,
who resided constantly at the camp, gives the following particulars of
the seasons and climate in his medical report, which is published in the
volume of the Geographical Society’s Journal, quoted above (p. IS6).
“ As far as our observations extended, there seems to be three seasons
in North-west Australia, viz.—the wet season, commencing about Decem-
ber and lasting to February; the spring, or cool season, from March to
July; and the dry or hot season, from August to November. Our first
arrival at the Victoria was in September. The whole country was
parched, the vegetation dried up, and bush-fires were frequent. The
heat of the day was not followed by a cool night. Though the maximum
heat was not excessive, rarely exceeding 114° Fahr., the minimum was
very high, seldom falling below 80° at any time ; and I have known the
thermometer suspended in the air to stand at 98° at sunrise. During
these months there was scarcely any dew; lightning was constant to the
east and north-east, and was rarely absent for six months. There were
occasional thunder storms during the month of October.
“The rains commenced towards the end of November, and by the
middle of December had fairly set in. On the 18th the freshes had raised
the river some four or five feet. From the 20th to the end of December
the rain was incessant, and on the 7th of January the river was eleven
feet above its average level. This was the greatest height attained.
There were, however, indications of its being a very dry season. The
weather during this time was very oppressive, and the excessive moisture
rendered the heat most trying to the party, many of whom were actively
employed. By the end of January the rain had almost entirely ceased,
and at the end of February the air had regained its usual dryness.
“From March to July there was a constant succession of beautiful
weather. The noon-day heat seldom exceeded 95°, and was tempered by
a delicious south-east breeze, which blew uninterruptedly for nearly five
weeks, and, with slight intervals, for four months. The days were bright
and cloudless, the nights clear and cold—the thermometer generally below
50° at sunrise, and sometimes below 40°. The weather had a most bene-
ficial effect on us, and its influence was specially felt by those of the
party who were for so long a time resident in camp, at one spot, and.
without any active employment or exercise.”
Notwithstanding this cool season, the climate will not seem highly
attractive to Europeans, but experienced bushmen will not hesitate to
face it, with an important object in view. A better description of
dwelling than a tent will reduce the temperature within doors very con-
siderably; but certainly those whose business lies with the shipping will
prefer residing on the seaward side of the Entrance Range, where the
westerly breeze blows almost continuously during the hot season in the
interior. But, notwithstanding the height of temperature at the camp,
the general sanitary condition of the party appears to have been good.
The only ailments experienced were an irritable state of the stomach,
which yielded to quinine, and a disorder of the eyes which lasted usually
for twelve hours, and may have been caused by contact with insect or
vegetable poison. Mr Elsey was able to report that “ There was no case
of diarrhoea or dysenteric affection, no rheumatism, nor any injury arising


from the very considerable exposure to which we were unavoidably
subjected.”
We will conclude this notice of the Upper Victoria with an extract
from Mr. Wilson’s paper already quoted, giving a description of the
available country in its neighborhood.
“The soil on these plains (the jasper plains of the Upper Victoria),
is a rich clay, frequently very deep, and is derived from the decomposi-
tion of the shale rock after being left bare by the removal of the sand-
stone. The limestone frequently protrudes, and in such localities the
soil is more calcareous. Trap plains occur in the higher part of the table-
land. This rock is generally of more recent date than the sandstone,
and seems to have flowed over depressions, or hollows, worn out of
the latter. It is extensive on Roe Downs, occupying sixty miles from
east to west, and computed by Mr. Gregory to extend over a million of
acres. The jasper plains contain about 320,000 acres; Beagle Valley,
with valleys adjoining, 160,000 ; and the extensive valley of the Norton,
Shaw, and Saunders Rivers it would be difficult fully to estimate, but
there appeared under my own observation an extent exceeding 1,500,000
acres, to which, if we add the fine country at the head of Sturt Creek,
and that at the head of the River Fitzmaurice, they will make an aggre-
gate of 5,000,000 of acres. These tracts have come under our united
observation, and may all be considered well-watered pasture land.
“ I have said that North-west Australia is a grassy country, and this
character is due, not only to the great abundance of grass with which it
is covered, but also to the luxuriance and variety of the grasses. A
few of these, however, are predominant, and in most instances afford
excellent pasture. Perhaps the most extensive is a variety that resembles
wild oats, and grows from the height of three to six feet. This grass
attains its greatest perfection on the stony slopes, and at the base of the
ranges. It grows in many places on the top of the table-land, and on
dry gravelly patches. Bordering this grass, but on better soil, another
variety growing close and fine, and not often exceeding three feet high,
might make excellent hay. This grass covers extensive tracts on the
plains, and when ripe it is very difficult to travel through on foot, as it
lies, broken by the wind and parted from its roots, in a tangled mass, a
foot to eighteen inches deep, and clings round the feet and legs while
passing through it.”
NORTH-WEST COAST FROM VICTORIA RIVER TO VAN
DIEMEN’S GULF.
The north-west coast from Point Pearce to Van Diemen’s Gulf is well
wooded, and has altogether a hospitable appearance, but nothing has yet
been discovered that is calculated to render it attractive to settlers.
There are, however, some harbors on the coast which will render it
interesting to navigators, and which, therefore, deserve some notice.
Cliffs of red sandstone are conspicuous throughout this part of the coast,
alternating with sandy beaches, where the land slopes gradually, and with
belts of mangrove near the mouths of creeks and rivers.
Pout Keats, thirty miles north of Point Pearce, is a well sheltered
harbor, which may prove useful to coasters on occasions.
Anson Bay, forty-five miles north of Port Keats, is a capacious sound,
twenty miles across, and clear of shoals as far as yet examined. The


shores are low and well wooded, and are so easy of access that the hay
will be much resorted to by coasters employed in the timber trade, this
being the nearest point to the Victoria River, where gum timber can be
procured in abundance. Fish are very numerous on this part of the
coast.
Paterson Bay (lat. 12° 30' S; long. 130° 35' E.), is a deep narrow
inlet, with an inner harbor of deep water curving to the eastward, named
Bynoe Harbor. The shores are well timbered and easily accessible.
Pools of fresh water were found at the head of the inner harbor by the
officers of H.M.S. Beagle at the end of the dry season.
Port Darwin, fifteen miles to the eastward of Paterson Bay, is
another deep inlet, also well timbered, the palm tree forming part of
the forest on the shores of both harbors. The bamboo is also found
here. * * *
Adelaide River (lat. 12° 10', long. 131° 15'), was ascended by the
boats of H.M.S. Beagle for nearly eighty miles, the water being per-
fectly fresh during the last thirty miles; and the survey of the river by
Lieut. Stokes showed it to be navigable by vessels drawing eighteen feet
water for about fifty miles, or to the point where the river water is fresh.
The banks are low up to this point, and the country level, spreading out
on each side into open plains, which appeared to be flooded during the
rainy season. Clumps of trees are dotted over the surface of the plains
like islands. The mangrove lines the shore in the lower part of the
river; but about thirty-five miles from the mouth, the banks are bordered
by forests of bamboo, which continue upwards beyond the point where
the river becomes fresh—the bamboos here attaining the enormous height
of sixty to eighty feet. As this is the only spot in Australia where this
peculiarly useful production has been found in any great abundance,
these forests will of themselves prove sufficient to attract visitors
whenever any spot in the neighborhood becomes settled.
The river abounds in game, more especially water-fowl, and a bird was
seen resembling the guinea-fowl in color and habits, which may prove to
be a new variety of Australian game.
Melville Island, which lies at the mouth of Van Diemen’s Gulf, is
nearly ninety miles long, and forty miles wide at its broadest part. It is
separated from Bathurst Island, lying to the west, by a narrow strait
leading into the gulf, which is navigable, but not likely to be used, being
very narrow. The interior of the island was not
explored, as the natives proved very formidable, and never ceased hos-
tilities with the strangers as long as the latter remained.
Although explorations were not carried into the interior, its general
character was sufficiently seen to show that it may some time become a
valuable settlement, the soil being good and productive, and the timber
large and valuable. * * • Ido not know of any single
production of Melville Island that cannot be procured on the mainland,
excepting the hintangor , a light and tough timber much prized for ship s
spars, and which is in general use on board vessels which fit out in the
Straits of Malacca.
The superior fertility of Melville Island is probably attributable to its
being situated at the point where the periodical east and south-west
winds meet. * * * The difference of temperature of the
two winds may produce heavy falls of dew, if not showers of rain.


VAN DIEMEN’S GULF.
Van Diemen’s Guee is a magnificent deep-water inlet, 100 miles long
and from thirty to sixty wide, so sheltered to seaward by Melville Island,
which lies across its mouth, that it has the appearance of a large inland
lake. There are two entrances to the Gulf, one to the north, fourteen
miles wide and clear of dangers, with soundings of thirty-five to forty
fathoms, and the other to the west, ten miles wide, and studded with
islands and reefs, having channels between them of seven to fifteen
fathoms. The most interesting feature of the Gulf is the group of navi-
gable rivers at its head, one of which can be entered at low water by the
largest ships, and at a distance of 100 miles from its mouth is still a
fine river, with its sources evidently far in the interior. The entire south
shore of the Gulf consists of low level country, very scantily wooded, and
is apparently the end of a broad valley running far inland between the
great range coming from the south-east which abuts near the east side of
the Gulf, and a lower parallel range which terminates in the neighbor-
hood of Port Darwin.
The Gulf, as far as it has yet been explored, is clear of islands and
shoals except at the north-east corner, and the depth of water in the
centre is thirty-four fathoms,
■x- a- The coast abounds in fish, and the shelving banks are ex-
ceedingly favorable for the construction of those enormous fish-weirs of
poles and bamboo-netting in which their [the Malayan population]
industry is chiefly displayed, all the materials being at hand; while the
sheltered nature of the coast would relieve them from the risk of having
their labors destroyed in a single night, which so often happens in less
favored localities. At the same time the fresh water lagoons, which
come close up to the banks of the creeks, on which their huts would be
built, might be laid out in paddy-fields of the most productive description,
so as to enable the fishermen to indulge in a recreation to which they
are superstitiously addicted—for the operations connected with the
growth of rice are rather considered as a pleasure than a toil.
Taking all circumstances into consideration, Van Diemen’s Gulf must be
regarded as the gem of Tropical Australia, and it may even compete with
the Victoria River as the site of the great northern capital. The coast at
the head of the Gulf and the lower part of the great valley offer peculiar
attractions to natives of the east, be they Malays, Chinese, or natives of
India, while the upper parts of the valley, far into the interior, are ad-
mirably adapted for stock-runs. Seamen, too, will fully appreciate the
open character of the navigation ; and it is by no means improbable that
the colonists of New South Wales and Victoria will prefer having the
northern terminus of their mail and telegraph lines at a spot not more
distant from their boundaries than the Victoria River, and much more
favorably situated in other respects.
NORTH COAST FROM MELVILLE ISLAND TO CAPE WESSEL.
The country bordering the north coast is clothed with forest, suffi-
ciently open to allow a cart to pass through without much difficulty, and
is well grassed, but at the same time so overspread with an undergrowth
of saplings and tall plants as to intercept the view, and prevent the stock-
man from performing his duties ; while sheep-farming is rendered im-
practicable by the destruction to which the fleeces are liable by the
brushwood and grass seeds. * * *


The Coburg Peninsula is 120 miles in circumference. * * *
It is crossed by a number of parallel ranges of sandstone, from eighty to
300 feet high, running in a north-north-west and south-south-east direc-
tion, between which lie the ports and inlets above mentioned. Fresh
water is abundant, either in permanent pools, or is accessible by digging
to the depth of a few feet at the base of all these ranges, and the same
rule applies to the north coast generally, * * *
Pom Essington (Lat. 11° 10', Long. 130° s'), is an inlet more than
twenty miles in depth and comparatively narrow, containing both an outer
and an inner harbor, the mouth of the latter being fifteen miles from the
open sea. It was on the western shore of this inner harbor that the settle-
ment was formed by H.M.S. Alligator and Britomarf, in November,
1838, and which was broken up in December, 1849, by H.M.S. Meander
removing the garrison to Sydney and destroying the buildings. The
inner harbor was selected on account of its superior capabilities for the
erection of defensive works, the establishment having been formed as
a naval station. It proved to be less healthy than the outer harbor, the
temperature being a degree or two higher, while the sea breeeze some-
times failed to penetrate as far as the settlement; but no better site
could have been selected without evading the instructions under which
Sir Gordon Bremer acted ; and it was not known at that time that land-
locked harbors in tropical climates are always unhealthy unless they are
acted on by a breeze constantly blowing, so as to dissipate at once the
malaria which arises from stagnant sea-water exposed to the rays of a
tropical sun. As a harbor for affording shelter to shipping, it can scarcely
be excelled, and it will no doubt be used occasionally for such purposes
when the coast comes to be frequented.
Port Bremer is another narrow but deep inlet lying a few miles to
the eastward of Port Essington. It affords excellent anchorage, but is
not frequented either by the trepang fishers or by the natives, the malaria
being so great that a few days residence on its shores is nearly certain
to be attended with an attack of fever.
Raffles Bay, the site of the first settlement formed on the Coburg
Peninsula, is more open and of less depth than Ports Essington and
Bremer, but resembles them in its general features. * * *
The buffaloes which were originally brought from Timor, have increased
to some hundreds, or perhaps thousands, and have spread along the coast
to the eastward; but no traces have been seen of the European cattle and
ponies which were also left, although it is by no means improbable that
they will have sought out some favorable spot among the neighboring
hills and have also increased in number. * * *
Croker Island is twenty-one miles long, with an average width of
four miles. Although so small in extent, it contains specimens of every
description of country found on the neighboring main land. The points
are composed of sandstone ridges, well timbered, and part of the interior
is occupied by open plains, occasionally flooded, with lagoons well fur-
nished with maruait, and swarming with waterfowl. * * *
Bowen Strait is the channel that separates Croker Island from the
main land. It is about three miles wide, with an uniform depth of five
to seven fathoms. Captain Barker, of the 39th Regiment, the last Com-
mandant at Raffles Bay (a highly accomplished officer, who was after-
wards killed by the natives at Encounter Bay, while surveying the mouth


of the great Murray River) recommended that the settlement should be-
removed to the shore of Bowen Strait, and it is certainly the most de-
sirable spot as a residence for Europeans of any that has been found on
the Coburg Peninsula. * * *
Liverpool River, lat. 12° S., long. 134° 20' E., was discovered and
explored for forty miles from the mouth by Captain King, in 1819. The
river is easy of access, having no bar, the depth at the mouth, which is
four miles wide, being ten to fourteen fathoms, decreasing to six and
four fathoms ten miles up, where the width is half a mile. The banks
are lined with mangroves, of a large growth, up to the point where the
water is fresh at half-tide (fourteen miles from the mouth). Above this,
the banks spread out into broad plains, which are occasionally inundated,
and are precisely of the same character as those of the South River of
Van Diemen’s Gulf.
The Liverpool River may hereafter prove to be a point of great im-
portance, for although other rivers of equal magnitude may be discovered
on the north coast, its central position must always secure the preference.
There is every reason to believe that its valley extends far inland, as
Leichardt, when crossing its meridian, experienced a steady breeze from
N.N.E. during the afternoon and early part of the night, which he
thought to be the sea breeze blowing up the valley of the Liverpool, and
there is every reason to believe that he formed a correct opinion. As a
port, too, it is magnificent, for a ship of much greater draught than the
Great Eastern could enter with perfect safety.
Wessel Islands, at the north-west extreme of the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, are a chain upwards of sixty miles long, but so narrow, that in
some parts the distance across to the opposite coast is not more than
half a mile. The islands are moderately elevated, with cliffs on the
south-east side, and a gentle slope to the beach on the north-west, the
whole being well clothed with forest. * * *
CARPENTARIA.
The western shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria from Wessel Islands to
Limmen Bight are not immediately interesting, being remote from the
lines of communication along which the stock runs are most likely to
extend. There are several good harbors on the coast, and trepang of the
"best description abounds; but this is not calculated to tempt European
enterprize. IN or is the country itself of very great promise as far as it
has yet been examined by its only visitor, Flinders; the vegetation
being stunted, while the supply of moisture, owing to the coast being
sheltered from the full strength of the north-west monsoon, is limited—
indeed the rains are said sometimes to fail altogether for a season. On
the other hand, the south-west coast of the Gulf, which runs in an almost
straight line from the Roper to the Flinders, a distance of nearly 400
miles, is probably more favored by nature than any other piece of land of
equal extent within the tropics. With the exception of the mangrove
forests at the mouths of the numerous rivers, there appears to be scarcely
an acre of land that does not afford pasturage, while the timber is good
and abundant; and, as for fresh water, the sea at the head of the Gulf is
itself so fresh at times from the outpourings of the rivers, that the trepang
fishers, who are driven to the head of the Gulf by the strength of the
monsoon (occurrences which happen about every three or four years), fill


up their fresh water alongside when anchored so far from the land that
the tops of the trees are barely visible. The seasons are the same as at
the Victoria River, with cold bracing winds during April, May, June, and
July; but Carpentaria is free from the hot season of the Victoria, as a
sea-breeze pours in from north-east every forenoon during the dry months,
penetrating well inland, and cooling the atmosphere.
Roper River, which enters the sea near the bottom of Limmen Bight,
is the best explored of any of the Gulf rivers excepting the Flinders,
which last was traced from its sources to the sea by the late enterprizing
explorer, Burke. Leichardt came upon the Roper, in the month of Oc-
tober, about twenty miles from the sea, and found the country along its
left bank well grassed and openly timbered, chiefly with the Australian
box. Waterfowl, especially ducks and geese, were exceedingly numerous,
and the river abounded with fish, which the natives, who possessed iron
cutting implements, caught in traps made of the wild rattan. Mussels
were also abundant, and formed an important article of consumption
among the natives. Leichardt followed the river up in a westerly
direction for several days, the country rather improving as he ascended.
A strong sea-breeze blew up the valley of the river every afternoon, and
proved very refreshing to the travellers. The natives, too, were friendly.
The mouth of the Roper has not yet been explored, and there i&
reason to fear that it will have a sand bar, as the sea-breeze blows in
from the north-east nearly every day during several months of the year,
and this part of the coast is rather exposed.
Limmen Bight River. —Leichardt came upon this river only a few
miles from the sea, among a net-work of salt-water creeks, and followed
it up for eight days (from October 6th to 14th) when he found a crossing
place at a spot where a stony bar crossed the bed of the river. The
river water was salt, but abundance of fresh water was found at the
heads of the tributary creeks, where lagoons, such as those of Van
Diemen’s Gulf, swarmed with wild fowl; —spoon-bills, ibises, geese, and
whilstling ducks being the most numerous. The bed of the river was
broad and sandy, like that of the Lynd, and the flats which extended on
either side were openly timbered and well grassed. Deep ponds of
constant water were met with near its banks, and altogether the country
is of a most promising character, and well adapted for running herds
of stock.
Wickham River was struck by Leichardt’s party at the end of a
ten miles’ journey after crossing the Limmen Bight River and he con-
sidered it to be a tributary of the latter. “At the end of the stage, the
uniform color of the country was interrupted by the green line of a river-
bed, so pleasing and so refreshing to the eye, with the rich verdure of its
drooping tea trees and myrtles, interspersed with the silver leaves of the
Acacia neurocarpa and Grevillia chrysodendron. The river was formed
by two broad sandy beds, separated by a high bergue, and was full 700
yards from bank to bank. It contained large detached waterpools,
fringed with pandanus, which were very probably connected by a stream
filtering through the sand.” ( Journal , p. 434.) The red wallaby was
numerous, and one of a flock of red foresters was caught by the party
and afforded an ample repast.
Red Kangaroo River (long. 136°) was so called from its being the
spot where Leichardt’s party first met the famous red forester of Port


Essington (osphranter anterlopinus). The whistling duck was also
abundant, and the country was well timbered with cypress, pine, and
stringy bark, but it does not seem to have been well grassed, _ as the
cattle preferred the leaves of the rattan, which were growing in pro-
fusion.
Sir Edward Pellew Islands consist of a cluster of five islands,
each from seven to seventeen miles long, with a number of smaller islets,
lying close to the coast in longitude 137°, and occupying a space of thirty-
four 0 miles from east to west, and twenty-two miles from north to south.
They were discovered and partially surveyed by Captain Flinders, in
December, 1802, who, however, did not explore the coast of the main
land, which was only indistinctly seen. The islands are all hilly, the
rock being a hard, close-grained sandstone, with a small admixture of
quartz, and slightly impregnated with iron here and there. Ihe forest
consists of several stunted varieties of the Eucalyptus, with Livistona
palms and a kind of sandalwood, which may some day become an article
of commerce. The mangrove abounds near the shores of the islands.
* is- * Fish and turtle are abundant, and small kangaroos,
hawks, pigeons, and bustards are found in the woods. * *
The sheet of water on the inner side of Yanderlin Island, the eastern-
most and largest of the group, forms a capacious port, which will be of
considerable importance as being the only one on the south-western
shore of the Gulf, if we except Investigator Road at the Wellesley
Islands, which, however, is too far from the mainland to compete with
Port Pellew as a convenient anchorage for vessels visiting the coast for
commercial purposes. It is also probable that other ports will be found
when the passages between the islands lying in the western part of the
o-roup come to be examined, and, moreover, the rivers which enter the
sea on the parts of the coast sheltered by the islands are likely to be
accessible to shipping from having their channels undisturbed by the
ocean swell. The three rivers discovered by Leichardt in this neighbor-
hood, and which are likely to enter the sea under shelter of the islands,
are the Macarthur, the Robinson, and the Seven Emu Rivers. It may be
regarded as almost certain that at least one of these rivers will have a
deep entrance.
Seven Emu River. —This river, with the others mentioned above,
become so interesting for the reasons already stated, that the smallest
particulars respecting them are of value. I shall therefore extract
copiously from Leichardt’s Journal, so as to give the particulars in his
own words. “ September 14. We travelled three or four miles north-
west through a teatree forest, when the country opened, and a broad salt
water river interrupted our course. It came from the west-south-west
and went to east-north-east. We proceeded eight or ten miles along its
banks before we came to fresh water. In its immediate neighborhood
the country was beautifully grassed, and openly timbered with blood
wood stringy bark, the leguminous ironbark, and the white-barked tree
of the Abel Tasman. Over the short space of eight miles we saw at
least one hundred emus, in flocks of three, five, ten, and even more at a
time; they had been attracted here by the young herbage. We killed
seven of them, but they were not fat, and none seemed more than a year
old. This extraordinary success induced me to call this river the Seven
Emu River.”


Robinson Riyer. Leichardt came upon this river the day after
leaving the Seven Emu, from which it is distant about eighteen miles.
* * * The river was about 200 yards broad, with steep banks
intersected by deep gullies. Two teatree creeks, which entered it at the
point where our examination stopped, contained fresh water in the upper
part of their short courses. * * * The Robinson is
evidently a much smaller river than either the Seven Emu or the Mac-
arthur, but as a large body of water pours down its channel during the
rains, the mouth, if sheltered by islands, may possibly prove to be of
sufficient depth to admit shipping.
Macarthur Riyer is the largest of the three streams whose mouths
are likely to be sheltered by the islands, and it is to be hoped that it will
prove navigable in the lower part of its course. It lies about twenty
miles to the westward of the Robinson —the intervening country being
clothed with forest, through which the travelling was hot and dusty,
although a “ refreshing breeze” from the sea was blowing up the valleys
of the rivers. “ Sept. 21.—Our journey to-day was in a north 50° west
direction for about eleven miles, through stringybark forest, in which the
melaleuca and cyress pine were either scattered or formed small patches
of forest. We then crossed a shallow sandy creek surrounded with
thickets of cypress pine ; passed some broad-leaved teatree forest, and
came to a fine open country timbered with teatree, and further on with
box and white gum. After fifteen miles, our course was intercepted by
the largest salt-water river we had yet seen, and we turned at once to
the west-south-west in order to head it. Deep hollows surrounded by
teatrees, but quite dry, extended parallel to the river. We observed
several islands in the river, and it was joined by some deep creeks filled
with salt water at their lower parts, but dry higher up. The whole
country was equally open and well grassed. The leguminous iron bark,
the white barked tree of the Abel Tasman, the fig-tree, the sterculia in
fruit, grew in the forest, and the white water-gum in the hollows, the
drooping teatree at the level of the freshes, and a species of salt-water
casuarina below it. I called this river the Macarthur, in acknowledg-
ment of the liberal support my expedition received from Messrs. James
and William Macarthur of Camden.”
Abel Tasman Riyer, so named by the Dutch navigators who first
explored the Gulf, is in lat. 16° 27' 37", long. 13/° 23, or eighteen miles
east of the Seven Emu River. It is of precisely the same character as
most of the other rivers of the Gulf, being fordable immediately above
the point reached by the tide. Leichardt’s particulars are interesting.
“ High hills were at its left bank, and as we followed it up in a direction
south 60° west, the right became more broken and the vegetation richer.
# « * A spring of fresh water was below the camp at the
edge of high water, * * * and an abundant supply of
fresh water was found in a creek which joined the river a few hundred
yards from the fishery, in lat. 16° 28' 57", long. 137° 53 . I consider this
river to be the Abel Tasman of the Dutch navigators, and that it is
probably joined by the Calvert. Its flats were well grassed, and very
openly timbered with bloodwood, stringybark, leguminous ironbark, then
in blossom, and a large tree with white smooth bark, spreading branches,
and pinnate leaves.”— (Journal , p. 396).


The Caevekt is a fresh water river, or rather river bed, which had been,
crossed the previous day. It is immediately after describing the Calvert
that Leichardt makes the emphatic statement in his journal which has
attracted so much notice in the Colonies, and which is here given. “ The
whole country round the Gulf was well grassed, particularly before we
crossed the Nicholson, and on the plains and approaches to the rivers
and creeks. The large water-holes were frequently surrounded with a
a dense turf of fimbristylis (a small sedge), which our horses liked to feed
upon. Some stiff grasses made their appearance when we approached
the sea-coast, as well on the plains as in the forest. The well-known
kangaroo grass (anthisteria) forms still one of the principal components
of the pasture. The scrubby country had a good supply of tufty wind-
grass ; and although the feed was dry during this part of the year, our
cattle and horses did exceeding well, as I have already mentioned. Both
took an occasional bite of some acacias, of grevillea chrysodendron, and
of several other shrubs. Cattle driven over the country we have passed,
by short stages, and during the proper season, would even fatten on the
road.”— (Journal , p. 394).
Van Aephen Riyee.— The mouth of this river was also seen by
Flinders, and its position well determined, as the opening bore south 3°
west, when the noon observations were taken, making the latitude of the
ship 16° south; long., 137° 53' east. He thus describes it:—“The
opening may be half a mile in width, but a dry sand runs across from the
west side, and left no prospect of its being accessible to the ship; the
shoal water, indeed, extended further out than usual, being caused pro-
bably by a deposit of sand from the inlet. The range of low hills before
mentioned as running behind the coast was still perceived; but in front
the country was low as before, and somewhat less covered with wood.”
(Voyage, vol. 2, p. 161). Probably neither this river nor the Abel Tas-
man can be entered except by vessels under 100 tons burthen, as the
coast hereabouts is very shallow, the depth of water in fathoms generally
corresponding in numbers with the distance from the shore in miles. *
Leichardt came upon the Van Alphen in lat. 16° 41', long. 137° 48',
where its bed was 300 yards broad from bank to bank, but with only a
narrow channel of running water. It does not appear to differ in any
remarkable particular from the Abel Tasman. Mr. Gregory crossed this
part of the head of the gulf about thirty-five miles inland of the.track of
Leichardt, and came upon two rivers, which may have been the Abel
Tasman and the Van Alphen. * * *
If this river is found to extend so far inland as is anticipated by Mr.
Gregory, its sources will be little more than 100 miles from Newcastle
Water, the lake discovered by McDouall Stuart, in one of his latest
expeditions.
WINDS.
The north-west monsoon, which may be looked for towards the close
of the year, brings a change in the weather. When the monsoon is
strong, which happens usually at intervals of three years, it sets in with
a fresh breeze and heavy rain-squalls, and advances steadily into the
interior, thoroughly moistening the surface of the earth. There are also
grounds for supposing that it drives the heated air before it, thus causing
the hot winds which affect all the southern colonies at this season—for it


is certain that the hot winds in South Australia, New South Wales, and
Victoria are most felt when the northwest monsoon is stronger than
usual. In milder seasons the monsoon produces little effect far beyond
the coasts; indeed the heavier clouds do not appear to rise to a very great
height above the surface of the earth, for in some years they are so
obstructed by the mountains of Java that the rains do not reach even the
south side of that island, on which occasions the north-west coast of
Australia gets the monsoon from west to west north-west, but with a
diminished amount of moisture.
TIDES.
At Port Darwin, near VanDlemen ’s Gulf, more than 300 miles to the
westward, the rise and fall during springs is twenty-four feet; and alto-
gether there is upwards of 500 miles of coast in this north-west region
on which dry docks available for ships of the largest class could be con-
structed without the aid of pumping machinery.
TEMPERATURE.
Port Essington is the only spot in Tropical Australia where the
range of the thermometer has been registered throughout the year.
There the maximum was 97° and the minimum 63°, the former occur-
ring in the month of November and the latter in June. The ther-
mometer was kept in a low building with the floor raised five feet
above the ground, walls of weather-boards, and roof of shingle, or split
casuarina wood. Had the thermometer been kept in a building of the
same construction as the common dawk bungalow of India, the maximum
would have been at least four degrees lower. The settlement, where the
observations were made, was on the shore of the inner harbor, eighteen
miles from the sea, and on some days the sea breeze altogether failed to
reach it, so there was a disadvantage on this point also. lam satisfied
that on any part of the coast accessible to the sea breeze between Mel-
ville and Wessel Islands, the maximum would very rarely if ever be
above 90° in an attap bungalow, such as is used by Europeans in Java
and the Straits. On the north-east coast, the maximum is likely to be
two or three degrees lower under similar circumstances with regard to
shelter, and the minimum may also be somewhat lower, but this is a
doubtful point. In the interior, and on coasts less favorably situated with
regard to the sea breeze, the maximum will be at least 10° greater or
about 100°; but on the other hand the minimum will be from 20° to 30®
lower. On the banks of the Victoria River the thermometer once fell as
low as 40°, and Sir Thomas Mitchell experienced severe cold (the
thermometer below freezing point) while close to the tropic during his
last expedition from New South Wales in the direction of the Gulf of
Carpentaria. There can be no doubt that those who have to go abroad
during the hot season will be exposed to a severe degree of heat, calcu-
lated to produce a large amount of discomfort, although it may not be
injurious to health; for at Port Essington our kangaroo hunters, generally
noncommissioned officers of Marines, were exposed almost daily during
the hottest season of the year to long-continued exertion on foot; never-
theless, they were always the healthiest men in the garrison.
VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS.
No single vegetable production has yet been discovered in the neighbor-
hood of the Victoria of a nature calculated to furnish an exportable article.


Timber, usually abundant in new countries, is so deficient in quantity
and inferior in kind, that when the country becomes settled, beams and
planks for large buildings will have to be imported from other parts of
the coast or from abroad. Mr. Gregory’s party were enabled to obtain a
few logs of the drooping tea-tree for the repair of the expedition schooner;
but this tree grows only as a fringe on the brink of the river, and must
soon be exhausted, while the timber of the stunted white gum was
found to be unsound and useless except for firewood. Under these cir-
cumstances the mangrove forests, which overspread the low half-drowned
lands at the mouth of the river, will become of importance, _ I could never
account for the low estimation in which the mangrove is held by the
colonist, unless it is owing to the circumstance of its growing in the salt
water, which may be supposed to render it inferior. The same prejudices
do not exist in Malayan countries. In the province where I now reside
several thousand acres, indeed all the available mangrove land, has been
bought up at the rate of ten shillings per acre, solely for the sake of the
timber. The straight pieces are found to be well adapted for posts and
rafters of out-buildings, while as fuel for driving steam machinery the
wood is inferior only to coal. Some native fruits, and a plant that was
used as a vegetable, were found by Mr. Gregory’s party; but, as a
general rule, the colonists will have to depend on their own exertions for
supplies of this kind. The yam and sweet-potato seem well-adapted to
soil and climate. Game of the same description as that found in other
parts of Australia was also met with, namely—kangaroos, wallabies, duck,
quail, and cockatoos, but the emu seems to be scarce. The river does not
appear to be well supplied with fish, which, however, are abundant on
the coast near the mouth of the river, and turtle will also be found at
certain seasons, as the shells of a number of dead turtle were seen at the
south point of the river mouth, which received its name from this
circumstance.
The colonist will have to depend (in the first instance at least), solely
on the natural grasses to afford him a return for the capital invested—and
certainly, according to the accounts given, there must be sufficient to
feed and even fatten a far greater amount of stock than can be brought
upon it for years to come, even should the breeding of camels, for which
the country and climate are evidently well adapted, be added to of
cattle and horses. It will not be safe to calculate on sheep-farming
until the experiment has been tried. Markets will have to be found for
the produce, and for the herds that will be driven overland from the older
colonies ; as the shipment of horses from the south-eastern ports must
cease as soon as the Victoria River is opened up.
GRAIN, FRUIT, AND GARDEN VEGETABLES.
Wheat. —This grain did not succeed at Port Essington, for although
it could be made to produce an ear, the seeds never came to maturity,
nor do I think that it is ever likely to be grown near the sea except at a
certain elevation above its level. Wheat of very good quality, but rather
small in the grain, is, however, produced in considerable quantities in
the Portuguese settlements on the north side of Timor, at an elevation
of 1,200 feet above the sea level, and as this locality is three degrees of
latitude nearer the Equator than Port Essington, there can be no reason-
able doubt as to its succeeding equally well on the uplands of the tropi-


cal region at a much smaller elevation ; so that the stock stations of the
interior will he able to grow their own supplies if the transport of flour
from the sea-coast proves too expensive. The Portuguese in limor
obtained their seed originally from Demaun, in the neighborhood of
Bombay. Australian seed will produce a larger grain, but nothing can
exceed in quality the flour yielded by the Timor wheat. The crop is
reaped within five months ,after the sowing of the seed.
Maize grows well both near the sea and on the uplands, and produces
so abundantly that it is likely to prevent attention being paid to other
descriptions of grain as food for stock. Some cobs of the first crop
raised at Port Essington excited the admiration of the natives of limor
and the islands, who were thankful to obtain a few grains as seed. Ihe
cobs were, indeed, four times the size of those grown on the islands, and
produced at least three times the number of seeds. Maize (not rice) is
the staff of life among the natives of these hilly groups, for although
the sago palm exists, it is not so plentiful as at Ceram and the Moluccas.
Wheat and maize being alone sufficient to supply the wants of an
European people engaged in pastoral pursuits, other cereals are not
likely to be cultivated until the country becomes populous. Bice could
be grown to perfection on the low lands near the coast and on the banks
of rivers, but a large amount of manual labor is required for its
cultivation.
The Banana is likely to become the most popular of all fruits among
colonists in Tropical Australia, as it produces a full crop within a few
months after being planted, and the fruit itself is less palling to the
appetite than any other tropical fruit. It succeeds best on newly-cleared
land, and requires very little care beyond the erection of a stout fence
around the spot where it is planted to keep off sheep and cattle, who would
otherwise soon devour their juicy stems and leaves. The plant dies
after yielding a single crop, but it is reproduced by the suckers which
shoot up from around the root, all of which, with the exception of a
single plant should be removed, and transplanted elsewhere. Young
plants can be obtained at all the neighboring islands. * *
The Pine Apple also proved a great success at Port Essington.
The plant is easily introduced from the islands, as the crown of the
fruit takes root if twisted off and set a few inches deep in a shallow box
of mould. When once planted in a favorable spot it propagates itself by
sprouts from the root like the banana, and spreads rapidly without any
care whatever, as the prickles on the leaves keep off every animal except
the wild hog, which does not exist in Australia. It seems to thrive best
on rocky points near the sea, where there is barely sufficient soil to co\er
the roots; but it succeeds well everywhere, even on the permatangs or
sandridges thrown up by the sea, where, however, there is a large
amount of calcareous and decomposed vegetable matter.
The Papaya, (Garica Papaya) the papaw of India, is found tnrough-
out the islands, and also grew well at Port Essington. It is propagated
from the seed, which is round and black, and is sometimes used instead
of capers as sauce for boiled mutton by economical housekeepers. Ihe
plant sends up a stout but rather soft stem eight or ten feet high, which is
crowned by a thick cluster of leaves. The fruit, which is of the size of
a small melon, and not unlike that fruit both without and within, grows
from the stem below the cluster of leaves. The fruit eaten as a melon,


is much liked by some, but it is far more generally esteemed when used
as a tart fruit, or in lieu of apples in the composition of sauce. The
leaves have also some useful properties, for if freshly-killed meat is
wrapped up in the young leaves, and a handful is also thrown into the
pot in which it is being boiled, it can he served at table the same day as
tender as meat that has been hung up for weeks in a cool climate.
This plant seems to have been first introduced from America, but it has
now become so common in the Archipelago, that it is to be seen around
nearly every house, European or native, and has even penetrated among
the Papuans of New Guinea and Torres Strait, who have been for ages
almost cut off from intercourse with strangers.
The Water Melon. —This fruit also was introduced and fully
succeeded at Port Essington, and although not equal in size or flavor to
some of which 1 have partaken in Western Australia, it is immeasurably
superior to those of the islands.
The Custard Apple (Anona squamosa), buah nona of the Malays,
produced well at Port Essington, but requires care, as I belie've is the
case everywhere. Its congener, the Soursop (A. muricata), was also
introduced and the fruit proved greatly superior to that grown on the
islands.
The Guava and the jambo, which belong to the same natural order
as the eucalyptus, seemed to thrive at Port Essington, but they were not
much esteemed. Owing to some perversity of taste, I suppose, the little
native gooseberry was preferred to all other fruits, at least in the con-
coction of tarts and puddings.
The Orange, lime, peach, apricot, and grape are already well-known
in the southern Colonies. The two first did well at Port Essington, and
I think the others would succeed on the table lands of the interior,,
especially where the limestone formation prevails, but experience alone
can decide this point.
The Pumkin will be a very popular vegetable at the inland stations,
as it is readily propagated from seed, and grows well around and over
the huts; while the fruit is not only esteemed when boiled as a vegetable,
but as an ingredient of pies and puddings. It grew to admiration at
Port Essington, and several of the more careful and industrious of the
marines forming the garrison were able to collect sufficient money, by
disposing of their surplus to ihe shipping, to purchase their discharge
from the service on their arrival at Sydney, after the breaking up of the
establishment.
The Turnip Radish has a white root, longer and more tapering than
that of the turnip, and partakes of the character of both the vegetables after
which it is named, as its roots, when well boiled, are not a bad sub-
stitute for the turnip, while the top affords excellent greens, and the
young roots eaten raw are quite equal to the European radish. It is a
Chinese vegetable, and is cultivated at Copang in Timor for the use of
the inhabitants and shipping, from which place seed can be easily pro-
cured. Neither the turnip nor the European radish grows well near the
coast. Probably the latter may succeed on the uplands.
The Tomata, or love apple (Lypcopersicon esculentum) proved a great
success at Port Essington, producing fruit at all seasons of the year.
The seed was brought with us from South America. It is likely to grow
well in all parts of the tropical region.


The Capsicum. —Several varieties of this plant were grown at Port
Essington, chiefly the large and less pungent kind and the small bird’s-
eye pepper. Both produced abundantly. It is evidently well-suited to
the soil and climate of the tropical region.
The Sweet Potato (convolvulus batatas) produced exceedingly well,
and proved a good substitute for the European potato, which would not
grow near the coast.
The Sugar Cake. —This plant grew well at Port Essington, but it
required much attention, more especially in the way of irrigation, which
was necessary every few days during the dry season. There are many
tracts of great extent where irrigation could be employed, and the crops
would, doubtless, prove luxuriant; but here again the question of labor
stands in the way, there being other branches of industry in which it
could be more profitably employed until the time arrives when an
abundant population will admit of the cultivation being followed with a
certainty of success.
STOCK.
Cattle. — l am of opinion that horned cattle will, in the first instance,
prove the greatest source of profit to colonists in Tropical Australia.
Cattle thrive so well on the grasses; do not appear to be affected in-
juriously by the climate; and are so well able to preserve themselves and
their young from the attacks of native dogs and aborigines, by which
alone they are liable to be molested; while at the same time the surplus
stock can be disposed of so readily as working bullocks, for export as
live stock to the neighboring countries, or by sailing them down for
ship’s provisions; and even if these demands should fail, a handsome
profit could always be realized by boiling them down for tallow—a process
that had become general throughout the southern Colonies before the gold
discoveries caused a great demand for butcher’s meat, and which has
never totally ceased up lo the present time.
The Asiatic breeds of cattle are all bad milkers, and will not even yield
the small quantity of milk they produce unless their calves are at their
side. They are nearly all of the Zebu or humped kind; and Ido not
know a single variety the introduction of which would be otherwise than
injurious, if the imported animals were allowed to mix with the European
cattle.
Houses. —There can he no doubt whatever as to the capabilities of
the tropical region for producing horse stock of the very best description.
With abundant pasturage, large tracts of open country on which the
young animals can exercise their limbs with freedom, and a climate
closely resembling that in which the best breeds known in the world are
produced and flourish, nothing but neglect and want of precaution in the
selection and breeding can prevent them from becoming as celebrated as
the steeds of Arabia or Barbary. Indeed the Australian horse already
equals them in power of endurance, although much must be done in the
way of importation and careful selection before any near approach can be
made in speed or beauty of form. And it fortunately happens that this
region of Australia is conveniently situated for the importation of stud-
horses of the Arab breed, which can always be procured*at the ports of
India to which the colonist’s own surplus stock is most likely to be con-
signed. The experiment of crossing with the Arab has already been well
tested in the neighborhood of Sydney, with the very, best results.


The best crossed-bred animals that I have met with are those reared
at the Glugor estate in Pinang—the dams being of the Sumatra breed, and
the stallions Arabs or Persians. The produce is an animal rather larger
than a galloway, showy, but quiet to handle, and so much esteemed both
for saddle and harness that I suspect this description of stock would meet
with a more ready sale among the island settlements at least, than full-
sized Australians.
Sheep. —Nothing short of actual experiment can decide the important
question as to whether the tropical region of Australia is suited for
sheepfarming; but those who have closely watched the progress of the
experiment which commenced some years ago, with the occupation of
Port Curtis cannot have any serious doubts as to the result. Of course,
the sheepfarmer will have to keep up the staple of his fleeces to the
standard level by frequent importation of improved rams ; but he may not
be put to greater trouble and expense in this behalf than he had incurred,
while depasturing his flocks in the south, where a hot wind of three days
would do more injury to his flocks than weeks of mere sunshine, probably
with a cool breeze during the whole time. The greatest nuisance that the
sheepfarmer will have to encounter, will, I think, be the grass seed ; for if
his flocks are allowed to run in the high grass when the seeds are ripe and
the fleeces long, the latter are likely to suffer. This, however, can be
obviated by precautions well-known to sheepfarmers ; and the only disad-
vantage that I can foresee in connection with the tropical region will be
the increased closeness of supervision required. This, however, is not
likely to prove a disadvantage in the end.
It will not be necessary to enter into particulars respecting other kinds
of domestic animals, as all those common in the southern Colonies appear
to thrive equally well in the tropical region.
But the prosperity of the first colonists will depend on the markets
that the neighboring countries present for the disposal of the surplus
stock of horses and cattle; and it will be necessary that the ships employed
in the transport shall not be chance vessels, merely chartered for the
voyage, but vessels owned by the colonists or by their supporters in the
parent Colony in the south, and fitted expressly for the purpose. * *
The best markets for horses will be found in Madras and Calcutta,
where the demand both for military and private purposes is very great.
It is also likely that a large demand will arise in Java, where the horses
of the country are too small to furnish remounts for the cavalry and
artillery. This island may also prove to be a good market for cattle, as
it is not a pastoral country, the waste lands being overrun with dense
jungle. * * ♦
The first week in September will be the best time for a ship to leave
the Victoria River with a cargo of horses for Madras or Calcutta, as she
will arrive at the commencement of the cool season, when the horses
will soonest recover condition. The passage will last about five weeks,
as the winds become light towards the end of the season.
LABOE.
Whether any great demand will arise for Chinese agricultural laborers
remains to be seen, but if tropical produce comes to be cultivated on a
large scale, India alone could not supply the number required, and Chinese
labor will be best suited to supply the deficiency. In that case it may


"be expected that the immigration will, be carried on much in the same
mannerwith that in the Straits Settlements—the immigrants being brought
down as a deck freight, and residents in the settlement advancing the
amount of passage-money on their engaging to serve for a term. Their
cost will be somewhat less than that of Indian laborers in the matter of
passage-money, but they must not be expected to serve after their term
has expired, as they will probably commence working on their own ac-
count, either as cultivators or as petty tradesmen.
There can be no doubt whatever that a large spontaneous immigration
of Chinese will set in on the tropical coast of Australia as soon as the
country has become sufficiently occupied by Europeans to afford them
protection from the natives; as the marine productions are so abundant
and of so valuable a description that they would long ago have been
active in the enterprise but for the dread they entertain of the wild black
tribes of the Archipelago. As it is, they are the chief, if not the sole
supporters of the trepang and tortoiseshell fishery carried on by the
natives of Celebes and Sumbawa, who would be unable to fit out their
expeditions were it not for the advances made by the Chinese merchants
and traders of Macassar. No encouragement will be required on the
part of Europeans, as they are now so well supplied with information as
to what is going on in Australia, that they will enter the field the moment
it is fully opened by the establishment of permanent settlements on the
coast. Their enterprise is likely, in the first instance, to be directed to-
wards the marine productions; and salt fish, edible seaweed, pearls,
mother-o’pearl shell, kima shells, shark’s fins, balachong or caviare made
of fermented shrimps, and many other productions suited for the China
market, will be added to those which they have heretofore procured from
the coast through the instrumentality of the Indian Islanders. Although
the Chinese are year by year becoming more partial to the use of vessels
of European construction, I think that the collection of these products
will be carried on in junks such as those employed on the coasts of China,
as they could make the voyage with safety as regards seaworthiness, and
their construction and fittings are peculiarly suited for the work in which
they would be engaged.
Since the above was written, I have received application from parties
in the colonies who contemplate trying their fortunes in Carpentaria, for
information as to whether the Straits Settlements could furnish them
with their annual supplies. There are certain articles which are in-
dispensable on a sheep station, such as wool-shears, drays, materials for
sheep-dressing, &c., which cannot be obtained here at present, and it
would be best for parties before starting on their enterprise, to make
arrangements with a merchant at one of the southern ports for sending
on their annual supplies by some vessel bound through Torres Straits,
which could take on their wool to a port at which it could be shipped for
Europe. If the party is sufficiently large to bear the expense of a small
vessel of forty to sixty tons burthen, it would be a great acquisition from
the very first, as there must necessarily be a quantity of useful articles
belonging to the party that cannot conveniently be transported overland.
After discharging her cargo at some port or river in the Gulf, where she
would meet the party, the vessel might be usefully employed in keeping
up an intercourse with the islands, where many articles are procurable


that would he extremely useful, if not necessary, to a new establishment.
It would, of course, be convenient if some article were immediately
available to furnish an export cargo, but I know of none with the ex-
ception of salt, large deposits of which are found in some of the salt
water creeks of the Gulf. Leichardt’s party came upon one of these
immediately after making the Gulf. I think I have already extracted
the paragraph of his journal which records this event, but to make sure,
I will insert the details here—“ I started immediately with Mr. Calvert
and Brown, and sure enough I found the broad bed of a creek one mass
of the purest and whitest salt. Lumps of it had crystalized round stems
of grasses which the wind had blown into the water. A little higher up
the creek, a large pool of water w'as full of these lumps, and in less then
ten minutes we collected more than sufficient to supply us for the rest of
our journey. Ship loads of pure salt could have been collected here in a
very short time, requiring nothing but drying and housing until it could
he removed.” ( Journal , page 346). The locality is not distinctly indi-
cated, but it must have been near the mouth of the Gilbert or of the
Caron river. Salt, however, is a strict Government monopoly at the
Dutch ports of the Archipelago, where the supply is furnished from the
Government saltpans of Madura, near Java; but there are still some
native ports, as Ampanam, on the island of Lombok, and Badong in Bali,
where it can be imported without risking the seizure of the vessel. In
the course of time other articles suitable for the consumption, of the
islands will be available, as already noticed.


INTERIOR OF THE COUNTRY.
Our knowledge of the interior of the country is confined to the imme-
diate neighborhood of the tracks of the several explorers, who have
from time to time traversed it in different directions. Extracts from
Gregory’s and Leichardt’s journals, have heen already quoted, as
embodied in those from Earl’s Hand Book; and a few additional quo-
tations from the accounts of the more recent explorations of Stuart,
and from the Report of Mr. F. G. Waterhouse, together with extracts
from the local papers of the day, will be now given in connection with
some of the principal positions marked on the accompanying map.
EXTRACTS EROM STUART’S JOURNAL. .
Tuesday, April 15.—Sturt’s Plains, Forest. _ * * *
Found a fine waterliole three feet deep and about forty in diameter, the edge
of which was surrounded with conglomerate ironstone rock.
* * Came on some fine ponds of water, about one and a-half
miles long, twenty feet broad, and three and a-half feet deep. I
examined them on both sides, to see if they would do for a permanent
camp for the party ; and I think I may depend, on the water lasting two
months without any more rain, as it is a point nearer. I name these
ponds Howell’s Ponds.
Tuesday, May 20. * * * Struck a small watercourse
running towards the north, followed it, and at two and a-half
miles came on some ponds of water, * * * < At present
they are not more than three and a-half feet deep; examined around
the wooded plain to see if there was any larger body of water, but could
see none. This plain is covered with small gums, having a dark bluish
green leaf with a grey colored bark, there are also a few white ones
around the ponds of water, which abound with grass. *
Wednesday, May 21.—Auld’s Chain of Ponds. Started at twenty
minutes past eight o’clock, a.m., course north, the morning has been so
thick, with a heavy fog, that Ido not get a start till late; at three miles
I found another chain of ponds, but not so large, these I name McGor-
rerey’s Ponds. Proceeded on the same course and passed through some
thick belts of hedge tree and scrub, the country then opened into a
splendid grassed one, with gums and other trees. * * *
Friday, May 23. * * * Daly Waters. We passed
some fine holes of water, which will last at least three months; at five
miles the water is becoming more plentiful, and the creek broader and
deeper, but twisting and turning about very much, sometimes running
east and then turning to the west and all other points of the compass;
having seen what I consider to be permanent water, I shall now run a
straight course, 20° east of north, and strike it occasionally to see if the


water continues. I have named these Daly Waters, in honor of His
Excellency the Governor-in-Chief. Within 100 yards the banks are
thickly wooded with tall mulga and lancewood scrub ; but to the east is
open gum forest, splendidly grassed ; proceeded, and occasionally touched
the creek, and always found fine reaches of water which continued a
considerable way; at thirteen miles they seemingly become smaller and
wider apart. * * ■»
Monday, June 2.—North of Daly Waters. The whole day’s journey
has been through a splendid grass country, and open forest of gum-trees
and other shrubs, some of them new to us. Here again we have also
met with the bean-tree, the blossoms of a bright crimson, and at this
•season they seem to shed their leaves. * * *
Friday, June 6.—Plain east of Blue Swamp. * * *
After passing over a rotten plain, full of holes and covered with grass
and stunted gum trees, proceeded to the top, from which we had a good
view of the surrounding country —to all appearances one of the blackest
and most dismal views a man ever beheld; even the splendid grass
country 1 had been coming through has the same appearance. The
cause of it is the trees being so thick, and some of them of a very dark
color, and nothing but their tops can be seen, which gives it the appear-
ance of being a dense scrub. * * *
Wednesday, June 11.—Blue Grass Swamp. * * *
Camped on the largest pond. The country we have gone over, alfhough
there are a number of holes and cracks in it, is really of the best
description, covered with grass up to the horses’ bodies, We have
passed several new trees and shrubs; the bean tree is becoming more
numerous here ; at this season and in this latitude it sheds its leaves, the
flower is in full bloom without them. * *
Saturday, June 14.—River Strang ways. * * * Found
the water to be deep and beautifully clear; proceeded down a little
further, and saw another large one. The hills close to the creek are
very precipitous, and we shall have difficulty in getting the horses down
to water ; the hills, where they come close to the creek, are covered with
spinifex; I shall, therefore, require to camp the party at the mouth of
the gorge, where there is plenty of feed. * * *
Saturday, June 21. * * * Started, following the river
down; it frequently separating into two or three channels, and again
joining. Numerous small watercourses are coming in on both sides,
from east and west; it winds about a great deal—its general course to-
day for nine miles has been nearly north-north-east. We passed a num-
ber of large lagoons, nearly dry, close to the stony hills; when full they
must retain water for a long time. There is very little water in the main
channel. At the nine mile I found a large and excellent pool of water
in one of the side creeks; it will last some time. It being now after-
noon, and there being a nice open plain for the horses, I have camped.
* * *
Friday, June 27. —West Roper River is a splendid river. We have
passed many brooks and deep reaches of water some miles in length, and
the country could not be better —it is really magnificent. * * v
The water of this river is most excellent; the soil is also of the first de-
scription ; and the grass, although dry, most abundant, from two to five
feet high. This is certainly the finest country I have seen in Australia.


We passed three rocky hills yesterday, not high, but having grass up to
their tops, round which the river winds at their base, forming large and
long reaches of water. On the grassy plains it forms into different chan-
nels, and is thickly timbered with sheaoak, gum, cabbage trees, and other
trees and shrubs. * * *
Monday, June 30. * * * Came upon a large reedy
swamp, through which the river seemed to flow; and again, at twenty
miles, came upon the river running into the swamp, and coming
from the north-north-west. Although travelling twenty miles, we have
not made more than ten miles in a straight line the general course is
west. The country is of the same excellent description. We have
passed the stony rises on the north side of the river, which are covered
with grass to their tops. After crossing the river, I ascended another of
the same kind. To the south are a few hills scattered over the grassy
plains, with lines of dark green trees between them, showing that they
are creeks flowing into the river whose junctions we have been crossing
to-day; the same to the south-west, and at west 20" south the distance
appears level, with a single peak just visible.
Thursday, July 3.—River Chambers. * * * It seems to
take its rise in a grassy plain to the east of this; the valley through
which the creek flows is well grassed, but the sides and the tops of the
hills are spinifex mixed with grass ; all the small valleys are well grassed.
Friday, July 4. * * * Arrived at a nice broad valley
with a creek running through it, course north-west. At a mile it received
a large tributary from the east of north, and the bed seems sandy , mela-
luea and gum trees in it, also the bean tree. The valley is covered with
grass from two to four feet high. * * * , , ,
Saturday, July 5. * * * Struck another large branch com-
ing from the north-east, and running apparently south—plenty of water
in it; this I named the Waterhouse. * * . * T^ e country
on the last course is again of the very best description and well-grassed;
the hills are stony, but abound with grass.
Monday, July 7.—Waterhouse River. * * * Ascended
one of the rises, which are not high, and found myself on a sandy table-
land, which continued for six miles, having coarse grass and spinifex
growing on it. Towards the last two miles it again became well glassed.
The timber is stringy bark, some splendid trees ; amongst them gums and
a number of pines, also very fine. The cabbage palm still growing in
the creeks in great numbers, some of them very tall, with several branches
on the top. The first eight miles was again over a splendid country, and
the last three of the same description. * * * Proceeded
and found it a fine creek with plenty of water; following it about one
mile to the north-west, when it became dry. There it seems to come
from the south; there are a great number of cabbage palms on its
batiks
Tuesday, July B. * * * Came upon another large
creek having a running stream to the south of west, and coming from
the north of east. Timber melaluca, palm, and gum, with sortie of othei
description. This I have named the Katherine, in honor of the second
daughter of James Chambers, Esq. The country gone over to-day,
although there is a mile or two of light sandy soil, is good for pasturage
purposes, in the valley it is of the finest description.


Wednesday, July 9.—Katherine. * * * Proceeded on
the westerly course, expecting to meet with a creek ; found none, but
large spings coming from sandy rises. * * * There is an
immense quantity of w r ater coming from these springs; the soil round
them is of the best deep black .alluvial —about a mile to the west is a
strong stream running to the south-west from them. I have called them
Kekwick Springs, in honor of my chief officer. * * *
Friday, July 11.—Adelaide River. * * * The country
is nearly all burnt throughout, but those portions which have escaped the
fire, are well grassed. I should think this is a likely place to find gold in,
from the quantity of quartz, its color, and having so lately passed a large
basaltic and granite country —the conglomerate quartz being bedded in
iron, and the slate perpendicular is a good sign. * * *
Saturday, July 12.—The Mary, Adelaide River. * * * The
country has recently all been burned; but judging from the small patches
that have escaped, has been well grassed up to the pass of the hills. The
valley and banks of the creeks are of beautiful alluvial soil. One new
feature seen to-day is the growing of large clumps of bamboo on the
banks of the river, from fifty to sixty feet in height and about six inches
through at the butt. * *
Tuesday, July 15. * * * Crossed granite and quartz
rises, with broad valleys between —both splendidly grassed. At three
miles crossed a small creek with water; at another mile the same creek
again ; one also to my line on the south-west side, and immediately went
off to the south-west. At six miles the river (Mary, Adelaide River)
came close to the line, and immediately went off to the west; continued
on my course through granite and quartz country, splendidly grassed, and
timbered with stringy bark and gums, pines, palms, nut trees, and a
wattle bush, which in some places was thick, but not at all difficult to
get through. * * *
Wednesday, July 16.—The Mary, Adelaide River. * * *
Crossed some stony hills and broad valleys with splendid alluvial soil,
the hills grassed to the top. On that course struck the branch of the
river ; still very thick with the same kind of timber already mentioned.
Most of the bamboos are dead; I suppose fire has been the cause of it.
I again find it running to the north; I turn to that course. At three
miles struck a large creek coming from the east, with large sheets of
water; had to run it up a half-mile before I could get across it. Crossed
it all right, and passed through a beautiful valley of green grass. *
* * I have seen a number of kangaroos to-day; they do
not seein to be as large as those in the south. * * *
Thursday, July 17. —Tide Creek, Adelaide River. * * *
Passed over some stony hills, small creeks, and valleys well grassed. At
three miles again met with the branch of the river—with bamboos and
trees of the description same as before—a running stream, but not so
rapid. At five miles, observing an open plain among the trees, and the
river tending more to the westward, I changed my course to it, 15 ° west
of north ; found it to be Cpen plan of rich alluvial soil at places ; at
times it seemed to be subject to inundation, 1 suppose the drainage from
the range to the eastward, which is distant about four miles. lam
pleased it has been burnt, but where it has not, the grass is most abundant;


where the water seems to remain it is. rather coarse. The plains are
studded with lines of green gum trees, and the palm cabbage are nu-
merous, which give them a very pretty park-like appearance. * *
Saturday, July 19.—Lilly Marsh, Adelaide River. * *
There is a small stony range of hills to the west, which at the end of the
three miles, dropped into a grassy plain of a beautiful black alluvial soil,
covered with lines and groves of the cabbage palm trees, which gives it
a very picturesque appearance —its dip is towards the river ; in two miles
crossed it, and again ascended low table land of the very same descrip-
tion as the other; at fourteen miles struck another creek with water, and
camped. The country gone over to-day, though not all of the very best
description, has plains in it of the very finest kind—even the sandy table
land bears an abundant crop of grass. The trees are so thick that I can
get no view of the surrounding country; the tall beautiful palm grows in
this creek. * * *
Tuesday, July 22.—Fresh Water Marsh. * * * The edge
of the marsh was still of the same rich character, and covered with
luxuriant grass.
Wednesday, July 23. —Struck a large creek, deep and long reaches;
thence three-quarters of a mile south before I could cross it. . This I have
named Thring’s Creek. * * * The country gone over to-day,
after leaving the side of the marsh, which, as well as the banks of the
creek, and also some small plaifis, are of the same rich description of
soil covered with grass, the other parts are slightly elevated, the soil light
with a little sand in the surface of a brown color; timber, mixture of
stringybark and gums with many others; also, a low thick scrub, in many
places it has lately been burnt, the few patches that have escaped
abound in grass. I have come twelve miles to the eastward to try to
round the marsh, but have not been able to do so; the plains that were
seen from the river by those who came up it in boats is the marsh; it
is covered with luxuriant grass, which gives it the appearance of exten-
sive grassy plains.
Thufday, July 24.—Came up in a broad valley of black alluvial soil,
covered with long grass; from this I can hear the wash of the sea on the
other side of the valley, which is rather more than a quarter of a mile
wide, is growing a line of thick heavy bushes, very dense, showing that
to be the boundary of the beach. Crossed the valley and entered the
scrub, which was a complete network of vines. Stopped the horses to
clear a way, whilst I advanced a few yards on to the beach, and was
gratified and delighted to behold the water of the Indian Ocean in \an
Diemen’s Gulf, before the party with the horses knew anything of its
proximity. * * * If this country is settled, it will be one of the
finest Colonies under the Crown, suitable for the growth of any and
everything—what a splendid country for producing cotton! Judging
from the number of the pathways from the water to the beach, across the
valley, the natives must be very numerous; we have not seen any,
although we have passed many of their recent tracks and encampments.
The cabbage and fan-palm trees have been very plentiful during to-day’s
journey down to this valley.


EXTRACTS FROM MR. WATERHOUSE’S* REPORT.
Near here (Mount Hay) are some broken ranges, some of which are
running nearly parallel with the Mac Donnell Range, forming broad level
valleys, in which the soil is much enriched from the washings fromt e
ranges on either side. An abundance of fine grass is found in these
valleys which, lodging from a distant view which I obtained, on our
JS’frTa WpJt of the Mount Hay Range I think must be very
extensive. A continuation of these well-grassed valleys seemed to
extend in a north-westerly direction as far as 1 could see. A
From Central Mount Stuart we crossed again the Hanson, which was
dry but found, at a few miles farther on, some water in small lagoons
under some sandhills ; these on our return were dry. Near here I saw
some bean-trees in bloom (Erithrma). The blossom of these treesi is
rich and handsome, of reddish color, in clusters of papilionaceous
flowers; the leaf is bilobed; the foliage of the tree is scanty, and the
wood exceedingly soft and spongy. We next came to the Stirling, w er
with plenty of water. ftc first
running stream I had seen since leaving Adelaide. There was a
plentiful supply of water here, and in parts a fine broad stream o
deep water ; P on our return in September, there were but a few long
shallow waterholes left. A few smooth-barked gum trees are growing on
the banks. # Creek) had sor ne ve ry long, broad,
and deep waterholes, with much conglomerate rock in the bed of the
creek There were some fine smooth-barked gum trees °n its ban s.
On our return in September, the water was much reduced, yet there was
still a good supply. We next crossed the Whitmgton Range, and campe
onone S of the sources of the Morphett, where we found water. This
is of a very hard compact silicious sandstone. Prom thence we
went to the Tomkinson, where we found plenty of water; and then we
proceeded to the Burke, where we found some good waterholes.
•P * * * Most of these watercourses have the appearance of
not having had water in them for many years. In the beds of the most
considerable are to be seen growing gum trees of all ages, as well as
acacias and shrubs. In some places, large gum trees, now black with
age that have been deposited by great floods, are to be seen scattered
over the vallevs near the banks. The only water I saw in these creeks,
either going or returning, was in waterholes in the deepest parts of the
beds many of these were small, and contained but a scanty supply, and
often distance apart; they had not the appearance of being per-
manent Many of them we found dried up on our return. _
I found this portion of the country very poor in zoology, having met
with while travelling, very few species of birds or animals. The common
r„ck Jtdlaby was found throughout in rocky ranges and the uroo kan-
was occasionally seen in the same localities. The dingo or native
doe was heard and seen throughout the continent. The birds whic
were seen were chiefly those that are common in the far north, such as
the small rock pigeonf the blue-crested, the bronzed-winged, and brown
• Mr. Waterhouse was employed as Naturalist to Stuart’s Expedition.


flock pigeons ; kites, on Sturt’s Plains (where they feed on grasshoppers),
were very numerous, * * *
* These ponds (Howell’s Ponds), consist
of a chain of small waterholes in a low part of the plain, which are
supplied by surface drainage. Most of tnem are deep, and I should
think would hold water a long time, the soil being of a tenaceous clayey
nature. Judging from the appearance of the surrounding country, in
which there are many depressions, I think it probable that when it
becomes better known many similar chains of ponds may be discovered.
Small swamp gums are generally growing around them, but so are they
also in other low localities where no water is, so that they afford no
indication which can assist the explorer: the general nature of the
country is such, that the waterholes can only be seen upon a. near
approach, and are thus difficult to find. These fine open plains are
evidently very extensive, and of a dark alluvial soil of a somewhat clayey
nature, covered with luxuriant grass, are very suitable for pastoral
purposes. Belts of thick scrub are frequently met with, where sand has
been accumulated by the action of the wind. Whilst camping at Howell’s
Ponds, I met with a beautiful arborescent species of bignonia, with a long
yellow trumpet-shaped flower. This was the only tree of the sort I found
in blossom, though afterwards I met with many in fruit, which I was
enabled to collect. The tree grows about fourteen feet high, with a
delicate foliage; the leaves are long and narrow; the seed vessel is a
long pod, with a curiously winged seed inside. *
The Daly Waters consist of some waterholes in a conglomerate rock
in the bed of a creek ; the one near which we camped was about eight
feet deep, although not large. In it were many small fish of the perch
tribe, some skins of which I procured; these fish are of the same species
as those I found throughout the country from Merchant’s Springs to the
Roper. I here met with a very pretty species of green and red parrot,
which probably is new, as Ido not find it figured in Gould s worjc, also
a singular black and white, with long bill curiously notched {cr actions
picatus), and several other birds, which I shot and skinned. There are
several new species of handsome gum trees near these waters, the foliage
of which is bold, the leaves being the largest I have seen, some of the
leaves were broad, and nearly a foot long ; one species has a very smooth
bark of a pale nankeen color; these trees give a very pretty and varied
effect to the scenery. The nut trees, a species of terminaha , or, perhaps,
achras, are very plentiful near here, and a second species was found with
a long leaf. The gum of these trees is readily soluble in cold water, and
is crood to eat when pounded very small and dissolved ; three large table
spoonsful we found would make one quart of thick gum water. In
appearance it is very similar to gum tragacanth. Another new tree was
found growing on the banks of the creek, it was about fifty feet high
with a fine thick foliage, the leaves were dark green and shiny, the bark
was rough, and the barrel straight, and about eighteen inches in diameter.
The wood of this tree is exceedingly hard and much resembles lignum
vita;. I regret being unable to procure any flowers or seeds from this
handsome tree. In the neighborhood of Daly Waters many very in-
teresting plants were common, as several malvaceous plants, a species of
caper, some acacias, among them acacia farinesiana, a grewia , a iermi"
nalia. * * *


The banks of the river (Strangways) are deep and steep, and there are
many small creeks running into it; the bed is with a rapid fall, and was
dry, with the exception of few waterholes in deep places, generally at a
great distance apart.
From this camp, still following the river, we passed over a country with
good alluvial soil, well timbered and with good grass, till we arrived at
the Rock Camp, where we camped by some immense detached blocks of
sandstone rock. To the west and north-west were seen many sandstone
rises, one of which I ascended for the purpose of obtaining a view of the
surrounding country, which I found in the direction of these stony rises
appeared to have much porcupine grass, but moderately well timbered
with small gum and other trees. To the east the country appeared much
better, being level, and having larger trees and good grass. * * *
The general character of the Strangways is that of a narrow, deep
river, with steep banks in a clayey soil. The banks are well lined with
a large species of casuarina and other trees, which keep them from
falling in. The descent is rapid, which may account for the bed being
dry, except in a few deep parts where there were small waterholes. The
soil near the banks was generally of a rich alluvial character, and the
grass both tall and good, although dry. A few good dams, placed at
intervals across the river, would keep the water up, and prevent so much
running away. * * *
Leaving the camp on the West Roper, June 26th, for the purpose of
making the Adelaide River, we returned by following up the river in
search of a ford : after passing over some excellent and well-watered
country, having rich alluvial soil with most 'luxuriant grass and well
timbered with gum trees, we succeeded in finding a ford on the second
day’s journey. The river winds very much, and the banks are so thickly
lined with trees, palms, and canes, that it is quite concealed from view,
and we often found it difficult to reach the water from the thickness of
the growth of the vegetation on its banks. * * *
■x * * These fine springs (Keckwick’s Springs) furnished
a good supply of water to several rivulets, the number and extent of
which were concealed by dense vegetation ; several species of ferns were
growing near these springs, and some of the largest and finest calhstemons
that we had seen. We here met with, for the first time, a beautiful
species of parrot (tichoglossus ruhritorquis) very similar to the one
known near Adelaide as the Blue Mountains.
Proceeding from the springs we soon arrived at a stony rise, ascending
which we came on some table-land extending, in the part over which we
crossed, about thirteen miles. The whole of this table-land was well
timbered with tall, straight gum trees, of from Ift. to 18in. in diameter,
of a species much resembling stringybark f eucalyptus fabrorum ), occa-
sionally a few native pines (frenelaJ, were seen, as well as some fan
palms (Livistona) in seed, some of which I collected. After travelling
about four hours through this forest of trees, we suddenly came on a
deep precipice of rough porous volcanic rock, from the top of which we
had a very extensive and beautiful view. In the foreground was a fine
broad deep valley through which a stream was running, but so overgrown
with trees and palms, some of which were from sixty to seventy feet high,
that the stream was completely concealed from view. ** * * To
the north and north-east, beyond the valley, the country was fiat as far as


could be seen, and appeared to be well grassed. Far to tbe north-west
the country appeared hilly and well timbered.
After leaving Billiatt’s Springs, July 15th, south latitude 13° 1/ 22",
we met with frequent stony rises, some composed of very hard sandstone
with veins of quartz, others entirely of very white granular quartz—
occasionally a little coarse-grained grey granite was seen to crop out in
the form of boulders, and near which was generally some blue schistose
rock of a very finely laminated nature. This part of the country is
much intersected by narrow deep creeks of running water concealed by
palms, bamboos, gum, and other trees growing on the rich alluvial soil
on the banks ; and in the valleys, which were well grassed, and timbered
with several species of gums, with occasionally a few native pines
(frenela), and other trees. * * *
* * * On coming on the Adelaide River, which, at the
part where we struck it, appeared to be about eighty yards broad, with
steep banks and deep water, the edge of which was well lined with
palms and large bamboos. The water was without any apparent current,
and there was no indication of a tidal mark on the bank. Soon after
leaving the river, we came on an extensive marsh, in parts thickly wooded
with large gum trees. * * *
From Anna’s Creek the country gradually falls and is intersected by
deep creeks of water, thickly lined by beautiful palms, bamboos, and
trees. Occasionally volcanic rock was seen in small rises, and some
thickly-timbered belts with a dense undergrowth of scrub and woodbine,
which was passed through with difficulty. This sort of country con-
tinued till we arrived on a very extensive and luxuriantly-grassed fresh
water marsh, on the margin of which we camped, where there was some
slightly elevated ground a short distance from the river. The next
morning I went down to the river for the purpose of examining it, and I
found a fine sheet of water extending in a northerly direction as far as I
could see, and probably about eighty yards in breadth. * * . *
* * * To the east the marsh was skirted by a low rise
of well timbered ground. The bank of the river being too boggy to
proceed that way to its mouth, we were obliged to skirt the marsh by
following the rising ground to the east, which after passing ovei well
wooded and watered country, with occasionally some fine open grassy
flats of rich black alluvial soil, we came on a belt of marshy ground,
crossing which we found on the other side a narrow belt of scrub, com-
posed of mangrove and several sorts of umbrageous trees with a thick
growth of underwood, in which was much woodbine, which we were
frequently obliged to cut to clear a passage for the horses. After forcing
our way through this, we came suddenly on the sea (July 24th), the tide
was out at the time, and the shore presented to our view nothing but a
level sheet of blue mud extending half-a-mile to the water s edge. Ihere
was a narrow margin of sand above high-water mark on which were
found a few dead shells, but no sea-weed was anywhere to be seen.


EXTRACTS EROM SOUTH AUSTRALIAN REGISTER, DEC. 26, 1862.
Our readers will doubtless be glad to have an opportunity of perusing
such statements as are recorded by other explorers relative to the country
which has now been opened up by Mr. Stuart, and which lies between
the scrub recently passed through and the sea coast which formed the
terminus of his journey northward. We are fortunately able to supply
full particulars on this subject from having obtained a copy of Leichardt’s
journal, which contains a detailed description of that part of Arnhem’s
Land which lies between the Roper River and Van Diemen’s Gulf.
When Leichardt described this country in 1846, public attention was
struck with his account of the magnificent scenery which he had passed
through ; but, though a strong impression was produced, the new country
appeared to the people of these colonies so far distant, and so completely
unconnected with existing settlements, that no more immediate results
were anticipated from the explorer’s discovery than if his travels had
been in Borneo or Java. But now the case is different. The glowing
description given by Leichardt of a country separated from Sydney and
Adelaide by a dangerous journey of many thousand miles, will be applied
in the diary of Stuart to a country within easy access of our northern
boundary, and likely, at a very early date, to be occupied by stock from
this Colony. When Mr. Stuart states that the public will be astonished
to learn the particulars of this part of his journey ; and when Mr.
Keckwick remarks, as he does in a communication given elsewhere, that
the beauty of some part of the country, with., its palm-trees and other
tropical vegetation, was remarkable, our readers will have no difficulty
in understanding the extent of these statements after the report which
Leichardt has given of the same region.
The Roper River, which Stuart struck soon after getting through the
belt of scrub, is thus described by Leichardt“ As far as the tide ex-
tends, this river is from 150 to 200 yards broad, deep, with steep banks
lined with dense hedges of the pandanus, of the drooping teatree, and
several other brush trees, amongst which jasmin in blossom rendered the
air fragrant with the perfume of its flowers. Vines hung from tree to
tree, and a fine leguminous climber, with green flowers, big pods, and
big brown seeds, grew in abundance.” These seeds, crushed and boiled,
formed, it is said, a very nutritious food. Speaking of the Roper in
another part of his journal, Leichardt says: —“The country along the
river is openly timbered, particularly its upper part, which opens into
fine plains, and would be well adapted for pastoral purposes. There are,
however, many rocky ranges, bluff isolated hills, and mountains which
frequently approach the river, and render the travelling along its banks
difficult.”
The South Alligator and the East Alligator are afterwards fully
described by the same explorer. He says—“ The valley of the upper
East Alligator, which I rather should call Goose River (for nowhere we
observed so many geese, and what is called an alligator is no alligator,
but a crocodile), is one of the most romantic spots I have ever seen in my
wanderings. A broad valley, level, with the most luxuriant verdure;
abrupt hills and ranges rising everywhere along its east and west sides,
and closing it apparently at its southern extremity; lagoons,forming fine
sheets of water, scattered over it; and a creek, though with salt water,


winding through it.” Descending from the high land through which
these rivers run, and approaching the coast now reached by Mr. Stuart,
but more to the eastward, Leichardt gives a full account of the low
country around Van Diemen’s Gulf. One of the first things which
attracted his attention was the appearance of buffalo tracks, which
increased as the expedition neared the sea shore. Describing this part
of the country Leichardt' says—“ The stringybark, the melaluca gum,
and the leguminous ironbark are the prevailing timber. The cypress
pine is abundant on the neck of the peninsula, the cabbage-palm with
long pinnetified leaves grows along some of the creeks, and even on the
ridges, and forms a grove and almost a forest at Mortejolk. Along the
creeks and in the swamps the teatree grows to a stately size, and yields
an excellent timber. The small fan-leaved palm is very abundant; the
little gooseberry-tree becomes a low shrub.” As the party proceeded,
herds of buffalo were seen, until, as Leichardt says, the whole country
became as closely covered with buffalo tracks as a well-stocked run in
New South Wales could be with bullock tracks.
The natives whom Leichardt met in the neighbourhood of Van
Diemen’s Gulf were friendly. Many of them used Malay words, and
some of them, from having been in contact with sailors, were acquainted
with a little English. Some attempts at theft were detected amongst
them, but there was exhibited none of that ferocity which had been met
with amongst the natives on the other side of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The chief result of his journey through this country was, he thought,
that it demonstrated the existence of a practical route between the
eastern part of the continent and the Alligator Rivers. It seems never
to have entered into his imagination that the fine country which he was
passing through could be possibly approached from South Australia, or
that the magnificent rivers which he was descending would at any time
be regarded as possible outlets for a direct overland trade between these
colonies and the Indian Ocean.
Gregory, who in 1856 made a journey from the Victoria River, around
the head of the Gulf of Carpentaria, to New South Wales, passed at no
great distance beyond the belt of scrub which Mr. Stuart has now pene-
trated. It was an object with Gregory to keep as far inland as possible.
But the country towards the centre of the continent looked so hopeless
that he went round by the Roper River, and availed himself of that
useful stream as Leichardt had before, and as Stuart has now done,
though for a different purpose. Gregory describes the country in the
neighbourhood of the Roper as the best with which he met after leaving
the Victoria. The ranges he found were of basalt, and there were feed
and water for stock in abundance. This concurrent testimony iti favor of
the country around the Roper is valuable, for it appears, from Mr. Stuart’s
chart, that it is by the way of this river that the tableland and the sea-
cca't beyond must be reached. It is in that direction, after failing in
all others, that he has now succeeded in penetrating the bad country
which repelled him in his last expedition—the bad country which made
Gregory shun the interior, and which had previously caused Leichardt to
hug the coast as much as possible. It is by way of the Roper that the
whole river system of Arnhem’s Land can be reached.
By bringing this valuable coast country into direct communication
with South Australia Mr. Stuart has done more than he would if he had


explored new lands in the interior. He might have shown us, as some
explorer doubtless will before long, what kind of region lies between the
centre of the continent and Western Australia. An immense country
never yet trodden by the foot of white man there still remains to be
examined. But no discovery of new territory could be half so important
as this extension of Mr. Stuart’s previous track to a part of the coast
which is supplied with good harbors, and backed by a fertile tableland,
across which vast rivers take their course downward to the sea. Me
look upon this extension as practically giving South Australia another
sea frontage. By a coincidence, which we have a right to accept as a
good omen, the great river which Mr. Stuart followed down already bears
the name of Adelaide, and is thus associated with South Australia in
the minds of all persons.
EXTRACT FROM SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ADVERTISER, JAN. 26, 1863.
In a kind of postscript to his Journal, addressed to the Hon. the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, Mr. Stuart thus sums up his views of the
newly discovered country: —“In conclusion, I beg to say, that I believe
this country (i.e. from the Roper to the Adelaide, and thence to the shores
of the Gulf), to be well-adapted for the settlement of an European popu-
lation. The climate being in every respect suitable, and the surrounding
country of excellent quality and of great extent. limber string}balk,
iron-bark, gum, &c., with bamboo fifty to sixty. feet high on the banks of
the river, is abundant, and at convenient distances. Ihe country is inter*
sected by numerous springs and watercourses in every direction. In my
journey across I was not fortunate in meeting with thunder showers and
heavy rains, but, with the exception of two nights, I was never without
a sufficient supply of water. This will show the permanency of the dif-
ferent waters, and I see no difficulty in taking over a herd of horses at
any time.”
Adelaide : Printed by authority by W. C. Cox, Government Printer.








