

\\ H nERI /
\ SOCIETY' Tlg /
NUMISMATIC NOTES AND MONOGRAPHS
No. 128
THE VENETIAN GOLD DUCAT
AND ITS IMITATIONS
HERBERT E. IVES
Edited and Annotated
PHILIP GRIERSON
THE AMERICAN NUMISMATIC SOCIETY
BROADWAY AT 156 TH STREET, NEW YORK
1954


Founded 1858 - Incorporated 1865
Broadway between 155 TH & 156 TH Streets
New York 32, N. Y.
PURPOSES : The Society was founded for the collection and preser-
vation of coins and medals and for the investigation of their history
and other subjects connected therewith.
MEMBERSHIP'. Applications for membership are welcomed from
all interested in numismatics. Inquiries regarding membership
should be addressed to the Secretary of the Society.
DUES'. The annual dues for an Associate Membership are $7.5°.
Issues of the Notes and Monographs, Museum Notes, Hispanic
Numismatic Series, and Numismatic Literature are distributed to all
members.
PUBLICATIONS'. The Numismatic Notes and Monographs consist
of separately issued papers, each on a single topic, of which two
to four numbers appear each year. The American Numismatic
Society Museum Notes is a publication, irregular in appearance,
consisting of brief notes and papers, principally on items in the
Society’s collections. Numismatic Literature is a quarterly listing
current numismatic publications with abstracts of their content.
Numismatic Studies is a series which accommodates works of full
book length. The Hispanic Numismatic Series, published in co-
operation with the Hispanic Society of America, consists of publi-
cations devoted to the coinage of the Iberian Peninsula, and is
based on the collections of the Hispanic Society.
MUSEUM: The Society maintains a museum located in uptown
Manhattan, New York City, which houses its offices, collections
and library. Collections embrace coins of all periods from their in-
ception to modern times, medals and decorations. Selections from
its cabinets are on display in an exhibition. The library, consisting
of about 12,000 volumes, covers all branches of numismatics.
The Museum is open to Members and the public on Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, It is closed on
Sundays and Mondays and the following holidays: New Year's
Day, Lincoln’s Birthday, Washington’s Birthday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Election Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christ-
mas Day. The hours of the Library are from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. The
public exhibition is open from 2 to 5 p.m.


NUMISMATIC NOTES AND MONOGRAPHS
Number 128


NUMISMATIC NOTES AND MONOGRAPHS
is devoted to essays and treatises on subjects relating
to coins, paper money, medals and decorations.
PUBLICATION COMMITTEE
A. Carson Simpson, Chairman
Alfred R. Bellinger
Agnes Baldwin Brett
Thomas O. Mabbott
Theodor E. Mommsen
Sawyer McA. Mosser, Editor


The Venetian Gold Ducat
And Its Imitations
HERBERT E. IVES
Edited and Annotated
PHILIP GRIERSON
THE AMERICAN NUMISMATIC SOCIETY
BROADWAY AT 156 TH STREET
NEW YORK
1954


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED BY
THE AMERICAN NUMISMATIC SOCIETY
PRINTED IN GERMANY
AT J.J. AUGUSTIN • GLUCKSTADT


CONTENTS
FOREWORD vii
INTRODUCTION I
I. THE DESIGN OF THE VENETIAN DUCAT, 1284 C. 1840 5
11. DUCATS OF THE ROMAN SENATE 9
111. OTHER WESTERN EUROPEAN IMITATIONS 13
IV. DUCATS OF THE KNIGHTS OF ST. JOHN OF JERUSALEM
AT RHODES AND MALTA l 8
V. OTHER EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN IMITATIONS 22
VI. ANONYMOUS LEVANTINE IMITATIONS 25
VII. INDIAN IMITATIONS 29
VIII. GILT COPPER DUCAT TOKENS 32
IX. DIES FOR IMITATION DUCATS 33
KEY TO THE PLATES 35




FOREWORD
This is the third and unhappily the last of Dr. Ives’ contri-
butions to the literature of numismatics. His previous publi-
cations were a monograph on imitations of the English noble,
published in 1941 as No. 93 in Numismatic Notes and Mono-
graphs, and an article contributed to Museum Notes in 1952
on the design of the Florentine florin as an aid to its dating.
His main interest was that branch of comparative numis-
matics which involves the study of the spread and imitation
of important commercial currencies, and his strength as a
scholar lay in his talent for observing and analyzing the in-
cidence of small details of design which could be used as
evidence for classification and dating. It was only a short
step from the florin to the ducat, and he had virtually com-
pleted the sketch for this monograph when he died suddenly
on 13 November 1953.
In the previous summer, on the eve of his last visit to
Europe, Dr. Ives asked me to read his rough draft and dis-
cuss it with him. Since he was one of the most modest of
scholars, he always assumed that others were likely to know
more about a subject than he did himself. The book seemed
to me to fulfil very adequately the purposes he had in mind,
and beyond urging that certain sections required expansion,
I had not many suggestions to make.
Dr. Ives returned from Europe with some fresh material,
but had scarcely begun the revision of the text and notes for
the printer before he died. I was asked by The American
Numismatic Society to complete the work, and was only too
happy to perform this service to the memory of a distin-
guished collector and scholar. I first met Dr. Ives when he


was visiting England in 1951. We subsequently corresponded
on problems of later medieval coinage, and he showed me
every kindness when I was in New York for the first time
in 1953-
The manuscript of the book, in the form in which it
reached me, consisted of the text as I had originally seen it,
accompanied by rather sketchy notes and partially mounted
plates. Full indications were available as to how Dr. Ives
intended to complete the latter.
The text as printed here is basically as Dr. Ives left it, but
I have systematized the spelling of proper names, checked
the dates and cross-references, and added sections on points
which I had discussed with him and on which I knew he
intended to work. I have not called attention to small
changes I have made in his wording, whether for literary
reasons or in correcting trivial errors of fact, but I have put
all substantial additions of my own in brackets. This does
not apply to the footnotes, which are almost entirely my
work, since I had only rough jottings regarding his chief
authorities and few references in detail. The general plan of
the plates is that devised by Dr. Ives, but some have had to
be slightly adjusted either to include additional material or
to utilize more satisfactorily the space available.
The majority of the coins illustrated formed part of Dr.
Ives’ own splendid collection and are now in the possession
of The American Numismatic Society. I am indebted to the
keepers of the coins in the British Museum and the Ashmo-
lean Museum for permission to publish several specimens in
their respective collections, and to Sig. Tommaso Bertele
for sending me a photograph and description of a coin die in
his possession and giving me permission to include it here.
NEW YORK, 17 AUGUST 1954- PHILIP GRIERSON


INTRODUCTION
In the second half of the thirteenth century two important
gold coins were introduced in Italy, the florin of Florence
(1252) and the ducat or zecchino of Venice (1284). Of virtu-
ally the same size and value, and of high purity, these coins
were issued, with little change in design, for a period of
several centuries: in the case of the florin, up to 1533, after
the institution of Alessandro de Medici as first Grand Duke
of Tuscany; in the case of the ducat, up to the suppression
of the Venetian Republic by the Treaty of Campo Formio in
1797 and even beyond, into the nineteenth century. Both
had a wide circulation 1 and were extensively imitated, but
the imitations followed a somewhat different course in the
two cases.
The florins of Florence were copied almost exclusively in
western Europe: in Germany, the Low Countries, France and
Aragon, where over a hundred rulers, states, and cities issued
florins bearing the lily for obverse, and St. John the Baptist
as reverse, with the FLORENTIA of the original replaced by
FRANCIA, FLAD, or other identifying place or ruler’s
name. These florin imitations flourished in the fourteenth
century, but had practically ceased by 1400 except in Ara-
gon, where they persisted well into the fifteenth century.
The goldgulden, derived from the florin, lasted longer, but
with the lily and St. John superseded by other types. The
1 Cf. Josef Muller, “Venezianer Miinzen im XIII. Jahrhunderte und ihr
Einfluss auf das mitteleuropaische Miinzwesen/’ Numismatische Zeitschriff,
XV (1883), 222-37, an( l the article of Dieudonne cited below, p. 4, n. 10.


florin imitations have been very fully listed and described by
Dannenberg, 2 Joseph, 3 and others.
The imitations of the Venetian ducat, in contrast to those
of the florin, were produced almost entirely in regions south
and east of Venice : 4 in the eastern Mediterranean, the Levant,
and out as far as India. Unlike the florin imitations they were
not a phenomenon of a few decades, but continued during
the whole period of the ducat, that is, up until the nineteenth
century. It is the purpose of this essay to give an account
of the spread of these ducat imitations, which it has heretofore
been possible to comprehend only by consulting widely scat-
tered sources.
[lt must be remembered that imitations of the ducat
throw light on only one aspect of its influence. The weight
and intrinsic quality of the coin were as important as its
external appearance, and the manner in which it was taken
as a model by rulers who in the fifteenth century were
reforming or creating a gold coinage is most revealing. This
was equally true of the Christian west and the Muslim east.
Afonso V of Portugal, establishing in 1457 the new cruzado
2 Hermann Dannenberg, “Die Goldgulden vom Florentiner Geprage,”
NZ, XII (1880), 146-85.
3 Paul Joseph, Historisch-kritische Beschreibung des Bretzenheimer Gold-
guldenfundes ( vergraben um 1390 ): nebst einem Verzeichniss der bisher be-
kannten Goldgulden vom Florentiner Geprdge (Mainz, 1883). This article first
appeared in vol. 11l of the Zeitschrift des Vereins zur Erforschung der
rheinischen Geschichte und Altertiimer zu Mainz. The most convenient
listing of florin imitations is that in Arthur Engel and Raymond Serrure,
Traite de numismatique du moyen age, 111 (Paris, 1905), 1437-40.
4 The relatively small circulation of the Venetian ducat in northern Europe
is reflected in the composition of the Bretzenheim hoard. Of the 1005 coins
it contained, 451 were Florentine florins, 549 were florin imitations or de-
rivatives, and only 5 were Venetian ducats. In contrast to this, see the
account of the board of Puerto de Santa Maria at Cadiz by F. Mateu y
Llopis, “El ducado, unidad monetaria internacional oro durante el siglo XV,
y su aparacion en la peninsula Iberica,” Anuario del Cuer-po Facultativo de
Archiveros, Bibliothecarios y Arqueologicos, II (1934), 1-34.


with the guinea gold which Portugese exploration of the
coast of west Africa was for the first time bringing to his
kingdom, made this coin of the weight and fineness of the
ducat, 5 and Ferdinand and Isabella, in carrying out their
great monetary reform by the Pragmatic of Medina del
Campo of 13 June 1497, took the value of the ducat as that
which their excelente should follow. 6 In the early years of
the century, when the Venetian ducat circulated in great
quantities in Egypt under the name of tfranty, the Mamluk
ruler An-Naslr Faraj (1399-1412) made his new r gold coin,
called after him the nasery, identical in weight with the
ducat, 7 and so a few years later did Al-Ashraf (1422-38), 8
S A. C. Teixeira de Aragao, Descripgao geral e historica das moedas ... de
Portugal, I (Lisbon, 1874), 230. The mint specifications were a fineness of
23 3 /4 carats and 64% pieces to the mark, so the weight was a fraction above
that of the ducat.
6 Aloiss Heiss, Descripcion general de las monedas hispano-cristianas desde
la invasion de los Arabes, I (Madrid, 1865), 134. The mint specifications
were a fineness of 23 3 / 4 carats and 65 pieces to the mark. The text of
the Pragmatic can be most conveniently consulted in Tomas Dasi, Estudio
de los reales de a ocho, I (Valencia, 1950), Doc. no. 75, pp. LV-LXXIX.
7 A. Rauge van Gennep, “Le ducat venitien en Egypte: son influence sur le
monnayage de Tor dans ce pays au commencement du XVe siecle,” Rev.
Num., 4th series, I (1897), 373-81, 494-508. The esteem in which the ducat
was held was due to its uniformity of weight as much as to its purity, the
gold coins of the Mamluks in the fourteenth century being struck to no
weight standard at all. The appearance of the ducat in quantity in Egypt is
stated by a contemporary historian to date from about 1388, but seems to
have been earlier, since the Florentine Niccolo Frescobaldi found it in
common use in Cairo in 1384. An-Nasir Faraj’s predecessor Saif-ed-din
(1382-99) attempted to drive it out of circulation by reviving the old dinar
of traditional weight, but had no success. Although the nasery was of the
same weight as the ducat, it was not of such fine gold and so was valued
at less (Rauge van Gennep, op. cit., 499-501).
8 Rauge van Gennep, op. cit., 501. The coin of Al-Ashraf, known after him as
the ashrafl, had a great future before it, since it provided the name and
one of the main standards of weight for the later gold coins of Persia
(H. L. Rabino di Borgomale, Coins, medals and seals of the Shahs of Iran,
1500-1941, Hertford, 1945, 14).


while even Muhammad the Conqueror took the ducat as
the standard for his altun, the gold coin of the Ottoman
Empire, struck for the first time in 1478. 9
Equally significant is the way in which during the fifteenth
century the word ducat came to displace florin as the common
expression for a gold coin. To a writer of the fourteenth
century, every gold coin was a “florin” of some particular
sort, even if it bore no physical resemblance to the Italian
coin and was of quite a different weight. The French masse
d’or was a florenus ad sceptrum, the chaise d’or a fiorenus ad
cathedram, and so on. But in the fifteenth century the com-
mon word was ducat; people spoke of ducats of Bohemia or
Hungary, and in Holland and Germany, and even in Florence
itself, the florin was termed “ducat of Florence.” 10 The fun-
damental reason for the change was the fact that the Vene-
tian coin had been so little copied in western Europe. The
Florentine florin had been widely imitated, many of these
imitations were seriously debased, and the bad reputation
they earned reflected quite unjustifiably upon their proto-
type-]
9 This at least is the earliest date (A. H. 883) recorded; we do not know
positively that the coin was created in this year.
10 See the remarks of Adolphe Dieudonne, “Des especes de circulation Inter-
nationale en Europe, depuis saint Louis,” Revue suisse de numismatique,
XXII (1920), 15-17.


THE DESIGN OF THE VENETIAN DUCAT
1284— c. 1840 11
The ducat of Venice was struck in pure gold, of weight
3.56 gm. ; 12 its diameter was at first 20 mm., but increased
later to about 21 mm. The uniform design, which varied only
in small details through the centuries, is illustrated by the
large, infrequently struck ten-ducat piece shown in Plate I,
1. The obverse displays St. Mark standing at the left; at the
right the doge kneeling, holding a staff or banner, alongside
which is the woid DVX. The inscription around the border
is the doge’s name to right, and to left S. M. VENET(VS
or I). On the reverse is the figure of Christ, surrounded by
stars, in a pointed oval technically known as a mandorla. The
legend is SIT.T.XPE.DAT. Q. TV.REGIS.ISTE.DVCAT {Sit
tibi Christe datus, quem tu regis, iste ducatus, ‘Let this duchy
which thou rulest be dedicated to thee, O Christ’.)
[According to most works of reference, the name of the
coin is derived from the last word of the legend. This is a
11 The main works of reference are Nicolo Papadopoli, Le monete di Venezia,
3 vols. (Venice-Milan, 1893-1919); the Corpus Nummorum Italicorum,
VII-VIII (Rome, 1915-17); and Giuseppe Castellani, Catalogo della Rac-
colta Numismatica Papadopoli-Aldohrandini (Civico Museo Correr), 2 vols.
(Venice, 1925).
12 The order of the Grand Council of 31 October 1284 which created the
ducat prescribed that it should be “tarn bona et fina per aurum vel melior
ut est fiorenus” (Papadopoli, op. cit. 1, 123). Authors like Pegolotti regularly
take it as being 24 carat gold, and modern assays have found it to be
997/1000 fine {lbid., p. 124). The coin was struck at 67 to the mark of Venice.
This has been variously estimated at between 237.52 g. and 238.453 g.; at
the latter figure the weight of the ducat works out at 5.559 g.


popular derivation which is not correct. The word ducat was
first applied to the silver gross! of Venice, 13 coined from 1202
onwards, on which no such legend occurs, and when the new
gold coins came into existence eighty years later they were
called ducati auri, to distinguish them from the current ducati
argenti, and ultimately the word “ducat” came to be applied
solely to the gold coins. The evolution was precisely similar
to that of the word “florin,” which was used first of silver
coins of Florence and subsequently of the fiorini Toro, or
fwrini for short. The word ducat originally meant the silver
coins struck by Roger II (1102-54) and William I (1154-66)
of Sicily from 1140 onwards for the duchy of Apulia, and
their name {ducatus or ducalis) came from the ducatus Apu-
liae, 14 It was presumably applied to the Venetian ducat
because of a general resemblance in design, 15 and because
no other word existed at that time to denote a silver coin
of higher value then a penny.]
Various changes in design occur, in the character of the
doge’s cap, in the lettering, in the disposition of the figure
of Christ and the nimbus in the oval, in the number and
arrangement ol the stars. These changes, which often offer
a means of identifying the prototype of an imitation, are
13 The proof is a passage in the chronicle of Martino da Canale, cited by
Papadopoli (I, 81), which says under Enrico Dandolo (1192-1205) “fu
comencie en Venise a faire les nobles mehailles d’argent que Ten apele
ducat, qui cort parmi le monde por sa bonte.” Martino da Canale wrote
in the early thirteenth century, before the gold ducat existed.
14 See the appendix on the ducats of the Norman kings in Arthur Engel,
Recherches sur la numismatique et la sigillogvaphie des Normands de Sidle
et d’ltalic (Paris, 1882), 65-71.
15 The Norman ducat showed on the obverse the standing figures of Roger I
and his son Roger, or William I and his son Roger, holding a long cross
between them, and on the reverse the nimbate bust of Christ. The Venetian
grosso (silver ducat) showed on the obverse two standing figures, the doge
and St. Mark, holding a banner between them, and on the reverse the
seated figure of Christ.


exhibited, with descriptive notes, on Plates II to VI, along-
side the complete list of doges. [The changes are not always
exactly coterminous with the rule of the doges indicated,
for there was a certain amount of overlap between some of
the types, and particular details, such as the presence or
absence of a beard on the doges of the late fifteenth and early
sixteenth centuries, evidently depended upon the actual ap-
pearance of individual sovereigns. There are also occasionally
quite inexplicable variations from the normal type. A ducat
of Andrea Dandolo (1344-54) in the collection of Philip Grier-
son has the cruciform nimbus of Christ on the reverse re-
placed by a nimbus containing three small crosses, one above
and one on either side of the head. In every other respect it
is quite normal (wt. 3.51 g.), and there is no doubt that it is
a product of the Venetian mint.]
The method of coining the ducats was not changed through-
out their history; they were all hammered coins, with the
exception of a milled pattern (Plate V 1,2) made under Aus-
trian rule with the name of Francis 11. [The earliest ducats
had their dies adjusted t or more rarely ft, this prac-
tice, which was very unusual in the middle ages in the West,
being no doubt derived from Byzantium. 16 In the second
half of the fourteenth century this regularity was abandoned,
but it seems to have been revived in the fifteenth century,
at least so far as the majority of the coins were concerned,
though irregularity is found from time to time in every
reign.
The issue of the ducats did not end with the dissolution of
the Venetian Republic in 1797, though it is not easy to dis-
cover exactly how much longer their minting continued.
Coins in the name of the last doge, Lodovico Manin (1789-97),
16 See Philip Grierson, “Pegged Venetian coin dies: their place in the
history of die adjustment,” Numismatic Chronicle, 6th series, XII (i 95 2 )»
103. Cf. also below, p. 34.


are believed to have been struck down to 1823, 17 since they
were enormously popular in the Levant. The ducats with the
title of FRANC.II 18 were minted during the first Austrian
occupation of Venice (1797-1805), partly at the mint in
Venice and partly at that of Giinzburg. Ducats with the
title of FRANC.I 19 were struck at Venice between 1815 and
1822, when their minting was discontinued, 20 but coins with
the FRANC.II legend were apparently being struck from the
old dies in c. 1840. 21 These are indistinguishable from the
earlier issue, but must none the less be regarded as the last
Venetian ducats struck by the lawful mint of the city.]
17 So Carlo Kunz in Paul Lambros, Monete inedite dei Gran Maestri dell’Or-
dine di S. Giovanni di Gerusalemme in Rodi (Venice, 1865), 23, note i.
18 CNI, VIII, 644, nos. io-ii. The numbering of this emperor, who ruled
1792-1835, is peculiar, since he was Francis II as Holy Roman Emperor
(1792-1806) but Francis I as Emperor of Austria (1806-1835). Coins giving
him the title of Francis II therefore precede those bearing the title of
Francis I.
19 Ibid., 655, no. 38.
20 Siegfried Becher, Das osterreichische Miinzwesen vom Jahre 1524 bis 1838
(Vienna, 1835), I (i), 116-117; Josef C. Adam, “Die Miinzen unter der
Regierung des Kaisers Franz 11. bezw. Kaiser I von Oesterreich 1792 bis
1835/’ Mitteilungen des Clubs der Miinz- und Medaillenfreunde in Wien, XI
(1900), 45.
21 Josef Cejnek, Osterreichische Miinzprdgungen von 1703 bis 1Q35 (Vienna,
1935), 68.


DUCATS OF THE ROMAN SENATE
The earliest imitations of the Venetian ducat, most closely
resembling their prototype in style, are the series issued in
the name of the Roman Senate 22 in the fourteenth and early
fifteenth century. 23 They differ from the contemporary Vene-
tian ducats almost solely in their inscriptions. In place of
S. M. VENETI we find S. PETRVS; in place of DVX along-
side the staff we find SEN, which is continued in the circular
inscription as ATOR VRBIS; and on the reverse the in-
scription is ROMA CAPVT MVNDI. SPQR.
[These ducats are usually dated 1350-1439. 24 The terminal
date may be accepted, for an exchange table of 1439 de-
22 Though the coins are called “senatorial” because they refer to the Senate
and not to the Pope, they were issued by the city authorities with papal
approbation, and after the return of the popes to Rome from their sojourn
at Avignon there was only a single mint in Rome striking both “papal” and
“senatorial” coins. See Camillo Serafini, “L’autorita pontificia nelle monete
del Senate Romano,” Atti e Memorie dell ’lstituto italiano di Numismatica,
I (1913), 129-41.
23 The main collections of material are the CNI, XV, 160-80, nos. 495-662,
and Camillo Serafini, Le monete e le holle plumbee pontificie del Medagliere
Vaticano, I (Milan, 1910), 56-63, nos. 377-463. An invaluable study is
V. Capobianchi, “Appunti per servire albordinamento delle monete coniate
dal Senato Romano dal 1184 al 1439,” Archivio della Reale Societd romana
di Storia patria, XVIII (1895), 417-45; XIX (1896), 75-123. Edoardo
Martinori’s “Annali della Zecca di Roma. Serie del Senato Romano,
1184-1439,” Atti e Memorie dell'lstituto italiano di Numismatica, VI (1930),
220-60, unfortunately got no further than a bibliographical introduction,
and is of little use in this connection.
24 See Serafini, op. cit., and the CNI. The reasoning is set out by Capo-
bianchi, op. cit., 104-7, 113-14.


scribes the ducat of Pope Eugenius IV bearing his arms,
which replaced the ducat of Venetian type, as a ducato nuovo.
The date of origin is based on the assumption that the ducats
were first issued on the occasion of the Papal Jubilee of 1350,
since it was on this occasion that the Sudario, the cloth
showing the face of the Saviour, was exhibited in Rome and
first came into prominence, and the Sudario is very fre-
quently used as a symbol in the legends of the ducats. Such
reasoning does not exclude the possibility of some of the
ducats being earlier than 1350, and we have good evidence
that they were, for the Florentine merchant Pegolotti, writ-
ing c. 1340, includes romanini Toro a carati 23 e 3 / 4 , which
can only mean these ducats, in the list of gold coins current
in his day. 25 They did not yet exist in 1317, since the chapters
relating to coinage in the Statuti dei Mercanti di Roma of
this year refer only to money of silver and billon. 26 Their
origin must therefore be placed between 1317 and c. 1340.
The three stages 27 in the history of the senatorial ducat
are illustrated on Plate VII. They differ according to the
obverse legend. The first is that closest to the Venetian origi-
nal, with S. PETRVS (corresponding to S. M. VENETI)
reading vertically downwards to left, SEN (corresponding
to DVX) reading vertically downwards in the center and
finally the remainder of the last word (Sm)ATOR.VRBIS
reading outwardly downwards, in a position corresponding
to the doge’s name on Venetian coins, on the right. The
second series is identical with the first save that SEN reads
25 Francesco Balducci Pegolotti, La pratica della mercatura, ed. Allan Evans
(Mediaeval Academy of America, Publications No. 24, Cambridge, Mass.,
1936), 287. On the date at which Pegolotti was writing, ihid., xiii-xiv. Much
of the material is earlier, but how much earlier it is impossible to say, since
the text has not yet been critically analyzed.
26 Capobianchi, op. cit., 104.
27 The CNI and Serafim have three stages; Capobianchi makes five by
further subdividing the second and third according to the way in which
SPQR is written in the reverse legend.


vertically upwards, making the sequence ATOR.VRBIS a
more natural one. The third continues this arrangement, but
S. PETRVS now reads outwardly upwards, following the
circumference of the coin. Within these broad divisions there
are many varieties of moneyer’s or issue marks (crossed keys,
Sudario, Moor’s head, rose, etc.), some of which are also
found on silver coins which bear the names of individual
popes and thus allow groups of ducats on which they occur
to be given an approximate date. 28 In the final period the
banner on the obverse terminates below in a shield with the
Condulmerio arms (Plate VII, 4), those of Pope Eugenius IV
(1431-47), whose personal name was Gabriello Condulmerio.]
These coins were followed by the regular papal coinage of
ducats, retaining the old size and weight but with designs
in which all traces of the Venetian type are lost. [The only
apparent exception to this is the ducat a double ducat
also exists of Paul II (1464-71) showing the kneeling pope
receiving the keys from St. Peter (Plate VIII, 4), but the
resemblance between it and the traditional Venetian type is
purely accidental. The bestowal of the keys was an obvious
theme on a papal coin, and the design is one of a remarkable
series of novel types produced towards the middle of the
fifteenth century by an enterprising and talented moneyer
and die-engraver, Miliano Orfini of Foligno, who worked for
a number of years in the papal mint. 29
The existence of this Roman series of imitation ducats is at
first sight an anomaly, since the only other large group of
Venetian imitations was situated in the eastern Mediterra-
nean area, and there is no reason to suppose that Venetian
28 See E. Martinori, Annali delle Zecca di Roma: Urbano V - Giovanni
XXIII (Rome, 1917), 9, 25, 31-2, 41, 49; Martino V - Eugenio IV
(1918), 8-9, 29.
29 See E. Martinori, Annali della Zecca di Roma: Nicolb V - Rio II (Rome,
1918), Paolo II (1917), and Sisto IV - Innocenzo VIII (1917), passim ;
L. Forrer, Biographical Dictionary of Medallists, s.v. Orsini {sic. !), Emiliano,


coinage was particularly important in Rome. The most likely
explanation is that since the economic life of the city revolved
around the financial operations of the papal curia and the
entertainment of visitors, in either case being concerned
with the subjects of every European state, it was desirable to
have a gold coinage which approximated in value and ap-
pearance to one or other of the best known coinages of the
day. The florin was out of the question, for the Roman mint
was largely controlled and administered by Florentines, and
the magistrates of Florence took strong exception to the
imitation of the coins of their city and endeavored to prevent
it where they could. If the florin could not be imitated, the
Venetian ducat was the next best thing, and the moneyers
had no scruples in making the resemblance as close as they
reasonably could.]


OTHER WESTERN EUROPEAN IMITATIONS
The further imitations of the Venetian ducat in western
Europe are, unlike the copies of the Florentine florin, rela-
tively few, and never occur far afield from Italy. No con-
siderable coinages took place, and specimens of such as exist
are rare.
Genoa, the great maritime rival of Venice, adopted the
type of standing saint and kneeling ruler in the middle of
the sixteenth century for some of its silver coinage, but not
for any extensive gold coinage. There occurs, however, a gold
ducat (Plate VIII, i) closely resembling the Venetian piece,
with obverse inscription DVX.ET.GVB REIP.GEN and re-
verse inscription DEO.OPT.MAX.GLO. This ducat, in the
former King of Italy’s collection, 30 is not listed in any of the
principal works on the coinage of Genoa, and should perhaps
be classed as a pattern, [though the only recorded specimen
shows considerable signs of wear. Its style, and the fact that
a similar Venetian type was introduced on the silver testone
in 1554, permits us to assign it to the mid-sixteenth century.]
In the same category of pattern is to be placed a unique
silver piece of Duke Ferdinand Gonzaga of Mantua (1612-26),
illustrated on Plate VIII, 2, which shows St. Andrew stand-
ing, holding a long cross and a monstrance, with the kneeling
and bare-headed duke to the right. 31 The obverse inscription
30 CNI, 111, 258, no. 1.
31 First published by N. Papadopoli, “Monete italiane inedite della Rac-
colta Papadopoli,” Rivista italiana di numismatica, XXVI (1913), 81-2,
and reproduced in CNI, IV, 355, no. 125. The coin is now in the Correr
Museum at Venice (no. 4049).


is FER. D. G. DVX. MAN. VI. E. M. F. with Till, i. e., his
number as duke of Montferrat (MF) beneath. On the reverse
is the figure of the Virgin in a mandorla surrounded by the
inscription PRAESIDIVM NOSTRVM.
Belonging also to the group of imitations of the Venetian
ducat is the piece issued by Amadeus VIII of Savoy
(i4i6~39) 32 shown on Plate VIII, 3, which, however, illus-
trates the breaking away from the design of the prototype
which is common in imitative coinages and which will be
seen again in the coins of Malta. In this case the reverse
shows instead of the figure of Christ the arms of Savoy. The
obverse has the standing saint and the kneeling ruler, but
the saint (Maurice) is a figure in armor. The inscriptions are
AMADEVS.DVX.SABAVDIE and SIT.NOM.DIN (sic) BN.
DTM (sit nomen Domini henedictum) .
The next two continental European imitations to be noted
are of interest as being the most northerly excursions of the
Venetian type. The first is the ducat issued by the princi-
pality of Dombes in Burgundy in the seventeenth century.
This (Plate VIII, 5) has the type of St. Mark and the
kneeling ruler, with DVX alongside the standard. The in-
scription is FRANC. PRINC on the right and SM TREVO
upwards on the left. On the reverse the inscription is SIT
XI ADIVTO REGIS TE DOMBA.
[These ducats were first ascribed by numismatists to
Francis II of Dombes (1582-92), as the name FRANC seemed
to imply. But the design of the reverse, with stars above and
below the figure of Christ, corresponds to that of Venetian
ducats of the mid-seventeenth century, and it is now agreed
that they must be assigned to Anne Marie Louise de Mont-
pensier, princess of Dombes (1650-93). Boucher d’Argis, who
was a member of the sovereign council of Dombes and had
32 CNI, I, 48-9, nos. i-8.


access to its records, wrote of the exploitation of the right of
coinage by the mint of Dombes during her reign:
Mademoiselle de Montpensier fit travailler longtemps a la monnaie de
Trevoux; on y fabriqua des pieces de 15, 30 et 60 sols, mais surtout beau-
coup de pieces de cinq sols dont il se fit un grand commerce dans le Levant
et des sequins d’or au coin de saint Marc. Les Venitiens s’en plaignirent
hautement; mais la souveraine de Dombes leur repondit que saint Marc
etait le patron de Trevoux comme il Test de Venise.
The name FRANC was used to preserve the resemblance to
the Venetian coins, on none of which the name Marie ap-
pears, and was probably specifically intended to recall the
ducats of Francesco Erizzo (1631-46), FRANC ( iae) PRINC
[eps or essa) being not very remote from FRANC.ERIZZO. 33 ]
Of the same period are the ducats issued in 1650-72 and
1679-86 by William Henry, Prince of Orange and later
William 111 of England (Plate VIII, 6), bearing for obverse
inscription GVIL.HENR.D on the right, and on the left,
reading vertically upwards, GPRAV.E.S. The reverse legend
reads SOLI.DEO.HONOR.SIT.GLORIA. 34 These, like the
33 The attribution is discussed in an excellent article by P. Mantellier,
"Sequins frappes a Trevoux,” RN, 2nd series, II (1857), 264-79, from
which the quotation of Boucher d’Argis cited above is taken. Trevoux
was the mint of Dombes. Mantellier’s conclusions are summarized in
F. Poey d’Avant, Monnaies feodales de France (Paris, 1862), 111, 96-7.
Arnold Morel-Fatio, "Les sequins fabriques par les princes de Dombes a
Trevoux,” RN, 2nd series, X (1865), 199-204, subsequently argued that
the coins should be assigned to Anne Marie Louise’s predecessor Gaston
(1627-50), on the ground that he was Francesco Erizzo’s contemporary,
but this is not sufficient proof, and we have documentary evidence for
Anne Marie Louise’s interest in the affair. Morel-Fatio does, however,
publish a uniface copper piece of Venetian ducat style, perhaps a pattern
for such a coinage of Gaston, with the legend DVX.G.DOM S.M. TREVO.
34 N. Papadopoli, "Imitazione dello zecchino veneziano fatta da Guglielmo
Enrico d’Orange (1650-1702),” Riv. Ital. Num., XXIII (1910), 333-40.
The existence of the coin had been known to Poey d’Avant (11, 410), but
only on the authority of Duby, who in turn relied on the description of a


ducats of Dombes, were issued for the Levant trade. In both
of these ducats a V of the obverse inscription is arranged to
fall in the position of the V in the S. M. VENETI of the proto-
type, so that on casual inspection the piece would appear to
be a Venetian ducat.
The last European ducat imitation to be noted is of
peculiar interest because it was issued in Florence, whose
florin was for centuries the chief rival of the Venetian ducat.
It was not an official issue, but was put out in 1805 as a com-
mercial venture for use in the Levant. It bears on the obverse
a standing saint and a kneeling bishop holding a crozier; the
inscription is S. M. FLOR. D. ZEN. E.P.F. (i. e. Divus
Zenohio episcopus Florentiae). To the left of the crozier,
reading vertically downwards, isALVX. On the reverse, sur-
rounding the figure of St. John in a mandorla, is the in-
scription S. lOAN. BAPT. F. ZACHAR (Plate VIII, 7)
[These ducats, which were known as Zenobini or Zanohini,
were struck at the Tuscan mint for a banker named Cesare
Lampronti, and were made deliberately crude in style so as
to resemble more closely the last coinages of Lodovico
Manin. The venture was not a success and many of the coins
were withdrawn and remelted, which accounts for their
present rarity. 35 There exists another version, of much better
specimen in the imperial collection at Vienna in Johann Friedrich Joachim,
Das neuerofnete Miinzcabinet, 111 (Niirnberg, 1770), 36-8.
35 The best account is that of Guido Ciabatti in a ten-page pamphlet
published at Florence in 1865 and entitled Illustrazione dello zecchino detto
Zanobino (moneta inedita). Ciabatti made inquiries about it at the mint and
discovered the original dies used for striking the coins; he illustrates a wax
impression made from them. He was mistaken, however, in supposing the
coin to be unpublished. A specimen in the Reichel collection, now in the
Hermitage, was described in Die Reichelsche Munzsammlung in St. Peters-
bourg, IX (St. Petersburg, 1843), 466, no. 2, and one in some Italian
collection was illustrated in [Giuseppe Grimaldo], Numismata Veneta
(Venice, 1859), under Doge XLVIH, while the origins and nature of the
piece had been briefly described by J. G. Pfister, “On an unedited gold


style and without the meaningless ALVX, but this bears
every mark of being a modern forgery put out to deceive
collectors (Plate VIII, B),]
coin of Florence, struck in 1805, which was called “II Zecchino di San
Zenobio,” Numismatic Chronicle, XVI (1853-4), 77-80. There was a
specimen of the coin in the Ruchat sale, Part II (Rome: Santamaria,
13 June 1921), no. 1266.


IV
DUCATS OF THE KNIGHTS OF ST.JOHN
OF JERUSALEM AT RHODES AND MALTA
The longest series of ducats of Venetian type, next to the
series of Venice itself, was issued by the Knights of St. John
of Jerusalem, continuing from the middle of the fourteenth
to nearly the middle of the eighteenth century. This series is
not continuous, for ducats were not coined, or at least have
not been recovered, for about a third of the Grand Masters.
Rather considerable deviations of design from the Venetian
prototype are found in the series, but on the whole they are
close copies of the current coins of Venice.
On Plates IX-X the complete list of Grand Masters is
given, with asterisks to indicate those who are known to
have struck ducats. Representative coins of all the main types
are shown to the right.
RHODES 36
The first gold ducat was struck by Dieudonne de Gozon
(1346-53), with the obverse of the Venetian type: the Grand
36 The two chief works are Gustave Schlumberger, Numismatique de VOrient
latin (Paris, 1878), 214-68, and Supplement (1882), 14-15* 21-22, and
Baron Edouard Henri Furse, Memoires numismatiques de VOrdre souverain
de saint Jean de Jerusalem, 2nd ed. (Rome, 1889). It is often necessary
to refer to the older monographs of Julius Friedlaender, Die Miinzen
des Johanniter-Ordensaufßhodus, ijog bis 1522 (Berlin, 1843), and the work
of Lambros referred to above, p. 8, n. 17. An essential study of the ear-
liest ducats is Nicolo Papadopoli, “I primi zecchini dei Gran Maestri
deU’Ordine di San Giovanni di Gerusalemme,” Proces-Verbaux et Memoires
du Congres International de Numismatique, Bruxelles, igio, 349~58-


Master kneeling, receiving a banner from the hands of
St. John the Baptist. The reverse has the distinctive design
of an angel seated on the tomb of Christ. The obverse le-
gends are S. IOhES.B vertically downwards on the left, MGR
(Magister) vertically downwards in the center, and F (rater)
DEODAT downwards on the right. The reverse legend is
+hOSPITALIS QVENT.RODI, the Q being an abbrevi-
ation mark for con, so that QVENT stands for conventus.
This type was also struck by the next Master, Pierre de
Cornillan (i354~55)-
The next appearance of the ducat is under Antoine Fluvian
(1421-37), who issued extremely close imitations of the Vene-
tian coin, with the inscription S.M.VENET and DVX, dif-
fering only in the name of the “doge,” F.ANTONIVS. These
pieces were protested by Venice, and the Grand Master is-
sued a second series on which the reference to St. Mark and
Venice was replaced by one to St. John the Baptist and
MRO was sometimes substituted for DVX. The next ducats
known, those of Jacques de Milly (1454-61), followed essen-
tially the same pattern, with the reverse of the Venetian
ducat, and on the obverse the kneeling Grand Master, bare-
headed, with the cross of the Order on the shoulder of his
robe, and the name of St. John instead of St. Mark.
The ducats of the last six Grand Masters at Rhodes, from
Jean Ursino (1467-76) to Philippe Villiers de ITsle d’Adam
(1521-22), are close copies of the Venetian ducat (including
the doge’s cap), differing only in the obverse inscription. This
has ~F(rater) and the Master’s name on the right, S. IOhANIS
to the left, and, in place of DVX alongside the staff, M.P.
(magister Petrus) or another Master’s initial. The introduction
of the exergual line at about 1500 in the Venetian ducat is
reflected in the ducat of Emery d’Amboise (1503-12).


MALTA 37
The coinage of ducats by the Knights of St. John, inter-
rupted by the expulsion of the Order from Rhodes in 1522,
was resumed at Malta after 1534 with pieces still closely
copying the contemporary Venetian designs. Certain changes,
however, were made at this time, to continue for nearly a
century. The obverse inscription no longer mentions St.John,
but gives the name of the Grand Master in full, around the
circumference of the coin. In the case of one ruler, Jean
d’Homedes (1536-53), the date appears beneath the exergual
line. The reverse design is still Christ surrounded by stars in
a mandorla, but the inscription is changed to DA-MIHI-
VIRTVTEM-CONTRA-HOSTES-TVOS.
Early in the seventeenth century, with Antoine de Paule
{1623-36), the kneeling Grand Master again begins to be
represented bare-headed, and St. John is depicted in a short
skirt.
At the end of the seventeenth century a major change of
design was introduced with the abandonment of the figure
of Christ on the reverse in favor of the arms of the Grand
Master, and the date reappears. Under the two Grand Masters
issuing these pieces, Gregoire Caraffa (1680-90) and Adrien
de Wignacourt (1690-97), there were also struck four-ducat
pieces of the same general style (Plate I, 2), on which, how-
ever, the kneeling figure on the obverse is no longer robed,
but appears in contemporary costume.
Under the last three rulers who issued ducats of the Vene-
tian type (1697-1736) the obverse figures are again changed.
St. John appears in a tattered costume, the Grand Master
in ornamental knee-breeches, and the staff carries a large flag
bearing a cross. The inscription is VINCES PIETATE. On
37 The chief authorities are the book by Furse, cited in the preceding note,
and H. Calleja Schembri, Coins and medals of the Knights of Malta (London,
1908).


the reverse appear the arms of the Grand Master with his
name and title.
This series ended in 1725. After it the ducat continued for
a time as a monetary denomination, but with the portrait of
the Grand Master on the obverse, thus losing all resemblance
to the Venetian coin so long imitated.


OTHER EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN IMITATIONS
Concurrently with the coinage of ducats by the Knights of
St. John of Jerusalem and with the wide circulation of the
Venetian ducat in the Latin kingdoms and principalities of
the eastern Mediterranean, there occurred a number of imi-
tative coinages in that region. The ducats in this category
are all close imitations of the Venetian type, with the sub-
stitution of local rulers’ names for those of the doges and
other saints for St. Mark. They are frequently of base gold
and crude workmanship.
The most complete series of these pieces was issued on the
island of Chios, 38 under Genoa, starting with the coinage of
Tommaso di Campofregoso (1415-21), which bears the ob-
verse inscription T.DVX.IANVE and S. LAVRET (Plate
XI, i). 39 The figures of the saint and duke on the obverse, and
of Christ on the reverse, with the usual reverse legend Sit
tihi Christe, etc., are closely copied from the contemporary
Venetian coins.
Following the reign of Tommaso di Campofregoso, Chios,
together with Genoa, came under the rule of Milan, and the
gold ducats of 1421-36 (Plate XI, 2) have the inscription
38 The best accounts of the ducats of Chios are in Schlumberger, op. cit.,
418-23, and Supplement (1882), 17-18, and Paul Lambros (Lampros),
Msoatcovixa vojjuafxocTa tcov SuvaaT(ovT9j<; Xlou (Athens, 1886). The older
monograph of Domenico Promis, La zecca di Scio durante il dominio
deiGenovesi (Turin, 1865), is still of use. The two articles by Gnecchi in the
Rivista italiana di numismatica for 1882 do not touch on the ducats.
39 Lambros and Schlumberger, probably with justice, attribute to Chios a
number of the blundered imitations of Venetian ducats of the late four-
teenth and early fifteenth centuries of the types discussed below, pp. 25-8


D [ux). MEDIOLANI for Filippo Maria Visconti, duke of
Milan, and the saint is S.PETRVS. 40 After 1436 until 1443
Tommaso di Campofregoso again coined ducats, and the
series is continued by five Campofregosi until 1458, with a
return to St. Laurence as the patron saint. In this period
the staff for the standard commonly rests on a large S
for Sius, one of the ways in which the name of the island was
spelled (Plate XI, 3). The last of this series is a ducat issued
in 1458-61 by Charles VII of France during his rule at Genoa,
with CLI in place of DVX alongside the standard, and
COM VN. LAN and S. LAVRETI for inscription (Plate XI,
4). [The initial L of Laureti is written like a V to recall the
word Veneti.]
To be included in the Chios series also are the ducats issued
by Venice under the doge Leonardo Loredan (1501-21)
which were known as Scioti and were intended for the Levant
(Plate XI, 5) 41 . They are of rather crude workmanship, with
the obverse inscription entirely encircling the figures.
In this same general category are the ducats coined for the
island of Mytilene by its rulers, the Gattilusi, between 1376
and 1462, with the ruler’s name and D. METELI[NI] (Plate
XII, 2-3). 42 Still farther east are to be noted the ducats of
40 A specimen of the coin in the imperial collection at Vienna was published
by Alfred Nagl, “Ueber eine Mailander Goldiminze nach dem Typus des
Venetianer Dukatens,” Numismatische Zeitschrift, XXIII (1891), 181-90.
He attributed it to Milan itself, and supposed it to have been struck to
commemorate the bestowal of the title of duke on Gian Galeazzo Visconti
in 1395. F. Schweitzer, who had published it earlier (“Zecchino di tipo
veneto deU’arcivescovo Giovanni Visconti, signore di Milano (1349-54)”
in his Notizie peregrine di numismatica e d’archeologia, 111 (Trieste, 1856),
65-70), had equally incorrectly attributed it to Giovanni Visconti.
41 The name scioti and the design are known from a Venetian exchange
table of 1543 reproduced in Papadopoli, Monete di Venezia, 11, facing
p. 178. There was a specimen of the coin in the Biblioteca Reale at Turin
(Papadopoli, op. cit., 11, 179) as well as the one illustrated here.
42 Schlumberger, op cit., pp. 432-46 (by Lambros); Supplement, pp. 18-19.


Foglia Vecchia (Phocaea) on the mainland of Asia Minor,
issued by Dorino Gattilusio (Plate XII, 4), with the in-
scription D.FOLIE. 43 Most easterly of all are the ducats
of Chiote type struck by Filippo Maria Visconti and Tom-
maso di Campofregoso for Pera, the Genoese quarter of
Constantinople. 44 They have a large Pat the base of the
staff, taking the place of the S on the ducats of Chios.
In the series of eastern Mediterranean ducats must also
be included certain close copies of the ducat of Andrea Dan-
dolo (1344-54), with blundered lettering and with a K or KO
at the feet of the figure of Christ on the reverse (Plate XII, 1) .
These have been attributed to Robert of Anjou, duke of
Achaia (1346-64), and if this is correct they were presum-
ably struck at Chiarenza. 45
43 Ibid., pp. 442, 445-6. P. Lambros in his ’AvexSotoc vopuopocToc xal aoXu-
|3B6[3ouXXoc t<ov xocto. roup piooix; odwvocp Suvacmov ryj? 'EXXaSop (Athens,
1880), 66-73 publishes two further imitation ducats which in his view
contained the names of Andreolo and Domenico Cattaneo. They are repro-
duced in Schlumberger, Suppl., pi. XXI, 16, 18; cf. p. 19. In my view the
legends are merely blundered and the attributions quite uncertain.
44 Schlumberger, op. cit., pp. 447-54. It is largely a summary of P. Lam-
bros, ’AvexSotoc vopdcrpcocra xotcevtoc Iv Ilspav utto ocutoGc aruoixla;;
tcov (Athens, 1872). In his Supplement, 22, Schlumberger
notes the acquisition of a further specimen by Lambros.
45 Schlumberger, op. cit., pp. 320-1. There is a long series of them in the Papa-
dopoli collection, now in the Museo Correr at Venice; see Castellani, op. cit.
(above p. 5, n. 11), nos. 16216-32. For one struck in silver, see below, p. 26
and PI. XIII, 2, The attribution to Robert of Anjou was made by P. Lam-
bros in his ’AvexSotoc vopuapocxoc xotcevtoc ev PXapsvTcra xava t<ov
‘Evstcxcov utto Po(3spTOu tou s£ T%ll£Xo7covvif)CJOu,
1346-1364 (Athens, 1876). It is certain that the Greek workmen who made
these coins often substituted K for R, a letter which did not exist in their
alphabet; cf. ANDK for ANDR on the obverse of many of these coins.
Nevertheless the attributions seem to me rather hazardous, and Papado-
poli apparently did not accept them.


VI
ANONYMOUS LEVANTINE IMITATIONS
The Venetian ducat circulated widely in the eastern Medi-
terranean or Levant; this we know from the written re-
cords, 46 and it is confirmed by the frequent occurrence of
ducats with a Turkish counterstamp (Plate V, i) meaning
“standard” or “genuine.” 47 In addition to the Venetian and
other “official” issues of Rhodes, Malta, Chios, etc., there
was a very wide circulation of imitations, often of poor work-
manship, with jumbled or illegible inscriptions, of metal of
varying degrees of baseness. These can only be attributed to
a place of origin if their provenance happens to be known;
usually they are merely described as “Levantine imitations.”
A few selected specimens are shown in Plate XIII, which
together with the impressions from dies described in Sec-
46 For many later medieval records, see the article by Range van Gennep
cited above, p. 3, n. 7. One of his most striking instances is that of an
Arab historian of the fifteenth century giving the price of wheat at Mecca
in terms of Venetian ducats. I know of no collection of material doling
with later centuries, but all contemporary accounts of the Ottomans
remark on their importance. Much information on their circulation in
Persia will be found in the work of Rabino di Borgomale, cited above,
p. 3, n. 8. They were the chief form in which foreign gold entered Persia
(pp. 3, 38), and had a premium over other gold coins since they were bought
up by money-changers to sell to travelers to Mecca or India (p. 42), as their
international reputation made them acceptable everywhere.
47 Paul Bordeaux, “Les sequins venitiens contremarques de caracteres
arabes,” Riv. ital. num., XXIII (1910), 119-26. This particular counter-
mark is found on ducats ranging from the late sixteenth to the early
eighteenth century, and appears to have been imposed on coins entering
Asia Minor in the early eighteenth century from the newly conquered
provinces of Greece and the Morea.


tion VIII and shown on Plate XVI will serve to illustrate
the whole series.
[The first and second specimens are imitations of ducats of
Andrea Dandolo (1344-54), the legends in both cases being
perfectly recognizable. The first of the two is of the same size
and style as the original, and clearly a contemporary imi-
tation. They are fairly common, 48 and it is probable that one
of their chief centers of manufacture was in Chios. The second
coin, which belongs to the class ascribed conjecturally to
Robert of Anjou, is of silver and of good style, though the
legend is badly blundered. It was no doubt originally gilded,
and the spread fabric, which makes it decidedly larger than
the normal ducat, was necessary in order to bring it up to
full ducat weight.]
The third specimen is typical of very large numbers with
semi-legible inscriptions cut by illiterate engravers. In this
case the character of the doge’s cap, the occurrence of the
exergual line, and the nimbus of Christ projecting beyond
the oval, date the prototype as of about 1500, but the doge’s
name cannot be deciphered or identified with any doge of
this period. Other specimens of this kind can be identified by
their more legible inscriptions as copies of doges through the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 49
The fourth specimen is of extreme crudity in the rendering
of the figures, and the inscription can be recognized as a
bungled PAVL.RAINER (1779-89)- [No. 5 is an imitation
of some unidentifiable eighteenth century doge, but its aber-
rent weight (2.95 g.) makes one suspect that it is a trinket
made by a jeweller and was not intended as a coin at all.
48 See Schlumberger, op. cit., 497 and PI. XIX, 25-26, and Supplement, 21
and PL XXI, 19-22, for illustrations of other specimens. There is a long
series in the Papadopoli collection (Castellani, nos. 16197-16215). The coins
assigned to Robert of Anjou (above, p. 24) really belong to the same class.
49 See Castellani, op. cit., nos. 16086-94 (i4th-isth century imitations
attributed to Chios), 16233-70 (i4th-iBth century imitations), 16275-81
(imitations in copper).


No. 6 is a nineteenth century imitation of a ducat of the
last doge, Lodovico Manin (1789-97). The counterstamp is
of a type which during the past half-century has, at least in
theory, been placed on all gold objects passing through the
hands of goldsmiths in Egypt. It has three panels: the left
one contains the fineness, the center one the name of King
Faruk, and the third Roman or Arabic letters indicating the
date. The more usual occupant of the central panel is an ibis,
the international goldsmith’s symbol for Egypt. In this par-
ticular case the fineness is 21 carats and the date letter is j ,
which represents a period running from 11 February 1951 to
8 January 1953. 50
The last two coins illustrated belong to a different class.
No. 7 is an imitation ducat of Marino Falier (1354-5). This
doge ruled for only seven months, and his short reign makes
his ducats among the rarest in the Venetian series. It is in
the highest degree improbable that they would have been
imitated in the Levant, and it seems likely that this piece is
a crude modern forgery produced with the interests of the
collector in mind. 51 ]
The final specimen, No. 8, is of peculiar interest in the
domain of imitations, because it copies not one current gold
piece but two. It is of base gold and scyphate, like the later
Byzantine nomismata, and the obverse type is that of two
standing figures clearly derived from Byzantine models; the
figures in fact closely resemble those appearing on the coins
of such twelfth century sovereigns as Manuel I (1143-80) and
Isaac II (1185-1204). The inscription is Greek in appearance,
50 I owe this information to Dr. George C. Miles, who will shortly con-
tribute a study of these counterstamps to Museum Notes.
51 There are other forgeries of the rare coins of this doge. See Castellani,
op. cit., no. 16544 f° r a specimen of an otherwise unknown denaro sco-
dellato, and a copper piece published by Philip Grierson, “Deux fausses
monnaies venitiennes du moyen age, ”Schweitzer Munzhlcitter , IV (i 954)»
86-90.


but quite meaningless. The reverse type is the figure of Christ
in a mandorla, surrounded by stars, with a blundered in-
scription. From the fact that the stars completely surround
the figure, it is evident that the prototype for this coin was
of the seventeenth century or later. [The piece came from
Cyprus, and its abnormal type and weight (3.75 g.) suggest
that it is a jeweller’s ornament and not a coin.]


VII
INDIAN IMITATIONS
Venetian ducats, “checkens,” “checkeens,” chequeens,” 52
played a prominent role in the commerce of Europe with
India. References to the occurrence of Venetian ducats in
India occur as early as the fifteenth century, [and the Portu-
guese discoverers found them in use at Calicut and in the trea-
sury of the king of Ceylon. A late fourteenth century hoard
of 448 gold coins found at Broach (near Bombay) in 1882
included 34 Venetian ducats, and smaller finds of later centu-
ries have been recorded elsewhere in India and as far afield as
Ceylon. The coins seem to have been especially common in
the Malabar region, on the west coast, and are frequently ref-
erred to in commercial records down to the early nineteenth
century. 53 They were known in southern India as sanarak-
52 For variant spellings, see the Oxford English Dictionary, s. v. “chequeen.”
It comes from It. zecchino, an alternative word for the Venetian ducat,
and appears in English in the late sixteenth century; it has only recently
been driven out by the form sequin, imported from France. Zecchino in
turn derives from It. zecca, “mint,” from Arab, sikka, originally a die
used in coining but by transference the mint where the work was done.
Cf. such terms as “sikka” rupees, common in the literature of the East
India Company, meaning newly minted coins fresh from the dies. Zecca
is sometimes supposed to be connected with Giudecca, the quarter of Venice
where the mint was situated, but this is unlikely; Giudecca is traditionally
supposed to mean “ghetto,” from giudeo, “Jew.”
53 See T. G. Aravamuthan, Catalogue of Venetian coins in the Madras
Government Museum (Bulletin of the Madras Govt. Museum. New Series,
General Section, vol. 111, Pt. 3, Madras, 1938). Only 15 coins, one of them
an imitation, are in the museum, but the publication is of the greatest
value for its collection of references to ducats and its information on
commercial relations between Europe and India.


kdsu, “the coin of the sanar,” the sandy being a toddy-drawer,
a person whose profession it is to climb the palm trees and
draw off the sap from which toddy is made. It has been sup-
posed that the figures of either St. Mark or the doge were
mistaken for a sdndr, the staff between them being the palm-
tree, but this is scarcely likely. An alternative explanation
is that the word comes from Venetiano; the dropping of the
unaccented first part of the word would leave something like
shano, and the assimilation of this to sdndr would provide an
obvious popular etymology. 54 ]
Imitations are found of all degrees of degradation of in-
scriptions and of quality of metal. It is difficult in many cases,
without knowledge of provenance, to differentiate these
copies from the “Levantine” imitations, 55 but in some in-
stances the types take on a distinctively Hindu character
which makes the attribution to India unquestionable. A few
selected specimens are shown on Plate XIV.
Attention may be called to the transformation of the staff
bearing banner or cross into a staff or tree with trident-like
top; to the appearance of a floral pattern at the feet of the
figures, which Aravamuthan identifies as a lotus in bloom;
and to the transformation of the figures into Hindu deities.
This transformation is shown most completely in Nos. 6
and 7, where the standing figures on the obverse are the Hindu
deities Rama and Sita and the reverse figure their devotee
Lakshmana. 56 The obverse inscription of No. 6is a recogniz-
able rendering of ALOY.MOCEN S.M.VENET. In the last
piece, No. 7, although the workmanship is excellent in the
figures of the deities, the inscription is a mere jumble of
pseudo letters. The place of issue of these pieces is unknown.
54 So Aravamuthan, op. cit., 6-7.
55 Nos. 1 and 2 odPlateXlV may well be Levantine, not Indian, since No.2,
which is of silver, was procured in the Levant.
56 Pp. 4-6. Aravamuthan illustrates such a piece, one of eight in the pos-
session of a Cawnpore family which had owned them for several generations.


It is probable that many of these pieces were made not
for currency but to be used in necklaces or other jewelery,
where their broad flan was more acceptable than the small
thick native Indian gold coins. [Oliver Codrington, who
described the Broach hoard alluded to above, wrote of Bom-
bay in 1882 that “the sequin still holds its own as the favorite
coin for ornaments in this part of India” and declared that
“they are still made in quantities in the city, a thin piece of
gold being hammered between rudely cut coin dies of the
shape of hammer beads.” 57 In Travancore such necklaces
were much worn by the Syrian Christians, who prized them
as religious medals. 58 ]
57 Quoted by Aravamuthan, op. cit., p. 4.
58 Aravamuthan, loc. cit. The Portuguese colony of Goa had the reputation
of being a prolific source of these trinkets. See R. H. C. Tuffnell, Coins of
southern India : hints for coin collectors (New York, 1890), 34-5.


vrn
GILT COPPER DUCAT TOKENS
The design of the Venetian gold ducat is clearly recogniz-
able in certain gilt copper pieces frequently found either
isolated or as ring-mounted charms in the Levant. Two such
pieces are shown on Plate XV, i, 2. They are well struck,
of good workmanship, but both figures and inscriptions are
mere caricatures of the originals. On the obverse the central
staff and exergual line are prominent; the figures of St. Mark
and the doge are represented by plant- or flower-like ghosts
of human figures. The inscription is BIDOTNOCEN-OV3H
MEI, which is obviously a degraded ALOY.MOCEN S.M.
VENETI; alongside the staff are the letters OCY. On the
reverse the figure of Christ in the pointed oval has become
a device resembling an inverted anchor; the inscription is
•DIOESIMIVOD” AHIV3OATOV, in perfectly clear well-
cut letters, defying interpretation. 59
A later and apparently final form of these tokens has the
same obverse and reverse type and the same obverse legend,
but with the reverse legend altered to JOANNES.ILLE.
COQVVS. SUL FILIIQUE (Plate XV, 3,4). These tokens,
which are of two sizes and are usually gilt, are reputed to
have been struck by London merchants named John Cook and
Sons in the nineteenth century for the East African trade.
With these shoddy tokens the long line of ducats, which
flourished for over five hundred years as a “universal”
coinage of high esteem, comes to an end.
59 A specimen of this piece illustrated by C. F. Keary ("The Morphology
of Coins,” NC, 3rd series, VI (1886), p. 81 and PI .V, 100) is attributed to
north Africa, but a Levantine origin is more probable.


DIES FOR DUCAT IMITATIONS
Interesting evidence regarding the places of origin of
ducat imitations is furnished by dies which have been dis-
covered and recorded from time to time. The first to be noted
is a die described in the Indian Antiquary for 1873. 60 This die,
which is of bronze, was found at Umreth, a town in the Kaira
Zilla, north of Bombay, and after cleaning yielded the inked
impression shown on Plate XVI, 1. The figures aie fairly
close copies of the standard Venetian type; the inscriptions
are blundered, but that of the obverse is recognizable as one
of the doges named Alvise Mocenigo. The date of fabrication
of the die is not known, but, from the name of the doge it
must be of the eighteenth or nineteenth century.
The second die is described and illustrated in the Numis-
matic Chronicle for 1952, 61 and an impression from it is shown
on Plate XVI, 2. In this the figures are of poor workmanship
and the inscriptions somewhat blundered, but recognizable
as those of Lodovico Manin, the last doge of Venice. The die
was found in the region of the Persian Gulf.
The third die to be noted is in the possession of the Ameri-
can Numismatic Society, which secured it from a visitor who
60 J. Burgess, “Discovery of dies,” Indian Antiquary, II (1873), 213-14.
The pair of dies was seized by the police in the house of a suspected
receiver of stolen property, and was accompanied by another for striking
counterfeit gold coins in the name of Shah Alam. The article notes the
existence of a forged die in the Calcutta Mint museum used for making
ducats of Giovanni 111 Corner (1709-22), and of a genuine (?) one for
ducats of Lodovico Manin.
01 R. A. G. Carson, “Dies for an imitation zecchino,” NC, 6th series, XII
(1952), 113-14.


bought it in the bazaar at Damascus. The die, of bronze, is
illustrated on Plate XVI, 3 and an impression from it is
shown on Plate XVI, 4. The figures are of neat but barbaric
workmanship; the inscriptions are meaningless, but obvi-
ously blundered from those of a ducat of Paolo Renier
(1779-89). The similarity of this impression to certain of the
imitations shown in Plate XIII is quite close.
[These three dies are of the traditional medieval type,
being simply bars or blocks of metal which in striking would
be aligned by the eye of the workman without further
mechanical aid. Two more elaborate pairs of dies are known
to exist. One of them, found in Crete and now in the Biblio-
theque Rationale, was published and illustrated by Philip
Grierson in 1952. 62 It consists of two blocks of iron into
which steel dies had been fitted. The blocks were held in
place, when a coin was being struck, by projecting iron pegs
on the upper block fitting into corresponding holes in the
lower one. In view of the good style of the coins which these
dies would have produced, Mr. Grierson concluded that they
were genuine instruments of the Venetian mint and were
used for striking ducats of Alvise IV Mocenigo (1763-78).
This opinion must be discarded, for a similar pair of dies is
in the possession of Signor Tommaso Bertele of Rome, who
obtained it in the bazaar at Istanbul and sent a description
and cast to Mr. Grierson for publication (Plate XVI, 5). This
pair of dies, which would strike ducats of the same doge, is
of a slightly different pattern from the ones found in Crete,
having four pegs instead of two, but was clearly intended to
be used in the same way.]
62 “Pegged Venetian coin dies,” Ibid., 99-105.


KEY TO THE PLATES
The coins are ducats, and are in the ANS (Ives collection) unless the con-
trary is stated. In a few cases I have failed to trace the source of Dr. Ives’
illustrations.
i. Venice. Giovanni 111 Corner (1709-22). Ten-ducat piece. 34.85 g.
Rhodes. Adrien de Wignacourt (1690-97). Four-ducat piece.
13-82 g
11.
111.
IV.
1. Venice. Giovanni Dandolo (1280-89). 3.50 g.
2. Venice. Andrea Dandolo (1344-54). 3.50 g.
1. Venice. Antonio Venier (1382-1400). 3.52 g.
2. Venice. Andrea Vendramin (1476-78). 3.45 g.
1. Venice. Leonardo Loredan (1501-21). 3.49 g.
2. Venice. Marcantonio Trevisan (1553-54). 3.50 g.
1. Venice. Pasquale Cicogna (1585-95). 3.49 g. With Arabic coun-
terstamp sahih, “genuine.”
2. Venice. Carlo Contarini (1655-56). 3.45 g.
1. Venice. Francesco Morosini (1688-94). 3.46 g.
VI.
VII.
2. Venice. Emperor Francis II (1797-1805). 3.46 g.
1. Rome. Senate. ANS (Scoville bequest). 3.51 g.
2. Rome. Senate. 3.49 g.
3. Rome. Senate. 3.50 g.
4. Rome. Senate, (with Condulmerio shield). 3.50 g.
1. Genoa. Mid 16th century. CNI, 111, pi. X, 12 (
VIII
Genoa. Mid 16th century. CNI, 111, pi. X, 12 (former King of
Italy’s coll.). 3.40 g.
2. Mantua. Ferdinand IV Gonzaga (1612-26). Venice, Museo Correr
(Race. Papadopoli, No. 4049). 3.78 g. (silver).
3. Savoy. Amadeus VIII (1416-39). CNI, I, pi. IV, 17 (former King
of Italy’s Coll.). 3.50 g.
4. Rome. Paul II (1464-71). ANS (Scoville bequest). 3.48 g.
5. Dombes. Anne Marie Louise de Montpensier (1650-93). 3.41 g.
6. Orange. William Henry (1650-72, 1679-86). 3.35 g.
7. Florence. 1805. 3.45 g.
8. Florence. Forgery of 1805 piece. British Museum. 3.49 g.


A. Rhodes. Dieudonne de Gozon (1346-53). Venice, Museo Correr
(Race. Papadopoli, No. 15643). 3.51 g.
B. Rhodes. Antoine Flavian (1421-37). Furse, p. 76 (from former
King of Italy’s Coll.).
C. Rhodes. Jacques de Milly (1454-61). Not located
D. Rhodes. Pierre d’Aubusson (1476-1503). 3.50 g.
E. Rhodes. Emery d’Amboise (1503-12). 3.46 g.
A. Malta. Jean d’Homedes (1536-53). 3.40 g.
B. Malta. Alofius de Wignacourt (1601-22). ANS (Scoville bequest).
3-37 g-
C. Malta. Antoine de Paule (1623-36). British Museum. 3.35 g.
D. Malta. Adrien de Wignacourt (1690-97). 3.45 g.
E. Malta. Antoine Manoel de Vilhena (1722-36). 3.42 g.
1. Chios. TommasodiCampofregoso (1415-21). 2.2g. {sic.) Base gold.
2. Chios. Filippo Maria Visconti (1421-36). 3.47 g. Base gold.
3. Chios. Pietro di Campofregoso (1450-58). Gnecchi sale cat.,
Part 111 (Frankfurt; Hamburger, 12 January 1903), no. 5134.
4. Chios. Charles VII of France (1458-61). Ibid., no. 5135.
5. Chios. Leonardo Loredan, doge of Venice (1501-21). Martini sale
cat.. Part I (Lugano: R. Ratto, 30 January 1929), no. 830.
1. (?) Achaia. Robert of Anjou (1346-64). Schlumberger, pi. XII, 34.
2. Mytilene. Giacomo Gattilusio (1376-96). Ruchat sale cat., Part I
(Rome: Santamaria, 13 June 1921), no. 756.
3. Mytilene. Dorino Gattilusio (1400-49). Schlumberger, pi. XVI,
26.
4. Foglia Vecchia. Dorino Gattilusio (1400-49). Ibid., pi. XVII, 6.
5. Pera. Filippo Maria Visconti, duke of Milan (1421-36). Ibid.,
pi. XVII, 21.
6. Pera. Tommaso di Campofregoso, doge of Genoa (1436-42). Ibid.,
pi. XVII, 22.
Anonymous Levantine Imitations.
1. 3-47 g- 5- 2.95 g.
2. 3.38 g. (silver) 6. 3.47 g.
3- 3-35 g- 7- 3-44 g-
4. 3.30 g. 8. ANS (from Cyprus). 3.75 g. Very pale gold.
Indian Imitations.
1. BM. 1.86 g.
2. 1.10 g. (silver)
3. Oxford, Ashmolean. 1.91 g.
4. BM. 1.32 g.


5. BM. 2.63 g.
6. 2.6 g.
7- 3-05 g.
XV. Gilt Copper Ducat Tokens.
1. 2.89 g.
2. 2.25 g.
3- 247 g-
-- I -55 g.
XVI. Dies for Ducat Imitations.
1. Indian Antiquary, II (1873), 213.
2. See NC, 1952, p. 113.
3. ANS.
4. Impression of no. 3.
5. T. Bertele coll.


PLATES


~ " J ''^ y ,J> '-,^
MULTIPLE DUCATS


13 1 o-11
fjSI KA'rrMf^ i|-i»
1311-27
•fb/x
1355-56
l356_61
1365-67 " fe ”
Giovanni Dandolo
Obv. DVX Staff with
flag. Flat cap on doge,
no exergual line, large
circular nimbus on
Saint Mark.
Pietro Gradenigo
1289-1310
Marino Zorzi
Rev. Nine stars irregu-
larly arranged, nimbus
and feet project outside
oval. DVCAT,
Giovanni Soranzo
Francesco Dandolo
1328-1339
Bartolomeo Gradenigo
1339-42
Andrea Dandolo
1344-54
Marino Falier
>9 /Vc?,
wM
Rev. 9 stars uniformly
arranged, 4 to left, 5 to
right. (Some coins of
Francesco Dandolo ha-
1354-55
Giovanni Gradenigo
ve the stars irregularly
arranged, so regularity
probably began during
his reign.)
Giovanni Dolfin
Lorenzo Celsi
Marco Corner
Andrea Contarini
1367-82
Michele Morosini
VENETIAN DUCATS, 1284-1382


1462—71
1471-73
1473- ‘
1474-
Antonio Venier
1382-1400
Michele Steno
Tomaso Mocenigo
bv. DV^j 2 - This type
evolves slowly, begin-
ning as a square, placed
diamond-wise, with four
circular depressions.
Francesco Foscari
Pasquale Malipiero
Cristoforo Moro
Nicolo Tron
Nicolo Marcello
Pietro Mocenigo
Andrea Vendramin
1476-78
1478-85
Obv. Pointed cap on doge.
On Andrea Vendramin
Giovanni Mocenigo
and Marco Barbarigo
the legend runs below
the kneeling doge.
Marco Barbarigo
1485-86
Agostino Barbarigo
1486-1501
VENETIAN DUCATS, 1382-1501


Leonardo Loredan
1501-21
Antonio Grimani
1521-23
Andrea Gritti
1523-39
Obv. Exergual line under
figures.
Rev. Nimbus and feet
entirely within oval. 9
or 10 stars, with one
above book.
Pietro Lando
L 539-45
Francesco Dona
1545-53
Marcantonio Trevisan
1553-54
Francesco Venier
1554-56
Lorenzo Priuli
1556-59
Gerolamo Priuli
1559-67
Pietro Loredan
1567-70
Alvise I Mocenigo
1570-77
Sebastiano Venier
1577-78
Nicolo da Ponte
1578-85
Obv. DVX. Roman let-
tering, only one hand
on staff, small nimbus
on Saint. Flag on staff
reduced to pennant or
absent.
Rev. Small nimbus on
Saint. Inscription nearly
or completely encircles
oval. 12 stars.
VENETIAN DUCATS, 1501-85


Pasquale Cicogna
1585-95
Marino Grimani
1595-1606
Leonardo Dona
1606-12
Marcantonio Memmo
1612-15
ev. 15-19 stars, one
below figure of Christ.
Giovanni Bembo
1615-18
Nicolo Dona
Antonio Priuli
1618-23
Francesco Contarini
1623-24
Giovanni I Corner
1625-29
Nicolo Contarini
1630-31
Francesco Erizzo
1631-46
Francesco Molin
1646-55
Carlo Contarini
3v. Sixteen stars, with
one above and one below
figure of Christ. In-
scription ends DVCA.
1655-56
Francesco Corner
Bertucci Valier
1656-58
Giovanni Pesaro
1658-59
Domenico Contarini
1659-74
VENETIAN DUCATS, 1585-1674


Nicolo Sagredo
1675-76
Alvise Contarini
1676-84
Marcantonio Giustinian
1684-88
Francesco Morosini
1688-94
Silvestro Valier
1694-1700
Alvise II Mocenigo
1700-09
Giovanni 111 Corner
1709-22
Alvise 111 Mocenigo
1722-32
Carlo Ruzzini
1732-35
Obv. Staff ends in
Alvise Pisani
cross
1735-4 I
Pietro Grimani
1741-52
Francesco Loredan
1752-62
Marco Foscarini
1762-63
Alvise IV Mocenigo
1763-78
Paolo Renier
1779-89
Lodovico Manin
1789-97
Francis II
1797-1805
Francis I
1815-35
VENETIAN DUCATS, 1675-c. 1840


ist period
2nd period
3rd period
DUCATS OF THE ROMAN SENATE


' '' 1 3 ' y ' 4
5 6
OTHER WESTERN EUROPEAN IMITATIONS


GRAND MASTERS
An asterisk indicates those for
whom ducats are known. The letters
refer to the types employed.
Helion de Villeneuve (1319-46)
*Dieudonne de Gozon (1346-53) A
*Pierre de Cornillan (1354-55) A
Roger de Pins (i355~ 6 5)
Raymond de Berenger (1365-74)
Robert de Juilliac (1374-76)
Jean Ferdinand d’Heredia
(1376-96)
Philibert de Naillac (1396-1421)
* Antoine Flavian (1421-37) B, C
Jean de Lastic (1437-54)
* Jacques de Milly (1454-61) C
Pierre Raymond Zacosta (1461-67)
*Jean Ursino (1467-76) D
*Pierre d’Aubusson (1476-1503) D
*Emery d’Amboise (1503—12) E
Guy de Blanchefort (1512-13)
*Fabrice del Carretto (1513-21) E
*Philippe Villiers de ITsle d’Adam
(1521-34) E
(1521-22 at Rhodes, 1530-34
at Malta)
DUCATS OF RHODES


GRAND MASTERS
An asterisk indicates those for
whom ducats are known. The letters
refer to the types employed.
* Pierre del Ponte (1534-35) A, but
without date
Didier de Saint Jaille (1535-36)
*Jean d’Homedes (1536-53) A
Claude de la Sengle (1553-57)
*Jean de la Vallette-Parisot
(1557-68) B
*Pierre del Monte (1568-72) B
* Jean de la Cassiere (1572-81) B
*Hugues de Loubenx Verdalla
(1582-95) B
*Martin Garzes (1596-1601) B
*Alofius de Wignacourt (1601-22)
B
Ludovic Mendez de Yasconcellos
(1622-23)
* Antoine de Paule (1623-36) C
*Jean Paul Lascaris-Castellar
(1636-57) C
Martin de Redin (1657-60)
Annet de Clermont-Gessan (1660)
Raphael Cotoner (1660-63)
Nicolas Cotoner (1663-80)
* Gregoire Caraffa (1680-90) D
*Adrien de Wignacourt (1690-97)
D
* Raymond Perellos y Roccaful
(1697-1720) E
*Marc Antoine Zondadari
(1720-22) E
* Antoine Manoel de Vilhena
(1722-36) E
DUCATS OF MALTA


1
2
4
J 5
Tommaso di Campofregoso
(1415-21)
Filippo Maria Visconti, duke of
Milan (1421-36)
Tommaso di Campofregoso (again,
1436-42)
Raffaele Adorno (1443-47)
Giano di Campofregoso (1447)
Lodovico di Campofregoso
(1447-50)
Pietro di Campofregoso (1450-58)
Charles VII of France as lord of
Genoa (1458-61)
Leonardo Loredan, doge of Venice
(1501-21). Ducat struck for Chios
DUCATS OF CHIOS


I
2
3
4
5
«|
6
Achaia
(?) Robert of Anjou (1346-64)
M ytilene
under the Gattilusi
Giacomo Gattilusio (1376-96)
Francesco II Gattilusio
(1396-1400)
Dorino Gattilusio (1400-49)
Domenico Gattilusio (1449—59)
Niccolo Gattilusio (1459-62)
Foglia Vecchia
Dorino Gattilusio of Mytilene
(1400-49)
Filippo Maria Visconti
duke of Milan
(1421-36)
Tommaso de Campofregoso,
doge of Genoa
(1436-42)
DUCATS OF VARIOUS EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN MINTS


" '' 4 1 ~
LEVANTINE IMITATIONS


• mS mti# %0i9
"zzs£y $*:£uy
3 4
7
INDIAN IMITATIONS


klmM\ MA\
Am VMm //lUns isv .s.x-ji ynAsk
i
2
4
GILT COPPER DUCAT TOKENS


DIES FOR DUCAT IMITATIONS


31508023122359


*
■
