



Ik


THE
7TH FIELD ARTILLERY
BRIGADE YANDOO
Containing publications of the organ
of the 7th Field Artillery Brigade,
Australian Imperial Forces, whilst on
board the S.S. "Argyllshire," with 9th
Field Artillery Brigade and the 9th
Field Ambulance, en route from
:: :: Australia to England :: ::
BY
THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT
Bombardier Bohu (26th Battery) and Gunner Harding
(zsth Battery), ~]tk Field Artillery Brigade.
VOLUME I.
AUGUST, 1916


INTRODUCTION
HE Editors have honoured me with a request to
write the Introduction to the bound edition of
The Yandoo.
During sixty days' voyage on the H.M.A.T.
"Argyllshire," the sameness of duties, exercises and
scene"y caused many of us to feel that complaint so
commonly diagnosed as " down in the dumps," and
great weekly events like the issue of The Yandoo
helved materially to "lift 'em up again."
Quite apart from the humour contained in the
columns, the records of experiences at ports of call
and events of interest on board will, in years to come,
provide food for reflection to members of the 7th and
9th F.A. Brigades and 9th Field Ambulance.
I sincerely hope that Bombardier Rohu and
Gunner Harding will go on with their good work and
that this volume will be No. 1 of a series relating
experiences of the 7th F.A. Brigade A.1.F., covering a
period dating from the sailing of H.M.A.T. "Argyllshire "
on the 11th May, 1916, leaving Sydney, to our return to
that city in the month of " ? "of the " ? " year.
T. A. J. PLAY FAIR,
Captain,
26th Battery,
7th F.A. Brigade.


PREFACE
OWING to the hot weather and inadequate printing
facilities on board, it was impossible for the Manage-
ment of The Yandoo to meet the demand for copies
of the paper, and acting on the suggestion of Captain Playfair
decided to have the ship's papers reproduced in booklet
form as a souvenir of the voyage.
We trust that Volume I. will be of interest and value to
members of the 7th and 9th Field Artillery Brigades and
9th Field Ambulance, and that further Volumes will follow
descriptive of life in camp, at the front, and of our return
to Australia.
We desire to express our great appreciation of the
assistance of Gunner Duckworth in preparing the sketches
and rendering other valuable services to the paper; also to
Gunner Sanders, and to the following who kindly furnished
negatives and prints for the photographs: Lieut. Col.
Pearce, V.D., Sgt. Major Allett, Sgts. Buckle and Richards,
Bdr. Rohu, and Gunners Allport, F. M. Jones, Gersbach,
Duckworth, Newman, Vickery, Fletcher and Small.
SIL ROHU,
ERIC HARDING
(THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT).
LARK HILL,
SALISBURY PLAINS,
AUGUST, 1916.


HM
" Taking in a Reef in Anchor." " Argyllshire " Leaving Sydney Harbour,
" Merry Old Salts " and Our " Guardian Angels."
Left to Right: Cant. W. Chicken (Master "A8"); Major T. B. W. James (Acting C.O., 7th
F.A.B.); Lt.=Col. R. St. J. Pearce, V.I). (C.O. Troops, "A8"); Lt. Col. F. O'Mahoney (C.O.,
9th F.A.B.); Chief Officer Wynn ("A8"); Lt.=Col. F. S. Maguire (C,0,, 9th F.Amb.).
ARGYLLSHIRE.


.
1 ' Iff! ft
W - fljlM
ifcl8
' : ' : ;: iSi >'"" Vi ■ -:Mh.
. •
■ ;'_ ....' ..
Front: Lt. Pearce, E.S.; Lt. Moriarty, G.V.; Capt. Leeds, R.N. (A.M.C.); Lt. Raymond, H.G.;
Lt. Raw, A.; Lt. Oxley (9th F. Amb.). Second: Major James. T.B.W.; Lt.CoI. O'Mahonv, F.,
O.C., 9th F.A. Bde.; Cant. Chicken, Master "A8"; Lt. Col. R. St. J. Pearce, V.D., O.C. 7th
F. A. Bde., O.C. Troops "A8"; Chief Officer Wynn, "A8"; Lt.= Col. Maguire, F.S., O.C. 9th
F. Amb.; Capt. Rev. Bell (Chaplain). Third (standing): Lt. Dyson, A.N.; Capt. J. M. Irwin; Lt.
J. Gleeson (Adi. 9th F.A. Bde.); Lt. Buzzard. M.; Lt. Scott, E.S.; Lt. (i. J. Hammond (Adj. 7th
F.A. Bde.); Caot. Swallow, T.K.; Capt. Harrison, 9th I : . Amb.; Lt. Satchell, G.K. (Dental Corps);
Lt. Owen. G.B.; Lt. Rourke. Back: Lt. Thomas, C.H.; Lt. Williams, G.T.; Capt. Campbell, E.;
Lt. Audsley, W.A.
% I $&$ttbk^ |-ff' --m^&r
!1' wBBBBBro
Front: Lt. Morell, T.; Lt. Watson, K.I).; Lt. Griffith, E.; Lt. Colquhoun L.J.; Capt. Samson,
C.M. (A.M.C.). Second: Lt. Penny, D.F.C.; Lt. Fogarty, R.F.C.; Lt. Baxter, J.W.; Lt. S ""|h"
p.o. • Capt. Marfell, W.L.; Captain Playfair, T.A.J., "Bully"; Capt. Howe, S.G. Third: Capt.
Young M.M.S.; Lt. Freeman, M.D.; Lt. Saunders, T.J.; Lt. Hamilton, A.E.; Lt. Neylan, fc.M.
Lt. Greenshields, G.T.; Lt. Davies, I).L.
OUR OFFICERS
in thzir " Frill-de-Dolls."


Our " Ports." Leaving " The Warren," Sydney.
Aii Revoir, but not (iood=bye. Leaving Woolloomooloo
Bay, 11.6.16.
Thoughts!! and the Folks that followed the "A8"
to the Heads.
DEAR OLD SYDNEY.


Ribbons ! Ribbons ! Casting off from Wharf.
" Goodbye, 'Arry! Farewell, Liz! "
OQ0OOOO0©
r [ ; "
The Launches Were Kept Busy.
" Flirty " Clark Island in Distance.
The Final Gaze on our Harbour from the Seats
in the " Gods."
GOODBYE SYDNEY.


Church Parade. Where our Threepences Went.
Watching the Boxing. Risky Work Hanging On.
" The Orchestra." Getting in Good Work.
LIFE ON BOARD SHIP.
Things that kept the Dumps away.


THE BIRTH OF THE YANDOO.
The 7th F. A. B. YAHDOO springs into life in compliance with what is
believed to be a real and acknowledged demand.
A body of men such as those of the 7th Field Artillery Brigade, sud-
denly severed from the routine of civil life with all its conveniences,
recreative facilities, and freedom of action, readily realises what the
loss of these former privileges entails.
The YANDOO presents itself to Officers, N.C.Os and men, with the ob-
ject of to some extent ameliorating the adversities attendant on the chang-
ed conditions. . . , +
Its ambition is high. Commencing its career on the troop ship, it
proposes to follow the Brigade in its itinerancy through camp life and act-
ually into the firing line.
"I am in a position where 1 am demanded of conscience to speak the
truth, the truth I speak, impugn it whoso list" Such is the motto ad-
opted, and more or less adhered to, by at least one of our Australian aau-
ies. The YAMDOO will endeavour to conform to this high ideal, subject to
military necessity and the requirements of the censorship.
While sharing in the versatilities of camp life, this paper desires to
guard itself against anything likely to detract from its welcome among the
home folk and friends in sunny Hew South Wales. Topics and text must b„
unimpeachable. , .
Any movement for the general welfare of the urigade is aseured of
wholehearted support, and while, in its present close association with r
units on board, the YANDOO does not wish to confine itself entirely to mat
ters solely affecting the 7th Brigade. Affairs of general interest to the
whole of the troops will be welcomed by way of stimulating cordial relations
throughout the ship. „ , _ j
The YAHDOO hopes to secure news items, local, general and wireless.
These to be more reliable than the eruptive rumours frequently favored with
more circulation than credence. Sports items, personal pars, and general
matters of interest will find (inclusion. . , f
The paper comes as an aid to the promulgation of everything of interest
and value to its readers, a champion of every worthy aspiration and affil-
iates with Officers, H.C.Os and men in their resolve to make the 7th
Artillery Brigade "Hull! secundus".
DURBAN
AS passed the breakwater, through the narrow entrance of Durban Bay
and moored adjacent to The Bluff in ideal weather about mid-day on Saturday,
3rd J^ave 9 approved, it was not long before all hands, with the exception of
a few on duty, were transported across the Bay, and on p " n £°£° r
car and ricksha to the town, some two miles distant. A bath a nd dinne
were the principal requirements. like kmcs They
The Australians throughout their stoy were treated like kings rney
were extended numerous invitations to private residences where they fared
sumptuously, nothing being left undone by hosts and hos te s 8 "
stay more enjoyable. A notable and very much appreciated feature wasthe
welcome which the visitors received at the hands of of the town.
They were carried free on the city trams, admitted gratis to the Zoo and
Saturday half holiday regulations were waived to enable them to obtain thei
requirements at business establishments. almost
Church parade took place at 11 a.m. on Sunday and the troops almost
filled the body of the spacious Town Hall.
Rickshas easily won first place as a source of amusement. Other
attractions were the beach, gardens and Zoo, each of which was » g


kahki clad visitors. Motor cars containing Australian soldiers
were much in evidence along the picturesque avenues of the suburban
hills. All were impressed with the fine residences and public
buildings, the well kept streets and abundance of natural vegetation.
Throughout the visit the conduct of the troops was exemplary
and favorable comment was heard on all 3ides.
At 10:30 pm on Sunday, all returned to the ship, and the follow-
ing morning, a3 the Afl steamed out of the bay and headed southward
along the African coast, hearty cheering and unanimous consent
pronounced the visit one of the brightest and most memorable in the
'lives of those on board. Floreat Durbanusl
WHO SAID:-
What's the meaning of "YANDOO"?
An aboriginal word signifying
Messenger.
11 i
That while in Durban the Sgts.
of 27th stuck to that old addage
"Birds of a feather go mit
d«mselves" .
t i t
That the C.O. was not pleased with
the boys' behaviour at Durban.
iii
That the "Forget-me-nots" which
Gnr. McCulloch (26th) was seen to
take from The Royal, Durban,, were
for a bookmark.
i i i
That Gnr. Steel (26th) wanted hi 3
blood tested.
I I I
That Sgt. Maj . Allett (Hd Q,rs)
wasn't fond of child studies...
Well, why did he take his camera
to Umgeni?
I t I
That temptation could not be
overcome. Refer Gnr. Hayward
(26th). '"
That Cpl. Browning (25th) did
not get a chance.
i i t
That the Bo's'n Sc Steve forgot to
hang out to windward when they
rounded the corner in the ricksha.
i i i
?Hat Sgt. Hogarth (27th) was a
pearl diver- certainly he lo3t
his money.
i i i
That Private Walters (Hd Q,rs) met
his female ideal in Cape Town.
iii
That those who declined to go on
route march on 13th were shrewd.
i i t
That the nigger who swam from
Cape Town pier to ship and back was
no swimmer.
i i i
That there is going to be a row
between amateur photographers and
mess orderlies.
i i i
That Gnr Rowan (BAC) did not _a:.oy
the route march, on 13th.
THEY SAY:-
That with an ounce of luck &
a lb of choice there are few
Officers and men who would
not return via Durban.
I I I
That the boys thought they
had ordered fish by the yard at
Durban, opon my "sole" Gnr.
Nettle ton (28th) was one who
did.
i t i
That an elongated member-of 7th
was 3een to "feed" well at the
Waverley, and looked well in the
rick3ha with (nuff said).
II i
That one of the Gnrs. at the
tea party at Doctor Campbell's
(Berea) swears vengeance on a
certain officer. Wha' for?
f I I
That free tram rides gave the
boy 3 great opportunities for
glad-eying. Some girls, these
Durbanites.
f I f
That a syndicate of 26th has
worked out a system to break
the Crown & Anchor. So far
they have had to call up more
capital.
i t i
That Cpl. Kerr (25th) is not
satisfied with Capt. Samson's
answer to his question.
t i i
That one of the Officers of 25th
thought he was on orderly duty
at The Royal, Durban. When
passing a table occupied by
Gunners, he inquired "any com-
plaints?"
"Yes sir'.' no issue of permits."
i n
That the black cat refused point
blank to budge from Capt. Samson
cabin door mat.
t I t
That Driver I.K.Harrison (26th)
has systemised everything.
i i i
That Gunners Cuthbertson and
Hunt (BAC) suffered internal
tains after a visit to an
orchard in Durban.


OBITUARY. ?
A funeral took place on board, on Friday afternoon, Bth. instant.
Deceased had lived to a ripe old age, and judging, by his aroma had
been a long time dead. The body was carried round the various
decks by pall-bearers, followed by the largest procession of mourners
in the history of the ship. The vast assembly bared their heads
while a most impressive service was performed, and amid the strains
of Auld Syne, the honored dead was lowered into Table Bay.
Thus was laid to rest, neither unwept, unhonored, nor unsung -
CHEESE - complement of the days rations.
SPORTING
A good roll up of contestants at
forthcoming boxing tournaments
is hoped for.
i ■ i
A tug-o'-war will shortly take
place between late units 15/1
and 4/5.
11 1
Rosebery by Moonlight - we saw
1 Esmeralda beat The Bolter in a
, 6 fur. gallop on fo'o'stle track.
Time 1-12$.
1 1 1
S 9th Field Ambulance Opera Co.
started 13/6/16. Comprises 48
acts , 6 of which have been per-
formed. Any member of 7th or
: Sth Brigade wishing to hear this
famous opera, call at A1 troop
deck any night after 10 o'clock.
Cast,- Ah Pesmany (Chinese Wrest-
ler) Ah Porter (Leading Lady)
Sing Burnside (Mandarin) Hop
Sturch (2nd Mandarin).
BIRTHS DEATHS & MARRIAGES
To Mr & Mrs Ginger-Nigger, 5"
daughters & 3 sons, all doing
well. Mrs Ginger-Nigger wishes
to convey thanks to all ranks
for their kind inquiries.
PUBLIC NOTICES
Next debating class Tue. week
"Fighting" Bill Roberts against
all comers. Firemen specially
invited.
LOST AND FOUND
Lost: half a mo'. Driver Tailby
25th Battery. Reward.
ADVERTISEMENT. Leggings, boots
and bandoliers shrunk free,
gratis and for nothing. Guaran-
tee good job. Apply M.O. 7th or
9th Brigade.
WANTED
A good reliable watchman to keep an
eye to clothea when drying. One
used to main guard preferable:
apply--any gunner.
i i i
Asst. Holystone-rack-maker. Must
not sing the growling song. Apply
"Lamps"
i • t
Hot water for washing up. Apply
all mess orderlies.
■ i i
Another spud barber. Apply "Tiny"
forward galley.
t i i
To purchase electric light globes
for wash places. Urgently required.
9 I I
Good upper and lower molars to
masticate midday joints.
t > i
FOR SALE
Several Crown & Anchor sets. Apply
Provo. Marshal's office.
11 i
Canine mascots, black and brindle,
Warren-Cape Town breed. Apply
Gunner Camp.
t t i
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
IBluey 27th) The tall new addition
to your Bty. was the first man to
mourn for Kitchener on this ship.
i t I
(Pessimist BAC) Some were; hut the
majority were not seeking N.C.O. jobs.
The moustaches were only grown for
c onvenience.
11 t
(Bluegum 28th) Life belts were not
made to fit: they were made by the
Bo's'n, not by Gowing Bros.
i t i
(Nuggett 25th) No; Bdr. Rohu never
charged for cutting hair.
i 11
(Worried 27th) There is no regulation
against a Bdr. singing ragtime melod-
ies .
The Editor will be pleased to answer
questions on all subjects.


The daily routine of a soldier's life as told by a few well known
hymns : -
6:0 a.m. REVEILLE - Christians Awake
6:30 ROUSE PARADE - Art thou weary, art thou languid
7:0 BREAKFAST - Meekly wait and murmur not
7:30 C.Os PARADE - When He Cometh
8:45 MANOEUVRES - Fight the good fight
11:45 PHYSICAL DRILL - There we suffer grief and pain
1:0 p.m. DINNER - Come ye thankful people coma
2:15. RIFLE DRILL - Go labor on
3:15 LECTURE BY N.C.O. - Tell me the old old story
4:30 DISMISS - Praise God from whom all blessings flow
5;0 TEA - what means this eager anxious throng
6:0 FREE FOR THE NIGHT - 0 Lopd how happy we shall be
6:30 OUT OF BOUNDS - We may not know we cannot tell
7:0 ROUTE MARCH - Onward Christian Soldiers
10;0 LIGHTS OUT - Peace Perfect Peace
10:15 LAST POST - all are safely gathered in
10:30 INSPECTION OF GUARDS - Sleep on beloved
11:0 NIGHT MANOEUVRES - The day Thou gavest Lord is ended
GENERAL RECREATION COMMITTEE
7th F.A.Brigade.- Capt. Playfair,
Bgt. Macartney (Hon. Sec), Gnr.
Fountney. 9th F.A.Brigade.-
Lieut. Perry (Hon.Treas.), Bdr.
Jamieson, Gnr. Pickles. 9th Fid.
Amb..- Capt. Harrison (Chairman}
Sgt. Lee, Pte. Burnside.
CONCERTS. Four have been held
viz. 7 th-Bde . 9th Bde.i Fid. Amb..
and an impromptu on Empire night.
TUG OF WAR. Held in two classes,
A& B. The 3rd round is now being,
run off & final will shortly take
place .
BOXING. Fore & aft groups have
held respective tournaments.
Combined meeting eventuating shottlj
WRESTLING." So far only one match
held. Two more will take place
during the week.
GENERAL SPORTS. Obstacle races,
cock fights, shooting comps. etc.
will be arranged shortly.
PRIZE FUND. The amount already
subscribed totals £4l of which £25
has been expended in purchase, of
valuable prizes.
The Treasurer will be glad to
receive outstanding donations to
prize fund so that list of- receipts
from respective Batteries may be
completed.
TO POETS ?
Capt. Harrison (Field. Ambulance)
has offered a prize of ten shill-
ings for beat limerick, on any
topic of .troop ship life.
Entries should be handed to the
Management of this paper not
later than Thursday next, 22nd
inst.
THE YANDOO FUND
The initial and incidental
expenses of this paper will be
met by sales; present price 3d
per copy. Cash statement will
be published each issue for
information of those interested.
When; liabilities have been met
it is hoped to publish free of
charge until further obligations
arise.
The Management desires to
thank Mr. H.B.Flint, Secretary
& Manager' Ellama Ltd. Cape Town,
for his generous dealing in the
matter of the purchase of
printing plant; also the
Manager of Yost's Agency, Durban.


The Durban Breakwater in the Making.
All Ashore for Church Parade. Sunday, 4th June, 1916.
Natives in their Kraal. " Gwendoline " is 90 Years of Age.
DURBAN.
Snaps of our first Stretch ashore


A Durban " Monopolist."
The Two with Their Hair
Up are His Wives.
" Pals." Native Women in Civies.
" Jim Fish," Ricksha Boy.
DURBAN
Snaps of Nigs.


mMAIWI-
•GBfiiKIEKSOnGEBW" 9EK!3E>BC]aE'-A@°
•GROaSOCDG 9C06 ML-
G>C3° °cSOC3S a®-
1. Instrumental Medley of Gnrs Beattie, Stev-
Selection Popular Aira -enson, Smith, Ryder,
Cans dale 4 Scott.
2; An "Old Dart" "Up from Somerset" Gnr. Blackmore
V Warble
3. Choir Rehearsal "Sons of the Sea"
/ "Soldiers of the King" Everybody
"My pals are calling"
4 A Sentimental "The Western Outcast" Pte . Walshe
Talk
5. Paddy's Delight' "Come back to Erin" Gnr. Pickles
6. Something on the Selected Gnr. Beattie
St r l ng
7. Four of a kind "Sabbath Morn" 26th Bty.; Sgt.
Peyton, Gnrs.Wilson
Neal & Newman.
8. A Sea Sway Rag, "Uncle Joe" Bdr. O'Keeffe
9. A Wind 4 Reed Favorite Mrs Gnr. . Cansdale 4
Affair Bvr. Ford.
10. Some of our Pads "The Blue Dragoons" Cpl. Williams
11. Neddy Eloquence "Rio Grande's Last Gnr, Ash
Race "
12. A Poet's Dream "Fol-de-101-1 ol" Pte. Burnside 4
everybody
13. Our Dorothy's "So long Letty" Everybody
Best
14. The Spaniards' "Drake goes West" Gnr. Newman
Dread
15. A Sweet William "Excelsior" Gnr. Pickles 4
Pear Cpl. Williams
16. Who Said So? "What a Mouth" Gnrs. Sweet 4
O'Connor
17. Echoes of Home "Somewhere a Voice
is Calling" Pte. R. Martin
"I Hear you Calling Me"
18. A Canoodling Duo Wrestling Pte. Pesmany 4 Gnr.
Hart.
ACCOMPANISTS Gnrs. Sparkes 4 Scott
GOD SAVE THE KING
Printed and donated by The YANDOO Management, in aid of the
following Funds:- ROYAL ALFRED HOME FOR AGED MARINERS. THE SNARESBROOK
SAILORS' ORPHANAGE and LIVERPOOL HOME FOR AGED SEAMEN.


A Fatigue that was Never Rushed. Holy=Stoning the
Decks.
_„ _* T £JS*. *i:i .• r . n
Hors de Combat. After a Heavy Meal of " Esparagras "
and " Turkey."
SRB&"w -
The First Monday. Washing Day.
LIFE ON BOARDSHIP.
Things that kept us moving.


THE PASSING 0? LORD KITCHENER.
By the death of Lord Kitchener, the Empire has sustained the loss
of a great statesman and soldier, whose va3t experience, strength, of
character and wonderful powers of organisation, were of invaluable
service during the present crisis. He will be universally mourned
throughout the Empire and the allied countries.
Though the critical part of Lord Kitchener's great work has been
accomplished, his death must nevertheless be considered one of the
reverses of this great War. The effect of reverses in Britain's
history has been to concentrate and stimulate the resources of the
nation, and thus expedite success. With such a culmination, Lord
Kitchener's life and death in hie country's cause will not have been
in vain.
Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime;
And departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of tine.
Troopship AB, At Sea
16th June 1916
Dear Australia, -
If this letter is brief or uninteresting, you must blame the cen-
sor. We are as busy as ever. Pulling heavy guns up and down the
ateep cliffs at The Warren on roasting hot days, and all the many hard
ships I used to relate, sink i?ito insignificance when compared with
the multifarious duties of the present. Physical drill, main.guard,
holystoning decks, discussions on past events, bakers and butcher's
fatigues, washing clothes, mess orderly duties, attending lectures,
and waiting for the canteen to open, make life on board a continuous
hustle of inactivity.
We left Durban on the morning of Monday sth June. A good swell
on the sea soon began to have its effect. Disconsolate looking indiv-
iduals, while not admitting sea sickness, confessed to feeling "a litt-
le thin round the neck" or "none too clever".
On Wednesday night a passing boat signalled the news of Lord Kit-
chener's death, which caused our usual exuberant spirit to give place
to a feeling of gloom. A memorial service wa3 arranged for the foll-
owing Sunday, but unfortunately inclement weather intervened.
It was raining on Thursday morning when we entered Table Bay and
moored in Cape Town docks, but the weather did not deter us from grasp-
ing an opportunity to get ashore. Table Mountain, with Devil'a Peak
and The Lion's Head on either side, rose precipitously from the shores
of the Bay to a height of 3,580 ft., and it was easy to form an idea
of their grandeur notwithstanding that the summits were hidden in the
clouds. Leave was granted from about 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.. The
following morning A 8 left the docks and anchored in the Bay.
Cape Town cedes first place to Durban from the standpoint of nat-
ural beauty, but the former is the greater business centre. Our visit
was in Cape Town's off season - cold and wet. By a large section of
Capetonians, we were welcomed most heartily. The Cape Town Club was
particularly hospitable, extending the privileges of membership to
Australian Officers while they remained in port; also arranging for
afternoon tea and anything else they desired to be supplied, to soldiers
free of charge at Cleghorn's first class tea rooms. Among the large
Dutch population are patriotic and loyal citizens and public men,
we noted with regret a good proportion of the antipodal element, mainly
among those of a lower educational standard.


Perhaps the most popular attraction is the trip to Camps Bay.
This is made by motor car, op tram from Adderley Street. Ascending
the mountain slopes, the car passes the gar-dens and over the Kloof Nek
between Table Mountain and Lion's Head. From the summit of the Kloof
a magnificent panoramic view of Cape Town, suburbs and coast is obtain-
ed, -while the steep sides of the mountains tower on either side. After
passing through dense forests of fir trees, the car passes the Round
House, formerly shooting box- of Lord Chas. Summerset. Beyond this
rise the peaks of the Twelve Apostles. Descending the slopes, the
car soon reaches Camp's Bay, a popular pleasure resort, provided with
hot and cold water baths, cafes and places of amusement. The return
journey is made along the coast, round the massive Lion's Head, and
through the residential suburbs of Sea Point and Green Point.
Another place of special interest is Groote Schuur at Rondebosch
home of the Right Honorable Cecil Rhodes. This beautiful residence
is situated on an extensive estate, laid out with gardens and adorned
with 3tatues. It is here that the nation erected that Classical
Monument and Watts' Statue of "Physical Energy" to Mr. Rhodes' memory.
We could not help contrasting the well kept streets and roads in
the vicinity of Cape Town, with the jolt and jar of Parramatta Road
and other Sydney thoroughfares.
On Tuesday 13th it was announced that a route march was to take
place on .shore. Being a voluntary parade, a number who were not walk-
ing enthusiasts chose to remain on board. It was an agreeable surprise
when we were dismissed about 1 pm and given leave to enjoy ourselves in
Cape Town till 4 pm. The money market was somewhat tight, the author-
ities having collected Australian notes from those desiring them changed
This proved an effective curtailment of undue vivacity, but as leave
was not premeditated, the motive could not have been military prepared"
ness. We boarded the tug shortly after 4 o'clock, and on coming along-
side of our ship were enthusiastically greeted by the non-starters.
When we informed them of our having been granted leave, they were not
envious, as they had had an eventful day on board. Nigger our mascot
had pups, and an accident occurred through a chap getting both his ears
cut off in trying to lick the bottom out of a jam tin.
We lay in Table Bay until Friday 16th, when the four troopships
Benalla", "Beltana", "Marathon" and "Argyllshire, escorted by the
Cruiser "Kent", weighed anchor, and before long the curtain of distance
and darkness was drawn over South African shores.
We have had no letters since leaving Sydney, and are expecting a
pile on arrival at our destination. It is largely on the strength of
this anticipation that I have been able to write this unusually lone
letter.
Yours sincerely
"Pro patria"
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
(Eill Coalie, Firemen's <irs
For'ard) Physical culture in-
structors are apparently un-
aware that you sleep off duty-
otherwise there would be no
jumping. ' ' 1
KEnoggera 9th) Gnrs. Beattie &
Stevens of 9th are teachers of
violin tickling.
t i t
(Bribery and corruption not tol-
erated by The Yandoo Management.
Your £1 forwarded to Head Q,rs.
t I I
(Bondi 25th) There is no offic-
ially recognised tirea champion.
C,15 mess has a nominee.
I f I
(Justice) Refer you to Gnr. C.G
Gentle J.P. (25th) re Interpret-
ation Act and trout streams.
LOST AMD FOUND
Found; the same old smile on the
Bridge. Capt. Chicken, the boys
are pleased and wish you well.
t i i
Found at Durban: pieces of £1 note.
Evidently the work of 9th Field
Amb. man.
t I I
Lost : our Bulldog mascot, last
seen running with Vet. Sgt. Evans.
i i i
Found: bottle Black & White Whiskey.
Apply Gnr. Callaghan (27th).
i > i
Found in pudding last Sunday,
one raisin. Owner may have same
by paying cost of this ad..
t i *
Lost: phonograph handle - apply
musical director 7th BAC.


WHO SAID:-
Our naval gunners were trained
in gunnery school at Mick Simmons '
1 1 1
Submerirritis is responsible for
so many sleeping on deck.
1 1 1
"Jam" - Pearce & Ferris (26th).
1 1 1
That stew does not agree with
five-bob-a-day tourists.
1 1 1
That Sgt. Buckle's (Hd. Q,rs. )
marvelous machine gun is cooled
with six pennyworth of ice.
t T t
That 'd' Sub wan to blame for
two full dress parades in 25th -
was it 'C * Sub?
1 1 1.
"Not a man shall leave this deck
until that jam is found".
I ! t
That the melodies of Sigs. Sweet
& O'Connor have scared the ships
eata up for'ard. inquire 9th BAC.
That Hammock Sgt. Smith intends
visiting the deck now we are near-
ing the tropics.
1 1 1
Medical inspections were not
necessary.
I < 1
Gnr, Camp had gone to the dogs.
f I I
Sam & Steve (9th Cooka) are
some bare knuckle experts.
II 1
Boils are rampant in 7th. Refer
Gnrs. Kay, Lynch, Carver, McDavitt
& GoBwe.ll.,
1 1 1
Stewed rabbit & rough weather
go together.
! I I
"What, is goose for the gander is
goose for the goose".. Can Sgt.
Fulker (28th) tell us?.
K , 111
That the-promenade deck is no
place for cheese.
1 11
Potash & Perlmutter (26th) dev-
elop films for nothing.
1 1 1
That Dad Worsfold (9th Field
Amb.) was inventing a stretcher
to aid mess orderlies in getting
tucker down to troop decks.
1 t 1
That Sgt. Friedlander. doesn't.
like guard.
i 1 1
That Gnr. Fernandez (35th) ia
to get a. good conduct medal.
t ft
The females in the boat at Cape
Town were ladies.
THEY SAY.-
That some Officers, tried to- get
some, pretty pictures in Table 3sy
t 1 1
Maggie fe.ll out of her nest; ask
Lew ie a (7 th BAC).
1 1 1
That Lieut. Soott (9th) is doubt-
ful as to the efficacy af the
breastplate & buoyancy of Horlicka
Malted Milk, bovril & sauce.
1 t 1
That Sgt. Sheerlegs of eq.uine
corps wants something to paint
air a. different color at mead
times.
t 1 1
That the Sgts. Venn. Brpwn. ars at
present on. C.I.D. staff.
I 1 1
That the cat no longer troubles
Capt. Samson, Lieut. Hammond hav-
ing found her a home in. 2nd Stew-
ard's cabin.
II 1
That Wt. Officer Squair knew a
man who died of eating bread. Was
it the. ships bread?
1 I I
That Gnr. Talbot (7th EAC) has
been summoned to War Office to fill
an important position,
1 1 1
That Gnr. Chas. Betland (9th)
will sing any man. on. board. Must
be muzzled saprano voice.
1 1 1
That Christian Bros. Parade. (C.B»
Praternity) have made a glaciarum.
of aft deck,
111
That Capt. Donovan. (AMC) tried
his French on a Belgian, Officer at
Durban.. "Excuse me Ido not speak
your Australian language" was the
reply.
1 11
That Gnrs. Lenthall & Saunders (jjaC
axe going to open a fish & chip
joint when they get home.
1 11
That our (& other coves') sweet-
hearts would be proud of us on
washing day if they could see us.
1 r 1
That the 7/1 mascot, Mother Gooee
is expected to bring forth a clutch
shortly; she was seen making her
nast in a heap of ashes.
1 1 1
That the girl 3 of Sydney will.be
like, ostriches in the near future.
1 t 1
That Maudie's pater (who runs a
picture show at Cape Town) must
have suffered by the nature of the
keensake3 given two Lieuts. of the
9 th.


I N BY ™ L
YANDOO MANAGEMENT: Glffi. HARDING (25th), BDR. ROHTJ (26th.) „ GNR. CAMP (27th).
LIMERICK COMPETITION.
Won. by Bdr.Soper *(27 th) as intim-
ated by notice. The following ent-
ries were also received.-
We have heard of a paper or two-
But the paper that ha 3 most to do
With the life of the boys,
Of their sorrows and joys,
Is the paper on board - The YANDOO,
(Gnr. T. Orr, 34th Bty, 9th Bge.)
The above haa been awarded a spec-
ial prize of 7/6.
The cook's made soma stuff ha
calls duff;
Taste it just once, that's enough.
If you once get a craw full
The pains will be awful;
Lor' lummyj What horrible stuff.
(T. 0. B. 9th Bge.)
On. board there's a seaman called
"Lamps";
In growling he beats all the champs..
And his language is strong,
When we sing him a song,
That rousing old playmate of Camp's.
(Bdr. Abbott, 23th Bty.)
ATIVERTT SEMEN TS
Haircutting by latest methods, Capts.
Samson & Irwin, Cabin 58,. Further ref-
erence Capt, Playfair.
Box plan, for positions at hot water
tank may be seen, at this office. Ha
bookings mare than one week ahead-
Vacancies for lodgers; board option-
al. Apply Barber's shop..
CASUALTIES
4 killed; several severe and scores
of minor injuries in rush for first
l3sue of The YANDOO.
■ i i
Gnr. Baker (7/1) broke his mo' in
three places in the dark last night.
tii
Bdr. Single (7th BAC) fell down
stairs and squashed hi 3 tooth paste-
Long drop king; Pte. Mealy (AMC.) .
SPORTING
General Sports Carnivallst July.
Fancy dreßs parade"; we want all
to combine to make this a- huge
success 4
t i i
Boxing tournament starts, Y/ed.
28th. Shooting competition, and
Quoit Tournament for Thursday,
tii
Scratch puller Lawson- (34th) will
acfcept any challenge,
lit _
WANTED
Competent Instructor in, Trumpet
& Bugle blowing: 7th Brigade.
11 t
To purchase extra life be.lt.
Apply Gnr. Selig (9/1) & Gnr. Case
(27th).
* * *
Antidote for rat-bite - Sgt.
Macartney (Hd. Qrs ) .
lit
Automatic deck washer. & quick
drying machine , -Only to work be-
fore day break.
i i t
A groundsman for Lance Sgts.
Cricket Club.
i i «
Extra wages for a long slab cook's
mate .
i i i
Singing pupils - Bdr. Mason (7/l),
under patronage Mayor of Durban.
i i i
Curling pins - Gnr. Haxtnett
(25th).
t 11
Candidates for Water Police Force.
Must be able to bluff mess order-
lies. Consult Water Guard Polk-
inhorn,
t i i
A. good time like some of the chaps
had at Cape Town, under hospitality
of Mrs. Callaghan.
i i i
NOTE: Lord. Chas. H. Somerset re-
ferred to on 2nd page, not gummen-
set. Error attributable to "Pro
Fatria" writing from tropics. ,


What Father Neptune Did. It Happened after
Leaving Durban.
Looking and Feeling Sorry for Those Who
Wouldn't Go for the Route March, 13th June.
The (iame Used to be Driven or Led (?) up to the
Shooting Post by the Natives.
CAPETOWN DOINGS,


I
The Mist not Missing. Lion's Head from Camp's Bay.
j
...
Returning to " Home, Sweet Home " (?). The "A8" at
Capetown. Table Mountain in the Distance.
' ■ . ■ . . ■
A Sunset alter Leaving Table Bay.
CAPETOWN RECORDS.


«ITHE-7"FAB-TMIQI»
VOLf'PART-3-\ r^UBIQUE," H JULYZ^JS/G
Id sue d from the Porpoises 1 Paradise, South of Canary Islands.
ESPRIT DE CORPS
"Hello old man! How're things?".- A cheery greeting heard among
the soldiers on the AS. The reply, selected from the unfathomable
fountains of the Australian's voluminous vocablary,, usually signifies the
same good humour as the question. Though probably a detail, such sal-
utations, even to a casual observer, indicate by their heartiness and
frequency, a prevailing spirit of comradeship! esprit de corpsr
Comradeship in this undertaking, as well as being most natural, is
invaluable: even as combination to success in'football and a united pull
to tug- of-war. All clubs, societies and unions are founded in recognit-
ion of the principle that Union is Strength, and that no man can live ab-
solutely independent of hie fellows. To ignore such an axiom by disre-
gard to the laws of cleanliness, greed, or in ari? of the numerous ways to
manifest lack of consideration for others', is to excite unfavorable opin-
ion, and the offender is fortunate if Bome definite action is not taken
to his detriment. The average Australian, will champion public rights
against encroachment by the individual; and inversely, regard for the
public welfare invariably commands respect.
Added to advantages of comradeship from the individual standpoint,
are regimental benefits. Without good fellowship among pals, continuance
of friendship is impossible; In the same way, the spirit of comradeship
is a strong factor in building up seal and loyalty in Subsection, Battery,
Brigade and the Field Artillery as a whole. It even extends beyond thai.,
to all the Australian Forces, and finally in a preference and love for the
Empire's Army in its entirety.
This esprit de corps, so indispensable to an army, is well worth iijst-
ecitk as a valuable asset In years to come. Whan the present European
'scrap" is over and "BillJ ins" ■ cnce more returns to his civil calling, he
will not forget little sacrifices on the part of his fellows. He will
look back with gratitude, on the occasions when examples of comradeship
eased the hardships of active service; Men who fought side by side will
take pleasure in recalling associations of the Great War, and the nation
will assuredly benefit in consequence of the lives of its sons who adoptee
as their motto "Esprit de corps".
The following letter was found on deck - will be returned on proof
of ownership. -
Troopship A 8
Atlantic Ocean, 28th June 1916,
My Dear Girlie,- , . , „ .
Ho doubt by the time this letter is posted, my las t which wa3 wjitten
from Cape Town, will have reached you. „
Shortly after leaving Table Bay we encountered roughtand cold we a the.,
and quite a number were sick, Karry Watsford included. ....
On the afternoon of Saturday 17th June, an Officers Football match
took place on the port promenade deck. Only four men. per .urned up.
Lieut. Colquhoun several times succeeded in eluding the full back (Major
James) but rather consistently loafed off side. A resort to, fisticuffs
was narrowly averted when the two < medicos (Capts . Samson a Leeds) disputed
possession of the medicine ball. Lieut. Morell was on the ball from start
to finish and caused his opponents considerable trouble. tt_ 1 =
On the 18th instant the first issue of The Yandoo was published. Unle
the demand for more copies is satisfied in future issues it is expected
that the Provo-Sgt. will have to intervene to quell the dis trubance.
A much augmented main guard, wearing life belts, and the issue °*
orders re no lights to be exhibited on deck, impressed many with the dang r,
from submarines, but feelings of insecurity were alleviated by good practic
exhibitions of naval gunnery. The "Kent" transfers itself from
to
OS


one part of the ocean to another with surprising rapidity, and reconnoit-
res with such vigor as to verify the reference to submarines shouted by a
blue jacket from-the cruiser in Table Bay - "We. like r em".
At 2 o'clock on Saturday afternoon (24th instant) a combined concert
took place.. Programmes were printed by The Yandoo press and their sale
resulted in. £ll for distribution among various Mariners' Funds. Bombardier
Soper and-Gunner Orr donated prizes received in competition (10/-
and 7/6 respectively); and Nigger in the same generous spirit sacrificed
two pups to the good cause. A black, one was knocked down to Captain
Playfair for 35/- and a Ginger to Gunner McLean, for 8/6. Autograph
,fiends, Gunners Camp, Vickery and Levy came, to the fore with £l:5;0 for
autographed programmes. Gunner Edgar raised £1:6:6 by a raffle. Total
amcunt raised £16:12:6.
We crossed the line at 1 p.m. on Sunday, and now that we are going
d6wn hill should make much more progress, though Corporal Talhot (BAG)
contends there is no apparent difference in the level of the water.
Father Neptune was no doubt rather disappointed in that the occasion pass
without ceremony, but owing to reckless spirits having "cruelled"- the joke
on a former occasion, Captain Chicken locked upon such celebrations with
disfavor.
In consequence of the indisposition of some of the firemen the A 8
began to fall astern, necessitating the services of some of the artillery-
cen being requisitioned for the stokehold. The work is not clean, and
vihen leaving duty it i 3 hard to realise that the volunteers are Australian,
soldiers and not ricksha boys deprived of ornamentation.,
It will be 7 weeks to-morrow since we left Sydney and We sure looking
forward to the termination of the voyage. Hoping to hear from you. soon,.
Your loving Soldier Boy.
FARRIER
Farrier »faa a fighter,
Farrier was a. pug.;
Farrier went to fight a chhp-
Took him for a mug.
Farrier with the gloves on
Looked a pretty guy,
But looked a silly josser
When he stopped one in the eye .
Farrier made a smack,
Farrier made a misa,
Then he stopped a. beauty
Tni&t knocked him in a jiff.
Farrier on his baolc
Finish of the bout,
Farrier wonders where he is,
Farrier counted out.
Farrier, Farrier, Farrier,
Thought that he could biff,
Thought he was a champion -
Found he was a stiff.
Farrier's had enough:
Doesn't want to brag,
The' only thing that Farrier s : iruck
Farrier struck a snag.
WANTED
A dark corner for striking matches.
i t t
A butter, jam and. cheese monopoly -
The Cronulla Boys C.13 Mess (25th).
i i i
All the nice girls left behind in
Sydney.
Stink respirators. - apply the
survivors of C. troop deck.
i i i
Luminous paint suitable for ring
Ipolta and other obstacles.
A 8 POLICE COURT
Before Mr. Justice George King Q..M.S.
TTiTi 1 . L. H. Brovm 1 (23tn; euoitkririe
sentry and ex-infantryman, was charged
with leg-pulling; having obtained,
instruction in rifle drill from a
.Sgt. of 26th.
i 11
Gnr. Spud-Dixie (after deck) was
charged with obtaining lo lobsters
from a vendor whil3t moored in Table
■Bay, by means of a false pretence.
As the amount was forthcoming in con-
science money the charge lapsed,
I I I
Sgt. Fulker (28th) was charged with
receiving a hand made gold casket
from the citizens of Pera, Brazil, in
recognition of his discovery of what
caused fires - NOT guilty.
iii
A Corporal of 25th was charged with
defamation of character by alluding
to certain Gunners in the following
manner;- "Us is Corporals on lo bob
them over, there is'only Gunners oft
a bob a. day". - Case stands part
heard.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
(Pork Butcher Aft) We believe me3s 4
cq.n supply you with some fine porkers
" 111
(Saloon. Alleyway) Capl, Leeds was no
infringing any regulation by having,
a light in his cabin a.t 3am.
111 '■
(Angler 27th) The fish hook found
in the pudding last Sunday does not
necessarily imply that the- duff was-
used as a sinker.


■ THEY SAY:-
That mess orderlies will make good,
cab drivers - used, to the rank.
I I 1
That Colonel O'Mahony and Major
Jame3 are top notch Uncle Joe swayers.
t r •
That Gnr. Cook (28th) is a somnam-
bulist and poler.
I t I
That Bdr. Patterson is still star
gazing for the little lubra at Durban.
i t i
That Sgt. Kelly s (25th) faTvorite
expression is "Always picking on ma"
I t 1
That .the only time Colonel Pearce'a
hair stood on end was when the lascar
was cleaning the fanlight.
» I I
That the Adjutant was in isolation,
vide Ship Order 42 part 2.
i t i
That Wt. Officer Evans was a conn-
oisseur of cheese.; refer B.S.M. Curran.
■ : I
That Gnr. Sgarkes (27th) has charge
of Y.M.C.A.. stationery; also magazines
and books can be exchanged.
t i t
That "A. Rest Cure for Nerves" ia the
title of a pamphlet to be issued by
S-M. Allen (28th).
t I I
That the Chief Officer has been un-
animously elected to position of
observer for miniature range.
11l £
That stirrup irons are maddening
to Sadler Sgt. Walters (28th).
11 i
That now Capt. Donovan, has raised
the price of Patience from l/9d to 2/-
ha can staxt a Commission Agency on. th
profits.
iii
Thp.t the rats prefer the kit bag of a
&.M.S. to "lark" with.
i i i
That many prayers were said while
donning uniforms for Church parade
last Sunday (temp. 145 in shade).
t ! I
That striking matches cm deck is pro-
hibited. Pipes and cigarettes will in
future be lit by men on light duty.
i i i
That by making Concert & Boxing pre-
parations etc. the Chief Officer has
merited the thanks of the boys. Too
true .
i i i
That Dr. Barnardo's Homes benefited
to the extent of £9:10:0 last Church
Parade.. Will donor of button please
send cotton.
i i i
That another epidemic has broken out
Q,uoititi3.
WHO SAID:-
That 7th Hd, Qrs. have not got
"Rusty".
T t t
"Get off that skylark" in the for'
ard galley.
i i i
That Bdr. Pountney's ancestral .pro
fession was stoking and trimming.
I I t
That Cpl. Jaeyes (28th) was very
fond of "Tricks".
I t I
That the bulldog wanted what be-
longed. to Gnr. Bond (34th).
I t I
That tha mystery of the dungarees
was solved by Lieut. Owens (9th).
111
That Harold the Butcher a nd Jimmy
the Baker are sharing their kennel
with the bulldog.
SPORTING
AIR GUN SHOOTING
9th F. Amb 181
7th F.A. Hd.Q,rs &
Refts 193
Officers (non-com-205
petitive for prize).
33rd Bty 201
25th Bty. (one team
only fired to pre-
sent) 201
Competition still proceeding.
TUG OF WAR
A Section
26th Bty A 2 team in final
V
34 th v 35 th Al.
B Section
9th BAC Al team
V
33rd B2 v 27th 82.
BREVITIES
We have it on the authority of
a Warrant Officer that the Hotel
Cecil (London) is no place for
Gunners or Drivers.
i i i
Gunners McDonald and Ohlscn.
(25th) are inquiring for the
Owner of the stew found on their
backs when reaching the bottom
oi the stairs.
i t i
It is rumoured that "Jimmy the
Rat" will interview pupils from
'D' Sub (25th; for private tuit-
ion in Elocution and the Art of
Public Speaking. Instructor "Andy
the Bunyip".


THE YANDOCJ MANAGEMENT: - BBS ROHU (2gth), GNR. HARDING (25th), GNR. CAMF(j?7th)
THE BOYS OP THE AB.
(By Sgt. B.M.Naah 36th Bty., 9th Brigade.)
They have come from God's own country, and they go to God knows where.
And what of their future? Who can tell?
Battle and bloodshed; death and hell.
But what do the boys of the A 8 care
So long ae they know that they're doing their share,
And can sing that "Australia will be there".
How Greenhide Bill had been droving out where papers and mails are rare;
But when news came through what the Huns had done,
He cried "By the heat of the western sun
May I die in a hole like a native bear
If I don't get right over and do my share".
Baby killers; Australia will be there.
Now Greenhide's love for the Kaiser would-have made the K&Aser stara;
And he sold his kelpie for half a quid,
Whilst his saddle knocked down to the highest bid,
And the station took over his chestnut mare.
Then he scratched a gumleaf from out of his hair
As he muttered "Australia will be there".
Now a bank clerk from Sydney office, reclining in easy chair
Remarked as he heard of the Anzacs' fame
That Theatres were getting horribly tame,
And for tennis and boating he'd ceased to care;
And he joined the Artillery right then and there.
Good lad! so Australia will be there.
There are miners and railway workers- a thousand trades are there.
Bushie and townie hand in hand-,
The Office, the Workshop, the Man oh the Land,
Each of them ready to do and dare
For the land of his birth and the girl who is fair;
Singing gaily "Australia will be. there".
Such are the men of our Units, that the A 8 shall proudly bear;
The 7th, the 9th and the A.M.C.
Shoulder to shoulder to do and to be;
From God's own country, to - God knows where.
So the shiji sails on and the boys don't care
So long as "Australia will be there".
THE YANPOO FUND
As intimated in the first issue of The YANDOO , all money receive*!
by the sale of papers is for the benefit of the Brigade.
It 13 anticipated that liabilities will shortly be met, when a
statement of receipts and expenditure will be furnished.


One of the I>akar " Knuts " Coming
Aboard.
A Senegalese Postcard=selIer in all his Glory..
.'*■ ' f . A
m
'-.L
Native Fish Specialist. The Boys of the "A8" Proved
to be Good Bargainers.
DAKAR.
Was formerly a great Slave
Centre.


The Lads of the Village. Speciality: Cadging.
Diving for Money. These Nigs Dived for Many a
Penny with Tin Foil on it.
The Breakwater. Dakar in the Distance.
DAKAR.
\ IWhere there was no shore leave.


THE TERMINATION OF THE VOYAGE.
The end of the voyage ie In sight. For the 1764 men comprising
the 7th and 9th Fiejd Artillery Brigades and 9th Field Ambulance , the
8 weeks voyage on board the A 8 has been a unique experience which will
live long in their memories.
The feeling on being once more quartered on dry land will in
t^ e x£ ase t! ? e majority, be one of profound thankfulness; but
at the same time the advantages consequent on the term on board willbe
none the less appreciated. We have enjoyed abundant manifestations of
the kindly interest and great courtesy of the. Master of the ship (Capt,
Chicken) and his Officers. The intimate relationship soldier with
soldier; Battery with Battery and Brigade with Brigade, has resulted in
broadened minds, and created a fellow feeling which will be of lasting,
benefit to the respective units and the troops themselves.
Among the troops on the A 8 are men ranking high in the commerc-
ial world, agriculturists and pastoralists from all parts of the country
and representatives from every conceivable sphere in civil life.
The difference temperamentally is just as varied as the spheres
from which they come, but the conduct generally has been satisfactory in
the extreme, due in a large measure to an appreciation, of the Confidence
reposed in them by the C.O. Troops (Col. Pearce ) and his liberal treat-
ment in the matter of leave. The men aboard the A 8 have earned a reput-
ation on this trip which if sustained will bring redundant credit on.
themselves and the Forces of the Commonwealth, AM) IT WILL BE SUSTAINED.
The unanimity of the co-operation to nip in the bud the isolated breaches
of regulations anent lights and noises on deck, is significant of a firm
resolve on the part of the troops to unitedly insist on ths preservation
of their own interests.
We all look forward eagerly to our arrival in England. With so
widely diversified temperaments, it would be too much to expect an entire
absence of unseemly conduct, but a united stand against behaviour likely
to bring disrepute upon the regiment will produoe results reflecting
inestimable credit on the Australian Imperial Forces, and secure for
every man a pride in his corps which will be amply justified.
S. S. Argyllshire
TO THE TROOPS ON BOARD THE AB.- At Sea, July 3rd 1916
Your long weary voyage is nearing the end, so I will take thi3
opportunity of wishing you all Au Revoir, and to thank you for the
general good conduct and discipline you have shown since you came under
my wing.
To the mess orderlies I must convey my thanks for the general
cleanliness of the decks and mess utensils. Owing to my illness I was
unable to personally inspect them, but the reports I received from the
Chief Officer were highly satisfactory.
To Lieut. Col. Maguire, Capt. Harrison and Private Barrow,A.M.C.
words fail me to express my feelings for their kindness and attention,
during my illness and convalescence. I hope they will accept the will
for the deed. r *
You will be landing at Devonport in a few days' time for a spell
in England to prepare you for the Front. The A 8 will be returning to
Australia. Personally I wish the order was reversed, but it is notto
be, and until we strafe the Germans we must go on doing our bit for the
Empire and put our personal feelings on one side.
So Au Revoir and good luck to you all. You carry with you my


beat wishes, for X know you will make good when the time cornea for you
to show your mettle. In the near future when peace reigns once more,
I hope to hare the honour to convey you all back to sunny Australia.
Your sincere friend,
LT COL PEAfiCE, C.O,. Troops .writes
The Yandoo has reached the end of the Bectiotyof its exist—
ence, and I consider it a privilege to be allowed to contribute to the
last pages of the First Volume.
Our ship has been a home to us for 8 week3, and while adding my
mite of appreciation of the efforts of the Captain and Chief Officer for
our comfort, I must express my great satisfaction at the excellent
behaviour of the troops. Without the hearty co-operation of the men,
the work of the officers must always be hampered. During my military
career X have endeavoured to impress on my comrades the necessity of
"Playing the Game" under adverse as well as favorable circumstances ,and
I am bound to acknowledge that the troops of AS have, cheerfully respond-
ed at all times.
Should we still be closely associated on shore, I feel sure the
same pleasant relations will continue, while if it is our lot to be sep-
arated. I most heartily wish those that are not with us the best of good
luck.
We must all remember that the fame of Australia is in our keep-
ing, and I am confident that no action of ours willsully it.
- J
Frca MAJOR JAMES, Act. O.C./th Brigade:- Af * L~/a/.
On board ship every'man has "played the game" - one could wish
no more than that.
The voyage, however, is but the preface to our service, and we
must not rest upon our laurels. We have to fight the most formidable
troops in the world - we must train ourselves to bpat them. We 3hall
be serving with the army of Marlborough, WellingVto & Kitchener - we
must be worthy to do so. Jf
LT. COL.O'MAHONY O.C. 9th Brigade says;- X /\m ■
The desire of every man on board the AS is to have altiand in.
the settlement of this great war. That brings us here.
In sport3 of various kinds on board ship the goodfellowship bet-
ween all ranks has been most marked; but it will have been noticed that
the. want of training and cohesion has at times resulted in loss to in-
dividual or team. Take heed. Avoid excesses of all kinds, enjoy
yourself when you can; train all you KNOW., and when the time comes to
strike, be FIT, strike HARD, BE MEN. /I
I maXniu/P /
From LT. COL .MAGHIRE, 9th Field Ambulance :- A// Dq
The first requisite for efficiency is Health. Re me mbeiv always
that the sick man is a burden to the army, and neglect nothing that will
xae.p you in perfect health at all times. Disease attacks you from
outside; it is your business to keep it outside. The surest way to do
1 ?v is to^ a - 70id excesses and to maintain thorough cleanliness of person,
clothing food utensils and quarters. Do this and you will alwayi be
lit to "Play the game".


The Owner of last week's letter has been found. In gratitude, for the
recovery of sane, he has placed the following at the disposal of the
press.- Troopship A 8
West cf Gib.
yy Dear Hobber,- , 4th July 1916
Wo oJ?e now anxiously looking forward to our arrival in Engiana.
All hands wear life belts continually, and carry filled water bottles.
Alarms are sounded, repeatedly, and we have now learned to gain our
parade grounds with despatch and precision. We are thus prepared for
erjergenciee. At one morning alarm officers appeared with lathered
facao, and arrayed in nocturnal suits. Capt. Harrison leapt from
hia bath with avidity, Col. Ifaguire. stayed only a moment to add a gar-
ment or two to his undershirt, and Sgt. Major Watt did the comet a c t
down, the steps from the island deck.
About 11 aa on the 28th ult. the five ships executed a right
wheel (or its equivalent in nautical parlance) and at about 9:30 on
the following morning sighted the ißland of Goree which was settled
600 years ago and used in the slave traffic.Passing this, wa entered
the dock at Dakar, a French naval station, and terminus of the West-
ern. Sahara Caravan Route. No sooner had we dropped anchor than the
ship was surrounded by canoes containing niggers who caused much am-
usement by diving for coins. We were told that the sharks accounted
for 60 or 70 of the niggeis every year. Some of the canoe 3 contained
fißb (mainly red bream and herring) which were sold at 1/- per doz.
and even at a lower rate to a good bargainer. Dakar, the principal
town and seat of Governor General of Senegal, is situated just South
of Cape Verde, and is a town of narrow streets and populated by a few
whites And an abundance of natives. The residences of the former are
designed for the tropical climate, and roofed with French tiles.
Yellow fever, black, water fever and malaria are not uncommon. The
Senegalese are apparently much superior in intelligence to the other
African races v/e have encountered. They fought remarkably well as
soldiers in the Gallipoli campaign during the daytime but were super-
stitious and fearful at night. The chief export from Dakar is pea-
nuts, about 3000 tons being sent away each year.
A party of officers who constituted a shore party, were not enam-
oured with the place, but found their way about notwithstanding, that
their French was inadequate when it came to the purchase of bovril -
pepper was the nearest they oould get to it.
We left Dakar with Welsh coal in the bunkers at 7:30 pm on the
30th ult. convoyed by the "Kent" and "Swiftsure" - the latter vess.el
we learn from a well informed Sergeant, was originally constructed for
the "Chfllaniari" Government.
On Saturday last the Recreation Committee ran a boxing tournament
We are not possessed of a very large number of exponents of the noble
art, but'some good bouts provided an excellent afternoon's entertain-
ment. „
Good-bye old chap - will take first opportunity of writing after
reaching Me fry England.
Yours to a cinder,
Bill.
WANTED
Singers for the 7th Bde „ Glee
Party. Apply Gnr. Wilson (26th)
Kb joking.
i i i
Pills to appease appetite of
pale pink pretty Paul & party.
Apply The Glory Hole.
r i »
An interpreter for "A' 1 deck -
must be conversant with-Bosche,
Chinese, also pommy dialects.
t i t
RRRRRRRRRRs - Bdr. Aliworth
2Sth Battwy.
! I I
By all ranks, 3 weeks leave in
the Old Dart.
iii
Hair out with No.2s - Bdr. Barton
(25th).
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
(Gnr Ash BAC) You will be unable
to replace your P.A..T. on board.
Sgt. McDougal (£?th) acts as ships
encyclopaedia.
i i i
(Hd.Q,ra) The man who saved, the
colors in front of your office and
did not know it, was Sgt. Jones of
9th. I ''
(Artificer) Now we are on this
side of the line, this bit of the
world belongs to Nugget of Sgts.
Mess. I ''
No trace. When the
alarm was sounded you should have
taken the tea and cakes with you.
We saw Nigger eating something.
• it
(Poet) Write another & jump over-
board.


MY PALS ARE CALLING
I've put my house In order and I'm going.
Going today, going today,
I'm fed right up with football, cricket
& rowing,
I'm sailing for countries far away.
No more round the town in leisure, can
I roam
Nappy and gay, happy and gay;
Not while my pals are fighting o'er the
foam.
I'm going to get right in their tracks
today.
Chorus -
In years to come I know I'd be regretting
If I wasn't there, I wasn't there.
I'm sure a chap would find it quite
upsetting
If anyone said ALad did you do your share?"
Every day our boy 3 are marching from out
back
On their way, on their way.
Town men, brown men doing a willing whack
Of a nation's work which calls us all today. .
Chorus -
Chorus
My pals are at the front I hear them
calling,
Calling for me.
I seem to hear them, "hear them ever calling.
It's by their side we ought to be.
■Who's a-coming? Who's a-coming?
There's a place for you and roe to fill.
Put away your stick and glove
Leave your home and the girl you love
And be right there when Germany pays the bill
(This song rvas composed by Mr. Marsh Little
of Sydney, and was sung firstly by himself
and secondly_bv_Cpl i Jh J x _Williams_. _9th_Fl(hA]
BERSONAL i. MISSING FRIENDS
The fish a da shops of Syd.
wanta da know where Private
da Selwyn (AMC) has a gone.
No more soala da daag for 4
of da egg and 1 of da steak
for nix. - no gooda.
(N.C.O) Know me in. future as
GUNNER. - Astill (26th).
Shoeing Smith Peacock: write
soon to your Darling Treasure,
(Sgt Reid. 26th) Altho' yau
may not feel one, you will
still be an Australian in.
your little spine freezer
coat.
LOST
Morse alphabet. Reward. Apply
amateur signallers.
NAUTICAL
The sentry astern reported
"Object afloat on port bow
at 5 o'clock".
AUCTION SALES
Sold by H. Camp Ltd. in aid of
Nigger's quarantine expenses.
Oranges : each IQ/- J. Windeyei;
6/- Col. Richards, 5/- F.
O'Keeffe.
Pup Lieut. Audsley 22/6
Col. Pearce donated 10/'- and
a collection realised 24:19:10
making a total of £7:13:4.
TROOPSHIP COMMANDMENTS
1. The Colonel is thine only Boss. Thou shalt have none other but him.
8. Thou shalt make many graven images of Officeßs that fly in the heavens
above and N.C.Oa that own the earth, beneath.
3. Thou shalt not take the name of thy O.C. in. vain., when he does not hold
thee guiltless and gives thee C.B.
4. Six days shalt thou rest and enjoy thyself. On the Sabbath day shalt
thou do thy washing.
5. Honor thy cook and thy mesa orderlies for they are essential to thy
welfare.
6. Thou shalt kill only Huns, rats and other vermin.
7. Thou shalt not adulterate our coffee, our milk, our limejuice., or our
soup.
8. Thou shalt not steal thy neighbour's badges, nor his soap, nor his
washing, nor his F.A.Ts, or at any rate be found out;
0. N.C.Os, thou shalt not bear false witness against thy comrades.
10.Thou shalt not covet thy comrade's housewife, nor his .sox, nor hia air
cushion, nor his balaclave cap, nor his stripes, nor his jam,,
nor thy Officers' quarters.
ANDIE'S LAMENT - Ttgie "Why do they Call Me Archibald".
Why do they call me Andie Kerr?
Andie Kerr, Andie Kerr,
Why do they call me Andie Kerr?
Anything but Andie Kerr.
A-n-d-i-e, that would have been quite sufficient for me
I don't mind them calling me An-an-die
Hut, why the K-e-r-r?


THE YANI'OO
Pace irts from sale of three issues £29;5;6.
profits will go towards purchase of sporting requisites
for the benefit of the 7th Brigade. p h i r v en The Chief Steward, 2nd
The Management desires to thank Capt. Chic , which have
Steward and several members of the crew, for many kindnesses win
r a tetany assisted in the production of
SEA SICK
Just a quivering sensation,
Just a heave and something's gone
Just a shudder, then anotner
and you know there's something
wrong.
Just a sudden bolt for daylight
And you just get there in tirns
And your dinner hits the briny.
Why! The wastage seems a crime.
And your stomach keeps on heaving
Tho' there's nothing more to heave
And you pray to God the ship would
s ink
And so your pains relieve.
- F. 0.8. 9th B.A.C.
THE LATEST IN BOOKS
"The Finger Hail Memory System' -
A scientific work by Professor
Cherry (25th).
.An examination poem, "The Morse, My
Kingdom for the Morae" - Browning.
"How the 3wift3ure sank the Dialect ,
Anonymous..
"The Roll Call" - by the author of
"Don't I Use My Head". While this is
read, B. sub 25th. will sit to attent-
ion.
SPORTING
TUO L F J™ byl^ ti0 A 2 won by 26th B1 wtn by 9th BAG B2 27th
Laws on Shand Clark Smith
Hunter He illy Wannot Smith
Doy le Fowler Brooke" O'Connor
Thompson mooter
Hartwig Cade 11 Fredericks Bundle.
Youngman Bernard Gilles nuckam
Cameron J.S. Harding Le Plastria
Cameron H.N, Wallace Christensen Bre-kspear
Barratt Bleach H.B. 9 Connor ®cCul!och
Barclay McCarthy Atkinson McCulloch
n„ nT r,e BOXING
Won by 26th Not yet finished. The following are the
Tebay fihf-^ B * , Welter Weight Middle weight
Goatley" Mack (25th) Gcddard t'/f J
Andrew Cullen (7th EAC) McMillan (3oth) Higful (34th,
Grose
Total 35
FOOT RUNNING AIR GIJN SHOOTING
From the boat deck to This resulted in a draw between No. a
life belt in State Rooms team 7th BAC and. No. 1 team, 28th Bty.
8 to 14 is a good hundred Score 224 out of 250.
yards. It was a false No. 2 7th BAC No. 1 28th Bty
alarm, but Col. Pearce Morris Fidler
holds the record (even Bloodworth Rutleage
time). Single Ladd
Nail Sutter
The finish of the boxing Rose Gregg
tournament will be held Maasey McDonald
to-day (Safurday) weather Weekes Hardwioke
being favorable Ash Bragg
Gardner Knignt
Burrell Re id
These teams will shoot off again.


W JL 'raw'
7 Is V
Stti- -L- u SJGSS: k W J
TW£ MWooo J TAFF /) T 7/V£ ■ T/R OP/CS ■'
THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT: BDR. ROHTJ (26th) & GNF.. HARDING (25th).
THEY SAY:-
That Kiwi 13 not used in 25th -
they have Cherry Blossom.
I I T
! That Bdr. Mumford asks unnecessary
questions after lectures.
I" ' ' '
That the choirs of B & C decks are
taking up a collection to purchase mouth
organs. 1,1
That while in Dakar officers ordered,
glasses of HAM - whose French was
responsible .
t t 1
That B.S.jj. Shelly-Jones (26th) must
.have been tee totally mixed whan he did
not know one of his own Battery on the
troop deck.
t 11
That the beds in the hospital are
Twin.: above and beneath.
1 f 1
That the boys are looking forward
to a speech from Andy the Chief Baker.
t I I
That Sgt. Atkinson is some rifle shot:
£2:12:6 represents 630 bulls.
1 1 t
That Dr. Callaghan (BAC) was listening
for the birds chirping when passing the
Canary Is.
That Sgt. Eggleston lost his stripes -
overboard.
1 1 t
That the companion, way leading to B
deck is the Sgts'. only stumbling block.
1 1 t
That the boys heaved a sigh of relief
after the las t full dress parade.
1 1 1
That the motto of Bakers' Fatigue
(35th) is "The. early Bird Catches the
Worm" - but why 1 hr early,
t » t
That tame ducks are easily stalked.
Lieut. Owen got 13 in one shot.
1 1 1
That The Yandoo was nearly issued
minus illustrations this week. Gnr.
Duckworth's C.B. expired just in time.
WHO SAJD:-
That all pearl aivers come from
27 th.
t t I
That Gnr. Ccombes (35th) "always
had £5O with him when on the wall-
aby and could go 10 days without
water.
t 11
That S.M. Barton (7/1) is a great
singer of "Roses"
r t t
That Cpl. Coyne (7/1) likes the
girls who use "Rogues".
1 1 1
That Cpl. Williams (AMC.) wears a
chemise.
t t 1
That Dinkum Dot Da3h Doughty
(Hd Qrs) has lost his punch.
t 1 t
That Sig. Small (25th)likes his
norning coffee at 10 pm,
t 1 1
That Capt. Playfair did not get
Capt. Harrison out of his cabin
between 1 and 2.
t t T
That the 36th has a real live
detective in Gnr. Brady.
I ! I
That Bdr. De Dear (26th) is a
manicurist.
1 1 t
That Gnr. Niddrie (25th) is
qualifying for a Bottle-4h.
i i f
That Gnr. Davis (36th) is a
lost property expert.
1 1 1
That the prisoners could not
find the ships police.
i t r
That Gnr. Cook (28th) has fin-
ished his Rip Van Winkle act.
t t i
That 7th had no scratch pullers.
Gnr. Thompson (for'ard galley)
beat ship's champion.
That Tom O'Keil'3'smile wins
his fights.


Plymouth, the Place Where Drake Made Himself
Famous.
' , *WBL Bi
The Last Sight of our 44 Home " of 60 Days.
'■:■#'■ - ■ . •
- ■ ■ ■■■■:■ ' ....
" A Spello." Yeovil Junction. En route tor Camp.
END OF VOYAGE.
Were we sorry ?


P \
Silvery Sea. English Channel.
||
" Tea and Buns " on Exeter Station. The
Thoughtlulness of the Mayoress and
Ladies was Much Appreciated.
Disentrained at Ainesbury. En Route for
Larkhill Camp, Salisbury Plains.
END OF VOYAGE.
Nearing our new home.


A Day on the "
)own he comes with vicious looks.
Celling drill is oft the books,
Git yer 'ammicks off their 'ooks !"
That's our Sergeant Major.
" Come on, all you table stewa
For your stew and other £h
Don't lay there like sleeping lizards
I speak no second time!"
To he wash-house for a soaping
In the dark we low are groping,
All the time we're madly hoping
Waiting men with faces dour
with voices so
Clean your teeth another hour,
I'm not in a 'urry !"
Bos'ns mer with muscles strong
Push, the holy-stone along,
Keeping time to the growling song
now and t
Amateurs with a bit of pluck
DOR the gloves anc try their luck
In the ring when the gong s struci
Once or twice a week.
s day draws to a c
While the "AS " onward goes :
Nearer the land where the big gun grows,
We take things as they come.
33rd Batty. Staff.


