

WALSH AND TINAROO MINING DISTRICT,
J-lERBERTOJM.
QUEENSLAND
fuiblisbeb bp tbe Exhibition Committee, Iberberton, with
tbe approval of tbe Executive Commissioners for
dueenslanb, Centennial international Exhibition,
/iftelbourne, 1888.
Ifrlbmmu :
CENTENNIAL PRINTING & PUBLISHING CO., LTD., RUSSELL ST.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CAIRNS & HEARS,
auctioneers,
Mining Brokers, Land, Insurance, and General
Commission Agents,
GRACE AND WILLIAM STREETS,
HERBERTON.
C. & M. are prepared to afford to intending investors
full and reliable information on all Mining Properties in
the Walsh and Tinaroo District.
PURCHASES NEGOTIATED.
Estates Managed for Absentees.
Herberton Secretaries and Agents for:
John Moffat & Co., Irvinebank.
The Montalbion Silver Mining Company, Limited,
Montalbion.
The Oberlin Tin Mining Company, Limited,
Glen Linedale.
The Glencairn Tin Mining Company, Watsonville.
The Walsh Tin Mining Company, Walsh River.
The Albion Extended Silver Mining Company,
Montalbion


d AOEI & NEWELL,
HERBERTON, IRVINEBANK, MONTALBION AND PORT DOUGLAS
(General /Ifoercbants,
Customs, Shipping, Insurance, Forwarding and Mercantile Agents.
AGENT
John Moffat & Co., Irvinebank.
Montalblon Silver Mining and Smelting Co.,
Montalbion.
Silver Mining and Smelting Co., Newellton.
Liberal Advances made on Tin Ore
for sale o
S FOR,
Commercial Union Assurance Coy.
Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria.
Steam Lighter “Arakoon,” Port Douglas.
S.S. “Zeus,” Cairns.
and all kinds of Agricultural Produce,
r shipment.
JACK & NEWELL,
Herberton, Irvinebank, Montalbion and Port Douglas.
ADVERTISEMENTS,


ADVERTISEMENTS
g&l. WILKINSON,
•
SEEDS AND PLANTS.
Drugs, Chemicals, Patent Medicines,
Sponges, Toilet Requisites.
LETCHER’S BLOWPIPE CASES.
FEVER CURE
That never fails, is a Specific for Jungle Fever.
GRACE STREET, HERBERTOR.
B, MCCANN,
GRACE STREET, HERBERTON.


Roeg’S
THE
MIN K I!AL,
TIMBER 5 AGRICULTURAL
RESOURCES OF THE
WALSH AND TINAROO MINING DISTRICT,
JRERBERTON,
QUEENSLAND,
publishes bg tbe Exhibition Committee, Iberberton, with
tbe approval of tbe lEjecutive Commissioners for
(Slueenslanb, Centennial snternational inhibition,
/Dbelbourne, 1888.
MELBOURNE■
CENTENNIAL PRINTING AND PUBLISHING CO., LIMITED.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.




PREFACE.
'This brief sketch is published by the Local Committee at Herberton
for distribution at the Centennial International Exhibition, Mel-
bourne, 1888, in the hope that it will prove interesting to those
visitors who desire information as to the general resources of this
portion of Queensland.
The Exhibits forwarded by the Committee are under the super-
vision of Mr. Henry Hammond, one of the Honorary Commissioners,
in whom the Committee have every confidence, and who will be glad
personally to afford any information as to the district, etc.


I N D :e X
Situation of the District and Climate ... ... ... 7’
Kail way Communication ... ... ... .• • •■ • 7
Ports... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 7“
Population ... .. ... ... ... ••• ••• b
Herberton—Great Northern or Prospecting Claim and
Other Leases and Claims in Herberton ... ... 7
Deep Lead, Alluvial ... 9'
Watsonville ... ... ... ... ... ••• 9'
Bakerville ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 10
Cummins’Camp ... ... ... ••• 10
Eureka Creek ... ... ... ... ... • • • 10’
Silver, Montalbion ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Walsh River District ... ... ... ••• 12
California Creek ... ... .. '' ’ • •• • ■ • 12
Fossil 8r00k... ... ... ... . ■ • • • ■ ■ • • 12
Irvinebank ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 12’
Glen Linedale ... ... ••• ... ••• 13'
Newellton ... ... ... 1^
Return Creek, Coolgarra ... ... ... ... ■■ ■ 11
Mount Garnet ... ... ... ••• H
Nettle’s Creek ... ... ... ••• H
Hot Springs... ... ... ... • -■ H
Mineral Statistics —Tin, Lead Bullion ... ... ... 14
Geological Description of the Field ... ... ... 16
Timber ... ... ... •• •• I?
Agricultural and Pastoral Resources ... ... ••• 19’
Floriculture... ... ... ... •• 20'


WALSH AND TINAROO DISTRICT
(Better known as the Herberton District),
Is situated in Northern Queensland between the parallels of
17 and 19 degrees of latitude (south). Its ports are Cairns
ami Port Douglas, and is a portion of highly mineralized country,
extending from the Pacific on the east to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria on the Western Coast.
MINTING FIELDS.
In this belt are situated the following mining centres :—The
Mulgrave (gold), the Walsh and Tinaroo District (silver, tin,
copper, and marble), Etheridge (gold and silver), and Croydon
(gold and silver); and immediately north of the 17th parallel is the
undeveloped gold-field of the Hodgkinson.
HAILWAY.
The district of Walsh and Tinaroo referred to, will, in the near
future, be tapped by the Cairns-Herberton railway, now in course of
construction. It is intended that this line will be continued across
westward, via Etheridge, until it meets the line now also under
construction to Croyden from Normanton, on the Western Coast.
If this projected line be carried out in its entirety, a district will
be traversed, which, in its potentiality for wealth cannot be sur-
passed. The contract for the second section of the railway
provides for its completion by June 1889. Tenders for the third
section, which presents no engineering difficulties, and will bring
the railway to Atherton, 10 miles only from Herberton, are to
be called for at once.
HERBERTON.
Herberton, about 55 miles via Cairns from the Coast, is the
commercial centre of the district. Here tin lodes were first dis-
covered and worked, and they still take the lead in the production of
that metal. Almost from the inception of that industry, however
the track of tin has been followed westward to Watsonville, Cool-
garra, Eureka Creek, Irvinebank, Glen Linedale, California Creek,
and the head waters of the Lynd and Tate rivers.
There is but little doubt that as capital is introduced and
systematic working is adopted the output will be increased, and
the prosperity of these further centres will progress and rival,
if not exceed, that of the parent locality.


TIMBER.
The ranges between Herberton and the coast, with the inter-
vening plains and tablelands, and to some distance north and
south, are covered for the most part by dense forests of valuable
timbers (vide Timber resources), growing luxuriantly in the rich
volcanic soil; the clearing of which will leave country unequalled
in its agricultural capabilities. A portion of this forest district
will be traversed by rail for about 11 miles from Herberton, from
which it is expected that cedar alone will afford a remunerative
traffic for years to come.
POPULATION.
The population of the district (Walsh and Tinaroo) at the last
census was 2342 ; it is now computed to be about 3000.
CLIMATE.
The town of Herberton is situated on the eastern watershed of
the Coast range, near the head of the Wild river, at an elevation
of about 3000 feet above the level of the sea. It has a cool and
agreeable climate, and is entirely free from the torrid heats and
malarious diseases common to many tropical latitudes. Its posi-
tion on the margin of both the mineral and agricultural country
giA r es it peculiar advantages as a commercial centre. It will
shortly be formed into a municipality, and will, when railway
communication with the coast is completed, become a town of
very considerable importance. Its population at the last census
was 785 ; it is now estimated to be about 900.
DISCOVERY OP TIN LODES.
The first tin lodes opened in the district were worked here.
Application was made for the Prospecting claim in April 1880,
and it was granted as an award claim to the applicants, Messrs.
John Newell. Thos. Brandon, Wm. Jack, and Brown. It is a
freehold of 60 acres, and in point of productiveness and the
systematic manner in which it is worked stands without a rival
in the field. The plant includes two winding engines, steam
pumping gear, rock drills, &c.
TIN MINES.
The following are the chief leases and claims : —The Prospectors
Freeholder “ Great Northern,’’ “The Phoenix,’* “ Ly-ee Moon,”
“ St. Patrick,” “ Try Again. ’ “ Three Star,” “ Wild Irishman,”
“Poor Stroller,” “ Southern Cross,” “Monarch,” “ Bradlaugh,”
and “ Great Northern Extended.”


The crushing and dressing plant is the property of the Her-
berton Tin Company, and consists of a 15-stamper battery and
the usual dressing appliances driven by a 14 h.p. engine.
DEEP LEAD (UNDER BASALT).
Two miles lower down the Wild River commences a flow of
basalt, which has covered the country for miles, filling up the
gullies and old river beds. One defined flow followed a course
parallel to the Wild River and evidently filled a bed similar in
its course to the present stream. This country is being extensively
worked for alluvial tin, which is found with river drift under the
basalt. The wash varies from 8 inches to 3or 4 feet in thickness,
and carries from 40 to over 100 lbs. to the load, a fair average
being about 60 lbs. The country falls abruptly from the margin
of the basalt to the Wild River, and so permits the lead to be
drained by tunnelling under the basalt, which is the method
adopted. The depth of basalt varies from a few feet to 60 or 70
feet, one tunnel in Masterton and Co.'s claim is over 1400 feet in
length, and has drained a considerable area which is now profitably
worked. Little capital has been as yet expended on this part of
the field, and few better opportunities offer for its profitable
employment, as the deeper ground, where it is natural to expect
the heaviest deposits will lie has not yet been exploited.
WATSONVILLE.
Watsonville district, about 7 miles west from Herberton, lies
in a valley surrounded by granite and porphyry hills. For the
most part the lodes are situated in a rangy country on the
south and eastern side of the township. Among the principal
mines may be mentioned, “ North Australian,” one patch of
which yielded over 300 tons of black tin, and was the richest ore
taken out of this part of the district. The proprietors are now
sinking and prospecting in the vicinity of the old finds.
LODES.
The Glen Cairn has crushed 1016 tons for a yield of 145 tons
black tin.
“ Federation - ’ surface workings has yielded 137 tons black tin
for 715 crushed. The latter lode consists mainly of ferruginous
quartzites, but little prospecting has yet been done.
Other lodes which have yielded good returns are “ The Bar of
Soap,” Stewart's “ T ” claim. “Boundary,” “Spear,” and “King
of the Ranges.” The two latter are the property of the Pioneer
Tin Company.


Good returns have also been obtained from the Great Western
Company’s mine. Copper, silver, bismuth, &c., are also found
here; tin, however, is the only mineral profitably worked at
present.
CRUSHING MILLS.
The crushing and dressing plants at Watsonville are the Great
Western Tin Company’s mill, driven by a 10 h.p. engine, and the
Bischoff Company’s mill, driven by a turbine with a capacity of
15 h.p.
BAKERVILLE.
About three miles westerly from Watsonville, and separated
from it by a belt of unproductive granite, is Bakerville, and in
the neighbouring hills is situated another group of mines, some
of which have given very excellent yields.
cummin’s camp.
Four miles south-westerly from Bakerville is a group of mines
situate in what is known as Cummin’s Camp district. This
district has been profitably worked for some time, and recently
several new lodes of good promise have been found. The chief
claims and leases here are, “ The Nil Desperandum,” “ Try
Again.” “Victory,” “New Chum,” “Surprise,” and “Persever-
ance.” In the vicinity are. also the “Alice,” “ Sunbeam,” &o.
EUREKA CREEK.
Eureka Creek is about seven miles northerly from Watsonville,
the leases and claims here (tin) are, “ The Greek,” “ Young Aus-
tralian,” “ Ivanhoe,” “ Lass o’-Cowrie,” “ Clan Ronald,” •• Black
Rock,” “ Eclipse,” “ Great Eastern,” “ St. Patrick,” “ Sunburst,”
“ Telegraph,” “ Gladstone,” &c., which have given very good
returns both in quantity and quality, and have all the appearance
of permanent lodes. A crushing and dressing plant has been
completed within the last twelve months, driven by a 16 h.p.
engine.
SILVER BELT.
From Eureka Creek, south-westerly, a large belt of silver-
producing country extends, of which the Montalbion township
(about 22 miles from Herberton) is the centre. At this thriving
little township there is a complete smelting and reducing plant,
two water-jacket furnaces, and all the most modem appliances
for reducing and treating the silver and silver-lead ores, erected
by Messrs. Moffatt and Co. The properties here are chiefly held
by the Montalbion Silver Mining and Smelting Company, and


arjk.cs: & NEWELL,
HERBERTON, IRVINEBANK, MONTALBION AND PORT DOUGLAS
(General Merchants,
Customs, Shipping, Insurance, Forwarding and Mercantile Agents.
AGENT
John Moffat & Co., Ivvinebank.
Montalbion Silver Mining and Smelting Co.,
Montalbion.
Silver Mining and Smelting Co., Newellton.
S FOR
Commercial Union Assurance Coy.
Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria.
Steam Lighter “Arakoon,” Port Douglas.
S.S. “ Zeus,” Cairns.
Liberal Advances made on Tin Ore and all kinds of Agricultural Produce,
for sale or shipment.
JACK & NEWELL,
Herberton. Irvinebank, Montalbion and Port Douglass.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


mainly consist of these groups ; viz., the Montalbion, close to
the town, the Orient group, distant four miles, and the Bilverfield
group, distant about two miles.
SILVER LODES.
The majority of these lodes are well defined, and have all the
appearance of permanency. The silver is associated witli lead,
iron, kaolin, manganese, sandstone, and, in some of them, rich
patches of chlorides of silver have been found. There is a large
area of adjacent country worthy of being prospected, presenting
numerous outcrops of lodes assaying fairly for silver. Fluxes,
lime, and iron, are obtained in the vicinity, and also from New-
ellton Fuel (wood) is plentiful all over the district. There are
still many 7 good mines held privately.
WALSH RIVER DISTRICT.
Westerly, nine miles from Montalbion, through a comparatively
unprospected country, commences the Walsh River District, but
recently opened. Excellent returns have been obtained from the
lodes (tin) here, some of which are w r ell defined, and should, on
the erection of dressing-mills in the locality, pay handsomely.
The nearest mill is distant about 16 miles, viz., Irvinehank.
CALIFORNIA CREEK.
California Creek, about 12 miles from the Walsh River. This
district formerly yielded large quantities of stream tin. Recently
many claims and leases have been taken up on lodes. Crushing
appliances will shortly be erected. There are here also galena
and copper lodes, and deposits of iron and lime, valuable for
fluxing purposes.
The country westward towards Georgetown is known to be
tin-bearing for many miles, both for lode and stream tin ore.
The latter has been worked on the Tate and Lynd Rivers, and
lodes have been taken up at Fossil Brook and the Tate River
70 miles west of Herberton, but the scarcity of the water is a
great hindrance to successful prospecting.
IRVINBBANK.
Irvinebank is a tin-producing centre about 17 miles from
Herberton westerly, and five from Montalbion.
CRUSHING MILLS AND TIN SMELTING
The principal lodes here and in the vicinity are owned by
Messrs. Moffatt and Co., who have developed them in a systematic
manner, and also have erected a very 7 complete 10-stamp self-


feeding battery and dressing plant; also a smelting furnace.
The township is a very prosperous little place, 1 containing three
hotels, stores, &c. The mill last year crushed 5480 tons 3 cwt.
of stone, yielding 520 tons 1 cwt, 3 qrs 91hs. black tin.
GLKN LINEDALE. CRUSHING MILL.
Glen Linedale, about nine miles from Irvinebank, is a recent
development. Some grand tin lodes have been discovered here,
justifying the erection by the Oberlin Company of one of the
most complete batteries and dressing mills probably in the world.
The tin lodes are rich and of great size.
TIN LODE.
An eminent mining authority reports the “Gordon’’ claim at
Glen Linedale as one of the largest deposits of tin ore yet disco-
vered in the district, the limits of the lode not having yet been
reached, although it has been cut to a length of 70 feet, a width
of 35 feet, and a depth of 150 feet. 3000 tons of ore have been
excavated and are now at grass The quantity of ore in sight
can therefore only be approximately estimated, but he calculates
it at 14,120 tons of an average quality of 12|- per cent. He also
estimates the cost of treating the stone at 14s, Bd. per ton, and
that 150 tons of stone could be easily treated each week, which
should yield about 862 tons black tin per annum, and it is
estimated that this quantity will be exceeded. Besides the
“ Gordon ” there are several very rich lodes in the vicinity, some
of which have recently become the property of the Oberlin Tin
Mining Company, Limited.
SILVER LEAD LODES.
Newelltou is about 11 miles south-west from Herberton, and is
the centre of a district rich in lodes of silver, lead, copper and
marble. There are several very large “blows” here, caps of
lodes, and deposits ; but they have not yet been fairly exploited.
One of the best known of these is the “ Potosi.” This locality
was first discovered by Mr. J. Y Mulligan and party, who were
granted a GO acre prospecting freehold for silver, which, circum-
stances have not yet enabled them to develop.
SILVER SMELTER.
There is a water-jacket smelter here, with plant complete.
Many mineral leases have been recently taken up, and it is con-
fidently expected that this portion of the Geld will give good
returns for invested capital.


Return Creek District is the most distant in this direction
■S.W., at present. Coolgarra, its township, is about 22 miles
from Herberton. Many good tin lodes have been discovered
here. The locale of the Victoria Mill is the dressing plant, and
the district only wants the introduction of capital and cheaper
■communication with the coast to become a prosperous one.
COPPER, TIN, AND SILVER LEAD.
There is a large area of tin, silver, and copper-bearing country
trending south of west from here. Mount Garnet Freehold,
distant about 10 miles from Coolgarra, is a huge 11 blow,” con-
sisting chiefly of copper ores, and their intervening country is
traversed by several well-defined outcrops of silver and tin lodes.
Lime and iron are also plentiful. The creeks in the neighbour-
hood are worked for alluvial tin.
The disability of expensive carriage to and from this outside
district will now soon be removed, and this will admit of a much
quicker development of the lodes than hitherto.
HOT SULPHUR SPRINGS (MEDICAL.)
On Nettle’s Creek, about 28 miles from Herberton, and eight
from Coolgarra are the Innot Hot Springs. These springs have
gained a considerable reputation for their curative virtues, in
chronic rheumatism, gout, some liver and kidney affections and
allied disorders.
The waters bubble up at a boiling temperature through the
sandy bed of the creek for a distance of 100 yards. The Pro-
prietor of the springs, who has a lease of them and adjacent land
from the Government, has constructed baths and erected a two
storied house for the convenience of patients and visitors. The
waters taken internally have an aperient action, but patients
undergoing treatment combine bathing with the di inking of the
waters. Two or three baths of a duration of 20 or 30 minutes
being taken daily. The waters are strongly impregnated with
free sulphurous acid gasses, and contain in solution the salts
(carbonates and sulphates) of lime and magnesia, the chlorides
of sodium and potassium, also traces of iron and lithium, a com-
bination which accounts for tie excellent curative virtues of the
waters.
MINERAL STATISTICS.
The following statistics of the district are compiled from the
general returns from the opening of the field up to December
fllst, 1887.


TIN (BLACK TIN).
Year.
Tons.
Cwts.
Qrs.
Lbs.
1879
131
9
0
0 Stream only
1880
193
11
0
0
1881
1183
10
0
0
1882
1810
1
3
0
1883
2805
16
3
0
1884
2623
14
0
0
1885
1831
11
0
0
1886
2345
0
0
0
1887
... 2000
0
0
0
4924
13
2
0
SILVER (LEAD
BULLION.)
Year.
Tom\
Cwts.
Qrs.
Lbs.
1886
340
1
2
14
1887
1041
5
0
25
1381
6
3
11
TIN ORE.
The mill returns for I8i7 are
Herberton Tin Company, Herberton. —Stone crushed, 2518-
tons 14 cwt. 3 qrs., yielding 560 tons 4 cwt. 2 qrs. 4 lbs. black
tin.
Loudon Mill Machine, Irvinebank.—Stone crushed, 5480 tons.
3 cwt., yielding 520 tons 1 cwt. 3 qrs. 5 lbs. black tin.
Bischoff Mill, Watsonville.—Stone crushed, 2577 tons 14 cwt.
2 qrs., yielding 248 tons 5 cwt. 0 qrs. 10 lbs. black tin.
Great Western Company’s Mill, Watsonville.—Stone crushed,.
911 tons 7 cwt., yielding i 37 tons 8 cwt. 0 qrs. 4 lbs. black tin.
Victoria Mill. Coolgarra.—Stone crushed. 654 tons 4 cwt
yielding 41 tons 13 cwt. 3 qrs. black tin.
TOTAL YIELD, 1887.
Total of stone crushed for year 1887 in this district, 12,142*
tons 2 cwt. 2 qrs., yielding 1507 tons 13 cwt. 2 qrs.; to this is to
be added the bagging ore, i.e., stone averaging over 60 per cent,
black tin, which is not crushed previous to smelting, and the
alluvial tin from the Herberton Deep Lead, Coolgarra, California
Creek, l ate Biver, &c., which bring the total up to 2000 tons.
The character of the stone, judged by the crushing returns, is
seen to be over 10 per cent. This excellent average yield is,
however, much exceeded in some portions of the district, notably


Herberton, where 2578 tons of stone yielded 560 tons of black
tin, or an average of 20.29 per cent. The output of lode stuff ore
has steadily increased from the first of the field, the apparent
exceptions to this having resulted as in 1882, from accumulations
having been passed through the new mills in freshly opened
centres.
SILVER ORE.
The silver returns are as satisfactory as those of tin. The
Montalbion Silver Mining Company during last year-—the first
completed year of its existence—smelted 4849 tons of ore for a
yield of 1041 tons of lead, containing 272,863 ounces of silver.
TIN LODES.
A description of the geology of the district is far beyond the
scope of this pamphlet. All the evidence, however, leads to the
conclusion that the lodes are permanent, and as a matter of
practical experience, ms- far as then have been tested, improve at a
depth.
In the earlier days of the field the output of tin, considering
the defective appliances and crude method of working, was
astonishing. This was the outcome of the surface deposits
around the outcrops of the lodes, being easily obtainable. These
having been exhausted, solid work had to be done in the lodes,
requiring the use of machinery, yet, in spite of the absence in all,
excepting one mine (Great Northern and Prospecting Freehold
of other than hand labour, the export or tin has steidily
increased.
COST OF CARRIAGE AND RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION.
The Government Geogologist, Mr. 11. L. Jack, says in his
official report of 1883 : —The cost of carriage is enormous, and
only rich or dressed ore can afford to pay it When the railway
promised by the Government is constructed, there can be no
reasonable doubt that the field will advance by leaps and bounds. ’’
And again, the Rev. Tenison Woods, in his official report, says :
“ Taking all the appearances together, there can be no doubt of
the immense value and importance of this mineral country—it
may be truly called the Cornwall of Australia—and there are no
metallic lodes on the Australian continent which can be at all,
compared with those of the Wild River, or Herberton District "
COST OF CARRIAGE.
The cost of carriage amounting from <£B to .£lO per ton to
Coast, militates severely against the advance of this field. The
matter of carriage, which in a goldfield is of but small importance,


simply enhancing the cost of labour, is a serious factor in the
profitable export of the bulkier metals, such as tin, copper, and
silver lead. This drawback will be remedied in the near future by
the completion of the railway now in course of construction.
No reference to the mineral advancement of the district would
be complete without mentioning Messrs. Moft'att and Young, who
are virtually its pioneers, having introduced capital, and led to
the development of Herberton, and successively to Irvinebank,
Montaibion. and Glen Linedale, and whose efforts are still enlarging
the field and developing fresh discoveries.
TIMBER AND RICH SOIL.
The flows of basalt, covering a large portion of the country
intervening between Herberton and the Coast, have, in many
parts, given rise to a rich chocolate soil, fertile to a degree, and
at present covered by a dense luxuriant scrub, containing many
valuable and rare timbers.
About 12 miles from Herberton, on the Barron Waters, and in
plain or table land country, the Herberton-Port Douglas road
passes through a belt of scrub, and it is in this locality and the
tablelands to the south, that the most valuable and useful timbers
are found.
CEDAR
Attempts have been made to express in figures an idea of the
enormous quantity of cedar alone which will be available for
export on the completion of railway communication with the coast.
It may be considered that for all practical purposes the supply is
inexhaustible ; for so reproductive is the soil, genial the habitat,
and rapid its growth, that with supervision to prevent wanton
destruction, an abundant supply of young cedars may be counted
on to replace those cut down. The bulk of the buildings in
Herberton are constructed of this timber, for which there is an
unfailing demand, both for export and throughout the colonies.
Baron von Midler describes this timber as a light, beautiful
wood, easily worked, and susceptible of a high polish. It is very
much in request for furniture, for piano cases, for turnery, cabinet
work, &c. Trees are to be met with having a diameter of seven
feet and upwards.
BEECH.
The Red Beech is another plentiful timber. Both it and the
white beech are wonderfully strong, will not split, and are adapted
for building purposes. They are in great demand ; the Melbourne,
Sydney, and Brisbane markets will absorb all that can be exported.


KAURI PINK.
The Kauri Pine is not so numerous as the Beech, but it attains
such enormous proportions that the yield of timber from this
source is quite equal to that from beech. One on the Cairns-
Herberton road has a barrel of 12 feet in diameter, and a height
of 180 feet. It is regarded as one of the most valuable among the
timbers of the coniferte. Braces, stringers, and the beams of
wharfs remained, according to Professor Rirk, for many years in
good order after much t raffic.
BLACK PINE.
The Black Pine attains a height of 80 feet, with a diameter of
four feet. When newly-cut it is very soft. It takes a long time
to season, and then it becomes very bard.
BLACK WALNUT.
Black Walnut (Juglans nigra) is described by Muller and
others as a most ornamental timber, and of a purplish brown,
color, and much prized for high class cabinet work.
SUNDRY TIMBERS.
Other timbers found in this district sufficiently plentiful to be
of commercial importance, are Silky Oak, (two varieties), the
Yellow Wood, (Flindersia orleyana), a fine, hard wood, suitable
for choice cabinet work. Trees attain a height of 150 feet.
The Johnstone hardwood, the honeysuckle, and the bean tree
are very plentiful and useful, and should prove most valuable
timbers when cheap transit is available.
Another tree, whose proper name is not known, is one of the
hardest woods in existence. Its bark resembles that of cedar,
has very little sap, and is nearly all heart. Millions upon mil-
lions of feet of this timber are to be seen on the way to the
Russell River, especially in the neighbourhood of Toohey’s Creek.
The barrel is about 40 feet high, with a diameter of 3 to 6
feet.
None of this scrub country has been properly prospected for
timber. Such timbers as are enumerated above have been dis-
covered while prospecting for cedar, and do not by any means
exhaust the stock of those which are valuable for cabinet and
general purposes.
The scrub area of the lands of which this is a portion is not less
than a thousand square miles ; it probably is double that, and
should prove to a botanist an almost inexhaustible field for his
scientific researches.
It is not to the south and the coastal towns alone that we look
for a market, but the whole of the mineral country between here


and Croydon will, when railway communication is established
across the peninsula, give an enormous impetus to the timber
trade, and create a heavy traffic, and become a source of revenue,
as well as afford employment to thousands of men.
AGRICULTURAL ANT) PASTORAL RESOURCES.
A zone of forest land skirts the western side of the scrub,
both on the Barron, Herbert, and Wild River watersheds.
The head waters of these rivers take their rise from hills and
tablelands having an elevation of over 3000 feet above the
level of the sea. From this altitude the land declines to the
westward and of course to the coast. There is, therefore, in a
comparatively limited area a considerable variety of climate,
enabling the fruits and vegetables both of temperate and
tropical habitat to be grown, and where, as in the vicinity
of the scrub, and in many other parts the soil is of a basaltic
nature, the best results are obtained from cultivation.
The following produce is grown within a radius of 10 miles of
Herberton, for the market: —Potatoes, sweet potatoes, cabbage,
cauliflower, rape, turnips, carrots, parsnips, peas, lettuce, French
beans, eschalots, parsley, thyme, mint, &c., &c. ; melons, pump-
kins, vegetable marrows, ginger, arrowroot, wheat, and other
cereals, have also been experimentally grown with success;
but the crops, apart from the fresh vegetables, which find a local
market, and on which the farmers rely, are maize, oaten hay and
green fodder, and the English and sweet potatoes.
FRUIT.
Fruit cultivation promises to be a thriving and profitable
industry Orange culture began four years ago, has been
attended by wonderful results, the quantity and quality
of the fruit crops on the selections of Messrs. Nash and
Mazlin being beyond all doubt equal to anything seen in the
colonies, making due allowance for the ages of the trees. All the
members of the Citron family flourish equally as well as the
oranges, and in point of quality surpass those grown below the
ranges and on the Coast level. Seedlings three years old have
attained a height of nine feet, and have borne fruit in the fourth
year. Grapes and peaches also grow luxuriantly.
PASTORAL INDUSTRY.
Grass, &c.— Although the average quality of the grasses are
not to be classed with those of the Western Downs, the
climate conditions are such that the pastoralists and dairymen
have if anything the advantage of their Western friends. The


jAf-f
diQUO
f 103 3
A/
20 RESOURCES OF THE WALSH AND TINAROO MINING DISTRICT.
droughts which decimate flocks and herds in the interior are
unknown here. Thunderstorms in the spring, from October to
December, and heavy rains from January to March, come as
certainly as one year follows another, and abundance of water is
always found in the creeks and rivers. The valley of the
Herbert River and the country on each side south of Herberton,
from the Coast Range to the Great Dividing Range, is now
nearly all taken up and used as horse and cattle runs. Some of
the country is well adapted for sheep pasture, although that
branch of squatting has not yet been attended to. The immense
flows of basalt that in past ages swept down the valley of the
Herbert and debouched on the lower country are softened into
rich flats and plains, and carry abundance of grass and herbage.
DAIRYING.
Dairying is very successfully followed in the vicinity of
Herberton. To the west of the Range, although the country is
more subject to dry periods, there is a large extent of posture
land. One great advantage the stock raiser and dairyman have
is the certainty of a good market for their stock and produce.
As the mineral lands are developed and the agricultural districts
settled, the demand for fat stock will still further improve.
FLORICULTURE.
The rose is well represented, and blooms nearly all the year
round ; amongst the different varieties may be mentioned some of
the old favourites, such as those beautiful fragrant roses—
Devoniensis, Madam Bravy, Alba Rosea, Madame Berara,
Marechal Neil, Cloth of Gold, Celine Forrester, Gloire de
Dijon, and many others. The hybrid perpetuals are
represented by General Jacqueminot, Jean Rosenkranz, &c.,
Dahlias and fuchsias are thoroughly at home, and continue in
flower for a long time. Chrysanthemums of all kinds are seldom
out of bloom. Liliums, gladioli, hippeastrums, zephyranthus,
gardenias, Murraya exotica, camelias, &c., are to be found in our
gardens, together with some grand specimens of bignonia, venusta,
b. Tweediana, bougainvillia, alamanda, geraniumns, go without
saying, and the dianthus, phlox, heliotrope, mignonette, candy,
tuft, larkspur, and, in fact, most annuals and perennials are to
be seen in the greatest luxuriance. Along the banks of the Wild
River are to be found growing several species of fern, as adian-
tum, alsophila, asplinium, nidus, several of the pteris, and that
pretty little climbing fern, phynatodes, which looks so well in
hanging baskets. In the Barron Valley are to be met several
varieties of the lycopodium family, and also the charming plant
selaginilla tessalata. In that district also are to be found
numerous varieties of orchids, growing plentifully.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
JOHN BAIN,
(Late of Jarman’s Maryborough,)
Ipaddlcr and Jjfamcdd |j|akcr,
STREET,
HERBERTON,
Has always on hand a well-assorted stock of all
descriptions of Saddlery, Whips, Spurs, and Light and
Heavy Harness.
None but the Best Workmen employed.
Saddles Made to Order on the Shortest Notice.
Patronage Solicited.
R. JAMBS,
Chemist anb dentist
GRACE STREET, HERBERTON.
PRESCRIPTIONS ACCURATELY DISPENSED.
Patent Medicines. Horse and Cattle Medicines.
artificial fsita,
Set in Gold, A perfect Fit Guaranteed.
JAMES' CELEBRATED SOUTH AFRICAN FEVER MIXTURE.


