

s|i?
Si^&^x^ks








PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE
P. & O, STEAMER, "SUTLEJ.
ON HER JOURNEY FROM
SY D N E Y
(APRIL 14th)
TO LONDON
(JUNE Bth, 1886).
EDITED BY
CHARLES JAMES WALKER and ROBERT SANDS.




ABSTRACT LOG.
April 14
„ 15
„ 16
„ 17
„ 18
„ 19
„ 20
„ 21
~ 22
„ 23
„ 24
~ 25
„ 26
„ 27
„ 28
„ 29
~ 30
May J
~ 4
5
6
„ 8
„ 9
„ 10
„ 11
„ 12
„ 13
„ 14
~ 16
„ 17
„ 19
„ 20
„ 21
„ 22
„ 23
„ 24
„ 25
„ 26
„ 27
„ 28
„ 29
„ so
» 31
June 1
„ 3
7
„ 8
Weather Remarks, &c.
Left Circular Quay, Sydney, noon
Hard southerly gale
Furious southerly gale
Moderate gale and tine weather
Arrived at Melbourne, 11 p.m.
Fine clear weather
Left Melbourne, 1.20 p.m.
Light north-west wind and tine
Arrived at Glenelg, noon
Left Glenelg, 4.15 p m.
Fine weather, heavy south-east swell
Light wind and fine swell
Do do.
At K. G. Sound; ar. 9 a.m., left 3.50 p.m
Moderate Breeze and fine
Light variable airs and fine
Do. do.
Do do.
Moderate south-east trade winds
Fresh wind and squally
Light wind and cloudy
Light wind and fine clear weather
Calm and fine
Light variable airs and fine
Moderate wind and fine
Arrived Colombo, 3 p.m.
Head wind and fine
Do. do.
Do. do.
Calm and fine -
South wind and fine
Do. do.
Do. do.
Arrived at Aden, 6 a.m. and left at noon
South wind and fine
Fresh head wind and fine
Moderate head wind and fine
Do. do.
At Suez
In Suez Canal
At Port Said
Do. do.
Calm and fine
Light airs and fine
Do.
At Malta
Light airs and fine
Light following wind and fine
Arrived at Gibralter
Arrived at Plymouth
Arrived at Tilbury, London




SALOON PASSENGERS
Allen, Miss
Ash win, Mr and Mrs.
Beamish, G. R.
Blackwell, Mr, and Mrs.
Briggs, Mr. and Mrs.
Bbitter, A.
Buchanan, W. F. and 3 Misses
Burd, Mr.
Bultebl, G. F.
Burwell, F W.
Callaghan, Jas.
Campbell, Hon. C. and 2 Misses
Clogstonn, R P.
Cockerell, Miss
Cornish, Mr. and Miss
Cunningham, H.
Dixon, F.
Drinan, Mr., Mrs., and Miss
Fleming, Mr. and Miss
Fox, Miss
Gilbert, Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton, Mrs. R.
Hill, C. G.
Horn, St, A.
Jameson, W.
Jardine, E.
Johnson, Mr. and Mrs., Infant
and Nurse
Keep, A.
Kronfeld
Lamond, W. B.
Landbshut
Lewis, G.
Lipscomb, G. 11.
Mackay
McGowan, Mr., Mrs., and Miss
Mcßran, Mr., Mrs., and Infant
Nolan, Judge, Miss, AMissF.
Norris, J.
Nves, Miss
Oliver, St. J.
Oxley, Mr. and Miss
Pascal, L.
Postle, Mrs.
Price, Miss
Roger, Miss and Miss R
Rowland, J. R.
Roper, J. IL
Rudd, the Misses
Bundle, E. G.
Sands, Mr. and Mrs., Two
Children and Nurse
Smith, Miss
Simpson, Mr. and Mrs.
Speedy, Captain
Sadlier, Mrs.
Tanner, E.
Temple, C. F.
Tetley, Mr. and Mrs., Two
Children and Nurse
Thomas, J. J.
Tracey, Miss
Thompson, Peter
Walker, Mr, Charles James
Wallis, Mr.
Walter, C. A. L.
Whitty, Mr. and Miss
Wilkins, Russell
Wilson, C,
Worth, Mr. and Mrs.
Young, Mr. and Mrs.


SECOND-CLASS PASSENGERS.
Bancroft, Mrs.
Brain, Mr.
Bowman, J.
Clark, W. F.
Davies, R. L.
Kennedy, Miss
Kimberley
King, Master and Miss
Mercer, W.
Methalers, Alex.
McMuir, Mr., Mrs., and Miss
Phillips, G.
Picton, Mr.
Piper, Mr.
Planstead, Mrs.
Purcell, Mrs. and Miss
Scharliss
Smart, Mrs.
Sutcliffe, Mr. and Mrs.
Turner
Turvills, Fred.
Turvills, Thomas
Warburton, Seth
Wood, Jas.
AMUSEMENT
COMMITTEE.
Ladies.
Gentlemen.
Mrs. Sands
Capt. Speedy, Chairman
Fleming
„ Simpson
Miss Cockerell
T. H. Burd
E. Jardine
Mr. Lamond
G. F. Bulteel, Hon. Sec.
„ McGowan
„ Whitt y
THE “SUTLEJ ARGUS” STAFF.
Editors.
Charles James Walker | Robert Sands
Departmental Officers.
Messrs. Beamish, Pascal, Clogstone, Walter, Rolland,
Ashwin, and Landeshut.
DEPARTMENTAL EDITORS.
Advertisements ... G. R. Beamish.
Correspondence... ... E. M. Ashwin.
Poems and Essays ... S. M. Landeshut.
General News Messrs. R. P. Clogston A L. Pascal
Engravings ... ... J. R. Rowland.
Artists’Studios... ... T, H. Burd.
Log Book C. A. L. Walter.
Sporting Column ... Messrs. A. Keep & G. H. Lipscombe
Chief Clerk C. F. Temple.


CHOIR
Mrs. Sands,
~ Young, -
~ Hamilton,
Miss Campbell,
„ Fleming,
„ McGowan,
„ Fox,
„ Whitley,
Choirmaster
Capt. Speedy,
Mr. Jardine,
~ Keep,
„ Lamond,
„ Walter,
„ Oliver,
„ Bulteel,
„ Briggs,
Mr. C. J. Walker.
THE S.S. “SUTLEJ.”
Built at Barrow, April 4th, 1882 (Steel).
Gross Tonnage, 4,194. Nett Tonnage, 2,156.
Horse-power, 800. Indicated Horse-power, 4,500.
Length, 390 feet. Breadth, 423-^.
Length of Engine-room, 94^.
Capt. A. H. Johnson
Ist Officer, J. C. Long
2nd „ RG. Greensmith
3rd „ P. Lynch Staunton
4th „ F. Summers
sth ~ H. W. Kenrick
Surgeon, A. R. Grant
Purser, F. C. Buckland
Chief Engineer, J. Phillips
2nd ~ C. H. Tucker
3rd „ I). Crawford
4th ~ H. Turner
sth „ F. W. Ross
6th „ Geo. Rew
7 European Quarter Masters
1 Carpenter
1 Joiner
1 Boatswain
1 Boiler-maker
1 Winchman
1 Refrigerating Mechanic
1 Electrician
37 Stewards
2 Stewardesses
39 Lascars
30 Firemen
20 Coal Trimmers
10 Pursers (Natives)


No. 1.
APRIL 26th, 1886.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Messrs, roland, lamond, lipscombe & co., ltd.,
beg to announce to the nobility, gentry, and passengers
generally, that they intend commencing business, at the under-
mentioned address, as Advertising, Commission, Water, and Estate
Agents; Auctioneers and Dog Fanciers; Marine, Fire, and Life
Insurance Agents; Matrimonial Arrangements effected at the
shortest notice; Old Clothes bought, sold, or exchanged; Knight-
hoods and Baronetcies procured at small percentage ; Washing
and Mangling done on the most approved style.
N.B.—Our hours for receiving Canvassers, Book Agents and
Collectors for Charities —all day. We do our own business at
night.
Note the Address :
Nos. 84, 90 and 95, Yarra Lane, S. S. “ Sutlej.”
MESSRS, BULTEEL & JARDINE beg to inform the public
that they have opened business this day at No. 45, Port
Street (corner of Pantry Square), as Licensed Auctioneers,
Appraisers, Estate, and Calcutta Sweep Agents, etc. Private
Enquiries made with the utmost delicacy, the profoundest
secrecy and most deliberate circumspection. Every effort made
to trace Missing Friends, no charge if unsuccessful. All Goods
entrusted to our firm for Sale, between the hours of ten a.m.
and noon, will be promptly sold whether they belong to the
Vendor or not. Terms on application ; send further conditions
at time of Sale.
MESSRS. BULTEEL & JARDINE beg to give notice that
they have been favoured with instructions from Messrs.
Lipscombe & Vint, to Sell by Auction the CALCUTTA SWEEPS,
on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at eleven o’clock, on Quarter-
deck, weather permitting, for the runs ending on the following
day.


CART. JOHNSON.
The above sketch represents a man of sterling qualities
as a sailor, who contributes to all our wants by his genial
manner.




EDITORIAL.
Varied and many arc the expectations and conclusions arrived at
by our fellow-passengers concerning this our first issue of “ The
Sutlej Argus,” and we now propose to enlighten all speculations
upon our undertaking, by giving an outline of the characteristic
features this journal shall bear in all our issues.
\Yc must first allude to our position in conducting this
paper as being an honorary one, but with attendant arduous
duties attached, yet, we feel this position to be greatly relieved
and materially assisted by two prominent features existing in our
favour, whilst publishing this newspaper, firstly : —we have
received a most generous response and support to all our wants
from Capt. Johnson and his officers ; secondly : —we have been
much encouraged by numerous contributions forwarded to our
office, for publication, by many talented writers. Thus, our first
care will be that all matter published shall sustain the honour
given us, in being selected Editors of “ The Sutlej Argus ” by
the Committee of Amusement, by carefully and strictly maintaining
the confidence thus reposed in us. We intend to speak freely and
fearlessly, yet with that- judgement necessary to insure complete
success.
We have an able staff to assist us “with a hundred eyes” to
report and record the doings and sayings in this little world of
“ The Sutlej,” though, let none be alarmed at this enterprise by
imagining we shall descend to so low an ebb as to open our
columns for utterances beneath the dignity of a well-conducted
journal.
“LET THE PAPER SPEAK.”
This is my first appearance
Before the public gaze,
And I hope that when they’ve seen me
They’ll not deny me praise ;
For no enmity or malice
Shall in my pages find vent;
Not bad remarks of any sort,
That my readers would resent.


I intend to be a record
Of events both grave and gay,
That may happen on this voyage
To England—far away !
I’m called the 11 Sutlej Argus
A very proper name,
Altho’ as yet it’s not enjoyed
Much journalistic fame.
Sung to the People by Chorus of Editors :
So you that have the wit or skill,
Come lend a hand these sheets to fill!
Compose a poem,—write a lyric,
Or, on the ship, a panegyric ;
Or, if you’ve anything to tell
Of ’ventures strange that you befell,
We beg that you would them relate,
And on your pens we’ll humbly wait:
And, also, on the pens of those
Who’ll contribute—in verse or prose.
The Captain, with his usual grace,
Has undertaken Censor’s place :
His judgment and discrimination
Well fit him for the situation ;
Strict justice he will exercise
O’er all he has to supervise.
For contributions we desire
That won’t—in print—raise people’s ire ;
And politics we’ll leave alone,
As apt to raise “ Contention’s Bone.”
And any arguments and theories
About the Rads, the Whigs, or Tories :
All such things we would eschew,
Or we, perhaps, might mischief brew.
For a course we wish to steer
That of disputes will keep us clear ;
We only wish to give to you
Amusement for an hour or two :
And, striving hard that end to gain,
Trust that our efforts won’t be vain.
H. W. K


NOTES.
There is plenty of diversion to be found on board a large and
well-fitted passenger ship by those who can enjoy it. The activity
displayed in the formation of a committee of amusement, c un-
prising of ladies and gentlemen, almost before, one might say, the
ship was out of sight of Port Phillip Head, is in itself a very good
sign, while the readiness shown by all to join together in
purchasing a piano, betokens that the wish to make the voyage a
thoroughly enjoyable one is universal.
The selection of the committee has been careful and judicious;
and all will agree that a happier choice of members could not
have been made.
The list of entertainments has, it seems, so far, been very
well arranged, and the thanks of the public are due to the
committee for the zeal and energy they have shown in the public
weak
The theatricals that are to take place will afford ample
opportunity to all those who desire to show the people Avhat
knowledge they possess of the histrionic art.
A Fancy Dress Ball is to be given the Friday after leaving
Colombo.
Our thanks also are owing to those two able gentlemen who
have taken upon themselves the arduous and delicate task of
editing this paper, viz.;—Mr. Charles James talker and Mr.
Robert H. Sands; an undertaking involving a deal of energy,
prudence and tact.
We anticipate plenty of Cricket as soon as the weather
becomes suitably moderate; and there ought to be some good
matches.
Athletic Sports, though on a small scale, will also form an
item in the programme.
We should like to suggest, if it has not already been done so,
that a Chess, Draughts, and Backgammon tournament be held.
Altogether, we have every hope that the voyage will be one
that will enable us, in after days, to look back upon with a
pleasant memory, and never regret the brief month or two we
spent on board the “Sutlej.” —W. H. Rickken.


R. M. S. “SUTLEJ.”
SYDNEY TO MELBOURNE.
Those passengers who first came on board this fine steamer
at Sydney have, by this time, experienced unusual vicissitudes and
varieties of weather. Fortunately, the “Sutlej” has proved her-
self equal to all emergencies, though perhaps she may have seemed
too lively in a sea way for some discontented souls.
On leaving Sydney, the elements lost no time in executing
“ their nefarious little plans.” A head wind, gathering strength
every minute, blew in our teeth. The sea gradually rose, and the
stately “Sutlej,” so lately looking the picture of disdainful
strength, as she lay in Sydney harbour and “overpeered the
petty traffickers,” was bobbing and curtseying to the waves in the
most abject manner ; and small blame to her, for a nasty cross sea
was dancing round her like a skilful boxer, and seemed to be saying,
“Now,where will you have it?” As a matter of fact, she “had it” in
most places. The consequences of these unpleasant circumstances
were soon manifest; and the crowd of “fair women and brave men”
I had noticed on the quarter-deck melted gradually away, and did
not re-appear, with few exceptions, till our arrival at Melbourne.
One extraordinary acrobatic feat of our stout ship, which I
heard described as a combination of pitch and roll, played havoc
in the cook’s galley, and, in a second, the place was ankle deep in
entrees, apple sauce, ducks, tomatoes, fowls, jellies, stuffing,
puddings, and expressions which I do not understand, but believe
to be French. That night, and the following night, sleeping was out
of the question, the fact of standing first on one’s head and then on
one’s heels being sufficient to account for insomnia in ordinary
individuals, even had this not been supplemented by the din of
the storm, the clatter of loose buckets and other objects, the
crash of crockery, and last, but not least, the jabber, jabber,
jabber, of the Lascars. By the way, why will Lascars yell at each
other on the most trivial points at the rate of five thousand miles
an hour, and in a tone of voice so blood-thirsty and truculent ?
During the first night, the “Sutlej,” while amusing herself
by rolling the boats on her hurricane deck under water, rolled one
of them completely away. But, in spite of the rolling, we all
noticed that the “ Sutlej ” recovered herself quickly and easily,
and did not hang fire after a big lurch in that hesitating way
which makes apprehensive people shudder. The fact that we
thought ourselves getting along famously when we were going
five knots, and that, for one day, our run only averaged a trifle
over three knots an hour, will show what we had to contend
against. At last the storm abated, and on Saturday evening we
sighted a pilot schooner, which seemed to be admirably handled.


There are two of these vessels at Melbourne, the “ Mavis ”
and the “ Rip,” which cruise about a fortnight alternately, and
may be met with a long way from port. We took the pilot on
board, and, about midnight, dropped anchor off Williamstown,
Probably few passengers on board had experienced such
stormy weather before, and I believe that several of the officers,
like Mark Twain’s captain, “ had hardly ever seen it rougher.”
We have every prospect now of fine weather, so good-bye to
cross seas and cyclones, and here’s to an even keel for our
concerts, dances, charades, waxworks, theatricals, and the
numerous other amusements to which we arc looking forward.
GENERAL NEWS.
Possibly a hint to the Amusement Committee would give the
company a chance of seeing a good addition to the fun they
propose to furnish, in the shape of an Obstacle Race, the “talent,”
we feel certain, would make this fast and furious.
Pressure upon our space prevents us from reviewing the
fashions this week, but our special correspondent is now engaged
upon that interesting subject ; suffice it to say that the costumes
of the “Ladies” become more recherches everyday.
We are pleased to remark how the vice of gambling is con-
spicuous by its absence from this vessel.
A deputation of the passengers, accompanied by a reporter
from our office, interviewed the engineering staff of this vessel on
the morning of Thursday. They report that they were received
with every courtesy, and that they found the machinery in faultless
condition and working admirably. During their visit the engines
were slowed down for half-an-hour, as one of the cylinders gave
signs of heating. We understand that the delay was in favour
of one of our elders on board, for it enabled the number he
purchased in the “ Calcutta ”to win the pool. The deputation’s
arduous duties were not completed till the rising of the sun.
The gallant representative of H, M. Army has been busily
engaged for the last two days in defacing the Queen’s imago and
superscription. Personally we are inclined to condone this crime,
for the sake of the ladies who decidedly admire the charming-
ornaments into which he transforms the ordinary bob and ornate
florin.


CONCERT.
The event of the week came off on Saturday, Ist May, in the
shape of a concert, which took place on the upper deck under very
unfavourable circumstances, for, unfortunately, a very stiff
breeze was blowing. Mrs. Sands opened the concert with a
brilliant pianoforte solo, which was well received; this was
followed by a song by Mr. Walker, our able choir-master. After
this, a trio, “ La Scrcnata,” (for the piano, voice and violin) Mrs.
Hamilton singing with much feeling ; this secured an encore, and
the second verse was repeated. After this came a duet, sung by
Messrs. Lamond and Rowlands, “ The Larboard Watch; ” it is a
pity that such able musicians should have had no opportunity of
practising their parts, this duet was evidently not practiced, as
the parts were not kept as distinct as the composer intended, but
we hope to hear these gentlemen again in some song which they
know better.
Capt. Speedy then gave a recitation, “The taking of Perins;”
his style is so well known that comment is superfluous, but,
unfortunately, the acoustic imperfections of the concert room
rendered it almost impossible for those at the back to appreciate
the “ bon mots ” of the recitation.
Miss Drinan here followed with a solo on the piano, with
finished execution.
This finished the first part of the programme, and, after the
interval, our indispensable and willing pianist, Mrs. Sands, opened
with a pianoforte solo, which was performed with much delicacy
of touch and execution; this pleasurable performance brought
applause from all sides. Then followed a song by Mr. Briggs,
which was greatly and deservedly applauded, it being delivered in
a masterly style. After this, Mrs. Johnston took the voice part in
a piano, voice and violin trio; to her we ought to award the palm
of the evening, her rendering of this piece leaving nothing to be
desired, it was unanimously encored, and, if possible, she eclipsed
herself in the “repeat.” Mr. Burd and his banjo were received
with much applause, which was doubled at the termination of the
performance; he was of couse encored, and delighted his audience
with the ever welcome strains of “Home, sweet home.” Mr
Sands terminated the performance with a song, after which the
audience dispersed. Too much credit cannot be given to Mrs.
Sands for so ably accompanying, and she has our heartfelt
gratitude. We hope that as time goes on some other talent will
be revealed, so that it will not fall entirely on one to undertake
the arduous and thankless task of conducting each concert.
Wagner,


CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor of the “Sutlej Argus.”
Dear Sir, —All honour to you and your confreres for under-
taking the onerous duties and responsibilities of the newspaper.
To ensure success, it must be conducted on a broad basis and not
become the organ of a clique. It should be cosmopolitan and aim
at the comfort and well-being of all. You deserve, and doubtless
will receive, the hearty co-operation of every one who can, in any
measure, contribute to the general weal. I sincerely hope the
venture will be attended with the happiest results to the public
and subscribers, and to the proprietors. Every one knows,
unfortunately, that life on ship board often becomes a nursery for
slander and uncharitableness, and the “Argus,” with its hundred
eyes, will detect the first symptoms —if such should arise—and
slay them.
It will be a medium for the redress of grievances ; it will
prevent the erection of class barriers; and it may call forth the
latent energies of some of the younger portion of the community,
to express their thoughts in prose or verse. If well conducted,
the paper will, I am sure, contribute largely to make the voyage
pleasant, and leave behind happy memories of the time we spent
together. My object in writing, however, is to make two or three
suggestions:
Ist—That the dinner hour be altered from seven to six; as it
is, there is very little time for amusement. Most of the
gentlemen like to enjoy the weed after dinner, and when
that is over it is well nigh time to retire for the night;
besides, the alteration might secure to the poor jaded
stewards, whose work is never done, an additional hour’s rest.
I am told that the Captain was good enough to say that it
rests entirely with the Passengers, and, if they desire it, the
alteration can be made at once.
9 n d—That a Debating Club be formed, and that part of one
evening in the week be given up to open discussion. The
meeting to be free to all.
3rd—That a Prize be given weekly for the best Conundrum, to
be published in your columns. I will give the first half-
sovereign, the only stipulation being that the decision be left
to five gentlemen, to be named by yourself.
I am, Sir, yours, ect.,
Alpha.


Mr. Editor, — The enclosed lines have a far less claim to
merit than they have to originality. If they had not, they should
never have seen the inside of this box.
The allusions to the doctor and purser are not in the least of
a derisive nature, and it would require a very long stretch of the
imagination indeed to construe them into anything that reflected
in any way on the respective capabilities of these two estimable
gentlemen.
Trusting that my small contribution may find favour in your
sight, amongst the many sparkling emanations of wit and
wisdom, from the brains of more brilliant contributors with which
you will be beset, I beg to subscribe myself,
Yours most initially,
H. W. K.
THE ALPHABETICAL NAUTICAL RHYMES,
A stands for author :
The doggerel bard,
Who declares rhyming correctly
To be—for him—much too hard.
So let B stand for the bell,
Which at mealtimes they ring,
And its tones to the hungry
Doth sweet pleasure bring.
Q stands for the captain
Of tins very good ship,
And we all hope to make in her
A nice pleasant trip.
Q stands for the doctor,
A Scotchman—l grant
Of most ills he may cure you,
But of sea-sickness he can’t!
p’s for the engines,
That go night and day,
Driving ns on along
Neptune’s highway.
P stands for the flirting
That all sea's so much done,
And its all very well
When it’s only in fun.
Q stands for the guns,
There they are, in full view,
On the hurricane deck,
And they number just two.


MR. J. C. LONG.
This is the Chief Officer, Mr. J. C. Long,
For whom our regard is sincere and strong.




H stands for the hours
Tol(Ie)d off on the bell —
Tliis pun’s a well-known one :
I’m afraid it won’t tell.
| stands for the ills——
And they’re not a few —
That always attend us,
When on the deep blue.
J stands for the jokes
That now and then go round ;
Though, in nine out of ten,
No point can be found.
K stands for the kitchen,
Where presides our French cook;
What a power he has o’er us,
Through his cookery book.
L stands for the ladies,
Of whom I cannot say more
Than that all men of honour
Should them respect —or adore.
J\y) ’s for the maidens—
The charming young things ;
To make them real angels,
They but need the wings !
JSJ stands for the news
In this paper contained ;
Now, from whom, how, or where,
Could it have been obtained ?
O stands for the officers
Who keep the bridge look- out well;
Cut they must not —they dare not
Lool at a passenger “gal.”
p stands for the purser,
Who doth small pictures paint—
Who can spin a “ tall ” yarn
With the air of a saint.
Q stands for the questions
sailors are asked,
And to answer them, sometimes
They are most sorely tasked.
P stands for the run
That each day, at noon,
Will be found written up —
Near the music saloon.


S stands for the “Sutlej”
Our good old ship’s name ;
A true ocean racer,
Of East India fame,
stands for the time
That passes so slow,
When people have in them
No fun and no go !
(J stands for the union
That Gladstone would sever,
’Tween England and Ireland,
But we English say, never !
V’s for the vessels
We occasionally see,
Bound on a voyage
To some foreign “ countree.”
w ’s for the wind
That’s been roaring so wildly,
But soon we shall have it
Blowing gently and mildly.
And X Y Z for anything—
Anything you please;
For myself, I’d quite enough to do
With the A B C’s. H. W. K.
CONUNDRUMS, &c.
If three cats kill three rats in three minutes, how many rats will
one hundred cats kill in one hundred minutes ? A?iswer, 3333 J.
What is mind ? —No matter.
What is matter ?—Never mind.
If the ocean went dry, what would old Neptune say ?
EPIGRAM.
“ The little world we have on board
Was very much amused,
At certain little artifices
Certain people used,
To gain what—with any sense—
They surely might have known,
Could never be obtained,
With manners like their own.”
Ansivers will be published in our next issue.
Why is it impossible to build a house at the falls of Niagara ?
Because dam it you can’t,


Mr. Node’s b. c., “ Auctioneer.”. ..
Sts.
... 9
Lbs.
0... Devon.
„ Moke’s b. c., “The Lamb.”...
... 9
0... Sample.
„ Rosblbaf’s b. c., “ Honour.”
... 9
0... Lavender.
„ Wall’s b. h., “ Kerr.”
... 8
12... Argus.
„ Stone’s c. c., “ The Clog.” ...
... 8
11... Queens.
„ Ardyre’s b. c., “ Rambler.”
... 8
H...Petre.
„ Roe’s b. c., “ Landless.” ...
... 8
10... Collins.
„ Brett’s c. h., “Old Dog.” ...
... 8
10...Uncle.
„ Comb’s' c. c., “ Whiskey.” ...
... 8
10... Walkers.
„ Peek’s q. c., “ Keepsake.” ...
... 8
3... Find.
„ Prince’s bk. h., “Pasha.” ...
... 8
10... Longfellow
„ Land’s b. c., “Papyrus.” ...
... 7
0... Sydney.
SPORTING NEWS.
Mr. Editor, —This week I have pleasure in giving your
numerous readers a list of the probable starters and jockeys for the
Great “ Sutlej ” Handicap,
to be run at the next meeting of the S. A. J. C., viz. :
„ Johnston’s blk. c., “Commander.”... 6 o.. .Abdallah.
There may be a few alterations before the event takes place,
and one or two may drop in to swell the list.
The majority of the candidates have already been seen doing
their gallops, among which may be mentioned the two lower
weighted colts ; Papyrus took my fancy by his free and easy
style of going j whilst the other (Commander), with a little more
exercise, and now he has his shoes off, we hope to see him improve
greatly. They both have a good show at the wights. Auctioneer
may be said to be in the best condition at present, and, unless he
is overtrained by the day of the race, he will be hard to beat.
The Lamb went a little lame after yesterday’s gallop.
Honour has been doing good work in company; Argus is rather
big, as may be said of Rambler and the Clog, the former seems a
trifle stiff in his gallops. Landless has been heavily worked, but
will, I think, come fit and sound to the post.
The dark horse, Old Dog, has not yet been seen moving; I
hear he is a beggar to go.
Whiskey being fit and sound, and the favourite jockey,
Walkers, up, I fancy him and Auctioneer the most, unless one of
the light weights effect a surprise; in which case, I think
Keepsake will be handy. In next week’s notes I hope to give the
betting on the race, books on the event not having yet been
opened. Peeping Tom,


ENIGMA.
Behold the brave o’er-hanging firmament;
Measureless mystery —infinite extent —
The panorama of the sky unfurls
A wilderness of stars and shining worlds.
I helped the great astronomers of old
Their pathless revolutions to unfold ;
Aided Copernacus, Trycho, Brahe,
The diagrams and inference to draw ;
Kclper and Newton—greater still in fame —
My slight assistance helped to do the same.
I not alone to science aid impart,
My presence also is allied to art;
Rubens, Corregio, Raphael, Angelo,
My use and value in perfection show.
And William Hogarth—crowned with homely glory —
Whose speaking-pictures tell a truthful story,
Touched with artistic inspiration warm,
Hath well portrayed on beauty’s graceful form ;
While modern artists revel in delight,
When I present their works to public sight.
I sprung from brain of old, the mind to move,
Like sage Minerva from the brain of Jove ;
Gods —Philosophers of highest worth,
Possessing loftliest thoughts—have given me birth.
Dante, Euripides, Cervantes—these,
Solemn or gay, have sought the world to please ;
Presenting me to charm, instruct, and bless,
In choice Italian, Greek, or Spanish dress.
I trip, with measured step, to Shakespeare’s songs ;
And tell, with pity, brave Othello’s wroxxgs ;
And with emphatic eloquence declare
The wise insanity of poor old Lear.
But how can I, in changing dress,
Hope honest hearts to win ?
Now right and true as righteousness—
Now sinuous as sin.
Defiantly I stand in battle’s deafening roar,
Or on the sea, or on the land,
When death’s winged missies poxxr ;
Ox-, with a friendly hand, the di’owning help ashore.
Behold me now on high,
O’er earth’s dark deeds I lower;
Beneath a clear or scowling sky*


I brave the tempter’s power,
On mortals tend a ready friend,
In pain or pleasure’s hour.
If you search in the air and find me not there,
Nor see me from mountains or tor,
Then try the south seas, or, let the place be
The Channel or wild Labrador.
With the murdering wretch on the gallows seen,
When he feels the final shock;
The welcome gift of a friend, 1 wean,
My herald the postman’s knock ;
And the proud delight of England’s Queen,
With her high ancestral stock.
I aid in great design the architect,
His loftly and consti’uctive art direct—
Whether expressed in Wren’s cathedral, or
In strength of navalpporer—thew r er —the ships of war.
Follow' me right and you’ll perceive me true,
The enigma’s thread like Adrienne’s clue,
And plainly as a schoolboy’s simple task,
I run before your eyes without a mask ;
When caught, if all my features you explore,
The old, familiar face you’ve seen before.
And, tho’ you may despatch me with a laugh,
Resurgam is my glorious epitaph ;
For when you throng once more the coloured plain,
I shall appear and run my course again. ,
Frederick Burrikgton, Exeter,
Answer: A Line


MARKET REPORT.
A healthy tone prevails in the money market. The com-
mencement of the week Avas characterised by a someAvhat heavy
drain on the pockets of the passengers, by the presentation of
their wine bills ; but nothing occurred to detract the confidence
Avhich generally prevailed. And the addition of several names to
the list of subscribers to the amusement fund, denotes the
existence of ample funds so far as gold is concerned.
Silver has been in good demand for general entertainment
purposes, and the enquiries have been satisfactorily responded to.
Hops. Are in great favour and increasing demand, more
especially bctAveen the hours of eight and ten p.m. With the
addition of fine Aveather it is confidently expected that a large
business Avill be done.
Cotton, A firm tone prevails for the manufactured article,
in the shape of pocket-handkerchiefs, among those passengers avlio
selected Glenelg pier for a promenade, on the occasion of their
visit to that place.
Flour. Consequent on the discovery of the immense supply
of “ rolls ” in possession of the ship, the market has become some-
Avhat Aveaker, and prices are less firm.
Wines. Port is the only article in which trade may be said
to have been prominent. An inclination in its favour displayed
by the good ship, “ Sutlej,” has developed a desire on the part of
the passengers to force the market in an opposite direction ; and
it is thought that speculation Avill be spirited during the forth-
coming Aveek.
NOTES.
We understand that a morning service is about to be
instituted in the saloon, at ten o’clock, and that it Avill consist of
short prayers and a hymn. The duration of the service Avill be
about ten minutes or a quarter-of-an-hour. We hope our Bishop
will have the pleasure of meeting full attendances.
An auction Avas held on the 27th hist., for the sale of drawings
on the ship’s run. It Avas remarkably Avell attended, and the
biddings Avere very spirited ; the amount of the pool resulting in
the high figure of fourteen pounds.
Great credit is due to the auctioneer, Mr. P. F. Bulteel, avlio
officiated on the occasion; supported, both “liberally” and
“literally,” by Messrs. Jardine and Lipscombe.


POEMS AND ESSAYS.
Not a stir in the air,
Not a stir in the sea,
But the “ Sutlej ” she rolled,
So unsteady was she.
On the deck there sat two—
There was no one else near;
That’s the number to woo,
When there’s no one to fear.
First he spoke of the wind,
And the weather, the tide,
Then she said, “ You are kind
To sit near by my side.”
So at last he was started
To say pretty things,
For this beauty he courted,
And from him wisdom he flings.
“My true love ! my cuckoo pet!!
Will you be mine ?”
She looked at him once,'
Then she sighed as she said—
“ I am feeling so sea-sick,
I must leave you for bed.”
But when next they met,
And a chance he had
To resume with his pet,
Confound it, “ up came her dad.”
The dad then he talked
About wine that was corked,
And of sausages porked ;
Oh ! such nonsense he talked.
Now the poor young lover
Was tired of his jaw,
So he gave up his “ love ”
To escape any more.
This moral, dear reader,
Please learn from me :
Take your chairs far away,
And let nobody see
The love that exists
Between a he and a she.
Above all, dear reader,
I earnestly pray,
The next time you flirt,
Choose a very fine day. Tennyson, June.


“MAL DE HER.”
Sea-sickness, as some of you may have found out,
Is hardly a thing to make merry about;
It’s all very well if you’re not ill yourself,
But when you’ve to be in a small narrow shelf,
That does duty for “ bed,” and continually feel
A cold perspiration all over you steal,
You wish that you never had left “ terra-firma,”
And list to the other sick passengers’ murmur.
It’s not at all pleasant I think you’ll agree,
At least, that’s the idea it impressed upon me ;
But what I considered the hardest to bear
Was, the man in my cabin did not seem to care ,
For, while the ship rocks and the waves roll around him,
He’s not only well, but he likes it—confound him !
He sits and looks at me—as much as to say,
“ There goes your last meal, your uneasy to-day !”
“ Uneasy, dear sir? I should just think lam!”
And the first word that comes to my lips is a d—m,
As I see my portmanteau waltz off with my boots,
And the ship gives a lurch and upsets my cheroots ;
For first she goes up and then down on the ocean,
And my body goes up and down too with the motion,
Excepting my stomach—that’s soon in my throat;
I wish I was out of this wretched boat.
The water conies in—but never goes out—
And half of my things are all floating about;
Well! if this is your “life on the ocean wave,”
I’d very much sooner be laid in my grave ;
For I’m sure that no purgatory —ever so bad—
Could be worse than the terrible dressing I’ve had.
“ Salop,


MAY 3rd, 188 G.
No. 2.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Messrs. Rowland, lipscombe, lamond & co. beg
to thank their numerous friends for past favours, and
hope to receive their further patronage. Sales as usual.
MESSRS. JARDINE & BULTEEL again beg to thank their
patrons for past favours and their liberal support, and
hope to enjoy a further continuance. A sale of mixed goods
will be held on Wednesday, at 11 o’clock a.m., and the usual
instructions from Messrs. Lipscombe and Keep are in hand.
“ttTANTED. —Will anyone inform me where the “Sutlej”
VV pinfold is situated, in order that the “ stray ” cattle may
be pounded 1 ?
EDITORIAL.
Our intentions arc not so much to offer questions for
argument’s sake, but rather to combine knowledge with amuse-
ment. These, we trust, will be found in our succeeding columns.
VVc will now allude to the state of affairs at home. We
cannot give the leading important features at full length, yet, we
feel sure that those of us who have been absent from England for
some time, still retain true British feelings, and we are sorry to
note that our fellow-countrymen are under the shadow of the
Grand Old Man, who has, unfortunately for the constitution, so
many followers, that we feel it our duty to point out to them the
unmistakcable errors their leader is making by his doubtful efforts
for the welfare of the Empire; the same tending speedily towards
disintegration. The errors we would point out centre in his weak
imbecile foreign policy, and his truckling to the home rule party.
We cannot too strongly condemn his acts as a statesman, and
his followers likewise, who must, we think, be devoid of that noble
sentiment — patriotism ; and we would now say to all: remember,
first be “ patriots,”—then “ politicians.”


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editors op the “Sutlej Argus.”
Gentlemen,—l am instructed, by the amusement committee
of the second-class passengers, to request the pleasure of your
company at an entertainment to be given this evening, in the fore
cabin, at eight o’clock. I have, also, to express the regret felt by
them at their inability to make a general invitation to the first-
class passengers, in consequence of the limited accommodation at
their disposal. Nothing would have given the committee greater
pleasure than to have returned the compliment so gracefully
paid to the second-class passengers, on Saturday last. I can assure
you, however, that it was thoroughly appreciated On behalf of the
committee, I am, Gentlemen, yours faithfully,
May lBB6. R- L. Davies.
Answer to R. L. Davies, Esq., Honorary Secretary, Amusement
Committee, Fore Saloon .
Dear Sir,— Your letter of to day’s date to hand, we have to
thank you for the especial honour tendered us, in the invitation to
be present at to-night’s entertainment, your committee have
prepared. We regret our inability to take advantage of the full
programme, having important duties elsewhere; however, one of
our staff will remain to take notes in full for publication.
We are, dear Sir, yours respectfully,
The Editors.
SPORTING NOTES.
Betting on the great “ Sutlej ”, Handicap during the week
has been very slack, on account of the counter attractions at
Colombo. However, a few of the leading cracks have been doing
very good work. On Wednesday, “Auctioneer,” “The Lamb,”
and “ Honour,” had a grand trial on the new course (now enclosed),
before a large number of spectators; all did remarkably well, and
pulled up sound. “ Auctioneer ” seemed all there when wanted,
and made a splendid finish. “ The Lamb ” seemed in grand fettle
as he was led out of his loose box. “ Honour ” was all that could
be expected. After the trial, the stable laid out a lot of money on
“Auctioneer,” to win a few thousands at 6 to 4 down to 5 to 4
taken and wanted; and, from the tone of the market, I fancy he
is the pick of the lot. I am sorry to say he has been a little bit
off since, but, with careful treatment by his trainer, has picked up
again wonderfully.


MR. T. G. GREENSMITH.
As fine a fellow as sails the sea,
Mr. Greensmith, our Second, you’ll find to be.




In consequence of this mishap, the other candidates have
improved their position in the market, and are now much on an
equal footing.
“Whiskey,” “Keepsake,” “Papyrus,” “Landless,”and others
have also had a lot of money entrusted to their care, and those I
have mentioned have been seen doing steady work. “ Com-
mander ” (Abdullah up) had a good five-furlong spin ; I notice he
has taken to shoes again.
I am sorry to see “ The Clog ” scratched, as I always had a
strong fancy to him, and so had a large number of others 1 know.
Peeping Tom.
NOTES BY THE WAY.
It was on board the P. & 0. S. S.—from Bombay bound for
London. A Bishop who had seen long service in the mission
fields of India was returning home to enjoy a well-earned holiday.
In order to gratify his Indian tastes, he procured a quantity of
specially prepared condiments for use on the voyage. At the
dinner-table there sat opposite to him a Yankee, who, with all the
nonchalance characteristic of his race, thus addressed the dignitary
of the church, “ I say, mister, I’d like to taste that there sarcc
o’ yourn.” No notice was taken of this request; our Yankee
cousin, not to be daunted, repeated it, thereupon, the Bishop
pushed across the table a gallipot containing the fiery compound,
and accompanied the action with the remark, “ I may as well
mention that this is private property, and docs not belong to the
ship.” The Yankee replied, “ Well, stranger, I guess it’s none the
worse for that,” and proceeded to help himself to a liberal supply.
Unfortunately, some portion of it took a wrong direction. The
Yankee turned red hi the face, there was a spitting, a spluttering
and coughing; tears coursed down his cheeks, and all eyes were
centred upon him; the waiters came to the rescue, one patted
his back, another fanned him, a third held aloft a tumbler of
water, and, fearing lest the victim was about to faint, dashed it
over his head and face. At length the poor fellow came to, and
gulping down his mortification at being placed in such a sorry
plight, thus charged his assailant, “ I guess you’re a minister—
one of th’ orthodox sort.” The Bishop meekly replied that he did
not know precisely what meaning his questioner attached to the
ternv orthodox, but he believed his teaching had always been in
accordance with the doctrines of the church. “Ah, well,” said the
Yankee, “ I heard tell of a lot of you fellows going around
preaching fire and brimstone, but, darn me, you’re the first in all
my bora days that I ever come across that carried samples.”
Alpha.


Mr. Mackintosh Moke ...
Mr. Lamond.
Mr. Eglantine Rosblbaf
Mr. Burd.
J ulia, Moke’s Avife ... ,..
... Miss McGowan.
Susan, a maid of all work
Miss Cockerell.
THEATRICALS.
Last Wednesday evening, the amusement committee treated
ns to a performance of the well-known farce, “ Turn him out,”
which turned out a great success. Space will not permit us to
enter into a detailed description of the plot, which is as amusing
as it is clever, and is one continued flow of merriment from the
time the curtain rises to the final tableau.
The following'is a list of the Dramatis Personce :—
Nicodemxis Nobbs, an itinerant vendor of juvenile toys,
Mr. Bultebl.
The stage was extremely Avell arranged, although the manage-
ment had evidently great difficulties to contend Avith in the Avay of
entrances and exits. Ho\veA T er, as far as the audience were
concerned, they Avere all that could be desired.
The ladies acted splendidly. Susan, avlio had evidently
expended much time and study on her part, Avas the most
fascinating “ maid of all work ” it has ever been our lot to see,
and acted with that ease and grace of manner so characteristic of
a finished actress, and a pretty Avoman. This Avas not an easy
part to play, and Mr. Nobbs Avas very fortunate to have such
an able exponent as Miss Cockerell.
Julia Avas divine ! and AA*ore a most bewitching bonnet, and
Ave felt very much surprised that her husband should care to
amuse himself at Scarbro’—but “ such is life.”
We heard some of the audience in the back seats complain
that occasionally they had some difficulty in hearing the dialogue,
but it Avas really no small tax upon the vocal poivers of the ladies to
make themselves heard, and Ave think they managed extremely
well.
Nicodemus Nobbs had a great deal to do and he did it Avell.
We may specially mention his rendering of the luncheon scene
Avhich Avas a Avonderfully realistic piece of acting. The audience
had never any difficulty in hearing him, even in the most remote
parts of the house—or rather ship.
His get-up Avas particularly good, and he Avas evidently quite
at home on the boards. We fancy that little “nip o’ summat
invigorating ” must have been very acceptable as turning people
out of the house, Avhen they object to go, and, Avhen the thermom-
eter is at eighty-fiA r e, must be rather exhausting Avork.


Mackintosh Moke—by the way, rather a thankless part —was
ably rendered by Mr. Lamond. We did not envy him his position
inside the trunk.
Mr. Roselcafs get-up was so good that it was impossible to
guess who he was. Ho had a most difficult part, rendered more
so by the lack of space ; his acting was excellent; and it was
eventually discovered that Mr. Burd was taking the paid.
- All the “ make-ups” were extremely good, and the piece went
off without any of those little contre-temps as a rule so numerous
in private theatricals. This w r as probably owing to the able stage
management.
CRICKET.
As cricket forms an important part of our day-light amuse-
ments, it may not be uninteresting to some of your readers to
have a description of some of the most prominet players. First
comes:
Captain Johnston, a most enthusiastic cricketer —up to a
certain point. A good bat, with strong defence and considerable
hitting powers. Bowls a little—and could field, but seldom tries,
as he generally has an engagement below' when not batting or
bowling.
Mr. Johnson, —a good all-round man, never tires and does
his duty at all points cheerfully and well. lie shines particularly,
how r evei’, as a bat.
Mr. Simpson,—a first-class cricketer, good in all departments
of the game, and no team would be complete without him.
Mr. Walker, —a splendid field, the best in the ship; often
shows more daring than discretion, and suffers in consequence.
He has been known to play the captain a single w icket match, and,
after making five runs and knocking three balls into the sea, he
threw the bat after them, destroying the captain’s chance; the
result being, champagne at the captain’s expense.
Mr. Young, —a good bat and field; very hard hitter and a
sure run getter. Invaluable to any team.
Mr. Lewis, —the wficket-keeper of the ship, and does his work
well. Has good defence with the bat, but wants powei’.
Mr. Dixon, —our champion under-hand bow’ler, works very
hard, frequently to the detriment of his clothing. Has the best
average. Bats a little, and has been known to make runs.


Mr. Thompson, —the best round-arm bowler we have, has
been wonderfully successful. A stubborn batsman, difficult to get
rid of, and, when well set, makes runs. Thinks he can keep
wickets, but can’t.
Mr. Jamieson, —a good all-round man that yon cannot put
in a wrong place; not brilliant in any department of the game,
but in his youth must have been a regular dab.
Mr. Tetley, —a plucky player, either batting or in the field,
but wants finish. Always a useful man for any captain to pick.
Mr. Rowland, —a rising player, but wants practice ; most
energetic in all departments of the game, and will make his mark
before we reach London —probably in the English Channel.
Mr. Rundle, —the colt, balls a good round-arm ball, but
soon tires ; indifferent field, and wants power as a bat.
There are other occasional players, but until they are seen
more frequently in the field, no opinion can be formed of their
abilities.
It is under consideration whether we shall challenge the
Parsee or Australian Eleven, for a match at Lords, on arrival.
Umpire.


GRAND CRICKET MATCH,
On the “Sutlej” Quarter-Deck, Friday, 7th May, 1886.
MARRIED versus SINGLE.
MARRIED.
First Innings : —
Captain Johnston, bowled by Bulteel ... ... ... 6
Judge Nolan „ ~ Dixon... ... ... ... 0
Dixon, caught by Jamieson ... 0
Bishop Parry „ „ Dixon, caught by Jamieson ... 0
Mr. Johnson „ „ Dixon... ... ... ... 0
~ Simpson „ ~ Bulteel ... ... ... 4
~ Sands „ ~ Bulteel .. ... ... 0
„ Young „ „ Bidteel ... ... ... 0
„ Blackwell „ „ Thompson 1
„ Tetley ~ • „ Bulteel ... ... ... 0
Major Speedy ~ „ Bulteel ... ... ... 0
Mr. Cunningham „ „ Bulteel ... ... ... 0
No Balls 1
Total 12
Second Innings: —
Captain Johnston, bowled by Dixon, caught by Walter .~ 5
Mr. Johnson „ „ Dixon „ „ Jamieson ... 0
„ Simpson ~ „ Walker ... ... ... 16
„ Young „ „ Bulteel ... ... • 0
Bishop Perry „ ~ Bulteel ... 0
Mr. Blackwell „ „ Bulteel ... ... ... 1
„ Sands „ „ Bulteel ... ... ... 0
„ Tetley „ „ Walker ... ... ... 12
„ Cunningham „ „ Walker, caught by Walter ... 0
Judge Nolan „ „ Walker ... ... ... 0
Major Speedy „ „ Walker ... ... ... 0
No Balls 6
Total 40
Grand Total 52


SINGLE.
First Innings :
Mr. Jamieson, bowled by Simpson ... ... ... ... 4
„ Lewis, stumped by Blackwell, caught by Simpson ... 0
„ Dixon, bowled by Simpson ... ... ... ... 7
„ Bulteel „ „ Simpson ... ... ... ... 0
„ Walter ~ „ Simpson 0
„ Walker „ „ Johnson ... ... ... ... 4
~ Thompson „ „ Johnson, hit wicket ... ... 11
„ Rowland „ „ Captain, caught by Simpson ... 1
„ Buchanan „ „ Captain ... ... ... ... 0
„ Bundle „ „ Simpson '... ... ... ... 2
„ Beamish, bowled and caught Simpson ... ... ... 2
No Balls G
Total 37
Second Innings : —
Mr. Beamish, bowled by Johnson ... ... ... ... 0
~ Bundle „ „ Johnson, caught by Simpson ... 1
~ Buchanan „ „ Johnson, stumped by Lewis ... 0
~ Rowland „ ~ Johnson ... ... ... ... 1
„ Thompson, ~ ~ Simpson ... ... ... ... 3
„ Walker ~ „ Captain, caught by Tetley ... 10
„ Walter „ „ Johnson 7
„ Bulteel „ „ Johnson 0
„ Dixon ~ „ Johnson .". ... 0
„ Lewis „ „ Johnson 1
„ Jamies „ „ Johnson, caught by Young ... 1
No Balls 4
Total 28
Grand Total 65


CHARLES JAMES WALKER.




ROBERT SANDS.




CART. SPEEDY,
As a Haddendoa Chief of the Soudan,
In all the world there’s but one Capt. Speedy,
Who amuses, cheers, and helps us when “seedy.”




Blue Beard ...
... Captain Speedy
Sister Anne
... Miss McGowan.
Fatima...
Miss Oxley.
MRS. JARLEY’S WAXWORKS.
Ox Tuesday afternoon it was announced, to the surprise and plea
sure of the passengers, that a show of waxworks would be exhibited
on the quarter-deck that evening. It had not previously been
known on the ship that so celebrated a person as Mrs. Jarley was
on board with her magnificent collection of models. In due
course the entertainment came off; but before the curtain was
drawn back the proprietress came forward and explained that
it was but, the day previous she had put in an appearance.
She made an apology for only showing a few of the articles in
her collection, having, as she explained, no less than 1,700
facsimiles from life in the hold, but was only allowed to have these
few up. One passing remark is due here to the arrangement of the
deck and stage. The latter was most tastily contrived, hung and
festooned with flags, and lit by a row of foot-lights. Mr. Long,
our first officer, the author and executor of this work, is deserving
of the utmost credit for the harmonious and artistic blending of
colour and light, which greatly added to the effect of the show.
At the last moment another set of figures had been brought
up out of the hold, and called forth great applause, —a representa-
tion of our gracious Queen, with ladies in waiting, and John Brown
standing behind her. This closed the show proper, but Mrs. Jarley
had one more wonder in store. The figures were all paired off, and
then to the tune of a polka all commenced to dance. Thomas
grasped his mistress’ hand, and joined with the models in the whirl
as the curtains fell. The warm approval of the company was
amply attested by the plaudits which greeted the last scene, and
after the curtain was drawn. Too much praise cannot be given
to Mrs. Jarley and her assistants for the successful way in which
the show was conducted from first to last, and the company
remain indebted to them for one of the pleasantest evenings yet
spent on board.
The models were represented by :
„. (Mrs. Simpson, Miss Cockerell,
Flve Wms - |misses Buchanan, Miss Fleming.


Ajax ..
... Captain Speedy.
Lady Macbeth...
... Mr. Burd.
General Burnaby
... Mr. Young.
Family Ghost...
... Miss Cockerell.
Pears' Soap
... Messrs. Keep & Burd.
Ned Kelly
... Mr. Clogstone.
Policeman
... Mr. Beamish.
Frenchman
... Mr. Lamond.
The Queen
... Mrs. Sadlier.
Maids — Same as Bluebeard
s Wives.
John Brown ...
... Captain Speedy.
Mrs. Jar ley
... Mr. Bulteel.
Boy
.. Mr. Oliver.
FASHIONS ON BOARD R. M. S. “SUTLEJ.”
My dear Alice, —I have not forgotten my promise to write
and give you some idea of the fashions on board ship, but have
been waiting until the weather should become settled, and all the
passengers appear on deck. The last few days have been calm and
warm, and I fancy that all now prefer the deck to the cabins.
I have noticed some pretty dresses of light coloured cotton
materials ; one or tw T o of that pretty spotted muslin, trimmed with
lace. Very few white dresses have appeared as yet, for, though I
think most people prefer them, they so soon become soiled on
board ship, that a fresh one would be needed every day, and so
long as husbands and fathers continue to talk of luggage , it would
be impossible to carry about a sufficient supply.
Some ladies still wear thick stuff dresses. I suppose they are
waiting for this terribly warm weather, we are told, is in store for
us, and will then feel the greater benefit of cool attire so much
the more by contrast.
Several large straw hats, trimmed with flowers and ribbons,
or muslin and lace, have made their appearance lately; but I fancy
that those ladies who wear tight or close-fitting hats, with veils,
are really the wiser, for the glare from the water is what destroys
the complexion. Most ladies, however, when they come to sea,
make up their minds to being sun-burnt, and it soon passes off.
I cannot understand why some ladies w ear aprons, unless, indeed,
it is to make them feel more at home. A good many pretty
house-dresses are worn, though some ladies, even in this exhausting
weather, are energetic enough to don high-laced or buttoned
boots,


I have noticed and admired several very prettily-shaped feet
on deck, —yon remember my weakness for pretty feet.
Gloves of all sorts are worn, for many think board ship a
good place to use up half-worn gloves. Mittens are also to be
seen; they certainly are cooler than gloves, and save the hands a
little ; other ladies sacrifice appearance to comfort, and have their
hands free.
Parasols are not used as much as I should have expected,
indeed I have seen only one, that a very ordinary garden sun-
shade. Nearly all ladies now dress for dinner—some in evening,
others just in walking dresses. Black is most generally used ;
and there are some very pretty costumes in satin and lace, net,
and other materials, trimmed generally with bugles.
Both the deck and saloon look much brighter, now that our
ladies have recovered from the unfortunate first effects of a
voyage, and can pay more attention to appearances.
The hair is generally worn high ; it is cooler than those
basket plaits, and not so much trouble to do.
The evening entertainments on deck give plenty of scope for
taste in different styles of head coverings. Some wear lace, others
light woollen shawls of light or bright colours, and others, again,
woollen caps. Ido not admire the latter very much, and think,
on warm evenings, they cannot be very comfortable. The light
shawls are really very becoming, and make a pretty face (and for
pretty faces we are not wanting), appear still more bewitching.
Now, just a word or two about the gentlemen, whose toilets
are very amusing in this warm weather.
Some appear in suits of flannel, with coats unbuttoned and
those very unbecoming flannel collars; others in white linen or
drill suits, with gaily-coloured cummerbunds, which can hardly be
cool, but are certainly pictuesque.
It is amusing to see such airy garments surmounted by a
thick tweed cap or felt hat. I have only noticed one gentleman
in a neat straw sailor hat, though one or two of the older and
more sensible, wear large straw hats, which, though not becoming,
must be cool.
Though our ladies have energy enough to dress for dinner in
appropriate costumes, the gentlemen do not seem to think it
necessary,—they really are very lazy in this matter.
Now, I think, dear, you must be quite tired of me, as I
certainly am of writing, so adieu.
If I do not feel too lazy when this hot weather we are
promised comes, I may write again and give you a few more ideas
of dress and fashions on board of the “ Sutlej./ —Yours, Ac.,
Madge


SUNDRIES.
Amongst the many show-places to which visitors are con-
ducted in Colombo the residence of Arabi Pasha occupies a fore-
most position. The desire to see and converse with a man who
has caused such a commotion in Egyptian affairs, and whose name
will be handed down to posterity as the disturber of the peace of
Europe, is very natural, more particularly as a visit to the banished
General is considered a compliment rather than an intrusion.
During the stay of the “ Sutlej ” at Colombo one of our cor-
respondents accompanied a party of gentlemen from Victoria who
were anxious to pay their x-espects to the illustrious Egyptian.
On their arrival at the house they were conducted by one of
the servants to a pavilion in the garden, where they were shortly
afterwards joined by Arabi, who received them most graciously,
and entered into an animated conversation, which lasted about ten
minutes. On the departure of the visitors the Pasha shook hands
most warmly with each member of the party, and expressed himself
as highly pleased with the visit. Before leaving our correspondent
obtained Arabics autograph, written both in Arabic and English.
As the Argus is intended to be a medium of instruction as
well as amusement, we have much pleasure in publishing the
following items, which may justly be styled
“CURIOSITIES IN NATURAL HISTORY.”
Ls£. Queensland Oysters. —Some of these succulent bivalves
have recently been discovered of an immense size, and have been
forwarded to the Queensland Court in the Indian and Colonial
Exhibition. The specimens selected average from 10 to 15 cwt.
each, and will, doubtless, excite the envy and admiration of the
lovers of those dainties.
2nd. Instances of Longevity.-—- A gentleman living at
Toronto has attained the ripe age of 184 years, and is in full
possession of his faculties. He lives on one meal a day, and is
very fond of gardening. —Another gentleman, residing in Cali-
fornia, is 132 years old, and enjoys the most robust health. It is
said of him that the only occasion on which he shed tears was
when General Washington refused to allow him to fight, because
he was too old.
3rd. Gigantic Tree in New Zealand. —This monarch of
the forest measures 42 feet in diameter, and is increasing in bulk
each year.
In reference to the oysters, we are informed that one was
found so large as to resist the efforts of the strongest tackle to
remove it from its native bed.
The accuracy of the above statements is vouched for by a
Queensland colonist, who, it is almost needless to say, has been a
great traveller, and is now on his way to visit his native land.
He is known amongst his fellow-passengers as “ The Professor.”


IN THE CABIN.
In the cabin, oh ! my darling,
When the lights swing to and fro,
And you hear the gentle stewardess
Softly come and softly go ;
When the passengers’ complexions
Turn to hues not known before,
Will you think of me and love me
As you did upon the shore 1
In the cabin, oh ! my darling,
Think not bitterly of me,
Though I rushed away and left you
In the middle of your tea ;
For I felt an inward something,
Struggling, striving to be free ;
. It was best I left you then, dear,
Best for you and best for me.—
From • c Sutlej Gazette ” of November . 188Jf.,
CALCUTTA SWEEPS.
Last week we had two “Calcutta Sweeps,” promoted by
Messrs. Lipscombe and Keep. Mr. Bulteel made a very able
auctioneer, and created much amusement amongst the buyers.
On the first day, Wednesday, the bidding started brisk, but
showed a rapid decline before the finish. No. 265 being the first
number put up for sale was, after much spirited bidding, knocked
down to Mr. Cunningham for 10/6 ; this, curiously enough, proved
to be winning number, and he secured the pool, £l3 12s. 6d.,
14s. having been previously deducted for the amusement fund.
The second day, Friday, an important alteration was made,
making three prizes instead of one (ten above the winning number
being second, and ten under being third prize), thus affording
more interest to the purchasers of the higher and lower numbers,
by this means a larger pool was obtained. Mr. Tetley secured the
first prize, £lO ; Mr. Jardine the second, £3 155.; and the third
of £1 10s. was carried off by Mr. Tetley ; Ave were pleased to see
first and third falling to him for he Avas a most spirited buyer.
It is anticipated that that there will be three sales each week, and
Ave hope the “ Calcutta Sweeps ” will always receive as much
attention and patronage as heretofore.— Silent Joe.


STRAY SHOTS from “Pop-Gun.”
That a Fancy Ball in the Rod Sea is out of place.
That it should be postponed till cooler weather.
That the thanks of the passengers, as expressed by Captain
Johnson to the Committee of Amusements, and especially to
Captain Speedy, are well merited.
That the Committee should be unanimously re-elected.
That the donkey riders at Aden should send in theii
entrances for the Suez Handicap (“ catch weights”).
That more squashes have been consumed this passage than
any previous one.
That the Editors consider they have not met with a fair
share of the above.
That the owners of chairs on the starboard side of the hurri-
cane deck can seldom find them vacant.
That it is a pity Abdoolah is encouraged on the quarter-deck.
That some people are fond of taking half-an-hour in the baths.
That the “ Great Sutlej ” Handicap is postponed indefinitely !
indefinitely!
That a duel is being arranged at Suez ; cock-tails for two ;
sponge-cakes the weapons ! ! !


AT ® /' ft
/ !
/ I i
Jo u | I
I ! *
SURGEON GRANT.
Our amiable Doctor his post fulfils,
In soothing our sickness and healing ills.




MAY 19th, 1886.
No. 3.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST, last night, the following prescription ;
2 ounces Sense.
4 „ Temper.
6 „ Taste.
8 „ Discretion.
"JJV3UND, this morning, remedy for the above.
EDITORIAL.
As yet we have made remarks upon our voyage of merely a
passing nature. We would now allude more especially to the
exceptionally enjoyable passage we have had thus far together.
Enjoyable from many causes, but chiefly, we think, through the
able efforts of our energetic Committee of Amusements, whose
exertions have produced the many interesting programmes of
entertainment, carried out in a manner which we cannot too highly
praise We must not forget a good reason for this success, arising, as
it does, from the pleasing fact that the citizens of the “ Sutlej ”
collectively have exhibited that most charming of virtues, Good
Nature, and that there runs through the ship’s company a strong
esprit de corps rarely, unfortunately, witnessed, for we regret that
“ cliqueism,” that destroyer of all harmony on board a vessel, has
not yet been stamped out even in the P. and 0. service, hence our
gratification to be able to write in such laudatory terms is only
excelled 'in witnessing the results which are recounted in our
columns/ In rough or calm, in wind or rain, our passengers have
been dutiful to duty. On shore, in Colombo or Aden alike, wherever
we met a “ Sutlej ite,” this fact was realised, in seeing everyone
wearing bright and happy smiles of pure pleasure, proving the
unanimity existing amongst us. When we close our columns and
review the voyage, its pleasures and disappointments, we trust
that the “ What has been ” has realised our ideas of the “ What
might have been.”


A DISCOVERY.
A few days since a gentleman called at our office, in breathless
haste, to inform ns that he had made a ■wonderful discovery.
At the time of his appearance we were very busy, but his
first words were sufficiently striking to induce us to hear his full
statement; accordingly, we rung for our express quill-driver, who
writes shorthand, and instructed him to take down a verbatim
account of what the gentleman had to disclose; our readers will
please understand that this is a condensed report, but we have
omitted nothing of importance. The discovery consists of a
valuable deposit of coal within twenty miles of the city ; our
informant says it is nothing less than a mountain of coal, being
fifteen miles long, seven broad, and averaging six thousand feet in
height; he states that he has prospected it from end to end, and
from side to side, and from bottom to top, and he is perfectly
satisfied his estimate is within the mark; that he has run a
tunnel into it about a mile long, and there can be no doubt of the
enormous quantity which lies embedded; he further states it is
so easy of access that the cost of it will be reduced to a minimum.
We w r ere very much interested in this communication, and have
asked him to bring us a good fair sample, that we may judge of
its quality; meanwhile, we may indulge in a reverie as to the
probable benefits which will accrue, both to the city and the
country at large, if the statements should be substantiated;
think of the awful sacrifice of human life from explosions, which
are so frequent, from impure air and from accidents in descending
such great depths beneath the surface of the earth; think of the
number of wives made widows, and children orphans, every year,
from the same cause •, if this discoveiy proves to be a veritable
reality, all such risks will be avoided, and an immense gain in the
preservation of human lives will be effected; think of the vast
accumulation of wealth which will result from this discovery;
our informant, from a rough calculation, estimates that at the
present rate of consumption, there will be sufficient for the
necessities of every civilized country in the w r orld, for tw r enty
centuries at least; this fact, combined with others, viz.:—that
the deposit is so readily obtainable, and is so close to the sea
board, will bring the cost of production within one fourth of the
present rate; think of the magnificent fleet of merchant ships
which our country will command in order to convey this article of
export to foreign lands ; think of the number of men which will
be employed in this vast trade, of the great impetus which will be
given to all branches of our commerce, by the sale of this valuable
commodity in such gigantic proportions ; the more we look at the
picture which opens up before us and the longer we think of the
incalculable wealth which will roll into the coffers of the state, the


more we feel our incompetency to do justice to the mighty theme;
and so, wiping the perspiration from our editorial brow, we await
with what patience we can command the next appearance of our
estimable friend, who, by his discovery, has opened up such a
vista of greatness to our wondering eyes.
N.B.—Just as we are going to press, our worthy friend has
turned up with a huge mass of solid black coal, and we are
entranced. In the short time at our disposal we apply a few tests;
It is of a clear shining black; is in layers like every other coal;
it has the marks of leaves embedded in the strata; when broken
it splits exactly as coal does; it looks like coal; it feels like coal;
it smells like coal; we even had the curiosity to taste it and it
tastes like coal; in short, it is in almost every respect like the
coal in household use. The only point of difference we can
discover is a veiy slight one —it won't burn.
THE BARRIER RANGES SILVER MINES,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
These Mines, which are situated about 700 miles from
Sydney, 800 miles from Melbourne, and 350 miles from Adelaide,
just inside the borders of New South Wales, have lately come
prominently forward before the public, on account not only of
their vast extent, but of their unusual richness.
The ranges, which are about thirty miles wide, consist of a
series of low rough hills, covered with low Mulga trees and scrub,
run in a north easterly direction, right up to the Queensland
border, and show very prominently to the traveller, before reaching
them, the country for many miles, on each side being level plains
of great extent.
About twelve years ago, it was known that silver lead ore
existed in considerable quantities, but on account of the great
difficulty to be encountered in the way of transport to Adelaide,
which is the nearest seaport town of any importance, the poorness
of that class of ore, the extremely barren and dry nature of the
country, it was given up as unprofitable, until about two and half
years ago, when a small piece of silver ore of great richness was
promiscuously picked up by a lucky gold digger, on his way back
to Mount Browne from Adelaide, after he had the usual good time of
it there; he sent the ore down to Adelaide to be assayed, and received


the wonderful return of 10,000 ounces of silver to the ton of ore.
This seemed to him to be rather too good to be true, so he sent
another piece down, meantime keeping a look out for more stuff
of a similar nature. In the course of a fortnight the result of the
second piece arrived, it having been anxiously waited for by him
and some of his mates. This result was 12,000 ounces of silver to
the ton of ore, which made them begin to think silver mining
better than gold mining ; and the news having got wind, a regular
rush set in; quiet, steady-going people got the fever, and began
to dream of untold wealth ; and, in a short time, the lonely, dry,
dusty road from Adelaide presented a very animated and lively
appearance, reminding one very much of a road leading to a
country fair. In a short time, a very large number of people,
full of hope, if of nothing else, were scattered over the
country, much to the wonderment and consternation of the
rock wallaby and other denizens of this hitherto lonely spot.
News of rich finds came in daily, and the lucky finders had
a free run of the different drinking saloons, which seem to spring
up as if by magic, and where, when such a thing as a drop of
good water or a decent meal are things of the past, you can get as
much Scotch Whiskey or Queensland Rum as you have coin to pay
for. In a short time, men of capital began to arrive, bringing with
them assayers and mining experts; companies got floated, town-
ships and claims surveyed, banks opened, wells sunk, immense
tanks for the conservation of rain water, excavated the telegraph
wire, extended railway line surveyed and contracts for its
construction let, hundreds of adventurous spirits, bent on making
their pile, scattered all over the country, looking for the wished for
slug. At first things were rather mixed, there being no good gaol to
confine the unruly, and no court-house to have them tried. But,
take the men all round, they were a very good lot, as the following
anecdote will show you:—“A young, powerful fellow' had been
apprehended by the police trooper for being disorderly and
inebriated, and, having no better place to put him, the
trooper handcuffed him and left him in an open shed. Next
morning, the young fellow got up, and, feeling he w'ould like
a reviver, walked down to the nearest bar, got the barman
to give him a drink, and deliberately walked back again
to his shed, to aw r ait his trial.” On the whole, the genuine
digger is a first-rate fellow-, his greatest fault being his love
of fire water and fighting.
The chief mines have gone ahead very fast, and the district
bids fair to become a prosperous and permanent mining centre, in
fact, if we can believe the few Americans w'ho have yet visited it,
the district is likely to rival even the famous American silver mines.
Extraordinary instances of good and bad luck happen by the
merest chance. A person may loose or make a fortune. One man
I know' owned a share in a mine which cost him £35 ; as it was


evident money would have to be spent on it, and being a poor
man and becoming anxious about his liability, he gave another
man £lO to take ~up his responsibilities. That second man
guesses he made a good bargain, for the share is now worth
£IOO,OOO. This is a hard case, and the poor fellow has the
melancholy satisfaction of being able to relate how nearly he made
his pile. Smelting machinery, fit to reduce about 160 tons per day, is
now erected on the field on the different mines, and as soon as the
railway is finished, and more knowledge gained as to the best
methods of treating the different ores, a very great number more
will be erected.
Gold, tin, copper, bismuth, manganese, and other valuable
minerals are found in considerable quantities, and there is every
reason to believe that there is a prosperous future before the
inhabitants of the Barrier Ranges.— By “ one who was there.”
“ PROFESSOR WOODLEIGH’S ” ENTERTAINMENT.
We regret that pressure iipon our space prevented the follow-
ing report by our special appearing last week :
Programme.—Part I.
1. Introductory Song ... ... ... “ Tricks of the Trade ”
2. Comic Medley ... ... ... ... “ Blue Beard ”
3. Recitation ... ... ... ... ... ... “Home”
4. Song “ Happy Man ”
5. Recitation ... ... ... ... ...“ The German Jew ”
6. Comic Song ... ... ... ..- “ Cheap Jack ”
7. Recitation ... ... ... ... “ The Common Sailor ”
8. Comic Song ... “ Any Ornaments for your Fire Stove ”
Part 11.
Stump Speech “ The Milk in the Cocoa-nut ”
A Negro Lecture on “ Astronomy ”
A Lecture on “ Things in General!
“ God Save the Queen."
On Monday evening “ Professor Woodleigh ” gave a very
pleasant rendering of the above programme on the quarter-deck.


Though of undoubted ability, by his unconscious and un-
assuming demeanour the professor lost no time in impressing the
audience in his favour, which impression he maintained till the
close of his veiy varied entertainment. His introductory song,
“ Tricks of the Trade,” was humorously rendered and well received.
This was followed by a comic medley, “ Blue Beard,” the effect of
which, as regards time and tune, was ludicrous in the extreme.
The third and fourth events of the evening partook of a more
serious nature—“ Happy Man ” especially—the moral of which
being well worthy of adaptation. “ The German Jew ” served to
throw the merits of previous efforts out in stronger relief, espe-
cially the high moral tone of “ Cheap Jack,” which tone we hope
no one will endeavour to emulate.
The best recitation of the evening was the “ Common Sailor,”
a class, by-the-way, our professor sarcastically seems to infer, that
are thought of less than is really the case, so long as such common
sailors as the one who exerted himself so ably in our behalf are
represented on board our ships, there will be a class of men in
existence commanding the respect and esteem of landsmen. Tho
next song, “ Any Ornaments for your Fire Stove,” was essentially
comical, and added considerably to the pain in our already
exhausted sides. After this event the first part of the entei’tain-
ment closed, not before his audience had begun to marvel at the-
professor’s physical powers, in being able to maintain voice and
spirit so long.
The re-appearance of our entertainer was alarming in the ex-
treme. Attired in the garb of a gentleman of colour, with face to
match —the British sailor being “ stowed ” —the “ nigger ” lost no
time in entering upon his stump speech, “ The Milk in the Cocoa-
nut,” which was delivered in excellent style. A negro lecture on
“ Astronomy ” revealed facts of which Newton was certainly in
ignorance and lesser lights knew but little.
The entertainment closed with a lecture on “ Things in
General,” which was received with great applause.
The weather, though admirably adapted to his audience, must
have tried the professor considerably, though he left his platform
calm and collected as he looked upon his first appearance. The
professor has a strong, healthy voice, and delivers his songs and
recitations feelingly and well, and must have a marvellous memory.
We can only conclude with sincere thanks to our able entertainer,
whom we hope to have the pleasure of hearing again on a future
occasion.


“ 0 TEMPORA ! 0 MORES ! ”
Colombo
While standing on the steps
Of a certain great hotel;
It’s called “the Oriental; ”
No doubt you know it well.
I mused upon the vanities
Of people whom I saw
Ever flowing past me,
Or blocking up the door.
The figures flitted by me
In a panoramic view :
They all seemed very hot,
And very thirsty too.
I saw how many purchased
Some little bits of glass,
Resembling precious stones,
And set in bits of brass.
And as I watched the vendors,
I noticed with surprise,
The very candid way
They had of telling lies.
I next observed a couple,
A couple I knew well;
You really will be scandalized
At what I have to tell.
They came into the house,
And seated close together,
They had a little talk,
Perhaps, about “ the weather.”
I can’t imagine what they said;
Perhaps, they spoke “ of love : ”
He may have said “ my ducky ! ”
“ My darling ! ” or “ my dove ! ”
They seemed so very happy,
I left them quite alone,
Apparently arranging
Some business of their own.


She had no lynx-eyed chaperone.
Or if she ever had,
They’d given her the slip ;
It really was too bad !
I soon again observed them,
Reclining quite at ease
At a little marble table, —
Drinking! if you please.
He pledged her in a bumper
Of “ lemon squash,” I think,
A very non-intoxicating
Simple, little drink.
Then they called a carriage,
And sitting side-by-side,
They drove away together,
Like a bridegroom and his bride
And as they went away
I felt my blushes rise :
I felt that I was scarlet
Right up to my eyes ;
And, gazing at the carriage,
I thought of many things,
I thought of all the pleasure
That folly often brings,
And I wondered if the matrons
Who knew them both so well,
Would tell them on the morrow
They both would go to h—11;
Or would our great divine,
That pillar of the church,
Ask them why they left
Religion in the lurch,
And never thought of Scandal,
Whose amusing little tongue
Destroys the reputations
Of the aged and the young.
And I muttered while the night
Was beginning to advance :
“ I’d done the same myself,
If I’d only had the chance.”


FASHIONS.
My dear Maude, —Since my last letter to you, about things
in general, and especially about the ladies’ fashions on board the
“Sutlej,” I have noticed several new and pleasing items of dress;
and this hot weather has driven most of the ladies on deck to
sleep, and, in consequence, we have been charmed with some very
stylish and cosy dressing gowns, which we have a glimpse of as
the fair wearers are waiting to retire to their beds. Some are
pale blue flannel, with a jateau of lace and long narrow ribbons
down the fronts ; there are also pink ones, trimmed with torchoa,
and many others far too elaborate to describe.
For this warm weather I have devised a soft fichu, which is
most becoming and sensible, and a relief after the monotonous
colours and frilling. The prettiest I .have seen are white Indian
muslin, trimmed with narrow lace. I have noticed that shoes are
in vogue ; boots, 1 suppose, being too hot; and there are all sorts
and conditions of these, from down-at-heel slippers to smart satin
shoes, and a novelty in the way of light-brown leather ones, high
in the instep and heel.
The ladies have not taxed their ingenuity as regards the
dressing of their hair, with one or two exceptions it is worn in the
conventional “knot.”
Beads and all kinds of fancy necklaces are in great demand,
and add to the general effect, as do the very handsome bangles I
have noticed on some charming white arms. You know how nice
those handsome white silk sashes look on white or coloured
dresses; I have noticed several beauties in pink, blue, white, and
red.
The gentlemen also wear kammertands, but are, I am sorry to
tell you, still lazy and indifferent as to their dinner attire, which
I consider bad taste on their part, when they see the ladies take
the trouble to dress ; there are to this rule, as to every other,
exceptions, but fewer than we should like.
I expect to have more news for you shortly, as a Fancy Dress
Ball is in contemplation, but, owing to the extreme heat, it has
been indefinetely postponed.—Your loving friend,
Muriel,


CRICKET.
A return match. “ Married versus Single,” was played on
Saturday, the 15th hist. A condition of the match was, that no
round arm bowling should be allowed ; this condition told very
heavily against the single men, whose first victory was owing very
largely to their superior round arm bowling, and it was an
evidence of their courage that they consented to meet the
powerful bats in the married team with this condition. The
match resulted in a decided victory for the married men, owing,
principally, to the magnificent batting of Mr. Simpson, who scored
58 runs out of a total of 80. The single men scored 17 runs in the
first innings, and 28 in the second—Mr. Jamieson being the top
scorer. The bowling of Mr. Johnson, for the married men, was
very good. The single men, nothing daunted, are anxious for the
final match, and, as it will be played without any special conditions,
they are confident of success. —Umpire.
CONUNDRUMS.
A word there is of plural number,
A foe to rest and peaceful slumber,
Add to it the letter S
How great the metamorphosis ;
What plural was is plural now no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
My first, which washes half the nation’s gums;
Within my next four foreign countries come;
Of thee, my useful whole, each forms a paid ;
Thou art not science—yet teachest art.
My name the signal is for song and mirth,
Unless you me behead, and then, too quick,
Sorrow ensues—sorrow upon the sea—l then,
With shame, confess I make you sick;
Can viler transformation ever be 1
Answer , Music. Which by taking away the first letter
makes usick (u-siek).
My first is found outside of the door;
My second is a kind of corn ;
My third is what all men desire;
My whole is a united state.
Answer , Mat-ri-money.


MR. F. BUCKLAND.
This is our Purser,
Both courteous and kind,
Who attends to our wants,
And improves our mind.




MAY 17th, 1886.
No. 4.
EDITORIAL.
In another column we give a resume or brief outline of our
voyage. No doubt many will think when reading it that much
more might have been said. Yet had we entered more fully into
the details of our readers’ varied pleasures engaged in individually,
either when on board or on shore, we might have filled our pages
with accounts and particulars of merely singular interest. Those
who have been conspicuous in their efforts to afford general com-
fort and amusement deserve that notice that merit alone demands,
and we should, indeed, fail in our duty did we not record the
grateful expressions so generally felt of the satisfaction existing
amongst us concerning the manner in which some passengers have
assisted us to enjoy the passage. Before we mention their names,
we must first speak of the genial conduct of our estimable com-
mander, Capt. Johnson, who on all occasions has proved himself
worthy of our highest praise, and given us that pride we possess in
knowing him. We must not forget the chief officer, Mr. Long,
who has so fully gained our respect and the good name he bears
by carefully and attentively watching the interests and relieving
our numerous wants. Space will not admit of our speaking of the
other officers individually, though mention may be made of Dr.
Grant, our Surgeon ; Mr. Buckland, our Purser ; Mr. Greensmith,
the Second Officer ; and Mr. Phillips, the Chief Engineer, each of
whom has gained well-deserved credit from all of us. Undoubtedly,
the other officers share these expressions of regard.
In alluding to passengers who have contributed to our happi-
ness, we must be thankful to his Lordship, Bishop Parry, for con-
ducting services on Sundays and Morning Prayers daily during
the week. Next we should mention the office his honour, Judge
Nolan, has occupied, in being referee for our paper, and we are
pleased to say that only once was his judgment sought, and that
P


was given to our advantage. In speaking of the sports and amuse-
ments, concerts and balls, lectures, and other entertainments, we
must give the highest credit to the Amusement Committee, Cap-
tain Speedy being the respected chairman; the honourable secre-
tary, Mr. P. F. Bultcel, having taken a very active and praiseworthy
part. Many others have largely assisted in their endeavours on be-
half of the general weal, and we think that what they have done-
has been fully appreciated, and, doubtless, they will and do rejoice
in the thought —“ Virtue brings its own reward.”
Finally, we must refer to the ladies, and though we have not
the delicate feeling to the same extent that Sir Walter Raleigh had
when he wrote “ 1 fain would climb, but fear the fall,” yet we fear
we cannot, in speaking of our fair fellow-travellers, give them their
due, —-and should we not do so, we beg their forgiveness,—in
saying that the feeling on board amongst the gentlemen towards
our charming companions is one of admiration, such as we believe
can and ought to be meted out to each lady of our number :
admiration from many points of view—their kindness in being
ever ready to take parts either in concerts or other pleasures,
and as ministering angels generally. Drawing as we are
to the close of our voyage, we desire to refer individually
to those ladies and gentlemen who have so ably assisted us
in this our labour of love, for such, we can assure our
readers, it has been to us. Little did we dream when undertaking
this work that we had such talent at our disposal, as shewn in the
able sketches of Mr. Burd, whose style forcibly reminds one of our
old friend, “ John Leech.” In the sketches and caricatures by Mr.
Jardine we have an exposition of the school of “ Cruikshahk ; ”
and in the admirable little bits by Miss Fox, Mr. Staunton, and
Mr. Buckland we have reminders of incidents of our trip which
more than all written descriptions appeal to the heart of man. A
newspaper without pictures of some sort is now looked upon as
flat, stale, and unprofitable. To the large staff who so ably have
assisted us we give our thanks without stint, and feel sure they
will pardon us for not mentioning their names. We also thank
those who under a nom-de-plume have contributed so heartily to
our columns.
Before closing this our last “ Editorial,” possibly we shall not
be out of place in recording our appreciation of the services
rendered to the company generally by several of our friends, viz.,
to Captain Speedy, for his untiring efforts to amuse and instruct,
for we feel that without him many of the labours of the Amuse-
ment Committee would have been in vain; to Mr. Bulteel,
who, as Secretary of the Amusement Committee, has gone heart
and soul into the fun and frolic of the voyage, and who, by his
good nature and happy disposition, has had the effect of inoculating


others with the same spirit of fun, as an organizer of amuse-
ments of any sort he lias few equals and no superiors. When we
refer to the efforts of Mr. Oliver, we are sure we have the hearty
sympathy of all our friends. He has ably taken the lead in all
matters relating to that sweetest of all talents, Music, and has not
only conducted concerts with eclat almost equal to that of Halle
himself, but as the maestro has charmed our ears and soothed our
senses by the melodies drawn from that instrument of instru-
ment, the violin. The “Sutlej” Poet, Mr. H. W. Kenrick,
our fifth officer, deserves especial mention. We now refer
to the ladies, and following on the subject of Music, we
are sure that the name of Mrs. Sands will be received
with pleasure. This lady is always willing to give her kind sup-
port to anything in the way of a concert, both as an accompanist
and as a soloist Our vocalists, Mrs. Hamilton and Mrs. Johnson,
always give pleasure, and the finish of their songs is a moment of
regret. In Miss McGowan and Miss Cockerill we have most finished
artistes in theatricals. The appearance of either upon the stage is
a signal for enthusiastic applause. To mention the ladies indi-
vidually woidd be too long a task, but, in anything that has been
arranged on board, they have been both willing and eager to help,
and without their support nothing on board would have been a
success.
DONKEY RIDE AT PORT SAID.
A gay and festive party from our ship engaged donkeys on
arrival of the “ Sutlej ” at Port Said to ride round the different
sights worth seeing at this Port. A start at last was made with
great difficulty, owing to the persistent sticking up of our party
by the vendors of curios, and when once on the way the inhabi-
tants seemed to enjoy the bin nearly as much as the riders, more
especially the European portion, who might be seen standing at
their doors laughing, and evidently making remarks between
themselves on the appearance made by some on the Jerusalems.
The guide engaged to shew the party round, with the help of
the men and boys running behind with sticks, licking up the
lazy animals, soon had the party admiring, or otherwise, the
Township, which did not take long, there not being many “ lions ”
in the place. A halt was made at the further end of the town,
the donkeys being ridden to the inside of a restaurant, where the
party, after refreshing themselves with lemonade, were christened,


and names given to the riders and donkeys by the owners of the
quadrupeds. There were present—
Mrs. Ballarat on Mary Anderson.
Mr. „ on Roulette.
Mrs.JohnFergussonon Flying Dutchman.
Mr. „ on Mrs. Langtry.
Mr. Masher on Mrs. Cornwallis West.
Mr. „ on Devil-to-go.
Mrs. Langtry on Yankee Doodle.
Mr, „ on Jumbo.
After which the party adjourned to a photographer, who lost an
opportunity of taking the party by an extortionate demand, to
the regret of the party, who would have been glad of a memento
of a pleasant hour or two on shore. The price asked being £4
per dozen, and refused an offer of £2.
FASHIONS.
Dear Gladys, —Since last writing, no great change has taken
place in the “ Sutlej ” Fashions, but, as this is the last chance I
shall have of letting you know how things are, I seize the
opportunity. As far as the ladies are concerned, dress is gradually
becoming a comic medley, the mixture of dark stuff dresses,
summer hats, and fur capes, being very striking. The Gwalior
contingent brought a slight influx of fashions; and since leaving
Malta I have noticed some very pretty evening dresses. The
colder weather has brought some peculiar travelling caps to light,
and, with regard to the gentlemen, something quite astonishing in
overcoats. To the cold weather we may also attribute the change
in foot gear, boots being almost universally worn.
I need hardly allude to the Fancy Ball, which took place last
week, as an account of such an important event will surely find its
way into your local newspapers. We almost failed to recognise
some of our fellow-passengers, as they appeared, one by one, in the
garb of civilization, after the decidedly Bohemian appearance they
have been presenting during the hot weather of the last few
weeks.
If you see Ethel, tell her I have obtained the pattern of a
pink and white head gear, which, I am sure, will suit her to
perfection.
Since leaving Malta, w r e have seen a great deal of remarkably
pretty lace, tastefully arranged on evening dresses. I left this so
late that the mail will have closed if I do not conclude at once, so,
hoping you will write soon, —I remain your loving
Clytie.


LECTURE ON ABYSSINIA.
On Monday evening, the audience in the saloon spent a
pleasant hour-and-a-half in listening to Captain Speedy s Lecture
on the “ Soudan and Abyssinia.” Throughout his lecture (tho’ we
should call it “entertainment,”) the gallant Captain kept his
hearers’ attention rivetted by his lucid description of the peoples of
North Eastern Africa, amongst whom he has sojourned so long.
The lecturer pointed out that the “Soudan ” comprised that
part of North Africa stretching from East to West, between the
tropic of Cancer and the tenth degree of North Latitude.
The word «Soudan ” signifies, in the Arabic, “ the country of
the black ones,” and was given by the lighter coloured arab
invaders (who do not consider themselves hlacli at all), to . the
darker-skinned nations; they conquered in the ninth and tenth
centuries. The lecturer dwelt on the bravery of these tribes
their wonderful endurance of pain and undaunted courage.
There was, perhaps, little need of laying stress on these fine
qualities, as we have learnt, by dearly-bought experience, of the
intrepid manner in which these bronzed warriors hurled themselves,
armed merely with lance and shield, against our well-armed and
well-disciplined troops.
The second paid of the lecture was on “Abyssinia, the
lecturer personating, in succession, warrior, priest, and noble.
The marriage ceremony was most realistic 5 while the cm ions
mimetic power shown by the lecturer in his “ harp accompani-
ment, left nothing to be desired. In short, the songs, cries,
and costumes, used by these quaint people, will long remain
in the memories of the audience, giving a most vivid im-
pression of the strange land described. The lectuiex was intro-
duced by Bishop Parry, and the Hon. Charles Campbell, late
M.L.C. of N.S.W., returned thanks in an able speech, culminating
in a long quotation from Horace.
It is to be regretted that Captain Speedy did not give two, el-
even three, lectures, instead of cramming into one so great an
amount of interesting matter.


THE AMATEUR ASTRONOMER TO HIS PUPIL.
Come, Miss Blank, on the hurricane deck,
And I’ll astronomy teach you ;
Of gossip’s tongues it’s little we reck,
And scandal itself shall not reach you.
Come, and I’ll tell you all about
The stars and constellations ;
The names of many you’ll think, no doubt,
Most wonderful appellations.
See there, now, in the west descending,
Is the beautiful one of “ Orion
While higher up, your sight extending,
You come across that called “ The Lion.”
Look in the north, you’ll see the great “ Bear,”
And the juvenile, “Bruin,” beside him,
In the end of whose tail is fixed the Pole Star—
A fact! —which the cub takes much pride in.
I cannot, I fear, show you to-night
That small shining group, the “ Pleiades,”
Below the horizon, it’s just out of sight,
And it’s neighbour, the “ Bull,” or “ Hyades.”
There you see “ Perseus,” who courageously went
And rescued his love—“ Andromeda,” —
From the jaws of that savage sea monster, sent
By Jupiter’s wife, to eat her !
Surprised ; you exclaim that never before
Were you taught like this— astronomy ,
And that of the science you’ll learn no mure ;
Well —if you like—we’ll discuss matrimony.
You think that it tires you standing long,
Then, —then let me around you place my arm!
For you know you are weak, while I am strong ;
Pshaw ! —only a Prude would see the harm.
Yes, it’s quite true, that in this life
A man my enjoy much bliss,
If he possess a loving wife,
Who may, — oh, may I take one kiss !
What star is that, you ask, which gleams
Low down on the distant horizon 1
The reddest star, you say it seems
That ever you cast eyes on.
While just above it, thick and black,
A cloud there seems to hover,
Why, ’tis a ship—the gong they whack,
And—oh, hang it, here’s your mother ! H.W.K


SUPPER TO THE COMMITTEE OF AMUSEMENTS.
On Saturday evening, the 22nd inst., the Saloon Passengers
entertained the Committee of Amusements to a Champagne
Supper, on their retirement from office—Mr. W. F. Buchanan
occupying the chair.
The toast of the evening, “ Our Guests,” was ably proposed
by him, whose speech we give verbatim :
“ Ladies and gentlemen, charge your glasses ; I have a toast to
propose which, I am sure, will be heartily responded to. It is
that of “The Committee of Amusements,” ladies and gentlemen ;
it has been seldom that so pleasurable a duty has fallen to my
lot, deputed to me by my fellow-passengers, but I fear I
shall not be able to do the justice to it it deserves. The
committee have, through their assiduity, with the assistance
of other ladies and gentlemen, rendered our passage so
far agreeably enjoyable that we request them to continue their
good offices to the end of the voyage, instead of asking us to elect
other committees'in their stead. When I say this, I believe
I express the wish of all on board. It is for this purpose, and
to thank you all for the enjoyable entertainments rendered,
that we do ourselves the great pleasure of asking you, and all
the lady passengers, to accept our hospitality this evening.
I think it has seldom been the fortune of any of the P. & O.
boats to have a list of passengers of so varied talents, and so
distinguished beauty, representative of our “Sunny shores of
Australia,” “The land of brown heath,” “Erin’s green Isle,” and
“ Grand old England.” I would fail in expressing my feelings,
on this occasion, if I .did not call special attention to the fact
that our social enjoyments on board emanates from the ladies.
What would we be without their society? Is it not from
“ dear woman ” that we are inspired to deeds of valour and glory ?
Is it not from their inspiration we conquer our foes and become
the proud heroes of deeds of chivalry ? Indeed, I am not quite
sure that when the serpent tempted Eve that he did not eat the
forbidden fruit himself, leaving us woman in her primitive beauty
and godly purity. I cannot refrain from quoting a few lines
from “Marmion’s last words on Flodden’s gory field,” when
Clara quenched his dying thirst, from a spring close by :
“Oh ! woman, in our hour of ease,
Uncertain coy and hard to please ;
When pain and anguish nip the brow,
A ministering angel thou.”


Here’s to the committee of ladies and gentlemen; with three
times three.” This was received with rounds of applause. Captain
Speedy, on behalf of the committee, rose to return thanks, his
remarks being short, pithy and pointed ; he then called upon Mr.
G. F, Bulteel, the Hon. Sec., to support his response, who gave
interesting particulars of the work they had gone through, con-
cluding by expx-essing the gratification the committee felt at the
honour rendered them by the passengers, in having thus shown
such appreciation of their labours.
The next toast proposed was that of Captain Johnson and
Staff, by Mr. C'. J. Walker, who, in doing so, briefly reviewed the
pleasures derived and attentions received at the hands of the
captain and his officers, which was received amidst cheers,.
As might have been expected, from so able a commander, the
response he gave was listened to with lively interest, and was truly
characteristic of himself
Following this, came the pleasing toast, “ The Ladies,”
proposed by Mr. Keep, who, no doubt, was “keeping” his eye on
some fair lady while so doing, and this must have lent the charm
which enabled him to speak of the ladies so interestingly. Mr.
Pascal returned thanks on their behalf, and was certainly good in
all he said, in his usual witty and pleasant manner.
Here, Mr. Robert Sands rose and made an able speech, in
proposing that the committee should continue their offices, in
which he gave expression of the feelings of the passengers very
forcibly on this head. Mr. Ashwin, on rising to second this,
deserves further comment than we can here give, yet he, in
recounting the work done by the committee, clearly showed the
loss the passengers would sustain by losing such an efficient amuse-
ment committee, and thus the 'motion was carried unanimously
and enthusiastically.
The proceedings closed by singing the National Anthem


NANA SAHIB.
Nana Sahib, at the Fancy Dress Ball,
The envy, wonder, and admiration of us all.




SAVED FROM A FLOOD !
Along the North-western borders of Abyssinia <l Rains,”
which are called the “Lesser Rains,” fall occasionally from
December to February. The bed of the watercourse being line
dry sand is infinitely preferable as a camping ground to the stony
plain; but during the “ Lesser Rains ” it proves, nevertheless, a
dangerous. and risky halting-place. The storm that may at
any time burst over the distant mountains pours down such
a vast quantity of water on the hill sides that every ravine
is at once filled, and these all meeting in one deep water-
course, a sudden and unexpected flood is the result, and
everything is swept away before it without the possibility of
escape; a proof of this unpleasant danger occurred to myself in
1882-83. I was travelling with a friend fromMassowa to Kassala,
and reached a place called Amba ; the country just there was
particularly full of herbage, and our camel-drivers begged that
for the sake of their animals we might stop for the night;
accordingly we camped in the dry bed of the watercourse,
some eight feet below the plain; the sky, when we unsaddled,
was cloudless, and the shade of the tamarisks refreshing beyond
description; our baggage was soon piled in a square, and while the
servants were getting things in order my friend and I, taking oppo-
site sides of “ Khor,” started off in search of game, I was lucky
enough to get an antelope within a short distance, and, con-
sidering that I had done my duty in the way of foraging,
returned to camp about an hour before sunset; suddenly the
sky became overcast, and flashes of lightning appeared among
the Abyssinian hills; getting up quickly, I called the headman,
and asked him whether it-would not be better to move the
baggage out of the “Khor,” in case there shoidd be a rush of
water; he replied with the fatalistic spirit of the East, “Allah
Aalim ” (“God knows best”) but he added, nevertheless, that he
had already removed his camel-saddles to the bank above!
Calling my servants, I had the baggage removed some fifty
yards beyond the bank into the plain; no rain having yet
fallen that season, and the preliminary showers not usually
being heavy, I had no apprehension that the rush of water


would be so great as to overflow the banks, and, therefore,
there seemed no necessity for ascending the low hillocks
close by, which would have been a work of great labour;
scarcely had we made everything snug for the night when
we heard a low moaning sound, which rapidly rose to a confused
roar as the waters rushed down in a resistless wave, six feet high,
carrying roots, branches, trunks, and even whole trees, with it.
Presently immense drops began to patter on the dead leaves,
and this soon increased to a tropical downpour ! hastily quitting
the bank, I hurried to look after my rifles, I soon rolled
them up m an ox-hide, and carefully placed them under my
bedstead out of the rain, and spreading a large waterproof
sheet over my bedding, crouched under it till the storm
should pass over, I looked round for my friend, but could not
see him, the darkness being so intense that nothing could be dis-
tinguished save by the incessant flashes of white lightning;
the thunder was simply deafening, crash succeeding crash
like the cannonading of monster artillery ! presently the
wind rose to a hurricane, blowing off my waterproof ; sitting
up to grope for something to tie the corners firmly, I felt to my
horror and surprise that there was at least a foot of water under my
bedstead ! hastily getting on to my feet, I dragged out my rifles,
which had become embedded in mud, and carried them up
the adjoining hillock ; my men had at the same time become
aware that the waters were rising, and were engaged in
removing the baggage to the higher ground ; whatsoever
might then happen this hillock was our Ararat, and we
could do nothing further than wait for the flood to abate ;
the camel-drivers holding their buffalo-hide shields against
the blast squatted patiently on the ground, the servants cowered
under an ox-hide, while I wrapped myself in my waterproof, which
I had luckily recovered, and we all sat anxiously watching the
waters rise up the hillock inch by inch! at last with a
hearty ejaculation, “ Ul-hum-do lill-lah ” (“God be praised”),
one of the men pointed out that the flood had ceased to
rise, but suddenly a wave swept up beyond high-water
mark, chilling us with the fear that the waters were still rising,
and would ascend the two remaining feet of higher ground, and
thus submerge our hillock; but the next moment shewed that
this had been caused by an expiring blast of the wind,
and that the flood was abating as rapidly as it had risen!
All this time the most terrible apprehensions had filled my
mind regarding the fate of my friend and his two servants;
this awful anxiety was horribly increased by the fears of the
natives, who, from past experience,* assured me that they had not
the smallest chance of escape, having been last seen on the bank
of the river, and that had been submerged fully six feet!
there was, therefore, nothing to be done, but wait till the


roar of the waters had sufficiently subsided to give our voices a
chance of being heard, and then uniting in one tremendous yell
we waited in agonized doubt for a reply ; to my inexpressible
relief an answering “Gooey” came back, and I knew my friend was
safe; as the water receded, we managed by joining hands to
reach the bank, where we found my friend and his two servants
perched on a small tree.
His story was that on returning to camp he had taken his
rug to a spot where he had found better shade, and when his ser-
vants had given the alarm moved to the top of the bank, and
waited there with them watching the waters sweeping by;
he had become so fascinated by the novel and marvellous
spectacle of the overpowering rush, and the resistless might with
which they bore down trunks of trees, masses of herbage, and
even large boulders, that it was not until his servants exclaimed
that they were surrounded that he became aware that the flood
had overflowed the plain which intervened between the bank and
the hillocks ; they then tried to gauge the depth and strength
of the current, with a view to wading across to where we
were, but, in doing so, were nearly swept away by the
torrent! as the water rose up the tree under which they
had been sheltering, they climbed into its branches; during
an hour the river had risen six feet up the trunk, and
they were in the utmost peril, as the tree, being of small girth,
quivered and swayed to that degree that they expected every
moment to be shaken off into the awful torrent! besides this,
there was the possibility of being swept off by the trees carried
by, as well as the danger of their own tree being hurled bodily
into the flood. —Basra Felika.


CORRESPONDENCE.
Captain Speedy’s Lecture.
Dear Mr. Editor, —Doubtless you will have a full account
respecting the above Lecture from one of your own correspondents;
but you may not, perhaps, be aware of the very unanimous feeling
existing among Captain Speedy’s audience of the entire satisfaction
and pleasure they feel at having the privilege of listening to so
able a lecturer. My object in penning these few lines is to air the
opinions of all who heard him the other evening, and to express a
hope that we shall have the pleasure of hearing him again before
we reach Plymouth.—Yours, Ac., Soudan.
Ist June, 1886.
CONUNDRUMS.
Why are two young ladies kissing each other fulfilling a great
moral precept ?
Answer: Because they are doing unto each other what they
would that men should do unto them.
“ HIDDEN TREASURES.”
1 buried my father’s glass of brandy and water, and what
came up ?— Fa’s-nip.
My first is daily seen in the street;
My second is a personal pronoun;
My third is sometimes used by fishermen
My whole is an article of furniture.
Answer, Cabinet.
Answer to query (?). What would Neptune say if the ocean
ran dry ? If you give it up, don’t say “ I don’t know,” or, “ I
haven’t an idea-say, “I haven’t a-notion.” —(an ocean).


MAY 24th, 1886
No. 5.
A BRIEF RESUME AND AN ADDED CHAPTER.
All things have an end ; and a sea voyage is no exception to
that fixed, and unalterable decree. The “ Immortal Bard ” tells ns
that “all’s well that ends well ’” and so, we trust and hope, may
it be with us, in this our small and crowded travelling commu-
nity. It is now nearly fifty days since that wet and foggy
Wednesday afternoon of the 14th April, 1886, when, amidst the
waving of handkerchiefs and the farewell cheers of the multitude
of friends, who had gathered there to bid us god-speed, we cast
adrift from the Wharf in Sydney Cove, and steamed away for the
open sea. The rain came down and beat fiercely in our faces as
we strained our eyes to catch one last look of those we were
leaving behind us, —some for but a time and some for ever;
while the thick mist crept slowly around and hid from our sight,
one by one, the verdant beauties of the lovely harbour.
Hardly had we passed out of the shelter of the bold head-
lands of Port Jackson, when we were assailed by the storm king
in all his mad fury ; for two days and nights did our gallant
vessel contend with him and all his forces; and such was the
fierceness of the encounter, that, although she came out but
little the worse for it, the duration of her passage to Melbourne
was nearly double the length of what it would have been, had the
elements not proved so unpropitious. Fairer weather than that
which witnessed our leaving Williamstown Pier could not have
been; while at Adelaide, again, it was wet and windy in the
extreme. For two days after our departure from King George’s
Sound did the elements still continue unfavourable, and that
with a vigour that was as disagreeable as it was persistent. But,
entering the latitudes of the balmy S. E. trades, we were soon
in a fair way to that complete restoration of mind and body
which the experience of the last two weeks had made with all a
“ consummation most devoutly to be wished for.”


Colombo, with its palm groves and cinnamon gardens, its
luxurious vegetation and rich scenery, made a most welcome and
agreeable termination to the rather long and monotonous run
from Albany ; and full advantage was taken by all of the oppor-
tunity that was aftbred them of seeing a little Oriental life, in
some of its most interesting characteristics and surroundings.
As the S. W. monsoon was now supposed to have set in, it
was not without some slight misgivings as to the nature of the
weather we should encounter, that we left Colombo, on the
evening of the 10th, for the arid rock of Aden ; but, with the
exception of the first day, on which a moderate wind and a choppy
sea were opposed to us, the passage across the Indian ocean could
not have been a finer or smoother one than that experienced. A
gentle breeze blew by day, of just sufficient force to ripple the
water with tiny waves, and fan our hot and sun-burnt faces with
a cool, refreshing draught ; while towards the evening it died
away, and a dead calm reigned throughout the whole night-long.
Aden was reached on the morning of Tuesday, the 18th hist.,
and the ship was soon beseiged by the usual swarm of feather
merchants and itinerant vendors of eastern trash, with which the
place is infested ; while, over the side, the woolly-pated diving
boys kept up a continual and incessant clamour forcoins to be thrown
them. Those who desired to escape from the customary inconveni-
ences attendant on coaling, went ashore for the purpose of making
a hasty visit to the tanks, or having a ride upon the donkeys ;
while those who remained on board amused themselves in
examining or purchasing some of the various articles laid out
before them, presumably of Eastern or Arabian, but probably of
Brummagem manufacture. The coaling finished, it was
not long before we were again under weigh, en route for
Suez. Most of the passengers now prepared to resign
themselves to undergo the “baking,” to which, as they
all thought, they would be inevitably exposed in the Red
Sea; but their expectations, though well founded, were most
pleasantly disappointed, for, hardly had we got beyond Bah-el-
Mandeb, or the Gates of Hell, when we met with a fresh head
wind and a rising sea, which lasted throughout the whole passage
right up to Suez itself, in which port we dropped anchor on
Sunday morning. It was in the afternoon of the same day that-
we entered that wonderful triumph of engineering skill —the great
Maritime Canal. Our progress through was of the usual dull
and monotonous description, varied only by the occasional
passing of out-ward bound steamers.
Arriving at Port Said late on Monday evening, we remained
there until Wednesday night. This long interval was fully taken
up in a complete inspection of the place and its surroundings, and
everything that was worth seeing, including several men-of-war


Mr
C. G. Hill ...
£
... 0
s.
5
a.
0
Kobt. Sands ...
... 0
5
0
J. Gilbert
... 0
5
0
W. Jamieson...
... 0
5
0
33
G. H. Lipscome
... 0
5
0
C. J. Walker...
, ,
... 0
5
0
John Paterson
... 0
5
0
T. Drinan
... 0
5
0
E. S. Handle...
• • •
... 0
5
0
W. B. Lamond
• • •
... 0
5
0
33
A. Britter ...
...
... 0
£2
5
15
0
0
and other steamers ; while donkey riding was indulged in to a
large extent; frequent visits were made, also, to the gaming
tables, visits which had nothing whatever to do with curiosity,
but, as we have not yet heard of any disastrous consequences
arising from such proceedings, we have every reason to say that,
after all, no great harm was done. None were sorry,
however, to leave Port Said, and find themselves once
more traversing the ocean—or, rather, the blue and sunny
waters of the Mediterranean. After a quick and smooth run
during which the weather could not have been more beautiful and
tranquil than it was, we entered at daybreak, on the morning of
Sunday, the 30th inst., the quiet little Quarantine harbour of
Valetta —the particular rendezvous of the P. & 0. steamers.
Our early arrival gave those who intended an opportunity for
attending the celebration of High Mass, in the church of St.
John, which was to take place at seven o’clock that morning.
The “Sutlej,” at breakfast-time, was nearly deserted, for,
with the exception of the captain and officers, the invalids, and a
few lazily-inclined folks, most of the people had resolved to
partake of that meal on shore. The ship not leaving
till the evening, ample time was thus given for seeing
Valetta and its many objects of interest—of both historical
and local renown. About an hour or so before the vessel’s
departure nearly all had assembled on board again, most
of whom, if well tired, were withal well pleased with their day’s
outing.
THE SUBSCRIPTION LIST IN AID OF SEAMAN WILSON.
In our last issiie we gave the names of subscribers to this
fund. This now being closed, we append the complete list, as
received at our office, and the amount collected :
This amount we have handed to his lordship, Bishop Parry,
who will present the sum, collected after service on Sunday last,
together with this, shortly before we arrive in London, — Epitors,


CONCERTS.
The usual weekly concert took place on Saturday last, and
was an unqualified success. The opening piece, “ The Gipsy
Chorus,” was well sung by the “ Sutlej ” full company, and
received well-merited applause. Next came a vocal solo with
violin obligato, “ Kingdom Blest ” (Miss Paterson). It is only
necessary to mention the name of this artiste to conclude the song
was rendered in a masterly way, accompanied with just feeling
and expression by Mrs. Sands and Mr. Oliver on the violin. Mrs.
Wallis’s execution of “ The Couriers ” left nothing to be desired,
and Mrs. Hamilton’s “ Maid of the Mill ” deserves similar eulogy.
Next was “ The Blue Bells of Scotland,” by which Mrs. Sadler
delighted the audience. v Mr. Oliver now enchanted the company
by his faultless performance on the violin. To Mr. Oliver we
justly accord the palm of the evening, and his selection, 11 11
Trovatore,” thoroughly deserved the enthusiastic demonstrations of
delight that on all sides followed the closing bars. The position
of the reporter prevented his being able to comment upon the
reading from the “ Hurly-Burly,” given by Miss Rogers, which
concluded Part I.
Part 11. consisting of a pianoforte duet by Mesdamcs Stone
and Burt; a song, “ Surely,” sweetly sung by Mr. Johnston ;
“ Among the Lilies,” dulcimo and piano, Mr. Pascal and Mrs.
Sands; “ Good Company ” (Mr. Rowland); the ever-welcome
“ Taking a Pic-nic,” given by our enterprising Captain Speedy;
the “ See our Oars,” and “ God save the Queen,” left nothing to
be desired by us in a most'enjoyable evening’s entertainment.
An Observant Critic.
We are indebted to the Amusement Committee for having
provided us with a most enjoyable evening on Saturday last. The
committee has been so indefatigable in its endeavours to cater for
the passengers’ pleasure that the undoubted success it met with
on this occasion, while heartily deserved, must, nevertheless, have
been most welcome to each of its members.
The first item on the progamme was a pianoforte duet by the
Misses Campbell, who selected a few airs from Rossini’s favourite
opera,* “ The Barber of Seville,” for their first performance on
board the “ Sutlej.” A more popular selection could not have
been made, and the admirable manner in which it was executed
elicited loud applause from the audience. It is to be regretted
that the unfortunate illness of one of these ladies has been the
cause of their talent being concealed from us, and in felicitating
her upon her recovery we must express a hope that ere the voyage
closes we may be gratified with a few more opportunities of listen-
ing to her and her sister’s combined performances.


p
§ CO
I-! m
ft)
T 3 *>
h J n>
o s o
2 n
< 3 -T-
-{s rf- m
C/5 C/3
§ *
D, g* >
rt —]
gs 2
e ® O
zl c
s - » z
JS _
t re n |
P 05 I
3 8 £
jn C
:=r -s
n> o x---'
i-< pr> “
n £ —
U n z
rT
I 8 >
q ft)
CD '*
Cf) P
g o
§3 m
o ST -<
° I
<
F‘ O
5- Z
n»
ro '■*
O
s
3
CTQ
n




The duet was followed by a song. “ Madeline,” given in a
masterly manner by Mr. Sands, who is ever-rcady to assist, and is
always welcome upon the “ Sutlej ” platform.
Mrs. Hamilton, accompanied by Mr. Oliver on the violin,
next charmed us with the ever-green serenata by Bragga. The
burst of applause which followed its conclusion must have been
highly gratifying to the lady. Mr. Oliver’s accompaniment was
perfect, and played in his best style.
Mrs. Young followed with a solo on the piano, which was
received with marked approval, and then Air. Kurd introduced his
banjo, from which lie produced an air with variations which fairly
took the audience by surprise. The manipulation was perfect, and
the performance was so well received as to call for an encore, which
was not, however, accorded, as it was understood that the length
of the programme prohibited a repetition at this early stage.
Mrs. Johnson was never in bettor voice than when she fol-
lowed with a serenade, to which Mr. Oliver added the graceful
accompaniment set to violin. This charming performance was
loudly applauded, and again an encore was declined.
The first part of the entertainment concluded with a reading
by Mr. Elton, who chose “ Misadventures at Margate,” from
Ingoldsby Legends, to make his first appearance on the “ Sutlej ”
stage. The laughter which accompanied the reading testified the
pleasure which it conveyed, and we hope soon to see Mr. Elton
again at the foot-lights.
The second part commenced with a duet for piano by the
Misses Buchanan, and we are expressing the sentiments of all
present in remarking upon the great improvement these young
ladies displayed upon their previous performance of this difficult
piece. The audience were fairly delighted, and marked their
pleasure with loud applause.
Mr. Temple, who followed with the “ Warrior bold,”
eclipsed himself, and was heartily cheered.
Mr. Oliver then came forward, amidst the most hearty greet-
ing, to charm us with Mendelssohn’s glorious “ L’ange qui chante.”
This was so rapturously received that an encore was irresistible,
and the performer, no doubt gratified with his reception, seemed
to put even more spirit into his rendering of Raff's cavatina, with
which he followed.
The event of the evening was Mrs, Bay ley’s debut. Her
recitation of Whittier’s poem, “ Barbara Fritchil,” was received
with warm applause, and the touching story of a brave woman’s
patriotism lost nothing in the rendering. Mrs. Bayley responded
to an enthusiastic encore with Longfellow’s beautiful lines on the
Death of Minnehaha,” strengthening, if possible, the favourable


impression produced by her first performance. Every word Mrs.
Bayley uttered, however softly spoken, could be heard distinctly
by all her audience, an excellent “ trait,” and one not often met
with in amateur elocutionists. Refinement and taste are marked
characteristics of this lady’s reciting, and at the same time she
certainly gave us the impression that she possessed more power
than she actually cared to show. The acoustic properties of our
music room are not all that could be desired, while snatches of
irrelevant, and one might almost say irreverent, conversation,
wafted from the saloon below, in through the open windows of the
quarter-deck, are not of any material assistance to reciters, and,
taking this into consideration, Mrs. Bayley’s performance can only
be looked upon as most creditable.
Mrs. Sands played a pianoforte solo in her most brilliant
style, and the audience insisted upon an encore, which was
readily assented to; she also, as usual, officiated as piano
accompanist throughout the evening, and the company evinced
their appreciation of her valuable and generous assistance by
awarding her a round of warm and hearty applause.
The entertainment concluded with the “ Laughing Song,” by
Mr. Bulteel, sunsr in his best style, and assisted in the chorus by
all the gentlemen and, likewise, many of the ladies, who required
no training to add voices, which were prominent in the loud
“ ah, ahs,” which finished the most pleasurable performance it has
been our privilege to attend.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Dear Mr. Editors, —I am instructed by our Chairman and
the other members of the Amusement Committee to convey to you
their thanks for the able way in which you have conducted the
“Sutlej Argus,” and feel sure that the appreciation you have
met with from all on board will amply repay you for your arduous
undertaking.—l am, dear Mr. Editors,
Yours vei’y faithfully,
Percy F. Bulteel,
2nd June, 1886. Hon. Sec, Amusement Committee.


FANCY DRESS BALL.
We left Port Said at twelve p.m. on Wednesday, May the
26th ; and the following day, as the weather was propitious, it
was arranged that the Fancy Ball should take place in the
evening. This was perhaps rather short notice, but the Ball had
been so long in prospect that most people, we believe, had their
dresses ready. Those who attended the Ball were requested to
appear at dinner in their fancy costumes, and this caused a good
deal of amusement to those who were in their seats early ; each
new arrival was greeted with a round of applause, and many were
the good natured jokes passed round as each one took his scat.
As we looked down the tables, we could not help admitting
that there were hardly as many in fancy dress as we had expected
or wished to see, but still, considering the limited resources
available, the costumes were wonderful—the ladies in particular.
How is it that upon the eve of an occasion like this ladies always
declare they have nothing to ivear 1 and yet, when the time comes,
they appear dressed, I was going to say superbly, but this conveys
a very small idea of the taste and variety displayed on this
occasion; where do the dresses come from ? do they exhume
them from mysterious boxes in the hold ? or are they the product
of many weary, hot, uncomfortable hours spent in stuffy cabins,
in company with a needle and thread 1 we think they can hardly
be this, —but it is really presumptions of us to speculate about it
at all, it is sufficient for us that they are the product of woman’s
mind.—We see and admire, and beg the ladies’ pardon.
Upon coming on deck, after dinner, every one must have
been struck by the very pretty way in which the quarter-deck
was arranged and decorated. The side awnings were covered with
festoons of flags ; and the lights were sprinkled here and there in
a way which did great credit to the artistic eye of our chief
officer. The round seat in the middle of the deck had been
removed, which gave much more room for the display of the
costumes. On the port side, a refreshment table had been
arranged, and here might the weary disciple of Terpsychore gain


Miss Buchanan ...
“Mari tana.”
J)
A. Buchanan
... “Poppy.”
5)
E. Buchanan
... “Night.”
Burt
... “ French Peasant.”
Cockerell ...
... “Susan.”
>>
Drinan
“Bosebud.”
Fleming
... “My own Great Grandmother
fresh life and vigour after the struggles of the dance ; many did
so—and towards the end of the evening we observed men of
every religion, creed, nationality, and occupation, all alike doing
homage at the shrine of Bacchus, that god whose worship is, alas,
so universal.
We were asked, at the last moment, to write something
about the Fancy Dress Ball, and it seems so strange to attempt
to do so without saying anything about the dancing, but we think
that, after all, the dancing is not the most important thing in a
ball of this kind, and so we will dispose of it by saying that we
thought it might perhaps have been kept up with just a little
more spirit, but, as far as it went, it was excellent, the square
dances especially having a very pleasing effect. Amongst the
ladies’ costumes we must specially mention that of Miss Oxley,
who was universally admired. One very effective costume con-
sisted entirely of black and white, one side of the body being
black and the other white ; a great contrast to this was the
scarlet coat of a noble son of Nimrod. Another lovely arrange-
ment in black and white was one representing “Night;” the
white material in this costume was of a most beautifully fine
texture, and was quite dazzling in its brilliancy. Two of our male
friends had their complexions appropriately altered to suit their
nationality ; one of these dusky gentlemen, who told us that he
was an Arab Rais of a Nile Dahabiyah , had a peculiar phenomenon,
going on in connection with his nose—it gradually changed colour
as the evening advanced; at first we thought it was an optical
illusion, caused, perhaps, by the red lights on the quarter-deck,
but we believe it was really to be accounted for by the fact of his
having a very unstable complexion and a very bad cold.
We feel we have not said enough about the ladies’ costumes,
but, the fact is, we arc utterly at a loss to find suitable words to
express our admiration—we have been trying to do so for nearly
an hour and have to give it up. We have said nothing at all
about the ladies themselves, for the same reason, only more so.
We append a list of the different characters. If there are any
errors in the list, or any additions to be made to it, we shall be
glad if our readers will let us know.


Mrs. Johnson ... ... “Fish Girl.”
Miss McGowan ... ... “Fatima.”
„ Oxley ... ... “ Lady Betty,”
Mrs. Sands ... ... “Buttercup.”
Mrs. Simpson ... ... “Egyptian Lady.”
Miss Stone ... ... “Fish Girl.”
Mrs. Young ... ... “Buy a Broom.”
„ Hamilton ... ... “ Florence Nightingale.”
G. R. Beamish ... ... “Arab Rais of a Nile Dahabiyah.”
W. F. Duchanan ... “Arab Chief.”
P. F. Bultccl ... ... Hunting Costume.
Lieut. Elton ... ... Naval Uniform (Persian Gulf).
A. B. Grant ... ... “Indian Officer,” (war dress).
E. Jardine ... ... “Prince.”
G. F. Johnson ... . “Chef.”
A Keep ... ... ... “Quarter-master.”
W. B. Lamond ... ... “ Nana Sahib.”
H. J. Oliver ... ... “Globe Trotter.”
J. R. Rowlands ... ... “P.& 0. Officer.”
R. Sands... ... ... Black and "White.
Captain Speedy ... ... “Basha Selika.”
C. F. Temple ... ... “Stockman.”
C. J. Walker ... ... “P. &0. Engineer.”
C. A. L. Walter... ... “Neapolitan Fisherman.”
A. B. Young ... ... Uniform (West Camden Light Horse).


A SUGGESTION FOR NEXT MONDAY NIGHT.
The Last Evexing on the “Sutlej.”
11. IV. K.
We’ve met this night together, boys,
For the last night it will be
That we shall spend together, boys,
Upon the wide, wide sea.
We all have met with cheerful will—
We all ourselves have bound
To drink the health of everyone,
And wish good luck all round.
So first fill up your glasses,
And drink to the sweet lasses
Who’re aboard of this very good ship;
Then drink to her crew,
And her captain too;
Then to all who’ve been with us this trip.
Chorus of Colonials :
For we always shall think of Old England with pride,
Though our homes are so far away over the sea ;
And we’ll let the world know—what e’er may betide—
That we’re Britions in Heart —true British are we !
The days and weeks have flown, boys,
Since on Australian Quays
We bade dear friends farewell, boys,
To travel o’er the seas ;
While others are returning
To the land where lies their home ;
And some there are intending
Through the great world to roam.
So let none regret
That to-night they have met,
Each to drink to the healths of the others;
And in that toast that we’ll drink
Let us all by-gones sink,
And part from each other like brothers.
Repeat Chorus.
H.W.K


A MORNING PROMENADE.




CONCLUSION.
After a most pleasant voyage, extending over fifty-four days,
from Svdney, we have safely steamed into the Sound at Plymouth.
We reviewed elsewhere the interesting features of our long
journey, though we may point out, in passing, the number of days
we have actually been under weigh is only forty-three, the remain-
ing eleven being passed in the ports of call, viz.; Melbourne,
Glenelg, Albany, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Malta, and
Gibraltar. The concluding historical detail of interest which we
must record, is the final reception given to our last issue of the
“Sutlej Argus” when it was read in the Saloon on Wednesday
last, the 2nd inst. The Hon. W. F. Hely-Hutchinson, K.C.M.G.,
occupied the chair, and was supported by the Right Rev. Bishop
Parry, Captain Johnson, Judge Nolan, and others. The Chair-
man, in introducing the Readers, made an appropriate and stirring
speech, recounting how necessary it was for the well-being of
Englishmen, either abroad or at home, that they should possess
the power of the printing press. The Joint Editors proposed a
vote of thanks to the Chairman, which was carried by acclamation.
“ God Save the Queen ” being heartily sung at the conclusion.
In again expressing the best of wishes to all our readers and
fellow-passengers, and thanks to those whose assistance has been
so material in producing our paper; we only hope that the happy
results attained by the “Sutlej Argus” may be pleasing and
lasting memories to all.
We beg to subscribe ourselves,
CHARLES JAMES WALKER, J Jo{nt
ROBERT SANDS, \ Editors.


ADDEND A.
The reason for the delay in issuing this Paper
does not rest with either of the Editors. Mr. Walker
has had much difficulty in obtaining suitable men to
do the Sketches, and could not possibly have them
done earlier; and should any Subscriber fail to receive
his copy, he may obtain it by addressing a letter to
C. J. Walker, Elmwood Place, Leeds.
Af,F COOKE, HER MAJESTY'S COLOR PRJXTER, LEEDS.




