

I \ Jp
I flP Bk yHB|f
n^P»
BH | feCT f^.’f':. ‘•■: • >V';j
5BK «i v: .
-










i J)
m tSHh i b . I & i
H Iff i t&tKr*^
w jf Jfk HI w^^/’^jjt''
■ J-Mf 111 -* '***fc .’***'- wpjiow,
' Kii'i-a ■ , i WU» ' %sMarfl^0HPBBH!^' , ( |l t■BMitai8SK? , * , '* m vi& IK ’ * wjp £ •■■ .%>«»■-
It was a cut of craft I had never seen before.


THE
SPLENDID SAVAGE
A TALE of the NORTH COAST of AUSTRALIA
CONRAD H SAYCE
Illustrated by VICTOR COOLEY
THOMAS NELSON Sc SONS L™
London, Ldmhurah, New York, Toronto & Paris


*


mli
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 5
CHAPTER II 14
CHAPTER 111 22
CHAPTER IV 29
CHAPTER V 37
CHAPTER VI 48
CHAPTER VII 58
CHAPTER VIII 68
CHAPTER IX 77
CHAPTER X 86
CHAPTER XI 92
CHAPTER XII 99
CHAPTER XIII 106
CHAPTER XIV 116
CHAPTER XV 126
CHAPTER XVI 134
CHAPTER XVII 142
CHAPTER XVIII 149
CHAPTER XIX 156
CHAPTER XX 163
CHAPTER XXI 171
CHAPTER XXII 178
CHAPTER XXIII 184
in


* •
\


THE SPLENDID SAVAGE
CHAPTER I
ALL day the little ship The Seaspray battled gallantly against the
L storm. We were three days past Thursday Island, and we ought
to have been half-way to Timor Laut; but the gale had driven us far to
the south, and we were now more anxious to save the ship than to
keep to our original course. We guessed we were somewhere within
the Gulf of Carpentaria.
My father, Captain M‘Leod, was in charge of his own ship, and this
was my first long trip with him, for I had just left school. He had led
an adventurous life, and used often to tell me that knocking about the
world for a year or two would do me no harm, and that there was plenty
of time to choose what I would do with my life when I had seen what all
sorts and conditions of men did with theirs.
After a most varied career he had made a fortune with precious
stones, not selling them over a counter —oh dear, no! the thought of
my big bronzed father as a shopkeeper is too funny—but trading with
them all over the Pacific Islands and Eastern Asia in The Seaspray ,
giving full bent to his roving disposition, and acquiring wealth at the
same time.


This time we were bound for Singapore and Hong Kong, calling at
Java and Sumatra on the way, and Captain M‘Leod had chosen the
route round the north of Australia partly for my benefit, for tropical
islands had always meant romance and adventure to my imagination—
and didn’t I get my fill of romance and adventure too ? Read on and
you shall see.
When the third day out from Thursday Island closed down, our
brave little ship was still struggling against wind and wave. We had
no time to admire the streamers of storm-cloud coloured red and gold
by the setting sun, for every man aboard the craft had his duties, and his
own life and the lives of his companions depended on his attention to
them. But my father, born sailor that he was, noticed the clouds, and
one cloud in particular claimed his attention, and the deductions he
drew from it made him whistle for me to come to him at once.
“ Duncan, d’you see that little cloud low down in the west ?” he
asked, pointing to a dark, harmless-looking cloud, so small that I should
not have noticed it. “ That means dirty weather coming.”
I laughed and looked at my clothes, soaked in engine-grease and sea-
water. “You don’t call this very clean weather, do you, father ?” I
asked.
He looked at me proudly, for he liked a man to laugh at danger, and
then his face became severe again and he gave me his orders.
“ I want you and the steward to stock the two boats. Food for all
hands as much as the lockers will carry, and ammunition and water ;
don’t forget to fill the kegs, whatever you do.” He gave a few more
brief orders, and then concluded as I turned away to obey him : “ And,
Duncan, I want you to remember this is your job. You’re boss.
The steward’s under your orders, see ? . . . And send the mate to me
right away, will you ? ”
I ran to carry out his injunctions, for I knew the case was urgent.
Even as I ran I noticed that the little cloud had grown bigger, and
looked as if it were scudding over the troubled sea and not floating in
the sky as the other clouds were. The lowering-tackle of the boats
was in perfect order—that had been one of my jobs right through the
voyage, and I had taken a pride in it —and now we stocked the boats with
6


tinned food, as much as they would hold, and filled the kegs with fresh
water. This was no easy task, for The Seaspray bobbed about like a
cork, although she was running with bare poles and the engine set to
steady her and keep her head to the wind. When everything ordered
by the captain was done and snugly stowed, I reported on the bridge,
but the words were hardly out of my mouth before my father seized the
megaphone and bellowed down at the deck of the tossing ship :
“ Stand by, all hands ! ”
We seemed to be running into a solid rock. As a matter of fact it
was running into us, and it was not a rock, but a dense mass of black
cloud. I gripped the rail and leant against it, awaiting the impact.
It came ! For a moment it took my breath away like a douche of icy
cold water. The ship seemed to stand still as if a huge hand had
gripped her. Then she quivered, and then, without any warning, there
was a sickening lurch and she turned broadside to the gale.
Down went the foremast with a splintering crash and hung over the
side. My father vaulted the rail of the bridge, landed on his feet, and,
before I guessed his intention, he was hacking at the cordage which held
the broken mast. Two of the crew helped him, and you may be sure
I was amongst the first to follow that heroic leadership. At times
waist-deep in water, at others clinging like cats to a deck as slippery and
sloping as a roof, we hacked and hauled till the wreckage was free and
went overboard. But no sooner had we got rid of this broken limb than
the other mast went, high up this time and more dangerous still, for the
ship heeled over dangerously, and the man who went aloft to cut it free
would almost certainly give his life in doing it, for nothing could stand
against the screaming gale.
My father sprang to do it.
“ Make way there ! Make way !” he shouted to the mate, who tried
to stop him. But the moment’s argument saved him for a time. A
mighty wave rose up like a wall of green rock and fell upon the deck,
snapping the broken mast like a carrot and hurling it against the side.
Not content with this, the next wave took the spar and used it like a
battering-ram against the forepart of the ship below the water-line,
crushing the side as easily as I could crush a match-box.


In the gathering darkness I did not see my father for a moment.
The ship lurched over and the sea rushed into her, and she settled down
so quickly that each man was hard set to keep his footing on the deck.
Lower and lower she sank till we were all awash. Then I heard my
father’s voice through the megaphone. He had climbed to the bridge
and was standing there, one hand on the rail as calmly as if he were
directing a pleasure trip. My heart filled with pride, though his words
were ominous enough:
“ Man the boats ! ”
During the trip we had done frequent boat-drill, so every man knew
his boat and position, and in a few seconds the boats were alongside and
manned.
“ All aboard ? ” came the query from the bridge.
The mate bawled back; “ Aye, aye, sir ! ” but I seized my mega-
phone and shouted : “ Come on, father! ”
“ Cast off ! ” came the command from the hero on the bridge.
Probably the mate’s boat cast off—l could not see it because of the
mountainous waves —but I held up my hand, ordering the seamen not
to cast off my boat yet. For the boat I was in was the captain’s boat, and
he was still on the bridge. Another wave came and hid him from my
sight. The Seaspray turned as she settled and sucked us into the vortex,
and if an old seaman had not disobeyed my orders we might have gone
down with the ship ; but he cut the painter and the rowers bent to their
oars, and for a few minutes it was uncertain whether we could battle
against the pull of the sinking ship. The fear of death gives men great
strength, and we floated free at last. I saw my gallant father leap from
the bridge and then the smother of waves hid all, and when next we
rose on a crest nothing remained of The Seaspray but a few things that
had floated loose.
I kept my men rowing round the scene of the disaster till it was quite
dark. The mate’s boat I did not see, save once, when a signal-flare
went up, showing it for a moment before it was again hidden by the
waves; but though we tried to reach it, the gale kept us back. I was
particularly anxious to get alongside the mate’s boat, because in the
uncertain light of the flare I thought I saw my father standing in the
(8,01*) 8


“ Stand by, all hands ! ”
bows. I also thought I heard his voice through the megaphone,
“ Pull south. Pull south.”
Darkness covered us, the darkness not only of night, but also of the
(a, oi8) 9 B


howling gale, and the sea threatened to swamp us if we searched any
longer, so we set ourselves to weather the storm.
How we got through the night I don’t know. Already exhausted
by three days’ anxiety and labour against wind and sea, the wreck of
our ship had taken the last ounce of strength out of us. It is wonderful
what endurance there is in man, and how he will pit his puny strength
against the elements and win time and time again when it is a question of
fighting for life. And we were most certainly fighting for life, hour by
hour, without a minute’s pause, but we won, at least for a time.
Dawn broke on a cloudless, untroubled sky, a steady wind, and a
heavy sea. There were seven in our boat, six seamen and myself, for
The Seaspray had been a small ship lightly manned, and ours was a
smaller boat than the mate’s. My authority as the captain’s son was
unquestioned, and I doled out food and water to each man with a
pardonable feeling of pride, for was I not a little king in a world of my
own ? What an empty world it was ! When the light increased we
saw we were alone, absolutely alone, the only spot within the huge circle
of the horizon. Not a seabird, not a floating speck, above all, not a sign
of the other boat.
It was impossible to think she had gone down, for she was in every
way a better boat than ours, and the mate and engineer were aboard
her as well as my father. I clung to my belief that I had seen him,
though often in the coming days I was tempted to doubt that momentary
flash of sight.
When the sun rose the wind rose too, and we had other things to
think about than our loneliness. Too exhausted to row against the
wind and search for the other boat, we rigged the mast and hoisted the
sails and let the wind carry us where it would. Our general direction
was a few points west of south, and we were therefore running towards
the north coast of Australia, though we had no means of telling how far
away it was. So strong was the wind all day that we reefed the sail
twice, and, but for our anxiety and the heat of the sun, we should have
had quite a good time.
Towards evening any sense of security we had was rudely dispelled.
I had given out the last meal of the day—two ship’s biscuits with a slab
10
■ H ;
THE SPLENDID SAVAGE


We were alone, absolutely alone.
of bully beef between them, and a pannikin of water to each man —and
we were lying back as comfortably as we could in our cramped quarters.
One of the crew, a young man whose optimism had kept us cheerful with
stories and an occasional song, seemed particularly content with the
situation, and lay back with one of his legs over the side and the other
resting on the gunwale. He was amusing us with a comical account of
the good time we should have if cast on a desert island, and a roar of
laughter had greeted a particularly funny description, when a piercing
scream suddenly froze our mirth to horror.
It was so unexpected and so terrible that for a moment we did not
know who had uttered it, till we noticed that the seat of our jovial story-
teller was empty. Every one leaned over and looked into the water.
A swirl told us plainly what had happened. Then we saw our comrade
fighting with a huge shark. Our glimpse of his struggles and of the
cruel eyes of the great fish were only momentary, for the strongest man
is powerless against these brutes, and he disappeared into the depths of
the sea. We had been so interested by the man’s story that we had not


With a rush and a swirl the shark gripped the boat-hook.
seen the fin of the shark as it turned over to grasp its prey, and it was
not till it had grabbed the leg which hung over the side and had pulled
the man after it, that we became conscious of the awful tragedy.
Silence settled down on the boat. An hour of light still remained,
and we kept watch on each side for more sharks. Not that there was
any fear of them upsetting the boat —it was too heavy for that —but the
great white monsters had a horrible fascination for us after what had
happened. In a few minutes I saw two, and thought I saw others just
out of sight like ghosts in the dark water. I threw an empty meat-tin
overboard. It was grabbed at once, and we smiled grimly to think of
the shark’s surprise when it found it could not eat it. Perhaps this
particular shark resented the insult, for he rose to the surface and glared
menacingly at us. Now was my chance. I had with me a splendid
Winchester repeating-rifle, the present of my father when I won the
Public Schools’ Target Prize, and now I put it to my shoulder and took
aim. The shark sank. I waited. It rose on the other side of the boat.


One of the men thrust at it with a boat-hook. With a rush and a swirl
the shark gripped the boat-hook, and would have pulled it out of the
man’s hand if another man had not helped hint.
“ Hang on a bit,” I shouted, steadying myself in the rocking boat.
“ Hang on. I’ll get him.”
And “ get him ” I did. The first struck him behind the eye.
His grip on the boat-hook relaxed and he turned over. The second
shot w r as deep into his body and must have reached a vital spot, fcft he
gave one or two spasmodic jerks and lay still. But before we could tell
whether he was dead or not, the sea was alive with sharks, tearing him
to pieces and fighting one another at the cannibal feast. I emptied the
magazine of the rifle into them, but could not sight properly, for they
were moving too quickly. It was a foolish waste of ammunition, for
we might need all our cartridges to provide us with food in the
coming days.
Soon it was dark again, and I set watches for the night, and slept
fitfully. Another day followed and another, the wind gradually abating,
but still blowing us briskly to the south. On the third day, as light
began to steal over the sea, the man on watch roused us all with the
welcome shout: “ Land ahead ! ”


CHAPTER II
NO one knows how welcome is the shout of “ Land ahead,” unless
he has almost despaired of seeing land again. I don’t mean that
I had ever really thought we were doomed to die at sea, for it is not my
disposition to be easily discouraged ; but the bravest of us had been
through experiences which tested his courage to the full, and as I was
the youngest member of the party, it can easily be understood that I
was heartily glad to hear that welcome shout.
The last vestiges of troubled sleep disappeared instantly, and we all
looked to where the man in the bows was pointing. To me it appeared
like a low bank of cloud, and I was disappointed, thinking the man mis-
taken ; but the oldest seaman there confirmed the man on watch, saying
that it was indeed land to which the wind was driving us. We had a
larger meal than usual that morning, for I had been very sparing with
the provisions, especially with the water, and all that day we saw the
grey line on the horizon get higher and more distinct, and we picked out
an island or two on the port bow and various capes and bays on the
mainland itself. For we decided at once that it was the mainland ;
it stretched too far east and west to be an island, for although the Gulf
of Carpentaria is not frequented water, it has been well enough surveyed
for us to know about any big islands there.
How eagerly we speculated on what lay ahead of us, and how bitterly
we regretted when the wind died away, for we were very impatient to
land on the unknown shore. But we had to curb our impatience for
another day at least, and a toilsome day it was, labouring at the oars
with the land apparently just as far away as ever for all our rowing.
We even rowed through the night and took advantage of a little wind
to make still further headway.
The new day, the day of hope, dawned clear and absolutely windless.
Seen through the sparkling morning air the land seemed very near, and
14


we could pick out the white beaches between the shining water and the
dark trees behind. What puzzled me at first was a line of breakers a
mile or so from the beach : the water inside that line seemed quite calm,
whereas the ocean still swelled after the gale. But an old sailor who
knew the tropics well told me that the land is often protected by a reef
of coral standing out to sea, and he made me more than ever curious to
see the wonders of the country ahead of us by the tales he told me.
With a shout of joy we saw the sail flap at last. This puff of wind
was followed by others, till our boat was forging through the water
without any help from the oars. How glad we were, for our limbs ached
badly from their cramped positions, but I doubt if we should have
minded rowing very much, for every stroke would have brought us
nearer to the longed-for land.
Two frowning headlands rose, one on each side of a beautiful bay
straight ahead of us, and soon we were near enough to see a line of coral
stretching from one headland to the other, shutting off the lagoon from
the sea. Was there a gap through it, I wondered. I hoped there was,
for I did not like the look of the rocks east and west of the bay. To my
delight, I saw a spot where the breakers rolled straight through to the
lagoon, and I set the course for it with the wind dead behind me. What
better sailing conditions could a man want ?
All eyes were centred on the beach. Was it inhabited ? Suddenly
we saw a spiral of smoke rising from the trees, then another one farther
inland. Each of us had a different explanation as to what the smokes
could mean, for none of us knew, but we all agreed that they were signals.
And if signals, then human beings must be making them. Soon there
was no doubt of the matter. So far away that they looked like ants,
we saw one or two, then about twenty people run down to the water’s
edge and stay there. Doubtless they were gesticulating to one another
and pointing to us, but we could not see, though even at that distance it
struck me that they were women and children. But half my attention
was given to steering, for quite suddenly the wind changed, not only
blowing from a different quarter, but becoming choppy.
When we were quite near the gap in the reef, the wind changed
altogether, and so suddenly that it was impossible to tack, and we were


driven parallel to the shore instead of straight towards it. There was
nothing for it but to make through a narrow neck of water between two
high rocky points west of the bay. As we entered this water the wind
dropped for a moment, and we came under the shadow of the cliff in a
dead and ominous calm.
Then, with a roar, a squall struck us. If we had not been so inter-
ested in the people on the beach we should have noticed it coming,
though these tropical squalls travel faster than an express train, but it
found us totally unprepared. When it reached the narrow gap through
the rocks its fury was greatly intensified, and it caught us in the nar-
rowest part. Without a second’s warning it filled the sail, forced it
over, and upset the boat. If any one had had the presence of mind to
cut the sail away we might have been saved, but we were flung into the
water, clinging to any part of the foundered boat we could catch hold of,
while wave after wave tried to wrench us away. In this way we were
driven right through the gap into calm water beyond. At first I thought
we were all safely clinging to the boat, but then I noticed only five of us.
“ What’s become of Bert ? ” I managed to shout.
The man who answered me had a look of abject terror on his face.
“ He’s gone,” he shouted back. “ He’s ”
The sentence was never finished. With a scream that not even the
gale could drown, he was dragged from his hold, not by a wave as I
thought at first, but by a long white torpedo-shaped body —a shark.
So that was where Bert had gone.
All four of us saw it and we looked at one another, wondering who
would be next. Remembering what I had read, I started to kick and
make as much splash as possible, while I clung to the bobbing keel of
the boat. The others followed my example. The old sailor worked
his way along to me and shouted in my ear :
“ Have you got a knife, sir ? ”
Not knowing what he wanted it for, I gave him the huge clasp-knife
I always carried. He took it and shouted :
“ I’m going to cut the sail away, sir. She’ll ride higher then. You
hoist yourself on to her, sir. Perhaps you’ll drift ashore before these
brutes get you.”
16


Even as he spoke we were three, and not four, clinging to the boat.
The place was alive with sharks. Before I could stop him the heroic
old man gripped the knife in his teeth and dived. I never saw him
again, but soon the keel of the boat lurched higher, and I dragged myself
up and lay along it like a lizard. My last mate went, and I was alone.
How long ? Cruel unblinking eyes stared at me and huge V-shaped
rows of teeth were so near that I felt sure the next wave would make me
their prey. I could do nothing. This fact produced a numbness of
mind which fierce action would have dispelled, and I was slipping into
unconsciousness when I heard, or thought I heard, a shout:
“ Hullo there ! A minute more ! A minute more ! ”
But I must have been mistaken. Men fancy strange things in the
last few moments of life. I was alone in a shark-infested bay, and the
nearest white voice was many hundreds of miles away. I lapsed into
unconsciousness, food for the ravenous creatures which surrounded me.
I regained consciousness slowly. A glare of white light shone on
my face and I kept my eyes closed, but my body ached so badly that I
moved to try and get more comfortable. To my surprise I found I was
lying on soft fur. I looked up. A screen of leaves was just above me,
and beyond it was the fierce sunlit sky. I was too exhausted to wonder
how I came to be in such a strange place, but the light was suddenly
blocked, and I sat up to find a blackfellow standing in front of me. He
was smiling nervously and holding out a wooden dish with oysters on it
and a bowl of water. But more astonishing still were the words he
used. They were in guttural English, but quite plain:
“ White man, eat.”
I gave up trying to solve the riddle and did as he bade me, first
taking a long satisfying drink of water and then eating the oysters with
the relish of a starving man. They were very good, and the man’s smile
got broader and broader as his nervousness wore off and he saw I trusted
him. Disappearing quietly into the bush, he came back again with
another wooden tray piled up with little cakes and a bowl of honey, which
he put by my side. He went away again and did not return.
By this time I was beginning to look around me. In front was a
strip of grass and a gently sloping beach going down to the lagoon,
(8,013) jy c


for I recognized it as the one we had tried to enter from the sea. The
rug I was lying on was made of beautiful possum skins.
Where was I ? Who had brought me here ? Why was I being
treated in this friendly way ? Why did not my rescuer appear ? These
and countless other questions flooded my mind, but I was too tired to
hunt round for an answer to them, and now that my hunger was appeased
a great desire for sleep came upon me. I yielded to it and snuggled
down into the furs and fell asleep at once.
I must have slept through the whole afternoon and following night,
for when I awoke it was morning. I was still stiff, but good food and
long satisfying sleep had restored me, and I got up and stretched myself.
Immediately the same blackfellow as before appeared with his broad,
friendly smile.
“ White man good fella ? ” he asked.
I did not quite understand what he said, for I had never heard a
blackfellow speak before, but I gathered he was inquiring after my
health as a civilized host would have done, so I nodded and smiled
and pointed to my mouth, for I was ravenous.
He laughed, and rubbed his great big body like a child does when
it sees something very nice to eat.
“My word. Big fella tuckout,” he said, and went away again.
This time he brought me such a meal as I had not seen since leaving
civilization. Oysters again and more of the little cakes and honey, but
fish also and a bird that looked like a duck, but tasted different, cooked
to perfection. Hunger got the better of my amazement, and I fell to
with more energy than grace I’m afraid, and soon there was nothing left
but empty dishes —big wooden dishes like tiny broad canoes.
My host was evidently pleased*with my performance, and he showed
it by grunting all the time, but when I offered him part of the roast bird,
he surprised me by refusing it.
“ White man cook it,” he said. “ White man no cook longa black-
fella. Oh no. My word ! ”
I thought I must have misunderstood him, for there was no white
man to cook the food, but he persisted in his statement:
“ White man cook it. Big fella white man, Ballanda.”
18


“Welcome, white man,” he said.
It was no use my telling him that a white man did not cook it,
but that a white man was eating it. Perhaps that was what he meant.
At any rate I enjoyed it thoroughly, but when he asked me, “ More ?
More tucker ?” I shook my head. I was completely satisfied.
And now what was Itodo ? My hunger was gone and I was feeling
fit for any adventure, and my curiosity prompted me to explore my
surroundings. But the blackfellow had other intentions for me, and
when I started to walk away down the beach, he set himself in front of
me, not threateningly, but with very decided gestures.
“ White man sit down little time,” he said earnestly. “ Ballanda
come up little time.”


As if to prove his words, he pointed to a track in the sand. At first
I saw no difference in it from the tracks of the blackfellow himself,
but as the man kept on pointing to it, I noticed that, whereas his track
showed a gap between the big toe and the others, the track that he called
Ballanda’s track had no such gap. Suddenly the thought struck me :
Was this a white man’s track ?
I had taken off my own boots, for they were soaked with sea water,
so I made a mark with one of my bare feet beside this track. It was
very much like it, but smaller. The big toe pointed slightly inwards, if
anything, certainly not outwards as the blackfellow’s did.
All doubts were set at rest, however, by the appearance of a man
walking along the beach towards us. The blackfellow saw him first.
With a cry of “ Ballanda ! Ballanda! ” he pointed to the stranger and
disappeared.
In the clear light of morning I had a good opportunity of seeing this
man as he walked with slow, dignified stride along the beach. He was
over six feet tall, broad, and of magnificent proportions. His only dress
was a peculiar short skirt like two aprons of soft skin hanging in front
and behind, leaving his powerful legs free play. I thought his skin was
black at first, but as he came nearer I saw I was wrong : it was a
beautiful deep brown. A closer view of him showed that his belt was
full of cartridges and that a long knife in a leather sheath hung round his
neck. This wonderful specimen of manhood halted a few yards from
me and looked straight at me. His face was in keeping with his body :
a high, intelligent forehead, big, piercing eyes set well apart, nose, lips,
and chin denoting high breeding and great courage. This was no
Australian blackfellow. Never, even in pictures of Greek athletes,
had I seen such a perfect man.
I was ragged and unkempt from the sea, yet I faced him boldly,
remembering whose son I was and that I too had a body and mind to
be proud of. For I had been the head of Public School athletics for
two years, and some men had gravely predicted that when I attained my
mature development I should be one of the best amateurs in Australia.
The man’s scrutiny of me evidently pleased him, for his grave face
broke into a smile and he held out his hand.


“ Welcome, white man,” he said in a slow, deep, powerful voice.
I gripped his hand in silence, and we stood thus for some seconds.
“ My name is Duncan M‘Leod,” I said at length.
“ You are welcome, Duncan M‘Leod,” he said in the same slow
manner, and he uttered the name with hesitation as if his tongue was
unaccustomed to such syllables. “My name ” —he hesitated for a
moment and smiled again as he spoke the name —“ my name is Ballanda ”
(Bal-land-er).
In spite of his name, I knew he was a white man. Face, form, and
speech proclaimed it. Instead of savages, I had fallen into the hands
of one of my own race, strange indeed in dress and manner, and
evidently unaccustomed to mixing with his own people, but undoubtedly
a white man. My thought turned at once to the other white men,
my recent companions. What had become of them, and how was it
that I had not shared their fate ? So I asked him :
“ Who rescued me ? ”
He repeated the word “ rescue ” as if he did not understand it, but
his face soon lit with intelligence as if a long-disused cord of association
had been struck.
“ Rescued you ? ” he repeated, using the word with evident delight.
“ I did.”
“ Then I owe you my life,” I said.
“It is nothing,” he smiled. “ You are a white man. Come.”
It was so simple, almost childishly simple, yet there was a dignity
about his speech and ways which saved them from all suggestion of
foolishness or immaturity.
I followed him, wondering.


CHAPTER 111
WE walked along the beach in the direction he had come from,
Ballanda silent through custom, myself silent because there was
so much to see. The dark jungle came down to the strip of grass where
I had been lying, which fringed the beautiful beach all the way round
the bay from cliff to cliff. Though many of the trees were such as I
had seen only in the botanical gardens at home —many pandanus palms,
thickets of bamboo where a spring bubbled up and made a swamp,
and groups of paper-bark —yet the majority were my old friends the
gums, and I did not feel so lonely when I noticed their smooth trunks
and familiar leaves. But strange creepers coiled round them and joined
in a network from tree to tree, and sometimes I caught glimpses of
bright-coloured flowers like birds perched in the thick foliage.
In a few minutes we rounded a corner of the beach and stood at the
mouth of a broad river. Fully a quarter of a mile away the opposite
bank was dark with mangrove trees. They were the first I had seen,
and their tangled roots standing up out of the mud and the impenetrable
gloom under them made me glad to be in the sun on the other side of
the river. There were no mangroves just here, and the beach sloped
down gently from the country behind it, which rose to the plains at the
back and made the position a very healthy one. Beyond the man-
groves were the rocks near which my boat had foundered with such
disastrous results.
Ballanda must have guessed that the sight of these rocks was painful
to me, for he touched my arm and pointed up the river. A little dis-
tance away a creek emptied itself into the river. But my eye had no
sooner caught the glint of its water, than I saw something which claimed
my whole attention —a hut so beautifully built and situated that I stood
back in amazement. Ballanda was evidently pleased.


“ That is my home,” he said simply, and then he showed what a
fine nature he had, by altering the remark to :
“ That is our home. Come.”
You may be sure I was all eagerness to follow him. On our way
to the hut another surprise awaited me, for a blacks’ camp came in
sight on the other side of the creek. I had never seen the homes of
Australian aborigines before, but from what I had read and from the
pictures I had seen I thought these were very well made. I guessed
that this was due to Ballanda’s influence, but I had no time for further
speculation, for Ballanda began to talk, and his words were so few that
I wanted to catch every one. In a very few days this slowness of speech
wore off through talking to me, and I found he had as great a command
of words as I had, and he seemed to use them better, perhaps because
he valued them more through long absence from them. Now he was
telling me about the blacks’ camp.
“ They never come on this side unless I tell them,” he said. “ This
side is mine, that side is theirs. I never go there.”
I decided that I would act in the same way, and indeed it suited me
well, for I had no wish to live in a camp of blackfellows. Not that I
was afraid, but the blood of a white man rebels against too close associa-
tion with black, and I felt that though I was a castaway I was still
Duncan M‘Leod, son of Captain M‘Leod, white man, and there is no
prouder title in the world than that.
The hut was shaded by a huge overhanging gum, and hidden from
the blacks’ camp by pandanus palms with a thick trellis of flowering
creepers between the trunks. A path of white coral led to a jetty where
several little boats were moored, but I had no time to examine them
then, for Ballanda was showing me the hut.
If the word “ hut ” suggests something rough and uncomfortable,
it is wrongly used here, but I can hardly call it a house. The outside
was thatched with palm-leaves, both roof and walls, and the eaves hung
over so far that a wide shady veranda ran all round. Inside, the place
was lined entirely with hides, soft and dark-coloured, and the light from
the door and the porthole windows showed very comfortable quarters
indeed.


Ballanda saw me looking curiously at the porthole windows. They
were brass bound and set in brass frames, the very best ship’s work-
manship.
“ I will tell you about them presently,” he said, with a smile, and
with that I had to be content.
There were two rooms, and all the fittings were ship’s fittings, and
they were of a better quality than any I had seen. The Seaspray had
been well equipped, but the ship from which these fittings were taken
must have been a little palace in comparison. One room was a bedroom
and the other a living-room, and there was a lean-to outside, where this
extraordinary white man cooked his meals. There were even books on
a shelf and a photograph of a man very like Ballanda, but older, his father
probably, but what interested me more than anything were the weapons
on the walls. There were rifles and shot-guns of several makes, and
even one or two carbines, with bandoliers of cartridges, sporting-belts
with knives and pouches—in fact, a well-equipped armoury. Ballanda
saw my eye kindle, and he took down a Winchester. The pattern was
a few years older than the one I had lost when the boat upset, but it was
a beautiful piece of work and in perfect order. I handled it lovingly :
I had a great fondness for weapons. My companion understood and
he asked :
“ You shoot ? ”
“ You bet I do,” I answered eagerly, for I was no mean shot, and
longed for a chance of displaying my prowess.
“ Shall we try ? ” he asked, and I agreed instantly, but it would have
suited my pride better if I had not been so eager to compete against this
man. For I was destined to see such a wonderful exhibition of shooting
that I don’t expect to be believed when I describe it.
He let me choose my weapon, and his, I noticed, was longer in the
barrel than mine and quite unusual in several ways, for the barrel was
chased all the way up with scrollwork, while the stock was inlaid with
wood and metal in a most handsome design. It was evidently some-
thing special, and from the careful way in which he pulled it out of its
case of hide I knew he valued it and looked after it as a true sportsman
should.


He took a coil of rope and a bundle of spears and we went to the beach.
The glare of the sun on the sand and calm water of the lagoon was
almost too much to bear, but the green grass and the dark jungle looked
cool and inviting.
Ballanda gave me first shot. Setting a spear upright in the sand, he
paced back a hundred yards. I sighted. The spear looked hardly
wider than a thread, and my first shot missed, but the spurt of sand
behind it was so near the line of fire that Ballanda, who had been watch-
ing carefully, clapped me on the shoulder approvingly.
“ A splendid shot,” he said, “ for you are not used to the rifle
or the light. Take one or two trial shots and then sight the spear
again.”
I looked round for something to aim at. A flock of cockatoos
screaming in a giant gum caught my eye, and I wheeled round. Before
I could take aim Ballanda stopped me.
“ Don’t shoot at them,” he said.
I was surprised, and must have shown it in my face, for he went
on to explain.
“ I never let any one kill except for food. If I did we should soon
have to camp somewhere else, for they would kill everything like other
tribes do. But my tribe ” —he said the words with dignity as befitted
the chief he was —“ but my tribe have stayed here ” —he considered a
moment, trying to find the exact number of years, but failed, and con-
cluded—“ for several years.”
There was nothing for me to do but comply. Indeed, I saw the
force of this law he had made, so I expended half a dozen cartridges
on such things as trees and prominent pebbles, and then toed the line
and sighted the spear again.
This time I made it sway. The nick the bullet made was little more
than a scratch, but Ballanda was delighted. He took me back to a hun-
dred and fifty yards, and after three attempts I knocked the spear out
of the sand, but the shot was not square enough to break the spear.
Then I tried at a moving mark. Ballanda threw a spear into the air
again and again. It was incredible to me the height he could throw
the slender shaft straight above his head, but though I tried five times
(8,018) 25 D


to hit it as it fell, only once did I influence it slightly at a hundred yards,
and that was more by luck than good judgment.
“ You are splendid,” said Ballanda. “ You have just come from the
sea, so your hand is not steady. When you recover and are strong, we
shall see.”
These rather quaint words pleased me a great deal, and though I am
telling this story and therefore ought not to talk about my own skill,
I must record that, before many weeks had gone by, I had proved
Ballanda’s words to be true. Whether it was the perfect life I led with
him, or the constant practice I got, or the association with such a mar-
vellous shot as he was, or perhaps all three of these causes together—but
I improved beyond my wildest hopes. The shooting which had won
my laurels at school was child’s-play to this.
But I never equalled Ballanda. His skill with weapons of all kinds
was almost uncanny. As easily as I can put my finger on a dot, so
easily could he put a bullet on it whether it was moving or still, and if
I recorded the distances I should not be believed. His sight was
unusually keen and his nerves faultless, while his body seemed to obey
his mind perfectly.
After breaking the spear at two hundred yards three times in suc-
cession, he stretched the rope between two palms and broke it at a
hundred and fifty yards by cutting the strands five times in the same
place. The rope was native-made of teased-out bark, and was very
light, and the wind swayed it and made shooting all the more difficult.
Such a feat is not hard to write about, but it is wellnigh impossible to
perform. As a final exhibition, Ballanda selected a slender palm-tree
so far away that between the sights it looked no thicker than a pencil.
He printed the letter B on its trunk with bullets. Unless the tree
has been cut down or burnt in one of the grass fires which sweep the
country sometimes, it must still be there on that northern beach as a
witness to the truth of this record.
In all this Ballanda showed no sign of boastfulness. He evidently
loved all sorts of bodily skill and prowess, and was glad to find a man of
his own race to associate with in them. Again and again, when I
showed my admiration of his shooting, he would say to me : “You
26


I had never seen anything like it.
wait a little time. Presently you also will do these things.” And some
of them I did do, for the tree next to the one with B on it bears the letter
M, though I must admit it is not a very clear letter.
All the time we were blazing away I was wondering where the
ammunition came from. The barbaric appearance of my companion
was proof that no ship had called there with supplies, and yet we were
apparently wasting precious powder and shot. I asked Ballanda about
it, and he took me to his magazine, just behind his dwelling, and showed
me cases and cases of ammunition.
“ Wherever did all this stuff come from ? ” I asked, for there was
enough there to last two men for several years.


“ From the ship,” he answered. “ But I will tell you all I know
presently. Come and see the canoes.
He was like a great big child showing his toys to another child, but
instead of being toys, these things were the very framework of a man’s
life in these parts. The jetty was made of jungle-timber decked with
ship’s decking, and three canoes were moored to it. One of these took
my eye immediately, because I had never seen anything like it. The
canoe was very frail, and two slender curved poles projected from one
side and had a cigar-shaped float attached to them. It looked like two
canoes, one smaller than the other, joined by these arching poles.
“ That is for rough weather,” explained Ballanda. “It cannot
upset.”
The largest canoe was scooped out of one piece of wood, and had
beautifully shaped sides with the prow a little higher than the stern.
It looked clumsy, but from the way it rode at its moorings I saw it was
a very sensitive craft indeed.
“ Did you make that ? ” I asked.
Ballanda laughed. “Oh no,” he replied. “ That is very old—
much older than lam. Two old men in the camp over there remember
it being washed up. Many years ago strange ships with fierce dark
men from Macassa came for pearls and trepang and tortoise-shell,
but a gale drove their ship on the reef and they were all drowned except
this.” He pointed to the canoe as if it were a human being who had been
saved from the wreck, and indeed the thing looked almost alive as it rose
and fell in the waves.
“ They must have been Malays,” I said. “ I know they used to
sail along the north coast of Australia and pick up what they could.”
“ I only know they came from Macassa,” he replied, “ and that the
blacks here use one or two of their words.”
Ballanda himself had made the third canoe in native fashion, but
much better than they make theirs, using hides instead of bark to cover
the framework. It was about twelve feet long, with a beam of less than
eighteen inches and no keel, so it was a very tricky craft to handle.


CHAPTER IV
BY the time Ballanda had shown me all over his camp it was getting
towards noon, and the effects of my splendid breakfast had worn
off. My host must have been hungry too, for he suggested dinner.
“ What would you like ? ” he asked, as if the resources of a well-
stocked pantry were at his disposal. My natural answer was :
“ What have you got ? ”
Instead of answering, Ballanda waved his hand to the sea, the sky,
and the jungle, and said with a smile :
“ I’ve got everything.”
“ I bet I know something you haven’t got,” I replied in fun. “ I’d
like some fried eggs and bacon. There, I bet that’s beaten you.”
Ballanda thought a moment.
“ The bacon lam sure of,” he replied, “ but not the eggs. We’ll
go and see if they’ve been laid.”
I thought he was joking, but, sure enough, wrapped in palm-leaf cloth
and hanging in a home-made safe, was as fine a piece of bacon as you
could wish to see. Surely this was not saved from a wreck, I thought.
The idea was too ridiculous for words, but to see bacon in such a place
made me ask where it came from.
“ From a pig, of course,” was the reply, and Ballanda enjoyed my
bewilderment very much. “ There are pigs in the jungle, and we
have plenty of salt, and it is easy to cure pieces of it with all this wood
about.”
“ And where are we going for the eggs ? ” I asked. “ You’ll be
telling me you have a poultry yard and a vegetable garden next.”
“ Come and see,” was his answer, “ but don’t forget to take a gun.”
He slung one over his shoulder bandolier-wise, and I did the same and
followed him into the bush.
The hours of greatest heat were at hand and the bush was very silent.


Now and again we disturbed a resting bird, and it gave a sleepy note,
but there was nothing to indicate how full of life the bush really was.
We skirted one or two open places like parks with tall dry grass, which
offered ideal cover for game, till we came to a part of the jungle where
the soil was loose and sandy and the timber not so close. The ground
was very uneven here, and I did not notice a mound of sand and sticks
till Ballanda stopped at it. There was nothing about it to make me
curious, but when my companion climbed to the top and started
scooping away handfuls of decaying leaves and twigs, I was sufficiently
interested to watch him closely. The mound was just like a volcano
on a small scale, and Ballanda was groping in the crater.
“ Whatever are you doing ? ” I asked.
“ This is what you called my poultry yard,” he replied. “ The nest
was not finished the other day, so I am sure the eggs will be fresh.”
“ But you can’t tell me that’s a nest,” I exclaimed, thinking he was
making fun of me. “ I’m not such a mug as to think you get eggs out
of the sand.”
Just then he found what he was searching for, and held it up without
saying anything, for it was a complete contradiction of my words. It
was an egg about the size of a goose’s egg, and pinkish-brown in colour.
I took it and found it was quite warm. Ballanda put his hand down
again and found several more.
“ How many of these could you eat ? ” he asked.
“ Are they good to eat ? ” I replied cautiously.
“You wait and see. Will half a dozen be enough for you ? ”
I laughed at the thought of eating half a dozen eggs of that size, and
asked him how many eggs there were in the nest —if nest it could be
called —and what sort of bird it was that made it.
“ Fve found as many as fifteen,” he replied, “ and never less than
ten. I never take more than I want. They go bad very soon in hot
weather. The bird is a jungle-fowl, and the two of them make this
mound with their wings and feet. They don’t sit on the eggs as other
birds do, but fill up the hole at the top of the mound with half-dead
leaves, which start to rot and keep the eggs warm till they are hatched.
Some day you may see the birds at work. I have, twice.”
30


This was the longest speech he had made to me. His interest was
aroused, and his face glowed with enthusiasm as he spoke about the
jungle-fowls. I always found him enthusiastic about the wild life of
the jungle and the sea, and sometimes surprised him in later days sitting
motionless and silent in some remote fastness, watching birds and beasts.
He inspired me with a similar interest, and it was not long before my
patience was rewarded by the sight of a pair of jungle-fowls hard at work
making one of their extraordinary nests. I was close enough to see they
were about the size of ordinary domestic fowls.
Ballanda put back the leaves carefully and left the mound as he found
it. I watched this man of the wilds with new interest. All savages
have a lust to kill, but here was a civilized savage, if I may use the words,
a man with the inherent wisdom and instincts of a highly evolved race,
but living the most primitive life possible. I was glad to find English
speech coming more readily to his tongue, and the future stretched out
pleasantly in front of me with such a companion. For though I was
sad at losing my recent shipmates, I felt sure that my father was still
alive and that one day he and I would be reunited.
“ Did you like the bird you had for breakfast ? ” asked Ballanda.
“Yes. I have never tasted anything I liked better. What was it ?
Not duck ? ”
“No. It was pigmy goose. Shall we have another ? ”
I agreed with the suggestion heartily, especially because it meant
using my gun, for I was very anxious to try it. We returned to camp
by another route, and on the way came to a fresh-water lagoon covered
with reeds and water-lilies. Ballanda had cautioned me to be quiet,
so not a thing moved on the lagoon when we left the shelter of the
trees, but a soft sound, something like deep breathing, came from the
reeds.
“ Pigmy geese,” whispered Ballanda, referring to the noise.
He walked forward cautiously and I followed. Presently he sank
up to his knees in slimy mud. I expected him to draw back, but instead
of doing that he went forward, sinking almost to his waist. It was a
most unpleasant experience for me, though I got used to it in the days
to come, but I was not going to be beaten, and floundered along behind


my silent guide. I must have been making more noise than I ought,
for he turned round and motioned me to stay where I was.
“ When I make them rise, you shoot two,” he whispered, and went on
wading farther into the lagoon. All at once he stopped and held his
hand backwards to me as a signal that he had seen the birds. I stood
like an image, up to my waist in mud. Then I heard the cry of a male
goose. It was so perfect that at first I could not believe that Ballanda
was making it, but he certainly was, and presently I heard a disturbance
in the reeds and one or two birds rose and circled over him. When they
saw it was a man and not a goose, they rose straight in the air. This was
my chance —an easy shot. I gave them one barrel and then the other.
Two birds fell almost within Ballanda’s reach.
Every living thing on the lagoon was roused to instant action. A
cloud of birds hid the sky for a minute or two. How many varieties
there were Ido not know. The clamour was deafening, and it was added
to from the surrounding bush by the screaming of many cockatoos.
Ballanda was pleased with the success of his scheme. This “ talk all
same old man goose ” or duck or whatever the bird was, is a familiar
method with the blacks, whose weapons are only spears and boomerangs,
and therefore not deadly except at close range, and Ballanda had learnt
the decoy-calls from them. Pigmy geese have beautiful thick feathers
and are about the size of a common duck. Those I had shot were so
plump that the sight of them recalled the fact that we were hungry and
made us hurry home.
While the meal was cooking Ballanda showed me a bathing-pool
he had made in the creek. I needed a bath badly, both for refreshment
and for cleanliness, and what was my delight when Ballanda brought
me a white shirt and a pair of white trousers. They had evidently been
folded away for a long time.
“ They were in a box I brought from the ship,” Ballanda told me,
but he only smiled and shook his head when I tried to find out more.
“ Come and eat,” he said. “ Afterwards we will talk.”
And eat we did. From my constant reference to food, it may seem
that I paid it undue attention, but when it is remembered that I had
battled through a cyclone in The Seaspray , followed by several days in


an open boat, it will be understood that there was no limit to my hunger.
Such a meal as we set before ourselves would have stimulated the most
jaded appetite.
Prawns, cooked with certain leaves that tasted like curry, were the
first course. Ballanda showed me where to catch prawns. The best
place was a billabong which the sea only entered at very high tides, and
we dredged amongst the reeds with a big net and caught as many as we
wanted. Some of them must have been eight inches long without the
feelers. I did not like these brackish-water prawns half as much as
those we caught in the sea with a very fine seine. They were much
smaller, but had a better flavour, I thought. No doubt they were the
same species, but the billabong ones had grown peacefully with plenty
of food, whereas the others had been constantly preyed upon by other
fish. I have never found a finer bait than prawns for fishing on the north
coast ; every variety of fish likes them, and we used to half-boil them
to make them tough enough to stay on the hooks.
To return to the meal. Following prawn-curry came the promised
bacon and eggs. Ballanda did not use dripping to fry the eggs, but an
oil that looked to me like olive oil, but tasted much better. He told me
it was taken from the dugong, a fish something like a porpoise, but
without the dorsal fin. Its average length is about ten feet, and amongst
its many peculiarities are its nose and mouth, which are very like those
of a horse. I was destined to have personal experience of the dugong
later on, but when I tasted eggs and bacon fried in its oil I had never
even seen one of these strange creatures.
More of the little cakes came on at this stage, and my host told me
they were made of yam-flour, a root which native women dig up and
dry and then grind to powder between stones. I was feeling pretty
well satisfied by this time, but the sight of one of the pigmy geese all
brown and spluttering from the spit made me loosen my belt and tackle
this new dish bravely. In this I was urged on by the example of Ballanda,
who had an even better appetite than I had, for when I sat back and
declared I could not eat another mouthful, he calmly brought out the
second goose and demolished that also.
Ballanda’s kitchen was like the cook’s galley on board a small shio
(».oi 8 ) 33 £


except that there was much more room for everything, especially for
fires. It was as well fitted out as the rest of his dwelling, and though
some of the contrivances were home-made, most of them had evidently
once been part of a ship.
By this time I was burning with curiosity to know more about
Ballanda and how he came to be in such a place, so I reminded him of
his promise. He seemed quite willing, so we collected some skin rugs
and lay out under a shelter he had constructed with bamboo stakes
thatched with palm leaves. In front of us was the strip of grass, then
the beach and the lagoon with the coral reef capped with the spray of
ocean rollers, and over all the brilliant blue sky. It was the hour of
rest. Nothing broke the silence but Ballanda’s deep soft voice. I have
given his short history as much as possible in his own words, but some-
times I have had to use my own because disuse made him employ
wrong ones or take several sentences to say what later on he learned to
say in one.
“ I am Ballanda, White Chief of the Buffalo Totem tribe,” he began,
stretching himself on the rug. “My word is law from the Black Rocks,
which are three days’ canoe paddle towards the setting sun, to the
Tunnelled Headland, which is two days’ canoe paddle the other way.
Beyond the Headland live the Alligator Totem tribe, who promise to
obey my law, but do not. Very soon they also will obey the law of
Ballanda the Chief.”
This was said without boasting, and sounded very fine from such a
magnificent specimen of manhood as he was.
“ I came from the sea,” he went on, “ just as you did. Seven mon-
soons have come and gone since then. I remember very little what
happened before then, but since I saw you I have remembered more,
and words come more easily to my tongue.
“ I remember a white woman dressed in white. I think she was
my mother. And I remember my father when I look at the picture
of him in my hut. I think I once lived in a house with many rooms, and
grass and trees all round it. Other houses were not far away, a bigger
camp, I should think, than all the blacks’ camps in the world put
together. White men like us lived there.
34


“ The blacks unloaded these for me.”
“ My father once sailed with me in a canoe bigger than any canoe
that was ever made before. It had sails, but often it did not use them,
but went through the sea with black smoke coming from a chimney on
deck. Talking to you now, these things come back for the first time.
I have not seen a white man for seven monsoons.”
He paused and put his hand to his head as if memory were struggling
to gain the mastery. I guessed that some great privation or an accident
had partially robbed him of memory, and I found out later that I was
quite right in this. He was silent for so long that I had to remind him
of the story.
“ Oh yes, I was telling you how I came here,” he said, recovering
35


himself. “ There was a storm. I have seen many storms on this
coast, and they make me remember the one that washed me up on this
beach. There never was such a storm before. The canoe we sailed in
was very big and had a fire in the middle of it and black smoke, as I told
you before, but it was as helpless as my skin canoe over there at the
jetty. I have been beyond the reef when squalls have come down,
and I have weathered them because I know the ways of boats and of
waves. The man who steered this big canoe did not know.
“ I remember swimming, then something struck my head. That
was all. When I awoke, I was Ballanda, White Chief.”
He sat up and held out his hand to me, showing me a ring I had seen
but had not paid particular attention to. It was gold, engraved all
round with curious signs, and a dark red stone was set in it; not a ruby
or any stone my father had ever shown me.
“ That ring saved my life,” he said. “It fitted in with an old tale
of the blacks along this coast. They made me chief at once because of
it. The canoe that had brought us was jammed between rocks over
there beyond the mangroves. It was empty of men, but full of all the
things we had brought. I don’t remember why we came, but my
father must have intended staying away a long time and doing much
shooting, for there were many guns and boxes and boxes of ammunition.
The blacks unloaded these for me, and I brought away other things too.
Then another storm came and broke the canoe to pieces. I built my
hut out of the pieces.”


CHAPTER V
FOR a few days I idled about the encampment with Ballanda, never
going far from the hut, and enjoying such ample food and rest
that I soon got over the effects of the wreck. When I began to feel so
fit that I had to do something to work off my energy, he took me in
hand and taught me all manner of bushcraft and seacraft.
“We will become two Ballandas,” he said to me one day, “ and then
no one will dare to disobey us from the ocean where the sun rises to the
hill where it sets. Wherever our names are spoken, men will become
brave hunters in peace, and honourable enemies in war, and all camps
will be clean and well ordered.”
It was a fine idea, but impossible to realize, I knew, but I admired
the man for his childlike faith, and I learnt all I possibly could from him.
Clothes, or rather the lack of them, was an important matter. There
were only two shirts and one pair of trousers in the locker, and these
were of thin cotton and quite useless for our rough life. Ballanda urged
me to dress as he did, and indeed there was much to be said for his
simple costume, but it would take a long time for my skin to become
strong enough, and in the meanwhile I compromised in this way. I
found I must have a covering for my legs, because when I tried walking
through the bush without any protection, I got in such a state that it
was days before the scratches healed. So we made a pair of breeches,
something like riding breeches, out of soft possum skin, with leggings
and boots in one piece out of the same material. Ballanda taught me
to do all kinds of things with bark rope, and after one or two failures
I made two strong, light, pliable soles for my possum-skin boots.
Gradually I got used to going without a shirt, though I suffered
badly from sunburn the first week, and had to be plastered every night
with an ointment made of goose’s fat mixed with dugong oil. An old
lubra in the camp plaited me a hat out of palm fibres. She took a long
37


time over it, and made it under water, but the hat was well worth the
trouble, being very strong and as light as a Panama. So that was how
I went about. Broad hat, the upper part of my body bare and brown,
cartridge belt and knife, and my beautiful possum-skin breeches and
leggings.
We must have looked a strange pair, Ballanda and I, but as there was
nobody to make fun of us, we were none the wiser. In fact, I think my
garment raised me in the estimation of the blacks. At any rate they
kept away from me as they always had from Ballanda, except when he
definitely called one of them over, and when we did happen to meet,
they were very respectful to me.
Living, as we were, on the edge both of the sea and of a broad tidal
river, it was almost as necessary to be proficient on sea as on land.
Love of ships was strong in me, and my recent sad experiences had not
lessened it. So I took to canoeing like a duck takes to water, in more
senses than one, for I got so many duckings before I could properly
manage the delicate craft, that I spent more time out of them than in
them. But determination will conquer anything, and I had as my
example Ballanda, who handled the daintiest canoe with consummate
ease, turning it almost like the wind turns a floating leaf, and indeed
it seemed almost as frail as a leaf. And once, when the mood was on
him, he took the skin canoe out through the gap in the reef, meeting the
ocean rollers and being tossed from one to the other like spray. I heard
him shout and sing with the joy of combat, and never shall I forget
the dexterous twist with which he turned the canoe right-about-face
on the top of a huge comber. It was a wonderful exhibition, but very
foolhardy, for the place was probably alive with sharks.
For some time I confined my canoe practice to the lagoon. The
water was quiet there, and I got to know how slight a twist of the wrist
is needed to alter the course of a canoe. It was also safer from sharks,
for I was always liable to tip over at first, and I could see a long way
through the clear, still water.
One day I had an experience which taught me more about sharks
than a great deal of explanation would have done. I was out in the
skin canoe. Ballanda was wading in the shallows shouting directions,
38




and the game was for me to follow hi*" directions immediately, no matter
how quickly they came. This was splendid practice, for I had no idea
what the next shout would be, and he made the course as tricky as he
possibly could. I was getting on pretty well, and was absolutely
absorbed in the work, when I saw a long white body just under the water
a few yards from the canoe. If I had had any doubt what it was, the
three-cornered fin that stuck up out of the water when the brute turned
would have told me. A shark.
Ballanda’s next shout was unheeded. Those cruel eyes and that
horrid slit of a mouth fascinated me. I turned the canoe to the shore.
The shark passed under it, bumping it up ever so slightly, but quite
enough to disturb the balance. I must have plunged the paddle deeper
than usual, and, before I could recover, it was snatched out of my hand.
The jerk upset me.
The perfect life I had been living had tuned my nerves, and im-
mediately I touched the water, all fascination from the shark left me
and my mind was perfectly clear. I heard Ballanda shout. He must
have guessed what was happening, for the word that came over the
water was :
“ Splash ! ”
So I splashed ! Ido not say it boastfully, but I took a fierce joy
in pitting myself against this sea marauder. He was bigger than I was
and was more at home in the water, but I was a man with a brain, and I
knew, yes, I really did know, in spite of my deadly peril, that I should
beat him. I even gripped the painter of the canoe in my teeth as it
passed me and towed it along as I splashed my way to shore.
How often, on a summer’s day in the south, when bathing in the
sea, had I turned on my back and lifted one leg after another out of the
water, plunging them back again with a splash like riding a bicycle
upside down. This I had done in sheer high spirits, shouting all the
time because of the joy of sparkling water and hot sunshine. Now
I did just the same, but in grim earnest, though the same sense of
supremacy tingled all over me as it had done in former days.
I won. Ballanda came out to meet me, but when he saw how well
I was getting on he let me learn my lesson to the full, and we hauled
40


''' ' /
Those cruel eyes and that horrid slit of a mouth fascinated me.
ourselves and the canoe into the shallows with shouts of triumphant
laughter. Oh, it was good to be alive those days. Dangers did but
teach us resource and courage, and one adventure after another made us
exult in our youth and strength and in the glory of our companionship.
Shooting, of course, claimed much of our time. Not only had the
larder to be replenished almost daily, but also I was very anxious to
become as good a shot as Ballanda. When I think now of how we wasted
cartridges, I am surprised, for the ammunition-shed could not possibly
have held more than a few years’ supply at the rate we were going. But
when does youth ever think of the future ? lam glad, a thousand times
glad, that we did not. We lived in the glorious present, and knew that
to-morrow’s needs would bring a way of supplying them. So we prac-
tised shooting to our hearts’ content.
To show how mad we were, I will tell you about a mark I have on
(8.018) 41 p


my right ear. I shall carry that mark of folly to my dying day, and
though it is so slight that nobody notices it, I often finger it now and think
of the day it was made.
I had been a second Ballanda for several weeks when it happened.
I had made surprising improvement in all forms of sport and necessity
on sea and land. I was even beginning to cherish a hope that some day
I would rival the White Chief himself as a marksman. But as yet he
was far ahead of me with the rifle. One of the things he used to do
was to put four bullets between my fingers as I held my open palm
against a tree. This he did again and again at two hundred yards. At
first I was scared, and it taught me self-control and absolute confidence
in my companion’s skill as I held my hand steady while he blazed away.
One day, in bravado, I suggested changing the game to a more
dangerous one still.
“ I’ll put my head against the tree, Ballanda,” I said, “ and see if
you can draw its outline in shots from a hundred yards.”
What a foolish thing to suggest ! As soon as I did so I was sorry,
for my life would be at stake, not for a worthy cause, but just as a trial
of skill. But Ballanda agreed instantly and quite calmly, and I dared
not take back my words. So the tree was picked and the distance paced
off and I stood upright facing Ballanda. My nerves were in good order
and I did not shut my eyes. I pressed my head against the tree and
gripped its trunk with my hands and shouted that I was ready.
The first shot scorched my neck just where the jugular throbs.
The second did the same on the other side. The third burnt through
my hair on top, and the fourth was too near my left ear to be pleasant.
Probably I moved slightly. I cannot think it was Ballanda’s fault, and
indeed we proved it was not afterwards, for the distance between the
two shots left ample room for my head, but the fifth shot nicked the
flesh of my right ear.
I signalled him to stop. Even if the slight accident had not happened,
I could not have stood any more, and I wonder how my nerves stood
as much as they did. I stepped aside and put my hand to the wound.
Ballanda saw me and raced up, full of anxiety. I explained it was my
fault, but he would not let me take the blame.


“It was me,” he exclaimed very excitedly. “It was me. Oh,
what a fool I am. I might have killed you. I might have lost my white
friend.” For some moments he was too overcome to continue, and
when he became quiet, he said slowly :
“ Duncan, Duncan Ballanda, it is foolish to risk a life for sport.
We will never do it again. I will take care of my life for your sake.
Will you do the same for me ? ”
There was nothing sentimental in this simple earnestness. It
affected me deeply and I responded to it. We were closer friends after
the accident.
Although I improved in shooting, I could not forget my Winchester
repeating rifle, which had gone down when the boat upset. It was a
present from my father after I had won the Public Schools* Target
Prize, and was inscribed with my name in silver on the stock. I had
done a lot of shooting with it, and it fell easily into my hand. I could
not find a weapon amongst Ballanda’s collection that I liked half so
well. In fact, he did not have a rifle of that size, though there were
several boxes of cartridges in the store which were suitable for it and
for no other. There must have been a rifle like mine on the ship, but
Ballanda had missed it. This store of ammunition made me all the
more sorry I had lost my favourite gun.
Returning from practice one day after having made rather a poor
show, I mentioned my lost Winchester and the cases of ammunition
that would fit it.
“ Why didn’t you tell me before ? ” asked Ballanda.
“ What would have been the good ? ”
“ You could have had it at once,” he replied simply.
“ Whatever do you mean ? ” I asked. “ How could I have had
it when it’s at the bottom of the sea ? ”
“ I will get it for you.”
This was really too much to believe, and I was silent, wondering what
he would say next. Though his next remark was meant for an explana-
tion, it did not give me any more hope of having my rifle back.
“ I will dive for it,” he said.
“ When ? ” I asked impatiently, for the thing seemed mere folly to me.
43


Ballanda looked at the sea and then at the sun.
“ Next slack tide,” he remarked, as calmly as if he had suggested
gathering oysters when the tide was low. “ And that will be to-morrow
early.”
I went to bed in an unbelieving frame of mind. I had seen Ballanda
do wonderful things in the water, but this, I knew, was utterly beyond
him. He awakened me before dawn, and we had breakfast in the chill
grey light. We took nothing with us but our knives, and when we
pushed off from the jetty in the Malay canoe I thought how ill-equipped
we were for diving.
Ballanda took one paddle and worked from the stern, while I knelt
up and used mine in the prow. We went right out to sea through the
gap in the reef, and then turned west and entered between the frowning
headlands where The Seaspray's boat had upset. The tide was fast
falling to the ebb as we skirted the black rocks.
“ Show me exactly where you turned over,” said Ballanda.
This might have been impossible, had I not noticed, just before the
squall struck us, a few straggling remnants of a nest high up the cliff. I
showed Ballanda the spot, and told him that the boat capsized suddenly,
and that all the contents, especially such a heavy thing as a rifle, must
have been tipped out at once. I gave these details rather more to
satisfy him than because I thought he would get my rifle, for, now
we were at the scene of the accident, it looked more hopeless than
ever.
We waited for slack tide.
“ It’s very deep,” said Ballanda. “ The tide rushes through at
a great pace. IVe never been down here.” He pointed through the
dark swirling water.
“ Isn’t it too deep ? ” I asked.
“ I’ll try,” he replied, and gave me directions about keeping the
canoe’s nose steady while he dived.
Presently the water was sufficiently still for him to try. He took off
his sarong and stood up in the canoe with nothing on but his sheath-
knife round his neck. In the morning light his dark polished skin and
perfect figure made him look a statue of a god done in bronze. He took


He took two deep breaths, raising his arms over his head.
two deep breaths, raising his arms over his head and jerking them down
to expel the air, and then a third.
I had not expected him to dive just then, and was not quite ready,
but he left the canoe so lightly and cleft the water with so little dis-
turbance that the frail craft hardly rocked. It seemed a long time before
he appeared again. He let the air out of his lungs with a huge gasp.
“ I didn’t get it,” he panted. “ It’s very deep.” He took another
dive, from the surface this time just like a diving-duck, and I saw him


swimming his way down straight as an arrow till the shadows swallowed
him up.
Just as he disappeared from sight another thing came into view.
How well I knew it by now. White, smooth, relentless —a huge shark !
It was between Ballanda and the surface. What could I do ? It was
a matter of seconds, and I was in an empty canoe. How hard it is to be
idle in the face of danger, yet that was my state : sitting idle while
Ballanda met his death.
The shark must have seen him, for it cruised round waiting. The
man started to rise. He saw the danger and altered his course. The
monster turned and made for him. Swift as light Ballanda made a
stroke, jabbed one thumb into the shark’s eye and darted to the surface.
You may be sure I lost no time in pulling him on board.
“ I saw the rifle,” he panted. “ I would have brought it up if that
brute hadn’t interfered. I’ll get it next time, but I’ll have to settle
him first.”
I thought he meant that he would return another time, but I soon
saw I was wrong. Taking the sheath-knife out of its case, he gripped
it in his teeth and prepared to dive again. In vain did I try to prevent
him. I even moved the canoe away a paddle-stroke or two, but he shot
an angry glance at me, and I saw he was determined. The shark was
evidently in great pain, for it was swimming round and round in circles,
but it did not go away from the boat. I thought I saw other shadowy
white forms lower down, and I was sick at heart to think that Ballanda
was running such risks out of bravado or senseless revenge.
He dived again. I watched spellbound. It was the work of an
instant, and was done so well that it appeared easy. Ballanda shot down
till he was below the shark, then turned, the knife now gripped in his
hand. Suddenly he slashed a long wound in the body of the great fish.
Up he came and clambered into the canoe. The shark rose also and
all around was red with its blood. A few struggles and it was dead.
“ Now watch,” said Ballanda.
In an instant another shark appeared, then another, then a third,
then so many that the water seemed alive with them. They started
tearing off pieces of their dead companion. Ballanda slung a rope
46


round it and told me to paddle hard for the open sea. I did so, and we
led a procession of sharks right out beyond the rocks to the ocean rollers.
Ballanda took the rope off here and let the sharks enjoy the cannibal
feast.
“ Now back as quick as we can,” he shouted. “ I’ll get the rifle this
time.”
But before we reached the spot again the tide had begun to flow,
and, try as he would, Ballanda could not reach the bottom against it.
“ The current’s very strong down there,” he told me after the third
attempt. “ I’ve seen the rifle, though. It’s lying across two rocks,
and the water swirls between them and carries me away.”
I advised him to give it up, for I had seen enough sharks to last me
a long time.
“ Don’t you bother about them,” he assured me. “ They won’t
come in till every bit of the dead one is eaten. That’s why I towed it
out to sea.”
Near by, close under the cliff, was a shelf of rock on which lay several
big stones. They had evidently fallen from the main mass and been
too big for the waves to wash off. Ballanda saw them, and his face lit
with triumph.
“ I know what I’ll do,” he shouted. “ Just paddle under that
ledge, will you ? ”
I did so, and he took one of the stones on board. It was so heavy
that it would have swamped the canoe if he had put it at one end
or the other ; but he put it exactly in the middle, and with this burden
I paddled back to the same place as before.
Then Ballanda jumped overboard with this stone in his hands.
Down he went, and it must have taken all his strength to keep hold of
the stone, but he managed to do it, and when he rose to the surface he
waved my rifle over his head triumphantly.
It was little the worse for its wetting, and I cleaned and oiled it till
it was as good as it had ever been before. I had valued this rifle before,
but now I valued it more than ever because of my friend’s marvellous
feat. And it was with this rifle that I acquired such skill that even
Ballanda had to try his best before he could beat me.


CHAPTER VI
SO far I had slept in a hammock slung under Ballanda’s veranda
with a mosquito net over it. These were only temporary quarters,
and we now set to work to build another room on to the hut. There
was a pile of timbers and ship’s fittings near the storehouse, for Ballanda
had taken from the ship far more than he could use for his own dwelling,
and with these we soon had the framework up, a large room with a bunk
built against one end, a boarded floor, a table, and three port-hole
windows. Two blacks were employed to thatch the roof and walls
outside. It was a very tedious job, and the whole camp must have
worked at it, for every morning the two men brought over several
bundles of prepared palm leaves, which the other members of the tribe
must have got ready the previous day.
We had no buffalo-skins to line the inside with, and Ballanda’s
quarters looked so cosy and so suitable for our life of hunting and adven-
ture, that I wanted mine to be the same. I promised myself that in a
year or two my little den would look very fine with all sorts of trophies
on its walls.
Ballanda never took natives with him buffalo hunting. When the
hunt was over he used to send the men out to skin the animals and to
bring the hide and the head with brains and tongue to him, leaving
them to do what they liked with the rest of the carcass. For the buffalo
was their totem sign.
Amongst Australian aborigines, each tribe has its sign, usually a bird
or a beast; Boy Scouts name their patrols in the same way. The tribe
over which Ballanda ruled was the Buffalo Totem tribe. This shows
that, although the buffalo is not native to Australia, it must have been
introduced a long time ago, for some of the tribes are very old and their
totem signs go back many years. Anyhow, it did not seem right to
48


Ballanda to ask the tribe to help kill an animal they had taken as their
tribal sign. So we went alone.
Ballanda took the heaviest calibre rifle he had, and at his advice
I left my beloved Winchester at home and chose one almost as deadly as
his. Imagine us, therefore, setting out, not with the usual paraphernalia
for big-game hunting, but just two youths, almost naked, with a rifle
and belt of cartridges each, and, of course, the knives which never left
us. We were about equal in height, both well over six feet, Ballanda
topping me by an inch, and though he was broader and stronger both
because of the life he had led and because he had almost reached
mature manhood, yet I was not much his inferior.
We crossed the creek and followed the big river for nearly a mile,
then struck inland to avoid a forest of mangroves which lined the river
at this point. In about an hour we came to a grassy plain surrounded
on all sides by dense scrub.
“ An ideal spot for game,” I whispered to Ballanda.
“ Wait,” he cautioned me, peering across the long grass. “ D’you
see the grass waving over there ? ”
I followed the direction of his hand and saw —or thought I saw —
a movement about the middle of the plain. I was very excited.
“ Are they buffaloes ? ” I asked.
He shook his head doubtfully.
We were crouching down so that our heads would not show above
the grass, and I began to creep forward in the way I had stalked game
with my father. Ballanda stopped me with a touch of his hand.
“ We’re in the wind,” he said, and it was only then that I noticed a
faint breeze blowing. “We wouldn’t get a sight of them that way.
Come. I’ll show you.”
Now I was to see the hunting Ballanda at his best. Like a shadow
he shrank back into the gloom of the trees. I followed, and without
any noise we circled the plain, keeping out of sight. I say “ without
any noise,” and indeed I thought I was doing very well, but on many
following days Ballanda taught me the trick of walking silently, so per-
haps he was not quite satisfied with my performance then.
When we were opposite the hidden animals on the other side
(8.013) 49 G


Ballanda looked about for a suitable tree. I wondered at this, for I
expected him to creep forward against the wind and surprise his quarry,
and I wondered still more when he climbed a tree. I tried to follow, but
should have failed had he not helped me. In climbing he was certainly
my master, but not for long, because he wanted to teach me every
aspect of bushcraft, and I was so willing to learn, that after several
days I learnt the way of it, and was soon as much at home in a tree as
he was.
Higher and higher we climbed, till we came out on a bough which
overlooked the plain. There, below us, was the prettiest sight imagin-
able—a herd of wild horses. Unconscious of danger, they grazed as
quietly as if they had been tame horses in a paddock, but the cut of
them and their nervous alert movements were very different from the
sober actions of ordinary horses.
Every line of them was instinct with wild life. On the outskirts of
the herd was a magnificent stallion, jet black, with a coat so glossy that
it sent back the rays of the sun as if it had been made of metal. Farther
in were the mares, some of which had foals with them. Delicate little
fellows they looked, thin and sinewy like race-horse foals, and they ran
about and played with one another like young lambs. I looked at
Ballanda and touched my rifle. I did not want to shoot, but I wondered
if he did. He misunderstood me and frowned.
“ No, no,” he whispered. “ What’s the good ? Haven’t they as
much right to live as we have ? Besides, they’re no good to us.”
“ I didn’t mean to kill them,” I explained. “ I only wanted to
frighten them and see them gallop away.”
“ Your shot would spoil all chance of buffalo,” he said. “ I’ve
seen buffalo on this plain before now, though the best place is farther
on. But I’ll make them gallop, if that’s all you want.”
We made ourselves comfortable in the tree, and almost at once I
heard the cawing of a crow. I looked up. No bird could be seen,
and I had a splendid view of the forest, for we were very high up. Then
I heard other crows disputing amongst themselves just as if they had
been disturbed. I was so perplexed that Ballanda laughed. The
sounds of cawing had come from him.


The prettiest sight imaginable—a herd of wild horses.


“ Look,” he said, pointing to the horses, and then he started to
imitate crows again.
The horses had taken alarm. The stallion lifted its head and looked
towards the forest, stamping defiance. Of course it saw nothing, for
we were screened with leaves, but the crows still kept up the dispute,
so he circled round and round his herd, bunching them with foals in
the centre, mares next, and colts on the outside. It was wonderful
to watch the masterful way in which he did this, running open-mouthed
at any cheeky colt which disputed his authority, and reducing all to
perfect obedience. Then he approached the tree from which the
sounds came. Wild animals are naturally curious, and this magnificent
stallion was no exception to the rule. Ready to fly back in an instant,
he stepped delicately forward, snorting and stamping from time to time,
his tail falling in a fine curve and his crest and mane standing up nobly.
Ballanda handed me his rifle. “ Don’t watch me,” he said, “or
you’ll miss the fun. Watch the horse.”
But I could not help watching him, though I didn’t miss much of
what was happening on the plain either. I took his rifle and he sat down
on the branch. It seemed to me a great height above the ground, but
evidently Ballanda did not think so, for when the horse was almost
under the tree he slipped off the bough, grasping it with his hands for
a moment, and then dropped.
I gasped with astonishment. Surely he would be killed, or at least
he would break a bone. But no, he landed like a cat, unhurt. The
horse was too astonished to move for a second. Wild man looked into
the eyes of wild horse. It was wonderful. Glossy black horse with
muscles rippling under a perfect hide ; bronze man of such fine pro-
portions that he looked the very spirit of the bush.
Then he lifted his hands. Away went the stallion. Away went
the herd too, but the gallant leader of that herd always kept at the back,
between them and the supposed danger.
Ballanda was laughing quietly when I joined him on the ground.
Seeing my perplexity, he told me why he had cawed like a crow.
“ It’s an old trick,” he said. “ Crows often follow a mob of blacks
when they’re out hunting, hoping to get some scraps, I expect. So
52


the horses thought blacks were after them, but as they couldn’t see
them, the old chap came up to investigate. I’ve never seen it work so
well as it did to-day.”
The sun was now nearly at noon height, and we had no time to
linger if we were to secure any buffalo that day. The plain where
Ballanda usually came upon them was empty of big game. Perhaps
they had been warned by the thud of galloping hoofs, for the sound
would carry a long way. We saw where they had been feeding recently,
and, picking up their tracks, Ballanda followed at a run through dense
scrub where I could see not the least sign of a hoof-print. But his
bush-trained eyes never failed, and sure enough, after a most uncom-
fortable half-hour for me, we came on a place where the trees thinned,
not into a definite plain, but more like a well-wooded park.
I was nearly winded with running, and was not sorry when Ballanda
told me to sit down and rest for a while.
“ You’ll want good legs, a clear eye, and a steady hand to get
buffalo,” he said. “ You stay here till I come back. I won’t be long.”
“ But you’re not going to start shooting, are you ? ” I asked, afraid
he intended to leave me out of the fun. “I’m all right; really I am.”
He smiled at my eagerness, and I knew I could trust his word and
his guidance. “ No, I won’t shoot,” he said. “ I’ll leave my rifle
behind. I’m just going to have a look round and find out where
they are.”
“ How d’you know they’re here at all ? ” I asked, for there was
neither sight nor sound of the animals, but only a confused mass of
track leading into the glade.
He did not answer me at once, but stood stock-still listening. What
he heard, or whether he was using some strange bush sense which I
did not possess, I can’t say, for the hot middle of the day was silent to
me; but he looked up at last with as much assurance as if he had actually
seen the wide-curved horns and massive bodies of the buffalo.
“ They’re here all right,” he assured me confidently.
He faded into the darkness of the trees. “ Faded ” is a ghostly
word to use of such a full-blooded man as Ballanda, but that is just what
he did. Without a sound he was gone, and I caught only vague


glimpses of him before he disappeared altogether. I lay on my back
full stretch and took long, slow, deep breaths, expelling the air again with
as much force as I could without making a noise. There is nothing like
this to steady the nerves and restore tone to the body quickly, and I was
determined that Ballanda should have no cause for complaint. Soon
he was back again, standing over me before I was aware of his presence.
“ How are you feeling ? ” he asked.
“ Real good,” I answered. “ Did you see any buffalo ? ”
“ Yes,” he replied. “ There’s a big mob of them over there.”
He pointed to a patch of grassy upland with very few trees on it.
Then he corrected himself, for he feared I might misunderstand him.
“At least, I didn’t actually see them. But there are lots of tracks
going in and no fresh tracks going out. I’ve been all round. So they
must be inside, mustn’t they ? ”
His reasoning satisfied him, so I made it satisfy me. I was intensely
eager to start the actual work of the day, and as Ballanda was no less
eager, we started to walk towards the spot where he thought the animals
were, nearly bent double so as to keep out of sight. From time to time
Ballanda, who went first, stopped and adopted that same peculiar
listening attitude as before, and each time he smiled and nodded
reassuringly as if to say : “ They’re there all right. We’re a little
nearer them than we were before.”
All at once he stiffened, with his left hand held back in warning to me.
I stood still as a rock. One pace forward went Ballanda. I followed.
Another. Another. He sank on to hands and toes and crawled towards
a thick bush. When I joined him he pointed ahead.
It was my first sight of wild buffalo. About twenty of them were
quietly feeding within easy range. They were larger than full-grown
bulls and about the same shape, except for the hump and for the fore-
quarters, which were much heavier than those of domestic cattle.
Such heads and necks I had never seen on an animal before. Fold on
fold of skin hung from shoulder to jaw, and the head was so heavy that
it seemed to overweigh the body. They had huge wrinkled horns,
flat across the forehead and curving back in a grand sweep in such a way
that, when the animals lifted their heads and sniffed the air, the horns


Gripping its horns for dear life.
lay along the back. There was no fear of those horns being caught in
the scrub as they dashed through it. Except for this nervous sniffing
of the air, which was only the habitual suspicion of a wild animal, the
buffalo showed no sign of disturbance.
Ballanda picked his beast, I picked mine—both full-grown bulls.
Ballanda touched a spot six inches behind his shoulder, meaning that
this was the vulnerable point to aim at, and I nodded that I understood.
We sighted. Both rifles spoke at once. Both buffaloes fell. I was de-
lighted, especially as my beast had raised its head at the critical moment,
hiding its shoulder, and I had aimed below the curl of its forehead.
With a wild yell Ballanda sprang from cover. Away went the
buffaloes, and away went this wonderful savage after them. Never had
I seen such running. The herd was going at a tremendous speed, but
he caught up with it, fired, another beast fell, and still he gave chase.
I saw three more fall to his unerring aim before I lost sight of him.
Then something happened which took my full attention and nearly
55


took my life as well. The buffalo bull I had shot rose slowly and shook
its huge bulk. My shot had only stunned it. I found out afterwards
that a man might as well blaze away at a solid rock as expect to penetrate
the forehead of one of these animals.
The bull glared at me. I was too far from cover to retreat, and in-
deed I had no intention of deserting the field, so I brought my rifle to
position and waited. Then began a deadly game played with a powerful
rifle on one side and rage on the other, combined with what looked
amazingly like intelligence. For the bull never once presented his
flank to me. Try as I would, that impenetrable forehead was all that
I saw over the sights.
The rifle magazine held six shots. One had been expended. The
other five went the same way and just as uselessly. Each one found its
mark, I’m sure of that, for I was shooting for my life, and I had never
shot so well. But they did not even stun the beast: they glanced off
and left its face streaming with blood.
I had no time to reload, so I ran for cover, tugging at a clip of car-
tridges and trying to jam it home as I went. Just behind me thundered
the infuriated buffalo. My mind was clear. I knew exactly what I
intended to do. Once I gained the shelter of trees I would dodge, let
my pursuer charge past, and give him his quietus in the flank. The
clip of cartridges went home. Everything was right. A few more
yards and the chase would be over.
Then I tripped. I was giving sole attention to the rifle, and a vine
caught me. I fell, half rose, and instinctively brought the rifle to
position and fired. Up went the buffalo’s head with a snort of pain, but
his impetus was unchecked, and before I could fire again he was on me.
The thunder of his coming deafened me, and I saw broad wrinkled
horns flashing towards me. To save myself from being gored, I gripped
one of the horns and leapt aside. I was flung off my feet. I dropped
the rifle and gripped with the other hand, and with all my strength
vaulted over the beast’s grim forehead.
The shock made me lose my senses for a moment, and when I came to
I was lying along the back of the charging buffalo, gripping its horns for
dear life. The surprising turn of affairs had startled the animal out
56


THE SPLENDID SAVAGE
of its wits and, making no effort to throw me off, it dashed after the herd,
bellowing at the top of its voice.
I dared not slip off. Once relieved of my weight it might charge
again, and I was defenceless. So I hung on and waited for some cir-
cumstance to operate in my favour. We passed one dead beast after
another that Ballanda had killed, and at last came in sight of the herd*
Ballanda had shot all we needed, and was sitting on the last carcass. I
have never seen a man so surprised as he was when I came thun-
dering up.
“ Shoot, Ballanda ! Shoot! ” I shouted.
He held fire, for he might have hit me. Just as I dashed past he
recovered his presence of mind, and I heard the words :
“ Your knife, man ! Use your knife ! ”
Around my neck, by a strong leather cord, hung a long keen knife,
just like Ballanda’s, and this was now the only weapon I had. Working
forward as far as I dared, I drew the knife. Something had to be done
at once, for the herd was now only a few hundred yards in front, and
once amongst the others my doom was sealed. So I leaned over and
jabbed the point into the thick hide just above the jugular. I had to
press with all my might, the skin was so thick and tough, but I got it
home at last. Then I tore downwards, tore with the strength of
despair.
A gurgling bellow told me I had won my fight. The huge beast
lurched, tried to recover, then fell, throwing me clear. I was on my feet
at once, dripping knife in hand, ready to meet the bull if it recovered.
But, though he tried gamely, he was done. His life-blood gushed out
and he became quiet, and when Ballanda came running up my first
buffalo was dead.


CHAPTER VII
NEXT day we rested in camp and sent the blacks to skin the buffaloes.
Some of them came back the same night, others not till next day,
and we pegged the skins out on hard ground, rubbing in salt mixed
with a preparation of bark and leaves which Ballanda had learnt from
the natives.
I was surprised how little we saw or heard of the blacks. Although
less than a quarter of a mile away, we were almost as unconscious of
them as if we two whites had been absolutely alone on an uninhabited
island. This was due partly to the law Ballanda had made that no
blackfellow was to come on his side of the creek without special orders,
and partly also to the almost superstitious respect they had for him.
This was a splendid state of affairs, for I had heard and read about white
men, shipwrecked amongst savages as we were, who had gradually
adopted native life and customs, and had become very degraded.
My whole nature revolted against this and so did Ballanda’s, and we
took care to enforce the rules he had made.
Lying under the shelter the day after the hunt, feeling very satisfied
with the meal of buffalo’s brains and tongues we had just eaten, I was
talking about the blacks and how little they troubled us, when Ballanda
smiled. I asked him why.
“ Wait till to-night,” he answered. “ You’ll hear as much as you
want to of them when it gets dark.”
He did not explain what he meant, though I asked him, but I was
left in no uncertainty when darkness fell. The blacks had a feasting
corroboree. They had brought in as much buffalo meat as they could
carry, and determined to have a high old time. Fires blazed all over
the encampment, and especially at the meeting-place in the middle of it.
Weird, dirge-like chanting rose and fell, and we could see dancing forms
all decorated with pipeclay and feathers flitting around the fires. From
58


time to time these noises subsided, and we knew the blacks were gorging
themselves; but soon the chanting would begin again, perhaps to give
them another appetite.
This went on almost all night. At first I was interested, but after
a time the monotonous chant got on my nerves, and I could not sleep.
I wanted Ballanda to stop it, but he would not.
“ Let them have a good time for once,” he pleaded. “ I keep a
pretty tight hold on them as a rule, but they’re only a lot of children,
after all.”
So I spent a restless night, and felt I knew all I ever wanted to know
about blacks’ corroborees. But when they started the same thing
next night Ballanda exercised his authority and put a stop to it. It
was done very simply. When the chanting was at its height he went
outside the hut and fired a shot over the camp. There was instant
quiet. Even the yelping dogs seemed to respect his wishes, and,
although the fires were alight all night and probably the feasting went
on too, there was no more chanting.
One day soon after this Ballanda asked me :
“ Do you like crabs ? ”
“You bet I do,” I answered. “ Why ? Are there any round here ? ”
“ Hundreds, but it’s rather a dirty job getting them. What about
getting one of the blacks to come crab-hunting with us ? ”
It will be noticed that Ballanda’s speech was becoming more and
more free and easy. He soon found no difficulty in expressing himself
on any subject he wanted to. I readily agreed to his suggestion, for
though our food was plentiful and varied, such a delicacy as crabs would
make a very desirable addition to it. So Ballanda whistled through
his fingers twice and a native came over. The man was strong and
active, but not so tall as we were, and his skin was a real sooty black,
not a very dark brown like most native races except the Australian.
Ballanda explained our project, and Ranula—for that was his name—
grinned his understanding. He already had a thick waddy and a couple
of boomerangs in his hand, but he cut several thin sticks with prongs
on them like the letter Y with a long stem, sharpening the tips of the
letter and hardening the tips in our fire while he was waiting.


Instead of going seawards as I had expected, we crossed the creek
and walked along the bank of the big river till we came to the forest of
mangrove trees. It was ebb tide slack water, and the mud banks, topped
with the grotesque intertwined roots of the mangroves, did not look in-
viting. At the bottom of the mud bank, half covered with water, were
many holes, and Ballanda told me that it was there that the best crabs
lived. They might have lived there for ever as far as I was concerned,
for I saw no way of getting them out even if I were willing to walk about
neck-deep in mud, and I soon saw why we had brought Ranula with us.
Whether it was his wish to please the great Ballanda, or a genuine
fondness for getting dirty, I don’t know, but he seemed to enjoy his
job thoroughly. We found a fairly hard piece of bank, and squatted
there while Ranula went down into the ooze left by the tide. He sank
to his waist before he touched bottom, but seemed quite happy about it,
and peered into one hole after another. Presently he shouted :
“ Good fella crab sit down here,” and put his waddy into a hole.
Presently he pulled it out slowly. Gripping the end of it was a huge
crab, and so fiercely did the creature hang on, that it did not let go when
Ranula handed the waddy to us. Then I saw how to use the forked
sticks. While it still clung desperately to the waddy, the crab was stood
on its side like a plate, and a forked stick was put over it, holding it in
this position. In this way it was helpless and harmless, and very
ridiculous it looked too, with its legs and claws waving wildly in the air.
Soon another one was found and treated similarly.
Ranula had been slowly working down-stream towards a log, and
when he came to it he climbed on and peered into a hole which was out
of reach. Suddenly he gave a tremendous yell, sprawled for a moment
in the mud, and then made for the mangroves, hauling himself up the
roots in a great hurry. It was all over before we realized that the black-
fellow had been in deadly peril. The log which had looked so harmless
was nothing less than a crocodile asleep in the sun, nearly buried in
the mud.
Ranula soon got over his fright and joined in the laughter.
“My word, that one good fella log,” he laughed. “ Suppose me
burn um out, him make aller same Malay canoe.”


The joke was not very subtle, but it takes very little to amuse a
native, and Ranula sat on a mangrove root making jeering remarks to
the crocodile, which was now well out of sight. Soon he resumed his
crab-hunting, not wading in the mud now, but climbing about on the
mangrove roots and reaching over into the holes.
He found a third crab, and Ballanda was thinking of returning to
camp, when we had a most terrifying experience. We were all three
squatting like monkeys on a root, when Ranula leaned over and put his
waddy into a particularly promising hole. Instead of a crab, something
much bigger grabbed it, and jerked so hard that the blackfellow nearly
toppled over into the mud. He would certainly have done so, and gone
to a terrible fate, had not Ballanda, quick as thought, grabbed him round
the waist and hung on.
Slowly the nose of a crocodile emerged from the mud, then its
long snout, and then the cruel eyes looked up menacingly. It was this
huge reptile that had grabbed the waddy. For a moment the issue
literally hung in the balance. A fraction one way or the other would
decide it. The waddy, jammed in the crocodile’s jaws, actually pre-
vented the native from falling farther forward. Had he let go he would
have lost his balance. On the other hand, it was a certainty that the
crocodile would pull in a moment. I could do nothing. In fact, it
was all over before I had a chance, for there was no room to move.
Suddenly Ballanda shifted his grasp and grabbed the stick. Ranula
misunderstood his intention, and let go and jerked his body back.
Before he could catch hold of Ballanda the crocodile gave the waddy a
pull. The white man lost his balance and fell.
A cry of dismay went up. Ballanda fell right on top of the
crocodile. Even as he fell his presence of mind did not desert him,
for when the smother of mud had subsided a little we saw that he was
sitting astride the crocodile with the waddy jammed crossways as far
back as it would go, like an enormous horse’s bit. The great jaws
were thus kept open, and the brute could not drag Ballanda under the
mud, for it would have poured down its throat and choked it.
How the reptile’s armoured tail did flog the mud ! Man and beast
were hardly visible through the black evil-smelling spray. It was all
61


very well for Ballanda to shout: “ Shoot, Duncan! Shoot! ” but how
could I shoot a thing I couldn’t see ? I dared not pull the trigger of
my pistol, though I leaned over as far as I could and kept it pointing,
waiting for a favourable opportunity.
Ballanda must have jammed the waddy so far back that it wedged
there without holding, for, when the mud cleared for a moment, I saw
that his thumbs were firmly pressing into the animal’s eyes. I had read
of a man saving his life in this way, but had not believed it, but here
was Ballanda probably saving his life by doing just this thing. For the
crocodile had been gradually working its way farther from the bank
into deep water, where it could easily win the struggle ; but now, in blind
rage, maddened by the torture of its eyes being gouged out, it was
flinging itself nearer and nearer the mangroves.
I stood far out, extending my hand. Ballanda grabbed it and made
a last supreme effort, leaping to safety. He was utterly exhausted.
His superb strength had been taxed to the utmost, but as he crouched
down amongst the roots to recover, he thought of his wounded foe.
“ Shoot the poor beggar, Duncan,” he panted. “ Don’t let it get
away. It’s blind, and the others will only torture it.”
I wasted nearly a dozen pistol cartridges before it was dead. It
must have been in unbearable pain, for it flogged about, never still a
moment, and it was hard to hit a vulnerable spot. It was waste of
ammunition shooting haphazard, for its back and tail were covered with
scales that turned my bullets as easily as armour would have done.
The poor thing was out of its misery at last, and we hauled it up out
of the mud to keep it from being torn to pieces by other crocodiles.
We took the crabs home and sent back some natives at once to bring
in the head of our prize. The blacks had a great feast, but we did not
fancy eating crocodile steak. I stuffed the head, and have it as a trophy
in my study now with its jaws jammed open with the same waddy.
I must now record a very prosaic occurrence : I became ill with
fever. I should pass it over and go on to more of the many adventures
which fell to our lot, were it not that my illness was the opportunity for
the display of some very interesting blackfellows’ magic.
On the second morning after the crab-hunt, I awoke feeling very
62


The great jaws were thus kept open.
heavy and dull, and these sensations increased to such an extent during
the day that I could not hide them from Ballanda.
“ I must have eaten too much crab,” I said woefully.
“ That’s not it,” he replied when I had told him my symptoms.
“ You’ve got fever. You’d better go to bed and keep there.”
I felt too ill to object, but fancy going to bed when life was so full
of interest ! “ However did I get it ?” I asked feebly.
“ Probably from the mangrove swamp,” he replied. “Do you
remember being bitten by a mosquito there ? ”
I laughed dismally. “ Bitten by a mosquito I Why, I was bitten
by thousands. At least I felt like it.”
That was my last laugh for several days. I lay in the shade covered
by mosquito netting and forgot everything except my misery. Day
and night seemed very much the same, for half the time I was delirious,
and Ballanda told me afterwards that I went through my experiences
63


during and after the wreck of The Seaspray so many times that he got
to know them almost as well as I did.
He nursed me with a tenderness which was surprising in one who
had lived such a savage life as he had, and it was due to his care that
I am now able to record my gratitude. He dosed me with a bitter
concoction compounded of herbs, which made me break out into profuse
perspiration. He was always at hand when I wanted him.
One evening, just before dark, the fever was at its height. A man
came from the blacks’ camp and spoke to Ballanda. He approached
in fear and trembling, for the white man had not sent for him; but as
his mission was on my behalf, the delinquency was not referred to. I
was too ill to know what was going on, but Ballanda told me about it
afterwards.
“ Which way Duncan Ballanda sit down ? ” asked the man, coming
forward nervously. Ballanda pointed to my curtained bed.
“ Him big fella dead ? ” (very ill) asked the black again.
Ballanda nodded. He did not wish to show immediate friendliness
to a man who had approached his camp unbidden. The native seemed
at a loss how to continue. He moved one foot on to the other and
squirmed with embarrassment.
“ Manloo bin find um who did it,” he said at last, jerking his chin
in the direction of the camp.
Manloo was the medicine-man of the tribe, a very great person
indeed. Still the white man kept silence.
“ Him bin find out crocodile blackfellow bin sing Duncan Ballanda
big fella dead.”
Along the coast was a tribe of blacks who were not always friendly
to Ballanda’s tribe. Their totem-sign was a crocodile. The messenger
meant that, by using his magic, Manloo had found out that a member
of this unfriendly tribe was responsible for my illness. This was
characteristic of the blackfellow mind. Every unpleasant thing that
happens to them is thought to be due to the “ singing ” of an enemy.
“ What you do about it ? ” demanded Ballanda sternly.
“ S’pose you let us burn um Tchintu, Duncan Ballanda no more
lie down dead ; him jump up well, my word ! ” The native went
64


It was Manloo, the medicine-man.
through the pantomime of a sick man being suddenly restored to health.
“ You let um Manloo burn um Tchintu ? ” inquired the black ner-
vously.
(8,013) 65 I


THE SPLENDID SAVAGE
Ballanda nodded, and the man ran off immediately.
In a very short time he returned with two others. One of them was
a very big man marked all over with magic signs, some actually cut into
his flesh and showing great raised scars, others painted on or picked out
in feathers. The most striking thing about him was his head-dress.
An enormous pair of buffalo horns was fixed on his head, with supports
going down on his shoulders. It was heavy, and must have been very
uncomfortable, but he bore himself with dignity as he strode to our
camp. It was Manloo, the medicine-man. One of the others was
daubed white, and wore what was meant to be a pair of breeches and a
hat. The man who had been employed as messenger was not decorated
at all.
First they built a fire, dancing round it and chanting weirdly; then
the messenger went away along the beach, and when he returned, after
a few minutes, he was received with spears and boomerangs and a great
show of mock hostility. In fact, he was driven off, vowing vengeance.
The scene was now laid. The messenger had impersonated one of the
Crocodile blacks, who had been insulted by members of the Buffalo
tribe, especially by the third man, who, I was told, was meant to repre-
sent me, being daubed white and wearing breeches and a hat.
Manloo and the daubed man now retired, and the second act began.
The messenger crept near the fire with great show of stealth, and looked
round till he found one of the tracks of the daubed man. He became
very excited at this discovery, and chanted wildly as he danced round
the track. Then he produced a Tchintu, a magic thing made of two
feet of hair-string covered with red down, with a lump of resin at one
end from which the two front teeth of a rat projected. The other end
of the string was ornamented with the tip of a bandicoot’s tail.
The man held this Tchintu in both hands and started to “ sing ”
it full of magic. This consisted in squatting down on his haunches
and swinging backwards and forwards to the accompaniment of the
most dreary dirge. The words were repeated again and again, and
were meant to call down the heat of the sun into the Tchintu so that
it might burn up the man’s enemy —in other words, that I might get
the fever. When the thing had been properly “ sung,” the man put it
66


on the daubed man’s track and disappeared. That was the end of the
second act. The villain of the piece had done his deed.
After a little time along came the daubed man who represented me,
strolling about casually. Presently he put his hand to his head, then
groaned a great deal, and finally lay down with every appearance of deadly
sickness. When the poor actor was thoroughly tired of playing the
invalid, Manloo appeared on the scene. He gave one glance at the
sick man, and understood at once what was happening, of course, for
he went straight to the Tchintu and picked it up. At this the patient
gave some signs of recovery, but when the medicine-man threw the
thing into the fire the daubed man returned to full life and vigour
instantly. He proved how fit he was by making a great row and dancing
in a most violent manner.
Thus had the great Manloo found out what was the cause of my sick-
ness and had destroyed it in pantomime.
And, indeed, the night after this ceremony, which I had been far too
ill to notice, I took a turn for the better and recovered rapidly from that
time. The blacks of course put it down to Manloo’s magic, but I put
it down to the skill and devotion of my friend Ballanda.


CHAPTER VIII
I RECOVERED quickly, and was soon as well as ever and taking the
same keen interest in my life as I did before. It was a wonderful
life. Since Ballanda rescued me from the sea no rain had fallen, but
the dew was so heavy every night that the undergrowth and the ground
under it were saturated, and it was as good as a shower-bath to stand
under a bush in the early morning and shake the dew down. Sometimes
other things not nearly as pleasant as dew came down also.
One morning I awoke earlier than usual. I had had a perfect sleep
for over eight hours, and felt like a giant refreshed. I jumped off my
bunk and ran outside. The sea was dead calm in the lagoon and a lazy
swell kept murmuring on the reef. The sun had not yet risen. A
breath of wind shook the gum leaves over my head, and a few drops of
dew fell. They were so icy cold and invigorating that I thought it
would be a good idea to have a shower-bath before my usual plunge in
the swimming-pool. I had done this many times before, but this time
I chose a larger bush than usual and decided to take full advantage of
it. I stood under, grasped the trunk in both hands, and shook. Down
fell the dew, lovely and cool, and I felt the tingling glow which only
comes in this way.
Then I felt something very different. At first it was as if somebody
had~suddenly turned on a scalding hot shower. I gave a yell of alarm,
and jumped out from under the bush more quickly than I had gone in.
I was covered with ants ! They ran over me from head to foot, stinging
me till I felt as if I were on fire. If anybody had been there to see, lam
sure they would have thought it a great joke, for I had shaken down one
of those loosely-built nests which a certain kind of ant hangs from the
branches of trees.
It was no joke to me. Try as I would, I could not brush them off.
They clung most tenaciously, and I was rapidly losing control of myself
68


with pain when I thought of the sea. With wild cries, and waving my
arms like a madman, I dashed for the beach. Ballanda heard the
pandemonium and sprang out of his hut with a rifle, ready for action.
I dashed past him, and he brought his rifle to his shoulder, thinking I
was being pursued.
Into the water I flung myself and rolled over and over in it, but it
was a full quarter of an hour before I rid myself of the pests, and even
then the pain stayed long after. While I was wallowing in this way
Ballanda rushed up to me.
“ What is it ?” he asked. “Is it blacks ? Did they get you ? Are
you poisoned ? ”
I was still howling with pain, but managed to shout the words
“ Poisoned ! You bet I am. But it’s not blacks. It’s ants.”
It was a moment or two before he understood what I meant, and
when he did he subsided on the sand in helpless merriment. What
we must have looked like, I don’t know. Two barbaric white men
shouting at the top of their voices and rolling in the shallow water —
one through pain and one through laughter. Fortunately the blacks
did not appear on the scene. No doubt they saw us, but they left us
alone, probably thinking it was a “white fella corroboree.” I have
often wondered since how Ballanda would have preserved his dignity
if one of the natives had come up and asked what was the matter. As
for me, I wouldn’t have cared, for I can imagine nothing more undig-
nified than trying to rid one’s body of ants.
For days my skin burned as the result of that shower-bath, but the
wonderful healer —dugong oil—quickly set me to rights again; but I
never hear or read about the beauty of dew in the early morning and all
that sort of thing without feeling prickles all over my body.
Manloo, the medicine-man, was quite sure that one of the Crocodile
blacks had made me sick with fever, and he was very intent on revenge.
He came along one day with a tale about the evils of this neighbouring
tribe. Ballanda held council with the principal men of the tribe from
time to time, when differences were settled, rules made and altered,
and the general conduct of the tribe discussed. It was at one of these
council-meetings that Manloo told his tale.
69


It appeared that these Crocodile blacks used to practise the dreadful
custom of throwing their enemies into a pool infested with crocodiles.
Ballanda set his face sternly against this, and so far succeeded that the
pool was now inhabited by one crocodile only, an enormous beast, and
he was fed, not with human food as he used to be, but with pigs and
kangaroos and other game. And now Manloo had found out that the
gruesome practice was going to be resumed. This gave him great
satisfaction, for Ballanda would be forced to move in the matter, and
who knows what terrible revenge the White Chief might take upon the
delinquent tribe.
Ballanda heard him gravely and said nothing. The old man waited,
but the white man knew the value of silence, and appeared to be ponder-
ing deeply.
“ They bin fight with tribe over that way,” resumed Manloo,
trying to stimulate Ballanda to a decision. “ They bin fight and kill
big mob other blackfellas, my word ! All other tribe lay down dead
except one fella,” he urged, with native exaggeration. “ Crocodile
blackfellas bring back that one fella. They keep him one day, two day,
three day. Then they chuck him into water-hole. Snap ! Him gone.
Crocodile bin eat urn.” He imitated the action with great gusto.
“ What day they chuck him ? ” asked Ballanda gravely.
“ Not to-day,” was the answer. “ To-morrow when the sun so
high.” He pointed to the noon-height of the sun.
“ I will prevent it,” said Ballanda simply, standing up and dismissing
the assembly. “ I am Ballanda, White Chief of the Buffalo Totem
tribe, and my word shall be law from where the sun comes out of the
sea to where it goes down again behind the Black Rocks.”
He waited with dignity till they were out of sight, and then ran to
where I was lying in the shade mending a net.
“ D’you want a great adventure ? ” he asked, with an unusual show
of excitement.
I sprang to my feet. My shining eyes were enough answer.
“ There’s great risk,” he insisted, but his tone was joyful as if he
loved the risk.
“So much the better,” I answered. “ When do we start ? ”


“ Two men against a whole tribe.”
“ Why only one tribe ?” I answered lightly. “ Why not a dozen ?
Let’s settle the whole lot while we’re about it.”
And in this gay spirit we collected rifles and gear and ran down to
the jetty, Ballanda telling me what he knew while we were preparing,
so as not to waste time.
“ We’ve got a whole day and a bit,” he said, “ but it’s a good distance.
I’d give anything to beat those fellows before they disobey my orders.”
We took the Malay canoe and pushed off and paddled into the
lagoon. Glancing back, I saw a crowd of our blacks on the shore,
waving us farewell and chanting a weird but not unpleasant good-bye
chant. It was nice to feel we had their goodwill, and we plied our
paddles all the better for it, lam sure. They had infinite faith in our
powers, and we dared not fail them.
We soon saw that the task before us was a formidable one. No
sooner were we outside the coral reef than we met a heavy swell. If
Ballanda had not been such a consummate master of the canoe we
should have been swamped, and it tested his skill yet more when we
rigged the mast, hoisted sail, and ran before a stiff breeze. The canoe
had no keel, and our direction lay broadside to the swell, so you can
imagine we were kept hard at it, steering the frail craft and keeping her
tolerably dry. Ballanda managed the sail and steering-paddle, while I
bailed as fast as I could with two big shells very suitable for the purpose.
Night found us still toiling. Our little fire was the only spark on
the heaving ocean, and thousands of stars looked down on us from the
sky. One of my chief concerns was to keep the boat-fire alight.
Hitherto our canoe trips had been so short that we had not bothered
about cooking food, but this one was longer, and Ballanda was a great
man for his meals. So was I, and so would any one else have been if
they had been living the ideal life that we were. Before launching the
canoe Ballanda had piled a few handfuls of sand in the nose of it, and
had put some glowing pieces of charcoal on top. I had already learnt
the bushman’s trick of keeping a fire alight with very little fuel, and I
succeeded in keeping life in the tiny fire by protecting it with a large
bailer-shell.


THE SPLENDID SAVAGE
When night fell we were very glad indeed for that little blaze. It
was wonderful company. It also enabled us to have a hot satisfying
meal, a great luxury seeing that we were soaked with spray and kneeling
in water most of the time. A few eggs baked in hot sand, fish caught
fresh from the sea with a line and prawn bait, and a pannikin each of
hot coffee, did much to keep us cheerful. This coffee was Ballanda’s
own invention. When cooking cakes with yam-flour one day, he had
burnt the whole batch and had thrown them out. One or two hap-
pened to fall in a clam shell with which he ornamented the front of his
hut. Soon after this there was a short shower, and the burnt cakes
became steeped in water. Some forgotten memory must have been
stirred in Ballanda’s mind when he saw the brown rain-water in the
shell, for he at once started experimenting, and in the end, by using
several kinds of berries and fruit, dried and powdered, he made a very
delicious coffee.
But thoughts of food are leading me away from the object of our
trip, which was the enforcing of Ballanda’s law that no human sacrifices
should occur along the coast. The wind kept dead astern most of the
night, and did not give us any respite from our work. It suited us well,
however, and when the pale light began to tinge the sky and sea with
faint pearl colours we saw the Tunnelled Headland in the distance.
“ I’ve never done the distance so quickly,” said Ballanda, dexterously
avoiding a giant roller and bringing the boat to the wind again with a
powerful sweep of his paddle. “ The river where the blacks live is
just the other side of that headland.”
It was a curious headland, jutting out to sea abruptly like a tremen-
dously high wall, and a gap in it, like a giant archway, accounted for its
name.
“ You see that hole through the cliff,” said my companion. “ I’ve
seen water pouring through it like a flooded river. The blacks say an
evil spirit lives there, for even at slack water it is dark and terrifying,
but when the tides begin to come, the water rushes through with a
booming sound. No native canoe has ever gone that way and come
out on the other side. I believe the bloodthirsty beggars used to
push their enemies into the tunnel to appease the spirit that lived
72


there. That might have been before they took to feeding crocodiles
with them.”
“ Are we going through it ? ” I asked excitedly.
“ Not if the wind serves us,” he answered. “ It’s no use running
risks without a reason.”
But the wind did not serve us. At dawn there was a lull which made
us unship the mast and lay to our paddles with all our strength. At
sunrise the wind sprang up again, but dead ahead of us this time, and
it was soon blowing so strongly that it was impossible to tack a keel-less
canoe against it. All through the night we had scudded out in the open
sea so as to take full advantage of the good wind, but now we made
towards the shore for shelter, and after a struggle we got under the lee
of the Tunnelled Headland. It was still a couple of miles away, but
it stuck so far out from the land that, although the wind roared past it,
there was a space near the shore almost as calm as a lagoon.
We were making good way under this shelter when Ballanda shouted
to me :
“ Look on the top of the headland ! ”
I did so, and could see nothing but the frowning rock going up
straight to the sky like a rugged wall.
“ D’you see that flat part half-way along, just a little farther out than
the arch ? ” he asked again.
“Yes. I see it all right. What about it ? ”
“ I saw a blackfellow there just now,” was the surprising answer.
The headland was so far away and the light was so intense behind it
that I should not have been able to see anything even if it had been bigger
than a man, but Ballanda’s keen sight had picked out a painted savage
crawling along the top of the cliff.
We did not slacken our pace, however, and in time came almost
under the shadow of the great cliff. I was kneeling half-way along the
canoe, Ballanda was at the back, and it was his paddle-strokes which did
all the steering. Suddenly the course of the canoe altered. I looked
round to know why he had done this, and a spear fell into the water
not many inches from my head. If Ballanda had not seen that spear
coming, I should have been a dead man or a desperately wounded one.
(3,013) 73 K


“ Paddle ! Paddle ! Paddle for your life ! ” shouted Ballanda,
and I bent my back and shoulders to good purpose. Each stroke
seemed, to lift the canoe out of the water and send it foaming forward.
More spears fell, each narrowly missing us as we pursued our zig-
zag course. At last we were under an overhang, and safe for the time
being. How narrowly we had escaped ! Even as the canoe shot under
the crags a boulder crashed astern of us, so close that the wave it made
washed us farther into safety.
We were now under a kind of veranda of rock, and we brought the
canoe to rest while we got our breath.
“ I know the man who flung those spears,” gasped Ballanda. “ His
name is Harkoo, medicine-man of the tribe we’re going to. He’s the
one who’s causing all the trouble.
“ How ever did he know we were coming ? ” was my natural
question.
Ballanda shrugged his shoulders. “ I don’t know,” he replied.
“ I’m sure none of our tribe signalled. Perhaps his conscience troubled
him if he’s got one, and he was on the look-out. You were telling me
about wireless telegrams the other day. I’ve never seen that done,
but I’ve seen things just as wonderful. I’ve never once taken a tribe
by surprise,” he concluded, “ though I’ve often tried to.”
By this time it was full day, though we were in shadow. The water
was clear and very deep, but whereas I had often lain for hours in a canoe
on our lagoon and watched the beautiful things which lived under the
water, I saw nothing here but creatures that inspired me with horror
—bloated jellyfish waiting for their prey, a giant sting-ray flapping on a
flat rock, and, worst of all, two tentacles of an octopus projecting from
a hidden cave. It was indeed a place to make a native superstitious.
A dozen or more yards towards the shore was the archway, with a rising
tide pouring through it like water through a sluice-gate, but far more
terrifying, for it boomed and bellowed and moaned in the echoing vault
till the whole cliff seemed as if it were the abode of fiends.
“ I wonder what Harkoo’s doing ?” I asked.
“ He’s waiting on top to kill us if we show our noses,” replied
Ballanda. “ He’ll keep us here till noon if he possibly can, and let those


brutes of his throw their enemy to the crocodile. And if they do it
once, all the things I’ve worked for will go for nothing. But he won't
keep us here,” he added, with clenched teeth.
I looked at the foaming water gushing through the rock and an idea
struck me.
“ Couldn’t we get through at slack water ? ” I asked.
“ Are you game to try ?” he asked in reply. “ It’s the only way to
beat them, but I know nothing about the passage, and it’s not fair to
take a man to his death.”
“ Whatever do you mean ? ”
“ We might be able to sneak round, and I could put you ashore if
you like. You could walk back to camp in a couple of days if I didn’t
get through.”
“ And what about you ? ”
“ I’m going through the arch,” he said, in a determined voice.
“ Then I’m going with you.”
“ But ” he began.
“ I tell you, I am,” I insisted, and though he pretended to persuade me
not to run the risk, I knew he was glad I had chosen to see it out with him.
Higher and higher rose the tide, and the water became less turbulent
through the archway. Precious minutes were being wasted in idleness.
We imagined the blacks preparing for the ceremony. We felt sure that
Harkoo had boasted that he would stop the meddlesome white men
coming, and had promised that the ancient customs of the tribe would
be restored. These thoughts did not make waiting easier.
Slack water came at last. In order to work round into the arch we
had to leave the shelter of the overhanging cliff. Cautiously we paddled
out. A few moments of fancied security and down came another spear.
The savage was waiting. This time it struck the boat, and so great
was the force behind it that it stuck in the hard wood and quivered
there. Another followed. Ballanda ducked just in time, sprawling in
the canoe. Then a boulder followed. I took the law into my own hands
and paddled for our refuge again.
At first I thought Ballanda had been hit, but he rose slowly, and if
ever determination was written on a man’s face, it was written on his.


“ I’ll beat that man,” he said savagely, but with no show of useless
temper. “ I’ll beat him if I have to swim all the way.”
A few moments’ reflection convinced him, of course, that swimming
would be useless. Not only was the distance so great that he would
arrive at the camp too late to do any good, but he would be unarmed,
and therefore at their mercy. He pondered for a long time, and while
he pondered the tide turned, and we felt the pull of the current as it
set through the arch in the opposite direction. The water was now
pouring from our side to the other.
Then Ballanda made a great decision. Have you ever sat on one
rail, wedged your toes under another, and leaned over backwards ?
You know the strain it puts on your muscles to keep there even
for a second or two. That was what Ballanda did now, only the rail
he sat on was the bow of the canoe and the other rail was a paddle
jammed under the gunwale.
He rehearsed it as we sheltered under the cliff. With his rifle at his
shoulder he leant backwards over the water and looked up, so that he
was like a living figure-head of a ship, but turned upside down.
“ I want you to paddle me out very slowly,” he said. “ Harkoo’s
sitting on top there, waiting, and if he sees the canoe we’re done.
But he might not see me if I lean over. Or I might see him first.
And if Ido ” He fingered his rifle lovingly and did not finish the
sentence.
We made all ready. The bronzed body of my friend was strained
as far as it would go, and the weight of the rifle at his shoulder made the
feat wellnigh impossible. Out from cover we crept. We were seen.
A boulder fell. I avoided it. In doing so I spoilt Ballanda’s shot.
How he endured the kick of the rifle when he was in that position, I can’t
imagine. He fired again, and with a supreme effort jerked himself back
into the canoe.
“ Look out ! ” he yelled, seizing a paddle.
Something was falling. Something black, with waving arms and
legs. It was Harkoo, shot through the head. He fell into the water,
and we lifted him into the canoe.
“ We’ll exhibit this beauty in his own camp,” said my companion,
76


CHAPTER IX
“ \ T OW for the archway,” said Ballanda, taking his accustomed seat
1 \ in the stern of the canoe. “We may get through or we may
not. But if we do, I’ll give those blacks such a surprise that they’ll
never forget it.”
He was excited, as well he might be after such a feat of strength
and skill, and I caught his mood and steeled myself to play the game
whatever happened. The tide had turned some time ago, and the water
was now pouring through the gap in the cliff like a mill-race. In fact,
we felt the current many yards away, and all we had to do was to steer.
With the weight of the dead man, the canoe sat low in the water.
Soon the current caught us, and we could not have turned back even
if we had wished to, for we were carried on as surely as if a tow-rope
were pulling us. The high-arched opening loomed ahead, and we
rushed smoothly towards it, and in another moment it was above us
like a vaulted roof. The gap narrowed and bunched the water into a
still swifter stream. My eyes peered into the booming, roaring dark-
ness, for a rock would have splintered the canoe as easily as I could have
splintered a match-box, so great was our speed. Suddenly the roof
lowered. I had just time to shout a warning and to duck down, when
we were swirled into what looked like an enormous drain-pipe. For-
tunately it was not yet running quite full, but there was barely room for
a man’s head between the gunwale of the canoe and the roof, worn
smooth by ages of rushing water.
There was nothing to do but wait. The sound was deafening. No
wonder the rock echoed with such weird noises that the blacks thought
the place haunted. Even I, who am free from such superstitions, could
imagine all sorts of terrible things snatching at us as we sped past.
It was hard to breathe, for the air was drawn through, making a wind
faster than any gale. Relief came at last. Far ahead I saw a spot of


light appear and grow bigger. The oppression of the low roof was
lemoved gradually, and we felt space around us.
But though we could kneel up now, a very difficult piece of naviga-
tion lay ahead of us, for the water rushed over rocks only just below the
surface, any one of which would have sent us to our doom. Ballanda
steered. How he managed I don’t know, but I felt the canoe turn and
twist under me as he avoided one rock and then another.
At last we were out in the sunlight again, the blessed sunlight, carried
by the force of the current a long way from the cliff. I looked back.
The headland appeared very much the same from this side as the other,
and there was no way of telling how wide it was, but I found out later
that the passage was at least half a mile long. I recently heard of similar
places in other parts of the world, but however many there are, nothing
can rid this particular one of its danger, a danger which we fortunately
did not realize till it was over.
But youth soon forgets danger. The sun warmed our drenched
bodies, and though we had a corpse for company we were soon in high
spirits again. We dared not rest for more than a few minutes, as the sun
was rising near to noon and we still had some distance to paddle.
The river was not nearly as large as the one which flowed into our
lagoon, and it had a series of sand-bars across it which divided it into
deep pools. Near the most inland of these pools the camp was situated,
a dirty place indeed compared with the camp of Ballanda’s tribe, and as
we crossed the last bar and came in sight of it we found it deserted.
Through a screen of leaves we saw that every member of the tribe
was congregated on the bank of the pool. A weird corroboree was
going on.
“ WeTe not too late,” said Ballanda. “At least, I don’t think we
are. That chant doesn’t sound like it. If the dirty beggars had suc-
ceeded, they’d be dancing and yelling in high delight by now.”
No one saw us. We landed quietly and moored the canoe. Ballanda
took the dead man on his shoulders and we crept forward. A thicket
of bushes hid us from the open space of sand on the fringe of the pool
where the tribe was congregated, and we stooped down and reconnoitred
the position. All eyes were fixed on the pool. Suddenly there was a
78


We were carried on as surely as if a tow-rope were pulling us.


blood-curdling yell as the water swirled and the snout of a huge croco-
dile appeared.
“ That brute’s been teased till he’s ferocious,” whispered Ballanda.
“ I pity the man who gets within reach of those jaws.”
The crocodile was opening and shutting his jaws with great anger,
and swishing his tail till a foam of muddy water was all round him.
How he had been brought to this state we never heard, but he was ripe
for mischief and all ready for his sacrificial prey.
Where was his prey ? Ballanda knew the characteristics of the
tribe, and said that he saw no stranger there. Then a cry sounded from
up the river, the cry of a man struggling for his life. It was a despairing
cry, and we guessed that the captive was being prepared for death.
How wildly did the tribe respond to that agonized cry ! They danced
and shouted and beat themselves into a frenzy. It was a sight to strike
terror into the bravest heart.
Into the midst of this devilish pandemonium we strode, Ballanda
in the lead with the dead medicine-man slung across his shoulders.
You may depend I was not far behind, and that both rifle and pistol
were ready for instant use, and my knife loose in its sheath.
The effect of our sudden appearance was magical. At first the
natives stared, dumb and terrified. Then they cried as one man and
fled, but not far, for the bushes hid their quaking bodies, and black
fascinated eyes peered out to see what those wonderful white men
would do.
Ballanda advanced slowly to the pool. The crocodile saw him and
rose. He lifted Harkoo high above his head and held him there for
a moment. The man was decorated most elaborately with coloured
scars, scrolls of feathers, and necklaces and waist-strings of crocodiles’
teeth. Through his nose was a long thin bone, and his hair must have
taken hours of patient care to fix. The blacks could not fail to recognize
him. A moment later and he was hurled into the pool. A leap, a swirl,
a stream of blood on the muddy water, and all was over. A gasp of
astonishment, dismay, and fear went up from the hidden men, but none
of them came out. We two white men stood alone on the beach of the
sacrificial water with cocked rifles.


A moment later and he was hurled into the pool.
Again that agonized cry sounded from up the river. It was answered
by a fiendish laugh close by, and a man came dashing through the scrub.
The exultation froze on his face when he saw us. He looked round
hurriedly and prepared to bolt. Ballanda covered him with his rifle.
The White Chief knew this man. He was an able and unscrupulous
second to the cruel medicine-man who had just met his fate. As his
name Maylui indicated, he was a member of an inland tribe. He had,
for various unusual reasons, been allowed to tyrannize over the Croco-
dile people. Ballanda addressed him sternly :
“ Where you come from ? ”
The terrified man jerked his chin up-stream.
“ Answer me quick. What you do up there ? ”
(8,013) 8l L


The man knew better than to lie.
“ Me bin chuck um man in river.* *
Ballanda pointed to the pool.
“You bin chuck um man in river to feed crocodile ? ”
“ Ya,” agreed the man.
So we’re too late after all,” I ejaculated sorrowfully.
I had not meant Ballanda to hear me, but he did so and wheeled
suddenly.
“ What did you say ? ” he asked me.
“ I said we’re too late to save the poor beggar,” I repeated.
“ The crocodile hasn’t got him yet,” said Ballanda severely. “ And
he won’t. My name is Ballanda the White Chief, and I tell you he
J. »
won t.
The words themselves were childish, but the tone of resolution
made them impressive. This wonderful savage was determined to
uphold the power of his office at all costs.
By now the crocodile was resting on the seaward sand-bar, for these
reptiles rarely eat their prey at once, preferring to hide it under water
for several days. The body of Harkoo was therefore somewhere in
the pool, entangled with roots of trees and waiting for the fate he had
intended for another man.
Soon the victim floated into view, for a long reach of the river could
be seen from where we stood. His cries had ceased or we should have
seen him sooner, for I mistook the drifting object for a log. As it came
nearer, I saw that the man was tied to two strong saplings arranged like
the letter X. He was helpless, and even the mercy of a sudden death
was denied him, for the crocodile would maul him dreadfully before
it got rid of the saplings, and the whole scene would be clearly visible
to the bloodthirsty audience. They were well out of sight, however;
but as they saw the sacrifice approaching the pool, they could not
restrain little cries of expectation.
The victim touched the sand-bar at the entrance and swirled into
the pool. The crocodile saw him. I was spellbound. What would
Ballanda do ? Would he shoot ? No, for I heard him drop his rifle.
Just as the crocodile started for his prey, Ballanda dived. There was
82


silence, the silence of impending tragedy. The very leaves seemed to
hold themselves motionless, waiting for what might happen. The
bound man floated on and grounded on the sandbank at the other end
of the pool. Still no sign of crocodile or white man, save some eddies
on the surface.
Then a rising spiral of blood tinged the water. Whose was it —
man’s or reptile’s ? The eddies became more violent. The water
reddened with blood. Then Ballanda appeared with a knife in his
hand. He looked round and saw the helpless man on the sandbank.
A few strokes and he was at his side, and cut the bonds with the very
knife which had slain the crocodile.
For Ballanda had done to the crocodile what he had done to the
shark, but with a far greater risk. And had he done this to save an
unknown man ? In a sense yes, yet in reality he had risked his life
for the sake of a righteous law. It is because white men are willing
to take such risks for such causes that their flag waves in every corner of
the earth.
He came dripping from the water, sheathed his knife, and picked up
his rifle. For a time even I, his friend, kept my distance from him
because of the great deed he had done, and when his eye caught mine
and bade me come to him, his first words were as simple as his character
was great:
“ So I am still Ballanda, the White Chief.”
I took his outstretched hand.
“ And I am Ballanda’s friend,” I said proudly.
“You are Duncan Ballanda, a White Chief also,” he said magnani-
mously, but I knew that nothing I was or could ever do would put me
where Ballanda was in the minds of the natives along those savage
shores.
The rescued man, incredulous of his safety at first, came forward
cautiously. He was a young man, very powerful, and with an intelligent
and pleasant face. He was the sole survivor of a tribe which the Croco-
dile blacks had wiped clean out, and he had fought so bravely that his
enemies had deemed him a worthy sacrifice. He stood before his
deliverer at last, and white man looked at black man fixedly. The eyes
83


of the native soon fell. Ballanda was not only his rescuer, he was also
his master now. Stooping, the man lifted up one of Ballanda’s feet
and set it on his neck.
“ Me aller same lubra longa you,” he said, and in these words vowed
eternal servitude. /
“ Go and guard the canoe,” said his master, taking him at his word
immediately. The black went at once, and ever afterwards was our
constant, obedient, and courageous servant. We named him Ajax,
after the ship which had brought Ballanda to these shores, the name-
plate of which was nailed over the door of his hut.
And what of the Crocodile blacks ? They were still in hiding, not
daring to come out before such a hero whose displeasure they had
incurred. But Ballanda soon brought them out.
“ Come out, O disobedient ones,” he shouted. “ Come out and
stand before me, or I will call down the sun to wither you till the wind
can blow you away like dead leaves.”
They came trembling, all decorated as they were for festival, and
stood in a semicircle facing us, as far away as the limits of the open
space would permit. Very humble they looked, and very different from
the dancing fiends who had shouted with exultation less than half an
hour ago. Ballanda spoke to them again, using an heroic style of
address which suited well the occasion and the man :
“ O men of the Crocodile Totem, you have done ill. You thought
in your dark hearts to disobey the words of Ballanda, the White Chief.
You hoped to do it without his knowledge, for Harkoo told you I could
not hear beyond the sound of a voice or see beyond the sight of eyes.
But the wind told me of your wickedness, and the sun showed it plainly
to me. Therefore I came to kill you all with thunder and lightning.”
He tapped his rifle.
They shrank away from him, and he let his words have full effect
before he went on :
“ But there shall be no more killing. Harkoo has died and Maylui
must return to his own people.”
This man had already disappeared, and to his own people also, as
his subsequent appearance in this story will show.


“ There shall be no more killing,” repeated Ballanda. “ There shall
be no more throwing to the crocodiles. It is my law, the law of Ballanda,
the White Chief, whose word is law from the Black Rocks to the Tun-
nelled Headland. O men of the Crocodile Totem, I am your chief,
and your medicine-man must take his words from me, like Manloo, who
is greater than all other medicine-men because he speaks the words of
Ballanda. Then you too will become a great people, with full stomachs
and plenty of spears, and no enemy will be able to stand against you.
“ But if you disobey the law of Ballanda, the voice of thunder will
speak and the lightning flash till you all are dead.”
Above our heads sounded a plaintive “ Klee-klee,” the note of a
brombie kite. The bird was so far up as to be almost invisible against
the blue. Suddenly Ballanda brought his rifle to his shoulder, looked
up, and shot. Down fell the bird plomp on the sand at his feet. If I,
who knew his skill, gasped with amazement, what must those savages
have thought ?
“ So will it be with the man who disobeys Ballanda’s law,” he con-
cluded.
They crowded round us, but we kept them off. They danced and
chanted and made every kind of extravagant sign of reverence and
allegiance that they knew, but they wearied us with their grotesque
posturings at last, and the only way Ballanda could get rid of them was
by telling them they could eat the crocodile. Then they were in high
glee, hauling it ashore, and hacking it to pieces with their primitive
implements. We did not stay long to witness the revolting scene, but
boarded the canoe and dropped down to the sea —the sea which was so
fresh and clean after the sights we had witnessed.


CHAPTER X
THE smoke of cooking fires and the yells of feasting blacks were
seen and heard long after we crossed the sand-bar and were out
to sea. Ajax was now our companion, and he was in no mood to linger
after his recent experiences. He plied his paddle with all the skill
of generations of coast-dwellers. We seconded his intentions, for the
sights we had witnessed sickened us, and we wanted to get back to the
peace and order of our own camp. So anxious were we to get away
from the degraded Crocodile blacks that we had rounded the Tunnelled
Headland before we remembered that we had not eaten for many hours.
“ When did we have our last meal ? ” asked Ballanda, pausing from
paddling to ask this important question.
“ Mine was yesterday evening,” I answered. “ But I don’t know
about you. I saw an old lubra up there offer you a nice juicy crocodile
steak.”
He aimed his paddle at my head, but I ducked and it went over-
board. We both laughed, and had to put the canoe about to recover
the paddle.
Ballanda denied having eaten anything, “ though I was hungry
enough to tackle even that,” he explained. “ Let’s go ashore. There’s
a spring at the top of the beach over there, and we’re sure to find some
birds about.”
So we pulled for the beach and landed, leaving Ajax to haul the
canoe up into safety. The spring was a lovely place. From a moss
and fern clad rock a trickle of water fell into a pool. The very sound
of it was refreshing, and the taste was even more so. We drank our fill,
then bathed in the sea, and by that time were ravenously hungry.
Judge of our delight, therefore, to find a tasteful meal ready for us under
the shade of a group of pandanus palms. Ajax had proved his efficiency
as our servant in a very gratifying manner. As many oysters as we could
86


eat were spread on palm leaves, and eggs, turtle’s eggs, baked in ashes.
When returning with a load of oysters, Ajax had noticed the peculiar
track which a turtle makes in the sand. He had followed it and had
unearthed a nest of over a hundred eggs. They are larger and rounder
than hen’s eggs and are very rich, but there was no fear of biliousness for
us after all the exercise we had had and all that we were going to have,
so we ate as many as we wanted and put others on board for future use.
While Ajax was arranging the boat-fire and making all snug in the
canoe, Ballanda and I climbed the Tunnelled Headland from the land
side. If we had known how difficult it was we should not have
attempted it, but when we started we did not like to give up. The sun
was very low when we stood at last on the barren summit of the cliff.
How it boomed and roared and even seemed to shake, with the impact of
the water rushing through it ! Formerly we had thought Harkoo only
an evil-minded native, who was intent on frustrating Ballanda’s rule
along the coast; but as we stood where he must have stood when he
hurled spears at us, we could not help admiring his pluck. For, after all,
though he was a medicine-man, he was only a superstitious native, and
I expect he firmly believed that an abode of demons was under his feet.
We saw where he had clutched a tuft of grass in falling, and had
pulled it out by the roots. The smoke from cooking-fires was still
visible, but we were too far away to hear the shouting.
“ Come on,” said Ballanda. “ Let’s get back. I never realize how
much I like my camp till I’ve been away from it for a day or two.”
“ I’m just the same,” I agreed. “ I vote we go right ahead through
the night. Ajax ought to be a great help when it comes to paddling.”
And so he was. A more able and willing helper could not have been
found. He seemed to desire one thing and one thing only—to serve
the man who had saved his life. I think he regarded Ballanda as more
than human, and consequently stood in awe of him. I don’t know what
he thought of me, but, anyhow, the three of us got on very well together.
Our plans for returning directly to camp were frustrated. A gale
sprang up at sunset, blowing directly off the land, and though we
struggled against it for several hours, the canoe was swamped so often
that for safety’s sake we had to run before it.
87


We hoisted sail and kept our craft dead on to the wind, escaping
most of the waves and having a rest from the eternal bailing. In
managing the sail Ajax was invaluable. My father had taught me all
he knew about ships, and I was fearless where wind and sea were con-
cerned, but all my experience had been with keel or centre-board boats.
This round-bottomed cockle-shell of a thing was beyond me at first,
and a gale in the night was no place to experiment. One fault in
judgment, and we should have been tipped into the sea. So Ballanda
kept his mind and body constantly alert for steering, while Ajax trimmed
the sail as it was needed. They worked together perfectly. Ajax
seemed almost to anticipate his master’s wishes. The sweep of the
paddle and the slackening of the sail came almost together, and the way
in which we rose on the crests of mountainous waves, and suddenly
swept down the other sides, gave me a feeling of confidence in spite of
being tossed about.
It fell to my lot to manage the food and fire department, and I think
I carried out my duties as well as my companions did theirs. And it
was no easy task to keep a fire alight on a few square inches of sand in
the nose of a tossing boat, and it was still harder to cook under these
circumstances. But I did it.
Daylight found us out of sight of the mainland, with an island looming
up on the port bow. The gale was still blowing, and the sea had got
into our water-keg, so we decided to run to the island for shelter and
fresh water.
Approaching the island, we had all the sensations of discoverers
coming on a new country. We felt like Columbus sighting America,
for it was quite possible we were the first white men to set foot upon it.
It was small, hilly, and thickly wooded. On the windward side frown-
ing cliffs ran sheer down into the sea and offered no landing for our canoe.
On the lee side, facing almost due north, we found a splendid harbour,
protected by two lofty points which ran out from the land and nearly
met again across the harbour mouth. Inside there was deep water
right up to the rocks, except in one place where a creek ran across a
gently shelving beach. It was an ideal place for a camp.
As we passed between the guarding headlands, we came out of the
88


wind quite suddenly and rested for a few minutes in the grateful lull,
for the buffeting had tired us out. The canoe still had steerage-way,
and we came round into the splendid harbour in grand style.
What a surprise awaited us ! Not only the great circle of sheltered
water with a tree-clad hill overlooking it, not only the white beach and
the fresh water inviting us to cease from our labours and rest awhile, but
also a ship !
Yes, a ship ! Of all the things we had least expected to see, this was
the most surprising. We gazed at it in silence. It lay against the
mouth of the creek, leaning over to starboard as if stranded. High both
fore and aft, low-waisted, and with a lot of top-hamper, it was a cut of
craft I had never seen before, and it reminded me of a woodcut on an
old nautical chart in the museum. No masts were visible.
A strange silence brooded over the scene. We drifted nearer,
expecting some sign of life, but none appeared. Nearer still, and then
I, who was in the bow of the canoe, saw daylight through the hull of the
stranded ship.
“ She’s a wreck ! ” I shouted.
A closer inspection proved I was right. In parts, the sides of the
vessel had rotted away, leaving the framework like ribs of some huge
beast half sunk in sand. We were in the presence of a mystery, and our
voices were hushed as we beached the canoe and hauled it up past the
tide-mark. Hunger and thirst were forgotten. We walked slowly to
that relic of past days.
She was a Dutchman. The name Van Brakel , cut deep in imperish-
able oak, reminded us of the days when Holland ruled the sea. Though
her gaunt framework towered above us even now, half of her was buried
in sand which, by anchoring her there, had saved her from being broken
up by wind and sea and lost for ever. She was completely hollow. The
softer wood of her inside fittings had rotted away, leaving the oak
framework all the harder for the years of weathering it had received,
but on the high poop, evidently better made than the rest of the ship,
the decking still clung and the remains of a cabin also.
We climbed up and stood outside the place where brave men had
once lived. We were unwilling to break the secrecy of years. Ajax
(8,018)


had no such scruples, for he did not share our feelings. He walked
right in. But he came out quicker. With a yell of terror he fled,
swarming down the old hulk like a monkey, and ran along the beach,
not content till he was hidden behind the canoe.
This made us all the more curious. Although the framework
of the cabin was there, it was as open as the branches of a tree, except
that a foot of wall still held to the decking all round. We peeped in.
Nothing but bare spars caught our eye at first, and then we saw what had
given Ajax such a fright. The bones of men.
We did not bother to count how many men had died there, and it
would not have been easy to do so, for the wind had blown them
together in a heap. Other things besides human bones were strewn
about the floor : old flintlock pistols, the hilt of a sword with Van
Brakel engraved on it, several shoe-buckles, and a jewelled clasp which
might once have held together the plumes of a feathered hat; but
nothing to indicate the nature of the tragedy which had overtaken the
ship and crew.
When we had satisfied our curiosity we remembered our hunger
and thirst. Walking to the creek for a drink, we came upon a grass-
grown mound with a great oaken door stuck up against it like a tomb-
stone. And so it was, for the name Van Brakel was at the top, and under
it the initials of no less than forty men, all done in heavy copper nails.
This was neither a shipwreck nor a massacre by hostile blacks. Those
forty bodies had been buried in a hurry, and the men who had dug the
pit and put up the crude memorial had themselves succumbed in the
poop cabin of their ship. The mystery did but thicken with each new
discovery.
But mystery or no mystery, we had to eat. We had only our rifles
with us, but as we were rather tired of fish and oysters, we wandered
round in search of something to shoot. We managed to bag a couple of
birds which looked like pheasants, when Ajax suddenly flopped down
on something and then stood up with a fine pigeon in his hand. It
was a squatter-pigeon, a bird which cannot rise and fly straight off the
ground, but has to run a little way first, so that the natives are sometimes
able to catch it before it leaves the ground.


I was wandering a little distance apart when I saw a bird so much
like a domestic fowl that I thought I was mistaken. However, I shot
it, and it was indeed very much like the mixed-bred poultry which
one sees in old-fashioned farmyards. My thoughts were still occupied
with the wreck of the Van Brakel, and I wondered whether these birds
were the descendants of fowls which the old navigators had brought
with them. How ironical such a thing would be ! The men all die and
their ship slowly goes to pieces, but the birds they brought with them
for food survive and help to populate the island.
Fancies were soon dispelled by the splendid meal we ate. Even
the presence of the old ship did not spoil our appetites for roast poultry,
cabbage-tree palm, and hot coffee, and it was three very contented men
who stretched themselves out after it in the shade and prepared to enjoy
a lazy afternoon. It did not trouble us a bit that we were miles out of
our course, with no exact knowledge how far we were from home. We
were young and healthy ; there was plenty of game and fresh water on
the island ; this was only another adventure in our fascinating life.
I /■


CHAPTER XI
AN hour later I awoke from a comfortable sleep. Ballanda was
l \ breathing gently beside me, and Ajax also was asleep some distance
away. My companions were more truly savages than I was ; Ajax
because his mind had never been brought to bear upon anything but
his immediate necessities, and Ballanda because the memory of his
civilized life was so dim. Our discovery of the old Dutch ship did not
interest them half so much as it did me. In fact, while I had been
puzzling my brains to find a story that would fit the situation, Bal-
landa’s chief concern was how he could take some of the well-seasoned
oak back to camp.
“ It would make such splendid spear-heads/’ he said.
It was the romantic rather than the practical side of the thing which
fascinated me, and I could not sleep any more, so, picking up my rifle,
I strolled over to the wreck again. I found nothing more except an
old blunderbuss and a few metal things like coins and shoe-buckles.
These were all in the cabin, for the rest of the ship was a skeleton.
Disappointed, I continued my way along the beach, making towards
one of the rocky headlands. I gained a good view from there, and was
tempted to climb higher towards the centre of the island, till I came
to a grassy plateau from which I could see due south and west. The
faint blue outline of distant land lay on the horizon, the mainland, as I
guessed, and I amused myself by calculating the direction in which
our home camp lay.
Behind me was a bank of rock overgrown with turf and trees, and
above it towered the central peak of the island. My eye was idly
scanning this background when I was astonished to see a wooden cross
sticking out of the grass. I ran to it. It stood nearly five feet high,
and was certainly a cross, and at the junction of the two timbers was the


name which had stimulated my imagination so powerfully, the name
Van Brakel.
Was it a grave ? I asked myself. And if so, why had they chosen
this lofty spot as the last resting-place for a man of the sea ? Was it
the wide stretch of ocean that lay at his feet and the distant line of coast
which he had perhaps helped to explore ? It was impossible to tell.
Behind the cross was a mass of trailing vines which seemed to cloak
the solid earth, and as I gazed listlessly at it I saw a bird come out of
the vines and then go back again when it caught sight of me. Wondering
what kind of bird it was to nest in that place, and hoping to see its store
of eggs, I went up to the vine and started to pull the trailers apart.
What was my surprise to find behind it, not a bank of earth as I had
expected, but empty space. The vine was screening a hollow place.
Perhaps here lay the solution of the mystery of the Van Brakel. Quickly
I pulled aside the vine and disclosed a hole, a little bigger than a large
door, partly supported by an upright post and cross-beam and partly
by the solid rock. Several birds flew out as I let in the light, and I
stepped back with cocked rifle in case any dangerous beast should have
its lair in that secluded spot.
There was nothing to fear. The hole was about the size of a ship’s
cabin and was partly natural and partly the work of man. Almost
filling it was a massive table and chair, carved in a fashion long out of
date. And in the chair was the skeleton of a man. His head had fallen
forward on his hands.
Strange though it may seem, I was not afraid. The thing had
happened so long ago that time had taken all horror away, for me at
least. I pulled the curtain of vines farther back with a feeling of rever-
ence. I was breaking the solitude of the dead. This thing was once
a man who had climbed to this outlook to die, and so sure of death was
he that he had set up a tombstone in front of the door.
The afternoon light poured in and touched the white bones. They
were of a large man who must have had a commanding countenance,
for the forehead of the skull was lofty and the jaw firm and powerful.
On one finger was a carved gold ring, with an onyx on it which bore a
Dutch coat-of-arms. All vestige of clothing had long since disappeared,
93


but I found two jewelled shoe-buckles and a beautiful plume-clasp for a
hat, and later found a pair of engraved pistols and a wonderful sword-
hilt in a corner, as if the wearer had flung them there when they became
too heavy for his dying strength to support. The rest of this bold
adventurer was dust.
No, I was wrong. Some other witness of the past had been left.
I saw under the forehead a wallet and purse. I moved the skull just
high enough to take these away, and then let it rest again on its out-
stretched arms. The purse was of linked metal, and contained some
Dutch coins and three pearls which had once been wrapped in soft
leather. My father had taught me a little about gems, and I knew that
these were valuable because of their size, though age had made them
cloudy and slightly yellow. The covering of the wallet had probably
been leather ; this had perished, but the inside lining of gold and silver
thread still held together. It was covered with an intricate design of
initials and looked to me like Indian work, probably obtained on one
of this man’s voyages, but I was so eager to see what it contained that
I paid little attention to details just then. There were two sheets of
parchment, each in a separate pocket, and though they had been folded
all these years, the material of which they were made was so good that
they opened without breaking.
One was a map, the other a sheet of writing in a language I did not
know, though the words Van Brakel at the top caught my eye. The
ill-fated name was elaborated with scrolls and flourishes beloved by
penmen of a former day, and though the first half of the record was
firmly written, the second had evidently been done by a gradually
weakening hand, and the signature, Sebastian de Hooste, Leiden, 1615,
was hard to decipher. Lists occurred here and there throughout the
page, one evidently a list of the crew, for I thought I recognized some
of the initials which were on the oaken door ; another of merchandise
or treasure, and a Dutch word I knew, “ gulden,” occurred several
times, and once or twice another word, “ ducat,” a coin worth about six
gulden. So this old shipmaster Sebastian de Hooste had been a trader
as well as an adventurer, in fact, the love of treasure had probably been
the main reason for his voyaging so far from his native land. I gave


In the chair was the skeleton of a man.
up puzzling over the quaint Dutch manuscript and turned my attention
to the map.
I recognized it at once for what it was —a crude portrayal of part of
the North Australian coast, hopelessly wrong as to detail in many
places, but sufficiently correct in main distances and directions to leave
no question that this was probably one of the earliest definite surveys
of our northern coast. Capes and bays were named with strange-
sounding Dutch names, little sketches of good harbours or places where
fresh water might be obtained adorned the margin of the map, and in
one place was a tiny spirited drawing of a tribe of hostile blacks waving
their spears at the Van Brakel as she fired a broadside at them.
One sketch in particular interested me, probably because the word
“ ducats ” was written there, with a big figure which I could not read.
Both figure and word had been partly scratched out as if the map-maker
did not want others to share his secret.
The map was marked with a cross at the angle of a small bay, and a
sketch near it showed a rounded cliff very like the top of a man’s head,
and the likeness was further emphasized by rocks sticking out on both


sides like ears. No other part of the coast was as carefully mapped
as this one where the cross was put and the half-obliterated word
“ ducats,” and it stimulated my interest to its highest pitch, particularly
so because the ship’s course was marked straight out to sea from there
and ended in an island —doubtless the one where I was now standing.
So this was the last point on the mainland at which the good ship
Van Brakel had touched before she made for the island which was to
be her last post of call. What tales I made up to fit the scanty details
I had found. I lay on the grassy bank and wove stories of buccaneers
and hidden treasures, but rejected them one by one because some
essential link was missing, till at last I hit on an explanation which in-
cluded all I knew about the Van Brakel and as little else as possible.
One fact continually balked me. There were no signs of violence.
The gaunt relic on the beach had never sheltered a brood of pirates,
no black flag had ever waved at her masthead, and it was no mutiny
of cut-throats which had caused her to meet so tragic an end. No,
Sebastian de Hooste was a reputable man who had died slowly, still
retaining the command of his men, for it had taken the labour of several
days and several men to make him that simple dwelling which had
become his tomb, and it had been no easy task to carry the huge table
and chair up the mountain side. Besides, there were the graves on the
beach and the human bones in the poop-cabin of the wreck, and on
none of them was there a sign of a bullet wound or a cutlass mark.
This was my explanation, and subsequent events will show whether
I was far from the truth or not.
Sebastian de Hooste was a member of a titled Leiden family—so
my mind imagined him —who, tiring of his father’s counting-house,
had taken to the sea, an honourable profession indeed when the flag of
Holland waved in every breeze that blew over the seven seas. By skill
and influence he had risen to the command of the ship Van Brakel , and
traded from the port of Amsterdam for years, going farther and farther
afield as his confidence increased and as the unknown parts of the earth
opened their treasures to him. At last the wealth of India drew him,
then Java, till finally he made his headquarters at the Dutch colony of
Bantam in Java.


While resting after a voyage he heard a tale told by a dying man of
a strange coast many days south-east of Java, where strange trees grew
and strange animals and a race of men the like of which had never been
seen or heard of before. Perhaps it was such a tale, or perhaps it was
a series of gales which his clumsy craft could not weather, but at last
Sebastian de Hooste saw on his starboard bow a coast he had not seen
before. The need for fresh water and food sent him ashore, and you
can imagine the curious bewilderment of these old Dutch mariners
as they saw their first Australian trees and kangaroos perhaps, and
heard the screech of cockatoos. And, most of all, the natives must have
astonished them. The majority of these must have been friendly
at first, or else the adventurers would have turned for more hospitable
shores, and it is probable that they bartered trinkets and beads for pearls
and gold-dust. Malays had visited these shores long before the
Dutchmen came, and the natives knew that pearls and gold could be
exchanged for things they valued highly. At any rate, Sebastian de
Hooste was encouraged to explore farther, and, trained seaman and
cautious merchant that he was, he made a chart of his journey, adding
more treasure to his store from time to time, so that when he returned
to Holland he might have sure proof of the richness of his discovery.
No doubt he thought that the bells of Amsterdam would ring when
the Van Brakel dropped anchor there, and that he and his officers
would receive a pompous civic welcome.
But something happened to defeat his project of a triumphant
voyage home. My imagination did not overcome this obstacle for some
time, but at last I decided that fever or some such sickness had broken
out. Perhaps the natives at their last watering-place had poisoned the
water ; but whatever was the cause, Sebastian de Hooste took his
treasure from the ship and buried it, marking the spot on his map so
that he would know it again. Then he had beaten out to sea, hoping
that the free air of the ocean would cure his men of the pestilence. But
in vain. They sickened and died, and he had just enough of them left
to make for this sheltered bay and run the ship aground.
For days, perhaps weeks, he fought the sickness. He even got his
men to make him a shelter high up where the freshest air blew, and he
(3,013) gy N


climbed there daily and sat looking across the sea to the coast he had
mapped with such care and where his treasure-hoard lay buried, esti-
mated with true Dutch care to equal so many golden ducats. Every
day when he left the beach there were fewer men alive, till he was the
last, and then he too gave up his spirit, but not before he had recorded
his achievement on parchment and folded it in an imperishable wallet.
There, that is the story I made up, sprawling in the sun on the lofty
island tableland, and though the scanty facts fitted it well, it might have
been as far from the truth as are many such tales of early voyages. We
shall see.
A shot from the beach roused me from my reverie. I put back the
screen of vines and left everything as I had found it, except that I took
the wallet and purse and the jewelled ornaments. I left the old
adventurer still sitting in his great carved chair, but the secret was now
no longer only his.
I met Ballanda coming to seek me. As the sun sank he had
wondered at my long absence, and had tracked me across the sand and
even across the rocks, for he could track like a blackfellow. He was
half-way up the hill before I met him. I showed him what was in my
hand. The jewelled clasps interested him, but only because they
sparkled as the setting sun struck them, and the purse because he
had never seen a bag of linked metal before. But he was not interested
in the parchments at all, and took so little notice of my story when I
began it, that I did not bother to continue. He did not even wish to
see the last abode of Sebastian de Hooste. In this he was a true savage,
caring most for the needs of the present, and he was frankly disappointed
that my afternoon’s expedition had yielded nothing for our evening meal.
So I kept my secret for another time.


CHAPTER XII
YOU may be sure I was very eager to explore the coast and find the
spot marked on old Sebastian de Hooste’s map. I tried to arouse
Ballanda’s interest, but in vain. I showed him the map, but he was
more interested in the parchment than in the marks on it, and assured
me that the skin of only very young animals could ever make such ex-
quisite and durable material. But what did I want to know about the
tanning of skin when my imagination was fired by what I had found ?
So I told him tales of buccaneers and Spanish galleons, of mutinies
and buried treasure, of men with patches over one eye who used quaint
blunderbusses and swore strange oaths. In vain. He was indeed a
savage. The present moment concerned him more than the past or
future, and when I explained what cutlasses were, in answer to his
question about them, he only called the men foolish for using such
obsolete weapons. The advancement of knowledge was inexplicable
to him. There were two splendid swords hanging in his hut ; why
didn’t the men I was talking about use things like that instead of clumsy
cutlasses, or, better still, why didn’t they use service rifles ? The idea
of a blunderbuss sent him into roars of laughter.
I tried a different tack. Picturing the vast wealth which was some-
times buried on lonely coasts, I described what we should be able to do
if we found it. Before the mind of this splendid savage I drew alluring
pictures of civilized life. In this I failed worse than ever, as can well be
imagined, for when I came to ransack my brains for something which
Ballanda would like better than his present life, I was at a loss. For
our life was perfect, and not all the treasure of the Spanish Main could
give us a better time than we were having. I imagined Ballanda in a
stiff collar and long trousers ! No, it was certain he could not be
tempted to embark on a treasure-hunt because of what that treasure
would bring to him.


He was supremely content. He listened to my stories, but was
quite unmoved by them. When I stopped, he reached forward for a
nicely roasted pigeon, ate it, and lay back on the sand. What more did
he want ?
Or what more did I want ? I had health and strength, a life of
adventure with an heroic and pleasant companion, and I was beginning
to become skilled in all ways of savage life. Surely my lot was an
enviable one. Yet I was not perfectly content like Ballanda was. I
was not such a complete savage. His memory was empty, mine was
full, and I knew that the world was wider than the horizon we looked
at, and I longed for the freedom which wealth would give me, freedom
to go into every corner of the earth and experience many and strange
adventures amongst many and strange peoples. And most of all,
I was sure that my father would return. It was not only that momen-
tary glimpse I thought I had of him when the rocket went up from the
mate’s boat, but also an inward conviction that my father, who had been
my friend all my life, was still alive. So I wanted to test the old Dutch-
man’s plan very much.
Ballanda went to sleep long before I did that night. I lay and
looked at the dark skeleton of the ship Van Brakel against the pale night
sky, and thought the long, long thoughts of youth.
Next day the wind blew gently from the north, so we embarked,
paddled out of the magnificent island harbour, and hoisted sail. Before
night we were near the mainland coast again. Skirting a low pro-
montory, we saw on the beach of a shallow bay what looked to me like
a broad, long hut. Ballanda had been there once before, and told me it
was a pile of wood, and I was so interested that he agreed to land.
It was too dark to investigate that night, but next day I was up early and
had a good look round.
The wood had been cut from a mangrove swamp near by, but so
many years ago that sand had drifted half-way up the pile, and grass and
even little bushes were growing out of the top. It had evidently been
stacked to dry. But by whom ? And why did they not return for it
after taking all that trouble in cutting and stacking ? I walked round
the pile, and a sense of the mystery of these tropical shores came


strongly to me again. Had this anything to do with the Van Brakel ?
I wondered. No, it could not be, for the old Dutch ship had gone
straight to sea from the spot marked on the map, which was much farther
west than this bay.
A short distance on the other side of the wood-pile was the frame-
work of a shed —just the posts, nothing more, but the outline of a long
shed was unmistakable. And near it was a stone wall about four feet
high with three great cauldrons on the sheltered side. In fact, the wall
had evidently been built to protect the cauldrons from wind, and as I
found fire-blackened stones near them, I judged that the cauldrons had
been used for boiling something.
They were very old, as old as the wood-stack. They looked like
beaten copper, and age and sea wind and weather had turned them a
beautiful green. So engrossed was I with this new discovery that I
gave no thought to the others. They had been fast asleep when I left
camp. But I was reminded of them suddenly, for when I turned over
one of the cauldrons, somebody jerked me back from behind, and gave
a startled cry:
“ Look out, Misser Duncan Ballanda ! ”
It was Ajax, and he pointed excitedly to the sand I had disturbed.
“ Snake sit down,” he explained. “ Him bite you dead.”
I could see no snake, but when Ajax stooped down and pointed it
out, I saw a thin snake the exact colour of sand. But was this black-
fellow going to touch it ? Surely not, for he had told me it was veno-
mous. He probably wanted to show off in front of me, for he picked
it up by the tail as quick as lightning and cracked it like a whip, then
held it up writhing with a broken back.
“ Him very bad fella,” he said, grinning. “ Him bite. You lie
down dead. No get up again.”
My surprise pleased him, and indeed I was grateful, for I might
easily have put my foot on the deadly thing. Like a true native, Ajax
thought of the snake in a very practical light.
“ Him good-fella tucker,” he said, breaking off the head, which
contained the poison fangs. “My word, him very good-fella tucker.”
I did not question his statement, for if a native could relish crocodile,


there was no knowing where they might stop. So I changed the subject
by pointing to the cauldrons and asking :
“ What name these, Ajax ? ”
His answer was a hurried jargon of native and pidgin-English,
but I heard some words I knew : “ Trepang,” “ Malay,” and “ long
time ago.”
“ Malays cut um wood ? ” I asked.
“ Yah. Him bin cut um mangrove. Burn um longa shed.”
He jerked his chin in the direction of the framework.
“ And those ? ” I asked, kicking one of the cauldrons.
“ Boil um trepang,” he answered.
So this was a trepang camp, was it ? Or rather, it had been one,
as Ajax said, “ long time ago.” My father had told me about the
adventurous dark-skinned seamen who sailed their proas from Macassa
along the north coast of Australia year after year, collecting pearls and
tortoise-shell from the natives and getting trepang from the reefs and
curing it to sell in China, where it is esteemed a great delicacy.
Ajax had evidently seen it done, though no Malay proas had come
along that distant part of the coast for many years. He took me out
in the canoe and showed me the great slug-like trepang on the reefs,
and speared some and boiled them. We did not stop to cure them
properly, for the Malays take a long time about it. They first boil
the trepang slightly, then clean it and boil it again with a tan of man-
grove bark. This turns it red, and is probably done to deceive the
Chinaman, who thinks a great deal more of red trepang than he does of
grey, and it is only the latter variety which is found on the Australian
coast. After the second boiling, it is dried in the sun and then smoked
with mangrove wood in huge sheds, and when this is over, the fat slug-
looking object is shrivelled and has a very unpleasant appearance to our
eyes, but evidently not to the Chinese, for big prices are paid for it.
Ballanda made a stew with fresh trepang, but it tasted too rich and
fishy for me, and I was glad to satisfy my hunger on the more con-
ventional parts of the meal —a bird with a strong red bill which I had
found wading after oysters and had shot and roasted. It was very good,
though Ballanda and Ajax assured me that trepang stew was much better.


The way in which Ballanda found water on the beach was typical
of what I call “ bushcraft.” When we landed it was so nearly dark
that we did not bother to look for water that night, but used some we
had brought from the island. In the morning I was too interested in
the wood-pile to think of water, but when Ajax and I returned to break-
fast there was as plentiful a supply as if we had camped beside a stream.
There was no fresh water in sight, so I asked Ballanda where he had
got it. He pointed to a spot about a hundred yards away, just where
the sand met the grass of the jungle. I found a hole there recently
scooped, full of clear cold water, but, to my eyes, there was no trace
of water near. Why had Ballanda chosen this spot of all others ? In
explanation he showed me a tree standing by. The jungle was dark
with big gums and paper-bark trees, but this one was like a needle-
bush, though whether it really was a needle-bush, I don’t know.
“ You’ll generally find water near one of those trees,” he told me.
It sounded so simple, yet, because I did not know it, I might have
perished with thirst if I had been cast away on that lonely beach. As
a matter of fact there was probably a creek somewhere near or the
Malays would not have chosen the place for a trepang camp.
Before we left that bay I was to have another lesson in bush-lore,
if such a term can be applied to fishing, and it ended in a most un-
expected manner. The two low promontories which guarded the bay
were full of deep holes which the sea left as it went out. These were
full of fish, and Ballanda thought it would be a good idea if we took a
full cargo of fish back to our home camp as a present for the blacks
there, for though they can get any number of fish by spearing them,
they very seldom go to the trouble of laying in a big supply, and a real
good “ tuck-out ” would therefore be a treat.
To my surprise we did not start to collect bait or attend to our fish-
ing-lines or spears, but Ajax went away into the bush and brought
back an armful of leaves. I had not seen this plant before, and when we
set to work to bruise the leaves between stones, a white milky fluid
came out of them. With this strange cargo we embarked in the canoe
and paddled to one of the promontories.
Ballanda chose a big deep pool about ten yards across. The water


was so clear that we could easily see the bottom, and it was a wonder-
ful sight, with coloured rocks and coral and queer things clinging to
them, while in and out flashed all kinds of fish. It was like a tropical
aquarium I had once seen, but far more beautiful.
Into this pool the bruised leaves were thrown. As they sank the
milky liquid mixed with the water, and the effect of it was apparent
almost at once, for fish after fish rose to the surface, struggled weakly
for a time and then turned over, not dead, but drugged. Ballanda told
me that the next tide would clear the pool and none of the fish would
be any the worse ; but there they were, hundreds of them at our mercy.
We chose only the best, for. we did not want to overload the canoe and
make it a labour to paddle, but we took at least two dozen beauties of
several kinds grey, red, and golden schnapper, jumping mullet,
groper, rock cod, barramundi, and others that I cannot name ; a splendid
haul and without any labour on our part.
If it is not wise to count chickens before they are hatched, it is
equally unwise to count fish till they are safely ashore. Scarcely had
we pushed off into deep water when we heard a grating sound at the
bottom of the canoe, and then felt a slight heave as if she had grounded.
Ballanda and Ajax were paddling, and I was trying to keep our slippery
cargo to one part of the canoe.
She heaved again, more decidedly this time. Ajax gave a shout:
“ Look, Ballanda.”
And look we did, and never do I want to meet such greedy, deadly
eyes as stared up into mine. An immense shark was just below the sur-
face of the water. One of us must have thrown a rejected fish into the
lagoon instead of into the pool, and this had attracted the monster, for
monster it was, as long as the canoe and very powerful. We had nothing
to defend ourselves with except knives, for we had left our rifles on
shore. What should we do ? At any moment he might attack us broad-
side and tip us into the water, and then —it was too terrible to think of.
Suddenly an idea struck me. I grabbed a large fish and flung it
as far as I could from the canoe. Full speed after it went the shark.
The spell was broken, and Ballanda and Ajax paddled for their lives.
But what is one fish to a shark ? He returned instantly. I kept him


I kept them all off with doles of fish.
busy with another fish, and then another. The commotion attracted
several more sharks, not as big as the first one, but unpleasant com-
panions all the same, but I kept them all off with doles of fish.
It was now a question whether the supply would hold out. The
two men lay to their paddles with desperate strength, and we flew over
the water. I suppose it would have looked funny if we could have
seen it happening to anybody else, for I was tossing out one after another
fine fish ; but it was not funny to us just then. But when we beached
the canoe at last and hauled her up, we saw the funny side too, for there
were just three fish left, one apiece. We lay on the sand and shouted
with laughter. The relief from peril was so great that we gave full
vent to our emotions, and for some minutes we were speechless. At last
Ballanda said :
“ Come on, you chaps. Let’s cook them and get them inside us.
We can’t help taking them safely to camp then. Oh dear, oh dear.
Fancy that fine lot of fish going overboard,” and another paroxysm of
laughter made him helpless for a time.
(3,0i3) \ 105 o


CHAPTER XIII
ESS than a week had passed since we left our camp, but the natives
JL* could not have made greater demonstrations of joy if we had been
absent for a year. Ballanda’s prowess with the crocodile was already
known. In fact, an account of it had been received by smoke signals
the same evening as it happened, for one of the Buffalo blacks had been
posted on a hill to catch any message. The blacks felt enormously
proud of their chief.
Disregarding his rule for once, that no native was to approach him
without being sent for, they swam out into the lagoon as soon as we
entered between the gap in the reef. Some of them had ropes made of
human hair, which they fastened to the canoe, and swam back, pulling
it behind them ; others had branches of leaves with which they flogged
the water to scare away sharks. It was a truly triumphant and
barbaric return, and it reminded me of tales I had read about ancient
gods and goddesses being towed over the sea in boats drawn by harnessed
dolphins.
When we grounded on the beach, the rejoicing blacks lifted the canoe
bodily out of the water while we sat in it, and carried us up the beach
in this way. No doubt they wanted to carry us shoulder-high as
civilized men do with their champions, but they dared not touch us.
I was glad of this, for natives are like children, and too great a familiarity
with them would destroy our authority.
I wondered what Ajax would do under these circumstances. It was
hardly to be expected that our natives would care to carry him in the
triumphal procession, and they had not reckoned on his presence. It
was a test of the man’s good feeling, and he showed it well, for as soon as
the blacks started to fasten ropes to the canoe he dived overboard
and took his place with the rejoicing throng, and he was one of those
who lent his shoulder as we were carried up the beach. This showed
106


It was a truly triumphant and barbaric return.
that he had no wish to presume upon his companionship with us during
the last few days.
The problem of what to do with Ajax caused us some concern.
We could not let him build a wurley on our side of the creek without
showing favouritism, and that would not be fair to our tribe, yet we did
not know whether a stranger would be allowed to settle with them, for
aboriginal laws are very strict.
Apparently there was no prohibitive law in this case, and his inclusion
in the tribe was immediate and complete. We saw the result of it
two days later. Sitting under our shelter after dinner, we saw a man on


the far side of the creek with his hand raised to ask whether he could
come over. It was Ajax. Ballanda signalled that permission was
given, and he came forward.
“ What name, Ajax ? ” (What do you want ?) asked Ballanda, as the
black stood looking at the ground.
“ Me aller same lubra longa you,” said the man, meaning that he
was Ballanda’s servant for him to do what he liked with.
“ Good fella,” remarked Ballanda approvingly. “ You sit down
longa other fellas, eh ? ”
“ Yah,” grinned Ajax. “Me all day sit down longa them.” Then
he hesitated, and at last asked, with the nearest approach to a blush which
his black face made possible, “ Suppose me take um coo-wee-i (young
girl), you say all rightee, eh ? ”
Ballanda smiled. The man had asked his chief whether there was
any objection to his taking a wife.
“ Suppose you take um coo-wee-i, me say very good fella,” remarked
Ballanda approvingly.
Ajax was highly delighted. He grinned all over his broad honest
face
“You bring her along to see me,” added Ballanda.
The invitation rather scared the young bridegroom. Perhaps the
happy lady was not yet his wife, and might therefore object to being
ordered about by him; but her scruples must have been overcome, for
after a time, during which we heard a scuffle and much giggling, Ajax
returned with his present or future wife, we weren’t sure which.
To the adoring eyes of Ajax no doubt the lady was very beautiful,
but our standards are different, and we got rid of her as soon as we could.
But Ballanda did a thing to her which raised her to the seventh heaven
of delight, and is probably told in her camp to this day if she is still
alive: he threw over her head a necklace of coral beads which he had
made and stained many different colours.
So Ajax became a member of the tribe.
I often thought about the wreck of the old Dutch ship, and the
wallet and purse I had found with the remains of her captain, Sebastian
de Hooste. If I had had only myself to consider, I should have set out
108


straight away to explore the coast, but I did not want to go without
Ballanda, and I had hopes of interesting him in the venture. For now
and again as I talked to him he got glimpses of memory, vague at first,
like mist rising and then falling over a landscape, but they encouraged
me to believe that some day his memory would be completely restored.
In this connection the first occurrence was very simple. We were
both mending the fishing seine one day, and, because I was happy, I
was whistling. I went from one tune to another, till I hit on an old
school song and began to whistle it lustily. lam sure I had not whistled
or sung it for years, certainly not since meeting Ballanda, and I was
really glad to hear the familiar notes again. I gave myself up to the
tune till a tricky part of the net came and I stopped with the tune un-
finished. What was my surprise to hear Ballanda take it up and whistle
it correctly through right to the end.
Fortunately I did not show surprise, for I believe it is best to treat
cases of lost and returning memory very carefully. I went on with the
mending and whistled the tune again, and again Ballanda took it up
when I left off. I tried him with others, not letting him know I was
doing it on purpose, and was successful with two other school tunes.
This pleased me very much, because one thing I missed about
Ballanda was that we could not talk together about our life before we
became white savages. If only we had a past in common —and I was
sure his upbringing and school life had been pretty much the same as
mine—we should become more real pals than we were at present, for
though we were so friendly that either of us would have laid down his
life to save the other, we were too much like members of different races
to be really intimate. So I persevered and tried in all manner of ways
to restore Ballanda’s memory.
One day we killed and brought in a pig. There were a great many
of them in the jungle, but the flesh was rather coarse, and not nearly so
much like the pork I had been used to as dugong flesh was. However, it
made a change, and hunting pigs was great sport. When we cleaned this
particular pig ready for cooking, I washed the bladder and blew it up.
Ballanda watched me intently, but did not say anything. I fastened the
neck with a string and bounced it on the ground, for it was like a football.


All at once Ballanda got very excited. Picking up the bladder, he
rushed out to the beach and kicked it high in the air, jumping to catch
it as it fell. He did this several times, increasing in skill quickly. Then
I took a hand and we played football for at least an hour in just the way
I used to do at school when there was no definite game on. It seemed
to me that Ballanda must have been a splendid footballer at one time.
This was another definite recovery of memory, for football or any-
thing like it is unknown amongst the tribes of the north coast of
Australia.
A few days later I tried him with cricket and was very successful.
I am sure the game has never yielded so much fun and excitement as
it did on that lonely beach. Before long we taught the members of the
tribe how to play, and they entered into it with zest and soon became
very proficient. Ballanda was delighted. His memory of the game
and his skill in it came back quickly, and we had some splendid contests.
The black women made palm-leaf matting for the pitch, our bats
were of native willow with handles of split bamboo tightly bound
together with sinews and spinifex gum, and the balls were made of layer
after layer of thick bark —very much like cork —with a covering of tough
shark’s skin well damped and moulded and sewn till they were perfect
spheres.
Ballanda usually captained one side and I the other, and sometimes,
as a great treat, the women of the tribe were allowed to come and watch
from the top of the beach. Never was there such an enthusiastic
audience, and never, I am sure, did a cricket-field see such mighty hitting
and bowling. For the blacks have wonderful sight and powers of
throwing. They hardly ever missed a ball, however swiftly it came,
and boundary hits were more common at first than ordinary ones.
But, as skill developed, the game became more scientific, and we often
had splendid displays of real first-class cricket. The fielding would
have satisfied the most exacting captain. Some of them fielded in the
sea, and more than once a man has been caught out by a superb catch
when the fielder has leapt out of the water like a dolphin.
I have often watched Test-Match cricket since those days, and have
admired the green grass dotted with white-clad figures, and the lawn


They entered into it with zest.
of the pavilion bright with the dainty dresses of women. Our matches
looked very different, but they had a greater charm for me. A brilliant
sky, a dazzling sea, and a white beach backed by green jungle. The
players with black athletic bodies well oiled, and the distinctive feather
of their side stuck in their hair; while for spectators we had a group
of gesticulating men in one place and of equally excited women in
another. Some of the matches went on for days, and they usually
ended in a feast and corroboree, and though we two white men


entered fully into the game, I need hardly say that we took no part in the
succeeding festival.
So the days wore on. Hunting, fishing, sport, and unexpected
adventure, perfect health, and surroundings that left nothing to be
desired. Nothing, did I say ? Well, there was something wanting to
a man of my nature. I was not ungrateful for the lot that had befallen
me, yet often, when work and play were over, I used to open the old
Dutchman’s wallet and pore over his plan. And I thought of my
father too, and wondered how we should meet and when, for I never
doubted he was alive and would find me one day.
I stopped worrying Ballanda about the proposed treasure-hunt, for
he was a man of obstinate will, and I saw, to my great satisfaction, that
memory was slowly coming back to him. He paid more attention to
the tales I told him, and sometimes even asked me to repeat one which
had pleased him. You may be sure I told him most often about
buccaneers and the Spanish Main and the adventurers of the Dutch
East India Company. So I waited patiently till he himself should
suggest the expedition along the coast which Sebastian de Hooste had
mapped ; and it was not hard to wait, for our life was so full and so
completely satisfying.
One day he and I were scrambling through a mangrove swamp after
duck. Nothing in the world can equal such a swamp for sheer heart-
breaking depression. We were two fit, high-spirited white men, yet
coming out of the brilliant sunshine into the gloom of the man-
groves sent our spirits down to zero. We forgot all about ducks, and
struggled on and on with one thought and one only—to get out on
the other side.
The mangrove forest was dark and solitary. Overhead was such a
closely-knitted canopy of leaves that only a tiny patch of sky was visible
here and there, and the light that came through these patches made the
gloom more ghostly by contrast. It was like a huge vaulted tomb
with gnarled trunks for columns and the fantastic branches for roof.
And what shall I say about the floor ? Out from the mud curved a net-
work of roots running all ways, and liable to trip one up at every step
and throw one headlong into the evil-smelling mud. A tiny insect


Clammy wings beat all around me.


trying to crawl over a mass of tousled hair could not be more uncom-
fortable than we were.
The air was stifling, moist, and foul-smelling. Nothing could be
seen ahead of us but more mangrove trunks and roots. There was
silence save for an occasional weird sighing sound from the mud or a
flop as some reptile dropped from a root into its slimy home. Silence,
did I say ? Yes, except that neither of us were silent, and I found
that Ballanda’s returning memory was rich in expressive words suitable
for an occasion such as this.
Presently I began to smell a most abominable smell. I thought
some animal must be decaying, but when I asked Ballanda what he
thought, he smiled in such a queer way that my curiosity was aroused.
As the smell got stronger, I felt sure it did not come from anything dead,
and seeing big clusters of a strange-looking fruit hanging from the
branches ahead, I thought the smell must come from them. A most
suitable fruit to hang in such a dismal place.
“ I didn’t know mangroves had fruit like that,” I said.
Ballanda still smiled. “Oh yes,” he said. “Go up and pick one.
They’re rather interesting.”
And so indeed they were, very interesting.
I struggled over a particularly awkward network of roots to get near
the trees which bore this fruit. There they hung in the dim light, great
festoons of them. I reached up and picked one.
Suddenly the air was alive with fluttering forms. Shrill thin cries
filled the silence. Clammy wings beat all around me, hitting my face
and head so that I tripped and fell into the mud. As I pulled myself
out ruefully, still not quite understanding what had happened, I saw
Ballanda convulsed with laughter. I wished he too had fallen into
the slime.
“ How d’you like the fruit ? ” he shouted.
I was too bewildered to answer.
“ Nice and juicy, aren’t they ? They smell much better when
they’re ripe and taste better too.” With such pleasantries he worked
off his mirth, and by that time I was sufficiently recovered to ask him
what in the world they were.


“ Flying-foxes,” he answered; and as I still defended myself from
an occasional one that flapped against me, he added : “ Don’t kill
them; they won’t hurt you. But put those few you’ve hurt out of
misery and bring them along. The blacks like them better than
anything.”
I did as he suggested, and escaped out of that immediate neighbour-
hood . I had disturbed a colony of flying-foxes. The name is deceptive,
for the strange creatures are really bats with bodies something like small
foxes. They hang in huge clusters during the day, usually in dark
places like mangrove swamps, and come out at night to look for fruit,
which is their food. Australia has several survivals of the bygone ages,
when fish was turning to reptile and reptile to bird, and one of the most
interesting of them all is the weird creature which caused me so much
astonishment that afternoon.


CHAPTER XIV
AT last we emerged from the dismal mangroves into the beautiful
l \ light of day. How I revelled in it. By this time my skin was as
tough and nearly as dark as Ballanda’s, and I had discarded my possum
skin breeches and leggings and boots, and wore only a sarong. The
sun beat down on my almost naked body and warmed it through and
through, for the dark swamp had made me cold.
We traversed a belt of jungle and came to a reedy lake alive with
water-birds of all kinds. For a few minutes we stood in the shelter
of the trees and listened to the multitude of calls and splashings going
on in front of us, and when we moved forward we did not disturb the
birds in the least, for I was now as silent and stealthy a hunter as
Ballanda was. Such a lake as this was a joy to him. He loved to wade
out till the mud came up to his waist. He told me he felt more part of
nature then than at any other time.
There is no accounting for taste, and a muddy lake was certainly
not my idea of perfect hunting. The feel of mud was always repulsive
to me, and though I was a skilful stalker of ducks, I never really liked it,
preferring to feel the firm ground under my feet.
Perhaps the mangrove swamp had given me a sickener of slime, but
I let Ballanda go into the lake alone that afternoon. Just as I lost sight
of him amongst the reeds I heard a churring sound behind me.
“ Jungle-fowl,” I thought. “ That’s more in my line.”
So I turned and stole into the shadows as noiseless as a shadow
myself. The bird which had attracted my attention was moving about,
and I went deeper and deeper into the bush, which in this place was
more dense than usual. Great ropes of creeper hung from tree to tree
and often blocked the way, so that I had to climb through them.
Beautiful orchids flowered on some of these creepers, and when they
116


caught the light which filtered through the thick canopy of leaves over-
head, the flowers looked like brilliant butterflies or birds.
I was always a great lover of natural beauty and especially of the
silent charm of deep tropical bush, and I gave up the quest of the jungle-
fowl for a time and leant against a tree to enjoy the scene.
Suddenly the peace was broken by a shot from the lake. Ballanda
had started business amongst the ducks. Before the echo of the shot
died away something dropped past my face. At first I thought it was
a thick vine, and when I saw I was wrong, such a spasm of terror gripped
me that I dropped my rifle.
The body of a huge snake was dangling in front of me.
Already one of its coils was round my legs, binding me to the tree,
and its deadly head was waving to and fro near my face. For a moment
I felt frozen and absolutely powerless.
Nothing in nature so numbs the animal creation with fascinated
terror as the stare of a snake, for it is thus that the reptile catches
its prey. But though I also was one of the animal creation, I had
the brain of a man, and I shook off the fascination with a great effort.
My two hands were free. With the strength of desperation I gripped
the snake round the neck and hung on, keeping it at arm’s length.
This effort restored my senses fully and I gave a cry for help. A
desperate struggle followed. The snake flogged to and fro, jerking
the upper part of my body with it and gradually adding more coils
round my legs. It drew them tighter and tighter. Fortunately my
position against the tree prevented it from exercising its full crushing
powers, but even so, I found the struggle taxing my strength to the
utmost.
How it would have ended I don’t know. I feel sure the snake
could have held out longer than I could, but at last I remembered the
knife hanging round my neck. With another shout for help I put out
all my strength for a last effort, took away my left hand for a moment,
and unsheathed the knife. Before the reptile could take advantage
of my one-handed grip, the long keen blade had entered its body.
Setting my teeth, I ripped the knife upwards.
The snake’s body tightened like a steel spring. The pain was
ii 7


excruciating. I held on. Darkness settled on me. A sound of rushing
water filled my ears and I remembered no more.
When I came to, Ballanda was stooping over me. I was in the sun-
light. His face was very anxious, and when he saw me open my eyes
he gave a shout of gladness. I tried to get up, but all power had gone
from my legs though there was no pain in them. We chafed them till
sensation returned and I was able to stand up.
“ What was it ? ” I asked.
“ A python,” he replied.
“ Is its bite poisonous ? ”
“ No. It kills its prey by crushing them to death. There are not
many in the jungle here. This is the biggest Fve seen.”
We pulled it into the open and measured it. It was over fifteen feet
long, and must have been seven or eight inches through in the thickest
place. The whole of the fifteen feet was like a living spring, and once
it had got round the upper part of my body it would have crushed my
ribs and squeezed me to death. The knife-thrust was left-handed and
partly a fluke, for it had struck the glistening body fair in the middle
and severed the spinal cord. That explains the sudden contraction
which made me unconscious, though it was a sign of death on the
python’s part.
We gathered Ballanda’s ducks together and the flying-foxes and
took our way home slowly, avoiding the mangrove swamp, as I was
too shaky for scrambling over the interlacing roots. When the blacks
heard of my adventure they went off at once to bring the great snake
in ; and a royal feast they had of it too.
Though my memory of the time I spent in the northern wilds is
still vivid, I sometimes turn over the leaves of a diary I kept then.
Amongst the queer things which Ballanda had taken from his father’s
yacht before it broke to pieces were some books of travel and natural
history and one or two notebooks. These I made use of to amuse
myself writing down the events of each day, and I find this short entry
on the day following my adventure with the python :
“ Slacked all day and yarned to Ballanda.”
It was a glorious day for slacking, bright and clear, with a cooling
118


I gripped the snake round the neck and hung on.


wind from the ocean. Towards evening Ajax appeared on the other
side of the creek and signalled that he had something important to say
to us. Ballanda gave him leave to come over, and soon he stood before
us with eyes cast down respectfully. No native will look a white man
in the eye if he can avoid it.
“ What name ? ” asked Ballanda.
“ Me bin look where big fella snake close up kill um Duncan
Ballanda,” he answered.
“ Well, what about it ? ”
“ Me bin see um track nother fella snake.”
“ Whereabouts ? ”
“ Close up same place.”
“ Did you kill um dead ? ”
“ Ner. Me no bin see um snake, only track first time. Me go
lone. Me follow track longa river. Me sit down watch long time.
By’m bye me see um snake swim back —big fella snake, aller same close
up kill um Duncan Ballanda. Him go back same place him come from.”
“ So there’s another python, is there ? ” commented Ballanda.
“ How’d you like to have a go at it ? ” he asked, turning to me.
“ If I was prepared for it, I wouldn’t mind having a go at anything,”
I replied. “ But this dropping out of trees and taking one by surprise
is not a pleasant experience, I can tell you.”
Next day we strolled up the bank of the river to the place where
Ajax had seen the snake-track. Sure enough, there it was, pressed
deep in the mud at the edge of the water. We tried to follow it back,
but even Ballanda, great bushman though he was, could not follow the
indications, for the python was off the ground most of the time, and it
needed Ajax’s keener sight to detect a piece of broken bark here, a
flattened tuft of grass there, and a bent twig somewhere else. There
was no doubt that the snake had paid one visit, perhaps two, to the
scene of my adventure.
We went back to the river-bank and sat down. Half-way across
was a tangle of timber where a giant tree, washed down by a flood, had
caught on a sandbank and collected a lot of other debris which the river
had coated with mud. I was watching this mass when I thought 1


saw one of the logs move. I pointed it out to Ballanda, and presently
we both laughed, for the thing slipped into the water. It was a croco-
dile. There was another one on the driftwood, a huge beast, and he
evidently preferred basking in the sun, for he lay there motionless except
that now and again his eyes blinked.
Ajax was with us and was intently watching the opposite bank. If
he had not done so we should have missed a unique sight —a python
entering the water. There was no sound, and even if there had been,
we were too far away to hear it, but I am sure his entry was as noiseless
as it was unexpected. A gum tree grew back from the water, and we
saw the reptile uncoil from this, curve down to the mud, slide along it,
and disappear in the water. Presently its head appeared and he moved
swiftly across the river. Just as it came level with the island we heard
a flop. The crocodile had also gone into the water.
Suddenly there was a tremendous commotion. The snake’s head
reared several feet out of the water and then turned quickly as it dived
under. Eddies on top told us that a desperate struggle was going on.
Then the snout of the crocodile showed, then its head, and soon it was
scrambling on to the island, with the python wrapped tightly round it.
It was flaying with its tremendous armoured tail, and we heard its
gigantic jaws snap, but the snake was too quick for it.
It was a fine sight—two mighty denizens of the tropical ooze fighting
in full view. It had its ludicrous side too, for we soon saw that the
snake was powerless to crush the rigid hide of its adversary ; the snake
was too quick for the crocodile and the crocodile was quite safe from the
snake. But they fought hard for all that, sometimes right out of the
water, and sometimes smothering themselves with a foam of lashed-up
mud. Gradually the crocodile’s efforts died away and he lay quiet.
“ Big fella snake give um that one crocodile tummy-ache, I think,”
said Ajax. Perhaps it was so, for the python had wrapped three folds
round the crocodile and was squeezing hard.
But it needed more than a python to crush the body of that armour-
plated reptile. The snake seemed to think so too, at last, for it let go
suddenly, and the next thing we saw was its head just out of the water,
making straight for our side of the river. The crocodile’s “ tummy-
(3,ol3) 121 g J


ache ” evidently prevented it from following, and the python reached
the shore and disappeared.
“ We’ll get that fellow,” said Ballanda. “We don’t want pythons
in our jungle.”
I expected him to set out at once, for we were armed with rifles,
and Ajax was carrying our shot-guns, but my companion did not move,
so I looked at him inquiringly.
“Oh no, not now,” he said. “ We’ll have lots of fun with it
yet,” and he whispered a word to Ajax, which amused the native
immensely.
I was kept in the dark till next day, and even then I was still
mystified, for instead of a snake hunt, which I had expected, we went
out after pigs. About twenty men of the tribe went with us. We took
our guns, but we took ropes too, and in order that I should know what
was expected of me, Ballanda satisfied my curiosity enough to tell me
that we were going to lasso the pigs and bring them back alive.
I shall never forget that day. Hitherto our hunting had been
stealthy, and Ballanda and I had been alone, but this time our com-
panions were urged to make as much noise as possible when the signal
was given, and it takes very little urging to make blackfellows do that
very well indeed.
The first part of the hunt was silent. We arrived at one of those
flat grassy plains about the size of a football field, which are quite
common in the northern jungles. The blacks spread out in a circle,
surrounding the place on all sides, but keeping well within the shelter of
the trees.
Wild pigs do not run helter-skelter through the bush, but keep to
certain well-defined tracks, and we saw at once that a number of these
animals had walked up and down recently. Gradually, still with as
little noise as possible, the ring of blacks closed in, and the pigs were
driven into the plain without disturbing them very much. We
reckoned that at least fifty of them were in the enclosure. Then we
chose the three principal tracks which led to the plain. There was no
doubt which these were, for though they were very overgrown, and only
just large enough to admit a pig, they were trampled hard with much


The snake was too quick for it.
use. Ballanda took one of them, I took another, and Ajax had charge
of the third.
By this time the natives were almost bursting with excitement.
We arranged the ropes in the form of running nooses hanging in the
pig-tracks just as rabbits are caught with a noose of wire over the en-
trance to their burrows. The three of us then climbed trees out of
sight, and held the ends of our ropes.
I was nicely settled in my tree when I heard Ballanda scream three
times like a cockatoo. At the signal the blacks glided across the plain,
quick and silent as snakes. Then another signal was given, and they
leapt to their feet and yelled and danced and ran about in the most
terrifying manner. They entered into it with all their hearts, and the
plain sounded full of shouting blackfellows.
Next I saw heavy, low-set forms dashing for cover. They were
pigs. Their speed surprised me. With bristling necks and open
123


mouths they charged towards the jungle. I gripped my rope and
held on. Three or four were making for the track where my noose
was hanging. The first came, a fine boar with gleaming tusks—a truly
ferocious animal. I watched the loop in tense expectancy. He dashed
up. The rope caught him. No, it didn’t. Perhaps I moved it in
my excitement, for the boar saw it and made for the rope with open
jaws, cutting it as if his teeth had been as sharp as knives. The other
pigs went harmlessly by, and I was left with my rope hanging uselessly.
I was very disappointed. The shouts went on. Probably the
others had caught their pigs by now, I thought. Looking over the
plain with despondent eyes, I saw two more pigs rushing for my track.
A resolution seized me. I would not be beaten. Balancing carefully
on the bough, I waited. They rushed below. I dropped, dropped
clean on top of the foremost pig. It had expected anything but that.
I gripped it, where and how I did not care, and rolled over. When I
recovered from my fall I found I had got it by the hind leg. How it
squealed and struggled. It was so strong that it pulled me out of reach
of the rope, but I would not give in. Other pigs came on and charged
over me and my capture, and when I was beginning to wonder how it
would end, who should come along but Ballanda.
My first intimation of his presence was a roar of laughter. I was
sprawling on the ground, with both hands gripping the leg of my pig.
Ballanda could do nothing but laugh for several minutes.
“ Give me the rope. Give me the rope,” I shouted.
“But . . . But . . . Oh, you do look funny. I wish you could see
yourself,” he gasped.
“ Give me the rope, you silly ass,” I shouted again. “ Give me the
rope or I’ll let the thing go.”
I never would have let it go, but I said this to frighten him. It
had the desired effect, and we soon had the pig bound and helpless.
“ The first one chopped my rope as easily as anything,” I explained.
“ Did you get yours ? ”
“ I got two,” he replied excitedly. “ One on each end of the rope.
By the row they’re making over there, I should think Ajax has got half
a dozen.”


He had caught only one, however. The excitement took a long time
to die down. Such grunting and squealing of pigs, such yelling and
dancing of men, such screaming of cockatoos, which arrived on the
scene to see what was happening. We cut down four saplings and hung
our prizes to them and carried them back to camp in triumph. As we
needed only three for the next day’s “ fun,” as Ballanda called it, he
killed the fourth pig and let the natives feast on it that night. And
feast they did, so much so that Ballanda had to fire a shot over their
camp to keep them quiet so that we could get some sleep.


CHAPTER XV
NEXT morning the blacks brought over three strong bamboo cages
which had been made in camp while we had been out hunting.
A pig was in each cage, objecting strongly to the indignity of confine-
ment, you may be sure. Was this the “ fun ” Ballanda had promised
me ? No, surely not, and besides, the “ fun ” was to have reference
to the python. I was more mystified than ever.
The blacks slung the cages on poles and carried them off into the
jungle. Ballanda led the way straight to the place where I had en-
countered the python. One of the cages was left there, another was
deposited near the river bank, and the third was hung in a tree about
half-way between the other two.
It now began to dawn on me that the pigs were decoys—baits to
catch the python. No doubt some one would watch beside each cage
and dispatch the snake if it ventured near. But, instead of doing this,
Ballanda strolled away and settled himself comfortably against a log
as if the whole day were at his disposal to waste. Of course I did the
same. The blacks disappeared, but did not go back to camp. They
kept just out of sight, waiting to see what would turn up. From time
to time Ajax went the round of the caged pigs and stirred them up to
make them squeal, so there were very few periods of silence during the
time of waiting.
After a time, during which I got rather tired of being idle, a black
came running to us.
“ Big fella snake come,” he panted.
We followed him instantly, and he led us to the place where I had
had my adventure. As we approached we went cautiously, and
presently saw the big snake coiling along the ground. It was evidently
suspicious, for it often paused and lifted its mailed head high in the air
and looked round with its piercing, cruel eyes. I expected Ballanda to
126


shoot, for it offered a splendid target, but he made no preparation for
doing so, and even hindered me when I brought my rifle to my
shoulder.
“ Wait,” he whispered. “ Wait. Don’t spoil the fun.”
The pig was squealing lustily, no doubt urged to do so by Ajax,
and the snake went on its silent way. We followed, ready to fire in case
of need. It reached the cage. The pig saw it, and a terrified scream
went up, and it rushed to and fro against the bars. I felt sorry for
the poor beast, but the snake’s movements took all my attention. It
advanced to the cage, lifted its head, and looked round cautiously.
Feeling satisfied that it was safe from intrusion, it lowered its head and
looked at the pig. The snake evidently did not understand that the
cage held its victim safe for it to do what it liked with, for it practised
its deadly art of fascination as if the squealing beast had been free.
Gradually the squeals died away. The pig trembled and returned
the snake’s stare. Then inch by inch the python got nearer. The bars
of the cage were so spaced that it could just slide between them, and it
did so now. The pig tottered with spellbound fear, but before it fell
the first of the deadly coils were round it, then another. They drew
tighter, and the muscles of the python’s body stood out lengthwise.
It was a wonderful and a gruesome sight. We heard the bones of the
pig crack, and saw its strong compact body being reduced to a long
shapeless mass. It was impossible to tell when it actually died, for its
agonized cries ceased very soon, but it took a long time for the python
to crush its body to a shape it could swallow. Then it opened its
mouth and the gorging began.
If any one had told me that a comparatively thin python could
swallow a pig whole, I should not have believed him, but I actually
saw it done, and so did Ballanda and Ajax, and so did a crowd of natives,
for the cage was surrounded by hidden men watching intently each
move of the jungle-drama being enacted. Its mouth opened and the
pig’s head disappeared. Inch by inch, with great exertion, the rest
followed, the shape of the snake altering as its meal went down.
At last it was over, and the python lay down to digest the pig. But
it was not allowed to do so undisturbed. At a signal from Ballanda


the jungle gave up its watching men, and we all flocked round. The
snake was lying half in and half out of the cage, and I did not like the
risk we ran in going so near. It saw us and lifted its head and tried to
get away. But it couldn’t.
At last I saw what Ballanda meant by “ fun.” The bars of the cage
allowed the snake to get through before its meal, but not after. It
could not squeeze out of the cage now because of the pig it had swal-
lowed. It was a truly ludicrous sight, and I joined in the general
laughter. I expected it to crush the cage with its tail, which was outside,
but the meal had made it torpid, and it made no effort to exert its
strength. It even made no effort when the blacks lifted the cage on
long poles and carried it away in triumph.
Imagine the procession. Ballanda and I first as usual, then the
cage carried by four stalwart blacks, with a crowd of laughing natives
bringing up the rear. The gorged reptile lay on the bottom of the cage
with sleepy eyes, and most of its body lay out and trailed along the
ground. It was a male snake, smaller than the one which had tackled
me, which was a female.
The whole camp —old men, women, children, and dogs—came out
to meet us. We white men did not go all the way, but turned aside
to our hut and left the blacks to enjoy themselves as they knew how;
and enjoy themselves they did, if noise is any indication.
To tell the truth, I did not think much of Ballanda’s “ fun.”
It seemed cruel to me. Catching and caging the pigs was all right,
and using them as decoys was quite legitimate hunting; but it would
have suited my ideas of sportsmanship better if we had shot the python
when we had such a good opportunity, instead of giving the poor pig
such a bad time. For the pig had no chance ; that was the unfair part
of it.
As soon as I could I slipped away alone, determined to release the
other pigs. But Ajax had already done so. I met him coming back,
and he told me Ballanda had given him orders to set them free. So my
semi-savage companion was not so cruel after all.
In many ways Ballanda was an enigma to me. When I thought
I was getting to understand him, and to hope confidently for the time
128


when his memory would be completely restored and give us a firm
basis for real intimate friendship, he would do something which would
baffle me completely.
For instance, several times when I awoke early and could not sleep
again, I went into his hut and found it empty. At first this did not
arouse my curiosity, but when it occurred again and again, I very
naturally wanted to know what my companion was doing at that early
hour. One morning I followed his tracks. They led towards a great
cliff which projected abruptly from the edge of the jungle near the
beach, but before I had got far I met him returning.
He must have guessed I was following him, though he did not say
anything, but the sudden look of anger which came into his face when
he saw me spoke louder than words. I saw him first, and noticed a
strange far-away look in his eyes, almost like the hypnotized expression
which natives get at corroboree. I could not help wondering whether
this white man had become a savage even to the extent of worshipping
some barbaric fetish. Did he go away into the bush in the early
mornings and prostrate himself with weird chantings before some feared
or hated object which he had made his god ? I could hardly believe it ;
he was so splendid in every way, so like a jungle-god himself, that it
was hard to imagine him worshipping anything which his hands had
made. But for all my reasoning to the contrary, I was distressed. Why
was he so angry at finding me following him ?
I excused myself as best I could, and pretended I was out for a stroll
with my gun, and I walked back with him. His anger went away at
once, and we bathed and sported on the beach as gaily and as care-free
as ever we had.
Probably my curiosity would have prompted me to follow his tracks
some time during the day when he was absent, but something happened
a few days afterwards which drove all such thoughts out of my mind.
One morning I was awakened by a scream near the hut. I leapt
out of bed, grabbed my rifle, and was outside in an instant. The
scream was repeated, a little farther into the jungle this time. I dashed
to Ballanda’s hut. He was not there. Again I heard the scream. Was
it Ballanda ? I ran toward the sound. Perhaps my friend was in some
(8 ‘ 018) 129 R


deadly peril. Thrusting creepers aside, pushing through bushes and
around tangled undergrowth, I got farther and farther into the jungle,
following that repeated scream. The more I hurried, the more it
receded.
The jungle was damp and dim and cold, for the sun was not yet
risen. My mind was a confusion of conflicting thoughts, and fear for
my friend lent speed to my limbs.
I came to a place where the trees were not so closely packed together.
Suddenly a spear whizzed past, narrowly missing my neck. I jumped.
It came from behind, a true blackfellow method. Leaping behind a
tree, I brought my rifle to position. Not a moment too soon. A dozen
spears came from all points. One pinned my arm to a tree. I tried
to wrench it out, but it was barbed, so I broke it off and left it in my
flesh.
I had run into a cleverly laid ambush. Fortunately the trees at my
back were almost as thick as a wall. Rifle to shoulder and eyes looking
along the barrel, I sighted round in a semicircle. Had anything
moved, I should have plugged it as easily as I should at target practice,
for though my blood was up, I was cool and collected.
Something did move. I fired. A black figure leapt into the open
and fell. Another spear was thrown and another, but I seemed en-
dowed with superhuman alertness, for I dodged them and waited,
withholding my fire till I was dead sure of a kill, for I had only the
magazine full of cartridges and no refills. I had left my cartridge-belt
in the hut.
Was that a snake I saw ? No, it was a man, crawling on his stomach
between two trees. I let him have it, and he disappeared, wounded I
am sure, but whether mortally or not I don’t know.
More spears. One actually struck the butt of my rifle and glanced
off. The mark is there to this day. It was only a matter of time.
Sooner or later my ammunition would be spent, and then —I resisted
the thought and steeled myself for the present moment’s need. A third
shot. This time it found its mark, and two dead blacks now lay in the
dim jungle.
Suddenly a most unexpected thing happened. A shot rang out


A black figure leaped into the open and fell.
from behind me. A third black fell. Another shot. A fourth doubled
up and ran for cover. The shots came from above me. I dared not
131


look. Another spear was thrown, but the thrower's arm went limp
with a shot through it.
Then I heard Ballanda’s voice : “ Catch that fellow, Duncan.
Catch him quick. He’s the last.”
I dashed out and grappled with the wounded man. My arm, with
the spear-head in it, hurt terribly, but I ignored the pain. The man
would probably have got away, for my wound made me weak, but
Ballanda appeared at the critical time.
When our captive was securely bound I looked at Ballanda for an
explanation. I had been so fully occupied with keeping the natives at
bay that his sudden appearance on the scene had not surprised me as it
would have done under other circumstances. But now, though my
head was dizzy with pain, I had time to think.
“ I heard the screams,” he explained, “ and thought at first they
were carrying you off. So I came along as fast as I could. I was some
distance away. When I got near enough to see how matters stood I
climbed a tree. I could see them all from there, and I fancy they got
a bit of a scare. . . . But look here, what’s up ? You look pretty sick.”
I was indeed pretty sick. The spear-head was still in my arm. By
sheer will-power I had stifled the pain till now, but I could not hold out
any longer. I extended my arm to him, showing him the spear-head,
and . . . and I don’t remember very clearly what happened for some
time after that. I did not faint or become unconscious, but a numb-
ness of mind came over me, and I hardly felt Ballanda’s knife as it cut
the flesh away so as to pull out the barbed point.
To his surprise it was made of metal.
The relief of having it removed restored me somewhat, and when
he put a poultice of leaves on the wound I Was able to take an interest
in my surroundings again. All native spear-heads are made either of
wood, bone, or flint, and sometimes even of shell, but they have no
knowledge of extracting metal from its ore.
“ That’s not from the coast,” said Ballanda decidedly. “ The man
who made it must have come in contact with whites, or at least have
picked the metal up where whites have been. Don’t you think so,
Duncan ? ”


I agreed. It looked as if it had been fashioned out of corrugated
iron.
We examined the three dead blackfellows. Two of them were
Crocodile blacks and the third was Maylui, the man whose life we had
recently spared. Instead of returning to his own people, as Ballanda
had commanded him, this stirrer-up of strife had sneaked back to the
Crocodile tribe, had ingratiated himself with them again, and had even
led an attack against us.
It was probably Maylui who threw the metal-tipped spear, for he
was a black who had travelled all over the place, and must have seen
white men at one time or another.
Our prisoner was a Crocodile black, shot through the fleshy part of
the arm—a wound that soon healed.


CHAPTER XVI
WE returned to camp with our prisoner, and found most of the
tribe crowded on the far bank of the creek. They had heard
the screams and the shots.
Leaving the prisoner, we walked straight to the creek and faced the
expectant tribe. I wondered what Ballanda meant to do, for he never
explained his actions to the natives, deeming it below his dignity as
chief to do so. They saw us coming and crowded still closer, many of
them standing waist-deep in the water. Ballanda lifted his hand for
silence. The excited jabbering ceased instantly, and Ballanda’s great
voice boomed across the water.
“ O men of the Buffalo tribe, the spear of war has been thrown.
Ballanda the Chief and Duncan Ballanda have beaten off your foes,
but the spear of war has been caught in our hand and it will be thrown
back again.”
He paused, and a shout went up. He lifted his hand again for
silence and went on :
“ Yes, it will be thrown back. Too long have I spoken with fair
words to men whose ears are too full of evil to hear. Now will I speak
with the voice of thunder and my glance shall be the glance of lightning.”
He shook his rifle above his head, and the excited audience rattled
their weapons against their shields till it sounded like a gale in a bamboo
thicket.
“ Prepare for war, O men of the Buffalo tribe. Look to your spears
and your canoes, and to-night the old men of the tribe will yabber-
yabber with Ballanda the Chief and with Duncan Ballanda.”
He turned away and I followed him. With excitement at boiling-
point the natives disappeared, and all day we caught glimpses of them
overhauling canoes, mending paddles, and collecting their weapons into
bundles.


Our first duty was with the prisoner. To my surprise Ballanda
treated the man kindly. He was in such a warlike mood when he
addressed the members of his tribe, that I was afraid he would vent his
wrath on the unhappy man j but instead of that he treated his wound
with as much care as he had treated mine, anointing it with a mixture
of dugong oil and goanna fat and binding it with some of the precious
linen from the ship’s cabin-trunk. Then he gave the man a good feed
and made him comfortable in the shade—but I noticed that he bound
him securely.
When our breakfast was over we sat in front of the native and
questioned him. Ajax was called over to act as interpreter when
Ballanda’s knowledge failed, and to explain parts which might need it.
The man was quite willing to talk. In fact, he seemed anxious to tell
us everything, for a native transfers his allegiance very easily and very
completely. This was his story, though it took a long time to piece it
together.
Far off, at the head of the Great River, was a very warlike tribe —
Maylui’s tribe, in fact—who were powerful because of certain coloured
stones. These stones were dotted about their country and were
objects of veneration. Because of the brightness of these stones, and
the power they gave to the tribe, the blacks were called Lightning Stone
blacks. These stones were opals.
Ajax explained to us the legend in connection with them. In the
long, long ago, the days of the Alcheringa, when heroes walked the earth,
a particularly mighty hero, who had charge of thunderstorms, broke
pieces off the lightning and put them at the boundaries of the country
where he lived. In time his followers became a tribe, and when he
went away his spirit entered into the stones, and that is why the tribe
is so powerful that no other tribe is able to stand against it.
The news of Ballanda’s recent prowess with the crocodile reached
this tribe. Probably Maylui took it to them. They heard that the
Buffalo blacks were ruled over by a man who could kill with thunder
and lightning—meaning, of course, his rifle. This was a direct chal-
lenge to the spirit of their tribe, who hitherto had a monopoly of these
forces, so, after many corroborees around their sacred stones, they
i 35


decided to wage war against the Buffalo tribe and destroy this leader
who dared to usurp their ancient prerogative.
So they entered into communication with the Crocodile tribe
through their ambassador Maylui. These men agreed to help, and
Maylui, knowing from experience Ballanda’s power, felt sure that the
Lightning Stone blacks would have no chance unless the white men
were first got rid of. He arranged the ambush, and, as we have seen,
met a well-merited death.
“ So Crocodile blacks go back longa camp, send smokes longa
Lightning Stone blacks, tell um, ‘ you no come,’ ” concluded the prisoner,
thinking this would please us.
It certainly did not please Ballanda. If a hostile tribe was on his
borders, he would far rather they would declare themselves openly.
“ Let them come,” he said. “ Let them come and learn their lesson.
It’ll teach them not to meddle with a white man’s tribe. Perhaps others
will hear about it and learn the lesson too.”
“ But they won’t come if the Crocodile blacks send smokes to say
you’re still alive,” I objected.
Ballanda did not reply, but turned to the prisoner and asked ;
“You know um signals, eh ? ”
The man nodded.
“You know um signal say : ‘ White fella dead. Two fella white
fella dead. Come. Come kill um Buffalo blacks. Kill um dead.’
You know um that one signal, eh ? ”
The native saw Ballanda’s object immediately and grinned his under-
standing. Ballanda wanted the Lightning Stone blacks to think that
both of us white men were dead, and that consequently the way was
clear for them to fall upon our leaderless tribe. It was deceitful, but it
fitted in perfectly with blackfellow methods, and our prisoner entered
into the spirit of it with enthusiasm.
We led him to a little hill and watched him prepare his fire. To
those who are used to letters and telegrams, it might seem that no
definite information could be conveyed by smokes, but it is not so.
Aboriginal life is very simple, and the things that happen to them are
limited, so that the code of smoke signals need not be large. Anyhow,
136


the fact has been proved hundreds and hundreds of times that quite
complicated messages have been sent by smoke from one tribe to another
and from them on again if need be, till travellers have wondered how it
was that every black in the whole country-side knew all about their doings
before they arrived.
Fortunately it was a windless day. Our prisoner piled his fire
with damp twigs till a dense column of smoke rose in the air. In a short
time the clear blue sky far away to the south was stained by an answering
column of smoke. The distant tribe had evidently been on the watch
for a message. Our prisoner then stopped the smoke from rising with
a branch of green leaves, and then removed it for a longer or a shorter
time as the case might need. We white men soon lost the thread, but
Ajax watched and nodded his head from time to time.
At last the message was done, and we all looked to the south. A
steady column of smoke had been rising over there all the time. Now
it stopped and a reply signal began. Ajax interpreted it for us.
“Two fella white fella dead,” he translated, confirming the message
our man had sent. Then came the part which cheered Ballanda’s
heart: “We come. We come.”
“ Good,” he exclaimed. “ Very good. We’ll teach them to meddle
with white men.”
That night the old men met their White Chief and deliberated a long
time. I was there also, and I watched with interest the five old men
and Manloo, all decorated for this most important occasion. The fire-
light flickered on their black bodies covered with scrolls and lines of
white and red, and their hair plastered in fantastic shapes with mud and
grease. One of them was blind, but he was every bit as gaily decked
out as the others. He was the oldest man in the tribe, and was con-
sequently regarded as the wisest, according to the custom of the
Australian aboriginal.
At first the proceedings were rather slow, for the natives were over-
awed, but gradually their shyness wore off and they discussed the matter
at great length. It was rather pathetic to see these old men giving their
opinions, for I knew, and they knew too, that Ballanda’s opinion was the
only one that mattered, and that they were being consulted more as an
(8,018) !37 s


act of courtesy than because their views were worth anything. For
they were nothing else but children, grave aged children, persuading
themselves that they were assisting in the council of white men. They
took it all very seriously, and perhaps, after all, it never dawned on
them that they were no real good.
Manloo was an exception. He was a very alert man indeed, and his
position as medicine-man of the tribe was certainly due to his greater
ability. He had the resources of the camp at his finger-ends, and gave
them without any undue palaver : one hundred and fifty able-bodied
natives initiated into the rank of men and able to bear arms. Each
could be supplied with four spears, a shield, and two war-boomerangs.
Six canoes were in good order, with eight paddles each and a few spare
ones in case of need. Manioc’s information was to the point and was
very encouraging.
As to the temper of the men, he assured us, amid the assenting mur-
murs of the other councillors, that it was eager for war ; that the men
would follow their chief and Duncan Ballanda anywhere, and that they
would exterminate the Lightning Stone blacks who dared to presume
and a lot more in that strain.
That sounded well, but I had read about blacks in Spencer and
Gillen’s books on the subject, and I knew that war was largely a matter
of big words and bombastic show with them, and that they were quite
likely to cut and run when the first man was wounded. Of course, I
did not say anything, for there was always a chance that Ballanda’s
presence and example might lead them to a decisive victory. So the
conference went on.
Could the men be ready by daylight to-morrow ?
I expected an immediate and eager yes, but it came with hesitation.
There was a ceremony to be gone through first, it seemed.
Well, when could they be ready ?
If Ballanda would not fire his rifle and stop the corroboree, they
might be ready by daylight. Ballanda promised they could do what
they wanted for one night, but he told them not to do anything which
would unfit them for an early start.
“ And now, O wise men of the Buffalo tribe,” he concluded, “ go
138


They discussed the matter at great length.
tell the young men what is the will of Ballanda. We go to fight a foe
whose chin is held high with scorn and whose stomach is big with pride.
They have many spears, and their boomerangs are as many as leaves
when the monsoon blows hard from the sea. But we will break their
spears and will give their boomerangs to our women to dig yams ; their
chins shall be lowered with fear and their stomachs go empty till they
return to their own country. For lam Ballanda, whose voice is thunder
and lightning. Those that obey my law shall live in peace and grow
fat, but those that disobey shall leave their bodies for the birds and their
spirits shall not rest.”
The old men rose as he spoke and greeted the crude oration with
signs of great delight. Then each man stamped on the ground and set
his spear in the footprint.


“ Thus shall the spears of the Buffalo men do to the men of the
lightning stone,” they chanted. “ And as for Ballanda the Chief, his
voice shall reach to the edge of the world and make the hearts of all hie
enemies fail for fear.”
Of course, this was not exactly what was said. Some of the actual
words were :
“ Ita pukalana purtulinja apinia-a ” (May their hearts be rent
asunder), and
“ Okinchincha quin appani lichi ilchi-a ” (May their head and
throat be split open).
It did not really matter what they said so long as their mood was in
agreement with the arrangements Ballanda had suggested. This was
certainly the case, and they returned to the tribe with such shouting
and waving of weapons that one would have thought they were return-
ing from a victorious expedition rather than about to set out on one.
That night the blacks went through their ceremonies without any
hindrance from us. I was curious to know how they prepared them-
selves for war, so I crossed the creek without being seen and hid in a
tree overlooking the corroboree ground. The light of a large fire
made it as clear as day.
No women were present at the ceremony. The young men sat in
two circles round the fire, one facing the fire, the other turned away
from it, leaving a passage of a few feet between the circles. In this
passage marched Manloo, decked out bravely with a pair of buffalo
horns on his head and his body covered with the usual scrolls of his
profession. He had a long piece of buffalo hide in his hand, and as
he came to each man, he stooped down and rubbed the man’s thighs
and arms and chest with the hide. As each young man was thus
operated on, he leapt to his feet with a yell, waved his arms and legs
about to show that the strength of a buffalo had entered into him, and
then sat down again.
When this was over, and it took some time, the old men who had
taken part in the council brought in a huge bundle of spears and stood
round them, keeping the spears upright and rattling them from time to
time. Around this group danced the young warriors who were going


away next morning to fight, and I suppose this part of the ceremony
was a sort of dedication of the weapons of war. Much noise accom-
panied this part of the evening’s entertainment, for entertainment it
most certainly was, the blacks entering into it with childlike enthusiasm
and absorption.
Then each man took a couple of spears, a boomerang, and a shield
and they stood in rows like soldiers on parade. To the sound of low
chanting two old women appeared on the scene. First they made a
speech to the men, both talking at once, and very excited talk it was, and
the men responded to it with vehement signs of approval. Probably
the old ladies were exhorting the young men to do their best. When
they had exhausted their powers of rhetoric, they went along the lines
of men, taking a boomerang from the hand of each and hitting the
shield and spear with it as if to test the soundness of the weapons.
Everything was apparently in order, for the old women went away and
a scene of mimic warfare took place, only it was not very realistic, for
the enemy existed only in the imaginations of the actors.
They advanced in close formation, shouting fiercely and waving their
spears. They crouched as if grappling with their foes, they pretended
to throw weapons, and even to be wounded. Again and again they did
this till I thought they would never stop, and I feared they would not
be very fit to start in the morning after all this excitement.
At last they decided that all their imaginary enemies were killed.
Each man then flopped down on the ground and buried his head in the
sand and wailed in a most heart-breaking manner. Ajax told me after-
wards that this was to represent the relations of the Lightning Stone
men mourning for their dead. So, having killed all their enemies and
made provision for them to be properly lamented, our blacks went away
to sleep.
It sounds very childish when written down, but the blacks are such
good actors that they invested the whole ceremony with reality. No
doubt it was more real to them than to a mere spectator like me, and as
I walked back to my hut I could not help wondering whether this would
prove an instance of the saying that “ empty kettles make most noise.”


CHAPTER XVII
ONG before dawn Ballanda roused me, and we carried our
JL-y weapons to the jetty, putting them on board the Malay canoe,
the one made of skin being too frail for river work on account of snags.
We each took two rifles and a shot-gun and enough ammunition for
three months, besides knives, tomahawks, and fishing-lines. Our
personal luggage was very scanty, consisting of a buffalo-rug and a
native mosquito net.
We paddled up-stream a little way and then tied up, returning to our
camp for breakfast. We did not know when the next meal would be,
so we ate heartily. Then we went over to the blacks' camp.
They were astir, very much so, and it was just as I had expected.
Everybody was very excited and very boastful, but no one seemed to
know which boat he was to embark in or which were his spears. Our
presence silenced them.
“ Let the fighting men come forward," shouted Ballanda. These
were not the actual words he used ; I have translated them for the sake
of clearness.
They started to bustle about and get mixed up, jabbering all the
time, so he shouted again:
“ Quick. Quick. No one yabber but me, Ballanda."
After some little time a hundred and fifty men stood in ranks
before us. Some were armed, some were not. They all looked rather
frightened at Ballanda taking command.
“ Manloo, bring spears and shields and boomerangs," commanded
the chief. “ Ajax, pull canoes in line under the bank."
Both orders were carried out immediately. Each man was given
three spears, two boomerangs, and a shield. Any more weapons
would have been a hindrance to them. Six canoes stood ready. I
wondered how that crowd of men could possibly squeeze into those


Each man was given three spears, two boomerangs, and a shield.
canoes, for none of them could hold more than a dozen. I did not tell
Ballanda what I was thinking, and indeed he had the whole matter so
well in hand that I felt sure he would devise some way out of the
difficulty.
He walked along the front rank of men. As I said before, no native
willingly looks a white man in the eyes, but in times of excitement or
when he is feeling very bold he may do so. As Ballanda walked slowly
in front of them he looked searchingly into their eyes. Some met his
gaze. These he told to stand aside, and out of them he chose nine.
“ Manloo,” he shouted. “You captain the first canoe with these
nine men. Embark now and pull up-stream, and wait behind my
canoe.”
This disciplined method of doing things was new to the natives,
but Ballanda left no doubt that he meant to be obeyed, and they did
i 43


as they were told. Another ten were chosen in the same way and sent
to follow the first canoe ; and so on till every canoe had left the bank
with its complement of warriors in charge of a captain who was re-
sponsible directly to Ballanda.
There were nearly a hundred left—the weaklings who had not dared
to look their chief in the face. Very likely these had been especially
bold at the ceremony of mock warfare last night, but they were no good
for actual hard knocks. But Ballanda did not want to disappoint them,
all the same. The real warriors were now out of ear-shot, so it didn’t
matter what he said to the others.
“ You warriors of the Buffalo tribe, heroes every one,” he said, with
a perfectly serious face, “ I have chosen you for the hardest task of
all. I give you charge of the white men’s camp and of the whole tribe.
See that no harm comes to them, and see that the laws of Ballanda the
Chief are kept. I give you charge of these laws, and shall require an
account when I return.”
They may or may not have understood what he meant. At any rate,
they seemed very relieved. They were accounted heroes without the
trouble of earning the title.
We hurried away, got on board our canoe with Ajax, cast off, and
gave the signal to start. Dark shadows covered half the river, for the
sun was not yet risen above the jungle, but we paddled out into the
sunlight and strung out, a line of seven canoes filled with fighting men.
Once the excitement of departure was over, the blacks settled down to
their task, and the paddles rose and fell rhythmically.
The signal fire of the Lightning Stone blacks had told us that the
tribe was a long way away, and we paddled hard up-stream for two days,
not pausing except to camp at night. How glad I was that Ballanda
had insisted on our taking mosquito nets, for without them I could not
have slept. A few minutes before sunset the air was clear and free
from any pest except flies, which by now I was quite used to, but
directly the sun went down mosquitoes fell from the trees literally in
clouds. The blacks did not seem to mind them very much. Their
skins were tougher than mine, or perhaps the grease and mud with
which they rubbed themselves kept the pests away.


The third day passed, and we were now far away from home. Bal-
landa had imposed silence on the men, but I think they would have been
silent without his orders, for a native dislikes going far from his own
country, and his courage oozes away with every mile that separates
him from his dear familiar things. Our boastful warriors looked rather
dejected now, though as yet no word of complaint had reached us.
Towards evening we saw smoke rising from the jungle a few miles
ahead. Ballanda gave orders to camp, and strictly charged the men to
light no fires and make no noise. Our canoe kept on its way.
The sun set, and for half an hour it was treacherous going. In
the half-light it was impossible to see which was shadow and which
was real bank, for we were keeping as close to shore as we dared.
Gradually the stars assumed their sway, and we nosed round one bend
and another so silently that not even the roosting birds knew of our
passage.
At last we saw the glare of a huge fire through the trees. We
checked the canoe, steadying her by catching hold of a trailing branch.
Vaguely we heard the sound of a crowd of men talking and feasting.
It was clear they had no fear of an enemy being near them, for there was
no restraint either in piling up the fire or in shouting. We crept round
the last bend with the secrecy of a swimming snake.
A huge tree hung over the bank and hid us. Beyond it was a clear
open space of perhaps a dozen acres. The bank also at that place was
free from trees for a couple of hundred yards. At the back of the open
space, close to the wall of jungle, was a fire, sending sparks high in the
dark air and lighting up the gloom of the trees. Around it, in careless
attitudes of rest and feasting, were about two hundred men. We
watched them keenly, and though they were too far away for us to see
clearly, the light showed up first one and then another.
The Lightning Stone blacks were not so tall as our men, but were
broader and more ferocious in feature. They looked a more brutal
type altogether, and were probably endowed with greater courage than
our poor timorous tribe. For these men were descendants of genera-
trnns of fighters. Being an inland tribe, they had been always sur-
rOU? 8 l e 8) d by eneimes ’ and had bee n forced to fight for their tract of
*45 t


country, though often—and especially of recent years—these grim,
sturdy warriors had been the aggressors, and their name had become
a name to inspire fear in the hearts of other men.
Our men, on the other hand, had had no such precarious existence.
Hemmed in by the sea, the river, and a high range of mountains, they
had lived unmolested for centuries with an abundance of food and
material comfort. Consequently they had developed more culture—
if such it can be called—than those men that now feasted round the fire.
Manloo, for instance, was a highly intelligent man in his way.
“ They’d scatter our men like a shark scatters a school of schnapper,”
whispered Ballanda. “ Look at that chap there. He’s got a body like
a buffalo.”
“ And it’s buffalo-meat they’re feeding on,” I whispered back.
I was quite right. These men had killed several buffalos and were
roasting them at the fire, cutting off great chunks of flesh before it was
half cooked. No doubt they made jokes at the expense of the Buffalo
tribe, telling one another that just as they were eating this flesh, so
would they deal with the Buffalo men, not actually eating them perhaps,
for though a few of the northern tribes are cannibals occasionally, we
had not heard that the Lightning Stone men were as degraded as that.
Ajax was breathing hard with excitement. “You shoot, Bal-
landa ? ” he asked in a tense voice.
“ No, no,” replied the chief. “No shoot yet. We look about,
find their canoes first.”
It was risky work. The bank was low and there was no shadow
under it. If we had paddled past the open space and one of the fcasters
had looked up, he could not help seeing us against the silvery water.
We first found out that the canoes were not on the down-stream side
of the open space ; then we drifted a few yards to make sure we were
out of ear-shot, and crossed the river. On that side the shadows were
deeper and there was no break in them, and we had no difficulty in
getting above the encampment. Then we crossed over and again
drifted down.
Ajax saw the canoes first. I was too absorbed in watching the wild
barbaric scene which was being enacted round the fire in that midnight
146


theatre. The trampled dried grass, the wall of forest shutting in the
space, and the groups of men, fascinated me.
Ten big clumsy canoes were moored to trees in shadow. Was
anybody looking after them ? We drifted closer and closer, holding our
breath, then touched the bank and waited. It was well we did so, for
soon a man came running from the fire. Our eyes were sufficiently
used to the light to see vaguely that he had a lump of smoking meat in
his hand. A man on the bank near the canoes rose to meet him. So
there was somebody watching after all.
The man from the fire gave the meat to the other and ran back
again. If there had been two or more, we felt sure they would have
demanded their share, but the man sat down alone on the bank and ate
ravenously with many grunts of satisfaction.
Ajax touched Ballanda’s arm and pointed to a rug. Ballanda
nodded. Like one of the shadows, Ajax went ashore and we lost sight
of him. Presently the sound of eating stopped suddenly, there was
a cry, so muffled that we hardly heard it, and a short struggle. Bal-
landa leapt to the bank, and soon the two men returned with their
captive gagged with the rug and securely bound.
We had a whispered conference what to do with him. Ajax
wanted to kill him right away, but that did not fit in with our ideas of
white justice, for we had come upon the man unawares, and he had had
no chance to defend himself. So we laid him in one of his own canoes
for the time being, while we looked after more important matters.
We decided to let the canoes drift down-stream. Without them the
Lightning Stone blacks would have to travel across country and would
be easier to handle, and we thought that such a crippling blow as the
loss of their canoes would cool their ardour for battle considerably.
But we dared not let them float past the open space, for we might be
discovered with the work half done, so we towed the clumsy things
across to the other side and let them go there, drifting down in the
darkness. This took some time, for there were ten of them, but at last
it was done. We left the bound man on the bank where he had been
sitting.
By this time the fire had died down considerably and the Lightning


Stone men were asleep. Ajax was overjoyed at the success of our
venture.
“ Now you shoot um dead every one,” he whispered fiercely. “ You
leave um all dead. No more Lightning Stone men.”
“ No, no. White man no fight that way,” said Ballanda, much to
the native’s disappointment. “ White man no kill till nother man wake
up and know him want to kill.”
This was too civilized a point of view for Ajax, but he soon got over
his surprise at our missing what he must have thought to be a glorious
opportunity, for he had a childlike faith in his white men, and never
doubted that their judgment was the best.
We pulled up under a tree and waited for the dawn.


CHAPTER XVIII
FTER their night of feasting the natives woke late. They would
have been later had not something occurred that startled all sleep
out of them very rudely. When the light was strong, but the sun still
below the tree-tops, we went ashore, looking well to our weapons.
Creeping along the river bank without being seen, we came to the
bound man. He was asleep, as unconcerned about his fate and that of
his companions as a child would have been. But when we set him free,
he became very wide awake indeed. He rushed across the flat towards
the camp, yelling with enough gusto to wake the dead.
Ballanda and I stood in the open space with Ajax behind us. It
was our purpose to startle the blacks. Several times I have called
Ballanda a savage, and have even blamed him for doing things which my
unwritten code of sport would not allow, but I admired him again and
again because he never took human life unless it was absolutely neces-
sary. It was so in this case, for instead of sending back for our tribe
and creeping on our enemies in the night and killing them like so many
helpless sheep, he preferred to parley with them first to see if bloodshed
could be avoided. This was not weakness. It was true strength.
To the cries of our late prisoner as he rushed to his fellows, we added
a volley of shot, fired over their heads. I have never seen men so
startled. They believed us dead ; the smoke signals had told them so.
Yet here we were in the light of day. They had heard our voice—
the voice of thunder, and had seen the flash of lightning, which had
hitherto been the prerogative of their tribal spirit. They gazed in
terror-struck amazement.
The shouting fugitive drew near, and his panting words told them
what had happened. Escape by water was impossible. They looked
at the dark jungle and fled to its protection.
‘ That’s the end of the Lightning Stone blacks as far as we’re con-


cerned,” I said, rather disappointed, I must confess, that the adventure
had ended so tamely.
“ Wait,” said Ballanda. “ I don’t believe it is the end. They
won’t go far. I expect they’re all watching us at this very moment.
You sec.”
We were in perfect safety, with the river at our backs, and the semi-
circle of jungle in front, far enough away on all sides to make it im-
possible for a spear to be thrown from cover. While we watched, the
sun rose above the trees.
Before long I heard Ballanda say, “ There, didn’t I tell you ? ”
and sure enough, out from the trees right in front of us came three men.
Their hands were empty, and they held them over their heads to show
that their designs were friendly. They walked slowly with shuffling
steps, uncertain of their reception.
We stood still and let them approach. When they were about a
hundred and fifty yards away they stopped. Suddenly Ajax uttered an
exclamation and touched Ballanda and pointed to the ground at the
feet of the men. Ballanda nodded. I did not hear what Ajax said.
The men shuffled forward a few more yards. Ballanda held up
his left hand. His right gripped his rifle. My weapon also was ready.
At Ballanda’s signal they stopped again, but when he lowered his hand,
one of them, taller and more athletic than his chunky companions,
came a yard or two more.
We faced one another. They met our eyes unflinchingly. Fero-
city, brute courage, and a certain strain of fear were mixed in their
glances.
The leading man stooped. To me it seemed an act of obeisance,
and Ballanda’s muttered “ Look out, Duncan,” surprised me. The
man touched the ground. Ajax had been muttering all the time, and
now he burst out and grasped his master’s arm. For an instant
Ballanda’s attention was taken off the man, and in that instant treachery
dealt its blow.
Like a released spring, the stooping man straightened, bent back-
ward, and a spear came straight and true at Ballanda with tremendous
force. He saw it and dodged. Ajax also saw it and, thinking his


master was unprepared, he flung himself in front. It was an heroic
act. The spear struck him in the shoulder and he fell.
Next to fall were the three Lightning Stone blacks, shot through the
heads. Never did hatred give such deadly impetus to our shots.
We had been the victims of treachery. The blacks had been trailing
spears with their toes —an old trick.
I rushed forward, blazing with anger. Ballanda shouted to me to
return, but I did not heed him. The lust for blood was on me. Such
men were not fit to cumber the ground.
When I got in range of the trees, a shower of spears greeted me,
but I seemed to bear a charmed life. I ran on unchecked, firing into
the trees like a madman, seeing nobody, hearing nobody, intent
only to kill.
I found the jungle empty. A moment ago an army of savages had
been in ambush there with poised spears. Now I seemed alone. It
was uncanny, this utter solitude where I knew that life, wild, palpitating
murderous life was near me. I fancied I heard a whispering of leaves.
In reality it was the retreat of a horde of blacks, and though I knew it
and peered into the gloom with cocked and sighted rifle, hoping to get
a shot, I saw no human form. Give them the slightest cover, and a
hundred blacks can disappear as unobserved as shadows.
I waited, crouching to shoot. In vain—perfect silence wrapped
the jungle. My insane rage had gone. I leaned wearily against a
tree. So this was the end; no gathering of forces to a battle where
the best should win, no deeds of heroism that one associates with war,
but strategy, treachery, swift vengeance, and then flight.
My reverie was broken by a rope falling over my shoulders from
above. It was tightened with a jerk, and I was pulled off my feet with
pinioned arms. A native dropped out of the tree and grabbed me.
In all cases of assault my father had taught me to get the blow in
first if I could. I could not strike, but before the man recovered from
the drop I butted him in the stomach and knocked him down. Im-
mediately I fell on him. Our wrestling master at school had taught
us to grip with legs as well as arms, and this teaching now stood me in
good stead, for I held the man down while I struggled to release my
151


arms. The noose had jammed, but my right arm had sufficient freedom
to reach my knife, and I slashed through the hair rope.
Then a strange mood came on me. I was in danger and was fighting
for my life, yet I felt so sure that I was this man’s equal that I actually
sheathed my knife instead of plunging it into his body. I was deter-
mined to tackle him with my bare hands. You may call it folly.
Perhaps it was, yet months of perfect living had given me such strength
and courage that I felt I could overcome anything. This native and
I would fight with no advantage on either side.
We wrestled. Certainly I had more skill than he had, but his fero-
city and suppleness enabled him to slip out of hold after hold. I nearly
lost him several times, and once he was actually free, but I tripped him
with an ankle twist as he dashed away, and once more we fell to. At
last I got the double-nelson on him with a leg hold as well, and could
have broken his neck. It is a mighty hold, and has rightly been made
illegal for civilized wrestling. But we were two savages in a primeval
jungle, and we recognized no rules. He was mine. I bent his neck
down, doubling it under him. His breath came in gasps, and he knew
he was done.
Suddenly he grew limp and cried for mercy. I verily believe that
I should have killed him with that grip if he had held out much longer,
but when he cried for mercy my rage died away. I did not know the
words that came with such laboured breath, but I knew he was a beaten
man. The rope was near. I changed my grip suddenly and whipped
the rope round his wrists, and before he realized I had spared his life,
he was lying bound at my feet.
I led him to Ballanda. I found the chief treating Ajax. The
wounded man had been struck with a three-pronged spear tipped with
flint, and though the removal of the heads and the cleaning of the
wound must have been excruciatingly painful, he showed great fortitude
and no sign of pain crossed his face. He was a truly brave man. For-
tunately the gashes were not serious, and we stanched the blood easily,
but to our sorrow we saw that our faithful companion would be laid
aside for some time.
We put Ajax in the shade and turned our attention to the prisoner.


I butted him in the stomach.
He was a thickset, powerful man with a face like a gorilla—retreating
forehead, high cheek-bones, hardly any nose, thick protruding lips, and
a jaw which was the most powerful feature of the face. He was as
primitive a man as we had ever looked on. His bloodshot eyes glared
at us with fear and hatred, but somehow I had no dislike to him though
he had tried to take my life. It was warfare. And besides, I had
conquered him without taking any advantage, and I was proud and
inclined to be magnanimous.
Ballanda was leader, and his tone was decided :
“We must make an example of him.”
In the centre of the open space was one small tree. We bound our
prisoner to it and went away and sat down near Ajax. Any one who
had watched us would think we had gone right away, for we were out
of sight, though we had the plain in full view from our hiding-place.
(3,013) U


I asked Ballanda what he meant to do. He answered me evasively.
Ballanda never told his plans to any one, not even to me.
“ The final ceremony will not take place for a while,” he said.
** The tribe will come back again when they think we’ve gone, and I
want an audience when we deal with the prisoner.”
I was sorry to think he had decided on the man’s death, and I argued
with him, for it did not seem right to shoot a man tied to a tree. He
had done nothing but carry out the rules of his warfare. He was as
much a soldier as I was, I argued, and his act was no more a crime than
mine was.
“ What would you do with him ? ” asked Ballanda.
I did not know. “ I certainly would not shoot him,” I said.
Ballanda said nothing, and several hours slipped by in idleness. Of
course the prisoner had struggled to be free when he saw us go away,
and when he found it was no use he shouted at the top of his voice, and
I am sure his cries must have reached his fellow-tribesmen.
Towards noon, when my patience was nearly exhausted, I saw
shadows moving amongst the trees on the other side of the open space.
Then one or two men stepped out into the sunlight and ran back again
to test if the coast was clear. In my heart I hoped Ballanda would not
see them till they had set their bound companion free, but he had
noticed them before I had.
Soon the gloom at the edge of the jungle was full of moving forms.
The whole fighting force must have returned.
“ Now we’ve got our audience,” said Ballanda. “ Come on,
Duncan.”
“ I’m not going to shoot,” I replied sullenly. “ It’s not playing
the game.”
“ You leave the game to me,” he said sternly. “ I didn’t ask you
to shoot. But you stay behind if you like. I can do all I want to do
without help.”
He strode into the open. I followed, for in spite of my repugnance
at the thing he was going to do I would not leave him. The moving
shadows of men became still. Nothing was to be seen but the wall of
forest and the prisoner bound to the tree in the middle of the plain.


Ballanda advanced to within a hundred and fifty yards and levelled his
rifle. I held my breath, and so, lam sure, did the unseen watchers.
It was a terrible example to make of a man.
With rifle sighted on his victim, he waited. Then he advanced a
few yards and sighted again. This he did three times. My nerves
were strung to the highest pitch, waiting for the shot. It never came.
When his audience —as he called them —was at breaking-point, he
lowered his rifle, walked up to the man, and cut the rope. For several
seconds the man did not realize he was free, and when he did he dashed
for the trees faster than he had ever done before.
The chief returned to me. I felt ashamed at mistrusting him.
“ That’ll show them that Ballanda the White Chief is powerful, but
that he scorns to be cruel,” he said simply, and though I had no words
to offer him, I made a vow I would never misjudge him again.


CHAPTER XIX
TO have pursued the Lightning Stone blacks in their retreat home-
wards might have turned victory into defeat. For our men were
cowards; there was no doubt about it, and, once away from the river,
they would stand no chance against an inland tribe. So we returned
home victorious. I expect the blacks told tales of their own personal
heroism and of battlefields covered with slain enemies so often that in
the end they almost believed them. Ajax was too true a native to give
the show away, and besides, he had his own glory to make known, so
everybody was suited —except us, for they made rather more noise than
we cared about.
A few weeks of idleness and casual hunting followed, and my mind,
with nothing urgent to occupy it, turned to the subject of the Dutch-
man’s map. One morning, after a night spent dreaming of hidden
treasure, I awoke very early and got out of bed. It was still dark, and
I peeped into Ballanda’s hut and heard his deep, regular breathing. I
was restless and had no definite plan, but happening to stroll to the
jetty, I got into the skin canoe and pushed off into the lagoon. It was a
wonderful time. The air was still and the water also, except for a
long, slow, gentle fall like breathing coming from the ocean. Nothing
stirred, and I floated as lightly as a leaf, making no ripple.
Dawn came and I rested my paddle and watched it. An hour went
by, and I was near the extremity of the lagoon when I saw something
moving against the sky, high up on a cliff. The outline was sharply
cut against the radiance of dawn, and I watched and saw it move again.
A man was walking along the cliff to the highest point. I was curious
to know why one of the natives was scrambling about at that hour, but
when the figure perched on the very summit and stood silhouetted, I
saw it was not a native. It was Ballanda.
So that was where he went to when he left his hut early in the
156


mornings. I smiled to think of the crude notions I had entertained
about him, wondering whether he went away to worship some fetish
or other, when he was doing nothing more remarkable than looking out
to sea. But even that was remarkable, for he had lived near the sea for
several years and had no need to gaze across it so intently. Did he want
to see to the farthest limits of vision ? Why then did he not get into
a canoe and go much farther than he could ever see ? No, Ballanda was
not just simply looking out to sea.
He stood so still. He reminded me of a hero of ancient times wor-
shipping the coming of day, although there was no worship about that
unbending athletic figure. He just stared round the horizon.
Was the past stirring slowly in his mind like a man rousing from
sleep, and, without knowing why, did this vague unrest compel him to
watch from his look-out morning after morning ? What was he watch-
ing for ? Who knows ? Certainly he did not know. His past had been
across the water somewhere. Would his future lead there too ?
He saw me at last and hailed. I answered. The cliff rose sheer
from the sea in this place, and I saw no foothold anywhere, but Ballanda
must have known it well, for he scrambled over the edge and started
climbing down. His bare hands and feet clung to ledges which I could
not even see.
A ledge stuck out about a hundred feet above the water, and he rested
there for a moment. I was near the cliff, for sheer admiration of this
feat of climbing had made me want to see it more closely. Suddenly
he stood up and shouted that he was going to dive.
“ You’ll break your neck,” I shouted in alarm. His voice came
back :
“ I’ve done it lots of times before. There s deep water right under
the cliff.”
I have seen exhibitions of diving by good men, but this one of
Ballanda’s was better. He was so fit, so courageous, so full of the joy
of life ; not the sentimental rubbishy thing people write about in books,
but the sheer force of life itself bubbling up and irrepressible, like an
unbroken horse galloping in freedom and kicking up its heels because
it simply can’t help it.


That was why Ballanda dived. He shot out from the ledge with
arms spread wide like a swallow’s wings. He brought them together
and cut the water with one clean shaft of spray each side. For what
seemed a long time he did not come up. Then I felt the canoe bump,
and the next moment I also was in the water. Ballanda had upset me
on purpose.
“ I wanted to make sure you’d had your morning wash,” he laughed
as we rose to the surface. “Go down again. The dirt’s not all off
yet.” How we struggled and shouted and ducked one another in the
beautiful, clear, cool water, and then, having worked off our high spirits,
we righted the canoe and paddled back.
Ballanda evidently thought that some explanation of his presence
on the cliff was necessary, and at breakfast-time he introduced the
subject thus :
“ D’you know what I was thinking about this morning before I saw
you ? I was wondering if you’d still got that map of the coast.”
This was just what I wanted, but I curbed my excitement for fear
of spoiling everything, and answered casually :
“Oh yes, I’ve got it. What makes you ask ? ”
“ I thought it wouldn’t be a bad idea if we had a good look along
that coast. I’ve never been far west. I know the other way far better.
What d’you say ? ”
“ It wouldn’t be a bad idea.”
“ Let’s have a look at that old chap’s map, anyway. There was a
place he marked specially, wasn’t there ? You told me all sorts of tales
I didn’t believe, about what might be there. But ... I don’t know
. . . there might be more in it than I thought. I sometimes think
about those things you told me, when I go up there and look over
the sea.”
“ Yes,” I said cautiously. “My home lies over the sea, and so
does yours.”
I expected him to object to the suggestion that his home was any-
where but here, but he did not do that. He looked at me intently
and asked :
“ And people make a great fuss over pearls and things over there
158


He scrambled over the edge and started climbing down.
at ... at home, don’t they ? I mean, they’d rather have them than
a good feed.”
“ You bet they would.”


“ That’s funny,” he said, with a puzzled expression. It was not
natural for Ballanda to pursue a train of thought for long, and he dis-
missed the subject of the peculiarities of civilized people with a laugh.
“ Well, if they think as much of them as all that, I reckon we’d better
see if any of those tales you told me are true.”
“ They’re not true,” I said. “ I made them all up. Perhaps
there’s nothing there.” I wanted to see how keen he was.
“ Let’s go and see,” he answered, in a tone which showed that he had
made up his mind.
That very day we made all preparations. Ajax was now quite well,
and we decided to take him with us. The Malay canoe was overhauled,
extra paddles put in, rifles, guns, ammunition, fishing gear, and all
personal belongings stowed away, as well as water-kegs and some dried
food in case of emergency. Manloo was called over and told to look
after our huts, as we didn’t know how long we should be away.
It was a lovely day when we started, bright and clear, and our
thoughts were in harmony with it. I had warned Ballanda not to expect
that any of my stories of buried treasure would come true, for it was
extremely unlikely that we should find any such thing, but it was the
mystery and adventure that made our spirits rise so high. Ballanda
was just as keen about it as I was ; in fact, it suited me to let him appear
more keen, for he would then have only himself to blame in case of
disappointment. But Sebastian de Hooste had marked the map for
some special reason —it might be nothing more interesting than a grave
—and we were out to discover what the reason was.
Fortune favoured us, and a spanking breeze carried the canoe
along without the need of paddle. We passed Dugong Bay on the
morning of the third day. We had made good time by sailing right
through the night, for the swell was not heavy, and it seemed a pity to
put ashore when such a splendid wind was helping us.
On the other side of Dugong Bay the coast was a few points far-
ther north instead of being almost due east and west as it had been
so far, and for mile after mile there was no creek or bay or headland of
any kind. Just beach with its line of foam, then a long, long straight
line of jungle, and we were heartily glad that we were not compelled
160


to paddle along it. For there is some interest in a broken coast-line —
you never know what may be round the next point —but this monoto-
nous stretch of sand! We had nothing to complain of, and just lay
back and watched the sail doing all the work for us.
Early on the fourth day we reached the end of this dreary stretch,
and the coast became very broken. The jungle receded and gave
place to towering rocks jutting into the sea, and for several miles there
would often be no place where a canoe could possibly land. Behind
this coastal rampart of rock rose hills, going back to hign mountains,
timber-clad to the summits. The views we got were grand and awe-
inspiring. Then, quite suddenly, all this sloped away and we rounded
a headland into a large and beautiful bay with a white beach and a
creek running over it.
But something made us shout with joy more than the prospect of
making camp. The headland on the far side of the bay was shaped
like the top of a man’s head, with two curious rocks sticking out from
it just like ears.
We had reached our goal!
Now that we knew our sea voyage was over, we began to think how
cramped we were, and the prospect of a meal ashore made us ravenous.
“ I’ll let you have your old man’s head, Duncan,” said Ballanda,
laughing. “ I’m going to have the biggest meal that’s ever been
eaten on this beach.”
“ How d’you know ? ” I answered. “ Those old Dutchmen were
pretty portly.”
“You wait and see,” was his reply, and by the energy he put into
paddling as we came out of the wind, he bore witness that he was a
very hungry man indeed.
We beached the canoe and pulled it above the tide-mark, and then
each went a different way to get the ingredients of the huge lunch we
had talked about. Ballanda went to some low-lying ground where he
thought there might be a swamp with ducks on it, I went up the creek,
and Ajax waded about amongst some rocky pools and told us he would
look after the fish part of the menu, though, of course, he didn’t use
those words.
(8.018) 1 5 1 x


I waded up the creek about a quarter of a mile and shot two
pigeons and a bird like a pheasant, and was turning back when a
raised place clear of trees to the west of the creek attracted my atten-
tion. The space was not more than a hundred yards across each
way, and in the middle of it were some curious-looking objects which
at first I took to be huge lilies. But I soon saw they were not flowers.
Instead of being long stalks with lilies on top, they were blackfellow
spears with bunches of feathers tied to them, about twenty in a rough
circle with a larger one in the middle. I knew the place to be a black-
fellows’ burial-ground.
It had been deserted for some time. Several of the spears had been
blown down, some of them had nearly lost all their feathers, and only
one —the grave-post of a medicine-man perhaps—was still perfectly
upright. The sun glinted on this post, and I went over to see what
it was. To my surprise I saw a necklace made of gold coins linked
together. Gold coins, mind you, in a jungle near a wild and desolate
coast. The necklace was bound round a strong spear, and had evi-
dently been the dearest possession of the man buried there.
I did not take it away. It struck me as wrong to rob the dead,
but I examined the coins carefully, and found they were Dutch coins
with dates between 1594 and 1612. They were of pure gold and had
stood the weather wonderfully. Here was more material to stimulate
my imagination —a necklace of Dutch coins three hundred years old,
hanging on the grave-post of a blackfellow who was probably alive
a few years ago, for such flimsy memorials as they put up do not
last long.
I had to alter the story I had made up to account for the wrecked
Van Brakel in several ways, and the most feasible explanation I could
suggest was that the necklace had belonged to a member of the Van
BrakeVs crew, and that it had passed into the blackfellows’ hands
either as gift or barter —or perhaps as the reason and remnant of a
foul murder —and had been a treasured possession on the coast ever
since, till a medicine-man had owned it and had left instructions that
it should decorate his grave. This may be all wrong, but it fitted all
the facts and satisfied my mind.


CHAPTER XX
SATISFACTION of mind is all very well, but at that time I was
more interested in satisfaction of body. Therefore I stayed at
the burial-ground only long enough to make sure that no one had
been there recently, and then hurried back to the beach with the
birds. Ballanda and Ajax were there before me, and the smell of
cooking which rose from the fire made me forget all about Dutch
vessels and necklaces of coins and such things of the past, and remem-
ber only the present. I plucked and cleaned my birds quickly, and
soon they were adding to the appetizing odour.
This story refers so often to meals, that the reader may think we
did little else but eat, but he must understand that, whereas in a
civilized community food is prepared for us, and we don’t think much
about it till we sit down at table, in the tropical wilds, where I used to
live, each meal meant hunting and cooking, besides eating. The life
we lived gave us great appetites, and I blush to think of the enormous
meals we consumed in those days, and I envy the relish of sparkling air,
glorious sea, and perfect health with which we ate them. No need
for Worcester Sauce in those days, I assure you.
After offering the above apology, I will tell you what we had for
lunch that day. First came oysters straight from the sea and still
flavoured with salt water ; any number of oysters, and if we wanted
more, Ajax was very willing to run to the rocks and bring back another
handful. Then we had one of the most tasty dishes I have ever eaten
—crayfish baked in the ashes of a wood fire.
“ Don’t fill yourself up with these things,” cautioned Ballanda, as he
watched me tucking into the crayfish. “ There’s lots of stuff to follow.”
“ And there’s lots of room for it, I assure you,” I answered, striking
that part of my anatomy where the cavity is supposed to be. “I’m
as hollow as a drum.”


“ Well, be careful, that’s all,” he said, with mock gravity, though he
certainly did not seem to be acting upon his advice himself.
At last the crayfish was just a wreck. With great pride Ajax
lifted fried fish from the hot stones where they had been sizzling on to
palm leaves, and gave us each a big helping with all the flourish of an
accomplished cook. He might well be proud. An hour ago these
fish had been disporting themselves in the clear water, their beautiful
scales flashing in the sun, but to us they looked far more beautiful
with their scales off and a coating of crisp brown skin all over them.
Forks and knives we had none ; the proper table etiquette was to
grip the fish by the tail, clean one side of it with one bite and the
other side with the next, and then throw the backbone into the fire.
“ How are you feeling ? ” asked Ballanda.
I shifted my position and yawned. As a matter of fact I was
beginning to feel satisfied, only beginning, mind you, but the change
of position seemed to make room for more.
“ How am I feeling ? ” I answered. “ The tide’s about half-way
up the beach. Pass over one of those ducks, Ballanda.”
Even such appetites as ours were satisfied at last, and we lay back
at peace with ourselves and everybody else. It was a glorious after-
noon, hot in the sun, but where we were sitting in the shade a cool
breeze came off the sea and made it very pleasant.
“ What about starting to look for that treasure of yours now ? ”
asked Ballanda with a laugh, showing by his attitude that he had no
intention of doing any such thing.
“ I wouldn’t stir from this spot for all the treasure in the world,”
I replied. “ But what makes you call it my treasure ? I only made
up a story and told it to you.”
“ But that map you showed me ? ” he objected.
“ Couldn’t I have made that up too ? ” I asked.
“ Look here ! D’you mean to say . . .” He rolled over and
caught hold of me. I laughed and freed myself.
“ I’m far too comfortable to struggle,” I said. “ No, I didn’t make up
that map. It’s genuine enough. And I found something just now which
confirms it too.” And I told him about the necklace of gold coins.


“ But mightn’t it mean that the blacks found the treasure or what-
ever it was, and that necklace was part of it ? ” he suggested.
I had thought of this, but would not let myself allow of its possi-
bility. “ Perhaps so, perhaps not,” I answered. “I’m not at all
interested in such things now. I’m going to have forty winks. You
can go and hunt for treasure if you like.”
The forty winks were so pleasant that I extended them to many
more, and it was late in the afternoon when I awoke. Ballanda was
still asleep. Ajax was not there. We had been in a cramped boat for
some time, sailing night and day, and we needed sleep.
Presently I saw Ajax running along the beach from the west. He
was evidently very excited, and his shouting woke up Ballanda. As he
got near we saw he was carrying things in his hands, but we could not
make out what they were till he put them on the ground in front of us.
One was a coco-nut and the other was a piece of stone. The
former was remarkable enough on such a coast as this, where the
coco-nut is not indigenous, but it was the second that claimed my
attention first. It had once been part of a building ; that was per-
fectly clear, for the edges had been squared with a metal tool and a
piece of cement was sticking to its face. The most surprising part of
all was that the letters V.R. and the date 1838 were cut deep into the
stone. Victoria Regina, 1838 ! I was lost in amazement.
Ballanda was more interested in the coco-nut, and while I was
trying to solve this new mystery I watched him trying to find out
what it was. Finally I came to the rescue, and showed him how to
remove the thick husk and then break the shell. The nut was well-
grown and of a fine flavour.
“ Lots more,” said Ajax, pointing west. “Me walk about while
you all day sleep. Me go nother side rocks, see um tree aller same
palm-tree only much more bigger. Me catch um this one,” pointing
to the coco-nut. “ Then me see um big mob stones. Me see um
yabber-yabber (writing) longa stone, so me bring um longa you.”
There was only one thing to do. We followed Ajax, and he led
us across the creek and over the rocks which guarded one side of the
bay. On the other side was one of the most charming and pictur-
es


esque spots I have ever seen. Imagine a grassy glade several acres in
extent, sloping down to a white beach where the blue sea lapped with
a fringe of foam. Behind the clearing was the jungle. In the middle
was a group of large tamarind trees under which was the pile of stones
which had taken Ajax’s attention. Behind the trees were twenty or
thirty coco-nut palms waving gracefully in the wind, and not looking
at all out of place on a foreign shore. Other trees were scattered about
the clearing, and a closer inspection showed them to be English fruit
trees, pineapple, plantain, and others which I did not know, all ruined
or partly ruined by the attacks of white ants.
Paths choked with undergrowth led off from this main clearing
to others, where we saw the remains of smaller buildings, though in
some cases the jungle had completely covered the work of man, and
nothing was left but a grassy mound.
We sat down by a well which had fallen in, and discussed the
situation. I remembered hearing at school of several attempts being
made to found military colonies along the north coast of Australia.
These had been abandoned for various reasons, till finally Port Darwin
caught on and went ahead. Doubtless we were now on the site of
one of these settlements. I tried to reconstruct the scene for Bal-
landa’s benefit: red-coated sentries pacing in tight trousers and
heavy boots to and fro under the tropical sun ; fever breaking out and
killing one after another of these men —brave, indeed, but utterly
unable to live their old lives under the new conditions ; blacks coming
down and being met with English army tactics entirely unsuited to the
occasion, for the blacks would ambush the soldiers and spear them in
the back. Failure must have followed failure, till the Government
recalled the few men left. The only permanent survivors were the
animals and birds they brought with them—pigs, buffalo from Timor,
horses, and domestic fowls. These adapted themselves to the new
life and flourished exceedingly, and their descendants are found along
the north coast to this day. Slowly it dawned on the authorities that
a new country could be conquered, not by forcing an unaccustomed
civilization on it, but by finding out the new conditions and adapting
old methods to them.


I don’t know whether Ballanda knew what I was trying to ex-
plain.
“ Were they white men ? ” he asked, touching the stones almost
reverently.
“ Yes.”
“ White men from across the water where —where we came
from ? ”
“ From farther off than that,” I answered. “ From the land our
fathers came from.”
“ Were they like us ? ”
“ Yes. But they wouldn’t give up their ideas. They wore thick
clothes and either died or went away.”
“ Will we ever go away, d’you think ? ”
He had never asked such a question before. His voice was wistful,
and I saw memory dawning in his eyes.
“Of course we will,” I answered cheerfully. “ We’ll go away
some day and we’ll tell other white people what a wonderful place this
is, and they will return with us.”
This seemed to satisfy his simple, newly-awakened mind, and he
smiled. “ I wouldn’t like to stay away, of course. I wouldn’t be
Ballanda the White Chief there, would I ? ”
“ You’d be a chief wherever you went,” I thought, “ for you are
the stuff of which great men are made.” Aloud I said, “ Well, any-
how, our job just now is to find the spot Sebastian de Hooste marked
with a cross on his map. Perhaps we’re too late for your treasure,
Ballanda.” I said it jokingly in order to take his mind off the sad
thought which the ruins inspired. “ Perhaps the English soldiers
found it.”
This roused him to action, and we spent the few remaining hours
of light hunting about for a likely place. Though I had suggested it
jokingly, I thought it very likely that the Dutchman’s secret, what-
ever it was, had actually been discovered. A military settlement
would mean quite a large number of men for so outlandish a place, and
there would be very few spots along the coast, within walking distance
at any rate, which they would not explore.
167


Now it was Ballanda, and not me, who urged the claim of de
Hooste’s plan. At breakfast next morning we spread the old parch-
ment on the sand, and even Ajax helped us to pore over it. It gave
Ballanda a much clearer idea of the situation through having to explain
it to Ajax. The map was on a very small scale, and though the bay
was drawn out of proportion in order to give it importance, the cross
was thick enough to cover quite a large piece of ground, and made the
exact locality very difficult to determine. It seemed to be on the east
side of the bay. This fitted in with the character of the country, for
the hills came down on that side, and it was far more likely there would
be caves or fissures in the rock there, where something could be hid,
than on the other side of the bay, which was more level.
But though we searched, together and singly, for three days, we
found no solution to the mystery. Two caves seemed to promise well,
and both were above high-water mark, and had hardly any sand in
them. This was an advantage, for if they had been tidal caves the
secret might have become buried, but a most careful exploration of these
caves yielded nothing more interesting than a litter of young pigs and
a colony of bats.
“ It’s no good, Duncan,” said Ballanda at the end of the third day.
“ There’s not a crack in those rocks, where a man could hide a good-
sized pearl, that I haven’t looked into. Wherever it was that the old
chap hid his treasure, those English soldiers must have found it.”
I felt the same, and said something about being sorry I had brought
him on a wild-goose chase.
“ Not at all,” he broke in. “We’ve had a great time. I wouldn’t
have missed seeing that old settlement for anything. And look at the
pigs we’ve seen round here ! I reckon we’ll go pig-hunting to-morrow-
It wouldn’t be bad to take two young porkers back with us.”
We carried out this suggestion, and soon forgot our disappoint-
ment in a most exciting chase. The country was far more broken
than we were used to, and the animals made off into the hills, and we
lost track of them time and time again.
“ It’s no good hunting together,” said Ballanda at last. “ I reckon
we’d each better follow one and not leave it till we’ve got it. I’ll take
168


It led me into most difficult country.
the next we put up, you take the next, Duncan, and, Ajax, you follow
the third.”
Hardly had he finished speaking when a pig got up almost under
our feet and made off. With a shout Ballanda was after it. There
must have been two together, for a second one scuttled away squealing
just afterwards, and I followed it. It led me into most difficult
country. Had I not been used to hunting in the jungle I should have
given it up at once, but I managed to keep sight of my quarry in spite
of the boulders and undergrowth. He led me to the face of the hill
fronting the sea, and climbed till we were probably a hundred feet
above the beach.
Suddenly he disappeared. I was so close to him a moment before
that I was preparing to shoot. In fact, I should have shot sooner if I
had not been so out of breath, but now he was nowhere to be seen,
and instead of his grunts and squeals there was silence. We had
been running over rocks for the last hundred yards, and we left no
tracks that I could see, so I could not follow him in that way.
CB,ois> i6q y


While I was hunting round to account for this disappearance, I
heard a commotion on the hill above me, and looking up, saw Bal-
landa’s pig scuttling down the face with Ballanda in full cry after it.
“ Don’t shoot, don’t shoot,” I shouted, for I was in direct line
with the pig. Neither could I shoot, for I might have hit Ballanda.
I watched the bristly monster charging down, and then he too dis-
appeared. But I saw the spot this time, and marked it carefully.
“ Where’s he gone ? Where’s he gone ? ” panted Ballanda.
“ Didn’t you see him ? ”
“ Yes, I saw him,” I answered. “He disappeared suddenly like
mine did. I believe they both disappeared in the same place.”
“ Disappeared ! ” exclaimed my companion. “ Whatever do you
mean ? How could a pig disappear on a hillside like that ? ”
“ I’ll show you.”
I walked up to a hole in the face of the hill hardly bigger than a
rabbit-burrow. A bush was growing over it, and on the other side
of the bush the hole got all at once big enough to admit a pig. In
fact, I saw fresh tracks on the soft earth. I poked my head in and
groped round with my hands and found that the entrance turned
suddenly right into the rocky face of the hill. It evidently led to a
cave. From my cramped position I could not feel the roof, but I
heard pigs grunting contentedly in the darkness and squeals also, as if
a family of little pigs was there also.
Suddenly a thought struck me and I sprang back into the light.
“ Ballanda ! Ballanda !” I shouted. “ There’s a cave here. What
if it’s the one ? ”


CHAPTER XXI
BALL AND A looked at me in amazement for a moment.
1 “ What d’you mean ?” he asked.
“ Why, the cave I” I replied impatiently. “ The treasure cave ! ”
“ But this isn’t on the beach, and the plan says ”
“ The plan doesn’t say anything about the beach,” I interrupted.
“It doesn’t even say it’s a cave. And besides, look what might have
happened in three hundred years. Why, the whole coast-line might
have altered,” I insisted, willing to believe the wildest theory if only
the dying spark of hope might be fanned into flame.
Ballanda began to catch my enthusiasm ; but he still doubted, and
indeed so did I, once I looked at the real hillside instead of looking
inside my mind at the picture my imagination painted there. Yet it
was not so entirely improbable after all.
The place where the pigs disappeared was a mass of earth entirely
covered with luxuriant vegetation. Above it was bare rock, and above
that again was a more gradual slope, also covered with earth and grass
and trees. A landslide might easily have occurred here, leaving the
face of the rock bare and covering the mouth of the cave. One thing
I knew: a cave was there, or, at any rate, a hole in the hill large enough
to be the lair of wild pigs.
Ajax had now joined us, with a fine young pig slung across his
shoulders. He had cornered it amongst the rocks and despatched it
with a spear.
“ What d’you reckon we ought to do, Duncan ? ” asked Ballanda,
deferring to me as leader in what he chose to call the treasure-hunt.
“ Enlarge that hole first of all,” I replied, “ and then build a fire at
the entrance to drive out anything that may be there. I don’t like
tackling things in the dark. And besides, we’ll want a light to explore
the place.”


“ Good,” said Ballanda. Then he turned to the native and sent
him to the beach with his pig, telling him to return with a couple of
fire-sticks and an axe. “You bring um back quick-fella,” he con-
cluded, and Ajax, though he must have wondered whatever these
white men were about, ran off instantly to obey.
We did not wait for his return, but broke down a couple of saplings
and soon enlarged the opening with them. My theory of a landslide
was borne out by what we found, for it looked very much as if a great
mass of earth had tumbled down and nearly blocked the place up.
The work was hard, but we were very interested, and it seemed no time
before Ajax was back again with his fire-sticks and the axe. We cut
down other saplings now and used them as levers, and soon had a fine
hole made and a fire blazing in front of it.
The pigs had kept up a constant chorus of objection, but had not
come out. The place went a long way in, and they were at the back of
it, or so we thought; but when Ballanda threw in a blazing branch it did
not strike rock, but fizzled and went out as if it had dropped into water.
It dislodged the pigs, however, and they scuttled out, knocking
Ajax head over heels and scattering the fire in all directions. The
little ones looked especially funny, running as fast as their short pink
legs would carry them, their tails curled up just as I had seen young
pigs at home. We put the fire together again and piled on a lot of dry
branches till it flared up and lit the cave.
I took a blazing stick from it and entered. All at once I stood
stock-still. What I had expected to find I don’t know. I had hardly
dared to hope that our search was at last rewarded, but there, cut deep
in the rock, were the letters Van B and the date 1615.
So excited was I that I don’t know whether I shouted or not, but
Ballanda must have known that I had made a discovery, for he was by
my side in an instant, and we stood and gazed at the letters as if they
had been made of gold.
“ So this is the treasure-cave after all,” he whispered in an awed
tone.
“ Yes,” I replied in the same way; and then I added, “ but we
don’t know yet whether the English soldiers found it first.”


As if to prove my words, the branch I was carrying blazed up as
the flame caught a bunch of leaves, and I saw, scratched under the
letters Van B , but still perfectly plain, these words:
William Ludd
James Fraser Settlement Bay 1839
I dared not point them out to Ballanda, but he had seen them also,
and the reading-lessons I had given him enabled him to spell them out
correctly.
“ So they did find it after all,” he muttered.
The reaction from hope to despair was too much for us. We went
out and stared at the fire, unable to voice our thoughts. So this was
the end. I had not given up even when the three days’ search had
yielded no result; in fact, I had built my hopes on solving the mystery
more than I realized, and I was the more dejected. Ballanda was the
first to speak. He was a man of action, and rebelled against depression.
“ Let’s at least explore the place,” he said.
We took fire-sticks and went in again. At the back of the cave
was a pool of water, and beyond it the rock sloped away quickly. The
light showed there was nothing beyond the water. The place was
empty except for odds and ends of food which the pigs had brought
there. We stood and looked down into the water, which was fed from
a trickle in the roof, and which probably soaked away through the earth,
for the pool did not flow over. It was deep. Ballanda put his hand
in and could not touch bottom. He tasted the water and found it
very cold and with a bitter taste.
“ I wonder what made that pool. It looks as if the floor of the cave
had fallen in. The stream ran out at the entrance at one time. Did
you notice that the rock was water-worn ? ”
I hadn’t noticed it, but what difference did it make ?
“ I wonder how deep it is ?” he said. “ I’d like to try.”
“ What’s the good ? ”
“Oh well, we’ve lost the treasure,” he replied bitterly. “ It’s no
harm to find out all we can about the place where it was hidden.


Perhaps the pool wasn’t here when those English soldiers made their
find.”
I did not see what he was driving at, but was willing to do any-
thing to divert my mind, so when he lay down flat and leaned over the
edge, I grabbed his legs to save him from falling in. He groped about
for a time and then brought up something. It was soft and slimy,
like thick sea-weed, but it couldn’t be that, so we took it to the light to
have a good look.
All at once my spirits rose
“ That’s leather,” I said.
“ Leather ! ”
“ Yes. I’m sure of it. It’s all decayed, of course, and it’s a
wonder it hasn’t disappeared altogether. There must be something
in the water that’s preserved it.”
“ I felt quite a lot of it down there,” said Ballanda.
We dashed back and pulled up more of it. I was now quite sure
it once had been leather, though it now fell apart like jelly when we
touched it.
“ Look here,” I decided. “ I’m going down into that pool to
investigate.”
The water was frightfully cold, and as I lowered myself into it the
shock took my breath away, but I struck bottom at last and groped
round with my feet till I felt more of the spongy substance. I slipped
on it and went through, and underneath I felt some hard things, not
at all like stones. I managed to grab one with my two feet and bring
it to the surface after losing it once or twice.
It was a short, round, thick stick, something like a rough bamboo,
but very heavy. It was metal. We ran to the entrance.
It was gold !
How curiously it was formed I When our excitement allowed us
to examine it properly, we found it was made of little discs stuck
together by a coating of something. I scraped this film away with
the axe and saw at one end a bright gold coin.
The cylinder was a mass of Dutch coins stuck together like gela-
tine lozenges when they are allowed to get damp. Time, and some
i 74


We took it in turns to plunge into that icy water.


metal which was in the water, had cemented them, but the coating was
so thin that a few taps with the axe were sufficient to detach the coins
from one another. They were just like the ones I had seen made
into a necklace and wound round the medicine-man’s grave-post.
We had found the treasure !
How much of it was there ?
We did not cease work till we had found that out. Neither cold
nor hunger could deter us. We took it in turns to plunge into that
icy water and bring up whatever we could find. Besides coins, we
came across ten bulky bottles of pearls. The old Dutchman had had
the sense to fill the bottles with sea water and seal them, and the
deposit of metal over the sealing had preserved the contents still
more. We did not open the bottles, thinking it best to keep them
as they were.
The mystery was now explained—at least very little was needed
to complete the story I had made up. It was this :
The Van Brakel was probably cruising amongst the Dutch East
Indies with specie to pay the various staffs of the Dutch East India
Trading Company, when she was blown out of her course and came to
the unknown northern coast of Australia. Running short of fresh
water, the crew went ashore, and the natives, mistaking them at first
for Malays, with whom they traded in pearls year by year, offered them
pearls in barter. This struck the wily old Dutch skipper as a very
profitable enterprise, and he cruised farther and farther along the
coast till he had collected ten bottles of beautiful pearls.
Then something happened which we did not find out till much
later. It was the missing link in the story. Probably the manuscript
in Sebastian de Hooste’s wallet would explain it.
Some time later I gave that manuscript to a man who could read
Dutch, and he told me that a malignant fever had broken out on the
Van Brakel , and that several of the crew died, and all of them except
the stalwart skipper himself were more or less affected. So they fled
from that coast of pearls and savages and unknown diseases, hoping
that the open sea would cleanse the ship. Before they fled, the cap-
tain hid his treasure, for the sea was infested with pirates in those days,
176


THE SPLENDID SAVAGE
and a sick crew would have no chance of defending themselves. He
hid the coins in one thick leather trunk and the pearls in another,
putting them on the dry floor of a cave out of which a little stream
trickled.
So ran the manuscript, giving the names of the crew and the dates
on which they died. De Hooste’s fate is known to us.
How the treasure-trunks came to be lying in five feet of water is
not quite clear, but I think the same disturbance which caused the
landslide to block the mouth of the cave must have broken through
the floor, and the stream had filled up the pool and worn it deeper
and deeper.
How near those English soldiers were to great wealth ! There
were over fifty bars of golden coins, some of them containing seventy
and eighty each. When we had time to look at them more closely,
we found that more than half the coins were Spanish double-doubloons,
and we guessed that old Sebastian de Hooste was not the mild trading
captain I had pictured him, but had done a little piracy when the
chance came his way, and had robbed a Spanish ship.
Evening had come and gone, and night was nearly past when we
exhausted the treasure hoard. The coins had spread over the bottom
of the pool, for though the leather still held, it had no more strength
than jelly, and the gold had fallen through by its own weight.
At last nothing was left, and we were just three cold, hungry men,
standing round a fire in the cheerless light of dawn. Ajax had helped,
and though the sight of the piles of gold and the bottles of pearls
warmed our hearts even if it did not comfort our bodies, I don’t think
Ajax had any other satisfaction than that he had served his masters
faithfully.
Never mind, old friend, you are one of the few blackfellows whose
names and deeds have gone down to posterity.


CHAPTER XXII
THE treasure was too heavy to take away in one canoe-load, so we
made three trips to Dutchman’s Bay, as we named the place,
before we had it all safely stored in our huts. Fortunately there was
no fear of theft from the blacks, as the stuff was of no value to them,
and we pleased them very much by bringing thirty or forty coco-nuts
with the last load, and distributing the strange fruit amongst them.
It was amusing to see how they tackled them, for not one of them
had seen a coco-nut, and it was some time before they understood
that the thick covering of the shell was merely a pod. Blacks adapt
everything to their use, and it was not many days before the outside
coverings had been teased out into rough mats and the shells used to
carry water and liquid food.
I have said that the treasure was safe from the blacks because it
was no use to them. Neither was it of use to us, being neither a
weapon, nor food, nor a tool, and it is a striking instance of Ballanda’s
recovered memory and of his hope of the future that he was now quite
as keen on our find as I was. We even spoke openly of the day
when white men would come from the sea and take us away, not for
good, but just long enough for us to tell other white men of the won-
derful country that was waiting for them.
Ballanda was not alone now when he climbed his cliff in the early
mornings and gazed out to sea ; I was with him, and we called it
Expectation Point. With great labour we erected a tall flagpole and
ran the Australian flag to the top. It was a memorable day when we
performed this ceremony. We looked out all the guns and rifles we
had, to the number of fifteen, and ordered all the men of the tribe to
come to Expectation Point with us. We armed fourteen of them with
the guns and stood them in a row, telling the others to “ Yack-i
aller same mad fella ” directly the flag was hoisted.
178


It was a beautiful silk flag, which had been stowed away for years
in the bottom of the cabin-trunk Ballanda had brought from the
wreck, and when we tied it to the ropes it seemed eager to go aloft
and wave over land and sea. Ballanda remembered the tune of the
National Anthem, and I revived his memory of the words, and on that
promontory, in the light of the rising sun, we two white savages sang
the simple words which are heard in every corner of the globe.
Then Ballanda hoisted the flag. I stepped back into line and gave
the order to fire. The ascending flag was greeted with a salvo of
fifteen guns and a great deal of shouting. None of the blacks had
used a gun before, and several of them were knocked down by the kick.
All except Ajax dropped their weapons and ran to join their com-
panions, their shouts of alarm adding to the tumult. It was indeed
a novel and enthusiastic ceremony, and never were two white men
more affected than we were as the flag of our country waved over our
heads for the first time —a Union Jack on a field of red spangled with
the Southern Cross.
We celebrated the day with a cricket match, and excitement ran
higher than ever. I won the toss and sent Ballanda’s side in first.
We did not get them out till after dinner, for though we had a couple
of bowlers who could scare the wits out of any native batsman, Ajax
and his captain stood firm, the black just keeping his end up while
Ballanda scored. Many of the hits went to the boundary, and we
lost four balls.
At last I bowled Ajax with a leg break. It was our turn now. I
felt that, as I was chief of the party which had fired the salute, it was
up to me to do my best. I was feeling very fit. The days were long,
and we had at least six good hours ahead of us : 386 to equal, 387
to win.
Fortune favoured us at first, and one or two of my men stuck well
and a few scored heavily, two of them making over fifty in a very short
time. Civilized batsmen never ran so fast as my men did that day.
The men spectators shouted, the women spectators screamed, and
even the dogs entered into the spirit of the occasion and barked for all
they were worth.


I had a bad tail to my team. Some of them had not got over the
shock of the salute, and were too nervy for good cricket. In spite
of this we managed to pull up steadily, and by sunset were within
measurable distance of winning.
Expectation Point was in shadow. We were 351. I was batting,
and managed to run the score up to 376 before the shadow was half-
way up the flagpole. Ten to equal, eleven to win. The game was to
end when the sun no longer shone on the flag. How I watched that
strip of fluttering silk !
In came the last man, dashing down the beach, and the bowlers
were sporting enough not to waste any time, and bowled at me before
the man was properly in his place. I scored a four and then a two,
and then sneaked a one so as to take the bowling next over, for the
man at the other end was no good at all.
The flag was the only thing in sunlight when the next ball came
down. It was dead on, and I blocked it. The next was equally risky,
and I did the same. A tip of light still touched the flag. The next
ball would be the last. Manloo was bowling, and he could bowl. He
sent down a third the same as the others, thinking that, if he could not
get me out, he could at least prevent me scoring. It was perfect
length, and he thought I should play back at it as I had the others.
But instead of that I stepped out to meet it, and caught it fair, and sent
it right over the jungle trees. It was a mighty stroke. Everybody
watched it open-mouthed.
“ Lost ball! ” shouted Ballanda. “ Four ! ”
Tremendous applause greeted the announcement. We had won !
Victors and vanquished were equally congratulatory.
“ That was the last ball we’ve got,” said Ballanda. “We couldn’t
have gone on even if the sun had stayed up for another hour.”
We walked away to lower the flag and cover it with oilcloth at the
foot of the pole, for we were going to take great care of that bit of silk,
you may be sure. The blacks trooped back to camp, where a huge
pile of food awaited them—a newly-killed buffalo, several pigs, and
piles of ducks and geese and smaller birds, besides turtles’ eggs and a
quantity of yams. That was a great feast, and we let it go on right
180


through the night, and through the next day as well, till the food was
either exhausted or the capacities of the feasters tested to the full, we
did not inquire which. And to this day, if a blackfellow along the
coast wants to refer to a specially big meal, he speaks of it as :
“ Close up aller same that one Flag tuck-out.”
Soon after flag-day it struck me that it would be a good idea to have
such festivals often because of their good effect on Ballanda ; so I
suggested collecting a big pile of firewood on Expectation Point, to be
ready for the next “ white-fella corroboree.” Ballanda entered into
it with avidity, and some of the blacks were at once sent off to get
wood.
Three days later Ballanda and I happened to climb Expectation
Point just about sunset to see how the blacks had carried out his
orders. They had done all we could wish, and a huge pile of dry
wood lay ready, right on the extremity of the cliff. We hoisted the
flag “ to show that the governor of the colony was at home,” and sat
down to enjoy the calm evening.
The sun sank without a cloud or any mist. The edge of the sun
cut the horizon sharply, and was so distinct that we could tell the
exact moment it sank. A broad streak of red came over the sea and
then died away, leaving the ocean spread out below us like pale grey
silk. From where we were we could see no movement on the water.
It was natural that our eyes should wander round the semicircle of
sea and sky and back again, like a sailor on the look-out. The vault of
heaven and the pavement of the sea were perfect, unbroken by a single
speck. Then, in the wonderfully clear light that comes just before
sunrise and just after sunset, we saw a little stain of grey cloud above
the sea to the north-east. As it was the only break in the perfect
colouring, we watched it.
“ If only it was smoke,” said Ballanda.
“ That’s just what I was thinking,” I said. “If only it was.”
We watched it a little longer, and then I said, fearful of encouraging
hope that might only be dashed to the ground again :
“It’s a funny sort of cloud, don’t you think ? D’you reckon a
squall’s coming ? ”
181


“ Perhaps it is. . . . But, Duncan,” and he clutched my arm,
“ am I wrong, or is there really a black dot under that cloud ? ”
I strained my eyes. Was it imagination or reality ? I certainly
thought I saw a dot, so placed on the rim of the sea, that what we
thought to be a cloud might be the smoke of a ship.
Hope battled for a place in our hearts. The light lasted for no
more than another quarter of an hour, and before we lost sight of the
distant speck we had decided it was a ship.
“ Now for the bonfire,” said Ballanda. “ Duncan, you get a couple
of fire-sticks and set it going, and I’ll get a mob of blacks to keep us
well supplied with wood.”
He had taken command, and indeed the strength of his mood was
greater than mine, for whereas I knew what a ship would mean to us,
he did not, and the mystery called him all the more strongly because
vague memories of his youth were struggling to come to the surface.
In a short time the beacon was ablaze. We hauled down the flag
and stowed it in safety, lest a chance spark should set it alight. All
night we fed the flames. A line of blacks passed up more and still
more wood, till a distant sailor would have thought that part of the
jungle was on fire. But were there any distant sailors ? We were
tortured with doubt. It is so easy to imagine that one sees what one
so much wants to see, and, after all, the speck might have been any-
thing, a drifting log, perhaps, that happened to come under a little
grey cloud.
When these thoughts assailed us we kept silent and worked all the
harder, but when hope asserted itself, as it did time and time again,
we spoke freely, imagining all kinds of hoped-for possibilities.
Long before dawn the blacks were sent away, for we had a pile of
wood that would last for many hours. Ballanda and I were alone. I
began to talk about my father.
“ You know,” I said, “if he’s alive, I know he’ll come back. He’s
a sailor, and will remember exactly where his ship went down, and he’ll
never believe I’m dead till he’s searched for me. . . . And I feel sure
he’s alive,” I added.
“ I wish I felt like that about my father,” said Ballanda. “ Some-
-182


times I think I remember him, but it may be I’m only thinking of
that photograph. And yet I’m sure he was a tall man with broad
shoulders, and I seem to see him sometimes wearing white clothes.
Do men ever wear clothes like that ? ”
“Oh yes, often,” I answered. “ Especially in hot climates like
this.”
Talking in this way the hours slipped away, and the flames roared
aloft and sent sparks into the night. At last dawn began to come,
and a streak of faint light showed over the eastern horizon as if the lid
of night were actually lifting off the sea. How slowly the day gained
power when watched with such eagerness as ours was. It seemed
reluctant to lift the veil of darkness which shrouded the sea.
Slowly the surface of the ocean changed from dark velvet to dark
silk and then got greyer and greyer till we saw, or thought we saw, a
vague shape of black, a mile or so outside the reef. It took shape till
there was no doubt.
It was a ship !
We did not shout or wave our arms about; we made no sign of
joy ; the night had taken toll of our emotions. We just looked at
one another and then gripped hands.
“ Come on,” said Ballanda. “ Let’s go and show her the way in.”


CHAPTER XXIII
WE dashed away. As we left, some impulse made me pick up the
flag. Before we reached the jetty the blacks had launched a
flotilla of canoes, and were paddling over the lagoon like so many
water-beetles, making lines of ripples on the calm surface.
The ship rested on the water like a bird. Her lines were graceful
and gave an impression of speed, for though she rocked gently on the
ocean swell, she seemed eager to be off at a moment’s notice. As we
pushed off we heard a rattle of chains in the clear air and a shouted
order, and it may have been imagination, but I was sure the words I
heard were English. A smart cutter had been lowered from the ship
and was making for the reef.
She mistook the entrance. The natives saw her steering in the
wrong direction and waved spears and shouted instructions, and
paddled all the faster. The crew of the cutter took the demonstration
to be hostile, and we saw a tall man stand up in the bow, and immedi-
ately afterwards a Maxim barked and a spray of shot pinged over our
heads. This checked the blacks, but our canoe forged ahead, making
straight for the gap in the reef. The man stood up again and waved
us back, but we took no notice, and I am sure nothing short of being
blown out of the water would have stopped us just then.
The Maxim spoke again. This time the shots went lower and more
close than was pleasant. It was only then that I realized how like
natives we two white men were, both in dress and colour, and also in
the craft we were paddling. Our position was one of danger, and the
cutter was preparing another volley, when I remembered the flag.
I stood up and held the Australian flag over my head. The wind
caught it and fluttered the silk out to its full extent.
Sight of the flag was greeted with the silence of utter amazement
at first, then a lusty British cheer came over the water. The natives
184


took heart at this and clustered round us. The cutter was now too
near the gap in the reef for us to board her, so we turned and headed
a triumphal procession to the jetty. It was a truly barbaric reception.
First came a Malay canoe in which were two white savages, then a
flotilla of native craft, and following this a trim cutter. Our visitors
took the welcome in the right spirit and adjusted their speed to ours,
and when the boat finally pulled up at the jetty Ballanda and I had
landed and were ready to receive the men.
Something strange had happened to Ballanda. His face was
radiant with intelligence, and his eyes shone with joy as if he had just
found something he had lost for a long time.
We had been too excited to speculate who the strangers were.
They were white men —that was enough at first. Very likely the
ship had been making from Thursday Island for some such spot on
the coast as the Roper River, and had sighted our beacon and pulled
in to investigate.
A fine tall man stepped ashore first, and as he turned to give a
direction to the crew, something about his figure made my heart beat
violently. Then I heard his voice and saw his face. I recognized
him instantly.
It was my father !
We stood and faced one another on that jetty for several minutes
in absolute silence. Around us were natives, a tropical lagoon, a
white beach, and luxuriant jungle, yet nothing mattered of all that,
nor my bronzed body with no covering but a sarong of furred hide.
We looked into one another’s eyes. Then our hands met. Eye and
hand had said all there was to be said. Men do not gush sentiment
at times like that.
“Well, Duncan, my lad, how are you ? ” was what my father said.
“ Fine, father, thanks. Come and let me introduce you to Bal-
landa,” was what I said.
Ballanda advanced to meet this man who was dressed in spotless
white duck. The contrast was very great, yet never had I felt prouder
of my friend than I did at that moment. He looked every inch a king.
My father is a tall, big man, but Ballanda topped him by a head, and
(S,0I8) 185 2 A


was of such magnificent proportions that his very lack of clothing
made him look bigger than he actually was. But the grace of his
movement, perfect dignity mingled with perfect cordiality, surprised
even me who was used to it; the White Chief was receiving an envoy
from the great world. How proud, how very proud I was of him.
Some change had taken place in Ballanda, for instead of the un-
tutored savage of a few months ago, who was entirely ignorant of
the ways of white men, I saw a finished gentleman bowing as he took
my father’s hand and smiling a welcome. My father must have been
astonished, but of course he did not show it, and he brought the situa-
tion down to a more endurable level by remarking with a polite
laugh :
“ I thought you fellows were out to dispute our entrance. I
apologize for the suspicions we entertained.”
“ They were quite natural,” said Ballanda. “ The occurrence was
so unusual that we hardly took time to think. It is we who ought to
apologize.”
I’m afraid I did not mask my astonishment at Ballanda as well as
my father had done, for here was my friend, whose speech I had known
intimately for several months to be as unpolished as my own, using
graceful phrases which would have done credit to a cultured man.
To tell you the truth, I was a little afraid of him, wondering what
other development would show itself next. I need not have felt in
this way, for Ballanda’s mood was only a flash of his former life which
excitement had called up ; he soon relapsed into the unsophisticated
man I knew so well.
“ Won’t you and your men come up and have a meal ? ” he asked.
“ Thanks,” said my father. “ For myself I accept gratefully, but
the men are due back at the ship with fresh water immediately. It
was because our water-tank leaked and we ran short, that we came so
far south and saw your beacon. Perhaps you could show me the best
place to fill the kegs.”
This was done. The blacks helped willingly, staring hard at the
white men, but not daring to express an opinion while Ballanda and I
were there. My father then gave some orders to the mate, and the
186


It was my father!
boat pulled away from shore and the three of us walked up to the
huts.
“ I suppose you chaps want to know how I happen to be here,” said
my father, after he had done justice to the meal we put before him.
“ It looks like a stroke of luck, but I can assure you it is not, though I
did not expect to come to the end of my search quite so soon.”
We were sitting comfortably in the shade, watching the sea and
especially the ship riding at anchor outside the reef. He knew we
were burning to hear his story, so he began it without delay.
“You remember how the boats parted company after the poor
old Seaspray went down. I had intended coming aboard your boat,
Duncan, but the mate picked me up, and in the morning there was no
sight of you. How was that ? ”
187


“ I thought you were pulling south,” I answered, “ and of course
our boat did the same. Weren’t they the orders you gave ? ”
“ If they were, we didn’t obey them ; and because of it we’ve
been parted all this time. . . . But never mind. . . . Well, we had a
pretty bad time. One of our chaps went mad and threw the water-
kegs and a lot of food overboard in the night. I won’t go into that.
Five of them died, and the mate and I and six others were pretty far
gone when a Dutch trader picked us up and took us to Batavia. I
was ill there for a long time, and if it hadn’t been for the great kind-
ness of the consul I shouldn’t have pulled through ; but at last I
stood on my feet and faced the world again. But no one knew me in
Batavia, and though the consul was an awfully decent chap, I couldn’t
impose on him ; so I took passage for Singapore as soon as I could,
for I knew the manager of a bank there.
“ When I got to Singapore I was right financially, and was able
to repay the consul at Batavia for all his kindness, but I had started
moving about too soon and had a relapse of fever, which kept me on
my back for another month or so.
“ Naturally my chief concern all this time was what had become
of you. I felt sure your boat hadn’t gone down in the storm, and I
also felt sure you were still alive, though why I thought so I can’t say.
A chap gets strange fancies when he’s sick, and one of them that came
to me and stuck was that you were alive somewhere along the shores
of the Gulf of Carpentaria. You see, I was right, though men I talked
to called me a fool for entertaining such a wild hope. It wasn’t a
hope, I told them, it was a certainty.
“So I looked about for a ship going east. I could have got one
for Broome easy enough, and even for Port Darwin, but what I wanted
was a skipper who would cruise along the coast with me and poke
about any likely spot. I was told I might get such a rovmg skipper
in Port Moresby on the south coast of New Guinea, but certainly not
in Singapore, where men had more important things to do than follow
the whim of a man who had just got over fever. I went to Port
Moresby and waited.
“ All kind of men land up at Moresby. I never saw such a motley
188 ,


collection in all my life. All nationalities and all occupations, good,
bad, and indifferent, congregate there, and things are pretty lively
sometimes, I can tell you.
“ While there, I had the good luck to run across a man from
Darwin. He knew one of the Territory troopers very well, and told
me that this trooper had told him a yarn about a white man —Ballanda
he called him —who was sort of chief of a native tribe somewhere in
these parts. The story had passed through several hands before it
reached me, and you can imagine how keen I was to know more. The
man from whom the trooper got his information was a prisoner, a
member of a tribe known as the Lightning Stone tribe, whether be-
cause they were extra fiery or what I don’t know. Anyhow, some
of them had murdered two white drovers, and this fellow was one
of the prisoners.
“You may be sure I was more anxious than ever to search the
coast after hearing that fellow’s story, but the Fates seemed against
me, and neither love nor money would induce any skipper in Port
Moresby to do what I wanted. This delay turned out to be the best
thing that could have happened, for when I had decided to charter a
ship and take control myself, there sailed into the harbour that dainty
craft which you see out there.”
He pointed to the ship outside the reef. “ Dainty ” was just the
word for her, glistening white on a blue sea. She looked more like a
bird than ever now, for her sails were furled and she nestled in the
swell as if she had at last reached home. My father abruptly changed
the course of his story by turning to Ballanda and asking :
“ Would you mind showing me that photograph I saw in your
hut ? I think you mentioned it was your father.”
Ballanda brought it, and as he gave it to my father he remarked :
“ I don’t know for certain whether it is my father. But —but
sometimes I feel quite sure it is.”
To our surprise my father looked up and said in a very decided
tone :
“You need have no doubt on that score. This is certainly a
photograph of your father.”
189


We were too amazed to speak. In explanation he took Ballanda’s
hand and touched the ring.
“ No one but the son of this man could wear this ring,” he said.
“ Then you know him ? ”
“ Listen. I will tell you about him.”
My father was evidently labouring under some great emotion, but
he controlled himself and told the following story :
“ That man has got a name I honour more than any other in the
world,” he said solemnly, tapping the photograph. “ When I was too
young to remember them, both my parents died, and as I had no
brothers or sisters, I was as much an orphan as could be. This man’s
father” —he indicated the photograph—“was my father’s greatest friend,
and he took me into his family and I became his son. He was a man
of culture and wealth, a scientist of international reputation. He had
two children, a boy a few years older than I was, and a girl, who was a
baby when I joined the family. The girl became my wife and your
mother, Duncan,” he said sadly, “ and this man was and is still my
greatest friend.”
“ Then he’s still alive ! ” It was Ballanda who made the excla-
mation, his face alight with eagerness.
“ Yes, he’s still alive.”
“ Where is he ? ” demanded Ballanda, standing up and looking
round as if he were just about to start off and go to him.
My father hesitated before replying.
“ He’s searching for his only son,” he said quietly.
“ Am I his only son ? ”
“ Yes.”
Silence greeted this announcement. Unaccustomed emotions held
my friend dumb. Memory was returning to power again, but it
would be some time before it ran freely in the channels which had so
long been dry. The tension was almost unbearable, and my father
eased it by breaking the silence.
“ Your father’s name is Beowulf, one of the oldest and most
honoured names in the English language. Your Christian name is
Cedric.”


“ Cedric Beowulf. Cedric Beowulf.” The unaccustomed sounds
came slowly from Ballanda’s tongue, but soon he spoke them more
easily. We watched him, The Splendid Savage, as he entered into his
inheritance of memory. Soon he turned, and asked quietly and with
an authority which would not be denied :
“ Where is my father, Mr. ? ”
“ M‘Leod.” My father supplied the surname which even I,
whose name it was, had almost forgotten.
“ Where is he, Mr. M‘Leod ? ”
For answer my father stood up and pointed to the ship riding at
anchor on the evening sea. The cutter was leaving her again and
making for the reef, and everything was so clear that we saw a man
dressed in white standing in the bows.
“He is coming,” said my father simply. “ Shall we go down to
meet him ? ”
There was no hesitation now in making the entrance. The cutter
cleft the calm water of the lagoon with a curl of foam, and a wide V
which rippled till it lapped the encircling rocks. We waited, silent.
Then my father touched my arm and signalled me away. We walked
out of sight, for it did not seem best that we, who knew them, should
witness the meeting of the famous scientist, Saxon Beowulf, with his
son, The Splendid Savage.
THE END
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS


LIST OF THIS SERIES
(“Nelson’s Bumper Books”)
THE BUMPER BOOK FOR BOYS
THE BUMPER BOOK FOR GIRLS
THE BUMPER BOOK FOR CHILDREN
THE SPLENDID SAVAGE. For Boys. By Conrad Sayce
JUST LIKE FAY. For Girls. By Florence Bone
WHO GOES THERE ? For Boys. By Harold Avery
BRIDGET AND THE DRAGON. For Girls. By H. B. Davidson
ROUND THE DOCKS
GAMES FOR CHILDREN
OLD FAIRY TALES
NURSERY RHYMES
THE BOOK OF TRAINS
THE BOOK OF ANIMALS
MOTORING BY LAND, SEA, AND AIR
AESOP’S FABLES
MY BOOK OF PETS
ROBINSON CRUSOE
NELSON


\


