

Final Report
SECRET
ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEDDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 4
Assigned to
Address
Copy No.
Date of hsue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to idiom this copy
is issued. Anything contained in this report must only be com-
municated to approved and accredited executives of Government de-
partments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or ac-
cessories for His Majesty's Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable anount of detailed information
in this report which may only be of interest to those specialising
on the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Part
a special coloured page has been provided which sets out as short-
ly as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned with policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the ''iss-ion.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our out-
put, and to investigate certain technical problems and new devel-
opments in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned
with those aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ovrs,
and with promising technical developments. No emphasis has been
laid on points where the Mission consider that British production
methods or technical development are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook's Building,
40 Stratton Street, W.l
June, 1943


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY ANT) GENERAL CONCLUSION'S
OF THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
" 4 ■ENGINES, PO7/ER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
" 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQTJIROTT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
" 7 POST- VAR p ROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each p art. The P arts in a
section are lettered A, 3, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
3.12 H " twelfth " " " 5
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and r> art, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section } Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
4C - 5.12 indicates Section 4, Part C, Chapter 3, twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLS REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION. SUMMARY - AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
” 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
" 3 Broad policy conclusions
" 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AIfiSRICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGAN IS AT lONS
Chapter 1 General
" 2 Amy Air Force
M 3 Navy Department
w 4 War Production Board
" 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
" 6 Offioe of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Engineering departments
” 3 Factory layout
" 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
" 5 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
*’ 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
" 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
” 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
" 9 Curtiss Wright
" 10 Other aircraft firms
” 11 Data-on American airframe factories
" 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Special applications of lofting
" 3 Econony of floor space
" 4 Conveyors
M 3 Drop hammer
” 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
M 8 Stretcher
" 9 Special tools
H 10 Famum rolls
M 11 Rivet sorting
" 12 Finishing and painting
" 13 Extrusion manipulation
" 14 Pipe bending
” 15 Glenn Martin 3kin stretching process
” 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
" 18 Riveting
” 19 Spot welding
" 20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
M 21 Heliarc welding
” 22 Cycle we Id


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Scope organisation of engineering departments
3 Weight analysis
4 Factors and design requirements
" 5 American stressing technique
* 6 Aerodynamic design
" 7 Aerodynamic controls
8 Stressed skin construction
■ 9 Pressure cabins
" 10 Undercarriage design
" 11 Materials
" 12 Processes
" 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Description of new North American P. 51
" 3 Description of.Curtiss P. 60
* 4 Description of Beil P. 63
" 5 Description of Douglas A. 26
6 The Boeing 8.29 and Consolidated 8.32
■ 7 Current fighters in production
8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
" 10 Wooden aircraft
" 11 Flying boats
* 12 Tailless aircraft
* 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTING
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
" 3 Layout procedure
4 Alternative reproduction processes-
" 5 Camera procedure
* 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
3 Fuel tanks - American practice
" 4 Kose - American practice
SECTION 4 ~ ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Technical review of American engine developments
* 3 Propeller design
" 4 Power plant policy and installation
" 5 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLAI7T.
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
3 Methods of absorbing engine power
* 4 Speed control
5 Relative merits of testing plant end methods
6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL ATT) OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Fuel
" 3 Oil
SSCTION 5 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - SI-EC TRIG WIRING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Principles underlying American methods
" 4 American wiring practice
" 5 Maintenance and repair aspect
" 6 Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice.
* 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Chapter 1* Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Conclusions
" 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
* 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
" 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
" 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Aircraft instruments
■ 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
" 4 Equipment
" 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
* 7 Review of technique
* 8 Equipment ordered for M.A.P.
" 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTRUMENTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 Sunmary and conclusions
■ 3 Introduction
• 4 Outline of installations
" 3 Organisation
■ 6 Equipment
■ 7 Review of technique
• 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH.
PART A - ENGINEERING STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
• 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
■ 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of drawing
office staff etc.
■ 3 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration and
define duties
• 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 Technical manuals for part time study
" 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
" 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
■ 3 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased researcn equipment in Britain
■ 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
■ 3 American wind tunnels
• 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBISM3.
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
■ 2 Training aircraft


ENGINES, POWER PLANT AND PROPELLERS
PART A PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS.
Item 1.01 Liaison between design and production.
" 1.02 Planning for production.
M 1.03 Training.
" 1.04 Engine Testing.
M 1.05 Engine Packing and Corrosion Protection.
" 1.06 Magnesium Castings.
" 1.07 Power Plants.
” 1.08 Action.
CHAPTER 2 GENERAL DESIST AND PRODUCTION NOTES ON FIRMS VISITED
Item 2.01 Allison - Indianapolis.
” 2.02 Cadillac - Detroit.
” 2.03 Packard - Detroit.
M 2.04 Wright Aeronautical, Paterson.
" 2.05 Wright Aeronautical, Cincinnati.
" 2.06 Pratt and Whitney, Hartford.
M 2.07 Ford Plant, Detroit.
” 2.08 Chrysler, Detroit.
" 2.09 Ranger, Long Island.
" 2.10 Lycoming, Williamsport.
" 2.11 Hamilton Standard Propellers, Hartford.
M 2.12 Curtiss Wright Propeller Division.
" 2.13 The Aero Products Division of General Motors.
" 2.14 The Turbo Engineering Co.
" 2.13 Simmonds Aerocessories Inc.
M 2.16 Thompson Aircraft Products, Cleveland.
* 2.17 Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co.
" 2.18 Rohr, San Diegu.
" 2.19 Solar.
M 2.20 Lawrance Engineering Co., New Jersey.
" 2.21 Bendix Products Division (of Bendix Aviation Corp.)
South Bend, Ind.
" 2.22 Kinner Motors, Los Angeles.
M 2.23 The Stewart Warner Corporation.
■ 2.24 Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co., Minn.
" 2.25 General Electric Co., West Lynn, Mass.
CHAPTER 3 - ORGANISATION AND OUTPUT
Item 3.01 General.
” 3*02 Wright Aeronautical, Cincinnati.
" 3.03 Allison, Indianapolis.
n 3.04 Packard, Detroit.
" 3.05 Hamilton Standard Propellers, Hartford.
CHAPTER 4 - ENGINE AND PROPELLER .PRODUCTION PROCESSES AND EQUIPMENT
Item 4.01 Engine prodiction shop layout and planning.
” 4*02 Machine shop equipment and processes.
" 4.03 Inspection.
n 4.04 Engine testing.
" 4.05 Engine strip and inspection.
M 4.06 Materials.
" 4.07 Heat treatment.
" 4.08 Forgings.
" 4.09 Processes.
" 4.10 Valve forging methods.
M 4.11 Power plant manufacture and assembly.
" 4.12 Engine packing and corrosion protection.
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA.




PART A PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
4A.-1.01 Liaison, between design, and production. This is closer than in many
factories in Britain, and the results are beneficial to output.
4A-1.02 Planning for production. This work, including shop layout and con-
sideration of machine and labour requirements to meet the programme, is
undertaken on a more elaborate scale and has a greater proportion of
staff devoted to it than in Britain.
Unlike some of the airframe companies, both British and American
engine and propeller firms have for several years had sufficient orders
to Justify fairly complete tooling and jigging, and for this reason, and
because the methods follow so closely those used in the automobile
industry, practices have become relatively standardised and in general,
American manufacturing methods only differ from ours in their size and
scope. There are, however, a number of processes described in the report
which lire considered to be worth investigating and introducing into our
production, such as improved hardening technique, tumbling for the
removal of burrs, and profiling and polishing machines.
The actual layout of shops and the use of line production with or
without conveyors is quite different. It is only with the larger out-
puts which started with the expansion of the R.A.P. that greatly improved
shop layouts become possible, and it is felt that we have been slower to
take advantage of this than the Americans.
Factories vary considerably, but even the American parent factories
which are manufacturing a large number of different types of engines
have adopted some measure of line production, while in some of the ’’shadow"
plants the layout is really excellent-.
The Mission appreciates that there are difficulties in this country,
brought about by A.R.P., which da not exist in America, but they consider
that, in spite of these, considerable improvements in the layouts of
British shops are still possible.
More American special machine tools for use in Britain would assist
our engine factories to greater production.
J+A-1 •03 Training. American schemes aim not only at training semi-skilled
operators from unskilled entrants, but at training inspectors, foremen
and leading hands. The Mission feels that more attention should be paid
in Britain to the possibilities of training higher grade labour.
American organisations include a large number of "clerical" staff who
are in fact highly experienced in special branches of tsdhnical work.
In Britain such men cannot be retained if of age for the forces, although
they are in lact impossible to replace, and their loss involves
disorganisation and delay.
4A.-1.04 Engine Testing. In America all combat engine types are tested for from
6.3/4 to 10.1/2 hours and are completely stripped down for detailed inspec-
tion. The Mission is convinced that the extension of British testing to
a similar period would add to the reliability of our engines and would go
far to eliminate some of the troubles which occur in the early running of
a new engine. They also consider that the complete stripping which, by
the use of suitable tracks and conveyors, is carried out very economically
bath in space and labour in America, would lead to improved reliability of
British engines.
4A-1.05 Engine Packing and Corrosion Protection. Since the war began there has
been in Britain a gradual easement of the precautions taken against the
corrosion of new engines; as at first engines were quickly brought into
use without being stored for a long time, this did not have very serious
consequences. Now that engines are stored for increasingly long periods
there has been a definite increase in the troubles due to this cause which,
because it has come gradually, has to some extent passed unnoticed.


On American engines every possible care is taken to avoid corrosion
troubles, and it is recommended that certain of the American methods be
applied forthwith in this country. It is recommended that engines be run
on lead-free fuel immediately after their final tests, and that they be
packed in hermetically sealed envelopes of a material of the cellophane
type, and that a drying agent be packed in these envelopes and also be
placed in plugs fitted to certain engine openings.
4A-1.06 Magnesium Castings. The Mission was most interested in the increasing
use which is being made of magnesium for relatively highly stressed engine
castings. It has been ascertained that very little service trouble is
experienced with these parts and there is no doubt that the Americans are
more successful in their use of ma&iesium castings than we are.
It is recommended that a party consisting of a practical foundry
manager, a metallurgist and an engineer experienced in the design of
magnesium castings should visit America to make a special study of this
matter. «
4A-1 •07 Power Plants. Although the Americans have not adopted standardised
power plants, they have studied the large scale specialised production of
power plants more closely than we have and the scale of the to oling at the
major factories is ahead of our technique.
It is recommended that consideration should, be given to an extension
of the scope of power plant factories in this country by the adoption of
some of the latest airframe manufacturing technique, with more extensive
use of drop hammers, hydro-presses and stretch presses.
It is also recommended that the most up to date photo lofting
technique should be introduced.
The flash welding of engine mountings should be more keenly pursued
and every encouragement given to this process by the provision of the
necessary equipment.
4A-1 .08 Action.
(i) Further consideration should be given to the layout of factories
for line production and additional up to date machine tools
should be obtained from America where necessary to implement
tbi*-
(ii) Firms should be encouraged to extend training schemes, so as to
up-grade all classes of labour and not merely to train un-
skilled entrants.
(iii) Deferment of "clerical" staff should be permitted if they are,
by reason of special experience > impossible to replace.
(iv) longer engine testing periods, the complete stripping of engines
after test and improved corrosion protection in engine packing
should be introduced.
(v) A team should be sent to America to make a special study of
magnesium casting technique.
(vi) The best American manufacturing processes detailed in the report
should be introduced.
(vii) Bower plant design and production groups should be strengthened
by the adoption of advanced aircraft production methods and
photo lofting.
(viii) The flash welding of engine mountings should be energetically
pursued.


CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL DESIGN AND PRODUCTION NOTES ON FIRMS VISITED
4A-2.01 Allison - Indianapolis. The Engineering Department at Allison is 1,000
strong and controls experimental manufacture; in considering these numbers,
however, sane allowance must be made for the work done by the General
Motors Laboratory. The Engineering Department collaborate with the
production tooling and process section as soon as it appears that an engine
type is going into production.
The experimental machine and fitting shops are under the control of
the Chief Engineer; although not very large they are up to date, clean,
tidy and iianediately adjoining the Chief Engineer's design department.
In this experimental department one understands immediately on going
round, exactly what is going on.
Although the development of the Allison Vl2 engine has been slow in
the past, there has been a considerable improvement in the past 2 years and
Mr. Hazon, the present chief engineer, has effected many improvements.
It is interesting that this firm was particularly keen on learning from
the Mission.
The latest editions of the Vl7lO engine will undoubtedly prove to be
useful types, and although the 2k cylinder 3420 cu.in. engine is bulky, it
employs so many parts common to the 1710 engine that it is likely to prove
to be a sound type.
Allisons have, of course, considerable experience of diaft drive and
can be regarded as pioneers in this field.
Allisons have an advantage over the other American engine Sictories in
that the group is all situated at Indianapolis with the exception of the
Cadillac sub-contracting factory. At Indianapolis there are three plants
including the experimental and development shop and two main production
factories. There is a third factory just being completed further outside
the town and this completes the Allison group.
The production efficiency of the parent factory- in terns of man hours
of direct labour per H.P delivered is very good. The individual parts in
the Vl7lO do not appear to have been designed with a very keen eye to large
scale production; this is not entirely surprising as it was originally in-
tended as a Navy Airship engine. Where this engine scores from a produc-
tion viewpoint as compared with the Merlin is in the smaller number of
parts.
As is well known Allison's have an extensive business in the manufacture
of silver and lead bronze bearings.
The plant is mainly of modern design, well lighted and equipped, and
working conditions in both shops and offices are excellent. Wherever
possible, the shops are laid out for line production and conveyors are
used. The workmanship was first class and as good as the Mission have
seen.
It was noted that at the time of the Mission's visit, machines were
not fully loaded and that the production was unbalanced. This was attri-
buted partly to the preparation carried out to meet the caning increase in
prgoramne and to the advance training of Operators for the new plant (N 0.5)
of approximately 1,800,00 sq.ft. It was understood that 70$ of the
present personnel had been trained comparatively recently. As in many
American factories, however, some machine lines will never be worked cn all
the shifts. It is noteworthy that although many idle machines were seen
there were very few idle operators.
The whole plant is engaged on the manufacture of the Allison liquid
cooled engine Vl7lO and the programme has been well maintained, and could
easily be increased, if the necessary materials were available.
(1867')Gp.959.C8.R1.T8L


4A—2*o2 Cadillac - Detroit. This Division of General Motors manufactures Connect-
ing Rods, Crankshafts, propeller shafts, Inpellor Guide Vanes and Reduction
Gears for the Allison engine* About 2of female labour is employed* _ The
shops are laid out for a considerably greater output than is at present requi-
red, and although all the machine tools are not yet installed, the utilisation
of those at present available is rather low* The general layout and tooling
is excellent and rather on the lines of Packard, which is not surprising since
Mr* McCoy, the Master Mechanic of Packards previously held the same position
at Cadillac*
,4A-2*03 Packard - Detroit* This firm is specialising on the Rolls Royoe Merlin;
they hare entered enthusiastically into its production and are undoubtedly
turning out a good Job* They have introduced certain modifications into the
after cooled two stage engine, including the Wright sintered bronze cluthees;
they have also done some work on high altitude magnetos* There is only a
small design and development office under Colonel Vincent and the Mission did
not see anything of interest under the of New Engine Development*
The main work of the drawing office consists in re-drawing Rolls Royce prints*
The machine tools hare been purchased with a view to the possibility of
manufacturing the Griffon and this could be done by provision of suitable
jigs etc*, but the shop layout would make it difficult to produce both Merlins
and Griffons simultaneously*
All Packard - Merlin production is grouped in one area in a multistory
building, part of which is the original automobile plant and part a new exten-
sion* Although this type of factory is difficult from the point of view on
transporting components and does not lend itself to efficient layout, line
production methods have been installed wherever possible in conjunction with
closely spaced machine tools and roller conveyors are extensively used for
the movement of work between operations where this is necessary* Assembly
has been placed on a moving track, travelling at approximately 1 foot in ij
minutes and is fed by side lines, on which Sub—assemblies are carried out*
It was noticed that at the end of each sub-assembly line, there was a reason-
able backing of parts required for assembly and the whole was undoubtedly
giving good results*
The shops were originally laid out from time study data to meet a req-
uired programme of 850 engines per month, which output has already been
realised* All operations were broken down, so that the operation
time did not exceed 20 minutes and machine lines were laid out accordingly,
such operations as washing, heat treatment and inspection being commonly
included in the line* The progransae has recently been adjusted to 1,400
engines per month and the layout and machine loading figures have been revi-
sed to cover the new conditions* It is understood that a further increase
to 2,700 engines per month is being mads and that the additional capacity is
expected to be met by extensive sub-contracting*
4A—2.04 Wright Aeronautical, Paterson* The Wright Company have extended their
development and research departments at Paterson considerably and the staff
now numbers over 1700* The extension of the Wright aeronautical organisa-
tion from an engine production point of view is impressive; for the most
part all their manufacture is under their direct control as opposed to the
shadow manufacture system, although this principle is being deviated from,
in regard to the new plant being put up by Chrysler for the Wright Double
cyclone 18 cylinder*
Wright engines are developed at Paterson both from the experimental and
production aspects* There are six Wright manufacturing plants in operation
or about to come into production at Paterson with a total of 7 million sq.ft*
34*000 workpeople and a present output of about 2500 engines per month* l&e
experimental and development sides are also situated at Paterson and all the
works in this area are within a radius of a few miles of each other*
Prior to the war, Wright Aeronautical concentrated upon air-cooled radi-
als for their series production and they have continued this policy throughout
their expansion*
During certain periods in their past history, they have produced liquid
cooled in-line engines and it is understood, inspired by the Army just about
four years ago, they embarked upon a new 42 cylinder liquid cooled type called
the Tornado,


at a time when Wright Field considered that liquid cooled engines would be
necessary for high speed fighters, but despite several years of development
work, none of the firm's engineering staff appeared to be enthusiastic
about this engine.
A characteristic of the company appears to be a desire to get the
highest possible power per bank of cylinders from air cooled radials. This
is typified by the new high power edition (1350 h.p.) of the 9 cylinder
Cyclone. It is understood that an 11 cylinder single row radial has also
been built while it is known that a 22 cylinder 2 row radial is running.
It seems that Pratt & Whitney* s recent work on multi-bank radials is
now affecting their outlook, however, and a large volume multi-bank air
ooeled engine is belieyed to be in the design stage*
A broad outline of the scope of thek* experimental test equipment can
be gained from the following list of their test plant:-
9 Dynamometers
2 Propeller stands of 30 ft. dia.
4 Propeller stands of 20 ft. dia.
4 Propeller stands of 12 ft. dia.
19 Single cylinder units
One interesting piece of equipment is a 1000 h.p. steam turbine which is used
for driving a blower rig. The high speed of the turbine allows a blower
to be run without the normal step-up gears and this leaves more freedom at
the rear end of the blower casing for modifications to the entry form etc.
Steam is available from the same boilers for driving turbo blowers* and this
has been utilised in the development of the Wright turbo with air cooled
blades.
Wright engines are developed at Paterson both from an experimental and
production point of view. There are 6 Wright production plants in opera-
tion or about to come into operation at Paterson with a total of
7,000,000 sq.ft, and 3k,000 workpeople are now engaged. The experimental
and development side is also situated at Paterson, all the buildings being
within a radius of a few miles of each other.
Wright Aeronautical have two large shadow plants one at Cincinnati,
which has the most highly pro duct ionised plant for one type of radial
engine in the world, and a new factory Just caning into production,
organised and managed by Chrysler, for the 18 cylinder Cyclone.
4A-2.05 Wright Aeronautical - Cincinnati. This engine plant is run by Wrights
rather iu the same way as the Bristol Accrington factory or the Rolls
Royce Crewe or Glasgow establishments. It only makes one type of engine,
the R. 26008. This factory is exceptional in that it employs about
of female labour. There is a considerable amount of sub-oontracting in-
cluding the following parts; Crankshafts, Connecting Rods, Crankcases,
linpellors, Clutch plates, Valves, Rockers, Tappets, Propeller Shafts*
Pistons, Studs and Bearings.
One of the most interesting parts of this factory is the very large
new magnesium foundry which is Just starting production. It is at
present producing a hundred thousand pounds per month but is intended to
be capable of the production of a million pounds per month. Great use
is made in this coundry of mechanical methods, and mono-rail conveyors are
used for handling moulds and cores.
Heat treatment is carried out in a continuous furnace on a conveyor;
this is made possible by the use of Dow H Alloy, which is heat-treatable in
air and does not require the usual sulphur‘dioxide atmosphere. The factory
is complete with its own sales and service department, and there is a re-
presentative of the engineering department with a small staff working very
closely with the Quality Manager and the Inspection staff in investigating
any production troubles associated with engine design.


The factory is not completely blacked out, the lighting and general
working conditions are excellent, and above normal British standard.
The layout of the Machine Shop is mainly on line production and roller
conveyors are used extensively. The Assembly Shop, however, does not
give such an orderly appearance.
Prom a tour of the plant, it is estimated that the machine utilisa-
tion at the time pf the visit averaged approximately 60$, this
condition being attributed to the preparation for an increased schedule,
material shortage and absenteeism.
4A-2.06 Pratt and Whitney, Hartford. During the last 15 years there has been
considerable competition between Pratt and Whitney and Wright and one firm
has been ahead of the other in cycles throughout this period.
Xt would seem that Pratt and Whitney are now in the ascendant.
They have an engineering and design organisation of 1750 people and Mr. Hobbs,
their engineering manager has now got the layout of the experimental and
development section in the form for which he has been planning for some
years. Mr. Willgoos has undoubtedly been one of the master forces on
engine design.
Mr. Caldwell has recently bjgen transferred from Hamilton Standard to
form a United Aircraft Research Division, where he has set up a strong
section on all the various aerodynamic aspects of engine development, such
as fan cooling and also on Aircraft performance estimation and project work.
Unlike some of the other American engine firms, Pratt and Whitney are very
interested in aircraft and they realise that they must have progressive
ideas if they are to provide the right type of engine and installation at
the right time. Mr. Caldwell is also responsible for the technical side
of a strong flight test section.
It is characteristic of the versatility of outlook of this organisation
that the two sleeve valve engines referred to previously, which Sir Roy
Fedden saw in 1938, were dropped some two years ago after considerable
promising development running, in favour of the "Wasp Majo* n .
Much interesting equipment was seen and the following list gives some
indication of the special rigs etc., available.
fa) High Altitude single cylinder unit.
(b) 3 Test Rigs for reduction gear testing with the reduction gears,
mounted back to bade and connected by a twisted shaft to provide
the desired loading.
(o) High Altitude ignition test chamber.
(d) Blower rig for "Wasp Major" driven by a 2800 cu.in. engine.
(e) Mock-up of inter-cooler installation in air flow tunnel.
(f) Mock-up "Wasp Major" in air flow tunnel; over 15$ reduction in
drag is claimed as a result of rig tests.
The Pratt and Whitney factory at Hartford, is operated on similar lines
to the Bristol parent factory. They have concentrated all their own ex-
pansion at the parent factory and they undertake the manufacture of all their
new types there. The output has increased 14 times since 1938 and is now
3,300 engines per month at the parent firm, where six specific types of engine
with 30 different mark numbers are in production. 52$ of their output is
sub-contracted. There is a range of automobile firms in the Detroit area,,
such as Studebaker, Buick & Ford, who are making Pratt and Whitney engines
on a shadow manufacturing basis, in much the same way as the British Shadow
Factories in the Coventry Area.
4A.-2.07 Ford Plant, Detroit. The plant is very well laid out and the buildings
and equipment are first class. It has a floor area of 1,500,000, sq.ft,
and at the time of the visit of the Mission had 17,500 workpeople and an
output of 81f0 engines per month; it is laid out for 3-,000 engines per
month, which it is scheduled to each by the end of this year with 39,000
workpeople. Fords had followed almost completely Pratt and Whitney


practice in regard to machining methods, etc. and very little which was
novel was seen. This policy had been adopted, probably quite rightly,
in order to get production started quickly. Line production and layout
of the machine tools was, however, adopted, as would be expected in any
new factory building an established type of engine. An elaborate system
of mono-rail conveyors is used, but with the rate of production at present
being achieved, they are hot employed to any great advantage. This
factory is still only just getting under way and there are a larger number
of idle machine tools than in any of the Companies visited.
It is believed that the foundry methods are less conventional, but this
was not seen by the Mission.
Cast crankshafts have been run successfully, but are not being proceed-
ed with. Experiments with centrifugally cast cylinder barrels are .in hand
and there does not seem to be any reason why these should not prove
successful.
A visit was paid to the Ford River Rouge plants tool room, which has a
floor area of 750,000 sq.ft, and employs 4,000 workpeople; it combines the
requirements of a tool room with those of a large general engineering and
millwright*s shop and a great variety of work is carried out, including
repairs to the Ford cargo vessels operating on Lake Erie.
4A-2.08 Chrysler , Detroit. The Chrysler Co., are undertaking an ambitious job
in the development of their Vl6 liquid cooled engine, and in the Mission’s
opinion it will be much longer than they think before this can be ready for
production. Nevertheless they’have illustrated how useful automobile
technique can be in aero engine development.
Automobile body artists are used extensively for diagrams, perspec-
tive layouts, etc., and these are referred to constantly in the drawing
office. It was also interesting to see a full scale mock-up of the
engine in the drawing office.
Much use is made of clay models, which are made by model specialists
who work alongside the draughtsmen and build up the model as the drawing
proceeds. TVhile the Mission were at Chryslers they watched one of these
model makers fabricating a model of a blower casing and were much impressed
by the value of close liaison between the draughtsmen and the model maker.
In this connection it is interesting to record that Chrysler design their
castings as far as possible without ribs, and where ribs have to be used
they are kept as shallow as possible.
The other main feature of the Chrysler procedure is the extensive use
which is being made of static testing, using strain gauges, etc., and fre-
quently recording the results hiy means of the cathode ray oscillograph.
Numerous examples were seen, such as strain gauging of a crankcase in a
loading jig, vibration of elements of the crankshaft, etc. By adopting
these advanced methods, Chrysler have made very considerable modifications
to the original design before even running a main engine.
4A-2.09 Ranger. Long Island. This film is worthy of special mention in that they
are developing small engines with the same energy and in the same manner as
is normally employed for the largest military engines. The Engineering
Department has a total personnel of 423 and the Experimental Shop is
equipped with 70 modern machine tools.
At the present time the weekly production amounts to 80 six cylinder
engines and 30 twelve cylinder engines but the factory is planned for an
increase in this output to 150 six cylinder engines and 110 twelve cylinder
engines per week.
For a comparatively small firm the test equipment is extremely good.
The stands devoted to experimental work include 3 silenced main engine
dynamometers and 4 silenced single cylinder stands, together with modern
blower rigs etc., which are all housed in good cubicles and are provided with


equipment to reduce the temperature as low as minus 74°, with separate
instrument rooms.
Like Chryslers, Rangers are making considerable use of strain
gauging and other methods of static and dynamic tests. Strain gauges
are being used for such items as elements of the crankshaft, complete
crankshafts, rooker aims, rocker brackets etc.; the parts were
subjected to static loads in specially constructed stressing jigs.
Interesting crankshaft vibration tests were being made by
motoring the engine with the drive taken through a magnetic coupling,
by means of which vibrations of suitable periodicity could be super-
imposed on the natural vibrations of the crankshaft. By this means the
severity of vibration can be increased sufficiently to break the crank-
shaft if required.
The carburettor laboratory contained an altitude chamber large
enough to take the whole rear end of the engine complete with air
intake.
Wide use was being made of X-ray diffraction, mainly for the analysis
of surface stresses.
4/1-2.10 Lycoming, Williamsport. This firm produce a good range of training
engines, and the Mission considered that the Bagineering Department
staff of about 300 was just about adequate to deal properly with the
development of these engines. Two new engines, one of 2,470 and another
of about 3>300 cu.in. displacement, are both of the liquid cooled H
type, and in view of their size they must necessitate a considerable
development programme. Further than this, Lycoming have on hand the
development of 2 speed blowers and 2 speed counter rotating reduction
gears.
44-2.11 Hamilton Standard Propellers Hartford. This film undoubtedly benefits
from the close liaison with other members of United Aircraft, i.e.
Pratt and Whitney and Vbught-Sikorsky. The liaison between these
three firms and the planning of the policy is being carried out by the
United Aircraft Research Group under Mr. Frank Caldwell.
A great deal of development work is being carried out, both
on the new hub mechanism for the super hydrostatic and on steel and
composite propeller blades.
From a tour of the plant, it appeared that every endeavour is made
to provide specially equipped or designed machines for propeller
production, and that constant effort is being made to improve the present
set up and methods. Line production has been installed wherever
possible, and the floor space is fully utilised.
44-2*12 Curtiss Wright Propeller Division* The general layout and tooling is
on the same level as that of the Pratt and Whitney or Wright parent
engine factories and therefore behind the new American plants. The
engineering and development departments appear to be sound but the
amount of new development is considerably smaller than that being
carried out by Hamilton Standard.
44-2.13 The Aero Products Division of General Motors. This Company was
started by Mr. Blanchard, formerly with Curtiss Wright, primarily to make
steel bladed propellers. It was taken over by General Motors as one
of their divisions and started production about a year ago. Last February
they were employing about 4,000 and had an output of 20 propellers per day,
mostly 3 bladed types for Bell p. 39 Airacobras. The production is planned


to rise to 55 per day, by May with 60 $ sub-contracting, is a keen
though small firm with a good experimental shop and excellent laboratory
equipment. The shops are reasonably 'well laid out and have some in-
genious special machines. The design tf propeller blade is not a good
one for production but there is no doubt that Mr. Blanchard’s team are
fully aware of this, and better and cheaper methods of production are
being actively sought*.
4A-2.14 The Turbo Engineering Co. This Company has bean formed by the DeLaval
Co. to manufacture their exhaust driven turbo supercharger. At present
a great deal of the work is still dene in the DeLaval factory including
both machining and testing. The Turbo Engineering Co. have however,
recently moved into a separate factory a short distance from the DeLaval
plant. At the time of the Mission's visit they had only about 24 machine
tools, and had not really got enough plant to make a reasonable sized
experimental shop; however, the buildings for the production shops, which
had been partly built by renovafing an existing factory, were seen and were
practically ready for the installation of machinery.
Mr. Birmann, the Chief Engineer of the Engineering Co. was Chief
Engineer of DeLavals and his assistant Mr. Lerrocq was until recently with
the Allison Co. These two men have considerable experience in super-
charger and turbine design and with the backing of DeLaval and the active
support of the Navy Bureau of Aeronautics, it is believed that the Company
has great potentialities. The Burman type of inflow turbine has been used
as a light weight marine steam plant with considerable success.
4A-2.15 Simmon da Aerocessories Inc. This is an American branch of the British
Company and manufactures boost controls and hydraulic equipment, in
addition to a small amount of specialised electrical apparatus and some
experimental work on spark plug manufacture.
Hie boost control department consists of about 60 people. They have
in hand a considerable amount of development and experimental work, in-
cluding development of a single lever power control for Wright Held, and
it is doubtful whether they have got sufficient technical staff and ex-
perience to handle all this work, and at the same time deal adequately with
the problems arising in the manufacture of the boost controls for the
Bendix Carburettors being manufactured for Bristol engines. Development
work for Wright Field or Packard is almost certain to be given priority.
At present the boost controls are almost entirely sub-contracted and
the only work carried out at Simmon da factory is assembly and testing,
apart from some machining of experimental parts. Simmonds have a small
number of excellent light machine tools in their experimental shop and tool
room.
4A-2.16 Thompson Aircraft Products, Cleveland. The only works of this Company
which were visited were those producing inlet and exhaust valves and small
machines parts, mostly produced on automatics from bar. This plant
employs?,ooo men of whom 2,500 are non-productive. Hie method of producing
valves by the extrusion process is described in Chapter 4. The general
layout of the shops for this is quite good.
4A-2.17 Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co* A short visit was paid to this firm
chiefly to inspect the copper lead and plated silver bearing production,
notes on which are included in Fart B. The general layout of the shops is
good: a feature of the new factory is the provision made for staff welfare,
and the oantwen and staff changing and bathrooms are impressive.
4A-2.18 Rohr, San Diego. This Company manufactures power Units for the Consol-
idated B. 24 (Liberator) and Consolidated 183T3 (Coronado).
Great use is made of drop hammers using lead and Kirksite dies, and the
scale of tooling is more elaborate than for corresponding work in this country.
All the power units are built vertically, using line assembly, but
without mechanical conveyors. A good deal of work is being done on stain


less 3teel for exhaust ring shrouds etc*, but they are not manufacturing any
actual exhaust manifolds at the present time*
4A-2.19 Solar. This is quite a small company, specialising on exhaust manifolds
for in line and radial engines, with which they have great experience. Its
products enjoy a high reputation and are used on most American prototype air-
craft. Until recently practically all exhaust manifolds were formed in two
halves from stainless steel under drop hammers and were welded together.
Recently, however, mild steel pipes protected with vitreous enamel have been
introduced.
Solar designs of exhaust systems are now being manufactured by Fisher
Bodies in Detroit, using mechanical presses instead of drop hammers. 'Where-
as this must be a much cheaper process, it appears that the product is not
yet so satisfactory as the one produced by the slower methods used by Solar.
The Company is doing considerable development and experimental work on
spherical exhaust pipe joints and heat exchangers, and are getting an engine
and test bed for this work.
4A-2.20 Lawrence Engineering Co., New Jersey. This is a progressive firm of some
2500 employees at which about 50 are engaged on design and tools.
The Company makes auxiliary power plants for aircraft in 3 plants of
which No.l is engaged on Series 30> 15 h.p. 5 k.w* and Series 75 B, 37 h.p. 12
k.w. units. No. 3 produces Series 20A, 15 h.p. 5 k.w. in large production -
100 a day are coming out. Units are in demand by all the armed services as
well as by the Signals and MedLical Branches and the Company is finding diffi-
culty in maintaining supplies.
An interesting feature of the firm* s policy centred round the use of
electrical and other instrumental equipment in their engine development work.
Full use is made of Sperry M.L.T. vibration equipment and detonation pick up
units and cylinder indicating apparatus. Lawrence acknowledged the great
assistance in their development work afforded by such equipment.
4A-2.21 Bendix Products Division (of Bendix Aviation Corp.) South Bend, Ind.
This company has a total of 10,000 persons employed at the South Bend Plant
which conprises large shops engaged on a variety of products. There are about
250 people employed in the carburettor and fuel injection development plant and
there is in addition a complete carburettor production factory on the same site.
The standard of workmanship is high and the organisation of research and
production well balanced in regard to the carburettor products.
Women are employed to a large extent on the carburettor component testing
and assembly, while men operate the equipment used for air and fuel flow tests
of completed carburettors. The test benches and altitude boxes are up to date
and the processes and tests are well planned to keep pace with their production
flow.
4 A-2.22 Kinner Motors, Los Angeles. The Company is small and has fairly recently been
reconstructed. The policy of the firm has until the outbreak of war been limi-
ted to the production of engines for trainers, varying from 120 B.H.P. to 450
B.H.P.
The model now being concentrated upon is a 165 B.H.P. 5 cylinder radial
weighing about 325 lb. dry, and 375 lb. installed, with a diameter of 45 inches.
The No.l plant of about 50,000 sq.ft, employed 550 men making the 1 65
B.H.P. engine with an output of 150 per month* For a firm making a simple
training engine Kinners were well equipped with apparatus including a Miller
electrical torsiograph and vibrograph set, and the general workmanship and care
taken in the manufacture was impressive.
4A-2.23 The Stewart Warner Corporation. The Stewart Warner Corporation owns a North
and South Plant in Chicago and also controls the Bassick Co., Bridgeport, Conn;
a refrigeration plant at Indianapolis, the Green River Ordnance Plant at Dixon
111., and at Belville Ontario.


The North Plant make general purpose Heaters and aircraft Heaters,
instruments for aircraft and tanks, lubricating systems in co-operation with
the Tecalemit Ltd., England, and electrical parts of a secret nature.
In the South Plant fuses are made and the Indianapolis works produce
fuses and are now tooling up to make heat exchangers. The Bassick Co., and
the Green River Plant make shells and fuses. The North and South Chicago
Plants totalling 1,349*000 sq.ft, area employ 10,000 people of which ar®
women.
There are 94 persons who devote their entire time to the development of
aircraft heating equipment.
4A-2.24 Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co.. Minn. This is a large electrical
instrument Company which has specialised in the past in air conditioning plant
and electrical control equipment of all kinds. Since the war they have opened
an aviation division to deal with aircraft controls and have designed a turbo
supercharger control which is now in production and which promises to be a
sound contribution to the solution of the problem.
This firm has established a flight test section at the Minneapolis - St.
Paul airport where about six aircraft of modern types are being used for the
development of the turbo control and other electrical equipment which they
make.
General Electric Co.. West Lynn, Mass. There are two G.E. plants in the
Boston vicinity, the Lynn River Plant and the Everett Plant. The River Plant
forms the headquarters of the Turbo Division where Mr. Standerwick is the Chief
Engineer.
First class equipment is available for investigations on turbo units, and
the Everett plant is devoted purely to production of turbo units, and it is
interesting to note the speed with which this plant was erected. From break-
ing ground to completion of building took 8 months and on September 2nd 1941
50fo of the equipment was installed and 68 people began work.
The personnel of the plant now numbers 1824 working in 3 shifts of 8
hours each. The plant was laid out to produce 150 turbo units complete per
week - before it was completed the figure was stepped up to 300 per week.
This figure been surpassed and the output is now 400 turbo superchargers
per week and can be increased as soon as new design features are brought into
production - such as welded rotor buckets instead of dovetailed types.
CHAPTER 3 - ORGANISATION AND SCALE OF OUTPUT.
2|A-3«01 General. The expansion of the engine and propeller manufacture in America
has been planned on extensive lines by an industry which previously included a
small number of specialised firms With a considerable background of aero engine
manufacture. For the most part the American engine expansion was planned
earlier than for airframes, but even so the aero engine industry has been able
to draw on reserves of labour and machining capacity from the automobile
industry.
Prior to the war the aero engine industry in America, was practically
divided among two firms as regards series production. This has now been in-
creased to four majn groups of engine makers - two air cooled and two liquid
cooled. In some cases the expansion has remained under the parent organisa-
tion in other cases it has been entrusted to the automobile industry as
in the case of the Bristol shadow in England.
The aero ere*™* expansion in America has proceeded along sound and prog-
ressive lines and the present output of both military and training engines in
America is formidable and is ahead of the airframe requirements. Several ex-
tensive new plants are still being erected, with high class specialised machine
tools extensive tooling, which will not be in full operation until the
Spring of 1%4, by which time it would appear that the output of engines from
America will be on a very large scale indeed. First class, new, and in many
cases specialised machine tool equipment is used throughout all the engine man


ufacturing plants, extensive tooling and lino production is universally em-
ployed*
The demands of fabricated materials to meet the aircraft programs are
very great indeed and already difficulties with certain classes of material on
the airframe side have made themselves felt* No shortages of fabricated
materials are apparent on engine production at the present time but with the
considerable increase of output from several new plants , the question of
supplies of material in about 9 to 12 months' time will undoubtedly require
careful planning*
The general organisation set up is similar in principle to that used in
our factories, typical Divisions being Contracts, Finance, Personnel, Inspec-
tion, Engineering and Manufacturing. The first three Contracts, Finance
and Personnel, cover the normal functions as known in this Country* It is
usual for the Financial division to prepare daily tabulations of shop prod-
uction times, losses, etc* for use by the Production Organisation in increas-
ing shop efficiency, and it is felt that more practical information of this
type is prepared in America than in many of our Organisations*
The Personnel Division is responsible for all employment, welfare,
medical services, etc,, and forms an important part of the organisation, as
it is American practice to give greater consideration to these details than
is customary in this Country*
The greatest care is taken to make full use of the technical staff in
their technical capacity, and at a level of responsibility corresponding to
their status.
All offices and their printing, copying, model making, secretarial and
telephone facilities are first class* Administrative assistants deal with
much work which in Britain would require the attention of chief designers.
Junior leaders are encouraged t 6 accept responsibility and «»ke decisions,
and their seniors do not interfere with these minor decisions even tvimigh
they may not be in full agreement. Nevertheless the seniors know what is
decided and learn the worth of the Juniors; consequently it is rare for a
man to be promoted to a position he cannot adequately fill* This delega-
tion of responsibility allows the senior executives time to concentrate on
iiroortant matters, with sufficient leisure to be aware of (but not to dabble
in) the lesser affairs as well*
Inspection is often de-centralised and placed in the production line.
There does not appear to be any agreement on the position of this activity
in the organisation, as it has been seen under the control of the Engineer-
's* Manufacturing, and General Manager, and in one case, split between the
Production Manager for parts inspection and the General Manager for assembly
inspection.
The Engineering department covers all work from the initial design to
the issue of production drawings and is responsible for development and
research. The departments are well staffed with highly qualified produc-
tion minted personnel, and there is consequently a close liaison between the
department and the production side of the plant*
The Production Organisation usually consists of material control,
operation and plant layouts, tooling, time study standards, and production
control.
The Material Control Section is responsible for the determination of
quantities and the drawing up of delivery schedules, the follow up being


frequently left to the Buyer or Buyers. This practice obviously means
that the Production Control Section is entirely dependent on one or two
other departments for supplies, and this would not be expected to provide
a very high degree of co-ordination. This again is a debatable point on
which there are many different opinions, but there is much to be said for
giving the Production department oomplete control over all functions which
have a direct bearing on output. It is felt that the American factories
may develop on these lines when production overtakes the supply of raw
materials.
Programmes, schedules, etc., are wcrked out from the delivery programne
in great detail, and every possible attempt is made to enforce adherence to
dates, times, and methods specified. The Shop layout methods are based on
sound time study data and accurate operation layouts, and are used primarily
for the purpose of ensuring existence of adequate capacity for the fulfilment
of a specified pro grannie. This work is usually undertaken by the Standards
departments, who receive the layout of operations from the Tool Engineering
department. Standard times are entered against each operation, and this
information is used with the delivery programme for determining machine
loading* labour loading, and shop layout. Should it be found, when calcu-
lating the load on the Machine Shops, that there is insufficient capacity
to meet the programme, a requisition is prepared immediately for the purchase
of the additional number of machines required. It is important to note
that any changes of method or programmes are followed immediately by a
check on the loading, but it would be agreed that this provides a most use-
ful means of taking the necessary action in advance fir avoiding bottlenecks.
The Standards department is generally responsible for "the laying out of
both manufacturing and assembly shops. This is considered very thoroughly
in America and full use of previous experience has been made in the layout
of new factories, in order to obtain balanced production lines wherever
possible. Line production, is used extensively and such operations as
washing for swarf removal and heat treatment frequently take place in the
production line itself. The machines are arranged in operation sequence
and are generally placed close together to avoid an unnecessary amount of
movement between operations. Roller conveyors are widely used for the
movement of work between operations on detail manufacture, and continuously
moving conveyors are used for final assembly.
In this Country we are faced with additional problems introduced by
dispersal, and the provision of blast walls and shelters, but, nevertheless,
could benefit by more careful study when laying out both machine and
assembly shops.
It is usual in America to have a self-contained section responsible
for the design, ordering, obtaining, and storage of all tools, Jigs and
fixtures. The Tool Stores are run on similar methods to those normally
used in this Country, and all eonsumable tools are kept on a minimum stock
basis. Pull provision has been made for regular and systematic inspection
of all large tools and fixtures, in order that standard can be maintained.
Smaller tools, which are returned to Stores, are generally inspected, and
repairs effected before they are returned to the racks for re-issue.
The work of the Production Control department, in maintaining an even
flow through manufacturing shops, is simplified by line production, but it
is felt that the control exercised by this department is not up to the
standard as used by the better factories in this Country. A further point
which is open to criticism, is the fact that the issue of raw materials to
the shops is quite frequently authorised by Foramen, who, of course, are
attempting to work to the specified time schedules. This has been found
to be an unsatisfactory method in this Country, where a close control of
issue provides a more flexible means of maintaining a balanced flow and
ensuring declaration of scrap. Further, it was noted that the backing
in the Finished Parts Store was in most cases inadequate for the regular
feeding of assembly lines, although in some instances attempts were being
made to take out monthly shortage lists in the Finished Parts Stores. It
is appreciated that U.S. plants do not have to cope with dispersal problems,
and that consequently the methods they are using can more easily be made to
function. It is, however, very doubtful whether such methods could be ad-
vantageously employed in this Country.


Such observations as were possible in the limited time, indicated that
the quality of supervision in Both Offices and Shops was high, but probably
not quite up to the standard as seen in the airframe factories. The
training facilities for both Operators and Supervisors had been given close
attention, and will prove very beneficial to the industry now that the
skilled labour released from the automobile industry has been absorbed, and
it is becoming increasingly necessary to employ less skilled female labour.
Courses of training have been established for all operations, both in
Offices and Shops, and are run in collaboration with the local Technical
Schools and Colleges.
Although operation times are fixed by scientific methods, labour is
usually paid on flat rates, the one exception being Wrights (Patterson),
who were operating a group bonus soh&me. Working conditions in the newer
plants were excellent and welfare provisions up to a very high standard.
It was observed that, despite the absence of incentive payment, operator
productivity was uniformly high. A further point of interest was that
female labour in the engine and propeller factories was approximately 14$,
as against 35$ in the Airframe plants, but an increase can be expected in
America..
4A-3»02 Wright Aeronautical, Cincinnati.
Organisation. The main organisation is similar to normal practice seen in
America, with the one exception that the Buyer is not included in the
Material Control, but is responsible direct to the General Manager. In
this case the follow up of delivery of purchased orders remains with the
Buyer and is therefore divorced from Production Control. The sections
classified under the Production Organisation are not the self-contained
units as seen in other plants. It is felt that at the commencement a
similar organisation to that of the parent fira was set up and that • snail
changes have been made whidi have resulted in the above conditions, and may
not be permanent.
The Material Control is responsible for the preparation of both raw
material and finished part schedules, and for furnishing the purchase with
material requirements. The schedules are prepared from the delivery
programme, allowing a fabrication period of 4 months on raw materials re-
quired for purchase parts, 3 months on forgings and raw material for
fabricated parts, and 2 months on bought-out parts required on assembly
operations. Their functions do not cover the follow up of the purchased
orders, or the control of the Raw Material Stores, although sufficient in-
formation is maintained to make it possible for than to Urge the purchase
for anticipated shortages. The Material Control is also responsible for
work which has previously been seen under Production Planning and Control,
as they prepare and issue all shop orders direct to the shops and notify
Production Control in the form of a schedule of the finished part require-
ments. The Finished Parts Store also a Material Control responsibility.
From the above it will be seen that the Production Control activities
are limited and it is felt that in practice it must be difficult to draw a
line of damarkation between the two.
The main activities of the Production Engineering Division fall into
the following groups:-
Process or operation layout
Tool Design
Machine Procurement
Plant Planning and machine loading.
Operation layout sheets are prepared in detail from drawings for all items
that are to be made in the shops,, a list of such items being received in
schedule form from the Material Control. Operation standard times are
received from the Standards or Time Study Division, and records are main-
tained showing the machine loading position. All tools are designed by
this department and orders placed on their own Tool Roam, or on the Purchase


department, and punched cards are used as a means of maintaining the
necessary records for the follow-up of deliveries according to schedule.
The maintenance and storage of tools is also the responsibility of this
section, and it was noticed that provision had been made to inspect
cutting tools on their return to the Stores and for a periodical check to
be made on all tools and gauges on the shop floor. The standard times
received from the Standards department are used for shop layout, which was
also a responsibility of the Production Engineering Division. It will be
noted, therefore, that the Standards Division is mainly concerned with the
determination of standard times and for labour valuation.
Material Control
Functions:
1. Receiving delivery programmes fr>om the Sales department and preparing
schedules covering the requirements of raw materials, bought-out
parts and shop orders.
2. Receiving parts lists from the Engineering department, and breaking
down into parts for assembly and parts for manufacture.
3* Preparing a punched card for each part, showing quantity per engine,
and tabulating a parts list in part number order.
4* Extending tabulated parts list by number of engines on order, and
preparing an assignment list.
5* Obtaining material specification, size and cutting size from the
Production Engineering department for all items shown on the assign-
ment list.
6. Preparing requisitions for materials, purchase parts, and sub-
contracted parts, and issuing to the Purchase department.
?• Preparing shop order request forms for made here parts and issuing
to the Shop Planning Section.
8. Receiving operation sheets from the Production Engineering and pre-
paring shop order forms, typing material requisitions separately,
on which an increase of is made to cover scrap.
9. Releasing orders to the shops and entering an a follow-up card.
10. Receiving finished parts into the Finished Parts Store, and compiling
a shortage list of all items not up to schedule.
Production IShgineering
Functions:
1. Receiving from the Material Control a list of all made here parts.
2. Receiving blue prints from the Engineering departments.
3 • Preparing in detail the layout of operations and Routing sheets.
4* Preparing a tool order card for each tool or gauge required.
5. Preparing a punched card for each tool required, showing the tool
number, part number, tool description and size, and the date required
6. Tabulating a list of all tools required for follow-up purposes.
7. Designing tools and preparing tool orders for issue to the Tool Room
Purchase department.


8. Controlling sool Stores and all jig and tool maintenance,
9. Preparing machine requirement requisitions for issue to the Purchase
department.
10. Checking all gauges in the shops daily, and inspecting all cutting
tools on their return to Stores.
11. Receiving standard times from the Standards Division and laying
out the shops to meet the required programme.
Production Control
Functions:
1. Receiving schedule of finished part requirements from the Material
Control.
2. Receiving shop orders frcm the Material Control.
3. Procuring materials from the Raw Material Stores and issuing to the
shops, moving parts in manufacture from one operation to another.
4* Receiving shortage lists from the Finished Parts Store and chasing
accordingly.
5. Maintaining the necessary records for controlling the flow of work
through the shops.
6. Receiving engineering change forms and agreeing when a change can
he incorporated.
Standards Division
Functions:
1. Determining from time study the standard times for each dperation
as shown on the operation sheet received from Production Engineering.
2. Preparing labour load requirements.
3. Preparing job valuation lists.
4* Receiving from the Cost department tabulation showing weekly shop
efficiency.
Purchase department
Functions:
1. Receiving schedules and requisitions? for the purchase of raw
materials, purchase parts, sub-contracted parts, tools, gauges,
machines, etc., and issuing official orders.
2. Maintenance contact with the Material Control Division of the War
Production Board.
3. Maintaining necessary order record cards, showing orders placed and
parts received, and following up deliveries according to schedule.
Organisation charts and tabulated data on factory areas and labour
will be found on the following pages.


Wright Aeronautical Cincinnati
1822- R. 2600 B 14 cyl. Air Cooled
Area
Productive 2,917,201 sq.ft.
Non-Productive 1,458,956 sq.ft.
i
Total 4,375,977 sq.ft.
% Store of Total 18jS
Employees
Productive Labour 12,224 = 46$
Non-Productive Labour 14,363 = 54$
Total 26,587
Female (Productive) 35$
Female (Non-Productive) 35$
Engineering Staff (Design carried out by parent fim
at Paterson.}
Absenteeism 6$
Sub-Contracting 65$
Spares Deliveries 16$
Labour Summary
A. Productive Labour Total
Magnesium Foundry 1,176
Aluminium Foundry 2,598
Machine Shop 8,227
Plating 102
Heat Treat 121
Total Productive Labour 12,224
B. Non-Productive Labour
Inspection 2,386
Tool Room 896
Job Shop 423
Maintenance 2,378
Misc. Machine Shop 583
Misc. Foundries 601
Assembly 1,713
Test 466
Offices 4.917
Total Non -Pro duct ive Labour 14,363


4A-3«03 Allison, Indianapolis.
Organisation. There is close liaison between production and engineering
and it is usual practice far the executive of each department to hold
weekly meetings to discuss production problems*
Although the main division of the organisation is similar to normal
practice, the outlook is rather different* It is considered that it is
the responsibility of the Material Control to make provision for all parts
to be delivered to the Finished Parts Store in accordance with the assembly
programme. For this to be done, they mist furnish the materials and
place the orders on their own shops according to schedule, and look upon the
Fabricating Shop as one of the Suppliers. The Raw Material Store,
Finished Parts Store, and Shipping department are therefore separated from
Production and constitute part of the Material Control division*
Schedules are prepared by the Material Control section, calling for
finished parts for assembly approximately 1 month, and raw materials ap-
proximately 3 months, in advance of the shipping programme* The department
is sub-divided into groups for scheduling, material planning, ordering,
and follow-up, and records are maintained showing the current position against
scheduled position* No record is maintained showing materials allocated
and available, as it is the responsibility of the shop production foreman
to prepare a move ticket for material issue according to schedule* It is
difficult to see why this practice has not lead to serious troubles when
the shops have run ahead of schedule on so many items.
The Tool Planning and Process section is self-contained and comes under
the control of the Works Manager* They are responsible for the preparation
of tool schedules and for the laying out in detail of operations for each
part. The design, requisitioning on the Buyer, and following up of all
tools and gauges, is controlled by this section, and it is normal practice
for them to inspect all tools received, and to try out all layouts before
issuing to the shops* Approximately of the tools are made outside
and the tool room is therefore regarded more as a maintenance and repair
unit than as a tool manufacturing shop*
The standard times set in the Standards department are based on time
study and are used by this section far machine loading, labour requirements
and shop layout*
The Production Control section was conspicuous for absence of olerical
data* Schedules are built up in a central department monthly, giving the
future requirements* These requirements are issued to each shop control
foreman, who estimates the shop efficiency to meet programme* No shop
orders are issued, the material being procured from the store on receipt
of a move ticket made out by the foreman* These tickets are prepared


for all moves from one department to another, but not internally in a
department. The quantities of parte produced each day is entered against
the schedule, and a ebpy given to the central office for managerial
purposes. No other central records are maintained.
The Service department is responsible to the General Manager, and
issue to Material Control the monthly requirements of spares to be des-
patched. Control is maintained on the International Business Machine
equipment by punching monthly delivery requirements cards. As parts are
shipped, the respective cards are transferred from a live file to a dead
from which a tabulation can be taken out at any time for follow—up
purposes. *
The Service are also responsible for all service manuals, and for the
training of approximately 200 ground staff every two weeks.
The Inspection is divided into two sections, one over the fabrication
of parts and responsible to the Works Manager, and the other over assembly
and test, and responsible to the General Manager.
Material Control
Functions:
1. Receiving parts list and blue prints from the Engineering department.
2. Preparing schedules covering raw materials, bought-out parts and
fabricated parts.
3. Determining material requirements and preparing a material
requirements card for issue to the Buying Section.
Placing all official orders on the Suppliers.
5. Maintaining order record cards, showing orders placed, and goods
received, and following up deliveries.
6. Preparing and issuing to the Suppliers, full schedule of
requirements.
7. Receiving materials and controlling Raw Material Stores.
8. Receiving finished parts into the Finished Part Stores, and
allocating to assembly spares.
9* Despatching parts of materials, and preparing the necessary
despatch notes.
10. Maintaining perpetual stock checking in all Stores,
Planning and Tooling
Functions:
1. Receiving blue prints and release cards from the Material Control
department.
2. Laying out all operations, and preparing operation sheets.
3. Designing tools and preparing tool orders for issue to the Tool
Room or Tool Supplier.
A. Maintaining the necessary records for following up deliveries
of all tools and gauges.
5. Receiving, inspecting, and trying out, all tools before passing to
the Tool Stores.
6. Controlling both tool and machine repairs and maintaining the
necessary records for control purposes.


Standards department
Functions:
1. Receiving operation sheets from Tool Planning and determining
standard operation times*
2. Maintaining machine loading cards and issuing machine request
forms to the Purchase as necessary.
3. Preparing labour requirements.
4. Laying out manufacturing and assembly shops from time study data
to meet required schedule.
Production Control
Functions:
1. Preparing schedules, giving the monthly requirements for both
manufacturing and assembly shops, and issuing to the shop
control Foreman.
2. Maintaining records of completed parts against the schedule, and
issuing shortage lists as neoessary.
3. Preparing and issuing sub-contract rectification orders.
Service.
Functions:
1. Preparing monthly despatch schedules for all spares items, and
issuing to the Material Control department.
2. Preparing a punched card for each spares item, and tabulating
monthly requirements for control purposes.
3. Receiving copies of the despatch notes for spares, and tabulating
the delivery position, as and when it is required.
4. Preparing and maintaining all service manuals.
5. Receiving retrospective modification notes and controlling the
issue of parts.
6. Training ground staff personnel for the Army Air Force.
Inspe ction. The inspection organisation is peculiar in that the parts
inspection canes under the Works Manager whereas the Quality Manager who is
responsible for inspection of engines after green runs and for testing,
reports direct to the General Manager.
Allison, Indianapolis
Types V. 1710 12 cyl.Liquid
Cooled
Area
Productive 1,530,020 sq.ft.
Non-Productive 472,455 sq.ft.
Total 2,002,475 sq.ft.
% Store of Total 12$


Employees
Productive 12,334 = 73$
Non-Productive 4,586 = 27$
Total • ' 16,920
Female 22$
Engineering Staff (incl. in
above) 1,000
Absenteeiaa 10$
Sub-Contracting 70$
Spares Deliveries 18$
4A-3.04 Packard, Detroit
Organisation, The main divisions of the organisation are very similar
to practice common in America. It will be noted from the Organisation
Chart that the Chief Inspector is placed under the oontrol of the General
Manager. The Engineering division is responsible for design, develop-
ment, experimental, test and service, and issue of production drawings,
although under the existing contract, there is very little design work
necessary. It will be noticed that the Metallurgical department is under
separate control from the Engineering. This arrangement is not common,
but is working satisfactorily, as there is close liaison between the two.
The production organisation may be divided into four main sections,
Standards, Master Mechanic, Purchase and Production Control, and the Shops,
the activities of all thede Sections being co-related under the Manager
of the Aircraft division.
The Standards Division are responsible for the layout of details on
broad lines, showing only the operations and shops in which the operations
will be performed. Fran this stage onwards the Master Mechanic division
complete the layout as will be seen later. The Standards division may be
termed the Time Study department. They are responsible for all standard
times, labour loading under classifications, machine loading and shop
capacity, ordering machines, estimating cost of changes, etc., shop layout,


and for maintaining the necessary records* When determining machine
oapacity, allowances are added to cover Spares 1% Scrap % and nmchine
breakdown 10ft. One other fraction that is under the control of the
Standards Bivision, and which does not seem to be correctly placed in the
organisation, is the control of Tool Stores. It is usual under American
practice for these Stores to be the responsibility of the Section dealing
with design, ordering and follow-up of tools.
The Master Mechanic Division are responsible far completing the layout
received from the Standards division and for the design of all tools, Jigs,
etc., required to perform the operations. They place orders on the Pur- *
chase division for all items for which bought-out orders are required and
maintain records for their follow-up. The Master Mechanic division also
control the Tool Hoorn and are responsible for machine and tool repairs.
The Rirchase and Production Control Division oovers two distinct ac-
tivities. They are responsible for the determination of material re-
quirements, scheduling, placing all outside orders, following-up
all orders, receiving, delivering and storing them. Ihey are also res-
ponsible for the preparation of shop orders, internal progress, and
despatch.
It will be noticed from the description of the above three divisions
that there is a very thin line of demarkation between a number of their
functions and duplication of certain records has resulted. All details
are well covered in the set up, but a re-arrangemen t of certain divisional
fractions would give definite advantages.
Standards Division
Phnctions:
1. Receiving engineering release cards (ditto master) from the
Engineering Department.
2. Determining the operations and shops, and attaching this in-
formation to the ditto master, which is passed to the Master
Mechanics Division.
3* Receiving rough copy of the operation sheet from the Master
Mechanics Division (Process Section), and entering the type of
labour and standard time against each operation.
4* Preparing group standard time summary sheets from the
operation sheet.
5« Preparing labour load under classifications, and transferring
to summary sheets.
6. Preparing machine loading cards firom the operation sheets.
7. Preparing machine loading sumaary sheets and determining if
sufficient machine capacity is available, and the issuing of
machine request form, as and when necessary.
8. Passing operation sheets, group standard time sunmary Sheets,
direct labour time sunmary sheets and direct labour load
sunmary sheets, to the Master Mechanics Division for dupli-
cating and issue.
9* Laying out both manufacturing and assembly shops, working from
standard times and delivery programme.
10. Receiving from the Accounts department a daily tabulating showing
shop efficiency.


11* Controlling Tool Stores and Tool Croups.
12. Receiving change release forms from the Engineering department and
estimating the labour and tool cost of the change for discussion
at a weekly Manufacturing and Engineering Change Committee Meeting.
Master Mechanics Division
Functions:
1. Receiving release card from the Standards Division and preparing
an operation sheet in detail for each part and assembly.
2. Designing all necessary jigs and tools and the placing of orders
on the Tod Room or Purchase department.
3* Controlling the Tool Room.
4. Maintaining the necessary records for following up tool
deliveries on both the Tool Room and Purchase.
5. Repairing all machines and tools as necessary, and maintaining
the necessary records for control purposes.
6. Duplicating and issuing all forms received from other Sections.
Fugdhasing and Production Control Division
Functions:
1. Receiving blue prints and release card from the Engineering depart-
ment for all details and assemblies*
2. Preparing delivery schedules for raw materials, bought-out parts,
and works orders.
3# Determining the material ns<guirements and entering on a material
usage slip. (One slip per part number)
4. Preparing a material requisition for issue to the Buyer.
5* Maintaining order record cards, showing materials ordered and
received, and following up according to schedule.
6. Controlling the Receiving and Raw Material Stores.
7. Preparing and issuing shop orders to the Material Foreman.
8. Maintaining production control records in the shop, and preparing
daily shortage lists.
Psckard, Detroit
Type* V.1650 12 oyl. Liquid cooled
Area
Productive 1,878,284 sq.ft.
Non-Productive . 240.357 sq.ft.
Total 2,118,641 sq.ft.
Bsployees
Productive 11,481 ■ IGfL
Non-Productive 4,855 » 3C %
Total 16,336


Female Labour 12$
fiigineering Staff (Design carried out by parent firm)
Absenteeism 10$
Sub-Contracting 50$
Spares Deliveries 17$
4A.-3.05 Hamilton Standard Propellers, Hartford
Organ! sation. The of the main organisation are made according
to common practice bat the breakdown under the Factory Manager differs
slightly. The engineering, layout of operation, material order and
material control for the three plants, Hartford, Pancatuck and Norwich,
are all centralised at Hartford, with a Material Control Representative
in each plant, responsible for recording and despatching.


The functions of the Material Control Divis ion nay be dividied into
Material Requirements and Production Control, The Requirements Section
is responsible for scheduling, determining material requirements, placing
orders on the Purchase department and Shops, and for seeing that correct
distribution of material is made to the other plants. The Production
Control Section is responsible for the Raw Material Store, Finished
Parts Store and control of production, although much of the responsibility
of meeting the schedule falls on the Shop Foreman. Schedules are issued
by the Sales department monthly, showing shipping requirements of both
propellers and spares, and are used to compile priority lists for the shops
based an the month's shortage position. This form of control suggests
that the schedules of shipping requirements as issued by the Sales, differ
considerably from month to month and can only have a detrimental effect on
output. It is felt that the necessity of issuing requirements monthly
may be partly due to two items that were noted, and which were not conduc-
tive to high production. First, there were a considerable number df small
contracts in operation, all of which were controlled separately and could,
with the permission of the Army authorities, be combined Into larger
contracts. Seoondly, there was an excessive amount of splitting of
batches in the shops, over which there was no adequate control.
The Purchase department cover the requirements of all three plants,
and are responsible for the follow>-up according to schedule.
The Equipment Engineering department, although a small section, are
doing the bulk of process planning. Blue prints are prepared, showing all
operations necessary before the layout is drawn up, and from the blue print,
machines and fixtures are determined to meet production requirements.
Simple but efficient visible records are maintained, showing the ordering
and follow-up position of all machines and fixtures. A small section of
equipment demonstrators take each machine on delivery and see that it will
give the estimated output before it is passed to the production line.
Apart from the initial layout of special plant, the sectional functions
cover improvements to the present set up. Before any change is made,
the final cost of the equipment, and the final production cost of the part,
are both very closely examined.
Tool Engineering is responsible for the completion of the tooling as
shown on the operation sheet for standard tools and machines not handled
by the Equipment Engineer. Approximately of tool drawing requirements
are sub-contracted, and very little tool manufacture is done in the Tool
Room which is considered as a maintenance unit only. The maintenance of
tools is the responsibility of the Tool Engineer in the main plant only;
at both Pancatuck and Norwich it becomes the responsibility of the Shop
Superintendent•
A very sound step has been taken to provide additional machine tools
and fixtures, etc. in all cases of key jobs where a breakdown would cause
a hold up. This additional equipment is put on to the production line as
soon as it becomes available, and replaces the oldest equipment in use,
which is in turn sent for complete overhaul before being returned to the
production line to replace the next oldest. In this way, all equipment
is subject to the periodical overhaul.
Material Control
Functions:
1. Receiving parts list and drawings from the Engineering department,
and breaking down into assemblies.
2. Preparing a material requirements list (Requesting material
specification from the Tool Engineering, where necessary)
3* Preparing and issuing to the Purchase, requisitions for
materials sad purchase parts.
4. Maintaining order records for follow-up with the Purchase.


5. Receiving monthly shop requirements from the Sales, and issuing
to the Shop Foreman monthly shop schedules. (Requirements
increased to cover spares)
6. Preparing and issuing to the Stores all shop orders.
7. Receiving copy requisition from the Stores as materials are issued
and entering on order issue record. *
8. Receiving materials in Raw Material Store, and issuing against
Foreman's request. (The shop order is issued with the materials)
9. Maintaining raw material Stock records.
10. Receiving, parts in Finished Parts Stores, and allocating to
production and spares. 8
11. Building up groups of parts for issue to assembly.
12. Receiving schedule of spares from the Sales. Despatching and
preparing the necessary despatch notes.
Equipment Engineering
Functions:
1. Receiving drawings from the Engineering department.
2. Laying out operations by preparing a sequence of small drawings,
Chewing each operation.
3* Determining any special machines or fixtures required.
4. Preparing a summary sheet from the operation drawings, and issuing
to Tool Engineering.
5. Preparing requisitions for issue to the Purchase for any special
machines or fixtures.
6. Maintaining visible edge records for follow-up purposes with the
Purchase department.
7. Receiving special machines and equipment, setting up, and demon-
strating to shops* supervision.
8. Investigating and improving current methods of production.
Tool Bagineering
Functions:
1. Receiving release forms and lists of part numbers from the
Engineering department.
2. Receiving delivery programme from the Sales.
3- Preparing a summary sheet of operations, working from the drawing
and from information received monthly from the Equipment
Engineering Section.
4. Checking tooling capacity, and seeing that sufficient tools and
gauges are a valid) le for the shops or Inspection to meet the
required programme.
5. Estimating tooling costs.
6. Issuing operation sheets.


7* Entering against each opezation the standard times, and preparing
machine loading info mat ion for issue to the Factory Manager's
office#
8# Preparing list of tool requirements, and tool drawings, for issue
to the Tool Room or Purchase department#
9- Maintaining order records for following up delivery of tools#
10# Inspecting tools as received, and controlling Tool Stores#
11# Repairing tools and maintaining the necessary records for
cost and progress purposes.
Purchase department
Functions:
1# Receiving order authority from the Sales department#
2# Receiving requi sit ions for the purchase of raw materials,
purchased or subcontracted parts, standard jigs, tools etc#,
and issuing to Supplier#
3# Requesting drawing from the Engineering department for all
purchase parts, covered by the companies part number, for
issue to the Supplier#
4# Maintaining order record cards, showing orders placed and goods
received, and following up delivery according to schedule.
5# Preparing delivery programme for each Supplier, covering require-
ments for the next six months, and obtaining agreement with
Supplier.
£• Receiving monthly material requirements from the Material Control,
and checking against the schedule to see that each item has
been covered#
Hamilton Standard Propellers, Hartford.
Area
Productive 529,960 sq.ft.
Non-Productive 166,440 sq.ft.
Total 696,400 sq.ft.
$ Stores of Total 16$
Employees
" Productive 4,222 • 59$
N on-Pro du ct ive 2,922 = 4$
Total 7,144
Female Lab cur 25$
Absenteeism 7$
Experimental & Test (incl. in above) 214
Sub-Contracting 64$


Hamilton Standard ftropellers, Hartford
Labour Suamary
A. Productive Labour
Total
Hub 175i0
Blade 1,804
Assembly 4$ 5
Plate, Heat Treat etc. 43
Total Productive Labour 4,222
B. Non-Productive Labour
Engineering 257
General Accounting, Factory Accounting
Treasury and Timekeeping 157
Purchasing 3 6
Tool and Equipment Engineering etc. 43
Personnel, Employment and Welfare 36
Sales, Service and General Office 179
Factory Administration 21
Receiving and Rough Stores 71
Inspection 772
Finish Stores, Materials & Despatching,
Scheduling* Requirements 308
Service Repair 28
Experimental and Test 214
Shipping 129
Maintenance 543
Master Crib 28
Miscellaneous IQQ
Total Non -Product ive Labour 2, 922


CHAPTER 4 - ENGINE AND PROPELLER PRODUCTION PROCESSES AND EQUITMENT
Engine Production Shop Layout and Planning. Some details are given later
in this Chapter of tHe special machines ana manufacturing methods which were
seen, hut the most important lessons are to he learnt from the general
planning and laying out of the American engine factories and in the ad-
ministrative details.
Efficient planning is considered the most important contribution to
successful production and everything possible is done from the start to
make for smooth running of the plant.
The general practice is to keep all the lines working on similar parts,
such as gears, close together, rather than to make any attempt to arrange
the machining lines in any relation to the sub-assembly lines. There are
exceptions to this in the paae of major parts or assemblies, suoh as water
oooled cylinder assemblies and orankoaaes. At Alliaon, for example, the
major components of the cylinder assemblies flow from the machine lines to
the sub-assembly lines and a small buffer stock of components is kept in
the shops. However, in general praotioe, particularly on parts, the
components pass from the machine shop into finished stores before being
delivered to the bins Which are placed alongside the assembly lines or
benches. Conveyors are extensively employed, both overhead and at floor
level, or of the roller type, either gravity or manually operated. The
height of roller conveyors is carefully studied to suit the height of the
machine tool tables, eto. and where a change in height is required
pneumatic lifts are arranged to raise a section of the tracks. in other
oases pneumatic or eleotrio hoists with quick action grips or hooks arc
provided.
In general the operation on eaoh machine is planned to be carried out
in the time neoessary to produce the planned output of engines and if
time is longer than that necessary, the operation is dealt with by breaking
down into two or more parts rather than by duplicating of machines.
Where an operation or a sequence of operations takes considerably leas
time than ia available, then the machine or groups of machines are only
operated on one of the three shifts, or in some oases during only port of a
shift and the operators are moved to other machines. In hardly any oases
are machines set up for different Jobs, and once a Jig has been fixed to a
machine, it remains there until alterations or repairs are necessary. This
means that the utilisation of some machines ia not very high, and a number
of idle machines were Seen, in most factories. In some oases this was
beoause the factories have not yet reached their peak outputs but in many
oases certain machine tools will never be utilised for more than 25 to 50
per cent of the time.
This state of affairs seemed at first rather unsatisfactory but we were
assured many times that aaohine tool supply is no longer a bottle-neck and
that the War Production Board will very shortly be turning over a number of
machine tool manufacturers to other work. This is a matter of considerable
importance beoause it should mean that in the future there should be leas
difficulty in obtaining machine tools than has previously been experienced.
Tools are tested for ao many pieces per grind and an economical quantity
is fixed whioh is not exceeded so that the amount of grinding or
re-sharpening is required. By this method the life of Gutters is greatly
increased, and the planning of the tool requirements simplified.
In order to enable urgent modifications to be embodied quickly and
if neoessary before the tools and fixtures are completed, a number of
factories have special departments, e.g. the Wright Cincinnati plant which
makes only one type of engine has an exceedingly well equipped Job Shop of
170 machine tools including 4 Jig borers.
Machine Tools and Fixtures. Machine shop praotioe and machines are fair-
ly standardised throug!hout the industry and do not differ appreciably from
those used in this country. Wherever possible, standard types of machines
with special fixtures are used, but where they can be used advantageously


special machines of standardised design are built for special purposes
and in many oases use a high percentage of standard parts.
In a few oases, entirely special machines such as the special
Jackson or Helling orankpin turning machines are used. Another type of
machine which is fairly freely used is really a simplification for a single-
operation of a standard machine. Such machines are simplified lathes or
drilling machines, having fixed speeds and feeds, and are used because of
their lower cost.
Jigs and fixtures are of robust design and, generously ribbed for
strength. Great use is made of automatic hydraulic or pneumatic damping,
and these are often arranged with a toggle action so that a failure of the
power supply will not release the work, great attention is paid in the
design of these fixtures to the cleaning away of swarf, etc. through blew
off holes conveniently arranged in the base.
Removal of Swarf and Puttings. Removal of cuttings is continuous and
in sdme oases conveyors run under the machines depositing the cuttings on
platforms where they drain before being put into oentrifugers for the
removal of the maximum amount of cutting oil. Considerable use is
of hydraulic brloketting presses which press the swarf into cakes about V
diameter and 3" thick. Swarf in this form is much easier to handle and
commands a higher price from scrap merchants.
4&-4.02 Machine Shop Bquipaent and !Prooesses.
———- —■ —■ —- —run (i 'll
Gear Cutting. This is in general carried out on conventional machines.
The only noteworthy points are the excellent results being obtained with
Gleason Revere Roughers, which are used for roughing bevelled gears and
are extremely fast cutting machines, and the use by Wright Aeronautical at
Cincinnati of a multi spindle bobbing machine for producing the pinions for
their 20 pinion epicyolic reduction gear. One of these machines is
capable of producing the full output for the Cincinnati Ssgine Plant.
Gear Shaving. Goar shaving has been used for some years in the automo-
bile industry but was introduced on a considerable scale into the aircraft
industry by the Allison Company using machines made by the National Broach
Company. Other aircraft manufacturers are showing considerable interest
in this and the Wright plant at Cincinnati have installed some of these
machines although they are not yet in use.
The production engineer at Allison stated that gear shaving will not
correct profile errors and that its chief advantage is in obtaining a good
finish and some improvement in pitch accuracy. The Wright Company are,
however, hoping to get some oorreotion of profile errors by shaving and that
this is possible is claimed by the manufacturers of the machine.
Gear Hardy ing. All the engine firms visited made great use of die
quenching of gears. Two types of machines are used. One is the conven-
tional Gleason hydraulic machine in which the die and gear to be hardened
and lowered into the oil and the other is a new made by Tfamvif4i»
of Chicago* In this machine the gears and die are not submerged into the
oil but the oil is forced through the holes in the dies and ground the gears*
Both types of machines are automatic*
Gear Steels* Where grinding after carburising is possible it is usual
to use a nickel chrome hardening eteel such as Si!*432 which be
refined by a single heat treatment, and to carburise in gas and not in compound
as in British practice*
In certain oases where parts cannot be ground or where distortion is
likely to be particularly serious, nitriding is used* An interesting example
of this is the annular gear on the Cyclone. This gear is at present out on
a Fellows and then nitrided and lapped* It is proposed in order to get greater
accuracy to introduce a shaving operation after cutting the teeth and before
nitriding.
Another interesting development is the use by Pratt & Whitney of flame
hardened tool steel pinions in their dual rotation reduction gear. These


gears are shaved, and by eliminating the grinding operation it has been
possible to make pinions in one piece which considerably simplifies the
design. While there is nothing new in the flame hardening of gears, the
adoption of this principle on a high duty aircraft engine is believed to
be novel*
Gey Grinding* The majority of American gears are ground on form
grinding' s of the Detroit type, but quite considerable use is made
of Pratt & Whitney machines of the generating type, which are generally
agreed to do a better job*
Badiuaing Gears* The general standard of finish of the radiusing of the
ends of the gear teeth and the removal of sharp corners is very high* Some
experiments have been mode with machines for producing the radius on the
ends of the teeth but except in the case of very large gears hand methods
seem to be preferred*
Beduotiyi Gears* Both Allison and Packard reduction gears have & modified
involute form* "The departure from the true involute is definitely
defined and shown on a drawing by means of a graph*
Deflieg Profile Milling Machine for Impeller Guide Vanes.
This machine has been specially designed by Deflieg for the milling
of the rotating guide vanes used on Allison and Merlin blowers. Although
details of this machine have previously been made known in this country
and a similar method is used at the Ford Merlin faotory, it is felt worth
while to describe it again because it is known that the development of
blowers using this type of rotating guide vane is being carried out
elsewhere and also because there have been certain reoent alterations
developments is the method used*
These machines have hydraulic feed controlled by cams to suit the
contours of the vanes* The milling is carried out by cylindrical spiral
fluted cutters of approximately 3" diameter* The curved form of the back
of the plate is form milled using suitable end mills* The operation is
semi-automatic, electrical contact knock off stops being employed* These
are so arranged that they will repeat within *001"*
Allison produce the vanes on these machines fromfbrgings, but Packard
have found that it is most economical to use plain blanks and to form the
vanes roughly by oblique drilling at the roots and sawing out the triangular
pieces between the vanes on a Do* all band saw.
In the milling operation suitable locations are arranged at the back
of each blade for steadying operations during both sawing nHinng.
It has been found that rotors produced on machines of this type
require less material to be removed for balancing than rotors produced by
the usual milling process, also the finish is excellent and the minimum
amount of polishing is necessary*
Foard Connecting Rod Polishing Machine*
This machine is shown diagram
atically in Fig. 1*
It is arranged to polish both
Master and Artioulated Bods* The
machine consists of & suitable circular
table round which are disposed four
stations, one of which is used for
loading purposes only* The other
stations are a series of polishing heads
starting with a rather coarse grade of
polishing wheel and finishing up on a
second similar machine with a finely
greased polishing mop*
Fig. 1.


The rods are mounted on a fixture which is rotated on a cam controlled
carrying plate which allows the distance between the grinding wheel and
any part of the rod to be the same at any time* The rod, therefore, is
presented to the wheel and is rotated against the wheel, retaining the
correct shape* The diameter of the wheel, however, does not permit the
polishing of the comers between the pin holes and the rod proper* This
operation is extra and is carried out by hand on another machine.
Baush multi-head tapping machine.
Multiple tapping is a recent innovation in
America and has been gradually introduced during the past two years* The
main contribution to its success is the employment of Master guide screws
which control the spindle feed* There are examples of multi-tapping up to
96 spindles and it is safe to say thfit defective work is less than by
tapping through a Jig by hand* It is essential, however, that careful
inspection of all taps be made prior to use, and it is the practice in
most factories to check for thread form and effective diameter and to use
these taps in groups whose limits do not vary beyond •0005". Multi-tapping
is in universal use at the Packard factory in Detroit, who use a machine
manufactured by the Baush Machine Company.
Mailing Crankshaft Turning Machine.
This type of machine has been used in the American automobile industry
for some time and is used by Packard for machining the Merlin crankshaft
and by Cadillac for the Allison shaft. In this machine the shaft is
rotated about the Journal centres for turning the cr&nkpins and facing the
webs and balance weights* On the Merlin shaft all six pins are turned
simultaneously in 18 minutes by reciprocating tools* This machine costs
£B3oo*
Multi-Head Horimontal Drilling Machines*
In all the firms visited considerable use is made of special multihead
Fig. 2. Greenlee multi-head drilling machine.


drilling and tapping machines* These machines are built up from standardised
components and although built for special purposes are reasonably adaptable
in the sense that they can accommodate small changes, or different designs
of the same components* An example of a Greenlee machine of this type
is shown in Fig* 2.
Multi-Spindle Boring Machines*
Standard types of precision boring beads are marketed by Barnes and
Exoello in America and these heads are freely used in the industry for
making up special multi-spindle boring machines* These heads are arranged
with an integral electric motor drive for high speeds within a generous
range and for fine feeds, giving a maximum travel of between 6" and 9".
An example of their use is on the P&ok&rd Merlin wheel ease which
calls for 11 bores to be machined* The machine on which this operation is
performed is made up of a east iron bed, in the centre of which is fixed
a box jig* Around this jig are suitably placed 11 standard Barnes head
spindleB which carry boring and facing tools which are supported in long
bushes mounted in bosses on the box jig*
The 11 heads are electrically controlled from a Master panel to ensure
that no interfering of one spindle with another takes place* In other words
where the distance between the bores does not permit two spindles working
simultaneously, the controls are inter-looked so that one spindle cannot be
allowed to enter until the other one has finished its work and withdrawn*
The complete boring of the Merlin or&nkoase, including the recessing of
the main journals, is carried out on a machine equipped with Barnes heads;
this machine consists of a long bed at each end of which the boring heads
are arranged to slide*
Norton Crankpin Lapping Machine*
This machine is used by both Cadillac and Packard for polishing orank-
pins* This is done on a machine similar in principle to the Melling
crankpin turning lathe, the polishing being carried out by & carborundum
tape which is supported on rollers which reciprocate so as to follow the
crankpins round* The tape is automatically wound off one drum on to another,
bo that as it becomes worn it is continuously replaced*
Hexagon Broaching Machine*
A veiy interesting machine for forming hexagons on small turned parts
has been developed by the American Broach Company and Thompson Products*
This machine consists of a large carrier which rotates about a vertical
Fig. 3. Hexagon broaching machine.
axis* This carrier has a number
of indexing spindles carrying
chucks, into which the parts
to be broached are plaoed by
the operator* As this fixture
saves round the chucks auto-
matically clamp the parts and
first pass them between two
SfSgmental broaches, which
machine two of the flats*
The parts are then indexed
through 600 and another two
flats are broached in a similar
manner* This indexing and
broaching is then repeated and
the parts are ejected from the
machine* This machine will
out hexagons at & rate which is determined by the speed at which the operator
oan load it, which is in the order of 45 pieces per minute* Automatic
switching is arranged which stops the machine, should a part not be pushed
the correct distance into the chuck or should it be oversise on the diameter
to be broached* A diagram of this machine is shown on Fig* 3


Surface Broaohing*
As is well known very considerable use is made of surface broaching
in the United States* Generally speaking vertical machines are used and
these are usually double acting, one broaoh cutting, while the other one
is making its return stroke*
It was interesting tb note that a machine of this type had been set up
by the Wright Aeronautical Co* for the machining of articulated connecting
rods* One broach is flat for the sides of the rods at right angles to
the gudgeon pin bores, while the other is formed to the shape of the side
of the rod parallel with the gudgeon and wrist pin bores* But, because
of the expense of maintaining the latter broach, Wrights are now only
broaching the flat side of the rod and are milling the other sides* The
tine for the broaching of one flat side was checked at approximately
20 sec* floor to floor*
Cylinder Heads*
The long Greenlee machines used by Wrights for machining cylinder
heads have been described fairly fully in the technical press* These machines
are really a series of multi-spindle drilling and milling machines connected
by short conveyors which feed the heads automatically from one machine to
another* The machines, are, therefore, fairly adaptable and modifications
can be introduced without great difficulty as long as the basic design of
bead is not changed* For example, the machines at present being used for
oast cylinder heads can be used for carrying out- similar operations on the
forged heads* These machines save a considerable amount of semi-skilled
labour but require rather more skilled labour than would be needed by
single machines to oarry cut the same work* This is because a tool
breakage or temporary failure of a single unit of the Greenlee machine
naturally stops the whole line and must be dealt with very quickly* Also
to reduce the amount of idle time, it is necessary to change and reset as
many of the tools as possible at one tins, which means that a number of
skilled tool setters must be available*
The disadvantages of these machines can be appreciated if one realises
that they are equivalent to a line production shop in which the stoppage of
ooe machine immediately results in the stopping of the complete line.
However if any serious failure does occur in one component, it is usually
possible to miss out certain operations on the Greenlee and to carry out
these on general purpose machines* In any case, Wrights are convinced of
the advantages of this type of machine and are installing still larger ones
in their new factories* They do not appear, however, to have any explications
to British production, because the output of air-cooled poppet valve cylinder
heads is too small to justify their use. Further, in this country the use
of very large machining units is undesirable from the A.R.P. standpoint*
In the latest layout for machining the Wright forged
cylinder head, the fins are milled two heads at a time on
vertical spindle Cincinnati machines; each
spindle carried only one cutter, but the machines are
entirely automatic* The cylinder ports are machined on
multi-spindle Hydrotell- machines*
Spot Facings.
This operation is normally carried out on in*
-verted drilling machines, the feed lever being foot
operated; this method is considerably more convenient
than using a machine in the normal attitude*
On the Merlin connecting rods it is necessary to
radius the connecting rod belt holes where they break
through on to a curved surface* This is done with
a special cutter on a drilling machine which is fit-
ted with a cam action which reciprocates the radius-
ing cutter* This cutter has a single cutting edge;
the work is fed up to the tool add the arrangement
is shown diagramat ically in Fig* 4-.
Fig. 4.


Form Turning Austentic Steel.
In the manufacture of hollow head exhaust valves Thompson Produqts
have found considerable difficulty in machining the hollow portion of the
head and their standard method of pro-
ducing this is to form mill it. How-
ever, this method is very slow and
they have recently found by using a
very rigid lathe and a compressed air
feed with a hydraulic dasbpot that
they can carry out a rougih forming
operation by turning, although to ob-
tain the required finish a final
milling operation has to be carried
out. This feed arrangement is shown
diagrams tic ally in Fig. 5*
Valve Stem Bore Polishing Machine.
Fig. 5. Compressed air tool feed.
The bores for hollow valves are at present finish drilled and reamed in
capstan lathes after which they are polished with emery cloth on the ends of
polishing spindles, the valve being held
by the operator. This is an extremely
slow process and the operator can only
polish two or three valves per hour.
An experimental adaption of a drilling
machine has been made for carrying out this
work aikL it is proposed to make up multi-
spindie machines of this type which should
save maiy hours' labour. The general
scheme is shown in Pig. 6. ; the valve will
be carried on fixtures on the drilling
machine tables on which they will be slowly
rotated. On the drilling machine chuck
will be held a long spindle carrying a
rubber sleeve which will be expanded inside
a cylinder of carborundum cloth; the spindle
carrying this cloth will be sligitly out of
line with the hole in the valve so that it
always presses towards one side. The
drilling machine spindle will be oscillated
in the same manner as a honing machine.
Hand polishing will, however, be still
necessary to remove all circumferential
marks.
Allison Crankcase Lapping Machine.
Allison have developed a special machine for lapping the joint faces
of the two halves of their crankcases. The crankcase are reciprocated up
and down on a heavy cast iron plate which acts as the lap. At the same time
as they reciprocate up and down this plate they are slowly traversed across
it. Since the crankcase is not restrained in any way and it is pressed on
the polishing table by its own weight only, a very accurate surface is
produced; although this machine is somewhat crude it is not expensive and is
entirely automatic in operation.
Cylinder Barrel Finish.
The cylinder barrel finish on American engines is still very poor by
British standards. Both Wright and Allison form grind the cylinders to
allow for the change in dimension at the running temperature, in both cases
grinding is to about 20 -25 micro inches. Allison then hone, which still
leaves the finish at about the same figure. This degree of roughness as
measured is very similar to that obtained with the Bristol lapped finish,
but the actual appearance is quite different, the Allison finish being quite
bright but very scratchy, whereas the finish which has always been found
desirable at Bristol has been a dull matt finish free from scratches.
However, they claim that they are not in any trouble. Wright on the other


h»r* are in vety considerable trouble with oil consumption, the variation
from engine to engine being considerable, and the tendency for consumption
to rise after a short time in service being serious* They therefore recently
introduced a lapping process; this is not done as at Bristol, by replacing
the stone hones in the honing machine by cast iron laps, but by using slave
pistons and rings* These pistons and rings are reciprocated by using a
converted Barnes honing machine, but with the rotating mechanism disconnected,
a rotating movement being imparted by hand* The resulting finish
appeared very poor and a large number of scratches wfere left; the operation
was also slow* But in fairness to Vright it must be said it is a rather
lash-up method introduced in a hurry because of service trottoles*
Polishing and Buffing.
It was very plea-a-ing to note that the standard of polishing and the
removal of sharp corners, etc* was extremely high in all the factories
visited. It is believed that this high standard of work (which is mostly
carried out by girls) has been obtained by careful planning of the operations.
Each girl only does one small .operation for which the best possible tool is
used, fixed at a convenient height and angle to avoid fatigue, and she then
passes it on to the next operator. Apart from simplifying the work this
line production net hod gives a competitive incentive and helps to maintain
a satisfactory output. In most oases the operators are seated.
Dust extraction and ventilation are* very good, but in spite of this
visors dust excluding pads are worn by the operators much more than in
this country.
Machines for Drilling and Boring Hamilton Standard Airscrew Blades.
The first operation of drilling and rough reaming of these blades is
carried out in a Barnes multi-spindle which is rather on the lines of an
inverted Bullard* The propeller blades are stationary and held on top
the drills fitted upwards, the blades being indexed round opposite another
drill spindle at the end of each operation. These machines will drill and
ream a blade every six minutes, floor to floor time.
The finishing of the taper bore is carried out on a special vertical
spindle Heald "borematic". This machine finishes the taper bore to a
diametrical tolerance of .0002" and takes six minutes. Previously this
operation was done by hand scraping to a taper plug gauge and took several
hours.
4A-4.03 Inspection* There is a great tendency to de-centralise inspection and to
carry out inspection operations in machine lines rather in centralised view
rooms, although in some cases small wired-off inspection cribs are arranged*
The de-centralisation of inspection means that faulty parts are discovered
quickly and the production of a large number of wasters is therefore guarded
against* It does, however, mean that more Inspectors are required, because
they cannot always be moved from one Job to another and with the de-
centralised scheme they cannot always be kept 100$ buey; also supervision
is more difficult* However, the reduction of scrap and the elimination
of the unneoessazy movement of material is considered to outweigh by far
any disadvantages* In certain cases too, inspection is carried out by
machine operators, for example, we saw a milling machine operator gauging
diameters ground by another operator before setting the parts up in his
machine, and in another case an operator at an automatic chucking lathe was
carrying out pressure tests on castings in between the loading of his machine.
The Relationship of Inspection and Drawings.
While practice varies in America Just as it does in England, we gained
the impression that drawings were worked to more strictly; both in the sense
that meticulous care was taken to comply with everything oalled for on the
drawing, and in the sense that no checks were made and no operations were
carried out which were not specifically called for on the drawings. This
practice is, we consider, an excellent one, and has of necessity been
followed by those British Companies which have had, their engines built abroad
under licence, but it not always been carried out to the same extent


elsewhere and we found oases where American manufacturers making parts to
British designs have had to add considerable information to the drawings
and to amend limits and tolerances*
We found some difference of opinion on the question of whether the
surface finishes should be specified on drawings in terms of micro inches*
Borne companies do so, while others although using surface finish
control by micro-inch measurements do not actually specify the finish on
the drawings because they are afraid if they do so, at any time the Amy
or Navy Inspectors may call for a 100$ surface finish check ,which would be
entirely impractical with the nunfcer of instruments available in the country.
We believe, however, that such an unreasonable view would not be taken and
the practice of specifying the finish on the drawings and carrying out & per-
iodic check to see that the standard is maintained is an excellent one*
In the matter of the thickness of cast sections, the Americans
undoubtedly work more strictly to drawings than we do; for example, Packards
found on sectioning up & nunfcer of Rolls Boyce castings that the sections
ware well above those specified on the drawing and it was not considered
safe to work to the drawing figures, which were therefore amended to line
up with the Rolls Rcyce practice* The same thing occurs on other British
engines* It is recommended that British firms should adopt more realistic
dimensioning of cas<£ sections*
Inspection of Castings and Forgings*
Reference has been made above to the accuracy of castings and is made
later in this Chapter to the small machining allowances permitted on forgings.
This necessitates very accurate setting up of the parts and elaborate
ffmging fixtures are used* The castings and forgings are set up on these
fixtures and the important dimensions checked by plug gauge* or by visual
checks from templates built in as part of the fixtures, and when the
components are properly lined up in these fixtures, a locating hole or
face is machined and all further operations are carried out from this point*
In a number of cases these fixtures are duplicated and one set is held by
the manufacturers of the castings or the forgings and these manufacturers
are responsible for the machining of the locating points; in this way if
any casting or forging is found scant on machining the supplier cannot
blame the machining firm for having set the part up incorrectly, and has to
accept all the responsibility himself* For the same* reason in a lumber of
cases the forgers drill the centres from which crankshafts and other parts
are machined*
Piston Bing Inspection.
An interesting point on piston ring inspection was the use of a blood
red light for light tightness checks in a wall lit room; this light shows
up a defect much better than a normal white light and the operation could
be carried out without any screen or hood*
The. Mission looked out for methods of checking piston ring pressure
pattern or toe-out, but did not see any checks of this being carried out by
engine makers* In most cases a toe-out is agreed to between the engine and
ring makers, but rather contrary to the usual American practice this does
not seem to be usually specified on the drawings*
Glass Plug Gauges*
Considerable use is being made of glass plug "Go" and "No Go" gauges,
particularly by firms making shells and fuses; it is claimed that these
gauges are extremely stable and wear well and that they are cheaper to
produce than high class steel gauges* It is recommended that glass gauges
should be adopted in British aircraft and Ordnance works*
Stellite Mirrors*
Thompson Products use stellite mirrors for inspecting the bores
of hollow valves; they say that they have been found to be very much quicker
than a "borescope" which is only used on doubtful cases*


Nut Squareness Test.
Allison have had considerable trouble with their connecting rods and
it is probably for this reason that the engineering departn»nt had laid down
Fig. 7. Allison nut squareness test.
a tolerance for the squareness of the face
of the nut with the threads* The checking,
of this squareness on a production basis was
quite a problem for the Inspection
Department, but they have developed a machine
which allows this to be done at a very
high speed, it consists of an electric
motor which drives through a reduction gear
a screwed mandrill with a very slight
taper on to which the cuts are run* The
nut is held in the hand of the operator
and is run on to the mandrill until it
becomes tight* The face of the nut
pushes back a spring steel plate which is
forked so that it touches the nut at two
diametrically opposite points; ary out -of-
squareness of the face does not, therefore,
cause any movement of the spring plate as
a whole* On this plate is carried a deck
gauge which touches the nut at one
point, and which shows the out-af-squareness
by & vibration of the pointer* This
machine is illustrated at Pig* 7 ; with it
checks can be very rapidly carried out and
its use was being extended to other nuts
on the engine and several were seen in use
at Allison*
Radial Engine Crankshaft Alignment*
On their double row engines Wright cannot use a single lining-up bar
and they do not consider the use of two bars sufficiently accurate and these
are only used for a rough alignment, the final alignment being obtained by
trial and error and the use of clock gauges on the Journals. This neoessi**
tates a considerable amount of damping and un-clamping of tte crankshaft
Joints and to assist in this operation an electrically driven rig is used
for tightening the nuts* the exact extension of the bolts is, however,
checked by micrometer and the control of the electric tightening gear is
such as to allow this to be done with considerable accuracy*
Crack Detection*
Experimentally quite a lot of use is being made of Black Light or, as it
is known in this country, G-10-crack inspection. Briefly this consists of
washing the parts in a phosphorescent oil which is then washed off in such
a way as to leave behind small quantities of the oil in any cracks or pin
holes that may exist in the part. All these defects oan then be seen by
holding the part under a special light, in some oases slight heat being
applied by a hot plate to drive the phosphorescent oil to the surface.
Packard were using this process experimentally for checking the
stelliting on their valves and some use was being made of it by a number of
firms for detecting cracks or porosity in light alloy parts, the only
production use, however, which was seen of this process was on bearings
which was carried out both by Allison and Wright. Wright use it both for
their copper lead big end bearings and for checking adhesion of the silver
facing on the connecting rod oil retainers*
An opportunity was given to examine a number of typical copper lead
bearings showing various defects under this test. Wright had found
considerable difficulty in setting a rational standard for acceptance, except
in the case of bearings showing lack of adhesion in which case they were
rejected without question. However, a very large number of bearings show
aom porosity and they have set up three standards of these; one standard
is accepted, the second standard is quarantined pending furtter experience
and is only used if the exigencies of supply demands it, and the third


standard is rejected. On actual engine tests they have not been, able to
find any difference in performance between the first and second standards*
There is, therefore, some difference of opinion at Wrights as to the
utility of this test and most of the firms using this method of inspection
feel that a considerable amount of experience will be necessary before the
results obtained can be relied upon.
Experimental use of this method of inspection is now being made in
this country and the information which has been obtained by aotually
seeing it in use in America under production conditions will be of assistance
to us over here* It is believed that as experience is gained, this method
of inspection will become increasingly valuable*
Soundness Check on Small Castings.
Packard were experimenting with a solution of methylene iodide; this
solution is made up to be of the appropriate density for the alloycf the
basting being tested* Providing the composition is correct, this will show
up porosity by determining whether the casting floats or sinks. Alterna-
tively if there is no porosity it may show up certain errors of composition;
obviously, however, there may be combinations of porosity and incorrect
composition which would not be shown up. However, the method is very rapid
and experience may show that it has some useful applications*
4A-4.Q4. Engine Testing*
Test Plant and Equipment. In nearly all the films visited the test plant
was under the same roof as the engine production shops. In some cases this
was part of the original layout while in others the shops had grown round
the Test Department as a result of expansion* This arrangement is very
convenient but necessitates excellent sound proofing, efficient ventilation
and above all adequate precautions against firs*
Fire proof doors are provided for all test cubicles and generally in
the passages leading to the Test Department and to most of the rooms housing
test bed auxiliaries and the test crews* cubicles* Fixed fire fighting
equipment is installed by which any of these compartments can be flooded
with fire extinguishing gas or foam. Portable fire extinguishing equipment
is also provided on a lavish scale. Particular attention is paid to the
proper ventilation of all ducts, etc. and the test beds are kept clean and
tidy, which has an important bearing on fire prevention.
Reclaiming of lubricating oil is a general practice and in the Wright
Cincinatti plant, the oil reclaiming equipment in the Test Department is
also used for reclaiming the machine shop lubrioating and cutting oils and
a pipe line system leads from the reclaiming plant to various points in the
machine shop. These pipe lines are carried overhead, a practice which could
not be recommended in this country because of the danger of a pipe breaking
and causing a firs as a result of eneny action.
In the plants visited, the standard method of absorbing the engine
power on production engines varied considerably and included fixed pitch
propellers, constant speed propellers, and absorption and regenerative
dynamometers. Eddy current dynamometers are almost universally used far
accurate power measurement, but are not completely stable except when fitted
with electronic speed control. A detailed survey of electrical dynamometers
was carried out by the Mission and is being dealt with in Part C of tbie
section.
Due to the general use of exhaust driven turbo superchargers on American
engines, a great many engines are rated at ground level and in some oases
require a slight air pressure to obtain their take off power. Carburettors
are therefore generally supplied with air from a duot which has its own
supply of air from a centrifugal fan independent of the engine cooling air
supply. In general this carburettor air supply is thermostatically controlled
and oan be either heated or cooled as required*
The quick changing of engines on the test beds has been very carefully
studied* Engines are. prepared for test and fitted with as much equipment


as possible before being taken into the test cubicles. Quickly detachable
pipe and thermo-couple connections are used and Packard use rubbef exhaust
pipe connections. This is made possible by the injection of water into the
exhaust Just before these rubber connections. This seems to be an excellent
idea as it makes a very simple quickly detachable pipe and effectively
silences the exhaust*
Fuel Flowmeters are of the Rotameter typej. it is common practice to use
two sizes, one for low to moderate and the oilier for higher rates of flow.
Production Testing and Running in.
The running in of engines with electric motors is not usual, although
some firms run for a few minutes on the end of the assembly lines to oheck
oil pressures and see that the lubricating system is functioning correctly*
Packard are exceptional in this respect and run the Merlins in for one hour
on a motoring stand.
On the other hand both the light running and testing times arm
considerably longer than in this country and in every case (except small
training engines; engines are -stripped down and inspected between final and
endurance tests. It is noteworthy that even on the final test a considerable
amount of light running is carried out]. for example Packard do over two hours
light and incremental running at the beginning of the final test.
Running on lead free fuel at the end of the final test varies from 15
to 50 minutes*
Detailed engine test schedules of all the principal engines were
obtained by the Mission and these are * summarised below:-
Method
Motoring
In
Total
Green
Hun
Final
Total 1
includ-
ing
Motor-
ing
Remarks
Packard
Dynamometer
1 hr.
5i hrs.
4 hrs.
10£ hrs,
1 Proof
type test
per month.
Allison
Constant
Speed
Propellers
none
4 hrs.
3 hrs,
7 hrs.
No alti-
tude
checks.
Wright Aeronau-
tical Cincinnati
Fixed pitch
test clubs
& 5 to 10$
dynamometer
check
none
4 hrs.
2 3/4
bra.
6 3/4
hrs.
No proof
type tests
hut some
production
development
running.
No altitude
checks.
Pratt' & Whitney
(Ford)
Regenera-
tive elec-
tric
dynamometers
for oil
pressure
check
only
5 hrs.
4
hrs.
Ti
hrs.
These longer periods of test are made possible by the provision of
an adequate number of test beds and by the special arrangements made to
allow quick changing of engines. It is considered that the longer periods
of testing carried out on American engines is a very excellent feature and
it is recommended that as far as possible British engine production testing
should be extended and brought more nearly in line with current American
practice*
Production check Tests.
An the firms visited do a considerable number of modification and


production development tests for the approval of alternative material
supplies, etc* hut Packard was the only firm of those contacted which
takes a production engine at random for regular monthly check type test.
kArl±. 05 Engine Strip and Inspection. With the very large war time production,
greatdifficulty has been experienced in the handling of the stripping *
inspection and re-building of engines after endurance testing, entailing
as it did the laying out of the parts on inspection benches and consequently
an enormous floor space* In Britain strip and inspection is permitted
of a proporition only of engines which have been in series production
and on which operational experience has been gained. The American practice,
started by Packard, and which is being adopted in all the new factories
visited, is to carry out all strip, re-building and inspection on a conveyor
system* This arrangement is most systematic and the floor space and
man hours required have been so much reduced that there is little temptation
to adopt easements in the stripping or inspection procedure and it is
certain that a better product is ensured.
At first considerable official opposition was raised to this system
and to the abolition of the old-fashioned inspection benches, etc. but
this new system has been demonstrated to work so well that everyone from
the firms to the Army and Navy representatives are enthusiastic about it.
The principle of the layout adopted by Packard and Allison is shown
on Pig. 8. The track is rectangular with, of course, rounded corners.
Engines to be stripped are put on the track at one end and as they pass
down one of the long sides of the rectangle the major assemblies are
removed and passed down subsidiary tracks in which the detail strip,
wash, inspection and rebuild of* the sub-assembly is carried out. Only
the crankcase remains on the track. The other long side of the
rectangle is the rebuilding part and since the last parts to be taken
off the crankcase are the first parts to be refitted, the sub-assemblies
automatically arrive at the rebuilding portion of the main track in
the correct sequence. Where serious failures have occurred on test
requiring investigation or special treatment, the engine is dealt with
elsewhere under more conventional procedure. In the system adopted
by Packard and Allison parts and components are not pooled in the
normal course of events, although this is done as in England when
desirable.
In the Wright Cincinnati plant which builds the R. 26008 14 cylinder
engine, a somewhat different system is used. In this plant the engines
are stripped, on a track and the parts placed on & conveyor which takes
them through a washing machine. They are then taken off this conveyor and
put on benches for inspection. Each bench deals with certain assemblies
and not with complete engines. These assemblies are inspected and re-built
and are then pooled indiscriminately and no attempt is made to re-fit them to
the engines from which they came. The engines are re-built on a track.
While the Cincinnati system takes up considerably more space than the
Packard arrangements and was not considered to be so good, it is fairly
flexible and appeared to be working reasonably satisfactorily in spite of
the considerable trouble which was experienced with big end bearing and
rqifli gear on endurance tests at the time of our visit, and which was holding
up the re-building of a number of engines.
In the new Wright plant which is being built at Paterson for building
the R. 3350 engine, the layout will follow the Packard system more closely
in principle, although geometrically it will be somewhat different. It
is felt that with a well developed engine on which major troubles are
unlikely to occur on test, the Packard and Allison system is the best and
that with modifications it can be applied satisfactorily to radial
engines. It is strongly recommended that it should be adopted in this
country at those factories which are building a single basic type of engine
in sufficient quantities, since it makes practical the carrying out of a
complete strip and inspection on every engine and will therefore make for
increased reliability.
In America in spite of an output which is three times as large as ours,
there has never been any question of easements in stripping procedure and




the Mission found that the Array, the Navy and the firms were strongly
opposed to it. The firms were all satisfied that even with the increased
outputs that are planned there will be no difficulty in following the
present practice.
JiA-4*06 Materials. The following materials are either experimental or of recent
intro duct ion and may be of interest.
Chrysler Oil Seal Material*
Chrysler have developed an oil seal material which consists of
Neoprene and powdered leathery the leather absorbs oil and improves the
friction properties.
Turbo Blower Blade Material.
The forged material which has been used but which is being superseded
is called Hastalloy and has the following composition.
Nickel 62$ - 68$
Molybdenum 28$
Manganese 1$
Carbon .0295 - .12$
Silicon • 1$ max.
Phosphorus and .05$ max.
Sulphur combined
The latest oast alloy is known as Vitallium and is:
Cobalt 60$
Chromium }ss
Molybdenum 5$
Propeller Blade Material.
The latest aluminium alloy which is used on a small percentage of
Hamilton propellers is the Aluminium Company’s ZS7 6; this is similar to
HR. 77 and is a aluminium alloy. The composition is given within rather
wide limits and it seems possible that to obtain the physical properties
they must work rather closer. As given to us it was:-
Copper *ss “ 2$
Manganese »5% “ 1*5%
Magnesium .2$ -8%
Zinc 5$ “
Brinell hardness 150 ~ 180
Fatigue strength plus and minus
21,000 lbs. per square inoh.
Considerable trouble had been experienced with season cracking in the
bore of the roots and blades; shot blasting had been adopted and to a
certain extent this had been carried out retrospectively. Shot blasting
of the whole blade is now being experimented with to increase its fatigue
strength, but it is believed that the season cracking has been overcome
by quenching in boiling water.
The steels used on American steel propellers are:-
SAE 6130 Chrome Vanadium or
SAB 4330 Nickel Chrome Molybdenum
Propeller Blade Thrust Bearing Steels.
The latest alloy used by Hamilton Standard with reduced tungstan content
is as follows:^


Carbon • 50Jb * 60$
Manganese *2os - *kO%
Silicon *4s#
Chromium 7* 00# -8. OOjS
Molybdenum 2* 5C$ -3* 252*
Tungsten 1 • • BC^S
Sulphur *o2ss max*
Phosphorus <»o2ss max.
Vanadium • max*
Copper • max*
Magnesium Castings*
Much greater use is being made of magnesium castings in the U.S.A* than
in this country and. although there are production difficulties there does
not appear to be a great deal of service trouble, and the manufacturers
consider that they can make a considerable saving of -weight by the use of
magnesium* The War Production Board are encouraging further use of this
material in order to economise aluminium supplies, but at present it is
understood that it is being used entirely on its technical merits*
The scrap is very considerable and Wrights new Foundry at Cincinnati
with a designed output of one million lbs* per month has been planned on the
basis of although they hope to get down to a figure of about 25$ on
parts which have been in production for a reasonable time and on which they
have had & chance to overcome the oasting difficulties and determine the
best form of moulds, etc* This high rate of scrap appears to be fairly
typical, but we are unable to form an opinion as to whether it is due to
the setting up of a very high standard or not; certainly there is a
considerable amount of porosity in accepted oast ings and a great deal of
impregnation with tung oil is carried out* An interesting feature in a
number of foundries is the use of heat treatment on conveyors through
continuous furnaces; this method is made practical by the use of an alloy
(Dow'H) which is heat treatable in air and does not require a special
atmosphere as the British products*
The Mission consider that the use of magnesium for a number of highly
stressed engine parts (for example they use magnesium reduction gear cases
on radial engines, where in British practice a forged aluminium component)
is used) is a matter which should be investigated.
We recommend that a small. Mission should be sent out to the United
States to study this matter and we suggest that this should consist of a
practical foundry manager, a metallurgist and an engineer experienced in
the design of magnesium castings*
4A-4* 07 Heat Treatment*
Induction Hardening. There is considerable revival of interest in Induction
Hardening for aero engine parts*
Some of this is similar to the normal Tooo hardening prooess used In
this country but a new development, being carried out by the Chrysler
laboratory, is the hardening and heat-treating by very high frequency
currents.
They have one machine of 14,000 cycles and another experimental machine
of 36,000 cycles*
Bronze Plating* The normal practice where a machined part is not to be
nitrided all over is to tinplate it and to leave those parts to be nitrided
free of tin either by machining or by stopping off the tin with varnish or
rubber shields*
In order to economise in the use of tin, bronze plating has been
successfully employed* Apart from the economy this has an advantage in
that, should the plating be locally thicker than neoessary, it will not


melt and run as will tin plating and therefore, the occurrence of soft
spots is avoided*
Die Quenching. The very wide application of die quenching of parts
has been dealt with under the section on American gear production.
Cogan Quenching and Straightening Machine. This consists essentially of 9
rollers working in 3 sets of 3. The 3 top rollers are adjustable and the
Fig. 9. Quenching and straightening machine.
part to be hardened is fitted between the rollers and la rotated hy an
electric motor. The rollers and shaft are then lowered into the oil
quenching bath so that quenching and straightening take place simultaneously.
This type of machine has been satisfactorily applied to in line engine
camshaft and is equally applicable to a number of similar parts*
It is shown diagramatioally in Fig. 9-
Heat Treatment of Aluminium Parts. The technique of boiling water
quenching of certain aluminium parts to avoid internal stress and season
cracking,which was developed in this country by High Duty Alloys and the
Bristol Aeroplane Company, has been successfully exploited in a number of
applications in the U.S.A. Some consideration is now being given to
quenching by air or steam blasts and Allisons have considered doing this
on such parts as crankcases and cylinder heads, although they are father
afraid that the set-up required would be very complicated and require
considerable development. If they can obtain the same results by a simpler
method they will be much relieved.
4A-4.08 Forgings.
Improved Forging and Pressing Technique. The practice which is oomnon in
this country of buying forgings in the partly machined condition is not
generally followed in the United States. This means that it is necessary
to make the suppliers control the sizes of the stampings to a reasonable
degree of accuracy to avoid excess machining by the engine builder. In
order to achieve this, it is a common practice to specify a maximum weight
for the given stamping and to buy stampings at so much a piece rather than
to buy stampings by the lb. as is sometimes done on small parts in this
country.
This practice, which is common both in the automobile and aircraft
industry, has led to the development of very accurate forgings. General
tolerances of plus a 1/I6th are actually maintained and on small parts
plus where no machining but only shot blasting or polishing is
to be carried out. A very good example of the closeness with which parts
are stamped in America is the fact that the stamping for the Packard built
Merlin crankshaft weighs 30 lbs. less than the corresponding English
component.


Coining is used considerably on steel parts primarily as a straight-
ening rather than a sizing operation* It is howver, applied to aluminium
forgings to produce them very accurately to size and the dimensional
results and finish are in many cases comparable with pressure die casting*
These excellent results are obtained by oareful attention to detail;
both in the design of the parts and the tools, and by the constant
pressure which is brought to bear on the stamping manufacturers by the
engine builders rather than by any very special production methods. It
is believed that if the same care and consideration was given in this
country, a considerable saving in material and economy in production would
accrue*
Another practice which is not carried out in this country is the rolling
of bars with cam shaped or form shaped rollers which will produce various
sections along a bar. A bar rolled in this way may be used for producing
stampings or in some oases the parts may be machined straight from this
specially formed bar.
Constant speed Propeller Hubs for Aero Products and Curtiss propellers
are being forged with the bosses for the blades hollow* This entails the
tira of very heavy and expensive machines which form the holes in each boss
Simultaneously and since different machines are required for three blade
and four blade propellers, the plant required is very considerable* Aero
Products say that this is worth while but Curtiss feel that the saving in
machining time is not very great and the actual material saved in the hub
forgings only just justifies the manufacture of these special machines.
Aluminium Propeller Blades. The use of engines with turbo blowers
developing high altitude powers and the severe diameter limitations on the
propellers of a number of modern aircraft has led to the introduction of
very wide propeller blades which also have a high twist. The
Company have experienced sane difficulty in forging these blades
and the wear and life of the die has been somewhat unsatisfactory. They
are therefore developing a technique by which the blades are first forged
in a die to a flat section with rounded ends.
The section at any point has the same cross sectional area as the
final aerofoil section. The flash formed in the die is trimmed off and
the part finally stamped in the normal type of die.
As with these large blades two beats are in any oase required to form
the blade, the only objection is the necessity for trimming the flash after
the first stamping, and this is more than offset by the saving in stamping
time and the reduction in wear on the finishing die.
The preliminary die is, of course, very simple and cheap to produce and
is in any case not subject to serious wear or bursting stresses.
Ajft-r gorged Pistons. The forging of aluminium pistons on Ajax machines by
the AiimHrHum Company been carried out successfully for a number of
years is a very rapid method of production. It is interesting to note
that this method of forging has been applied to pistons for the Packard
built Merlin and although on the early batches there was some small trouble
with laps it is understood that they are now proving entirely satisfactory.
4A-4* 09 Processes.
Shot Blasting. There is an increasing use of shot blasting for increasing
the fatigue strength of steel parts, an interesting example being the
connecting rods on the Allison engine* These rods proved somewhat weak in
service and considerable trouble was experienced, so that it was absolutely
necessary to obtain the best possible strength within the limitations of
existing design* Allisons have stated that at the present day ratings shot
blasting means the difference between satisfactory and unsatisfactory
service*
We feel that the use of shot blasting is not a thing that should be
relied upon in an original design, but that it may be a very practical way


of overcoming trouble on some part which has been found in service to be too
near the bone and which can not readily be re-designed. It is important to
realise that the shot blasting on highly stressed parts is not used in any
way as a production easement and that the same very high quality of finish
and polishing is required in order that the parts can be adequately
inspected far material or other defects, before the shot blasting is carried
out. Once shot blasting has been done magnetic inspection for cracks is
very difficult and from the point of view of the inspection of parts after
service operation this is a considerable disadvantage of the process.
Another point is that the shot blasting must be very carefully
controlled to avoid distortion of the parts. Allison use 80 grit, and
automatic machines# These machines are adjusted to produce a certain
curvature on a steel strip which is shot blasted on one side only to act as
a control.
Another interesting application of shot blasting has also been applied
to the X 376 propeller blade material on Hamilton Prope lie re and is referred
to under the section on materials.
T«mhi -injfr. Considerable use is mads of the tumbling process fOr the made
of burrs on small parts including certain gears. Different materials are
used for this tumbling varying from leather scrap to granite pebbles, the
latter being the most usual. The general tumbling machine is similar to a
amft.li concrete mixer and the drum rotates continuously, but we believe there
is some development of machines in which the drum rotates backwards and
forwards through a wnail arc. With this method the parts are not thrown
about so violently and it is claimed that the method is more suitable for
certain hardened components.
Mechanical Plating. Plating has been
very much mechanised and is either car-
ried out from overhead conveyors or on
rotary plating machines. These rotary
plating machines consist of a heavy
central column carrying a number of
arms from which are suspended the parts
to be plated# Round the column are the
tanks for the* various cleaning, plating
and washing processes. By means of a
compressed air or a hydraulic ram, the
arms carried by the central column are
periodically raised to the parts
out of the tanks aid. the column rotated
to bring each arm over the next tank
where they are lowered in again# These
machines operate automatically on a
time cycle and the only manual opera-
tion is the loading and unloading of
the machine. A sketch of one of the
machines is shown on Fi{> 10.
Fig. 10.
Unimelt WeldinK Process# This system of welding has been developed by the
T--» rvte Air Products Corporation, a subsidiary of the National Carbon and
Carbide Company. It is an automatic electric arc welding process in which
a powdered flux which is fed from a hopper is used. The flux completely
cover© the arc and the machine is operated without the use of shields or
glasses#
For certain classes of work it has great possibilities and is very
rapid#
It was seen in use at F.O. Smith and the Curtiss Wright Propeller
Division. At the Curtiss works, it was being used for building up the ring
on the steel propeller blades which is used for gripping them in the Ajax
machines when upsetting the root.
Infra Red Heating# Infra Red heating of engines is used by Ford to assist
in draining out the heavy oil with which they are primed to reduce the risk
of corrosion in storage#


Painting and Enamelling. Enamelling on conveyors is practically universal.
In some cases the parts are automatically dipped, while in other oases they
are sprayed. Where spraying is used the booths have water spray walls -which
absorb the fumes.
Drying by infra red heating on the conveyors is commonly used. This
method is not only quick and cheap but does a better Job because the enamel
is dried from the inside instead of from the outside.
4A-4*lo Valve Forging Methods. An opportunity occurred for two members of the
Mission to visit the works of Thompson Aircraft Products and to see the
production of valves. A short account is given belovt, of the forging
process adopted by this firm for making hollow head exhaust valves.
The bar material is either cut off with an elastic wheel or hot
sheared and tumbled. The exhaust valves are then produced as shown on
Fig. 11.
4A-4.11 Power Plant Manufacture and Assembly. Power plants are in general
designed by the airframe manufacturer and are normally manufactured by him,
although in certain cases this work is sub-contracted.
Consolidated sub-contract the Power Units for the 3.24 Liberator and
the PB2T (Coronado flying boat) to Rhor. Since these Power Units include
the oil tanks and inter-coolers, they are both fairly complicated .
The FB2Y is engined with Rratt & Whitney R. 1830 engines with two stage
integral blowers while the 8.24 is fitted With Pratt & Whitney R. 1830
engines with turbo blowers*
Rhor assemble these power plants vertically* Since each of the four
power plants in both aircraft are different, there are 8 main assembly
lines but the first operation of each line is split into two. One half
deals with the front of the power plant and the other with the rear and at
a certain stage in the assembly these two halves are put together as shown
on Pig. 13*
Rhor claim that by vertical building they reduce the assembly cost by
30 per cent and that the building time is reduced because, if necessary,
as many as six men can work round a unit at once and there is also a big
saving in floor space. Photographs of the Rhor assembly plant are given
on Pigs. 12, 13 and
At the Ford Liberator plant at Willow Run, the power units are built
on an oval track using an overhead conveyor from which they are suspended.


Fig. 12.
Fig. 13.
Rhor power plant
assembly lines.
Fig. 14.


The use of an overhead conveyor makes for accessibility since no space is
taken up by a stand to carry the power plant. Ford considered the Rhor
method before adopting their system but decided that the overhead conveyor
principle was more economical*
On the other hand Rhor aye equally convinced that their method is the
best* One of the advantages of the Rhor system is that many of the parts
which have to be bolted on the bulkhead or elsewhere can simply be placed
in position and the bolts fitted, whereas with horizontal building it is
necessary to hold the fitting up against the bulkhead while fitting the
bolts, etc*
In the other firms visited, power units are built horizontally from
stands which are carried on wheels running on rails fixed to the floor and
which are moved either by hand or by mechanical means* Fig. 15 shows a
Fig. 15.
photograph of the Curtiss track Tdiich deals with three different types of
engines*
Before fitting the engines to the power units, it is necessary to
remove the slushing oil, with whioh American engines are treated prior to
storage* For this purpose Ford use infra red heating “by &. bank of lamps,
hut the general method appears to be to put the engines in a hot air
cubicle for this purpose, and this is the method adopted by Rhor* They
leave the engine in the cubicle for four hours, which time its
temperature is raised to 1509F*
In the Ehor plant, all cowling sheets are pre-drilled and there is no
drilling or reaming in position on power plants and no filing or trimming
during assembly* Sheet metal drill Jigs formed from the production tools
are used* The result is that the only assembly Jig on the power plant
assembly line is one used to position clips and fittings on to the engine
mounting, and the necessary building stands*
In the old established aircraft plants great use is made of drop
hammers and where stainless steel is used a great number of blows are
generally applied and complicated parts are formed in a series of dies*
Stainless steel exhaust ring shrouds are fed into the dies which are formed
as shown in Fig* 16. By this method the material is gradually worked to
shape. The material used is A.N.Q.Q.S. 772-2. For deep drawing Rhor use
class A (annealed) and the carbon is held to the maximum with chromium and
nickel to the bottom limit* For other work class B (quarter hard) is used*
In the Detroit area, where similar work is being Carried out by Ford
and Fisher Bodies, mechanical presses are used almost universally* This


has led to a number of difficulties, par-
ticularly in working stainless steel ex-
haust manifolds, and the older firms have
been very disparaging of the use of mech-
anical presses. Unfortunately no oppor-
tunity to study this work at Fisher
Bodies occurred. Ford were obviously
having some difficulty with their mech-
anical presses but they were confident
they would overcome this, and it is
expected that with experience, the mech-
anical press methods of manufacture will
finally prove the most economical method
for dealing with the majority of the
sheet metal parts* Aluminium alloy
cowlings where necessary are formed on
stretching presses*
Fig. 16.
•RvhAust Manifolds* Exhaust manifold manufacture for in line and radial
engines was seen at Solar* This Company use drop hammers with Kirksite dies
with lead zinc alloy top halves almost exclusively* The steel used is 18/8
stabilised stainless steel* They are insistent on the importance of low
carbon to avoid weld decay and intercrystalline corrosion* Carbon is held
below *07 % and is frequently down to *o k-% to Steels containing
titanium are preferred to those stabilised with columbium both from the
point of view of working and welding, alt hough special training and a slow
rate of welding is necessary to avoid pin holes with titanium. However,
both types of steel are used.
So far as could be ascertained, there have been no further developments
in the use of silver in 18/8 steels to improve their workability. Exhaust
pipes which are made from two pressings are normally gas welded together
but electric welding is used considerably for welding on the flanges*
Engine Mountings* Douglas have developed a flash welded.mounting for
redial engines and also an aluminium mounting ring which is machined from
an extrusion and spliced together* These developments are described in
the- section on power plant design*
4A-4» 12 Engine Packing and Corrosion Protect ion.
The need for improved corrosion protection on British engines* At the
beginning of the war certain easements with regard to corrosion protection
and the running on lead free fuel were introduced and since engines were
put into service quickly no serious troubles accrued* Since then however,
engines have been kept in stores for increasingly long periods and it is now
not tmnmiAl for an engine to be stored for 12 or 18 months before it is run*
This increased length of time has come gradually and it is felt that for this
reason the progressive deterioration has not been so noticeable* The Mission
took the opportunity of disoussing the question of engine corrosion with the
Australian Air Mission and they confirmed that some trouble with corrosion
in service had been experienced both on British engines, and on American
engines before their new technique was introduced* Recently a report has
been received from the Middle East which shows conclusively the need for
greater corrosion protection on British engines* As a result of certain
troubles with corrosion it was decided to examine same 30 odd engines which
had been manufactured in 194-0 or 1941, it was found that on the sleeve valve
engines 25% of the sleeves required reconditioning due to corrosion, while
on the poppet valve engines, serious corrosion of propeller shafts, crank
shafts and connecting rods had taken place and some of the propeller shafts
were unserviceable* On same of the engines the induction pipes had to be
renewed due to external corrosion*
American Practice* The protection against corrosion on American engines is
very complete* Engines are first run on non-leaded fuel and the oil
system flushed out with a special anti-corrosion oil (AMS Specification
N 0.3072). This flushing out with special oil is done either by motoring
the engine or while it is running on fuel* The same oil is also sprayed
into the air intake and into the cylinders through the sparking plug holes*


Dummy sparking plugs containing a dehydrating agent, usually silica
gel, are fitted and a similar type of plug is fitted in the oil sump; a
hag of silica gel is also -placed in the air intake and approximately
28 lbs. of this material are distributed round the outside of the engine.
The engine is then sealed up in a Pliofilm hag, which is a material which
looks like and has similar properties to cellophane, hut which contains
a high percentage of rubber.
The heavy flushing oil which is used is somewhat difficult to remove,
particularly in cold weather and it is usual to heat the engine to allow this
to he done more freely. In the Ford Willow Run plant this heating is done
with a hank of infra red lamps, in other factories the engine is placed in
a heated room for four hours at a temperature of 150^P.
It is obviously difficult $o cany out this heating on an engine instal-
led in a power unit and it may also he difficult to Carry out in the field.
If the oil is not thoroughly removed there is a danger of trouble with stuck
piston rings etc., and for this reason it is not recommended that the
heavy anti-corrosive oil should he used on British engines without very
careful investigation.
British developments. The use of Pliofilm, because of its high rubber
content, is however, undesirable and an alternative has been sought* The
Robinson Waxed Paper Company of
Fishponds, Bristol, a subsidiary
of E.S.& A. Robinson Ltd., have
after some experimenting, devel-
oped a suitable substance. This
consists of two sheets of lamin-
ated cellophane treated with a
special wax gum mixture. This
has approximately the same resis-
tance to tearing as the American
material and may be sealed with a
hot iron in exactly the same way.
It is believed that with care a
Joint can be unsealed by the same
process and the wrapping used for
a second time. An experimental
envelope or cover has been man-
ufactured and has been applied to
Fig. 17.
a complete Bristol power unit* This too£ approximately 6 minutes to fit
is of course very much cheaper than the American material. It is shown
in Pig. 17» ~
Becommendations. The Mission recommends that the use of a moisture proof
envelope and silica gel should he adopted for packing British engines
power units.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT PROM AMERICA
1* Allison
Works system procedure and progress cards, etc.
2. Hamilton Standard Propellers
List of total floor areas
List of employees
Various order procedure forms
3* Packard
Various forms on procedure
4* Wright
Plant statistics
Schedule of working conditions
Summary of Cincinnati employees by departments
Works system and progress charts




SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANT AND PROPELLERS
PART B DESIGN
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol American engine developments
n I*o2 Propellers
M I*o3 Power plant policy and installation
" I*o4. Blowers
n I*os Cooling
n I*o6 Air intake and fuel systems
" 1.07 Oil systems
M 1.08 Electrioal equipment
" 1.09 Exhaust systems and flame damping
tt 1.10 Reduction gears and long shaft drives
" 1.11 Bearings •/
" 1.12 Cabin heating and aircraft de-icing
w 1.13 Winterisation ,
" 1.14- Auxiliary power units
" 1.15 Static and rig tests
H 1.16 Detailed design
CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL REVIEW OF AMERICAN ENGINE DEVELOPMENTS
Item 2.01 Technical summary
” 2*02 Tabulation of engine powers
" 2.03 Tabulation of engine dimensions
" 2.04 Review of liquid cooled engines
” 2.03 Review of air cooled engines
CHAPTER 3 - PROPELLER DESIGN
Item 3.01 Conclusions and recommendations
M 3«02 Electric propellers
” 3.03 Hydraulic propellers
n 3*04- Contra-rotating propellers
w 3.05 Steel propeller blades
** 3*06 Wooden blades
" 3*07 Aerodynamic design of propeller blades
” 3.08 Propeller de-icing
CHAPTER A - POWER PLANT POLICY AMD INSTALLATION
Item 4.01 Interchangeable power units
n 4.02 Engine installations
" 4.03 Flexible engine mountings
" 4.04 Conclusions
CHAPTER 3 - SPECIFIC TECHNICAL I TOE
lien $.61 Blower policy
n 3*02 Single stage mechanically driven blowers
“ 5«03 Volumetric efficiency
n 5*04 Planiol blower
n 5*03 Blower drives
** 5*06 Two stage mechanically driven blowers
" 5.07 Turbo blowers
n s*oB Turbo blower controls
” 5*09 Single lever power control
H 3*lo Cylinder cooling technique
N 3*U Fan cooling
" 5*12 Induction systems and air cleaners
N lnduction system icing
" 5»14 Fuel metering systems
" 5*15 Fuel injection
n 3*16 Oil systems
" 3*17 Ignition equipment
* s*lB Exhaust systems and flame damping
* 5»19 Starters


HHAPTER p - SPECIFIC TECHNICAL ITEMS (cont.)
item 5*20 Two speed and oontra-rotating reduction gears
« 5.21 Long shaft drives
n 5.22 Bearings
" 5* 23 Cockpit and cabin heating
" 24 Winterisation
M 5*23 Aircraft de-icing
" 5*26 Auxiliary power units
« 5*27 Static and rig tests of engine components
" 5*28 Detail design
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS. BROUGHT FROM AMERICA


CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS.
43-I*ol American engine developments* In reviewing the position in America an
a whole, the Mission wishes to emphasise that there is no sign of any
slackening in enthusiast in development on reciprocating engines; the
reverse is rather the case* It appears that there is something like 4to
5 times as much development in progress on new types of reciprocating
engines in America as there is in this country, in addition to a considerable
volume of project work, for more advanced engines for the future.
The drive being put into reciprocating engine development in America
is indicated by the large amount of new experimental and research
equipment which has recently been built or is in course of construction,
including high altitude test beds, high speed wind tunnels for full scale
engine installations with flight propellers, and special laboratories
for work on a multitude of items such as heat exchangers, carburettor
and fuel systems, fuels and oils.
Several new engines for high power outputs were seen and some of
these are rapidly reaching the production stage. The Mission strongly
recommend the urgent development of one new liquid cooled and one new
air cooled engine of not less than 4,000 - 4,500 cubic inches capacity.
Although development work in America an water injection was
started later than in this country, it has already reached the stage
where large series production is beginning and development along this
line should be expedited in Britain, particularly for air cooled engines.
Action.
£ v- ,r - . ■■ * , •• J£. ' L "
(i) The necessary equipment should be made available,
both at Government laboratories and at firms,
for the necessary experimental work on new
engines.
(ii) Development of one new liquid cooled and one
new air cooled engine of not less than 4,000 -
4,500 cubic inches capacity should be started
immediately.
4®-l*°2 Propellers. The most important development in propellers in America
is the wide use of steel blades, including the adoption of advanced
types of pitch change mechanism which are built into the hollow roots
of the steel blades, and which give very high rates of pitch change.
These high rates of pitch change are very desirable for all operations
and will be necessary for the use of propellers as air brakes.
Experience both in Britain and America nas shown that alcohol
de-icing of propeller blades is of doubtful value and it is recom-
mended that work should be pressed forward on electric de-icing.
Action.
(i) A British design for a steel blade should be
initiated forthwith, based on the best American
type, or some other equally sound form of
construction •
(ii) In conjunction with the above, a new huh should
be designed with a compact operating mm
capable of very high rates of pitch change.
(iii) Development of electric propeller de-icing should
be pressed forward, as experience both in
Britain and America indicates


that the value of alcohol de-icing is extremely limited*
48-1.03 Bower plant policy and installation. Although standardised power plants
have not been adopted in America, their technique for the specialised
manufacture of power plants is nevertheless on a wider scale than our own
and should be adopted by our power plant firms*
The Mission most record that American cowling and cooling technique
for air cooled radials is ahead of British practice and has made consider-
able progress of late; good dividends are already being paid by the new
engine cooling research tunnels*
In the field of flexible engine mountings, considerable progress has
been made, aided by an advanced technique far the investigation of engine
vibrations* In view Of the emphasis placed by the Americana on flexible
mountings and their willingness to accept up to 50 lb* in weight for these
mountings on an engine of 1,300 h*p* it is recommended that this whole
subject should be investigated anew*
Action*
(i) A number of production methods teed by the up-to-date American
aircraft firms should be adapted to power plant manufacture,
including photo lofting etc. and modem heavy duty presses.
(ii) More attention should be given to the design and testing of
cowlings for air cooled radials; in view of the excellent
work already done by the N.A.C.A* etc*, due consideration should
be. given to this work in such designs.
(iii) Scientifically designed rubber mountings should be considered
for new engine installations of both liquid cooled and air
cooled engines*
Jiß-I*o4 Blowers. Although Britain is more advanced than America on 2 stage
mechanically driven blowers for liquid cooled engines, the Americans have
built up considerable experience on mechanically driven two stage blowers
for air cooled engines, in which field this country has lagged behind*
Two stages of supercharging are considered essential for a number of
applications in military aircraft and further efforts should be put behind
this development*
In conjunction with these blowers, some form of infinitely variable
or multi-speed drive is required, and the Americans have given a lead in
this direction* Such drives are required for two stage blowers far both
liquid cooled and air cooled engines.
Turning to turbo superchargers, it is considered that the Americans
have embarked on too large a programme for the General Electric type of
turbo supercharger, nevertheless this has undoubtedly played an important
part in the American aircraft programme and has led to the development of
more advanced types of turbos, which are definitely worthy of consider-
ation and should be explored in this country. Exhaust turbo development
must be followed up on the score of consumption alone*
British technique on turbo blower controls and single lever power
control is considered to be based on principles ahead of those in America
and full details of all our designs should be made available to them.
Due to their greater production of turbos however, the Americans will
shortly be in a series production of large numbers of turbo controls of
an approved type and it is suggested that these should be investigated so
that they can be used in this country in conjunction with American turbos
if such a policy should be decided upon.
Action
(i) More rapid and intensive development should be put into two stage
mechanically driven blowers for air cooled radials.


(ii) Development of infin±te3y-variable or multi-speed blower drives
for two stage engines of both the liquid oooled and air cooled
type should be encouraged*
(iii) Plight experience should be obtained at the earliest possible
moment on the advanced forms of turbo supercharger now becoming
available in America*
(iv) Considerable flight experience should be obtained with the
Minneapolis Honeywell turbo control, in conjunction with
standard G.E. 8.2 units.
48-1 *O5 Cooling* Generally speaking, the American developments on cooling
technique for air oooled cylinders are not applicable to British types,
but the Hanger development of "Al-fin" bonded aluminium fins for steel
barrels should be investigated*
The American work on fan cooling however is of considerable interest,
and research and development work should give attention to the desirability
of some method of control which will reduce the power required to drive
these fans at low altitude*.
Action*
(i) Details of Hanger w AI-fin H processes should be obtained and the
merit of this system investigated*
(ii) Cooling fan development should be speeded up and reference
should be made to original American work in this connection.
AB-1.06 Air intake and fuel systems* Although the Bendix carburettor has proved
a useful stop—gap for British engines it is by no means ideal and it is
considered that the British development of the E.A.E.-Hobson oarburotter
and the S*U* pump are more advanced; it is therefore suggested that full
details should be supplied to Amerioa*
Considerable development is being done in Amerioa on fuel injection
systems* It is considered likely that direct fuel injection will eventually
compete with continuous injection and consideration should be given to its
adoption on any completely new large engine*
Action*
(i) Details of R.A.B* carburettor and S.TJ* pump to be offered to
America*
(ii) Direct fuel injection should be considered during the initial
design of any new large engines, and should be actively pursued.
AB-1.07 Oil Systems*. American engines like our own are in considerable trouble
with oil systems, particularly at altitude* Both the German B.M.W* system
and the H*A*S* proposals are hopeful solutions* To date, little real
effort has been put into curing this trouble and it is recommended that a
complete investigation should be made*
A rt tiffla- Complete investigation should be made of engine oil systems to
eliminate the present troubles.
AB-1.08 Electrical equipment. It is considered that American spark plug design
is inferior to ours and that this has put a big electrical strain on the
magnetos and harness; for this reason these latter components have been
intensively developed and the Mission feels that they are superior
electrically and mechanically to our own. The Mission was much impressed
by the broad basis upon whioh ignition research is being carried out in a
large number of American laboratories, and they believe that this would
repay & detailed study. It is suggested that any future Mission should
include an ignition expert*


The Eclipse type 45 inertia cam direct cranking electric starter is a
useful development and nay prove valuable for large engines. It is con-
sidered that operational experience should be gained on this type of starter.
Action.
(i) Any future Mission to U.S. should include an ignition expert.
(ii) Development in this country on magnetos and harness should be
based on American experience, with particular reference to
American production equipment using supercharging.
(iii) Operational experience should be obtained on Eclipse type 45
starter.
48-1.09 Exhaust systems and flame damping. American experience confirms the view
that it is practicable to ODtain reasonable flame damping with individual
ejector exhausts on air oooled radials and this type of exhaust system should
be encouraged. Enamelled mild steel pipes are giving encouraging results*
American flame damping technique on the whole is not very far advanced
and we ought to collaborate more closely with them and supply them with all
data immediately it. becomes available.
Action.
(i) Ejector exhaust systems should be encouraged for air cooled radials
and American individual enamelled pipes tested.
(ii) All data should be supplied to U.S. on flame damping, and closer
collaboration maintained.
Reduotion gears and long shaft drives. The two countries are in about
the same stage of development of contra-rotating reduction gears, but the
U.S. are considerably ahead of us in regard to the application of two-
speed reduction gears, which are being considered with an eye to economical
cruising rather than to assisting take-off.
Certain carrier borne aircraft in particular would benefit from a
combination of two-speed and oontra-ratating propellers, and it is
recommended that this whole subject should be re-considered in the light
of American experience.
The Americans have gained considerable experience in long shaft drives
and are putting great faith in this system for the future, particularly for
tail-less aircraft. Reverting to the belief that there will be a place for
reciprocating engines for many years to corns, it is recommended that shaft
drives should be given further consideration for new types of aircraft.
Acting*.
(i) Application of 2-speed reduotion gears should be reconsidered.
(ii) Buried engines with shaft drives should be given consideration in
the layout of new types of aircraft, and should be actively in-
vestigated by the engine firms.
Bearings. Silver bearings are being used extensively on production
engines in America and this development should be pursued energetically
in this country.
Pratt and Whitney have shown the desirability of plain main bearings
on radial engines and it is recommended that future types of engines should
use plain rather than ball bearings in as many places as possible, including
supercharger bearings.
Action.
(i) Silver bearing production should be speeded up in this country,
employing American technique in teto.


(ii) Plain bearings should be carefully considered for all neir designs.
48-1 *l2 Cabin heating and aircraft de-icing. Much useful work has been done in
America on wing de-icing by exhaust heat and this system is to be
recommended for large aircraft*
Where this scheme is used it is convenient to use a second heat
exchanger to provide warm air for the cabin and the two applications should
be considered in parallel*
Where independent cabin heating is required, it is recommended that
individual self contained cabin heaters of the Stewart Warner typo should
be adopted*
Action*
(i) Exhaust heat de-icing and cabin heating to be considered in
conjunction for large aircraft*
(ii) Self contained combustion heaters to be adopted in other cases*
Winterisation* It is not considered that British work en winterisation
has been sufficiently complete* The American work in Alaska etc* , will
doubtless produce useful experience and we should keep closely in touch,
with their progress, and send out British equipment for practical trial
next winter*
Action* Maintain close contact with U.S* on winterisation tests and
set up a technical committee to review the position and take necessary
action to re&oh & practical solution*
!iB-I*li|. A*r r-nia-ry poorer units* Although the stage has not yet been reached when
the Americans have reached finality in their policy on auxiliary power units,
they havO gained considerable experience on a variety of sizes* Section 5
contains a report on aircraft electrics, and it is hoped that this will
assist in formulating a policy decision* When this is reached it should be
possible to combine our own experience on auxiliary power units with that
of the Americans to allow rapid development of the required types of
generating set*
AB-I*l*> Static and rig tests* American experience and the volume of test equip-
ment which has been used for strain gauging and for photo elastic'and
stress oo&t investigation etc., in the static development of engine com-
ponents and complete engines is considerable, and there is a wide field for
the application of these devices in this country* Pull details of a number
of these applications have been brought back; but this is a subject which
requires specialised attention and it is recommended that a special section
he set up to advance the art, and that at least one or two engineers who
already have some experience in this type of work should be sent to AmerUm
to study their methods at M.l.T.Cambridge, and at the various Government
laboratories and firms*
Action*
(i) A specialised section should be set up to further the art of
static testing* v
(ii) One or two suitable engineers should be sent to America to study in
detail the strain gauging and statio test technique on engines.
uv.1.16 Detailed design. One or two useful points on detail design were noted,
and it is particularly recommended that attention he given to methods of
gear stressing with a view to reducing the weight of gearing systems.
Action. AH available data on British and Amerioan methods
stressing should be 00-related and an investigation undertaken to determine
what reductions in weight are possible •




CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL REVIEW OF AMERICAN ENGINE DEVELOPMENTS.
48-2.01 Technical Summary. First priority on the Mission*s agenda was given to a
broad cross section for the Minister of how output could be improved within
the next 24 months; therefore all such technical matters as new engines came
under a second priority* It was not possible in the time available to visit
all the plants or to make a complete technical review, but sufficient visits
were made to form a pretty clear picture of the line of development in America
on reciprocating engines*
Not only are all the well established firms working on one or more
entirely new types, but several less well known companies and some automobile
firms have also been drawn in* It would be fair to say that 4to 5 times
more engine development is going on in America than in England at the present
time.
There is plenty of enthusiasm for reciprocating engines and some idea of
the trend of thought is given by the fact that Weight Field, the N*A. C.A. and
some of the constructors have just spent large sums of money on test plant for
conventional reciprocating engines up to 8,000 h*p.
When Sir Roy Fedden was in America in 1938 and again in 1940 he felt that
there was a strong tendency towards liquid cooling, due partly to European
influence and fashion* A day's talk with the power plant sections at Wright
Field and the Navy Bureau on the general trend of design indicated that air
cooling is now re-established, owing to the considerable reduction in cooling
drag now made possible as the result of the good work that has been done on
finning, baffling and cowling. There would appear to be the feeling that
there are problems in greatly increasing the size of the liquid cooled engine,
some of which difficulties are not so pronounced with air cooling; in other
words a reversion to the American viewpoint of some years ago.
It is characteristic of the Americans, however, that they go up two roads
rather than one. This line of thought is typified by the development work
done by Pratt & Whitney on the two liquid cooled sleeve valve engines illus-
trated in figures 1 and 2, These engines were of the vertical "H* type and
were about 2,400 and 3,000 cu. in. capacity respectively. After fully exploring
their possibilities the firm decided to discontinue their development in favour
of the air cooled Wasp Major. A further example is that the Navy claim to
have developed the finest liquid cooled engine in the world in the 2,470 ctuins.
Incoming which has been run at powers in excess of one h.p. per cubic inch.
Although it is understood that the firm are being given an educational order
for 100 engines, the Navy regard this type purely as an insurance policy and
propose to continue with air cooled engines. The Mission found that
Lycoming were also developing a larger engine on similar lines but of about
3,300 cu.in. capacity.
One firm is spending a million dollars a month on engine development, and
this figure is distinct from specific orders for new prototype engines.
Three other firms are spending sums of money of a like order.
The Mission saw two or three interesting new engines and there is no
question that two soundly developed large engines, the 24 cylinder Allison
of 2,600 h.p. and the 28 cylinder Pratt & Whitney of over 3,000 h.p. will be
available in production within the next 12 months. The American aircraft
industry is going to demand, and will doubtless get, sound conventional reci-
procating engines of 4,000 h.p. within the next four to five years. The
engine makers are very fuel conscious; they are not expecting a better fuel in
this war, but will be designing for a much better fuel after the war, say
in 3 to 4 years time.
An interesting discussion took place at Wright Field on the future of
fighter engines. There seemed to be the view that the ideal for medium alti-
tude fighters is a single-engined type using the largest available moderate
altitude air cooled engine, possibly going up to between 3>ooo and 4,000 h.p.
in the next few years, and in which the utmost attention is given to weight;
that for the high altitude general purpose fighter a liquid cooled two stage
multi-speed inter-cooled engine was likely to continue in popularity; that
for the long range patrol fighter and the attack bomber a twin engined type
(|868)Wt.i5922, 250,7/43,Gp959.C *R Ltd.


Fig. I. Pratt & Whitney experimental 2,400 cu. in
liquid cooled sleeve valve engine.
was required, the type of cooling was not specified. It was felt to be im-
possible to cover the fighter range without these three special types and
it was considered that the future of these types was entirely governed by
their power plants.
It is worth Mentioning at this point the definitions of the "Military"
and "War Emergency” ratings* The Military rating is based on the "Model"
test of the engine* This model test is done at Wright Field and net at the
engine maker's works* The procedure is for the manufacturer to develop the
engine type up to the stage where he feels confident that it will pass the
model test; he then prepares the engine and submits it to Wright Field*
For all practical purposes the model test can be regarded as the equivalent
to our type test, and details of the test for the Wright "Cyclone 18" is given
in tne Appendix*
Fig. 2. Pratt & Whitney experimental 3,000 cu. in
liquid cooled sleeve valve engine.


AMERICAN MILITARY ENGINES
Current and Experimental


AMERICAN MILITARY ENGINES— CURRENT AND EXPERIMENTAL
Basic Type.
Model Numbers, Features and Applications.
Take Off.
Military.
Normal.
Economical Cruise.
Red.
Gear
Ratio.
B.H.P.
R.P.M.
Boost.
ins. Hg
B.H.P.
per
sq.in. c
Piston
Area.
>f B.H.P.
R.P.M.
Boost.
ins. Hg
Alt.
Feet.
B.H.P.
R.P.M.
Boost.
ins. Hg
Alt.
Feet.
B.H.P.
R.P.M.
Boost.
ins. Hg
Alt.
Feet.
Dry
Weight
Lbs.
Continental IV-1430
Inverted V. 12 liquid-cooled
1,430 cu. in., 23 -4 litres.
SINGLE STAGE (Experimental) - 3
1,250
3,300
—
—
1,600
3,300
1
15,000
1,225
3,000
14,000
1
1
1,525
•370 : 1
TURBO (Experimental) - 9. - 5 has -466 : 1 red. gear and
weighs 1,550 lb.
1,450
3,300
—
—
1,600
3,300
—
25,000
1,300
3,000
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
1,500
—
Packard Merlin V.I650
Upright V. 12 liquid-cooled,
1,647 cu. in., 27 02 litres,
5- bore, 6-in. stroke,
6- : 1 compression ratio.
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). - 1 for Kittyhawk II,
P.40F.
1,300
3,000
54-3
4-72
1,240
1,120
3,000
3,000
48-2
48-2
11.500
18.500
1,080
1,010
2,650
2,650
44-2
44-2
9,500
16,000
810
758
2,320
2,320
37-3
36-0
9,500
16,000
1,475
•500: 1
2-STAGE, 2-SPEED, WITH AFTERCOOLER (Production starting
mid 1943). Rating to be increased.
1,300
3,000
—
4-72
1,520
1,300
3,000
3,000
—
13,000
24,000
1,240
1,080
2,850
2,850
—
16.750
27.750
—
—
—
—
1,640
•477 : 1
Allison V-I7I0
Upright V. 12 liquid-cooled,
1,710 cu. in., 28 litres, 5-5-in.
bore, 6-in. stroke, 6-65 : 1
compression ratio.
SINGLE STAGE LOW ALT. (Production). - 63 for Airacobra
P39D2 K & L. -73 has integral red. gear (-500 : 1), weight
1,343 lb. for Kittyhawk III P40K.
1,325
3,000
510
4-64
1,150
3,000
42-0
11,700
1,000
2,600
38-5
10.800
670
2,280
28-2
10,800
1,435
■500 : 1
SINGLE STAGE HIGH ALT. (Production). - 83 for Airacobra
P39M. - 85 has -448 : 1 red. gear for Airacobra P39N. & Q.
-81 has integral red. gear (-500 : 1), weight 1,345 lb. for
Kittyhawk III P40M and Mustang IA. P5IA.
1,200
3,000
50-5
4-22
1,125
3,000
44-5
15,000
1,000
2,600
39-5
13,200
670
2,280
28-9
13,200
1,435
•500 : 1
2-STAGE, VARIABLE HYDRAULIC DRIVE TO AUX. BLOWER
(Production just starting). - 93 for Bell P63.
1,325
3,000
540
4-65
1,150
3,000
497
21,000
1,000
2,600
42-5
20,000
700
2,280
31 -0
19,500
1,620
•447 : 1
TURBO (Production). - 49, - 51 (clockwise prop, rotation —
from rear end), - 53, - 55 (anti-clockwise prop, rotation
—from rear end), for Lightning II P38.
1,150
3,000
41 -7
4-03
1,150
3,000
41 -7
25,000
1,000
2,600
37-8
25,000
670
2,280
29- 1
25,000
1,340
•500: 1
TURBO (Development) - 89
1,425
3,000
—
5-00
1,425
3,000
—
25,000
1,100
2,600
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
1,365
•424 : 1
Wright Tornado R-2160
42-cyl., 7-bank, liquid-cooled
radial, 2,160 cu. in., 35- 4 litres,
4-25-in, bore, 3-625-in. stroke
TURBO (Experimental). -3 has clockwise propeller, - 5 has
anti-clockwise propeller. 2-speed contra-rotating red. gear
also being made.
2,350
4,400
—
4-45
2,350
4,400
—
25,000
2,000
3,800
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
2,735
approx.
•250 : 1
Chrysler IV.2220
Inverted V.16, liquid-cooled,
2,220 cu. in., 36-3 litres,
5-8-in. bore, 5-25-in. stroke.
TURBO (Experimental) - 3. - 5 has fuel injection and 100 h.p.
more is claimed for all conditions. Increased powers are now
claimed, including 2,200 h.p. for take-off.
1,950
3,400
—
4-61
1,880
3,400
—
25,000
1,610
3,200
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
1,961
-406 : 1
Lycoming XH.2470
H.24-cyl., liquid-cooled, 2,470
cu. in., 40-5 litres, 5-25-in.
bore, 4-75-in. stroke.
SINGLE STAGE LOW ALT. (Limited production). - 3 intended
for use with exhaust turbo. An alternative version has fuel
injection ; weight 2,400 lb.
2,300
3,300
57-5
4-42
2,300
3,300
5,500
2,000
3,100
490
3,500
—
—
—
—
1
2,430
•385 : 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Experimental). - 5 and - 8 have
2-speed single rotation red. gear (weight 2,702 lb.). - 7 has
2-speed contra-rotating red. gear.
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1,750
3,100
47-5
—
—
—
—
—
2,460
2-STAGE, VARIABLE HYDRAULIC DRIVE TO AUX. BLOWER
(Experimental). - 10 has 2-speed contra-rotating red. gear.
2,400
3,300
600
4-62
—
—
—
—
1,720
3,100
50-0
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Allison V.3420
Upright double V 24-cyl., liquid
cooled, 3,420 cu. in., 56 litres
5- 5-in. bore, 6-in. stroke
6- : 1 compression ratio.
TURBO (Limited production). - 11 has right-hand propeller,
- 13 has left-hand propeller and different blower gears.
- 15 has 7-25 : 1 compression ratio. -5 has two 12 ft. exten-
sion shafts to a single red. gear for contra-props, and weighs
2,955 lbs. with shafting and red. gear. - 7 provides a " T ”
drive from engine and right angle gear boxes for wing mount-
ing through extension shafts to props., weighs 3,640 lb. with
shafting and gear boxes.
2,600
3,000
—
4-56
2,600
3,000
25,000
2,100
2,600
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
2,600
approx.
•320 : 1
*
Ranger V-770
Inverted V. 12 air-cooled, 773
cu. in., 12-7 litres, 4-in. bore.
5- 125-in. stroke, 6-5:1
compression ratio.
SINGLE STAGE (Production). - 6 for Seamew, S03C2 and
SOR-I.
520
3,150
450
3-45
520
3,150
420
9,500
450
3,000
360
12,000
270
2,315
26-8
14,250
726
•666 : 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Development). - 5 with planiol
blower.
575
3,400
—
3-81
500
3,400
—
20,000
465
450
3,200
3,200
—
12,000
20,000
. —
—
—
—
815
•560: 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Development). - 7 with planiol
blower and higher altitude rating ; larger upward offset of
red. gear for cannon for P77.
575
3,400
—
3-81
500
3,400
—
27,000
465
450
3,200
3,200
—
12,000
27,000
—
835
■490 : 1
Wright Cyclone RI820
9-cyI., single row, air-cooled,
radial 1,823 cu. in., 29-9 litres,
6-125-in. bore, 6-875-in.
stroke, 6-7:1 compression
ratio.
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). -87 for Hudson III
A.29, Hudson III A PBOI, Hudson IIITC, C63 and Lodestar II,
C.60. - 95 has 75 h.p. less for economical cruise, for Martlet
IV, F4F-4B, Martlet 1, XF45-5, Mohawk IV, P36. Excess boost
up to 47-0 in. allowed on Martlet IV for 1 min. for carrier
take-off.
1,200
2,500
45-5
4-52
1,200
1,000
2,500
2,500
43 0
445
4.200
14.200
1,000
900
2,300
2,300
37-0
40-0
6,900
15,200
750
675
2,020
2,020
30-5
31 -5
6,900
15,200
1,315
•666 : 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production shortly). Wright
M.C94C with forged heads and inserted barrel fins.
1,350
2,700
—
508
1,300
1,000
2,600
2,600
—
4,000
17,500
1,200
900
2,500
2,500
—
5,500
18,500
—
—
—
—
1,327
—
TURBO (Production). - 73 with -666 : 1 red. gear for
Fortress 1, BI7C, -65 with -562 : 1 red. gear for Fortress
II and 11 A, BI7E & F.
1,200
2,500
460
4-52
1,200
2,500
460
25,000
1,000
2,300
39-5
25,000
600
1,940
28-5
25,000
1,310
•562: 1
TURBO (Production shortly). Wright No. C9HC with forged
heads and inserted barrel fins.
1,350
2,700
—
508
1,300
2,600
—
25,000
1,200
2,500
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
1,315
—
Pratt & Whitney RI830
14-cyl., 2-row, air-cooled,
radial, 1,830 cu. in., 30 litres,
5- bore, 5-5-in. stroke,
6- : 1 compression ratio.
SINGLE STAGE LOW ALT. (Production). - 67 for Hudson VI,
A.28.A., -92 for Catalina 1, II, III and IV, PBY5, Dakota 1,
C47, Dakota II, C53.
1,200
2,700
480
3 61
1,200
2,700
450
4,900
1,050
2,550
390
7,500
705
2,230
30-0
7,500
1,465
•562: 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). - S3C4-G for
Martlet II, F4F3A, and Boston II, A20, Hudson V, A28. -6lfor
Liberator II, B-24-B. -90 for Martlet III, F4F3A-I. - 90B
for Beaufort II.
1,200
2,700
480
3-61
1,200
1,100
2,700
2,700
450
42-5
5,000
12,000
1,100
1,000
2,550
2,550
41 -0
400
6,100
12,500
700
540
2,150
2,150
29-0
26-5
12.500
15.500
1,490
•562: 1
2 STAGE, 3-SPEED (Production). -86 for Martlet V, FM-I,
-88 which has very minor changes in rating for Coronado,
PB2Y-3B. Excess boost up to 48 0 in. allowed on - 86 for
1 min. for carrier take-off.
1,200
2,700
480
3-61
1,200
1,150
1,100
2,700
2,700
2,700
45-5
47-0
47-0
1,800
11.500
18.500
1,100
1,050
1,000
2,550
2,550
2,550
43-5
450
45-0
3,500
12,000
19,000
720
700
650
2,250
2,250
2,250
33-0
32-5
30-5
12.500
17.500
18,600
1,560
•667 : 1
TURBO (Production). -43 for Liberator III, B-24-D and
Liberator IV, B-24-E.
1,200
2,700
480
3-61
1,200
2,700
450
25,000
1,100
2,550
41 -0
25,000
600
2,150
29-5
25,000
1,500
•562: 1
Pratt & Whitney R2000
14-cyl., 2-row, air-cooled,
radial, 2,000 cu. in., 32-8 litres,
5- bore, 5-5-in. stroke,
6- : 1 compression ratio.
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Small production). - 3 and - 5 for
Douglas DC4, C54.
1, '
2,700
480
3-71
1,350
1,200
2,700
2,700
46-0
42-0
2,000
11,000
1,100
1,000
2,550
2,550
38-
39-
7,000
11,500
735
2,250
28-5
15,000
1,565
•500 : 1
Wright Cyclone R2600
14-cyl., 2-row, air-cooled,
radial, 2,603 cu. in., 42-7 litres,
6-125-in. bore, 6-3125-in.
stroke, 6-85 : 1 compression
ratio.
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). - 19 for Bermuda 1,
SB2A-I, Baltimore 1, II, III and MIA, A30, and Vengeance 1,
A3I. - 23 for Boston III, A20c. - 25 for Albemarle. - 27
for Havoc II.
1,600
2,400
450
3-88
1,600
1,400
2,400
2,400
450
44-5
2,300
10,800
1,350
1,275
2,300
2,300
37-0
41 -5
5,800
11,800
905
854
2,050
2,050
28-5
31*5
5.800
11.800
1,950
■562: 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2 SPEED (Production). - 8 for Tarpon, TMF-I.
- 8A with 2,800 r.p.m. for take-off for Helldiver, SB2c.
- 12 with -437 : 1 red. gear for Mariner 1, PBH3 (2,800 r.p.m.
allowed for take-off with 3 bladed prop. only). -9and- 13 with
30 h.p. more for economical cruise and other small variations
for Phillips & Powis H29. Ventura III, B37. Baltimore IIIA,
A30 and Mitchell II, B25-C.
1,700
2,600
44-3
412
1,700
1,450
2,600
2,600
430
45-5
3,000
12,000
1,500
1,350
2,400
2,400
39 8
40-2
6,900
13,000
975
878
I
2,100
2,100
29-5
27-5
13,500
21,400
1,980
562: 1
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Development). - Wright type
CI4BB.
1,900
2,800
—
4-60
1,150
1,450
2,600
2,000
—
3,200
15.000
1,000
1,350
2,400
2,400
—
5,000
14,800
—
—
—
—
2,045
—
•
2 STAGE, 3-SPEED (Development). - Wright type CI4BB ...
1,800
2,800
—
4-36
1,750
1,605
1,450
2,600
2,600
2,600
—
3,200
11,000
24,000
1,600
1,485
1,370
2,400
2,400
2,400
—
5,000
10,800
22,500
—
—
2,173
TURBO (Development). - 15.
1,800
2,800
—
4-36
1,750
2,600
—
25,000
1,600
2,400
—
25,000
—
—
—
—
2,045
—
Pratt & Whitney R2800
18-cyl., 2-row, air-cooled,
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). - 27 for Douglas A26
and - 31 (-562 : 1 red. gear) for Ventura Bll, B34. Other
models as follows have about 100 h.p. less for economical
cruise : 41 (-500 : 1 red. gear) for Marauder B-26-BI,
- 43 (-500 : 1 red. gear) for Marauder B-26-C and Com-
mando, C-46. - 51 (-500 : 1 red. gear) for Commando, C-46.
-47 (-400 : 1 red. gear) for Warwick. -37 has forged
heads and 2,100 h.p. for take-off. -45 (Development) has
fuel injection.
2,000
2,700
51-5
4-28
2,000
1,600
2,700
2,700
49-5
43-0
1,500
13,500
1,650
1,450
2,550
2,550
39-
40-
6,500
14.000
1,070
970
2,100
2,100
32-0
31 -0
9,700
18,500
2,300
• 500 : 1
radial, 2,804 cu. in., 46 litres,
5- bore, 6-0-in. stroke,
6- : 1 compression ratio.
2 STAGE, 3-SPEED (Production). -8 and - 10 for Hellcat,
F6F (-437 : 1 red. gear) and Corsair, F4U-I (-500 : 1 red.
gear). Take-off and all out ratings will be raised by 200 h.p.
by water injection.
2,000
2,700
53-5
4-28
2,000
1,800
1,650
2,700
2,700
2,700
53-
54-
530
1,000
13.500
22.500
1,675
1,625
1,550
2,550
2,550
2,550
47-0
490
52-0
5,500
15,000
21,500
1,100
860
955
2,200
2,200
2,200
33-
32-0
34-
12.500
14,000
23.500
2,480
500: 1
2 STAGE, 3-SPEED (Development). -29, with remote contra-
rotating red. gear and crankshaft speed cooling fan (for
buried installations). Take-off and all out ratings will be
increased by 200 h.p. by water injection.
2,000
2,700
4-28
2,000
1,875
1,800
2,700
2,700
2,700
—
1,000
12.500
19.500
1,675
1,625
1,500
2,550
2,550
2,550
—
5,500
15,000
21,000
—
—
—
—
TURBO (Production). - 21 and - 35 for Thunderbolt, P47 ...
2,000
2,700
51 -5
4-28
2,000
2,700
49-5 1
25,000
1,625
2,550
38 5
25,000
1,090
2,230
290
25,000
2,265
•500 : 1
Wright Double Cyclone
R3350
18-cyl., 2-row, air-cooled, radial,
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Production). - 8 for Mars
2,300
2,800
500
4-33
2,250
1,900
2,600
2,600
48-0
45-8
2,800
14,000
2,100
1,800
2,400
2,400
44-2
42-3
2,500
13,600
1,365
1,170
2,080
2,080
29-5
27-7
11,400
20,300
2,595
437 : 1
3,350 cu. in., 54-9 litres,
6-125-in. bore, 6-3125-in.
stroke, 6-70 : 1 compression
TURBO (Production). - 13 for B.29, - 21 for B.32, also - 23.
Compression ratio 6-85 : 1.
2,200
2,800
470
4-15
2,200
2,600
47-0
25,000
2,000
2,400
43-0
25,000
1,340
2,100
33-0
25,000
2,668
•350: 1
ratio.
TURBO (Development). -7,-9 has contra-rotating 2-speed
red. gear.
2,300
2,800
—
4-33
2,250
2,700
—
20,000
2,100
2,500
—
20,000
—
—
—
—
•438 : 1
Wright R4090
22-cyl. 2-row, air-cooled, radial,
4,090 cu. in., 66-7 litres,
6-125-in. bore, 6-3125-in.
stroke.
SINGLE STAGE, 2-SPEED (Experimental) - 1
3,000
2,800
—
4-63
2,950
2,520
2,700
2,700
—
2,000
11,000
2,400
2,190
2,600
2,600
—
6,700
14,200
—
—
—
—
3,230
350 : 1
Pratt & Whitney R4360
28-cyl., 4-row, air-cooled, radial,
4,360 cu. in., 71-5 litres,
5-75-in. bore, 6-0-in. stroke.
TURBO (Experimental). - 3 has contra-rotating single speed
red. gear. - 5 (weight 3,440 lb.) has single rotation 2-speed
red. gear, giving ratios of -290 : 1 and -500 : 1. -7 (weight
3,640 lb.) has dual rotation 2-speed red. gear giving ratios
of -390 : 1 and -500 : 1.
3,000
2,700
—
4-12
3,000
2,700
—
40,000
2,500
2,550
—
40,000
—
—
—
—
3,475
382 : 1
2 STAGE (Experimental). Data is approximate
3,300
2,700
—
4-54
2,800
2,700
—
22,500
—
— 1
—
—
—
—
—
—
3,600
(C49191) 500 7,43


As the American engines to date have not been fitted with boost controls,
there can be no assurance that pilots keep to the letter of the law as regards
taking only the power output cleared by the model test, and in emergency at
low altitude, high manifold pressures are frequently used.
In order to regularise this procedure and in order to lay down a maximum
manifold pressure which can be used, so that pilots can be warned that the
engine is likely to blowup if he goes beyond this, the war emergency rating
has been introduced. This rating is cleared by a test of about 7i hours
duration, including 5 hours of alternate periods of 5 minutes at war emergency
manifold pressure and speed and 5 minutes at about power. The final 2%
hours are done at war emergency manifold pressure and speed. Details of the
test schedule for Allison high altitude mechanically driven blower engines are
given below, and further details are available in the appendix.
A. Five hours of alternate periods of five minutes of War Emergency manifold
pressure and speed and five minutes at a speed between 60 and 70 percent
on propeller load based on the War Emergency values grouped into the
following temperature and time brackets.
1) 2 hours with carburettor air temperature of 70°F + 10°
2) 1 hour " " * nu 80°F 7 3°
3) 1/2 hour ■ m n n n + 3O
A) 1/2 hour 11 mnmm 100 op 7 30
5) 1/2 hour ■ 9999 110 Op 7 30
6) 1/2 hour " ■ ■ • ■ 120°F 7 3°
B. Two and one-half hours at War Emergency manifold pressure and speed with
carburettor air temperature of 70°F ± 10Pp.
The tabulations on the following pages show the most important types of
engines in production and under development and. a short description follows
of the salient features of each.
48-2.02 Review of Liquid Cooled Engines. The following notes are supplementary to
the tabulations, the engines being dealt with in order to size, starting from
the smallest.
1. Continental TV-1430. This is an inverted Vl2 liquid cooled engine
and is an entirely new departure for the Continental Co., whose previous exper-
ience has been entirely on
snail training engines.
No members of the Mis-
sion went to Continental
because they felt that, how-
ever good the engine might
be, it was unlikely to be of
interest owing to its small
size.
2. Allison V-1710.
Allisons have now cleared
War Emergency ratings for
their single stage engines
and the power curves for the
low altitude and high alti-
tude editions are shown in
Figs. 3 and 4 respectively.
The most important dev-
elopment undertaken by
Allisons recently has been
the two stage blower with
hydraulic drive for the
auxiliary stage and this is
fully described in s*os*
FIG. 3
FIG. 4


COMPARISON OF ENGINE BULK


The "War Emergency" power curve is shown in Pig. 5, which also shows the con-
siderable improvement of their rating compared with the earlier single : tage
engines.
Allisons are interested in the application of water injection but have
not yet done any work on it. There is no doubt that this system is particu-
larly well suited to their arrangement of two stage blower without charge
cooling.
An interesting fea-
ture of the Allison engine
is the hydraulic damper in
the main Auxiliary drive
which is described in
chapter 5* This damper un-
doubtedly assists materially
in easing the condition of
the whole rear end of the
engine and seems worthy of
stuty.
Allison are using
Bendix carburettors and.
in the case of the two
stage engine the fuel is
injected into the impeller
eye of the second stage.
This system allows them to
bleed air from the first
Fig. 5.
stage supercharger for supercharging the dual magneto, distributors and harness.
The cylinder construction of the Allison Vl7io P ■type cylinder block is
shown on Pig. 6. This design differs from the usual American ideas in in-line
water cooled engines, in that a continuous water Jacket is used. However, in
effect it is very similar to the use of separate Jackets in that a coolant in-
let manifold is used and stainless steel baffles are fitted inside the Jackets
Fig. 6. Construction of Allison V1710 F Cylinder Block
showing flexible mono-block coolant jacket.


round the cylinder barrels which, in effect, divide the cooling jackets.
In addition the flexible design of cast jacket used, gives very little support
to the crankcase and the advantages of a mono—block construction in this
respect are lost.
Referring to Fig, 6 it will be seen that the cylinder barrels are shrunk
into the heads. This shrinking in operation causes the bottom part of the
cylinder head to expand and the head to bow. Although it is understood that
soiae allowance is made for this, the bowing out is not constant and in going
round the Allison factory the llission saw several heads which had had to be
straightened after fitting the cylinders. To do this it is necessary to raise
the temperature of the assembly, which judged by the colour of the barrels was
of the order of 320°C* It is also necessary to grind the cylinder barrels in
position to ensure correct alignment. The allowance for grinding is ,025” on
the diameter. The material of the barrels is carbonised carbon steel and it
would appear that due to the rather large grinding allowance necessary,
nitrided barrels are impracticable. The joint between the bottom of the barrel
and the water jacket can clearly be seen in the scrap view, the jacket being
pulled up against the flange on the barrel by means of a ring nut. This is
made possible by the flexible corrugated construction of the jacket. The use
of washers at this joint has now been discontinued. Should any leakage occur
at this point it will be indicated by loss of coolant through the bleed hole
and will not cause leakage into the crankcase or cylinder. When the Assembly
is bolted down on to the crankcase, the long cylinder holding down studs tend
to relieve the load on the ring nut and to increase the pressure on this joint.
While this form of construction has much to recommend it from the point
of view of obtaining freedom from coolant leaks, the necessity for using a
flexible jacket is a feature which is undesirable on a high duty in-line engine
and may have something to do with the crankshaft journal bearing troubles
experienced, particularly as the crankshaft is relatively stiff,
3. Wright “Tornado” R-2160. The 42 cylinder 2,400 cu.in., 7 banks of
6 cylinder liquid cooled engine was inspected and several examples were seen
stripped, 14 of these engines have been built and have done a considerable
amount of running over a period of nearly four years. The 7 piece crankshaft
geared to coupling shafts between the cylinder blocks is an interesting
solution since it deals with the problem of power transmission through a long
crankshaft and also assists the problem of damping: it is however, hea'vy for
an engine of this power. The layout is shown diagramatfcally in Fig,7.
Fig. 7. Diagram of Wright “Tornado” crankshaft' and coupling shafts.


For some reason that was not apparent, the engine is in trouble with valve
failure and poor distribution.
The engine is complicated, the exhaust system is difficult and altogether
it does not appear promising for the modest potential power. It was initiated
by Wright Field as a fighter engine and does not appear to have been received
enthusiastically by Wright Aeronautical. If it was fully developed and reac|y
to g© into production at a rating of 2,400 h.p. then it would undoubtedly be
useful for the war, but as it is at least a year or 18 months off being cleared
for production, it appeared to the Mission to be of doubtful value.
This layout might prove attractive for an engine of double the size to
give 4000 to 5000 h.p.
4. Chrysler IV-2220. This inverted Vl6 liquid cooled engine is of
considerable technical interest and although the design is not attractive in
all respects there are several ingenious features. The most striking of these
is the method of overcoming the difficulties of transmitting the drive through
an 8 throw crankshaft. The crankshaft is split centrally, the two halves being
bolted together through a spur gear which meshes with a further gear between
the Vof the cylinders; this in turn transmits the drive to the propeller
through a shaft as diagramatieally in Fig. 8; the camshaft drives are also
taken from this point. In conjunction with this arrangement the smarting is
of interest in that the main mounting leads are taken by flexible pads on
either- side of the crankcase adjacent to the central driving gear. All the
main mounting loads are taken through these pads and only a steady bracket is
used at the rear end.
Fig. 8. Diagram of Chrysler reduction gear and central camshaft drives.
Tbs engine is of extremely small frontal area and can be enclosed by a
circle of 34" diameter. In view of the divided crankshaft and the use of
independent cylinders, however, the overall length is considerable although
the diy weight of about 2,000 lbs seems remarkably low for this form of con-
struction.
The cylinders are provided with 2 valves in a pent house head and while
the combust ion chamber shape is attractive it is doubted whether the engine
will be able to breathe adequately at very high piston speeds. The claimed
take-off power of 1950 h.p. at 3,400 r.p.m. seemed reasonable in relation to
the total piston area. It is considered unlikely, however, that the engine
could be in production for another two years by which time this power output
is likely to be inadequate for a new engine
The engine was originally laid out for fuel injection and exhaust turbo
blower; the former is being investigated by all the engine makers in America,
but the engine which the Mission saw on the bed was fitted with a carburettor.
5* larcoming XH-2470. This is an H type liquid cooled 24 cylinder engine.
A number of experimental engines have been built and run and powers of over
2,500 h.p. have been recorded, the rating of the production type engine being
given as 2,300 h.p. for take-off. This output of nearly 1 h.p. per cu.in. is
high and is quite an achievement in view of the small engineering staff. One
version of the engine has fuel injection.
It .is understood the Navy have given iy coming an order for 100 engines but
there does not appear to be any practical use for these.
It cams as a surprise to the Mission to find that Iycoming have also built


an experimental H type liquid copied engine of about 3,350 cu.in. capacity.
The most interesting feature of this engine is that the cylinders have been
displaced to an angle of 10° to allow more room for an efficient induction
system and this feature seems worthy of consideration for any future design
of H type engine.
Iycoming are developing a two stage blower and two speed counter rotating
reduction gear.
6. Allison V-3420. The 24 cylinder liquid cooled Allison is built up
of 2 12 cylinder engines on a common crankcase but employing twin crankshafts
which are coupled at the reduction gear. A considerable test backing has been
built up on this engine which is now in small scale production although there
is no outlet for it at the moment. Pour power units employing two stage
G.E. turbo superchargers are being built for installation in the 819 and the
Mission had an opportunity of examining this power plant which is being built
by General Motors under the direction of Mr* Don Berlin. The size of the
power unit and the complication of the piping was rather fearsome but neverthe-
less General Motors are pressing to have this engine adopted as an alternative
to the 3,350 cu.in. Wright for the 829 and 832.
k two stage blower with a variable hydraulic coupling for the auxiliary
stage is under construction. This blower is similar in principle to that for
the Y-1710 engine except that the carburettor is located between stages on the
former, but the whole mechanism has been built integral with the engine and
makes a neat assembly. The power curve for this engine is shown in Fig. 9*
Fig. 9.
Proposals have been made for using an engine of this type in a. single seater
fighter with extension shaft drive on the lines of the "Airacobra."
The crankcase of this engine, which is often a weak point in a 24 cylinder
in-line layout, looks very rigid and robust.
7. Studebaker 5.000 h.p. engine. Time did not allow a visit to
Studebaker to investigate this engine and we have very little information on
it. It is understood that the cylinder size is of the order of 8* bore by 12*
stroke and that particular attention is being given to good fuel consumption.
48-2.03 Review of Air-cooled engines.
1. Ranger V 770. The inverted Vl2 airvcooled engine of 4" bore x 5-1/8"
stroke is of considerable interest, in view of fts small frontal area and its
weight of only 750 lbs. The rating for take-off is 620 h.p. at 3,500 r.p.m.
on 91 octane fuel and a War emergency rating of 675 h.p. is under consideration.
Photographs of this engine are Bhown in Pigs. 10 and 11, while Pig. 12 shows
the 6 cylinder engine, from which the larger model was developed.
Interesting design features are the crankshaft torsional dampers which
cover Ijjr, 2 and order vibration. A torsional damper is also applied to the
camshaft.


The inlet and exhaust
valves are at present of the
same size but Rangers are
collaborating with M.I.T.
and the inlet valve will
soon be increased in
diameter.
The spur reduction
gear is at present of the
"Herringbone** type but
this is being changed in
favour of a straight spur
gear. A Bendix carbur-
ettor is used with injec-
tion into the impeller
eye.
Reference to Rangers
work on blowers and
cylinder cooling is made
in Chap.s of this Section
and the outstandingly
good work being done by
this firm, who are devel-
oping a small engine in
just the same manner and
with just the same drive
as is normally put into
the development of the
largest military engine,
will undoubtedly be
reflected in progressive
improvement of the type.
It is felt that the
effect of the war on
British engines of this
power has been to impede
development, but it is
considered that this
stagnation cannot be
allowed to continue
indefinitely and it is
suggested that firms
specialising on this
class of engine should
take careful note of the
work done by Ranger.
2. Wright Cyclone R-1820.
A re-rated Cyclone
9 with 1350 horsepower
for take-off will shortly
come into production.
It is expected that
engines of the new type
will be installed in five
Portresses this summer
for Service tests and
that the Change over for
production aircraft will
begin early in 1944-.
This engine has the new
cylinder barrels with
inserted aluminium fins
as described in Chapter
5* It also has forged
Fig. 10.
Fig. 11.
Fig. 12.


cylinder heads with deep machined fins pitched at about 7 to the inch.
Other features of this engine are a new piston, and the use of a silver
lined big end bearing.
ftratt & Whitney R-1830. No particularly interesting developments
are going forward on this engine and the only comment is to record the ins>res-
sian from conversation with pilots, etc. that this type has built up a
reputation second to none in .America for reliable service.
4. Pratt & Whitney R. 2000. This is a development of the R-1830
was designed for use in the D.C.4* The crankcase, solid crankshaft, split
master rods, etc. are identical to the R-1830 but the bore has been increased
to 5-3/4, with new cylinder barrels and heads. With a take-off power of about
1550 this will make an attractive engine, but no plans for pro duct ion have yet
been made.
5* Wrignt .Cyclone R—2600. The well-known 14- cylinder Cyclone is under
development for a take-off power of 1900 h.p. and will employ the same type of
barrel and forged head as the latest Cyclone 9« This development includes an
increase in swept volume of about 200 cubic inches which is effected by an
increase in cylinder bore.
6* Pratt & Whitney R. 2800.. This engine is in large scale production
and is building up a good reputation; it will undoubtedly play a large part
in America*s war effort. A considerable proportion of the output is of the
two stage type with intercoolers and it is interesting that despite this,
Pratt & Whitney have done some excellent work on water injection and quote a
take-off power of 2200 for the two stage engine with water injection. An
engine of this type was seen installed in the new Curtiss P. 60 fighter.
Carburettors have been modified for water injection and the extra parts have
been neatly built into the body casting.
The interest in water injection in America generally was considerable and
although experimental work has been done in this country over an extended
period, it looks as though the Americans will be in production with an engine
so fitted, before us.
The latest series of the R. 2800 engine which has now done considerable
experimental running and will shortly come into production embodies a number
of major modifications.
Probably the most fundamental change is an alteration to the crankcase
centre section which is now made in one piece instead of being split along the
longitudinal centre line; this ensures complete freedom from ary fretting of
the crankcase joint and provides more rigidily. In conjunction with this new
crankcase the crankshaft now has a joint adjacent to the centre bearing and
this allows a plain centre main bearing to be retained. This is shown diagramma-
tically in Pig. 13, and is of the Hirth type with radial serrations. This typ©
Original crankshaft.
New crankshaft.
of joint also replaces the longitudinal serrated type previously used in order
to overcome a tendency to fretting of the latter under overload running condi-
tions.
It will be noticed from the sketch that, In conjunction with these changes,
the mirror type crankshaft with four counter balances has been abandoned in
favour of the more conventional type of shaft with only two counter balances.


It is interesting to note that the whole family of Pratt and Whitney
engines still retain aluminium alloy crankcases and that they have not
adopted the steel crankcase now used by Wrights. Pratt and Whitney state
that they are unwilling to give up the rigidity gained by the comparatively
thick sections of the aluminium case.
7• Wright Cyclone R.3350* The 18 cylinder "Cyclone" is passing through
a difficult period with teething troubles but in view of the number of air-
craft which are scheduled for production with this engine, there is little
doubt that it will be made to operate satisfactorily, though it is considered
likely that it will be about a year before all the required modifications can
be cleared and in production. The power curve for this engine is shown in
Fig. 14.
One of the difficulties is
associated with high stresses in
the propeller blade roots due to a
nodding vibration of the engine as
a whole. The Lanchester type
balancer used in the R. 2800 has
been so successful that Pratt &
Whitney have been called in for
consultations with Wrights and
the latter have designed a simi-
lar type of balancer for incorpor-
ation in the R. 3350.
The original version of this
engine had the front and rear
banks of cylinders closely pitch-
ed and as there was not thus
enough room for exhaust pipes to
pass between the banks, two ex-
haust manifolds were provided, one
at the front and one at the back.
It is understood that several hun-
dred engines of this type will be
manufactured before production is
Fig. 14.
changed over to the later engine with store widely pitched hanks, which will
have a single rear exhaust manifold. Engines of the later type will he instal-
led first in the SB2D and the "Constellation" and later in the 829 and 832.
The latest type of cylinder barrel and cylinder head will come Into pro-
duction shortly on this engine while another interesting new feature is the
Fig. 15. Connecting rod system for “Cyclone 18”.


adoption of low tension ignition distribution with
coils mounted on the cylinder heads; this system
increases the total engine weight by about li*4r lbs.
The Mission saw one of the latest engines
stripped and it was interesting to note that the
"I" section of the artic rods have been turned
round in the same way as the master rod. The con-
rod assembly is shown on Fig.ls* A further fea-
ture is the relief on the top of the connecting
rod small end eyes, which has been introduced, it
was stated, to reduce cracking of the gudgeon pin
bosses in the piston.
The shrouded exhaust valve used on the later
Cyclones is shown in Fig. 16.
8. Wright 4090. This is a 22 cylinder two
row air cooled radial with an overall diameter of
some 58". It is believed that Wrights are also
running an 11 cylinder single row radial rated at
1500 h.p.
Fig. 16.
This family of engines are still in the development stage and have not
yet flown; in view of Wright’s present big end limitations with 9 cylinders
per bank it would appear that they have a major problem to solve. The increase
in overall diameter must* also be a handicap.
The impression was gained that Wrights were well aware of the limitations
of these engines and they have already started work on a larger multi-bank
radial.
9. Pratt and Whitney R. 4360. This 28 cylinder four row staggered rad-
ial of bore by 6" stroke was started some 27 months ago and rapid progress
was made with the two original prototype engines by using as many assemblies
as possible from the 2,800 cu.in. engines. Such parts as cylinder barrels and
reduction gear were employed. A total of 12 engines have now been built and
over 5,000 hours bench running have been completed; two engines were seen
running on adjacent benches at the same time. The present power output is
3,000 h.p. for take-off at 2,700 r.p.m. and 5l£ H manifold pressure; this will
probably be increased before production starts to 3»300 for take-off and about
2,800 h.p. at 22,500 ft. with a two stage blower, a possible war emergency
rating of 3,000 h.p. at 18,000 ft. was mentioned; this is remarkably good for
the weight of about 3;600 lbs. and a diameter of only 52" at the front of the
cowl and 55" at the rear.
The cylinders are bolted to the crankcase by means of 16 studs and are
rotatable for tractor and pusher installations. The exhaust ports are in the
normal side location but the inlet ports are located on the top of the heads
and are served by manifolds with flexible rubber joints between banks, these
being reminiscent of water manifolds on a liquid cooled engine.
Much work has been done on the cooling of this engine and it was stated
that only 5" of water pressure drop was required at 205 m.e.p.
A straightforward single piece four throw crankshaft is used with crank-
pins of roughly 3" diameter. There are five plain main bearings, in conjunc-
tion with a five piece crankcase with the sections split to allow assembly
over the bearings. The counter weights are concentrated on the two end wsbs.
The master rods are split and are similar in general design to those used in
the R. 1830 engine. The four connecting rod bolts are roughly 0.6" diameter.
Split gears are bolted to the crankshaft to drive the five cam rings.
There are 7 dual magnetos which are disposed radially around the front
cover in front of each line of four staggered cylinders. A Zerol bevel drive
is used at the rear end for the main auxiliaries comprising starter, genera-
tor, etc., which are again radially disposed around the rear end of the mag-
nesium blower casing.


Provision is made for flexible engine Mountings suspended from triangu-
lated brackets whose rear end is bolted to the Magnesium volute case and
whose front end is attached to the forged crankcase, but alternative mounting
schemes are being tried.
The Mission were shown a two speed contra-rotating reduction gear for
this engine, which was stripped after test and appeared to be in good condi-
tion.
This engine will undoubtedly allow a spectacular improvement in aircraft
performance and almost every aircraft firm in America is contemplating
machines using it; two prototypes were actually seen by the Mission. A
development batch of 50 engines is now in course of manufacture and production
will start at the end of 192*3 and is expected to build up to several hundred
engines per month by the middle of 192*4*
The Americans are convinced that there is a place for reciprocating en-
gines of this size and larger and they are going all out to produce the finest
large engines in the world.
Unless the British Industry embark on clear policy on large reciprocating
engines forthwith, they will be reliant on American supplies within a few
years.


CHAPTER 3 - PROPELLERS
J*B-3»0l Conclusions and Becomaendations.
Electric Propellers. Ike American production of electric propellers
is approximately 1/4 of the total output, and. it is understood that they
'will continue to be used in substantial quantities for the war period,but
that recent improvements in hydraulic propellers and certain difficulties
with electric propellers may mean that this policy will be discontinued
after the war, This, however, has not yet been decided and there is seme
development going on with electric propellers. The electric contra
rotating propellers that were seen in .America were heavy and complicated.
Steel Propeller Blades. Steel propeller blades are being actively
developed in America because of their long life and because they are
considered the most satisfactory solution for high powers. They at
present represent l/6th of the total production. This type of blade
gives more freedom for design of new pitch change mechanisms and allows
it to be made more compact and self contained. It is not felt that
either a steel blade or the improved hub that this makes possible could
be introduced in Britain during the war, but it is considered that this
type of blade and hub will be required fen? certain types of both civil
and military aircraft after the war and that development work should be
started.
As in this country, alcohol de-icing has been found so
unreliable tnat its discontinuance on certain types is under consideration.
Electric de-icing of the leading edge of the blade is being tested and it
would appear to offer a satisfactory solution for long range machines, and
especially civil aircraft where a high standard of safety is necessary.
With the experimental types there is a considerable loss of performance,
hut this will undoubtedly be reduced, and. it is considered that the work
which is being done on this form of de-icing in this country should be
encouraged.
48-3-02 Electric Propellers. The policy in regard to the application of
electric propellers in the United States has been different from that in
Great Britain, in that no British single engine fighter uses an electric
propeller, whereas this is a general practice in the United States. An
effort was made to find a reason for this. Various explanations were
given. None of these reasons are fundamental but various minor faults in
hydraulic propellers and production reasons have accounted for the use of
electric propellers.
1. At the time when a number of prototype fighters, such as the P.4o>
were developed, the Curtiss electric propeller was technically rather
ahead of the corresponding Hamilton type, since at that date Hamilton
Standard had not introduced the By drama tic type.
2. A number of the new fighters were manufactured by the Curtiss
Group, who naturally tended to use their own propellers.
3* Curtiss is an Army controlled firm and they would naturally tend
to use Curtiss propellers rather than Hamilton, which is a Navy controlled
company. Axmy favour steel blades and these have, until recently, only
been available on Curtiss propellers.
4* On single se&ter machines some trouble was experienced with oil
leaking from the hydraulic propellers reaching the pilot’s windscreen
and so obscuring his vision.
5* On a number of American engines the oil pressure at the front of
the engine drops considerably, and under negative or zero G conditions,
when manoeuvring or entering a dive, the loss of oil pressure in the feed
to the constant speed unit causes the engine r.p.m. to rise with
consequent damage to the bearings. This also occurred during inverted
flying.
6. Some trouble was at one time experienced with hydraulic


propellers with sluggish operation
at high altitudes, due to insuffi-
cient provision for the oil bleed-
ing.
7. On the Bell Airacobra it
was necessary to have a propeller
of such a design that the 37 mm.
cannon could be fired from the hub.
At that time the special Curtiss
electric propeller was the only
one available.
ftie latest types of hydraulic
propellers such as the Super Hydro-
matic and the Blanchard propeller,
manufactured by Aeroproducts,
eliminate all of these advantages
of the electric propeller and,
although the United States are
committed to the production of a
large number of electric propell-
ers, it is thought that the
tendency from now on may be towards
the hydraulic types.
Fig. 17. Curtiss electric contra-prop.
In England the electric propellers have been used almost exclusively
for multi-engined aircraft and the advantages which have been claimed for
this service have been the possibility of reversing and of looking in
fixed pitch. This latter point was a considerable advantage with non-
automatic carburettors in that it allowed the mixture to be weakened by
the altitude control on a3s r.p#m. drop basis, and also on a long flight,
if the propeller was locked in one pitch, then any incipient failure of
the engine led to a reduction of revs. , whereas with the propeller
constant speeding the r.p.m. were maintained and the pilot got no
indication of loss of power. In practice, however, advantage of this
feature was seldom taken and the latest American Super Hydrcmatic
propeller is not only reversible but will reverse very much faster
any electric type.
Electric operation has been applied to contra rotating propellers
but results so far achieved have been complicated and heavy, and we were
not impressed with the Curtiss dual rotation propeller, photographs of
which are shown on Pigs. 17 and 18. This propeller is operated by a
Fig. 18. Hub for Curtiss electric contra-prop.


pancake motor similar to that used on the single rotation propeller on
the Bell Airacobra; the front or outer portion is operated from the inner
propeller through a gear, rather similar to that used on the V.D.M.
propeller. Al 3 ft. propeller of this type weighs 775 lbs- A sealed
ball journal bearing made by M.R. C. is used between the inner and outer
propeller shafts.
liß-3 # 03 Hydraulic Propellers. There are two interesting new hydraulically
operaied propellers in the United States. These are
The Aeroproducts Propeller. This propeller is designed by
Mr. Blanchard and is made by a Division of General Motors. It has been
Fig. 19. General arrangement of Aeroproducts propeller.
in production for seme time
now and is used as standard
on the Airacobra. It is
thought, however, worth
while to discuss it briefly
because it does not appear
to be well-known in this
country. The general
arrangement drawing is shewn
cm Fig. 19 and a schematic
view on Fig. 20.
The oil system is en-
tirely separate from that
of the engine and is con-
tained in the propeller hub.
At present 5.A.E.10, i.e.one
of the lightest grades of
automobile oils, is used by
the Amy, although the Aero-
Pro ducts Company recommend
the use of 3587 hydraulic
oil as giving still better
results at very low tempera-
tures.
Fig. 20.


Oil pressure, acting on one side or other of the pistons which are
carried inside the propeller blade roots, pushes these pistons up and
down, and since they are carried on helical splines and also have
helical splines on their outside, the movement pf the piston causes
rotation of the blades. The three or four blades, as the case may be are
synchronised by a bevel gear at the front of the propeller. Oil at a
pressure of 1000 lbs ./in* is supplied by a gear pump which rotates with
the propeller and is driven by a stationary gear held on the engine nose.
The governor unit is particularly simple and neat. It consists of a
piston valve which directs the oil to the appropriate side of .the
pistons. This valve tends to move outwards due to centrifugal force and
is restrained by a helical spring acting on a beam. The relative
leverages of the weight of the valve and the force of the spring on this
beam depends upon the position of the fulcrum. This fulcrum can be
moved up and down the beam so as to alter the speed at which the
propeller will govern. Ibis movement of the fulcrum is carried out by
three quick thread screws which are rotated by an annular gear which is
under the control of the pilot. These quick thread screwy move a grooved
ring fore and aft and a shoe on the fulcrum engages with this zing.
This arrangement gives excellent governing. The rate of pitch change
is of course, governed by the size of the oil pump and the standard three
blade propeller gives 4-° per second.
Great care has been taken to avoid all risk of oil leaks; the Mission
had an opportunity to examine propellers which had been whitewashed before
engine test to show up any slight leaks, and it appeared from these that
the measures to prevent oil leaks had been entirely successful.
The advantage of the Aeroproducta propeller is its simplicity and
the elimination of any connection with the engine oil system. It is also
the first production hydraulic propeller which allows a 37 &■&• cannon to
be fired through the propeller shaft. The man hours required for the
manufacture of a complete three bladed propeller for the Airaoobra, which
of course includes all the governor mechanism, are about 300. Bie
particulars of an Aeroprodncts propeller designed for the Merlin engine
Mustang are as follows
Weight
Without Spinner Activity
Diameter Spinner Weight Factor
Aeroprop 3 blade 11*0 338 22 lbs. 102
« 4 • 11*1 428 22 lbs. 102
Aeroprodncts have under development a contra rotating propeller which
is essentially two propellers of the type described, except that the front
propeller has a synchronising valve instead of a governor which maintains
a definite pitch relationship between the front and rear propellers.
Hamilton Super gydrcmatio Propeller. This propeller has been
designed to an ideal specification without regard to simplicity. It is
not yet in production.
It uses a separate oil system and the blade operating mechanism is
in the roots of the blades, but in this case in the form of a vane working
in an annulus which operates directly to turn the blades. The use of this
type of mechanism involves very high pressures,of the order of 3000 lbs./I jot,
and this is provided for by cam operated plunger pumps, the number of
plungers being in each case twice the number of propeller blades. The
rate of pitch change obtained is 35° to 40° per second at 1500 propeller
r.p.m. Reversing can be carried out so quickly that it is unnecessary to
throttle the engine. This was demonstrated to the Mission on the test bed
and when reversing no change in speed was recorded on the engine
tachometer although & slight momentary increase of speed was Just
detectable by ear. The general arrangement of a contra rotating propeller
of this type is shown on Fig. 21.
The method of retaining the blades is interesting. The inner tracks


FIG. 21


for the ball bearings are formed on the blade root by induction hardening
and the outer tracks are formed direct in the propeller hub, the balls
being fitted through filtering holes which are provided. Although this
method is light and simple it obviously necessitates special accuracy in
order to obtain even loading on the four sets of balls. How this accuracy
is obtained is not known. The governor unit for this propeller is
attached to the engine nose and is of the normal centrifugal type.
48-3.0 V Contra Rotating Propellers. Some details of the mechanism of these
have been given above when discussing electric and hydraulic
propellers. They appear to be in much the same state of development as
in this country but they are convinced of their advantages and production
is planned to start this year. At present there is little information
regarding the relative performance of centra and single rotation
propellers as determined on full scale tests. Designs have been based on
N.A.C.A. tests of model propellers.
The only flight test information which the Mission obtained appertained
to the Curtiss XP6O, which is a single seater fighter with a Pratt & Whitney
R. 2800 engine, shown in Pig. 22. The performance of this aeroplane is not
such that a great advantage, other than in handling, would be expected
from contra rotating propellers, and this is confirmed by such flight test
information as was obtained.
Fig. 22. Curtiss XP60 with contra-prop.
The single rotation propeller tests were carried out with a 16 to 7
gear ratio and four bladed propellers of 12 ft. 11 in. and 13 ft. 2 in.
diameter. There is no difference in top speed performance between these
two propellers, but the smaller diameter, which is the one which Will be
standardised if single rotation propellers are used, is said to give a
rate of climb about 50 ft. per minute inferior to the 13 ft. 2 in.
propeller.
With the 6 blade contra rotating propeller, which is 12 ft. 2 in.
diameter, a two to one reduction gear is used. The all up weight with
the same military load is increased from 10,100 lbs. to 10,A0Q lbs. The
climb and all out level speeds at war emergency powers based on the
figures given to the Mission are shown in the tabulation below.


Comparative Performance of Curtiss P» 60 Single Seater Hghter
with 13*2" 4 blade propeller and 12*2" & blade contra propeller
Bate of Climb ft. per minute
Height
Sea
Level
12,500 ft.
20,000 ft.
Contra
Propeller
WOO
3600
3350
Single
Rotation
Propeller
4700
3500
3300
B.H.P.
2350
2100
2050
True Air Speeds m.p.h.
Height
Sea
Level
12,500 ft.
20,000 ft.
Contra
Propeller
370
1(00
420
Single
Rotation
Propeller
362
395
420
Although on this aircraft there is no appreciable change in speed or
rate of climb very little development has as yet been done and it is
possible that the performance with the contra rotating propeller will be
improved. However, in any case it will be retained because of the
improved handling.
No correction has been made for the difference in all up weight, as
this is a handicap which the dual rotation propeller must be able to off-
set, but it has been necessary to make an allowance for a slight
difference in engine powers, due to a small difference in the rating
used for the engines in the two tests.
Seme differential is allowed in propeller blade mechanisms so that
the relative pitches of the two propellers vary according to the blade
angle. For example on the Curtiss electric propeller in the fine pitch
position, both propellers have a blade angle of 20 0 but in the coarse
pitch position the front propeller has a blade angle of 6o° and the rear
an angle of
The distance between the centres of the front and rear propellers has
been determined by the design of the hub mechanism and by the necessity of
allowing a small clearance in the fully feathered positions, rather than
by an aerodynamio theory.
Curtiss Wright are using 15 in. centres for propellers with'9 ft. to
11 ft. diameter blades. Hamilton Standard use 17 in. centres for a
propeller suitable for blades up to 15 ft. diameter and this gives a
clearance between the blades of ij- in. in the maximum coarse pitch
position.


Comparative weights of contra-rotating propellers are given "below: -
Ifeke
Diameter
in ft.
Nuaber
of Blades
Weight
in lbs.
Curtiss
Electric
13
6
775
Hamilton
Super-
Hjrdro-
m&tio
12
6
630
Hotol
12.75
6
650
Do Havilland
13
6
630
l&- 3.05 Steel Propeller Blades. The Array Air Force has, several years,
encouraged the development of steel blades. The advantage of steel
blades, apart from the additional freedom it gives for the design of
special hub mechanism, lies chiefly in the reduced maintenance. On civil
air lines it has been found that the operating cost with steel blades is
considerably less than with aluminium ones because the work entailed in
blending out damage caused by stones, etc. on "take-off" is practically
eliminated. Steel blades are also an advantage against balloon barrage
cables.
There are four important steel propeller blades in the United States.
The Curtiss and the Aeroproducts which are in large scale production, the
A.o.Smith and the Hamilton on which considerable experience has already
been obtained and which will shortly be in production. In the case of the
Aeroproduets propeller and the Hamilton Super Hydraaatic, advantage has
been taken of the use of a hollow steel blade to put the operating
mechanism in the blade root, and on these propellers it would be
impracticable to use other than steel blades. In addition, on the Super
Bydromatie the blade bearings are formed in the actual root of the blades.
These factors make it difficult to get an exact comparison between
the weight of rteel and aluminium or wooden blades, but it is probably
fair to say that for sizes around 12 ft. diameter the actual weight of a
complete propeller is comparable with that of standard types using aluminium
blades and that above 14 ft. there is seme advantage from a weight point of
view in the steel blade design.
All the steel blades referred to are of approximately the same weight,
which is to be expected, since they all use steel of the same tensile
strength and the cross-sections are necessarily very similar. In the
smaller sizes, Hamilton use a composite construction with steel tips but
with the main portion up to about *7 radius in the form of a flattened
steel tube with an expanded rubber f dlring. This makes the Hamilton
blades very slightly lighter if allowance is made for the fact that part
of the bearings are formed in the blade. Weights for typical propellers
are tabulated below: -
Comparative Steel Propeller Blade Weights
Make
Diameter
Activity
Factor
Veight
Curtiss &
A. 0. Smith
13 ft.
70
65 to 70 lb.
Hamilton
Composite
12 ft.
70
64 lb.
Aeropro ducts
11 ft. 6 in.
100
60 lb.


Sketches showing the con-
struction of these designs are
shown on pig. 23 • The Aeroproducts'
propeller blade has a central rib
and therefore has greater resist-
ance than the Curtiss or 9sith type
against "oil oanning" vibration.
When steel blades of this type are
subjected to flexual vibration
there is considerable "oil canning"
or "panting" of the section and
this can be seen clearly with a
stroboscope when carrying out
vibration rig tests. On the other
hand the steel rib affects the
accuracy of the blade form and can
generally be felt on a finished
propeller. Technically there
seems to be little to choose
between the different designs of
all steel propellers but the
Hamilton composite propeller
possibly has a small advantage on
a weight basis in certain sizes at
the sacrifice of durability. But
it must be said that the part of
the propeller most liable to
damage is the tip and this is the
same on all the designs. Also
the all steel propellers may in
some installations require cuffs
to improve cooling, whereas the
Hamilton composite blade is, in
effect, a cuffed propeller.
Material. Either 5A8.6130
Chrome Vanadium or 5A8. 4330 Nickel
Chromb steels are used.
Manufacturing Methods.
Fig. 23.
Curtiss. The first six manu-
facturing operations are shown on Fig. 24. She
remaining operations are:-
7* Hatch up by selection with other
half.
8. Pit in heated die with collapsible
man dr ell and weld round outside.
9. The blade is then heated.in a
furnace with the open end sticking
out and the inside is welded using
a long water cooled oxy-acetylene
torch.
10. A copper fillet is then formed by
placing a copper wire along the
internal weld and heating the blade,
hydrogen is circulated through the
blade which is temporarily plugged
for the purpose.
Fig. 24.
Curtiss Steel Blade.
11* A ring is then built up on the root in a Unimelt machine. This
is an automatic arc welding machine in which a special flux fed
from a hopper is used.
12;. The ring is then machined true.


13. The root is then heated in an induction furnace which takes four
minutes and is upset on an Ajax type machine. It is then cooled
in flaked mica.
14. The other operations are straight-forward machining, polishing and
dull chromium plating.
The Hamilton Standard. The manufacturing stages in making these
blades are shown in Fig. 25.
Fig. 25. Hamilton Standard Blade.
In the larger sizes, the
tubular portion has a steel fairing
welded on hut in the sizes helow
14 ft. this fairing consists of h
hard sponge rubber with a solid
rubber covering. The trades for the
bearings are induction hardened.
Aeroproducts Propeller Blade.
In this propeller the main portion
of the blade which is shown on
Pig. 23 is a steel forging. The
front of this is machined on
hydraulic copying planers which take
two blades at a time and is a
reasonably straightforward job. The inner portion of this blade is, how-
ewer, the difficult part to machine and this is carried out on large
horizontal die-sinking Keller machines with either electri© or hydraulic
copying mechanism. This operation leaves a very rough finish and a great
deal of hand-grinding and polishing is necessary.
H ##
The back of the blade is a steel sheet .060 to .080 thick, which is
pressed to shape. The surface of the sheet and the main portion of the
blade are metallised with a copper spray gum and are then clamped together
in a heavy Jig for furnace brazing, using natural gas. The use of this
gas is very cheap in the States but it is necessary to control and watch
its quality, particularly In regard to C Og content, as this would cause
carburisation. The blades are then heat-treated and blown up in a steel
Jig, under air pressure to straighten them and to correct form errors.
This copper brazing operation gives a certain amount of trouble and
silver solder is being experimented with. The lower temperature involved
increases the life of the Jigs, but it is necessaxy either to use silver
solder of a sufficiently high melting point to allow the heat-treatment to
be carried out after brazing or to make the brazing operation also the
heat-treatment which is a possibility which is being investigated. Quite
a lot of experimental work is being done on different brazing times and
temperatures.
A. o. Smith Blade. This blade (Fig. 23) is flash welded. The root is a
hollow ?Ke leading and trailing edges are also forgings which
are polished internally. The cambered and uncambered plates are made by
rolling and pressing. In large propellers these plates may be forged to
gifs a varying section as required.. The tip is formed from a flattened
tube sealed at the outer end.
All faces to be flash welded are first machined. The leading and
trailing edges are first welded to the plates and then the root is welded
on. Finally the tip is flash welded to the remainder.
Corrosion protection. Dull chromim plate is the standard means of
protection and although this is porous, it has proved satisfactory,
providing the blades axe oiled. It does however reduce the fatigue
strength of the material and alternative treatments are being sought.
Aeroproducts are trying a treatment of the Pyrene type.
Repairing all Steel Blades. Curtiss steel blades are regularly
repaired and straightened after being slightly bent. This is a difficult
operation requiring a considerable amount of skill and a great deal of


hard woric. As it is being carried out in this country, it is not however
felt necessary to describe the methods used.
No experience of repairing on Aeroproducts blades is yet available
but the method proposed is to strip off the sheet steel back and to then
straighten the forged portion of the blade and to braze on a new sheet
steel back. This will, of course, always be a factory operation but it
is possible that it can be carried out by more systematic and mass
production methods than the rather crude hand straightening which has to
be carried out on the Curtiss blades.
The Hamiltop blade, providing it is only bent at the tips, should be
fairly easy to deal with although any damage entailing re-heat treatment
will presumably necessitate a new fairing.
The A O. Smith blade should be, perhaps, about the easiest to repair
as all the methods used on the Curtiss are possible, while in. addition
the welding on of a new outer portion should be practicable.
Conclusion. While it is not considered that on existing types of
British oombat aircraft there is arg great advantage to be gained from
steel blades, on very large propellers for high-powered engines, particu-
larly of the single rotation type, they may prove advantageous on a
weight basis. In addition to this it is felt that their reduced main-
tenance costs may make them absolutely essential for competitive civil or
transport aeroplanes. It is therefore recommended that the technical
development of a British steal blade propeller should be proceeded with,
although at the moment there does not appear to be any neoessity to plan
for large soale produotion.
Manufacturing Times. The firms visited were asked for their man
hours at present and for what they expected to require when production is
stabilised. Due to varying degrees of optimism and differing states of
development the answers are not directly comparative.
Firm
Man hours
at present
Anticipated
Man hours
Curtiss
60
AO *
Hamilton Standard
-
AO
Aeropro ducts
70
AO
The Aeroproducts time does not include the forging. No times for the
A.O. Saith are available.
The Mission feel that the ease of manufacture is probably as
follows
A.O.Smith
! Hamilton
Curtiss
Aeroproducts
The very expensive Hydro-Tell machines required for the Aeroproducts
propeller make it a poor produotion job apart from the question of man
hours.
48-3»06 Wooden Blades. The Mission found strong opposition at Wright Field to
the use of too den propeller blades on oombat aircraft. Various arguments
were put forward against their use such as:-
1. The difficulty of getting sufficiently thin sections for high
performance aircraft.


2. The man hours required for manufacture.
3. Resistance to atmospheric conditions.
With regard to 1 the Mission instanced the high performance obtained
with wooden blades on the Spitfire but Wright Field argued this was a
special case.
Referring to the question of man hours, we pointed out that these are
comparable with those required for steel bladed propellers.
Regarding resistance to atmospheric conditions, it appears that
American experience has been somewhat unfortunate and they have not had
adequate experience with the later British designs.
The Mission referred to other advantages of wooden blades, particu-
larly in regard to the reduced damage to engine reduction gears and
propeller hubs as a result of belly landings with wooden blades, but they
found these arguments unprofitable as a result of the Wright Field
attitude.
There is, however, no doubt that had plant for wooden blades been put
down a year or so ago, it would have very much widened the bottleneck which
exists in the production of propellers both for new aircraft and for spares
supplies.
The War Production Board were fully alive to this and were anxious
that we should convince Wright Field of the advantages of wooden
propellers.
With regard to the propeller firms themselves, both Aeroproducts and
Hamiltons are committed to the use of hollow steel blades for their latest
type of propellers but we found the Curtiss Wright Propeller Division very-
sympathetic to the use of wooden blades; they were however, unable to do
anything in the matter beoause of Wright Field opposition.
Some of the aircraft manufacturers were also interested in wooden
blades. This was particularly true of North American who were desirous
of having wooden blades on the latest edition of the Mustang with the
Merlin engine, the possible weight saving on this aircraft with wooden
bladed propellers being in the order of 130 lbs. without allowance for any
possible saving in tail ballast
It is understood that there are, in the United States, a number of
unused hydraulic presses which could be adopted for the production of
wooden propeller blades.
I*3—3-07 Aerodynamic Design of Propeller Blades.
"paddle Blades". On the Ventura, due to diameter limitations, and the
necessTty for avoiding the use of a four blade propeller because of
exigencies of supply, it was necessary to use a rather unconventional
design of blade. Particulars of this propeller are:
Hamilton Standard Hydromatic, diameter 10 ft. 6 ins.
No. of blades - 3
Solidity at .7 radius .134
Maximum chord 12.7 "
Thickness chord ratio at .7 radius - .083
This propeller is used on both the Ventura 834 and 837> which have
respectively Pratt & Whitney R. 2800 engines, and Wright R. 2600 giving
military ratings as tabulated below: -


M Gear
3 Gear
Alt.
R.P.M.
B.H.P.
Alt.
R.P.M.
B.H.P.
P & W. R.2800
1,500
2,700
2,000
13,500
2,700
1,600
flight R.2600
4,500
2,600
1,700
12,000
2,600
1,450
Both engines are fitted with 16 to 9 reduction gears. Although it was not
expected that these propellers would prove efficient their performance was
surprisingly good and has had & marked influence on the recent trend of
propeller "blade design.
Blades of this type have "been tried on the 8.17 (Fortress) and have
given an increase in ceiling of 2,500 ft. Four "blade propellers with
paddle "blades of high solidity are "being adopted on the 8.29 and 8.32
bombers.
Flared roots and cuffs* Tfte latest aluminium blades have much better
flared roots and the "telegraph pole" type of root is disappearing. This
has been made possible partly by the use of crankshaft vibration dampers
and partly by more accurate knowledge of the stresses, which has followed
on the improvement in strain gauge technique.
Contrary to expectations, the use of cuffs on liquid cooled installa-
tions has not led to any improvement in performance, but they are being
extensively used on radial engines, primarily to improve cooling. On the
Martin Mariner flying boat with four bladed propellers, cuffs are at
present only being fitted to two of the four blades. This was done because
the original Navy tests indicated that this gave the best cooling. How-
ever, further tests have been made and although it has been confirmed that
there is some improvement on the climb with 2 cuffs, it has been found
that the best compromise is obtained with cuffs on all four blades and it
is believed that this, latter arrangement will be introduced into production.
Aerofoil Sections. Considerable interest i* being shown in laminar
flow sections and these are used to a considerable extent on Hamilton
Standard propellers. Experiments, however, seem to show that in a very
short time dirt or abrasion causes a breakdown in the laminar flow and
that no substantial gain accrues from these sections.
Some interesting tests of blade sections are being carried out by the
Curtiss Weight propeller Division, using an engine fitted with thrust and
torque meters. Biese tests have been carried out with blades of the same
general design but differing in the section and with the same horsepower
and altitude at two different aircraft speeds and two different propeller
r.p.m , The results are- tabulated below:-
850 h.p. at 12,000 ft.
10 ft. 3 blade propeller with activity factor of 89i, B ft thickness
chord ratio at *75 radius.
Tests made with thrust and torqie meters.
Propeller
r.p.a.
Blade Section
Efficiency at
170 a.p*h.
True speed
Efficiency at
220 aup.h*
True speed
1,400
dark: X
82#
89#
N.A.C.A. 16 (High speed .5 to
.3 design lift co-efficients)
71#
84#
Double cambered dark X
76.5#
Qeycf
1,530
dark X
ai#
90#
N.A.C.A. 16(.5 to .3 design
lift co-efficients)
79#
87#
Double cambered dark X
85#
90#


Further tests with different design lift co-efficients are to he
made.
Propeller Tip Speeds. For various reasons a number of American
propellers are operating at rather high helical tip speeds. Hamilton
Standard say that they have a number which under all out level speed
condition at rated altitude are operating at a speed equal to the local
velocity of sound, and that they "believe that this gives a loss in
efficiency of about 5$ compared with the optimum design.
Curtiss Wright stated that on the P.47 Thunderbolt under the full
military rating level speed condition, the Ifiaah number is It Qffi*
Boeing have done considerable research on propellers under high
altitude conditions and say that they find definite loss in efficiency at
helical tip speeds in excess of 80$ of the local velocity of sound.
Considerable thought has been given to the development of very large
diameter propellers and all the propeller firms visited were thinking in
terms of maximum diameters of 18 ft. to 20 ft. and with relatively wide
chords. Mock-ups for some of these blades were seen.
The general practice in regard to propeller diameters and gear ratios
on current and prototype aircraft are shown on the following tabulations :-
Details of Propellers used in American Attack Bombers
Aircraft
Engine
Gear
Batio
Propeller Type
Diameter
Boston A20
Wright H2600
.562
3 Blade Hamilton
11 ft. 3 in.
Hudson A29
Wright H1820
.666
• N
10 ft. 6 in.
Baltimore A30
Wright H2600
.562
J * R
12 ft. 0 in.
Vengeance A35
Weight K26Q0
.562
H R
12 ft. 0 in.
Bermuda A34
fright R2600
.562
3 " Ourtiss
12 ft. 0 in.
Douglas A26
P.& W. R2800
.5
3 * Hamilton
Details of Propellers used an American Bombers
Aircraft
Engine
Gear
Ratio
Propeller Type
Diameter
Fortress B17
WTight H1820
.562
>3 Blade
Hamilton
11 ft. 6 in.
Boeing B29
Wright B3350
.35
3 *
N
17 ft. 0 in.
%
Liberator B2A
P.A W. HI830
.562
3 -
n
11 ft. 6 in.
Mitchell B25
P.d ¥. R2600
.562
3 "
*
12 ft. 6 In.
Marauder B26
P.A W. R2800
• 5
if *
Curtiss
15 ft. 6 in.
Consolidated
BJ2 /
bright R3350
.35
k 9
m
16 ft. 8 in.
Ventura B34
P.A W. R2800
.562
3 "
Hamilton
10 ft. C in.
Ventura B37
Wright B2600
.562
3 -
it
10 ft. 6 in.
■ 4 blades used experimentally
6 First three aircraft will have Ijhree blade Hamilton Hydromatics
16 ft. 7 in* dia*


Details of Propellers on American Hghter Aeroplanes.
Aircraft
Engine
Gear ,
Ratio
Propeller Type
Diameter
Kittyhawk P40
/Packard Merlin
1 or
'Allison.
.477
.5
3 Blade Curtiss
Electric
U ft. 0 la.
Airacobra P39
Allison
.5
h r n
10 ft. 3 in.
Airacobra P39
Allison
.448
3 " Aeroprop
10 ft. 4^in.
Bell P63
Allison
.443
4 " ■
11 ft. 7 in.
Mustang P51
Allison
•5
3 ■ Curtiss Electric
10 ft. 9 in.
■ P51B
Merlin
.5
4- ” Hamilton ■
11 ft. 2 In.
• P51B
Thunderbolt
«
•5
4 " Aeroprop x
11 ft. 1 in.
F47
P.& V. E2800
.5
4 " Curtiss
12 ft. 2 in.
Lightning
Allison
.5
r «
11 ft. 6 in.
Curtiss P60
P.4 W. B2800
.437
.5
4 11 single rotation
6 " dual Curtiss
12 ft.11 in.
12 ft. 2 In.
Corsair P4U
P.& W. H2800
.5
4 " Hamilton
13 ft. 3 in.
Hellcat P6P3
P.A W.. H2800
.4-37
3 " Hamilton
13 ft. 0 in.
m Type not yet standardised.
Details of Propellers used on ffLying Boats.
Aircraft
Engine
Gear
Eatio
Propeller Tjrpe
Diameter
Catalina PBY5
p.& w. BI830
.562
3 Blade Hamilton
12 ft. 0 in.
Mariner FEM3
Wright S2600
A37
3 " Curtiss
15 ft. 0 in.
Mars PB2K
Wright B3350
.437
3 * Curtiss
16 ft. 6 in.
48-3.08 Propeller De-icing. Sven with special shbes to distribute the fluid
it is generally agreed that liquid de-icing is unreliable and alterna-
tives are being pursued.
Electric De-icing. The Mission received good reports from both the
Army and Navy on tke of electric de-icing which is carried
out by heater wires embedded in a rubber strip on the leading edge of the
blades. Consolidated showed the Mission a report of flights on a 824
fitted with a heated wing and other special icing protections. This


aeroplane has been flown in appalling icing conditions and the electri-
cally de-iced propeller on one engine has given oomplete satisfaction.
On one flight of hi hours, 6J- gallons of alcohol were used for each of
the other propellers, in spite of which the vibration due to ice was said
to be terrific. Thd electrically heated propeller operated smoothly for
the whole flight.
In the Hamilton system the electric energy is generated by an
alternator, the armature of which is fixed to the propeller and the stator
to the engine reduction gear case. The stator is excited from the air-
craft system. The generator weighs 25 lb. and gives 1,400 watts at
1,200 propeller rvp.m. About watts per sq. inch are believed to be
necessary. loe builds up to a certain thickness and acts as an insulator
which raises the temperature of the rubber and causes melting of the
inner ice. (Oils breaks down the adhesion of the ice and it breaks off in
small pieces.
Service trials are being made on Catalina flying boats.
Conducting rubber in between two layers of insulating rubber is being
tried as a heater element.
Curtiss bright are also trying electric de-icing using current from
the aircraft system.
One disadvantage of the electric system is that with geared or engine
speed fans it will be difficult to apply. The most serious is however the
loss of performance. Wrights have found a loss of speed of 15 m.p.h. on
a 300 m.p.h. aeroplane due to fitting the shoes. This figure will be
reduced by better design but there will always be some loss on high speed
aircraft.
De-icing Lacquer. Hamilton Standard have developed a new lacquer
which is sprayed on the blades and which they claim is effective for
several hours. In general they claim that the active substance will not
be lost until the whole lacquer is removed by abrasion and corrosion,
although artificially it is possible to dissolve it out by immersing
the blades in water. If this is done the lacquer changes oolour.
Wright Field are very interested in this substanoe and service
trials are to be made. The Curtiss Propeller Division have tried it and
have not found it very promising.
De-icing Experiments. Curtiss Wright tests are made in flight on a
twin engine machine with a water spray from a pipe projecting from the
fuselage in front of the propeller. This does not reproduce natural
conditions but is thought to give useful information.
WTight Field have a Liberator (824.) which is loaded up with water
which is sprayed by powerful electric pumps driven by batteries carried
in the fuselage. This aeroplane is flown in front of the aircraft being
tested.
CHAPTER 4 - POWER EGG- POLICY AND INSTALLATION
lnterchangeable Power Units* The use of interchangeable basic power units
was discussed in detail with the Army and Navy authorities as well as with
the engine and aircraft firms visited*
The Mission went out to America with the intention of recomaending
that the British practice, of power units manufactured by the engine films
and basically interchangeable as between similar types of aircraft, should
be adopted* However, it was found the conditions varied so much from those
obtaining in this country that the recommendations finally made were for a
modified application, of the British practice*


Present position in regard to Fewer Plants in the U*S*A* No power plants
In the United States are Interchangeable as between different typos of
aircraft and in several cases on four engined machines the Inboard and
outboard power units have basic differences* In no case are power units
manufactured by engine firms (except a few experimental units built by the
Ranger Company) but in oertain cases power units are sub-contracted by the
airframe manufacturer to specialised firms such as Rohr* The equipment at
these specialised firms and at those aircraft factories which made their
own power units was excellent and there is no doubt that the planning which
had gone into the layout and tooling for the manufacture of power units
has a great deal to do with the excellent results obtained and the good
fit and finish of the assemblies* Some notes on the manufacture of power
plants are given in part A, Chapter 4*
The principle of qpickly detachable power units has, however, been
widely adopted and will be carried out, particularly on Navy aircraft and
these power units can be changed as quickly as British types* The
power plants are not, however, shipped abroad as complete units, the Navy
practice being to ship what they know as a "quick change unit", whioh is
essentially the power plant minus the engine, and the engine separately, the
intention being that they should be built up as complete power units ready
for fitting to aircraft at forward repair depots* In practice the opportunity
for this to be done does not always occur*
Reasons for the Different Policies adopted in America and Great Britain*
Tbis practice Is adopted because it does not ile up so many spare engines, and
it reduces the weight and bulk of the units to be handled which is a con-
siderable advantage, as in the Pacific a great many spares have to be sent
by air transport* It also simplifies the corrosion inhibition and sealing
up of the engines*
Further differences affecting the different policies in the two countries
are the great distances to be covered in the united States, which makes it
uneconomical for engine firms to supply complete power units and to ship
them from the coast to aircraft constructors* The general use of turbo
supercharged engines also adds enormously to the difficulties of standard—
isation*
Recommendations* The Mission was rather perturbed to find a number of
almost identical power plants which were being made at a number of different
factories, and that engines such as the 14 Cylinder Wright Cyclone were
being built into a number of different nacelles for whioh all the stress,
design and development work had to be carried out independently, whereas these
designs could have been rationalised with not only a saving in effort but
with the improvement which intelligent specialisation always brings in its
train* It was explained that British experience with both liquid and air-
cooled power units had shown that the thorough flight,testing and development
which could be given to a standardised unit eliminated many of the irritating
troubles which so often delay the flying of prototype and which sometimes
continue well into the production batches before they are eradicated.
The standardisation of design can also save a great deal of effort in
the production of stampings and fittings for engine mountings, etc* The
following specific recommendations were made to the United States authorities*
(a) On multi engined aircraft built to the sa» specifications and using
the same engines, an endeavour should be made to use interchange-
able power units and that wherever possible, the fitting of
alternative types of engines without basic change to the aircraft
structure should be considered, particularly if the engines first
fitted are of an experimental or not fully developed type*
(b) That these power plants should, where possible, be made by one firm
situated as near as possible to the works of the company making
the rest of the aircraft* For the present it would seem that
the design would have to be made the responsibility of one of the
makers of the aircraft concerned but eventually it might prove
advantageous if the engine firms would undertake the design and
development of power plants*


(c) That since engines once installed in aircraft may have to be stored
for a considerable period or even shipped by sea without special
protection from corrosion, there is no reason why they should not
be stored as power units and it is not understood why the filling
up of engines with heavy oil which can be only removed by heating*
should have been found necessary on American engines* This
practice is not adopted in England* The removal of heavy oil from
American engines before installing them, requires special equipment
which may not always be available and if it is not properly carried
out, there is serious risk of trouble from ring sticking* This
trouble has in fact been experienced on American engines operating
in Great Britain*
(d) If the use of the heavy oil for corrosion prevention can be dispensed
with, it was recommended that complete power units should be
shipped rather than separate engines and quick change units*
This would save a large volume of cargo space*
This whole question of standardised power plant was reviewed at some
length by the Mission during the first week of February at flight Field;
Colonel Bogeart was in the chair at this meeting and the recommendations as
outlined above were recorded in the minutes of the meeting*
The members of the Mission were therefore somewhat disturbed when
visiting an engine firm at the end of February, they were told by this firm's
Chief Engineer that the fright Field authorities had said that the Mission,
after hearing the situation in America, had agreed to abandon any idea of
converting the American authorities to standardised power plants* It is
felt that this should be recorded, and the Mission did appreciate that
conditions in America varied so much that a modified application of British
practice was advisable as outlined above, but they were by no means anxious
to abandon the whole project*
In regard to the question of the protection of engines when shipped as
complete power units, although the inhibiting of the engines against corrosion
with heavy oil is a problem, there appears to be no difficulty whatever in
adopting the wrapping of the complete unit in a sealed airtight cellophane
or Pliofilm bag. An illustration of a Bristol power unit sealed experi-
mentally in this manner and ready for placing in the packing case is shown
on Fig* 17 of Part A*
The Mission is convinced that so far as this country is concerned, the
British policy of concentrating the development of power units in the hands
of the engine firms is the correct one, although it is appreciated that
particularly in the case of single engine and specialist types, the design
mast be the result of close collaboration between the engine and airframe
firms*
It is, however, felt that we have got a lot to learn from the attention
whioh has been given to the design of aircooled engine installations in
the Dhited States, and that it is most important that every effort should
be made to keep the design of standardised power units up to date and to
revise them from time to time in the light of the latest knowledge, so as
to improve their aerodynamic efficiency*
A point which requires urgent investigation is the effect of shock
waves from ejector exhausts on the drag of engine nacelles at high Mach
numbers*
The scientific development of the best possible installation is much
more practicable when there are only a limited number of designs than
when each firm has its own ideas and designs which may be used only in
small quantities and cannot therefore justify such elaborate testing*
In spite, therefore of our smaller output of aircraft in this country,


ad compared with the United States, we should be able, by the standard-
isation of power eggs, to carry out at least as much testing on any
particular design*
Looking at this problem from the point of view of Great Britain, the
Mission is convinced that we should continue our present policy and that we have
not so far lost in the aerodynamic efficiency of these units by the concentration
of the development in the hands of the engine firms. It is most important that
these interchangeable units should be kept up to date and that every endeavour
should be made to improve their aerodynamic efficiency for the future.
Considerable work Is known to be in hand on new designs, but this would be
greatly assisted by more adequate wind tunnel facilities. The scientific
development of the best possible installation is much more practicable when
there are only a limited number of designs, than when every firm has
its own ideas and designs which may be only used in small quantities ana
will not therefore justify such elaborate testing*
43-4*02 Engine Installations*
Engine Mounting Structures* Mounting rings are, with one exception, welded
steel tubes which are an integral part of the mounting structure* This
means that carburettors must be removed when changing engines and for this
reason radial engines are always supplied with the carburettors not fitted*
but packed in the same oases*
This type of design makes for light and simple welded construction
And eliminates, the use of complicated machined fittings between the mounting
structure and the rings as used an British radials*
The ainm-irriiim alloy ring used on the Douglas SBD2D is an exception*
This ring is machined from two bent extrusions which are spliced together*
The original design called for a forging but this was found to be
impracticable* The mounting proper used with this ring is of the usual
molybdenum steel tube type but the end fittings are flash welded on* The
welding time is about 5 seconds* Sketches of the mounting ring and end
fittings are shown on Tig. 26. This mounting design is said to be
approximately the same weight as the normal American type but to be
cheaper to produce*
Fig-. 26. Engine mounting for Douglas SBD2D.


An interesting new engine mounting of monoooque design is used,
on the Douglas A»2 6 attack bomber* Douglas claim that it is 50 lbs*
lighter than a conventional structure although the Mission felt that
this estimate was probably optimistic* A drawing of this mounting is
shewn in Fig. 27 and a photograph on Fig. 28- The mounting is quickly
Fig. 27. Engine mounting for Douglas A.26.
Fig. 28.


detachable as will be appreciated from the photographs. With the layout
and accessories adopted on the rear covers of American engines, excellent
accessibility is obtained from the large assembly panel in the bulkhead.
It is unfortunate that such a design would not prove so practical on a
British engine with aooessory gear box, unless the latter was mounted
behind the bulkhead independently of the Power Plant. Such an arrange-
ment, however, has much to recommend it.
Access to engines from the bulkhead is not confined to monocoque
mounted engines and one interesting application is on the Lockheed
Constellation. In this installation, the engines are accessible in flight
by removing the panel at the back of the bulkhead. Since on the inner
engines the space behind the bulkhead is taken up by the l^nrHn g gear,
it is necessary to loner this in order to reach the engines, but the
wheel well doors are arranged to open to allow the undercarriage to be
lowered and then to close automatically when it is right down. These
doors form the floor on which the mechanic stands. Apart from
accessibility in flight possible, the closing of the doors with the
undercarriage lowered reduces drag on take off.
Engine Cowlings. A number of engine cowlings are at present in stainless
steel but partly because of the shortage of this material and partly
because aluminium sheet can be thicker and therefore smoother for a
given weight, its use in certain prototypes will not be followed on the
production models.
The N.A.C.A. have recently carried out a great deal of work on
radial engine cowling and the latest results of this work are embodied
in the diffuser cowl used on the Douglas A. 26 and certain other aircraft.
Photographs of this installation are shown on Pigs. 29 and 30 and a
drawing on Pig. 31. It will be seen that wing entry oil cooler ducts ar**
used and the treatment of the carburettor air intake is excellent
blends into the general design. The front mounted magnetos are cooled
by reverse flow underneath the stationary spinner, the small working
clearance which is necessary between this and the rotating spinner being
sufficient for the purpose* As will be noted, individual exhaust pipes
are used and these discharge in the gill annulus and are said to aid
ground cooling.
The propeller is fitted with cuffs. Plight tests carried out by
Wing Commander Summers have shown the cooling to be quite adequate.
Fig. 29. Douglas A.26.


Fig. 30. Douglas A.26.
Fig. 31. Arrangement of Douglas A.26 nacelle.


Pig. 22 in Chapter 3 shews the installation of a Pratt and
Whitney R* 2800 engine with two stage blower in the Curtiss P*6o which is
another good example of a modern low drag radial engine cowling.
48-4.03 Flexible Engine Mountings* As a palliative to serious vibration troubles,
rubber was used in America some 10 years ago as a vibration absorber in the
mounting, with promising re stilts* Further investigation led to the use
of rubber on & wide scale and eventually, so effective was it found to he
and so prevalent the troubles of which rubber was the cure, that such
mountings were fitted to all aircraft, and it beoame a routine matter for
engine mounting vibration characteristics to he examined before and during
the flight trials of a prototype*
A specification was issued governing the design of mountings and their
dynamic characteristics* The following clause from the specification
states the requirements in this respect:~
"Engine mounts to be installed by the airplane contractor* Frequen-
cies in all rotational and translational modes with isolators in place
shall be less than the freauenev corresponding to 45# of normal rated
r.p.m. or less than 75$ of normal rated propeller r.p.m. whichever frequency
has the lower value* The natural frequency of propeller engine combination
shall in no case be less than 400 cycles per minute on account of static
deflections becoming too large* *
"Permissible vibratory movements are allowed up to 0.009 inches at
first order* "
"Rubber must not exceed a temperature of 77°C during the cooling
requirements tests*"
The Air Farce is still using natural rubber for mountings although
synthetic is being tried - the characteristics being shear stress 50 lb./
inch* and compression stress 500 lb./inch^.
Development work has led to three main types of absorber - all having
"point suspension" characteristics, i*e. the virtual point of support of
the engine being as its centre of gravity* The three types are made by:-
(i) Wright Aeronautical Cozp*
(ii) Pratt & Whitney
(iii) Lord
Single units of the last two are illustrated in Figs. 32 and 33> the first
being a cylinder head type of fixing which is not being perpetuated* The
vibrational characteristics
are investigated on the ground
and in flight by means of
Sperry equipment using M.I.T#
siesmic pick-ups at appropr-
iate points# The electrical
output is proportional to the
velocity of movement so an in-
tegrating circuit is used and
results in all six degrees of
motion being recorded photo-
graphically# Sometimes the
"displacement" output is fed
direct to an harmonic analyser
and the constituent orders
separated out automatically*
For ground tests with vibra-
tors an Ames dial indicator
F ig. 32. P. & W. mounting.
is used for amplitudes# As stated above, evexy aircraft now undergoes a
check test and it is of great interest to note that Wright Field 'Engine


Fig. 33. Lord mounting.
Mount Laboratory by 1941 bad tested
the Defiant, Hurricane, Spitfire and
Wellington and had found that their
▼ibrational characteristics were much
worse than on the corresponding
American types and that the mounting
installations did not satisfy the
American requirements* The following
are the results of the Defiant natural
frequency survey and are of particular
interest because about the same time
(1941) an investigation was proceeding
in England on this aircraft into
excessive vibration*
(i) The aircraft tested was the Boulton-Paul Defiant-1, No* T. 4106.
Two rtibber pads at each rear engine bearer and one Tbrobestos pad at each
front bearer prevent metal to metal contact at the mounting points* Anti-
vibration bushings allowing relative motion between the power plant and
the aircraft structure sufficient vibrationally to isolate the power plant
were not provided on this aircraft*
(ii) The natural frequencies of vibration of the power plant mounted
in the subject aircraft were:'
(a) 475 o*p*m* - Coupled 801 l about the thrust (X-X) axis, Yaw
about the vertical (Z-Z) axis, and Translation along the
lateral (Y-Y) axis*
(b) 650 c*p*m* - Pitch about the lateral (Y-Y) axis, coupled
with Translation along the vertical (Z-Z).
(o) 11255 o*p*m* - Translation along the thrust (X-X) axis*
(iii) In all oases the resonant frequencies were due entirely to the
elasticity of the aircraft structure, the power plant and mounting being
sufficiently low to provide some degree of vibration isolation* The
tests indicated possible roughness due to propeller excitation in the
lower part of the operating range of the engine*
(iv) Description of Test Set-up and Experimental Procedure* The engine-
propeller mass was excited by means of an electrically-driven mechanical
vibrator of 3 inch-pounds unbalance producing linearly reciprocating
forces* The vibrator was attached to the engine in the plane of the two
front cylinders and in the longitudinal plane of symmetry of the engine*
The response of the power plant mass to the vibratory impulses was
measured by means of a special Ames dial gauge (rigidly supported in a
jig) used as a vibrometer* Vibratory resonance of the power plant was
measured at frequencies between 300 and 1750 o*p.m* in 50 o*p*m* incre-
ments* Additional readings were taken at frequencies near indicated
resonances*
Results* Vibratory amplitudes of relative motion between the
engine and its supporting structure were very small in the range of
frequencies tested (300 to 1750 o*p*m*)* The predominant motions were
those in which the engine and mounting structure ahead of the firewall
vibrated as a unit* Vibration of the power plant was also affected by
response of the aircraft structure and the stationary propeller blades*
The natural frequencies of the power plant mounting structure are
sufficiently low to provide sQme measure of vibration isolation* A possible
resonance at 2350 engine r*p*m* at propeller rotation frequency is indicated
Due to the strong coupling in this type of mounting system, it was not
possible to excite independently the several modes of motion. No correc-
tion of the pitching and yawing frequencies for gyroscopic effect of the
propeller was made.


German
British
U.S.A*
(▼) Conclusions.
(a) The method of mounting the power plant on the aircraft
structure did not permit de-coupling of the degrees
of freedom of the power plant mass* The elasticity of
the mounting structure, however, was sufficient to
provide a fair degree of vibration isolation.
(b) Small, discrepancies in blade angles of the propeller may
cause roughness at 2350 r.p.m. of the engine.
(c) The Material Division requires that vibration isolators
of low mechanical restraint be provided between the
power plant and its supporting structure. ?hus, the
power plant mounting system of this aircraft is not
in accordance with the requirements of the Handbook
of Instructions for Airplane Designers, Revision 4»
Section 11, part V, page 673, paragraph 101 (a) (3%
Further details of this investigation are available
in Appendix (1).
The following table gives Wright Field opinion, as a figure of merit,
on some of the American, British and German mountings tested, together
with the weight of rubber mounting parts oontained in each acting as
vibration isolators.
Aircraft Engine Weight of Figure of Merit
Rubber
Mounting
parts, lb.
8.23 R-2600 35 80J5 - 90J5 good
Dragon Wright
P. 36A R-1830—13 3 30% not recommended
P. 39 V-1710-35 Leas than 1 10$ bad fatigue fail-
Airacobra urea
P.4QS V-1 50 can be 80$ good
Warhawk reduced.
P.34A R-1830-49 22 80$ good
Lancer
Po 478 R-2800-21 44- 80$ good
Thunderbolt 6
P. 31 Y-1710-39 Less than 40 90$ good
Mustang ' *
Spitfire Merlin XLV D.H.3 Blade Less than 1 10$ poor
. *477:1 similar to ?.39
Hurricane Merlin IX Rotol .42; 1 " " 1 10$ poor
3 Blade wood
Defiant Merlin 111 D.H.3 Blade
.477:1 " M 1 10$ poor
Wellington Pegasus D.H.3 Blade
IC XVIII .3:1 Nil 10$ poor
M.E.109 D.8.601A 8.6 45$ fair
Ju. 88 Jumo 211 24 90$ good
In America the radial engine has been completely dealt with by
experimentation but the in-line engine hardly at all. Nevertheless the
opinion was expressed by Wright Field that by 1944 all aircraft plants
will have rubber insulated mountings.
Wright Field*s comments were also to the effect that the aircraft
structural problems demand that attention must he given to forcing effects,
and, apart from improved bombing and gunnery accuracy, that other advantages


result which cannot legitimately be assessed on an aircraft performance
basis at all. For example smooth engines allow greater crew efficiency
during long flights of up to 20 hours duration when physical and mental
fatigue would be aggravated by excessive vibration.
The Chrysler aero engine has a unique mounting. It consists of two
stiff side girders of forged light alloy carrying a large trunnion on each
side of the engine at the mid-point of its length; large rubber bushings
are employed between the girders and the crankcase. The rear end of the
case is supported from pitching by a light horizontal tubular tripod
anchoring to the bulkhead through a rubber isolator. Since the propeller
reduction gear is located at the main point of support this system can be
expected to possess considerable merit in practice.
On the question of the limited use of rubber on British mountings,
Colonel Dent said he is satisfied that if the British designers were to
study the utility of rubber then a more general use of it would be made
with beneficial results on the aircraft as a whole.
He suggested that the Lord Company would welcome the opportunity
to design and supply the parts necessary to convert a typical British
mounting or alternatively that Britain should send over a single engined
aircraft such as a Hurricane and Wright Held would modify and test it
and return it to U.K. for investigation.
Conclusions. The Mission consider that the American met nods of analysing
engine vibration characteristics are better than anything in this country.
These investigations have proved the value of correctly designed rubber
mountings and the Americans are convinced of their value, even for a
weight penalty of up to 50 lbs. on a 1,500 h.p. engine.
«
In view of this, it is hoped that advantage will be taken of American
experience and that a complete investigation will be undertaken both for
edr cooled and liquid cobled engines.




CHAPTER 5 - SPECIFIC TECHNICAL ITEMS
48-s*ol Blower Policy. The question of exhaust turbos versus two stage
mechanically driven blowers is under considerable discussion in America*
The Army have put. their faith in the G.E. exhaust turbos and are heavily
committed to the use of them* They have inspired the fitting of exhaust
turbos in single seater fighters, and have adopted them universally for
heavy bombers* The G.E. turbo has proved to be easy to produce and
there are now four firms engaged on the manufacture of this type; when
all the factories are in full swing there will undoubtedly be considerable
over-production and one plant may have to be shut down*
The impression was gained that the Army authorities are not quite so
confident as they were of the technical merits of this type of turbo far
two reasons: firstly for single seater fighters because of the lag in
accelerating the turbo, and because of the comparatively high drag, weight
and bulk of the installation and the loss of jet thrust; secondly for
bombers because of the complication and fire risk which are associated
with the present installations on large machines, and because of some
realisation of the difficulties of flame damping* In the case of the
present installation of the Wright 3350 cubic inch engines in the 8.29
and 8*32 for instance, the twin exhaust rings (front and rear) in
conjunction with twin turbos in parallel, has produced a coop lex
installation* Nevertheless the Army’s commitments far this type of
blower are so large that they are not likely to discard it lightly*
The Navy, on the other hand, have consistently supported the two
stage mechanically driven blower, and. large gpmbcrs of Pratt & Whitney
1830 cubic inch engines have been produced with two stage blowers and
inter-coolers and much operational experience has been gained on carrier
borne aircraft* It is interesting to note* however, that whereas the
Navy have been somewhat critical about the existing type of exhaust
turbo, they are now interested in the mare advanced Biraann turbo, which
is fully described in 5*07 and a prototype machine using it is now in
course of construction. The Wright company have also built an improved
turbo for the Amy, generally similar to the G.E. but employing hollow
turbine blades to allow a flow of cooling air* Both these advanced
types of turbo allow for utilisation of the residual exhaust thrust and
allow the turbo to be installed as dose to the engine as may be
desired*
li£-5«02 Single Stage Mechanically Driven Blowers* The Mission went to
America with the idea that they would be able to help on this subjeet and
they were able to give the Americans some useful information* It was
found, however, that the American firms are undertaking useful development
work on mechanically driven blowers and a lot of help is being given by
the N.A.G.A. supercharger committee under the leadership of Mr* Campbell
of Wright Aeronautical* This Committee is one of the many examples
found by the Mission of excellent pooling of technical information by
competitive firms*
In general terms the American production single stage blower is in
the same • category as our own production types as regards pressure ratio
and efficiency at a given impeller tip speed, up to 1250 ft. per second;
the Americans, however, are not prepared to accept the high induction
temperatures at which British engines operate satisfactorily, and the
TnATfiimim tip speeds are therefore kept lower. Typical impeller tip
speeds of British and American engines are given in the table below.
Typical Impeller tip speeds (ft* per second)
At all out
At Max* Ecoru
level speed.
cruise speed*
British
1400
1150
American
1250
950


The Americans now realise, as we do, the necessity of providing
adequate length to get a good blower entry and this is reflected in the
increased overall length of some of their later engines. Much rig work
is being done to explore various foras of entry and these developments
will undoubtedly result in further increases of efficiency in the near
future. Wrights, for instance, have "blown" various models of the
entry for the 3350 cu.in. engine and have arrived at a shape generally
similar to that for the Hercules 10 SM and comparable efficiencies are
expected.
Due partly to their lower impeller tip speeds and consequent lower
bearing loadings and partly to thear use of plain impeller bearings, the
Americans have not shown any interest in the use of double shrouded
impellers to reduce bearing end loads. On large impellers, however,
they are now in difficulty with failures, which they attribute to
vibration of the impeller vanes. A thorough investigation is in hand
and Pratt & Whitney are much interested in double shrouded impellers,
which they are confident will cure the trouble. In this connection it is
interesting that Allison and other engine firms are considering the
possibility of producing cast double shrouded impellers using plaster
cbres. Wrights have run a cast double shrouded impeller produced by
General Electric up to 1250 feet per second tip speed without trouble.
48-5• 03 Volumetric Efficiency.
While dealing with
blowers it is considered
opportune to mention the
interest being taken in
America in induction
systems to improve both
volumetric efficiency and
distribution. Allisons
and others have undertaken
quite a lot of work on
Fig. 34. Induction system on Allison V-1710 engine.
this and Pig. 34 shows an outline of the induction system evolved by
Allisons; they do not consider this to be perfect and further work is
in hand but the Mission was impressed by the apparent good distribution
of Allison engines running on the test bed. This is one of the
many subjects which are being studied at the various university
laboratories and when .a member of the Mission visited M.1.T., he was
shown several single cylinder units which were being devoted to
volumetric efficiency work with particular reference to the ratio of
inlet to exhaust valve size, valve sizes in general, port shape, piston
friction etc.
It is worth recording that on Pratt & Whitney two stage engines,
and on all turbo installations, the carburettor is located between
stages, but that the Allison two stage V. 1710 engine has its Bendix
carburettor on the induction side of the first stage. In order to
provide adequate metering control at.low engine powers, the carburettor
size had to be reduced below the optimum, with a consequent loss in
rated altitude. In order to overcome this, consideration is now being
given to re-positioning the carburettor between stages, and this arrange-
ment has been followed on the two stage edition of the 24 cylinder
engine.
As R.A.E. carburettor and the S.U. pump injector do not
depend on a pressure drop across a venturi for their metering, they can
be used in either position without any loss in performance, thus
giving more freedom in blower design.
Planiol Blower. It is characteristic of t'qe Americans that the com-
paratively small Ranger Company have engaged Planiol and set him up
in a Research Department with first rate test equipment and large
sums of money to carry out his investigations. Pigs* 35 and 36 are
illustrative of the type of equipment being used.


Fig. 35. Control panel for Ranger blower test cubicle.
Two types of Planiol blower are being
developed, one as a single stage single
speed for the Ranger 770 cubic inch engine
and the other as a two speed auxiliary
stage for the two stage Allison engine.
The chief feature of the Planiol blower
is that its pressure ratio can be varied
at constant impeller tip speed, by
means of tilting inlet vanes as shown
in Pig. 37* This allows a reduction
in the power required under all
conditions up to critical altitude in
conjunction with a reduction in induction
temperature. The impeller is interesting
in that it employs aerofoil section guide
vanes between the impeller blades, in
conjunction with three or four sets of
rotating entry guide vanes in tandem. A
split vane diffuser is used.
Fig. 36. Ranger blower test cubicle.
Fig. 37. Diagram of Planiol blower.
The design of the blower for the Ranger engine was originally laid out
on the basis o£ TJ% efficiency, but this has not been achieved to date.
Prop the tabulation below, it will be seen that the pressure ratio
achieved is corap arable with that of the Hercules VIII Mark II auxiliary
supercharger at the same impeller tip speed.
Comparison of Planiol Blower for Ranger V - 770 with orthodox
double entry first stage blower for Hercules VIII, Mark 11.
Impeller tip speed
Efficiency per cent.
Pressure Ratio
ft. per sec.
Hercules
Planiol
Hercules
Planiol
1100
75.4
72.5
2.2
2.3
1200
75.2
72.0
2.45
2.5
1250
75.0
70.0
72.5*
2.65
2.7
At 1250 ft. per sec. with four instead of three sets of
rotating guide vanes.
Blower Drives. Considerable interest is being shown in multi speed and
infinitely variable blower drives and Pratt and Whitney, for instance,
are testing a system, using a hydraulic coupling to accelerate the blower
for engagement of the various ratios. Wright are experimenting with a
multi-speed system with the idea of using four or more speeds.


Ore of the most interesting blower drives is that used by Allison on
their production two stage 1710 cubic inch engine; a similar arrangement
but with the two stages integral, is being made for the 3420 Cu. in*
engine* Allisons have adopted the Sinclair type variable hydraulic
coupling have devised a particularly suitable Application*
The Allison two stage blower provides no charge cooling and should
not be considered as a high altitude engine, but rather as an alternative
to a single stage multi-speed blower and as such it must be considered
to be very satisfactory. Future developments are, of course, likely to
include high*** impeller tip speeds in conjunction with charge coolers*
The integral blower is positively driven continuously from the
engine, and the hydraulic coupling is used to drive the auxiliary stage
only. The hydraulic coupling has two interesting features*
(a) Method of control* An arrangement of the coupling is
given in Fig. 38. The main feature is that there is a
constant oil inlet flow with a variable scoop outlet
control which varies the amount of oil in the working
chamber* The coupling does not therefore suffer from
the disadvantage of the Daimler Bens type where the
flow is smallest when the slip is greatest and consequently
when the maximum heat has to be dissipated*
Fig. 39. Continuous core ring.
Fig. 40. Interrupted core ring.
Fig. 41. Perforated core ring.
Fig. 38. Diagram of Allison hydraulic blower drive.
Fig. 42. Energy loss with hydraulic blower drive.


(b) Control characteristics* The normal fluid flywheel with
contiguous core ring as shown in Fig. 39 suffers the
disadvantage that the relative speed does not follow a
straight line law with respect to the oil level, and it
would therefore be difficult to control accurately* This
can be overcome as shown in Figs. I*o and 4 1 either by
interrupting the core ring or by perforating it, the
latter system being used by Allison*
In view of the Appreciable energy loss under the worst conditions
as shown in Fig* 42 a hydraulic coupling of this type cannot be
considered suitable for transmitting the full power of a high altitude
multi-stage blower -but the particular application devised by Allison
undoubtedly gives good results.
Iycoming are developing a two stage blower on similar lines,
employing a similar system with a hydraulic coupling for the auxiliary
stage*
48-5.06 Two Stage Mechanically Driven Blowers* As stated in the introduction
these have been consistently encouraged by the Navy. Large numbers of
Pratt & Whitney 1830 cubic inch two stage engines have been produced and
large numbers of Pratt & Whitney 2800 cubic inch two stage engines are
now in production*
The critical altitude of American two stage mechanical blower
engines normally varies from 18,500 to 22,500 feet which is only slightly
better than our best single stage engines* The early changeover to two
stages with inter-coolers was undoubtedly influenced by the objections
to high induction temperatures, which were previously mentioned, but
there is no reason why the critical altitude should not be raised and the
performance will undoubtedly be consistently improved as time goes on*
43-5•07 Turbo Blowers.
General Electric Turbo-Supercharger* Fig* shows a sectional view
and pig 1,1, the component -parts of aB2 unit.
Fig. 43. Sectional view of G.E. type B.2 turbo supercharger.


Fig. 44.
The apparatus consists of four main assemblies:
(a) Nozzle box comprising a nozzle ring and an exhaust gas
collector with provision for a waste gate in parallel
with the nozzles*
(b) A turbine wheel, connecting shaft, and supercharger rotor.
(c) A supercharger casing comprising two half light alloy
castings with air inlet passage and a cast outlet diffuser
ring.
(d) A cast aluminium bearing housing which serves to carry the
shaft and to locate by four radiating arms* the nozzle box
and the supercharger in co-axial relation.
’ J . ■ i- -
A modification has recently been introduced which reduces very
considerably the time for the welding operations. It consists of
replacing the built up nozzle unit by a cast one, in which the blades of
aerofoil section instead of flat*plates are hand scraped to remove casting
roughness, and which is merely turned on the inner and outer
circumferential edges to locate it for welding to the sheet metal nozzle
box.
The mounting of the turbine buckets is interesting; the buckets- are
first farmed by stamping from a small round billet of special steel, high
in tungsten and nickel content, in pairs and finished by successive
stamping processes to the desired dimensions. The buckets have a keying
tail on them which engage a corresponding slot in the wheel rim,
assembled in the wheel by hand, tlae process starting with six equally
spaced master buckets. Alternate buckets have their keying slots
terminating on different rim radii so that adequate material is left
between each bucket for essential strength.
When the buckets are all assembled by partial insertion in their slots
they are pressed into position by a 75 ton press. Peaning of each slot
end is carried out by an automatic indexing peaning machine which can deal
with a. complete wheel in less than one minute.


The forged material used for these buckets is called Hastalloy and its
composition is:
Nickel 62 - 68$
Molybdenum 28%
Manganese
Carbon .02 7 0.12$
Silicon 0.1 % max.
Phosphorus & sulphur combined O.G3$ max.
A modification is being developed in which
blanks are turned to a flat rim with a concave
groove on either side as shown in Pig* 4-5*
The buckets are cast in Vitallium to a
vee section at the root so as to form, when
3ig assembled on the wheel, a half groove on
each side. These grooves are then puddled
with welding wire to form a smooth surface
thereby adequately uniting the buckets to the
rim.
Fig. 45.
The specification for Vitallium is:
Cobalt 60$ Its melting point is 2800°P.
Chromium 35$ and it can be cast
Molybdenum 5$ within 0.001” to 0.0013"
of the desired size.
Adoption of the cast nozzle ring and the welded buckets on the turbine
disc will materially reduce the production time per unit.
Production Output. The Everett plant of the G-.E.C. now has an output of
400 turbo-superchargers per week and this can be increased as soon as the
new design features are brought into production.
Production is also proceeding at the Port Wayne Plant with capacity
for 1,200 per week; Allis-Chalmers have a capacity for 1,600 per week,
while Fords at Detroit have still greater capacity but are not yet in
quantity production
Weights of Production Units. The following tabulation covers the G-.E.
present production turbo-superchargers:
Turbo-
Supercharger
Designation
Engine
Rating
Rated Power
B.H.P.
Military
Power
Maximum
r.p.m.
Approximate
Weight in
lbs.
Type B - 2
1,000
1,200
21,300
135
" B - 11*
1,000
1,200
24,000
145
" B - 13
1,100
1,400
-
135
" C - 1
1,600
2,000
17,000
235
* Designed for higher altitude performance than the other types
mentioned.
A type D-2 turbo-supercharger has been manufactured in small
quantities although at the time of the Mission’s visit, it was not in
production at all. The type D has a normal rating of about 1400 - 1700
B.H.P. and weighs about 1 85 lb. The maximum r.p.m. are 19,700
All G-.E. turbines are designed for strength on a temperature of
1600°P. and rated for output at 14j00 o P.


Testing of Turbo-Superchargers. The testing of turbo-super chargers at
the River Works of the General Electric Company is divided into two general
classifications - development and production*
Development Testing consists principally of special tests of components
making up the unit* On completed units compressor efficiency tests are
run and data obtained for calculation of efficiency by both temperature-
rise and pressure coefficient methods*
In these tests the air enters the compressor from a straight duct
approximately ten feet long with a throttling valve at the duct inlet*
The air passes from the compressor into the discharge duct which contains
the pressure regulating gate and a nozzle to measure air flow. The air
temperature and impact pressures are carefully measured at the compressor
inlet and discharge* The turbines are driven by steam which exhausts to
the atmosphere*
Numerous hot gas tests are made including a 100 hour endurance run*
During this test the supercharger is operated for various lengths of time
at over speed, rated speed and at reduced speed conditions.
Accelerated life tests in which the turbo speed and gas temperature
are increased in steps are also made.
To deal with the development programme new equipment has been built
to test the turbo wheels and the impellers to destruction by gradually
increasing rotor speeds until failure occurs.
Production Testing. The principal test given to standardised
superchargers coming off production is called an operation test - which is
to check satisfactory mechanical operation - bearings - oil pump for
priming and delivery pressure - balance, from vibration observations, that
casing and oil lines are leakproof and that rotating parts are free*
No attempt made to duplicate rated altitude conditions. The test
at rated speed ensures that the power "developed by the turbine and
absorbed by the compressor is at least equal to rated power requirements
at rated altitude conditions.
On steam a short warm up for 20 - 25 minutes is followed by several
minutes at rated speed* The unit is then shut down for a few minutes,
and. visually inspected for excessive oil leakage after which it is given
one hour at rated speed except for type B which gets half hour at rated*
This is because on B units if it is rejected it is invariably because of a
fault within the first 5-10 minutes* After the operation test
inspection is made without stripping moving parts* If necessary to
replace minor parts the operation test is repeated. Rejections on type B
are very low*
The only other routine test for every supercharger is an over speed
test of the rotor assembly. This is made on the •complete rotor assembly
or a special stand driven by steam and brought up to 125$ rated speed
and held for one minute.
To check operation of production superchargers under actual operating
temperatures, speeds and powers, units are selected at random and given a
one hour hot gas test at 1500°F. _+_ 50°P. and a nozzle box pressure
sufficient to give 110$ rated speed. For type B one out of every 100
made are selected, and far other units this number is smaller depending upon
numbers previously manufactured*
Cabin Superchargers. The General Electric Company have also
specialised in centrifugal superchargers for pressurising cabins. The
following tabulation gives some particulars of these items.


PRESENT LINS OP CABIN SUPERCHARGERS
Electric Drive
Max.
Rated Eff • Weights Air Plow Cabin Transition Rated
(Compressor) Type Stages lbs, lb,/min, Alt,ft. Altitude Altitude
,50 EE-1 A 1 50 2.6 10,000 35,000 40,000
.50 PE-1B 1 50 4.0 Special altitude variation
.50 EE-3A 1 60 7.8 8,000 34-,500 40,000
Hydraulic Drive
.60 FF-2A & B 2 130 20 8,000 30,000 40,000
.58 EF-3A 1 150 30 8,000 34-, 000 40,000
.60 FF-4A 2 130 20 8,000 30,000 40,000
.50 EF-6A 2 130 5.6 8,000 35,000 40,000
.58 EF-8A 2 175 30 8,000 34,500 45,000
The electric drive comprises al5 Jew niotor driving the impeller
through a step-up gear set. A generator coupled directly to the engine
excites the electric motor. The supercharger can be placed remotely from
the engine drive shaft.
The hydraulic drive consists of high and low speed gears driving the
inpeller (s) through fluid coupling to provide the variable speed needed
as the altitude varies.
Other methods of driving the supercharger which are being studied at
the present time are: Oil turbine (torque converter), and planetary gears.
Methods'considered in the past and which are at present dormant are:
Oil motor, magnetic clutch, steam turbine and exhausir gas turbine.
Future Proposals by G.E. Cos. While the G.E. turbo unit has been more
or >SP in overall design - detailed improvements only being
introduced from time to time such as the oast nozzle box; welded turbine
blades a rK* sheet metal compressor casing - the problems of installation
are continually under review.
While, after much experimental flying, the "exposed wheel"
installation was an excellent solution of the blade cooling problem it has
proved very serious from the flame damping point of view, and this has so
far not yet been completely solved. It would appear that a considerable
improvement would be realised if the unit were installed with its axis
horizontal, or nearly so, such that the exit gases from the wheel could
flow directly backwards in a suitable tail pipe. Appropriate ducking
would be provided for cooling the canpletely buried unit and air and gas
nvi ti ng could be allowed to reduce the exit temperature below the flaming
value which is 1400°F. in the G.E. units. The makers claim that by this
method an exit velocity of 1300 - 1500 ft./sec. can be realised and 150
h.p. of energy obtained at 40,000 ft.
Axial compressors. An experimental unit is being designed in •
conjunction with ths N.A.C.A. but little of the work is actually being
done at the G.E. plant; Messrs. Allis-Chalmers and the N.A.C.A. are doing
most of the research.
The G.E. Cos. has always been striving for better pressure-ratios
and low weight and have, therefore, concentrated on centrifugal blowers
hence the rather scanty attention being given to axial units at present.
They are, however, mindful of the advantages of coupling axial blowers to
turbines but are marking time until the N.A.C.A. has done tne
aerodynamical work and put the work on a firm basis. Some analytical
work is therefore proceeding at G.E. in order to keep up to date but no
practical work is in hand.


Centrifugal Blowers. These have been tested at G.E.C. up to 2000 ft./seo.
tip speed and at speeds of over 30,000 r.p.m. The production inpellers
reach about 1200 ft./sec. # and about 1300 ft./seo. military overspeed for
five minutes. This will ultimately be for fifteen minutes on re—rated
units to match re-rated engines which will also have the fifteen minute
over speed allowance.
Oversize Compressors. G-.E. have considered the use of the oversize
conpressor to permit cooling of the turbine by mixing the excess air and
exhaust gas. They consider it to be possible but have not needed to do
they did it would not be to reduce the gas temperature but to
increase the range of the turbo unit.
Bearings* The reliability
of Iball and roller bearings is
a large factor in the turbo
unit and the bearing difficulties
experienced in the early British
work formed a very large part of
the development problem* The
attached graph, Fig. 46, is of
interest as representing the
performance of present ball
bearings under high speed
conditions* The diagram is
self-explanatory and shows turbo
bearings behaving in a way
consistent with other high speed
practice*
Fig. 46. Ball bearing performance curves
showing limiting R.P.M.
Competitive Designs* There are two competitive designs at present under
development in America* These are the Binnarm and the Wright
Aeronautical.
Birmann Turbo Supercharger. This is being developed by the Turbo
Engineering Company, Trenton, (an associate of the DeLaval Company) on
behalf of the Navy Department. It consists of a two stage centrifugal
blower driven by an inward flow radial turbine. (Fig. 47) •
The following are points of design interest:
The blower impellers have integral blades with separate rotating
guide vanes and act as a two stage mixed flow unit.
Leakage glands between first and second stages are of the labyrinth
type and semi-cascade vanes are used at the bends.
The turbine wheel is in one piece with inward flow vanes and fixed
entry guide vanes. Holes are provided for cooling air to flow through
the impeller boss and remove heat from, the rocts of the blades. Ten per
cent of the air from the first stage is bled off and reaches the turbine
by way of a circumferential clearance between the tVo parts of the casing
at the inlet to the second stage and fills the annular space around the
turbine bearing, thence through the holes in the wheel and eventually mixes
with the exhaust gas. A parallel flow takes place from the annular
space along channels or splines in the main shaft and cools the inside
of the bearing assembly thence joining the main cooling flow through
the wheel.
Obviously it is necessary to ensure that the final exhaust back
pressure is below the first stage pressure; in some instances this has
not been so and trouble has occurred with inadequate cooling.
Two plain bearing assemblies are provided in spherical seatings.
The turbine bearing has a multiple floating bush type with six bushes to
obtain low relative rubbing speeds, and a collar type thrust bearing is
also provided. The blower bearing is a simple small diameter plain
bush.


FIG. 47
BIRMAN N
TURBO SUPERCHARGER


Lubrication is by circulating and scavenge pumps driven from the
blower end of the shaft.
Normally the cooling is said to be very effective, an exhaust gas
inlet temperature of 1273°C. abs. being permissible, giving a turbine
efficiency of Q7fo and compressor efficiency 82$.
The weight is believed to be comparable with the G-.E. two stage i.e.
about 250 lb. for a 1500 - 2000 h.p. engine.
The waste gate is novel being a circular double seated valve in the
form of a short cylinder with a diameter slightly greater than the turbine
wheel arnfl pivoted across a diameter so that it is balanced against gas
forces. The figure indicates the manner in which this valve functions.
A high proportion of
exhaust thrust should be
obtained at exit from this
turbine, which is axial and
therefore permits installation
in the way illustrated in
Pig. 48 which shows the
Birmaim. unit.
This blower has a lower
rotational moment of inertia
thar the G.E. type and, it
is claimed, will accelerate
in approximately one second
compared with three or four
seconds for a comparable G.E.
turbo-blower. Typical
performance data for a type
n ß’* unit suitable for a 2000
h.p. engine is given below.
Fig. 48. Proposed axial installation
of turbo supercharger.
Ai+.-i+nriA ADD. Weight Discharge Discharge Pressure Inlet
™ IbsT Temp, " Hg. Pressure
35,000 ft. 295 260 32 in* 28 in.
33,000 ft. 325 275 36 in. 33 in.
32,000 ft. 338 f 285 36 in. 35 in.
Three of these Birman* units have been ordered by M.A.P.
Wright Aeronautical Turbo Supercharger. This unit is generally
to a G-.E. except that the turbine blades are hollow in a radial
direction and air is allowed to flow through for cooling and eventually
to mix with the exhaust gas. This unit is being developed for the
Cyclone 9 cylinder engine.
The current version of the Wright T.S.B. series turbo supercharger is
17 in. long and 25 in. diameter with a total weight of 108 lb. The turbo
maintains a peak pressure coefficient of 0.65 at 1300 ft./sec. and 0*675
at 1200 ft./sec. with corresponding peak temperature coefficients of
0.65 and 0.675 respectively which provide normal critical altitudes in
the region of 30,000 ft.
The chief advantages claimed for this unit over the present
available superchargers are the smaller size and the use of aircooler
turbine buckets, which permit operation at relatively high exhaust
temperatures, and permits also the installation of the turbo adjacent to
the engine without the need for exhaust gas cooling. A flight hood is
fitted to the turbo which can be decreased in qrea slightly to utilise
jet thrust, and it is claimed to provide same degree of flame damping.


Such restrictions would, however, have to be correlated with the available
exhaust energy in the particular installation considered. At present
little experience has been obtained on the flight hood method of flame
damping, although the Wright Aeronautical Corporation believe that
satisfactory flame damping can be obtained without seriously affecting the
jet thrust performance of the flight hood*
Applications of the General Electric Turbo Supercharger. Many American
types of aircraft have this unit fitted and the B1'7» B2A, P3B, P 47 are'
well known examples.
A number of new aircraft were, however, seen by the Mission which were
scheduled for turbo superchargers such as the North American XB2B, the
Boeing 829 with Weight R 3350 engines and an alternative liquid cooled
power plant with a 24 cylinder double Allison and the Consolidated BJ>2
also with Wright R 3330 engines.
Fig* 49 illustrates the XB2B installation with the G-.E. turbo unit
installed in the tail of the nacelle in a reasonably neat manner. The
pipe work is complicated and the cooling air ducting around the exhaust
manifolds may be criticised on the grounds that it constitutes a fire
risk should the exhaust pipe be punctured, since the exhaust gas will
leak into the cooling air space and further combustion may be promoted.
Fig. 50 shows the X 832 with dual turbos. Here again the complicated
ducting is in evidence and the bends necessary to accommodate the air
inter-cooler do not improve the induction system. The weight of this
power plant is 4467 lb. Fig. 51 shows the air entry ducts on the front
of the nacelle.
The 829 liquid cooled plant is indicated in Fig* 52 with the double
Allison mounted on the same bulkhead as the Wright 3350 engine.
Considerable complication results from the G-.E. type C.M. two stage
turbo installation and the reliability of the. ducting and sheet metal
work may be questioned.
The weight of the air cooled power plant is 4920 lb. and that for
the alternative liquid cooled plant was stated to be much heavier.
These large weights are not surprising since the bulk of the whole
power plants seems enormous $ the mean diameter of the air cooled
edition is about six feet and the length of the Allison Cowling being
about eight feet the circumference about twenty feet or a mean
diameter of about seven feet. Detailed power plant weights for the
817 and 829 are available in the Appendix.
Application of the Birmann Turbo Supercharger. This was seen at the
NavS aircraft factory Philadelphia and was installed experimentally in
a T.8.F.1 Avenger Aircraft fitted with a Wright 260Q8 engine. The
tests were temporarily held up because of trouble with exhaust gas
flowing back through the first compressor stage, and overheating the
turbine bearing during take-off and initial climb. A modification has
since been in the automatic control whereby the aircraft takes off
on direct ram without the turbo operating and the control brings the
turbo into action at a suitable height, normally about the rated value
for the driven blower. No experimental data is yet available.
The most interesting feature of this installation is the positioning of
the unit, with its axis practically horizontal, close up behind the
so that a rearward and downward exit duct permits a measure of
ejector thrust to be obtained.


PIG. 50 POWER PLANT INSTALLATION OF WRIGHT 3350 ENG. IN XB-32 AIRCRAFT


Fig. 49. Layout of G.E.C. turbo supercharger in
XB2B power plant nacelle.
Fig. 51.
Air entry ducts in X 832 power plant.
Fig. 52. Layout of Allison 829 turbo supercharger power plant.


Conclusions and Recommendations. The present types of General Electric
exhaust turbo superchargers, particularly the 82, is considered hy the
Mission to be going to be over produced in America. America will hold to
the G.E. series of exhaust turbo compressors for the next two or three
years in conjunction with the new controls, and it is believed that when
fire risk and flame damping troubles have been eliminated, these
installations will be satisfactory.
2. The Mission has no authority .officially to say so but from
discussions with the Americans, it is of the opinion that the exhaust
turbo will gradually drop out from single seater fighters as soon as
feasible, but America is comnitted *to too heavy a programme to drop them
out at the present time.
3. The policy in regard to the G.E.C. exhaust turbo application to
British production aircraft has somewhat changed while the Mission has been
in America and interest has waned. As the Mission sees the position, as
a result of its consideration on the G.E. exhaust turbo technique and
controls, if it is desired during the next two years to go higher with
the air cooled editions of the Lancaster and Halifax than is possible at
the present time, then the Mission feels able to give suitable
recommendations as regards a satisfactory solution on these two aircraft
with the G.E. turbo supercharger.
2** The Mission wants to put on record that although it has been given
a clear picture as to the difficulties and limitations of the present G.E.
series of exhaust turbos, this method of regaining power at altitudes is
not dead, and in fact provides the only known solution for certain
particular purposes. The more advanced types of exhaust turbo which are
now being energetically experimented upon in America hold out, in the
opinion of the Mission, considerable interest. It is recommended that
full consideration should be given now to the future needs in this
respect for certain new types of British •aircraft, and that research work
should be energetically initiated on up to date' exhaust turbos, it being
also appreciated that such work is good initiation into gas turbine
technique.
2*3-s*oB Turbo-Blower Controls.
Regulation of Turbo Unit. Originally the turbo supercharger was
Tnamiail'y norvfcrollftd, in that opening and closing of the exhaust waste gate,
the only regulating device it possesses, was carried out by the pilot in
conjunction withT the manipulation of the engine throttle. Since the only
indication of the turbo output was given by a manifold pressure gauge or
boost gauge, and by a tachometer revolution indicator driven from the
turbine wheel, or by a warning lamp, a really intensive and complicated
procedure was necessary to match it to the engine demands under varying
flight conditions.
It has been fully realised by the Americans for some time, however,
that an automatic device is necessary to relieve the pilot of this duty
there has been considerable design activity in attempts to evolve one.
The need became particularly inport ant because the Army Air Force had
been attempting to develop the turbo supercharger for fighter aircraft in
which it is imperative that full automaticity and complete relief for the
pilot should be provided.
Anmrioan Turbo Controls. The principal regulator in American use at
present is the Eclipse A. 7 type which consists of an unconpensated
pressure sensitive capsule stack tapped off the exhaust manifold upstream
of the turbine nozzle box and a servo piston which operates the waste gate.
Its purpose is to maintain a reasonably constant exhaust back pressure at
the nozzles. While functioning to this extent, fairly satisfactorily,
the Eclipse unit fails to eliminate the continuous control for the pilot.
The principle of design is such that it requires the turbo-supercharger
control to be constantly adjusted in a climb, since with the maintained
constant back pressure the pressure difference across the - turbine wheel


increases with height* The turbine speed therefore increases up to the
critical height, at which it should reach its maximum, (roughly 21,300
r*p*m* for the 332 unit)* Above this critical height the boost pressure
must be reduced manually by about 1.0 in. for every 1,000 feet in order
to prevent the turbine overspeeding. The Eclipse regulator may be
actuated from the aircraft hydraulic or engine oil systems and is a
standard fitting at present on Portress I, Portress II and Liberator 111.
As it requires about 1-J in. Hg. pressure drop to operate this control its
regulation of exhaust gas pressure may be found to be sluggish.
Another turbo regulator exists as a modification of the Eclipse and
is known as the G.E.C. N.l type. It has a piston valve so coipled as to
give a "follow up" and "cut off" action on the servo piston, and is
claimed to be more sensitive but enquiry in America revealed that G.E.
themselves had abandoned it in favour of a new electrical scheme now
undergoing development and which is referred to later in this ntf»mnr»n^inn t
An interesting attempt was made by G-.E. to introduce a rotational speed
control as well on the N.l by using a second capsule stack to measure
the pressure difference across the blower, which difference is
proportional to turbine speed. The capsule stack was then linked up
with the waste gate. No test data appears to exist on this unit and it
is possible that it was never produced for official trial in America.
The two regulators mentioned above are designed to operate off the
exhaust back pressure but a more desirable feature would be to couple them
to the carburettor inlet, but in such a case the Eclipse could be expected
to be unstable on account of its uncompensated servo piston. Other
types available in America although used to an unknown extent are the
G-.E.C. N. 7; the Eclipse A. 13 with bevel seated valve; the Eclipse A.lO,
a stronger unit for dual turbo installations; and the Eclipse A.*ll.
The N*7s A. 11; and A. 13 are basically the same unit. It was stated
that these originally worked off the boost pressure, but Weight Field
found after tests that exhaust back pressure (control had advantages.
This is now under review and the Power Plant (Branch at Wright Field is
endeavouring to evolve an automatic boost control with a turbo-over speed
device, but so far it has been unsuccessful and is prone to "hunt" in
flight.
In the meantime, however, various firms have tackled the problem in
a basic way and three premising controls are now about to become
available. These are designed by the Minneapolis-Honeywell Regulator
Coup any, the Bendix Aviation Corporation and the General Electric Coup any.
MIMEAPQLIS-HONEIWBIIi TURBO SUPERCHARGER CONTROL. This turbo control
aims at a complete solution of the problem by relieving the pilot of all
responsibility for the functioning of the turbo unit other than to pre-
set, by means of the manifold pressure selector, the operating conditions
he desires.
The system comprises a series of alternating current bridges
consisting of potentiometers energised by transformer secondaries, the
primaries of which are fed from a 115 volts 400 cycle alternator or
inverter. . Each potentiometer is actuated by one of the controlling
factors in the system such as manifold pressure, turbine 3peed, etc., and
the sum of the voltages selected is applied to an electronic amplifier
the output of which is connected to one phase of a two phase motor
operating the waste gate of the turbine. The other phase winding of
the motor is connected to the 400 qycle supply. The complete system,
shown diagramatically in Fig. 53 for a four engine installation, consists
of:
An engine induction system "pressuretrol", which comprises the usual
evacuated and pressure bellows suitably connected to react to carburettor
intake pressure changes. The bellows actuate a voltage dividing
potentiometer which feeds a signal into the main control circuit.
Fig. 54 indicates the mechanism.


Fig. 53. Diagramatic layout of
Minneapolis —Honeywell control.
Fig. 54.
Fig. 54a. M. H. turbo supercharger governor.
Fig. 56.


Fig. 55. Dimensions of M.H. components.


A turbo control amplifier, which is a three stage unit consisting of
two amplifier stages and one discriminator stage. It is fed by the same
115 volt 400 cycle supply as the other components. Standard American
electronic valves are used. In the case of multi-engine’ installations
the amplifiers are mounted side by side in a suitable casing and are
easily interchangeable.
Turbo waste gate motor. The motor is connected to the waste gate and
is controlled from the amplifier, suitable braking is provided to make the
system dead beat and if a failure of the supply takes place the waste gate
will be held in the position it occupies when the power failure occurs.
A balancing potentiometer and wiper are mounted on the casing and drive
shaft respectively.
Turbo supercharger governor. This unit is driven from the turbine
wheel through a short flexible shaft and is shown in Pig. 54A. It
provides a definite overspeed control as well as preventing the turbine
from accelerating at too high a rate.
Manifold pressure selector. This unit is installed in the cabin
conveniently for the pilot to select the 'desired manifold pressure. A
vernier knob and dial is provided with a range from 0 to 8 covering the
pressures for take off, climb, cruise and glide and up to 10 for
emergency power only. A.pressure selector is provided for each engine
and each unit has calibration adjustments to enable ell to be synchronised
under one knob.
Main and nacelle junction boxes. These are provided to facilitate
interconnection of the various components by appropriate wiring.
Pig* 55 gives dimensional outline drawings of these components and
Pig. 56 shows schematically the turbo control bridge circuit with the
various potentiometers grouped into three sections marked "X**, n Y M ,
”Z", any one of which can produce voltage signals at the instigation of
the potentiometer relays.
Considering section "X", if the manifold pressure selector is moved
to cause say a 6 volt signal between it and the calibrating potent i one ter,
this signal will pass to the amplifier and thence to the waste gate motor
which will ‘turn in the correct phase and at the same time the balancing
wiper attached to its spindle will be wound along to neutralise the
signal. Similarly if any of the other units are producing signals the
values and phases produce a resultant which eventually actuates the waste
gate motor, and the motor potentiometer again, cancels but the signal on
reaching the null position.
Pig. 57 shows curves
of typical flight data
for a turbo supercharged
engine during a climb
from s*ooo to 33*000 feet
using the M-H control
system, the engine speed
being 2*300 r.p.m. and
the manifold pressure
selector set to 37 in.
Hg.
The weight of the
whole system is 15 lbs.
for a single engine
installation plus 8 lbs.
for wiring etc., and 63
lbs. for a four engine
installation, plus 30
lbs. for wiring etc.-,
making 23 lbs. and 93
lbs. total respectively.
Fig. 57.


The current requirements are 67 VA at 0.8 power factor running or
standing and the maximum waste gate motor torque is 50 lb. ins. at crank
arm.
Pull details of the M-H turbo supercharger control system and its
underlying principles of operation are available in the Appendix.
As regards official approval the system has been thoroughly investigated
at Wright Field in flight on a 8.24 and 8.17 and both Consolidated and
Boeing are installing it on appropriate aircraft for further experience.
Similarly the M-H Company themselves have installed a set on a Lightning at
Minneapolis coupled to the throttles to give a single lever control.
This installation operates very well indeed, the engines opening up on
ground run rapidly in normal fashion with the selector set in any of the
limiting positions. The final increase of power from 37 in. Hg to 45 in.
Hg took about 4-5 seconds due to the overspeed governor coming into
action. The firm has received a production order for 84,000 sets.
BENDIX AVIATION CORPORATION. This turbo supercharger control
developed by the Pioneer Division of the Bendix Corporation has not
reached so advanced a stage as the M-H but is nevertheless a most
interesting system. In basic principle it closely resembles the M-H
control except that there are no rubbing contacts. The units comprise a
two phase waste gate motor actuated from an. electronic amplifier which
receives signals from three "autosyn" three phase relays. The motor
has a fixed phase winding connected to the 400 cycle supply and a variable
phase coupled tp the amplifier output. It is referred to as the
EDX31728. The torque motor unit on the waste gate runs at 7,000 r.p.m.
and is geared down to 5 r.p.m. of the shaft to control the waste gate.
The relays consist of manifold pressure* turbo speed and turbo
acceleration which rotate the antosyn units through angles proportional
to the changes in these variables. The autosyns operate on 26 volts at
400 cycles.
The manifold pressure unit consists of a double diaphragm with a
pressurised cane, and an evacuated capsule, coupled direct to an antosyn
generator giving an electrical output proportional to pressure. The
weight of the unit is 1 lb.
The pressure selector consists of a small tubular unit ins. .
diameter and 4 inches long with hand resetting of an autosyn generator,
i.e. by turning the armature. The dial is conveniently calibrated in
terms of inches of mercury boost. The weight of this unit is % lb.
The accelerometer and over speed device consists of a very small
alternator with a rotor diameter of about one inch driven from
the turbine wheel. The output from the alternator is proportional to
speed'and it is rectified and fed to a condenser which charges up if
there is a change in alternator speed. This charging current is fed to
the amplifier and thence actuates the torque motor - again without the
need for moving contacts. The overspeed portion has the ..alternator
output paralleled through a high pass filter which only passes a signal
when the r.p.m. are in the overspeed range. The signal is thence
passed to the amplifier.
The manifold pressure relay, accelerometer and overspeed device
are in series, each applied virtually across the grid resistance of the
amplifier input valve. The original unit gave reasonably satisfactory
results, tapped off the manifold pressure to limit the acceleration of
the turbo, but was in fact sluggish in control so the accelerometer
device was adopted instead. The weight of the combined unit is 1 lb.
The waste gate motor gives a normal torque of about 100 lb. ins.
but can develop up to £OO lb. ins. The gear ratio is 1500 :1; the
motor runs at 6,000 r.p.m. giving 4 r.p.m. on the waste gate spindleo
Hunting of the motor is eliminated by passing a direct current through
one of the phase windings. This is done by providing a condenser, with


a rectifier across it, in series with the fixed phase winding. The weight
of the motor is 3 lb.
The amplifier employing standard .American valves consists essentially
of a portion comprising magnetic amplifiers, each having primary And
secondary windings* Two primaries are in series and two secondaries, are
in opposition which gives a zero output under identical core conditions
i.e* with the same flux saturation in each unit*
The input to the primaries is from a supply at 400 cycles and there is
another winding into which D*C* can be fed from a radio valve controlled
by the appropriate autosyn units* If the D.G. is fed to one winding only,
then that core becomes saturated proportionally* This unbalances the
secondary voltages and results in an output which goes direct to the
Variable phase of the torque motor* The other phase is of course the
400 cycle supply. A phase-splitting condenser is necessary to put the
variable phase 90 degrees electrically out of phase with the supply*
The power supply can be from an inverter or from the A.C. ma-ina at
400 cycles and the system requires 30 watts per engine*
General remarks* Each component was seen working in experimental
form, and the "impression gained was that the Bendix Control was very
promising indeed, and is likely to prove better. than the Minneapolis-
Honeywell on account of the complete absence of moving electrical
contacts* No information is yet available regarding installational
details or weights, but it will be issued by Bendix in due course.
Complete sets are scheduled for production by about June 1943*
GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY* This control system operates electrically
on direct current and comprises:
A waste gate motor and reduction gear weighing about 4 lb. complete
A pressure regulator weighing about 5 lb. containing a capsule system
in a pressurised case reacting to carburettor inlet pressure. This
regulator box contains appropriate contact relays which control the waste
gate motor*
A turbine over speed unit consisting of a small alternator geared to
the turbine wheel providing an output proportional to speed which feeds a
rectifier circuit and charges a condenser which is tuned to resonance
to get a large signal of about 4 watts at the appropriate speed which
serves to operate a small torque motor in the relay box portion of the
pressure regulator. This small motor pushes a hinged lever away from
the "pressure" capsule by overriding a spring holding it in contact.
The effect of this is to actuate contacts which control the supply to
and the direction of rotation of the waste gate motor*
A tapped inductance is provided whereby two maximum turbine speeds
can be chosen, namely rated speed which is the normal limit,, and war
emergency speed,which can be switch operated at will by the pilot. To
achieve stability a repositioning linkage is provided to cut off the
current to the waste gate motor by opening contacts on the capsule lever.
No further information is available regarding this control system
although it was stated that a production order had been received for
5,000 sets and that 100 were to be delivered to the Amy- Air Force in
April. The General Electric Coup any has agreed to send to the Mission
a full report and description of this scheme.
British Turbo Controls* A regulator has been made in Britain by the
B.T.H. Co* and has been despatched to America for test* It consists
of a pressure governor, an overspeed governor, primary and secondary
relays, a servo, piston and the "floating lever" principle of governor
conpensation. During some brief tests in Britain before despatch it
had proved that a constant boost could be maintained in a climb, and
that it was very stable in operation. Another British turbo regulator


is the which is the simplest and neatest control yet
examined* It is shown diagramatically in Fig* 58 and it will be seen
that a spring loaded piston, 57* in cylinder B is directly coupled to the
waste gate 18* The lever 19 actuates the ordinary boost control shown
as Aat the right of the Fig* When the engine throttle is fully open
sad the boost control piston 22 therefore at the bottom of its stroke
then oil is fed to the turbo cylinder B through pipe 34 and moves
piston 37 downwards against the spring 40 until an equilibrium position
of the waste gate 18 is reached* An overspeed governor 42 driven from
the turbo unit reacts on valve 45-to limit the passage of oil from
cylinder Bto cylinder A via pipe 35 and vice versa* An overspeed
control lever 83 is provided to increase or decrease the load on spring
44 against which the centrifugal governor acts, thus controlling the
rate of flow of oil into or from one side of the control piston*
Fig. 58. Hobson-Plessey turbo supercharger control.
Waste Gate# This oonsists of a simple butterfly type valve inserted
in the waste duct from the nozzle box and no doubt has been chosen for
its simplicity and reliability under the exacting conditions of hot gas
flow*
On tbs type B turbo the torque required to operate the gate is about
55-60 lb* ins* although in general the operating motors are designed to
give about 120 lb* ins. to allow for possible friction and distortion.
It will be noted that the turbo control decides the "position" of
the waste gate, and that no attempt is made to use a valve that acts as
a relief valve by maintaining a constant bade pressure on the turbine*
It has been suggested that the correct form for a waste gate should be
a spring loaded flap valve, and that the tension of the spring should be
subject to control from the servo unit* This appears to be
fundament ally correct since it would allow the valve to adjust its
position without reacting on the control itself, and would permit the
control to regulate the exhaust back pressure, as it should and not
merely the position of the valve* In practice, however, the operating
loads on a valve of this type are likely to be very high indeed*


It is of interest to note that the General Electric Company do not
contemplate any change in waste gate design in the immediate future,
although it was noticed that Wright Field was experimenting with a
waste gate of conventional butterfly form but with a comb-tooth shaped
leakage path in order, it was stated, to cut down sensitivity to
movement under gas flow.
Conclusions and Recommendations. Although the Mission understand
that there is no immediate intention to apply the G.E. turbo to
British series production aircraft, nevertheless it is-considered
advisable to continue the investigation of the control problem for
possible future application.
The field has now narrowed down in Britain to the Hobson-HLessey
hydraulic control and in America to the three electric controls - the
Minneapolis-Honeywell, the Bendix and the General Electric.
On the score of simplicity, directness of application and basic
accuracy the Hobson-Plessey control outbids the others, and its
performance so far has supported the claims laade for it.
For these reasons the Mission recommends that it be offered to
the American authorities for examination and test in comparison with
their present systems. Taken in conjunction with the Mission’s other
recommendation that America should adopt the- latest British fuel
metering system - the R.A.E. carburettor or the S.U. pump injector -
this turbo control may well meet their requirements completely.
Regarding the three American turbo controls mentioned above the
Mission feels that, although the choice of a purely electrical control
has undoubtedly led the makers into a complicated design situation, yet
they have managed to get round it remarkably neatly. It would appear
that their lack of experience on hydraulic boost controls has
contributed largely to their decisions to contemplate electrical systems
involving thermionic amplifiers and electric motors such as the Honeywell.
The point is, however, that having done so the result is a small, self-
contained, neat and reliable piece of equipment which apparently does
its job, and will be in series production at the rate of a
month. To enable a direct comparison to be made with the Hobson-Plessey
control the Mission recommends that two sets of Honeywell equipment
be obtained now for flight test in the Wellington with turbo super-
chargers. Consideration could be given later to the Bendix and
General Electric units when they become available. Particular note
should be taken of the Bendix proposals since no moving contacts are
used.
48-5*09 American Proposals on Single Lever Power Control. Enquiry in America
on this' subject revealed intense interest* but little practical
achievement.
Wright Field is working on the problem with the various engine firms
and those who are engaged on designs for turbo Supercharger controls have
also got schemes for incorporating them in full single lever operation.
The Minneapolis-Honeywell Regulator Company are working on an edition of
their, electronic control, and Bendix are Using the autosyn units and
electronic amplifier and the G.E.C. a D.C. system called the "Flight
Engineer" based on the turbo control now undergoing development.
No details of any importance were available regarding these units during
the Mission’s visits, but information will be sent when the various
schemes are finalised. The first will be the Minneapolis-Honeywell
since a prototype contract had already been placed by Wright Field for
delivery in May.
An Allison scheme has been prepared based on the use of a Delco
boost control and this would appear to be the first of the engine
makers controls to be made available in the near* future.


Gonelxisions and. Recommendat ions« >lt is considered that Britain Xeads
America in the development of single lever Controls, and this has been made
easier because of the rational automatic variable datum type of boost
control which is a commonplace on British engines but which has only
recently been given attention in.America*
The British basic system enables a single lever control to be readily
introduced either in lay shaft, with rod and lever, form or in the shape
of a ty“draulically operated box or unit containing the appropriate relays
and servo pistons*
The Mission feels that American engine makers would do well to give
serious consideration to the British trends in matters of engine fuel
metering anl power control which are inevitably interwoven* To this
end., the Mission recommends placing the relevant information in its
latest form at the disposal of the American authorities with a plea far
its earnest consideration and adoption*
liß-5.10 Cylinder Cooling. A great deal of work is being done towards improved
cylinder head and cylinder barrel cooling and this is one of the lines of
attack directed towards improved, running conditions and a reduction in
overall power plant drag*
The N.A.C.A. have done considerable research into cooling fins and
the result of their work has been reflected in the latest production
designs both at Pratt and Whitney and Wright. The Pratt and Whitney
scheme illustrated in Pig. 59 is to use an aluminium muff in which the
fins are machined and which is shrunk on to the steel barrel. This
scheme suffers.the disadvantage that good finish is required on both the
mating surfaces and that the fit must be maintained to close tolerances.
The above difficulties are partially overcome by the scheme adopted
by Wright Aeronautical, as shown in Pig* 60* In this case the steel
barrel has a number of circumferential grooves of wedge section machined
in it and in these are inserted sheet metal fins in the fora of split
rings as shown. The indentation in the fins, shown in Pig. 61, to
reduce the risk of damage in handling, is noteworthy. The fins are
pitched at about 11 per inch.
PRATT & WHITNEY HAVE ALUMINIUM MUFF-
SHRUNK ON ; NECESSITATING ACCURATE
MACHINING AND GOOD FINISH. RANGER
USE SPECIAL CASTING PROCESS WHICH
GIVES A METALLIC BOND
Fig. 59. Pratt & Whitney and Ranger
cylinder finning.
MACHINE PEENING AT BOTTOM OF
ALUMINIUM FINS CAUSES METAL
TO BE DISPLACED INTO WEDGE
SECTION RECESS IN STEEL BARREL
Fig. 60. Wright cylinder firming.
Fig. 61. Indentations in Wright
fins to reduce damage in handling.


Figs. 62. “Al-fin” bond in original form.
Fig. 63. Latest “Al-fin” bond.
Fig. 64. Temperature gradient
of “Al-fin” bond.
Fig. 65. Original Ranger
“Al-fin” cylinder.
Fig. 66. Proposed one piece “Al-fin” cylinder.


Both the above schemes have given improved results ccmpared with the
original steel fins machined direct in the barrel forging, but neither
can be considered ideal in view of the risk of deterioration of the
heat transfer in service*
The Ranger Company have developed an alternative scheme which over-
comes these difficulties* This is known as the "Al-fin” pro cess
comprises the intimate bonding of an aluminium muff which is cast on to
the steel barrel* No details of the bond process were given, but there
is no doubt that particulars would be available to anyone interested in
trying the process* Development of the process has allowed a reduction
in the thickness of the bond as illustrated in Figs. 62 and 63 which
provides improved heat transfer and the results achieved to date are
encouraging as is shown by the comparative graph in Fig. 64; this
illustrates that, broadly speaking, the temperature of the "Al-fin"
cylinder is reduced by 20° from that of the original Ranger all-steel
cylinder*
As a further step Rangers
are developing a one piece
steel cylinder and head with
all the fins attached by the
Al-fin process and outlines
are illustrated of the
original cylinder and the
proposed one piece type in
Figs* 65 and 66* Rangers
are also producing seme Pratt
and Whitney cylinders for
test purposes*
Both Pratt and Whitney
and Wright are now turning over
to fozged cylinder heads which
embrace integral rocker
brackets* A sketch of the
cylinder for the "Wasp Major*’ is
shown in Fig* 67* In order to
overcome any tendency to fin
breakage due to vibration,
Wrights have developed a neat
metal fin damper, which can be
seen in the illustration of
their forged head in Fig* 68*
Fig. 67. Pratt & Whitney
"Wasp Major” cylinder.
Fig. 68. Wright forged head.


48-5.11 Fan Cooling of Air Cooled Radials. In general, the Americans have not
considered fans necessary for ground cooling but it is agreed that they
are necessazy for cooling under climb conditions and especially for high
altitude operation, also for weak mixture cruising on the slowsr machines.
Increasing interest in buried installations has given impetus to research.
Both Pratt & Whitney and Wright are in the midst of comprehensive
experimental work with engine speed aerofoil type fans in conjunction with
variable pitch stator vanes; the variable pitch of the stator vanes has
been introduced in an attempt to avoid an excessive increase in the power
required to drive the fan at low altitudes, but this has not sc far
proved a satisfactory solution to the problem.
In view of the growing complication of the front end of aero engines
with contra-rotating propellers and their pitch change mechanijsn, which
may be combined with 2 speed reduction gears, Pratt & Whitney have made
an attempt to achieve large pressure drops with propeller speed fans*
A prime consideration in this investigation was to avoid the increase in
the power required to drive the fan at low altitude, without going to the
complexity of variable pitch stator vanes* A solution to the problem has
been produced experimentally in the form of a propeller speed fan with a
multiplicity of turbine type blades, which is used in conjunction with a
fixed pitch stator with similar blades*
No flight test data is yet available of either of the types of fan in
question but comprehensive wind tunnel model tests have been initiated by
Pratt & Whitney and have been undertaken by the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, which illustrate the trend of development; the salient
features of the' fans- and the teat results are as follows:
Crankshaft Speed Axial Flow Aerofoil Pan.
the Wasp Major engine at 40,0CX) ft. in
a pusher installation with the fan
mounted ahead of the engine.
Fig. 69 shows the arrangement of
the fan, and details of the blades'
are given in Fig. 70. The tests
were made on a .4-16 scale model of
the nacelle with a fan diameter of
19*04 considerable twist ms
given to the blades and this is shorn
This fan was designed to cool
Fig. 69.
Aerofoil fan
Fig, 70. Details of fan blades.


graphically in Pig. 71 • It -was
learnt that the twist of the fan
blades would hare been considerably
less if they had been considered
from the inception of the design in
conjunction with the stator vanes*
and this would be advantageous from
a structural point of view*
Pig. 72 shows the 36 blade
stator; details of the blades are
given in Pig. 73 and the twist is
shown graphically in Fig. 74* The
cross-section of the model Nacelle
shown in Pig. 75 indicates the
alternative nose shapes which were
used* first to obtain the
characteristics of the fan only and
secondly to obtain the
characteristics of the fan in
conjunction with the -type of entry
which would be used in the final
installation. Dotted lines indicate
the alternative diffuser shapes
Fig. 71. Twist of fan blades.
behind the fan which were tested for comparative purposes* Figs* J 6,
77 f 76 «nd 79 show the model installed in the wind tunnel.
Fig. 72. Stator.
Fig. 74. Twist of stator blades.
Fig. 73. Details of stator blades.


Fig. 75. Cross section of model nacelle for pusher installation with aerofoil fan
Fig. 76. ¾ rear view.
Fig. 77. ¾ front view showing diffuser entrance.
Fig. 78. ¾ front view with nose cowl removed.
Fig. 79. View of stator
In order to meet the design condition for cooling under climb
conditions* a total pressure difference of 18*5 in. of water ms required
across the engine at <4o*ooo ft** and it was calculated that* for the
particular installation, the fan itself would have to provide a pressure
difference of 8*75 in* of water. It was proposed to retain controllable
cooling flaps*
The proposal to use a variable pitch stator ring to reduce the power
required to drive the fan at low altitude was put forward by Professor
Markham of M.1.T., who hoped that with the stator vanes at sane negative
angle of attack* the fan would operate with a minimum power input at seme
small pressure rise* thus giving the best possible aircraft performance
at high speed and low altitude*
Optimum results were obtained with a setting of 26° for the fan and
3for the stator ring, the space between fan and stator centre lines
being 2*54- ih* which was the minimum clearance to allow feathering of the
stator vanes*
The results of the tests were satisfactory and the desired pressure
drop of 8*75 in* of water at 4-0,000 ft** was achieved with a fan
efficiency of about The stator vanes 'were found to be absolutely
essential as the efficiency dropped to 6(s> without than*


Varying the pitch o>f the stator vanes did not* however* achieve the
desired reailt as although the pressure drop could be reduced to zero*
this caused the fan to operate in turbulent air and did not reduce the
powor required. In order to overcame this it is proposed to try varying
the angle of the trailing half of the stator only in the hope that this
will prevent stalling of the leading edge*
Axial Plow Turbine Type Fan. This fan was designed for slightly
different conditions. It was driven at propeller speed and was required
to cool the Wasp Major in a buried installation at 30,000 ft.
Model tests to a scale of .395 were made for both tractor and pusher
installations and these are shown diagramatically in Pig. 80. A cross
section of the blade is shorn in Pig. 81 which shows the aerofoil section.
It was found, however, that this had been done for strength rather than
aerodynamic considerations and a more practical solution might be achieved
with sheet metal blades with rounded leading edges. Details of the
inlet and exit stator blades are shown in Pigs. 82 and 83 respectively,
i&ilc photographs of the installation in the wind tunnel are reproduced
in Figs. 84 to 86*
Fig. 80. Cross section of model nacelles for turbine blade fan.
Fig. 81. Cross section of blade.
Fig. 82. Details of inlet stator blades.


Fig. 83. Details of exit stator blades.
Fig. 84.
Fig. 85.
Fig. 86.
Good performances -were achieved and a pressure difference of 9*3 in*
of water was produced at 30,000 ft., with efficiencies varying from 68$
to 79$ depending on the mass flow and the air temperature.
For preventing an excessive increase in power requirements at low
altitude, the tests were very satisfactory. Power requirements at
altitude, on the full scale engine were calculated to be about 200 h.p.
with an increase to only 240 h.p. at sea level. Xt was considered that
a normal aerofoil type fan absorbing the same power at 30,000 ft. would
require seme 600 h.p. at sea level.
Wright Aeronautical Pans. The Wright Aeronautical Corporation
development on fan cooling may be divided into fans for low and medium
altitude operation, and fans far high altitude operation. In the first
category the general fan designs are expected to provide from 8 to 10 in'.
H«0 pressure at sea level,and in general the fans will operate at
substantially crankshaft speeds by means of a step*up gear ratio. For
certain engines which have reduction gear ratios in the order of .65
crankshaft, it is expected that propeller speed fans can be applied which
will provide the necessary baffle pressure drop without use of step-up
gearing. It is expected that the fans for the low and medium altitude
operation will not require stators, or aiy other such means for control
of fan output. For the second category, or'high altitude fans, rotational
speeds up to I*3 times crankshaft are being considered with design
objectives 6 in. pressure at 40,000 ft. The high altitude fans will,
of necessity, require stators or seme other devices to provide for control
of the fan output at low altitude to prevent excessive power absorption.


It is considered that the use of fans will result in appreciable gains in
climb perfomance due to operation with cowl flaps substantially in a
faired position and with some thrust recovery from the cowl discharge#
It is believed that fan cooling on high altitude operation will be an
absolute requirement#
Conclusions# It is generally accepted that an efficient cooling fan
is necessary for adequate cooling of air cooled engines at high altitude*
quite apart from any considerations of buried installations# In most
cases it is desirable not run the fan faster than propeller speed and
Pratt & Whitney have indicated a promising line of development towards
this end#
Aerofoil section fans require a large power input at low altitude
and in order to overcome this, further research is necessary to provide
some form of control#
It is recommended that the two lines of development indicated in the
foregoing should be energetically pursued in this country both by
manufacturers of air cooled engines and by the R#A#£# as a satisfactory
solution to this problem is undoubtedly one of the keys to the success
of air cooled engines in the future#
Induction Systems and Air Cleaners#
Introduction# The Mission discussed the state of development in
America of engine induction systems and found a realistic outlook in this
respect# The design of these from the point of view of aerodynamic and
engine efficiency was being made the subject of much wind tunnel and full
scale investigation especially in regard to air-oooled engine
installations# This item refers briefly to the salient points including
air cleaners which form an operational requirement in order to reduce
engine wear and so prolong their service life# Items 5*13 and 5*14 that
follow deal respectively with induction system icing and fuel metering
systems#
Ideal air intake system#" For aero engines of conventional types
the ideal air intake system can be defined as one that will deliver clean
dry air at atmospheric temperature to. the supercharger impeller with the
least possible loss of total head resulting ? from the flight speed#
It will be noted that there are four important features in this
definition namely:
Clean Air# by which is meant air that is free from sand or dust that
can be harmful to the engine mechanism#
Dry Air* which in practice means free from a snow or water content that
could form ice catastrophically anywhere in the system#
Air at atmospheric temperature- Cold air is desirable for maximum
power output and ambient atmospheric temperature is the lowest that can
normally be obtained#
mnlraim loss of total head or alternatively maximum ram in the
supercharger inlet which implies an entry position on the aeroplane and
its attendant duct such that the resultant thrust, accruing from taking in
air through the entry and ejecting it backwards through the engine exhaust
system, will be a maximum#
Various foras of sand or dust separation by combined momentum and
filtration have been proposed and practical experience has been gained with
seme, but each system is best considered on its merits for any particular
installation# A serious disadvantage has, however, been suffered in all
air-cleaner systems so far in Service in that the filter has been
installed permanently in the ramming or forward pointing portion of the
intake with a consequent loss of dynamic head due to the pressure drop
across the element and it has been clear for seme years that by-pbss systems
are essential and have now been accepted#


While enabling the air to he cleaned during ground running, take off
and a suitable height, these systems will permit the cleaner to be
by-passed and intake ram to be obtained when required.
In general the design of duct, shutter and filter and their respective
construct ion and effect on airflow should be governed as far as possible by
aerodynamic principles and the control of the shutter or movable filter
should be either by a variable pre-set altitude operated servo and/or manually
operated by the pilot. It is not desirable that it should be operated
solely by the undercarriage.
British air cleaner technique. This is now developing along the above
lines but many aircraft are unfortunately still equipped on the old
principle with cleaner' elements installed permanently in the ramming intake,
with consequent loss of performance.
Information from the Kiddle Bast last year indicated that wet elements
cannot be maintained effectively in the desert, and while it is agreed that
the wet type, when properly maintained, is effective and offers less overall
reduction in yet the dry type is stated to be superior on
practical grounds under operational conditions.
British policy, therefore, is to specify dry elements which it is stated
will last 50 flying hours and can be considered as expendable stores.
American air cleaner technique. American aircraft did not use air
cleaners prior to the war so that when the requirements were issued little
time was lost in appreciating the need for by-pass filtration. The Mission
found that nearly every aircraft firm which had to provide cleaners as part
of the aircraft specification was engaged on designs embodying the by-pass
principle; and although no drawings had actually reached the stage for
inspection and discussion it was felt that the principles were appreciated
and would be followed.
Regarding cleaner elements the Army and Navy are completely in favour of
wet metal elements although these weigh up to 15 lbs. each in the larger
sizes. It was difficult to get personnel to agree that a dry-fabric
by-pass type could be just as efficient and could save a lot of time in main-
tenance in the field.
The American viewpoint is based on higher cleaning efficiencies: lower
pressure drops after a given period of use, and durability - all of which it
is claimed have been proved by Amy and Navy -tests in comparison with the
dry type elements.
At a meeting of the Technical Sub-Committee on Power plants held on
3rd. November, 1942 in U.S.A* discussion took place on an earlier recommenda-
tion of the Joint Aircraft Committee on Bth September, 1941 to the effect
that &n air cleaner should be installed in the induction system ahead of the
metering device and shall be of standard size for a filter frame two inches
thick. The filter frame shall be flat and shall have straight sides"
The meeting recommended standardisation, between the Amy, Navy and
British, of the installation of the elements in regard to
performance characteristics. The Navy did not want to sacrifice the per-
formance of fighters in order to perfect the filter installations but would
prefer to have the air velocity through the filter as high as 2000 feet/
minute. The Amy Air Force has already specified 1500 feet/minute. It
was eventually agr©©cl that a specification should be prepared for air filter
elements so far as physical and performance characteristics only are con-
cerned and not size, shape or material, and that the installation should
provide three alternative sources of air supply to the engine, i. e. cold
ramming unfiltered air; filtered air; and warm air. It was specifically
mentioned that the filtered air is not necessarily cold but may be drawn
through the filter system from a sheltered position and therefore it may
be warm.


Conclusions and recommendations. As regards the intake duct itself,
designs should aim at taking in air at a stagnation point such as on the
wing leading edge if ram is desired or from the nacelle or wing wake if a
dragless entry without ram is preferred. These are, in general, the
extremes and present practice aims at something between them - the chief
points with present knowledge being a smooth well rounded entry and a
reasonable expansion ratio with as few bends as possible.
Both countries have adopted the by-pass air cleaner system but at
present neither country has standardised this sytem on their current
military aircraft.
Prom the joint technical discussions during the past year it appears
that until the discrepancy of views between oil wetted metal and dry
fabric cleaner elements is settled in the light of Service experience, it
would appear to be futile to attempt to standardise. It should be noted that
the above-mentioned differences between British and American technical
opinion centred round the cleaner permanently installed in the ramming
intake, and may not exist in relation to the use of by-pass systems. It
might well be profitable, therefore, to reconsider firstly whether by-pass
systems admit of standardisation and secondly what type of element wet or
dry; metal or fabric is best suited for them, utilising inertia separation
as the first stage of cleaning.
The Mission recommends that decisive attention be paid to the general
problem as outlined above and that agreement should be reached with the
American Amy and Navy authorities on the broad characteristics for intake
systems and if practicable on the major points of detail design. The
availability of the many new wind tunnels, model and full scale, in America
will give an impetus to engine nacelle development, of which the air Intake
system is one feature, which will enable American aircraft to reach and
maintain a standard of efficiency which we may well find difficult to equal,
except by copying.
Means for providing appropriate entry swirl to the impellor are
beneficial since entry conditions play a large part in good supercharger
performance.


liß-5*13 Induction system icing.
In item 5*12 reference was made, in outlining the ideal induction
system, to the desirability of eliminating icing risks* This item discusses
the problem briefly and refers to the British and American technique In. this
respect.
Dry Air. Since it is impossible completely to eliminate free water or
water vapour from the entering air it is necessary to design the system so
that certain forms of icing cannot occur*
Impact Icing of the Duct Entry. There are three ways in which this can
be avoided:
Sheltered Entry or backward facing entry. This however fails to meet,with
present knowledge and experience, the maximum ram requirement. It has been
proposed elsewhere (Griffiths: Corbett) that air may be taken in from the
wake of a wing where the air is already at rest relative to the wing and
that ideally after final ejection a net gain results in overall thrust. This
has still to be demonstrated in practice so that in the meantime forward
facing entries, preferably situated on the wing leading edge, will be assumed
in respect of ram.
Iceguard, protecting a forward facing entry. This method consists
essentially of a suitable meshwork across the mouth upon which ice accretes,
and so forms a protective cap in front of the entry. Two types of iceguard
are at present in use; namely, "gapped" and "gapless", the latter being used
in conjunction with an automatic shutter in a sheltered position.
Heating of the intake duct either wholly or in essential parts so that the
metal temperature from mouth to supercharger impellor inlet is always above
o°C* This is the method used in British carburettors and supercharger
induction elbows by passing hot oil through the throttle butterflies and
carburettor and choke jackets and elbow. With an oil temperature above 60°C*
such carburettors and systems are ice immune.
Surface Icing upstream of the entry. This is adequately covered by the
heating method described and alee by the iceguard method. With a mesh of 4
per inch giving openings of less than 1/1 6 square inch each in area, and
effective ice cap has been proved to form in under appropriate con-
ditions in under 30 seconds. The amount of adhesive ice or snow that passes
the mesh in the initial stages of ice accretion is negligible and only
amounts to a slight deposition of frost on part of the intake surfaces. It
has been suggested that this initial deposition may be catastrophic on
certain non ice-immune carburettors.
Throttle Icing* due to rapid expansion of supersaturated air beyond a
partially closed throttle of the conventional type. In this phenomenon*
which can be quite serious, the best preventative where throttle and jackets
are heated is to provide adequate heat at the actual lip and upstream edges
of the throttle and at the jackets surrounding the butterflies. In the
absence of such heat, as on certain American carburettors, the only palliative
is the use of alcohol, by special spray jet or in the fuel if the metering
orifice is upstream of the throttles, and by spray jet if the fuel entry is
downstream. The latter method is bulky, costly in weight, and therefore
in aircraft performance, and cannot be relied upon to be successful
immediately when required as, for example, when icing is met during an
approach pripr to landing.
Refrigeration Icing occurs when fuel evaporates and the consequent cooling
increases the humidity of the entering air beyond 10C$5 with consequent freez-
ing of the free water and its deposition on the surfaces it meets. The
ideal solution is to eliminate any evaporation of fuel upstream of the blower
entry by spraying directly into the impellor.
The last two kinds of icing constitute the hazards that have menaced
carburettors up to the present time and both British and American developments
have aimed at ultimate elimination of the risk, but using different methods.


Britioh Anti-icing Technique*
Non ice-free carburettors. Some British carburettors have "choke”
oil-heating but lack throttle heating. These cover units in present
production but their design dates back over a period of some 10 years. With
these it has been essential to use either an adequate alternative hot air
supply with manual shutter control, or 6% alcohol fuel or alcohol* spray with
marmnl control. In each case an appropriate ice-guard looks after the
cold intake mouth. The use of ar ice-detector has been visualised in the
past, fitted downstream of the fuel entry nozzle but no satisfactory unit
so far been forthcoming although much experimental work has been done.
Ice imnune carburettors. There are also in present production,
however, the Hobson series on the later Bristol engines and the S.U. series
of carburettors fitted to the Merlin, Griff on and Sabre engines which are
ice-immune. Both these series have throttle and choke and in general
jacket heating and have proved themselves completely satisfactory in all-
weather operation. The RAB/Hobson injection carburettor which has been
under development for some years is of fundamental importance, although not
yet fully into production.
There is no blockage whatever, other than the throttle butterfly, in
the air duct and the metered fuel is iiijected directly into the impellor. A
parallel development is the S.U.- pump injector which similarly eliminates
any blockage member other than the throstle and also injects at the eye of
the blower. The salient, point here is that when equipped with jacket
heating to the supercharger air intake elbow and throttle valve and body
assembly, and with an air intake iceguard - either gapped or gapless with
automatic sheltered air shutter - these metering systems will be absolutely
ice imnune and represent a very striking advance in' carburettor technique in
this respect. If \he conventional throttle valve can eventually be eliminated
in favour of, say, controllable blower-entry guide vanes the system will re-
present an ideal only excelled from an anti-icing point of view by fuel
injection directly into the cylinder.
American Anti-icing technique.
The three prominent American carburettors, Bendex-Stromberg, Holley
and Ghandler-Svans sire, the Mission submits, unsatisfactory as regards ice-
iranunity.
They are inadequate on three counts, firstly, that in the non-injection
forms the first two are prone to refrigeration icing at and beyond the spray
bars; secondly, all three have choke-controlled fuel metering with fine
bore pressure balance orifices and temperature compensating capsule all
mounted upstream of the chokes in a position very vulnerable to ”surface
icing"; and thirdly, having no throttle or jacket heating they are
therefore exposed to "expansion icing" at partially closed throttle
positions.
To combat these serious faults the American aircraft makers have to
provide alternative shutter controlled hot-air inlets and alcohol spray de-
vices. These carburettors were claimed to be completely ice immune when
they appeared, and it is unfortunate that in actual fact they only represent
a serious retrograde step in carburettor design in this respect. Because of
the surface icing tendency at the balance tubes and screen, it is possible
that a conventional iceguard may not prevent it, since ,the initial frosting
stage during guard accretion, while otherwise harmless, may permit ice to
reach the pressure-balance tubes and block them. There is no direct
evidence yet in flight that guards are inadequate in this respect, and the
bench tests cannot yet be relied upon to be truly representative. Should
an iceguard prove satisfactory in this respect, there still reniains re-
frigeration and throttle expansion icing to be dealt with by the methods
mentioned above.
In the blower injection forms, the refrigeration risk is non


existent but the other two remain at present*
The realisation of the situation is indicated by the large amount of
icing research work done in America on these carburettors resulting in
demands for carburettor hot air temperatures greater than 90°F when
humidity is above 0% and the bar type fuel nozzle is used* With the
fuel spinner at the blower entry the maintained carburettor air temperature
is greater than 55°F unless relative humidity is less than 60%*
There has been no real interest in America in the use of ice guards
for intake mouth protection apparently because those concerned
have not yet appreciated the need for a basic re-design of their metering
systems and are therefore satisfied with the use of the palliatives already
mentioned* The Mustang is the only Service aircraft that uses a gapless
iee guard with manual and automatic air shutter, but no information was
available regarding operation in ice conditions* The Navy viewpoint an
engine de-icing in general was particularly strong in favour of hot air
intakes only and the Amy was equally prepared to continue with them.
The Airlines on the other hand reveal their doubts in the matter by
insisting on alcohol spray in addition for maximum safety.
Conclusions and reconroendations
It is clear that, in spite of the much greater experience of icing
conditions and the vast amount of practical investigation into combating
them, the American authorities have not attained such a satisfactory degree
of immunity as we have*
Whereas the British position will steadily improve - with the advent
of the RAE/Hobson and S.U. continuous injection systems towards the end of
19i*4, and using oil jacketing, complete immunity will be achieved - the
American situation would appear to be static since their newest carburettors
planned for very large production, still require the palliatives already
discussed.
Further, even with direct injection the American trend appears to be -
on the Bendix system at least - towards choke controlled fuel metering,
with all its attendant icing propensities* The Mission feels that further
effort must be made -to place before the Amrican authorities, the important
advantages accruing from the British methods of conferring ice immunity and
especially to advise them to abandon, as soon as practicable, their choke-
contErolled fuel metering and 'pressure balance system*
48-5* 14 Fuel metering systems
Introduction
Items 5.12 and 5* 13 respectively dealt with Induction systems and air
cleaners, and Induction system icing.
The following notes indicate the salient points of comparison, as
metering devices, of the British and American systems*
Comparison of British and American fuel metering systems.
Until comparatively recently all carburettors have used the pressure
difference between the entry of the throat of a venturi or “choke” to induce
the flow of fuel from a jet into the airstream* There are however certain
limitations attending this method and investigatory work in the past has
defined these, which range from a lower limit below which the fuel flow will
not match the air flow correctly and an upper limit beyond which the velocity
of sound is reached and no greater air flow can be obtained. This
phenomenon places a limit to the height at which the engine could develop
sea level pcwrfer with a given ehoke size.
The diversity of types and combinations of diffusers, jets and chokes
in past desigi is sufficient indication of the difficulties attending the
satisfactory practical interpretation of the basic venturi laws, which take
no account of compressibility effects* The use of choke metering in British


suction or pressure carburettors has always been in combination with a
float controlled feed chamber and appropriate altitude control is in-
corporated to offset the natural riehening tendency that occurs at reduced
atmospheric densities# The variation of fuel flow to suit the varying
engine operating conditions are achieved either by combinations of fixed
jets or by variable needle valve jets and these are the differentiating
characteristics between the two float feed British types - Hobson and S#U#
In general there is no direct temperature compensation#
The latest British introduction of the R#A#B# metering principle, in
which the engine itself acts as the air flowmeter and the fuel flow is
controlled in accordance with the engine rotational speed, the boost
pressure and temperature of the charge entering the cylinder and the
exhaust back pressure, has provided an ideal, solution to the problem and
the forms known as the RAE Hobson injector carburettor and the S. U. pump
injector system auger well for its practical fulfilment.
This basic system has made possible a direct realisation of the ice-
immune induction system together with elimination of the upper limit of
altitude, self-imposed by the choke control method# The metering
advantages of this latest British system over the American include:
Immunity from air intake disturbances. The American carburettors are
exremely prone to this disability which leads to much experimental work on
ducting before an installation is finalised# Full scale duct tests are
run with the carburettor in position and usually a calibration is done with
a straight ramming pipe as a basis for gauging the subsequent effects# Also
the use of hot air intakes leads to complications of this nature owing to
the abrupt entry in many installations#
Unlimited altitude for maintenance of sea level power with satisfactory
fuel metering# This has been mentioned above and is an important factor#
The gain in power of the continuous injection system ever the Bendix type
has been estimated to be about at 5# 000 feet to 6% at 30,000 feet due
to fuel evaporation in the supercharger and the elimination of the choke
restriction. Freedom of design of the supercharger entry duct is also
facilitated#
Improved fuel economy* Greater economy is possible with the British
system amounting to about 2 or 3% better than the simple choke carburettor
under given conditions, and the former does not suffer the excessive richen-
ing effects with altitude which is inherent in the Bendix venturi system.
In addition the fuel netering accuracy can be within £ 2% for cruising and
±4s for full power at ary height. Much development work has been done and
prototype carburettors to this design have been made for the Sabre and
Centaurus series of engines. That for the Sabre, complete with the super-
charger intake, weighs 46 lbs. in magnesium and 32 lbs. in aluminium.
General features and problems. Features common to both types are the use
of continuous injection which has proved a big factor in obtaining some
improvement in mixture distribution especially with the new type spinner
nozzles developed by Pratt & Whitney.
Fuel nozzles. The Bendix Company lay great emphasis on spray diffusion
and believe that vanes are essential in slinger rings. They have tried
pany types but find the engine makers prefer to develop their own schemes.
The present unknowns on slinger rings are size of holes - capacity of the
rim - use of graduated holes or a slot. It is important of course to keep
any channels after the metering nozzle as small as possible to avoid fuel
boiling before exit.
Pressure fuel feed. The elimination of the float chamber feed to the
metering unit has resulted in tremendous advantage in preventing engine
cutting under negative vertical accelerations - this advantage is common
to both systems.
Vapour locking. This is a common problem and is urgently requiring solution.


It is due to fuel boiling and/or air separation and can only be dealt with
by increasing the fuel delivery pressure to the unit or by installing an
adequate vapour separator device, in the feed pipe line, or by sufficient
cooling of the fuel*
Bendix do not use separate vent chambers although the Amy Air Force
specify them on certain installations and have an approved separator in
production by the King Seely Company at G-rand Rapids. No details of this
separator were obtained*
Bendix agree that the vapour locking difficulty with present feed
systems is a major problem in the diaphragm carburettor.
Finger type spray diffuser. Bendix stated that design responsibility
for these is linked with the engine firms who do much development testing
to get the best shape. The Packard-Merlin 6l finger diffuser is considered
by Bendix to be a good example.
Supercharger intake elbows. Bendix have much development work in hand on
blower entry and carburettor ducts. Use is made of photographic .recording
of smoke through transparent walls.
As a result of this type of work Bendix were able to increase the rated
height of the Packard-Merlin 1800 feet, without ram, by an improved blower
entry with a guide vane dividing it, using the Stromberg PD. 18 carburettor.
Variable choke carburettor. A variable choke is one way in which the
inherent limitations of the venturi suction carburettor may be offset at
altitude.
Bendix are considering an equivalent to a variable choke unit by in-
corporating a controlled air passage between the two main metering venturi.
This will act as ths altitude control being in the closed position at sea
level where it will have the advantage of increasing the metering head. The
rectangular throttle will be controlled by an aneroid relay unit. The
scheme is only in the design stage at present.
Conclusions and recommendations. Consideration of the relative metering
properties of the latest British and American systems leads to the final con-
clusion that the non-choke-controlled continuous injeotion is superior on ail
counts - independent of air intake disturbances; couplete ice-immunity; and
fuel-metering efficiency.
It is felt that the British principles although not yet in production,
are superior to the solutions in existence in America and can be more easily
introduced and manufactured than separate fuel injection systems. It is
therefore recommended that the interest that already exists in America for
the British RAE/Hobson injector carburettor and S.U. punp injector Should
be encouraged and all the information and data possible given to America On
this subject as at present they are planned for a very large production of
equipment which does in no way deal with these difficult and important
problems.
As regards British requirements, the action necessary is to expedite
introduction of the R.A.E. and S.U. systems.
48-5* 15 Direct Fuel Injection.
Introduction. There is some work proceeding on compression ignition
engines, principally by the Navy who have five projects in hand. The fuel
consumption so far is no better than a petrol engine. For example, the
Catalina flying boat with Pratt & Whitney 1830 engines using rich mixture
response fuel,and a high conpression ratio is giving consumptions of o*3B lb/
BHP./hr. with the standard take off power.
The N.A.C.A* have a single cylinder doing 200 - 210 B.M.E.P. which would
be reasonable if it could be reproduced on a main engine. The Navy have a
two stroke conpression ignition engine proceeding at Godfrey's and are also


interested in the British Aspin rotary valve, but believe it to be
of no value for large engines.
In this connection the International Harvester 00. has carried out
considerable development of a Wright single bank air cooled radial
engine using direct injection on the Diesel cycle. The engine is
somewhat derated in power but it is felt that a good deal of valuable
information on the injection technique will result from this work.
The Navy has already asked the carburettor companies to get
rid of the carburettor as a single unit and to dispose it as required
round the engine, with injection into the impellor eye. They are
now looking into four or five projects on these lines - one of which
was about to fly. Sane of these are direct petrol injection but
the Navy considers this more vulnerable than blower injection
because of the very high fuel pressure delivery to the cylinder
nozzle.
There is, however, very considerable interest being taken by the
Amy Air Force in experimental work on direct petrol injection, with
spark ignition, and nearly every engine film is doing work along
these lines. The Bendix Company appear to have laid down the
largest .facilities for development of the necessary equipment, which
takes place at South Bend, Indiana.
The Bendix injection system is quite ingenious so far as the pump
is concerned but the method of control by using what is virtually
a Bendix standard carburettor is a retrograde step, because it dis-
regards one of the most important features given by direct injection,
namely complete immunity from icing risks so far as the fuel metering
system is concerned. The need for intake protection against ice
accretion exists with conventional ramming intakes whatever the
metering system employed and is at present provided by the appropriate
type of ice-guard.
The R.A.E. Hobson Master Control injection carburettor will operate
perfectly satisfactorily as the control unit for a Bendix direct
injection pump without the disadvantage mentioned above. The weight
of the Hobson N. 5.2 model for a 3,000 h.p. engine unit complete with
supercharger intake elbow is 46 lbs which compares very favourably with
the Bendix control unit which weighs 55 lbs. without allowing for the
intake elbow.
History of Fuel Injection in America.
Early in the thirties Wright Field carried out, in collaboration
with the Marvel Co., and Mr. Chandler, much injection work# Pratt &
Whitney also produced an engine which ran on the Air Lines quite
successfully for over two years in the first Boeing low wing monoplane
passenger types. The Navy also undertook the development of
the Bendix system. About 1935 ib was announced in the„ S.A.E.
journal that the Army Air Force would change over to fuel injection,
but finally this statement was withdrawn. In the meantime the
Air Lines had developed a series of carburettors for their own re-
quirements and when the expansion scheme for American military
aircraft was introduced, these carburettors together with the Bendix
pressure type, were employed for all military engines also.
When the European war started, lively interest in. fuel injection was
again evinced but like the British, it was too 3-ate for the Americans to
think of introducing fuel injection for their military types. America
has, however, had the opportunity, which England has not had, of doing
development work. The Mission found a live interest on fuel injection
and the feeling that as the powers of engines went up so was there a
greater interest to introduce fuel injection in place of carburettors, but
it is felt there is little chance of fuel injection coming into production
in America during the next two or three years, although there is no question


FIG. 87
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF
BENDIX DIRECT FUEL INJECTION SYSTEM


this will occur as soon as there is an opportunity to do so.
Detailed Description of Bendix Direct Injection System.
The master control automatically meters the correct fuel quantity and
delivers it to the injection distributing pump, in accordance with the rate
of air fleer in the induction system together with specified engine
functioning. This pump distributes the fuel under the desired pressure to
the engine cylinders.
Referring to Pig. 87, the master control consists of four principal
cosponents, namely;
The throttle body (1) contains the air throttle valve, the main venturi
(5) and boost venturi, (o).
The automatic mixture control, or aneroid (2) applies temperature and
pressure conpensatian to the air velocity measurements so that the
mass air flow is determined. This is a pressure and temperature sensitive
capsule that acts upon a profiled needle that varies the flow of air to the
venturi pressure side of the air diaphragm in the regulator unit.
The regulator unit (3) has two diaphragns, one of which is acted upon
by the differential pressure between the boost suction (b) and impact
pressure (A); the other is acted upon by the differential pressure between
metered and unmetered fuel (C & D). Movement of the diaphragms oause a
poppet valve (7) in the fuel supply system to be displaced and results in
a change in the poppet valve setting, so that more or less fuel is delivered
to the control unit.
The control unit (4) meters the fuel. It has an idling valve (8) that
meters only during idling conditions, together with a set of metering
orifices, a fuel head power enrichment valve (9), and a manually operated
mixture control valve (10). The manually operated mixture control valve
is so arranged that the pilot can set it for idle cut-off, to stfOp the
engine; auto lean for cruise; auto rich for take-off; and full rich for
emergency. The proper metering orifices function anteaatically in
accordance with the pilots setting of the mixture control valve. The fuel
head power enrichment valve automatically enriches the mixture for high
power conditions.
The fuel cannot spill into the engine cylinders when standing, yet the
injection pump fuel chamber is kept filled. Furthermore, the control system
is such that even if the punp did not have a straight line delivery, the out-
put would be automatically compensated with change in speed.
From the master control the fuel is delivered to the .injection pimp
(11), viier eit passes through a sintered powdered metal filter (12). A
vapour eliminator (13) is built into the injection pump housing. Also, an
accelerating pump is'supplied with the unit if desired.
The plungers of each individual punping element (14) are actuated by a
half crankshaft speed wobble plate. Control of the output is effected by
axial movement of a slidable sleeve (13) on each punping element, the sleeves
being connected to a single carriage that is moved toward greater output by
a pressure differential set up between control ne tered fuel on one side of a
diaphragm, and boost venturi suction on the other side. Movement toward
less output in the opposite direction is obtained by a spring (17) so that
the carriage is in equilibrium when the engine is running steadily.
The system utilizes the fuel pressure for an actuating force and does
not require an oil or electric servo for movement of Control mechanism;
it is therefore not subject to cold weather sluggishness.
The pump is simple and conpact. The wobble plate and driving mechanism
is sealed from fuel by closely fitted tappets (18), which are pressure
lubricated from the engine. The fuel goes from the oheck valves through
self-contained passages in the main housing to the mounting flange of the
unit, where hollow cap screws are used to fasten the pump to the adaptor


■flangec Delivery lines from the adaptor connect to the spray nozzles
located in the engine cylinder heads. In this way the pimp can be removed
from the engine for service without disturbing the delivery lines.
The pump is timed to .begin injection near the beginning of the engine
piston intake stroke,with a maximum duration of 130° engine crankshaft
rotation.
The pump can be calibrated with ease on the test bench, and adjustments
in fuel delivery between the individual elements can be made on the engine in
case of necessity without dismantling the unit. Removal of plugs on the side
of the housing affords entrance to the by-pass sleeves, each of which has
two members so arranged that relative rotation of either will charge tne
position of the metering edge with respect to the main carriage and thus
change the fuel quantity. A simple spring lock is provided.
The by-pass sleeve covers a ported annulus on the plunger that has a
connecting passage to the fuel charge being pumped. This covering of the
annulus can be effected either earlier or later during the punping stroke,
thus increasing or decreasing the effective output of the unit. The
schematic diagram shown has a variable beginning, and constant beginning and
variable ending can be obtained, with only slight change in the unit. The
design incorporates the desirable feature of large port areas together with
maximum practical ratio of port area vs. plunger lift. These factors keep
the actual operating results close to the geometric design characteristics,
with resultant rapid cut-off at the end of injection* This permits quick
closure, minimizing the possibility of sticking and poor seating of the valve.
It also provides a relatively straight line delivery, i. e. with the fuel
output control lever kept constant, the output will not change appreciably
over a wide variation in speed.
The nozzle shown in Pig. 87 is of the sinple outwardly opening poppet
valve type that, is spring loaded. The valve seat angle and opening pressure
is adjustable to meet the reeds of various engines. For most of the engines,
the opening pressure of the nozzle is set at 400-500 lb./sq.in*
Pig. 88 shows some of the forms of Bendix injection equipment. At the
top are air metering units, which contain the air throttles and manual
mixture controls, designed for several well known American engines.
Below are shown the injection pumps those at each end being for engines
of over 2,000 h.p.
Below the pumps are the control covers containing the filters, vapour
separators and power control elements. Since the control force is obtained
from the fuel supply pressure it is claimed to be mere reliable than separate
oil serve power.
Fig. 88. Bendix direct fuel injection equipment.


The remaining items are the injection nozzles “which fit into the
cylinder heads.
Much research work on nozzles and spray diffusion has been carried
out by Bendix using special electronic recording apparatus shown in Fig*BBA*
Pigs* 89 and 90 show photographs of typical sprays and a record of the
action in terns of injection pressure and time.
Bendix are now proceeding with design modifications to decrease the
weight of the punp*.
The following is a review of weights of various sizes of injection
systems made by Bendix-Stromberg*
Fig. 88a. Special instrumentation
for picking up and recording
instantaneous pressures in an
injection pump and line system
under high-speed operation.
BENDIX LABORATORY RESEARCH EQUIPMENT
BENDJX LABORATORY RESEARCH EQUIPMENT
Spray Research. Bendix - Stromberg High-Speed Photo-
graphs of typical gasoline spray jets. Note variation in
spray density, due to fuel fine inertia waves and incorrect
spray nozzle design.
Fig. 89.


Fig. 90. Pressure time diagram for Bendix fuel injection nozzle.
Review of Wei/hts of Various Size Injection
Systems manufactured by Bendix-Strcmberg
A. The D9CI System consisting of the following
1* Injection pumps DX-113—All and DX—ll3—Al2 (two nine cylinder
pumps used on an 18-cylinder engine weighing 31 lb. Boz*each) 63 lbs.
2* Master Control DX—ll3—Al4- consisting of throttle body,
Regulator, Fuel Control and Automatic Mixture Control. 49 lbs. 2oz.
3* Nozzles and fittings (18 nozzles) 4 lbs. Boz.
4* Mounting bolts and washers 0 lbs.!4oz.
117 lbs. loz.
B. The 1881 System consisting of the following:
1. Injection punps DX-102-All(one 18rcylinder punp). 50 lbs. soz.
2. Master Control DX-106-Al5 consisting of Throttle Body,
Regulator, Fuel Control and Automatic Mixture Control. 55 lbs.
3. Nozzles and fittings (18 nozzles) 4 lbs. Boz.
4* Mounting bolts and washers 0 lbs. 14 oz.
110 lbs. lloz.
C. The I6AI System consisting of the following:
1. Injection Pump DX-109-All (one 16-cylinder punp) 43 lbs. 12oz.
2. Master Control DX-109-Al2 consisting of Throttle Body,
Regulator Fuel Control and Automatic Mixture Control. 41 lbs. 2oz.
3* Nozzles and fittings (16 nozzles) 3 lbs. Boz.
4* Mounting bolts and washers 0 lbs#l2oz.
9k its. 20a%
If tssts prove successful using the hytensilite (aluminium) castings
.the following reductions in weights will be possible on the 18-cylinder
injection punp DX-102-A11: -
Lower Plunger Housing (Meehanite) 5 lbs.
" " " (hytensilite) 1 lb. 12 oz.
Saving 3 lfes. 4 oz.
Upper Plunger Housing (Meehanite) 13 lbs. 6 oz.
w " (hytensilite) 5 lbs. 4 oz.
8 lbs. 2 oz.
This will reduce the weight of the injection punp DX-102-All from 50 lbs. 5 oz.
to 38 lbs. 15 oz.
New designs of injection punp controls have been drawn and they have re-
duced the length of the 9-cylinder punp DX-113-All and Al 2 two and three
quarter inches in overall length which will also /educe the weight.


ifß-5.16 Oil Systems
Petrol Dilution Systems. Army Air Force aircraft use the Worth fuel
dilution system with a hot-pot, which is in circuit the whole time and
which is connected to the main portion of the fuel tank by ports which are
intended only to allow replenishment of the oil in the hot-pot and not to
give any mingling of the oil between the hot-pot and the main portion of
the tank
The Navy do not like this system and prefer to warm up all the oil in
the tanks, but they do use a fuel dilution system; hot-pots are used but
are arranged to give some mixing of the oil with that in the main tank, as
is common on British installations.
Glenn Martin have a patented fuel dilution system which is supplied in
two types, one for the Army and the other for the Navy. In the Army system
the essential difference from the normal Worth arrangement is that the petrol
is put into the oil scavenge line. It is claimed that this allows the oil
in the hot-pot to be diluted even if the engine is hot.
In the Navy version the same arrangement of injecting the fuel into the
scavenge line is adopted, but the oil from the cooler is normally returned
into the main tank, and only into the hot-pot when the cooler by-pass valve
is in action or when the fuel dilution valve is operated. The special
valye to allow this to be done is made by U.A.P. to Martin design.
Although the Glenn Martin system undoubtedly has the advantage of
obtaining better dilution of the hot-pot and therefore the more certain
circulation of the oil when starting up, it may require to be operated for
a longer time before effective dilution of the eil' iu rthe engine and par-
ticularly on the cylinder walls, occurs; in fact it seems doubtful*wbether
this can ever be as effective as when applied by the normal forth systan
to a cool engine. \
The positive dilution of the scavenge oil pipes and cooler should,
however, greatly reduce the risk of excessive bade pressures when starting
up.
Oil Tanks. Considerable trouble has been experienced with oil frothing and
with loss of pressure due to aeration of the oil and this has led to various
special designs of oil tanks.
The oil tank used on the Mustang
has been designed to reduce the
loss of oil pressure at altitude
and also to be suitable for in-
verted flying. A diagramatical
sketch of this arrangement is
shown in Pig.9l.
Constant Speed Unit Feeds.
Trouble has been experienced with
temporary loss of oil pressure
under conditions of zero or nega-
tive G. lfhen this loss of oil
pressure occurs the hydraulic
Fig. 91. Mustang oil tank.
propellers go into fine pitch, and high r.p.m. combined irith the loss of oil
pressure has resulted in bearing failures. While the negative G condition
can be dealt with by special oil tank design such as that on the Mustang, it
is difficult to design for a zero G condition. In a number of cases, there-
fore, an oil reservoir has been provided to feed the propeller. This is a
standard air loaded hydraulic accumulator with § synthetic rubber
and a cspadlty of about 'one ha'lf tf.S. gallon. It is fitted between the con-
stant speed unit pump and the governor valve.
Feathering Pump Oil Supply. The normal arrangement of taking the oil supply
for propeller feathering pumps from the bottom of the tank has given trouble
under high altitude conditions, due to the oil oongealing and failing to


flow to the pump. Boeings have proposed a
scheme, shown in Pig. 92 in which the oil is
taken from the scavenge line to a reservoir
which is in front of the bulkhead and is there-
fore kept sufficiently warm; the reservoir is
arranged with the entry at the top so that any
air will escape upwards. Loss of* oil in the
system will not empty this reservoir. The re-
servoir must, of course, be made strong enough
to withstand the high scavenge back pressure
occurring when starting with cold oil and it
will be necessary to ensure that leakage past
the feathering pump under these conditions does
not upset the operation of the propeller. It
is understood that this system has not yet been
tested.
Oil Coolers. No opportunity occurred to study
American oil coolers in detail but it is note-
worthy that all the modern installations seen
were fitted with thermostatically operated
shutters. These are considered in America to
be essential on large coolers.
Fig. 91. Mustang oil tank.
General. Particularly at high altitude, there is still much trouble with
bad scavenging of engines, and with loss of oil pressure and oil frothing.
It is considered that submerged scavenge pumps will become essential and
considerable interest was shown in the B.M.W. oil system, although as far
as we know this has not yet been tried on any American aircraft.
Recommendations. While no solutions to the major troubles experienced with
oil systems were found in America, the fact that they are experiencing
exactly the same troubles as we are, emphasises the fundamental character of
the problem and the importance of radical changes to overcome them.
A great deal is now known in this country about the requirements for
oil systems and it is recommended that this knowledge should be welded into
finalised production designs and be adopted on all new aircraft types.
Known solutions are the B.M.W. system, and the R.A..E. scheme for returning
oil from the scavenge pump into the sump to maintain a constant level and
so avoid pumping air. This latter scheme is only effective if the engine
sump and scavenge oil passages are such as to avoid the formation of
froth in the crankcase.
The use with any oil system of thermostatic oil cooler air shutters- is
strongly recommended.
Since both countries are in equal trouble with oil system, it is
recommended that there should be the closest possible collaboration.
48-5.17 American Ignition Equipment Development. A considerable programme .on
high altitude flight development is in hand in the United States, on a
number* of aircraft, notably the P. 47 (Thunderbolt) and the 8.17 (Portress)
with particular emphasis on ignition equipment.
Whilst at Boeing an opportunity was taken to discuss this development
with the Plight Test Department and some discussions of ignition equipment
were also held at Wright Field with Colonel Robey.
Although some experiments are being carried out with spark plugs with
platinum alloy electrodes, the standard American plugs have heavy electrodes
of base metal; for the most part resistors are not used and those which have
been tried are of considerably lower resistance than in current British
practice. For these two reasons much greater trouble is experienced with
electrode erosion and the spark gaps tend to increase very rapidly. In
view of the high boost which can be maintained at altitude with turbo
blowers, these factors have led to very high electrical stresses in the ig-
nition equipment.


The following notes detail methods which are being developed to over-
come these difficulties.
Magnetos, There does not appear to be much trouble with the low tension
contact breakers and most of the trouble is centred romd distributors.
One line of improvement has been the development of better materails and
Wright Field spoke highly of the good results which have been obtained with
Melmac 3 which is a melamine resin produced by the American Cyanimid and
Chemical Co, This material is non-tracking and if, under high altitude
conditions, a flashover occurs it does not permanently affect the insulation.
The other line of development has been towards supercharging the dis-
tributor, This has been done by obtaining air under pressure from the
first stage blowers. Wright Field do not consider that it is necessaiy to
use ailioa-gel or other dryers in the air supply as a distributor can be ad-
equately drained and providing the pressure is maintained and there is a
definite flow they believe that they will stand considerable moisture. The
position is, of course, somewhat different when the whole harness is super-
charged as it is difficult to arrange adequate and suitable drains and the ire
is a danger of pockets of moisture occurring.
A suitable supply of air from a first stage blower is not always avail-
able and Bosch, Scintilla and the Edison-Splitdorf Companies are developing
magnetos with integral supercharging pumps.
In the Northwest magneto which is being built for the Packard Merlin
the distributor is sealed and can be charged through a suitable oonnection
from a "sparklet" cylinder with an inert gas much as CO2 or Argon. It is
said that promising results have been obtained 'from this magneto and it will
operate very well when filled with air if the special gas is not available.
The quantity of air is not sufficient to produce serious quantities of nitric
acid and since atmospheric pressure is maintained at altitude, it is quite
possible that the use of the special gas may be dispensed with.
The Frigidaire Co. have developed a new fokm of seal which has given
excellent service on commercial refrigerators and which is being applied to
aircraft magnetos.
Low Tension Distribution. The adoption of low tension distribution pro-
vides a fundamental cure and this is planned for early production on the
Wright R. 3350 18 cylinder radial. The normal frequency is used and the ooils
are therefore rather large and heavy*
Considerable interest is being shown in low tension distribution with
high frequency ignition. Both the oondenser discharge method and the auxi-
liary low tension spark gap have been tried;' so far, however, very little
fundamental information appears to be available as to the requirements.
It is generally stated that high frequency ignition will fire a fouled
sparking plug which would cause mis-firing with normal ignition, but the
Mission did not obtain any concrete evidence of this.
Ignition Harness. Plastic filled harnesses are in use cn a number of
engines, in some cases with cast magnesium conduits. It is, however, now
generally realised that this type of harness is impractical without the use
of detachable leads. Detachable leads, of course, have certain advantages
in themselves, but the connections have given a good deal of trouble and this
is one of the reasons why Wright Field are not very enthusiastic about the
plastic filled harness. In any case the plastic filling does not really
deal with these parts of the ignition system Which give most of the trouble,
i.e. the distribution and sparking plug ends of the leads and terminals.
Wright Field are carrying out some tests with rubber covered harness and
are Very interested in the good results which have been obtained with the
Bristol fully rubber' oovered design.
A drawing of the latest Pratt and Whitney cast harness is shown on
Fig. 93.


FIG. 93


.P a^>le « Although the standard Ignition cable used in 7mm.. fawn,
1 f used m thfi AlH*on engine and it is understood to be at least as
satxfactory. Stainless steel wire is used not apparently so much for
its greater mechanical strength, but because of its higher electrical
resistance. While we have found the advantages of stainless steel from a
mechanical point of view to be outstanding, the importance of the increase
in electrical resistance is obscure because to be effective in reducing
plug erosion, any resistance must be concentrated as near the sparking plugs
as possible, i.e. in the form of resistors as used in British practice. With
the normal construction of high tension leads there is an air gap between
the strands of H.T. wire, and this complicates the sealing of dbtributors
and spark plug terminals, but it is thought that apart from this it may in
itself be undesirable since it allows corona to be formed within the cable.
Experiments are being made in the bonding of the rubber to the wires so as
to eliminate the air space and also in the use of a layer of conducting rubber
next to the wire.
gpfirk Plug -Screens and Terminals. The Amy use ceramic spark plug screens
with the large flash-over distance of .900* In spite of this, trouble is
experienced and development is in hand on the sealing of the terminals so as
to maintain ground level pressure at altitude. Although the Amy are
enthusiastic about it, it is doubtful whether this solution will prove
practical under Service operating conditions. The alternative is to
supercharge the complete harness and terminals and to rely on an adequate
supply of air under pressure to scavenge the harness connections and remove
ionised air and to prevent the breakdown of the installation. However, the
Army do not favour pressurised harness and thus other alternatives are
being sought.
British spark plugs with platinum alley wires
are admitted to have good non-fouling characteristics and to be very
resistant to electrode erosion, but are criticised as being delicate to
handle and easily damaged by over-tightening or incorrect maintenance
procedure.
As already explained, however, the use of the American type of plug
accentuates troubles with the rest of the ignition system and considerable
interest is now beginning to be shown in the British plugs. Boeing said
that roughness generally occurs on a 8.17 after two, flights to 35,000 ft.
due to the increase in the spark plug gaps and the fouling of the plug
screens, and therefore for high altitude development work using standard
plugs, it is necessary to have a new set for each flight.
For ignition equipment development work, they are developing a rough-
ness indicator to measure the amplitude of the engine vibration on its
rubber mountings. The arrangement which was seen consisted of a suitable
system of levers and a pointer fixed on the nacelle which could be viewed
from the cabin. They have in mind, however, the development of a more ela-
borate method. Some sort of indicator of this sort is very necessary when
doing ignition development work on a four engined aircraft.
Conclusions. American spark plugs are inferior to British and because of
their design and the greater rate of errosion, require higher sparking
voltages. This throws a greater strain on the magnetos and harness and
has led to intensive development of these components, which is better and
more practical than in Britain.
The Mission considers that, both mechanically and electrically
American magnetos and harness are superior to British ones but the point
which impressed them most was the very large amount of research work being
done on ignition. This work |has been put cm a broad and fundamental basis
and it is believed that it WDuld repay detailed and careful study. It is
recommended that any future Mission to the TJ.S.A. should include an expert
on this subject.
A very interesting survey of the development at present in hand is
covered by the N.A.C.A. advanced and confidential report by Thomas T.Neill,
dated August 1942. A copy of this report has been brought back by the
Mission and is available to those interested.


48-5• 18 Exhaust systems and flame damping
Exhaust systems! Conventional free exit exhaust systems whether stub
pipes or manifolds have been highly developed in America and bulk prod-
uction is now organised on very efficient lines. The Solar Company of
San Diego, which was visited, concentrates exclusively on exahust mani-
folds ibr radial and in line engines and contributes a very large pro-
portion of the total requirements in this. Exhaust systems are designed
by the power plant groups of the aircraft firms and specialist firms such
as Solar take over the complete manufacture.
Sheet material, 18/8 stabilised stainless steel, is used and great
importance is given to the low carbon content, to avoid weld decay and
inter-crystalline corrosion. The carbon content is said to be prefer-
ably as low as ©.04 to 0.07$ aid steels containing titanium are preferred
to those using columbium from the point of view of working and welding.
Gras welding is largely used but electric welding is found to be useful
for attaching flanges to the manifolds. Special training is given to
the personnel in welding these materials which require a somewhat slower
rate to avoid pin holes.
The thickness of the material used for the majority of aero exhaust
systems is approximately 16 - 18 gauge and great attention is paid to
detail construction with a view to long life. The Airlines, for example,
demand a life of some 3000 hours from the manifolds they use. As regard*
pipe joints Solar produce spherical type which is said to be efficient.
Pig. 94 shows a cross section of the unit
and it will be seen that it comprises both
a sliding and a ball action, one and of
the joint being roll welded to one of the
pipes, the other being left free to slide
on the packing material. This packing is
made up from flat inconel wires 0.002" X
.0008" woven first into a fine net, which
is then rolled up to make a strand. These
strands are braided together to form a
rope and powdered mica is introduced at an
early stage to act as a form of lubricant.
Fig. 94. Solar exhaust manifold joint.
The rope packing is about*.so" square when finished and is placed in position
during assembly of the joint. The inner sphere is chromium-plated al-
though the chief designer at Solar’s was of the opinion that it would be
better to plate the outer portion and thought that it could be spun
after plating if previously heat treated. Solar is also working on a
joint with adjustable packing which seems worth while but is difficult
to achieve in light weight and small bulk.
The special inconel rope is made by the Johns Manvilie Company, but
in view of the scarcity of inconel, samples of stainless steel have been
made up but no experience had been obtained at the time of the visit.
When placed in position the packing is compressed about 15$.
Another joint used in America is made under licence by Ryan to a
design by Rohr of San Diego. It is also spherical and consists of an
austenitic cast iron spherical sleeve fitted with a single cast iron
piston ring over which the manifold is spun. It is claimed that the cast
iron sphere grows under heat and provides an adequate seal. The piston
ring, however, is bound to suffer under heat and in practice this is
found to be a source of trouble.
Regarding bulk production, there is much to be said for specialist
firms making manifolds for the whole of the aircraft industry rather than
each firm making its own. This is a point worth considering in Britain
although there is already a trend in this direction.
fflame damping. This requirement has created a formidable problem since
although the original need at the outbreak of war was the flame damping
of conventional systems, the need for maintaining ejector thrust intro-
duces much complication in the practical/designing of the manifolds.


Ejector fishtail dampers of reasonable efficiency are now in prod-
uction in America for non-turbo-supercharged engines. little success
has so far attended the work on damping exhaust turbo units without some
considerable loss of performance, and in this connection the General
Electric Company at Lynn have carried out some experimental work of a
fundamental .nature and also work directed particularly to the turbo problem.
The Mission found that the interest in America in achieving flame
damping was not universal although much work of an ad hoc nature appears to
have been done at certain places, and the seriousness of the problem is now
generally realised.
A Standardisation Committee was set up and a specification issued for
flame damping requirements. The specification is stringent - perhaps in
the light of more recent data from operational flying, rather too stringent
but it at least sets a standard which if extremely difficult to attain, is
a goal worth trying for.
The clauses include -
1) the exhaust system should be invisible over land at a distance of
150 feet or more and at 250 feet + 50 feet over the sea,
2) the loss of aircraft performance shall not exceed one per cent,
3) when the above requirements cannot be met the flame damper must be
readily detachable within one hour,
4) tests shall be made at each engine rated altitude and at 2,000
feet under the following conditions*
(a) military power rich mixture
(b) normal power rich mixture
(c) lOfo power rich mixture
(d) 70$ power weak mixture
(e) 50$ power weak mixture
all powers corresponding to operation on propeller load.
5) the fuel to be used in these tests shall have an aromatic content
as specified by the procuring agency, but in no case less than
20$ of aromatics by volume.
General Electric Company* s work. Practical tests on fishtails confirmed
the guiding principle that a reduction of the thickness of the exhaust gas
jet by spreading it out and of providing as. much boundary perimeter as
possible was an important faetdr in damping flame.
The effects of orientation were investigated and showed that when the
angle between gas jet and slipstream was less than about 45° the effect of
angle was small. Also the magnitude of the slipstream velocity was quite
secondary. As would be expected least flame was observed at 90° angle.
The effect of obstructions in the gas stream was investigated - the
action being that of an "ignitor**, burning starting at the obstruction.
The results show that the burning was caused by the entrainment of air into
the central core of the gas jet in the low pressure wake immediately behind
the obstruction with immediate burning spreading out at the sides of the
obstruction. Obstructions that are well streamlined or are otherwise
prevented from entraining air do not cause flaming.
General Electric have satisfied themselves as to the gas temperatures
below which flaming is a minimum and have investigated the matter on


exhaust turbo supercharger installations. The temperature range which
determines whether the slipstream essentially quenches the gas from a
rather narrow-. If the temperature is no- more than about
1500°P then an exhaust hood can be expected to do reasonably well in
suppression, but would b 6 useless if the gas temperature were 1700°F.
In fact with a nozzle box temperature l55O°F the air entrained at-the
roots of the buckets, at low nozzle box pressure ratios, and that dis-
charged into the hood by the standard connection cooling cap causes a
sufficient temperature rise to cause complete flaming on reaching the
slipstream. For this reason air sealing devices have been developed.
Complete flame suppression has been obtained on turbo supercharger
exhaust without any hood when the gas temperature entering the nozzle box
is cooled down to about 1200°?, but the weight ana size of cooler is
prohibitive. To drop the gas temperature from 1600°P to 1200°F would
entail an increase in engine speed of 200 r.p.m. at 25,000 feet to main-
tain a given cruising power and the specific fuel consumption at
rated power would be increased kfo.
After unsatisfactory results in flight .with a rotating screen for
cooling the gas after leaving the turbine, investigation centred round the
design of a pre-cooler for the gas. Tests made at Wright Field have in-
dicated that 1340°F at the turbo nozzle box is the critical temperature
at which flaming will occur. A report entitled "Measurements of High
Temperatures in high velocity gas streams" by W. J. King (available in the
Appendix) shows that the true hot gas temperature as measured by a General
Electric quadruple shielded thermocouple is between 40 to 100°P higher,
depending on the gas Slow rate, than the temperature of 134 J 0°F measured
with the plain thermocouple. This value of 1340°F corresponds to about
1400°P for normal power on present day air cooled engines using a quad-
.ruple shielded instrument.
A test flight at night with a shallow hood on a turbo installation
gave temperatures of 1360 - 1425°F from the wheel at low altitudes.
The highest nozzle box inlet temperatures measured, were 1450°P at high
altitudes. The turbo itself definitely met the Army flame suppression
requirements, although the discharge from the waste gate however, Was not
satisfactory.
General Electric therefore, advise the following maximum allowable
nozzle box temperatures as measured by a G.E. quadruple shielded
thermocouple.
For re-rated B-22 and B-33 turbo superchargers the ma-Hmiim continuous
nozzle box inlet temperature is 1600°F.
For all turbo superchargers not re-rated the maximum continuous
nozzle box inlet temperature is 1500°F.
For all turbo superchargers, inlet temperatures of 100°F higher than
the above figures are allowable for short periods of time.
In order to obtain adequate turbine output the nozzle box inlet tem-
perature should not be less than 1400°F as measured by the General Electric
quadruple shielded thermocouple.
For flame suppression the temperatures should be as follows
With short hoods to shield glow from buckets a main rmim nozzle box
inlet temperature of 1425°F is recommended for low altitudes.
At high altitudes the work taken out of the gases by the turbine will
permit appreciably higher temperatures than the 1425°F recommended above.
With air leakage inside the hood at low altitudes' an estimated gas temper-
ature rise of approximately 100 to 250°F takes place.
The flow from the waste gate should be cooled down below 1400°F before
it reaches the slipstream.


The General Electric Coaqoany recommends the use of a heat exchanger
installed before the turbo in preference to one installed downstream be-
cause of the greater flexibility in control and performance obtainable
from a properly designed upstream heat exchanger.
In this way, as stated by Wright Field, the gas temperature can be
reduced some 300-400°F giving approximately 1300°? at the turbine. In
terms of heat extraction the exchanger removes about 500,000 BTU/hour at
about 1,400 BEP engine power. At 1,000 BHP the value is about 350,000 -
450,000 BTU/hour. At cruising powers -the turbo casing generally runs
without glow but at' high powers the nozzle ring and wheel glows brightly.
The use of a hood or duct is therefore, also necessary.
The development of suitable heat exchangers and their effect on
overall a±craft performance is being pursued at Wright Field and also at
the various firms under the guidance of the N.A.C.A.
General Electric do not appear to have done any serious investigatory
work on deliberate gas/air mixing in ducts as a means of cooling below
the flaming temperatures and were interested in the work done at R.A.E. on
the subject and would like to be kept informed of future progress.
Other flame damping developments. The general impression gained during
the Mission’s survey was that a reasonable amount of theoretical work has
been done in America on exhaust gas propulsion and the design of appro-
priate nozzles and also on jet ejectors and augmentation by added air, but
comparatively little on practical application in conjunction with flame
damping. Such theoretical work has been duly published by the N.A.C.A.
and other bodies including the research division of the Uhited Aircraft
Corporation, whose recent Report R—74 on ejector nozzbs is of interest.
It is available in the Appendix together with an earlier Report R-309 oh
augmentation of jets.
Some recent work by the Aircraft division of the Curtiss-Wright Cor-
poration is typical of the development now proceeding on ad hoc-! lines.
The details are contained in a report which describes the adaptation of
the British fishtail exhaust ejector to the P. 40 type aircraft.
The Merlin/feurricane triple ejector manifold was not satisfactory on
flame damping or engine performance; it glowed badly and created excessive
back pressure.
New designs were therefore, experimented with for the Allison C-15
engine in P-40, 4®, 40C and 40G and the Allison F-3R engine in the P-4QD
and 4QE, and Figs. 95* ®nd 97 show the result which is quite conventional.
The stubs were tested on a P-40D at night and observed in flight and
from the ground. The engine conditions were auto-rich mixture at cruising,
normal rated and military power, and the report states that these ejector
stubs were satisfactory in that tjhe flame and the stubs themselves were in-
visible fron 150 feet. The exit area was 3.0 square "inches compared with
4*o square inches of the standard circular exit stub pipe.
Regarding the Packard Merlin V-1650-1 engines in the P-40F and P-4QL
aircraft the development of suitable flame damping stubs was based on a
sample provided by Wright Field Materiel Division. The investigations
were not completed at the date of the report 15th Fehruay, 1943, but had
reached a stage where production of the units was started. Fig. 9B shows
the Curtiss M.C.9 version of the Wright Field scheme which had been de-
signated "M.C." type dampers of which nine different models were ultimately
tried, and Fig. 99 indicates a close up view of this particular double pipe
swan-neck damper, while Fig. 100 shows the M.C.9PI and 9P2 production pipps.
The report available in the Appendix contains full details of the
development.
The tests were all carried out at the Buffalo Municipal Airport,
Buffalo, New York and the following extract gives some of the data obtained:-


Fig. 95.
P.40 Fishtail
exhaust ejectors.
Fig. 97.


Fig. 98. Curtiss MC9 Flame damper ejectors.
Fig. 99.
Close-up of Curtiss MC9 ejector.
Fig. 100. Type MC-9P2
Production type ejector.


The ds!C9 stub pipe shown in Fig. 98 is considered the best experi-
mental damper so far tried on the Packard Merlin v-1650-1.
Following some mechanical failures at the flanges the MC9 was re-
built and gave no trouble during 50 hours flying. Slight modifications
to the side cowls and exhaust shrouds are necessary to fit these pipes.
A speed check on a F-40F wiih the second set of M 39 pipes showed that
at all engine brake-horsepowers from 840 to 1060 at which the flights were
made the dampers were 2.5 miles an hou£ slower than with the standard
stubs, which gave 370.5 mph at 1060 BHP at 3000 engine rpm at 22,000 feet
density altitude.
As regards visibility the orignal MC9 was invisible at 150 feet from
flame or glow with only spasmodic Jets of thin flames while the new M 39
version was invisible at 50 feet, flame or glow, with no Jets of flame.
The MC9P was invisible.
Visibility on an 85$ dark night (no moon) due to city
illuminations outside airport
Stub pipe
Invisibility
distance
Glow
Remarks
MC9
150 ft.
no glow at 150 ft.
Spasmodic jets of thin flame
MC9
re-made
50 ft.
no glow at 50 ft.
Occasional jets of flame
MC9 New
50 ft.
no glow at 50 ft.
-
M09P1
250 ft.
no glow at 50 ft.
-
MC9P2
1KJ9P3
150 ft.
150 ft.
seen at 100 ft.
seen at 75 ft.
First 3 stubs invisible at 50A.
The above ground runs were made at take off power;, 3>ooo r.p.m.; 54" Hg
manifold pressure; auto-rich mixture. A night flight at a distance of
150 feet from and 100* above, three gronid observers showed the new MD9 stubs
to be 95$ invisible to 100$ invisible on all runs. Average distance from
aircraft to observers 250 feet.
A check on the possible carbon monoxide contamination of the cockpit
using a Mine Safety Appliance Company’s analyser showed a maximum reading
of o.ools C 0 compared with the Amy Air Force maximum allowable of
0.0055.
A further flight test on a P-40K under the same conditions but with
the fishtail type of damper, < some of which were enamelled, gave 100$ in-
visibility to the three ground observers who were at an average of 250 feet
from the aircraft.
Regarding enamelled stub pipes, this is an interesting development
which was examined briefly in Britain when heat resisting paints were being
used.
The work has progressed in America and it is stated that production
is proceeding on mild-steel welded stubs with 2 coats of vitreous enamel
for Airacobra, P. 40 and Boston 111 as well as for the Douglas A. 20 series,
Havoc and 887 and the North American B-25 Mitchell. The pipes are necked
down to 70$ of their port area and finish either round or with an oval
section. The back pressure is said to be less than 2.5* Hg and the short
stubs need no support other than the flanged Joint at the cylinder.
Although it was not specifically stated it is probable that the MC9
pipes described above for the P-40 series are'enamelled in this way. The
utility of such a process from the point of view*of avoiding nickel alloy
steel in short supply has much to conmend it, even if the life of the in-
dividual pipes is short - although Wright Field has tested them for 200 hours
on the bench and in flight with satisfactory results.


Examination of samples of the enamel and of an actual enamelled stub
pipe is now proceeding at the R.A.E. in order to assess the value of the
method on British exhaust systems.
Two firms have supplied the enamel. The American Porcelain Enamel
Co. Muskegon and the Ferro Enamel Corp., 4150 East 56th Street, Cleveland.
The method is to dip the part into cold enamel and then heat for 10
minutes at 1700°F and cool off slowly. Dipping-results in about 1- #
ounces of enamel adhering per square foot or a thickness of about
0.004 inches.
It was stated that dark blue colour is best to deal with visible
radiation while it is claimed that the heat transfer of the mild steel plus
charnel is as good as thicker stainless steel.
New installations. Of the new installations seen there was nothing out-
standing in novelty or utility. This is not a reflection on the American
effort, but merely confirms the British opinion that there is no "royal road”
to success in the design of flame damping exhaust systems. Each in-
stallation demands separate consideration and unless serious attempts are
made to investigate and plan the exhaust system at the outset of a new pro-
ject, the result will always be the unsatisfactory compromise we have at
the present time on nearly all aircraft.
Some 8.25 (Mitchell) aircraft have been delivered with multi-fingered
discharge pipes taken frcra the collector rings and led to the gill openings.
This is very similar to certain German efforts and it is merely a variant
of the "slotted shrouded" tail pipe principle already referred to. The
latest practice now in production comprises individual mild steel ejectors
finished in vitreous enamel. The stt*bs are short and project inside
individual louvres, through the cowling behind the cylinders and ahead of
the gill exit. They are fastened to theexhaust port flanges only and form
a very simple and effective exhaust system., The pipe from the top cylinder
is bent round the carburettor and air intake and is of necessity supported
against vibration and fracture. These are necked down outside the port to
about 70$ port area and then.merge at constant area into a 4 : 1 oval at
exit. This installation is another instance of the use of the enamelled
necked down pipes already described in regard to the in-line engines.
Some effort is being made by the Vega Company to achieve gas/air mixing
and a scheme on the Ventura gave promising results on damping, but apparent-
ly was unacceptable in Britain on account of speed loss. This was the only
American attempt at a duct installation brought to the notice of the Mission.
No flame damping exhaust system at all was in production for the
Curtiss Wright A. 25 single engine dive bomber, although it would appear
necessary for part of this aircraft* s general operational duties.
Regarding the large aircraft inspected, the Martin Mars fitted with
the Wright R. 3350 engine has the front and rear exhaust collector rings,
associated with this engine, with conventional exits at the rear. No
flame damping proposals for this aircraft have been scheduled so far.
Similarly the Constellation, the 8.29 and the 8.32 have the same engine
but with the collector rings coupled rearwardly to dual turbo supercharger
units. The parent firms are awaiting the design and supply of appro-
priate heat exchangers for these complicated exhaust systems. The problem
of glow of the hot metal surfaces may be expected to be serious and will
need attention such as cuffing or shrouding as has been done in the ex-
perimental Allison 8.29 power plant by sleeving the. pipe work with another
giving a 1" concentric airspace in which cold air is induced to flow.
This, however may well be a source of fire, should the exhaust pipe be
punctured sufficiently to allow combustion of the unburnt exhaust products
in the surrounding air stream.
Ducted Systems. It was early established in Britain that the only prac-
tical way to suppress f}.aine in engine exhausts is by cooling the gases by
mixing with cold air. The need for maintaining ejector thrust and yet
suppressing radiation and glow then led to the design of duot mixing systems


and subsequent bench investigations have confirmed the correctness of the
principle and have established the. required relationship between air and
gas flows to achieve flame suppression. Little had been done in America
on this fbrm of damper so the Mission was able to explain the principles
and to advocate their adoption In new design work.
Conclusions and recomnendations. In general the present stage of develop-
ment in America is:-
The Amy Air Force have adopted enamelled necked-down stub pipes on
practically all air cooled radial engines without turbo superchargers and
their use on liquid cooled in-line engines is extending rapidly.
The Navy Department is adopting fishtailed ejectors and on certain air-
craft, "shrouded slotted” or scrubber type of tail pipes which are attached
when required*to the outlets from the existing exhaust collector manifolds.
The use of heat exchangers is becoming a definite policy for turbo in-
stallations where wing de-icing, cabin, and gun heating are required and for
flame damping reasons.
Appreciation of the need for careful exhaust flame damping on night
operational aircraft has been slow in America, but this attitude has been to
a large extent influenced by the course of the Japanese war and the
tactical measures demanded by it.
The Mission was able to explain the urgent need for flame suppression
and, therefore, encouraged a more active attack on the problem, which, it is
hoped, will now be done. It should be emphasised however, that Britain
must make available all the relevant information and data at her disposal
since duplication of development work would be ah unnecessary waste of
effort. Co-ordination is therefore, essential to a greater extent than
at present and the latest British reports on ducted systems should be sent
over at once for circulation to the industry. The Mission was able to
give the results of this work up to December, 1942 and these were circul-
ated to the East and West Coast Production Councils for the benefit of
its member firms.
43-5*19 Engine Starters. The Eclipse Division of the Bendix Aviation Corporation
appear to have a monopoly of engine starters in America. These comprise:
Hand inertia starter designed for use on aircraft not equipped with a
battery system or where weight abd battery requirements
are important considerations. An Eclipse "External
Eriergiser" may be used in conjunction with inert-
ia starters to eliminate hand cranking*
Electric inertia starter designed for use on aircraft
where remote electrical control and provision for emer-
gency hand cranking are specified. If sufficient bat-
tery current should not be available these starters may
be cranked by hand or by an external energiser.
External energises This is an electrically driven hand
held motor with a straight or right angle power offtake
which can be plugged in to the above starters to speed
up the inertia wheels. It is shown in Pig. 101.
Direct cranking electric and inertia starter used where
remote electrical control and emergency hand cranking
are specified. It provides free flywheel acceleration
and continuous cranking after the starter-jaw has en-
gaged. The starter may be operated as a direct crank-
ing electric unit without the prior use of the flywheel
energy or for emergency may be used as a hand inertia
starter only or as an electric inertia unit only.
Fig. 101.


Direct cranking eleotric starter. This is the original type in which an
electric motor turns the engine through a gear reduction and an automatic
engaging and disengaging mechanism controlled through a multiple plate
clutch. Complete engagement of the starter-jaw is effected before
turning begins.
The largest unit in this series is the 24 volt A-160, suitable for
engines of 3350 cubic inch piston displacement.
There is also an E-160 model fitted with an integral hydraulic pump
for providing a pressure source for feathering and unfeathering the
hydroma tic propeller.
Combustion starter for use on single engined military aircraft where a
minimum of weight is of primary importance and emergency hand cranking is
not essential. Cranking torque is applied to the engine crankshaft by
means of a piston and screw-shaft arrangement which is actuated by the
high-pressure combustion products of a cartridge fired in a special
breech.
No hand cranking is provided in this starter.
Starters of various sizes are available in each category for appro-
priate sizes the largest being the A-Iso for a 3350 cubic inch piston
displacement engine and a combustion Type 688 for a 4500 cubic inch
engine.
There is a new series 45 direct cranking and inertia starter undergoing
development at Bclipse and a prototype has recently arrived in England.
The performance claimed for the latest edition seen by the Mission is
exceptional being 24 revolutions beginning at 150 r.p.m. at 2,200 lb. ft.
torque the flywheel running initially at 30,000 r.p.m. This performance,
if substantiated, greatly exceeds that of the prototype already received
and tested.
The Army Air Force uses electric inertia and direct cranking starters
fairly exclusively while the Navy policy is rather different; it stipulates
cartridge starters for single seater and carrier aircraft, and electric
inertia and direct cranking for the large flying boats. External ener-
gisers are also used.
The American outlook for the future centres round electric starting,
even for engines of s#ooo to 8,000 horsepower. In the Mission's opinion
there is some doubt About electric starting, either D.C. or A.C., surviving
on the ultra-large engine when it appears and the same holds for combustion
starters which the Mission believes have reached their limit of utility on
engines of over 2,000 H.P #
British policy on electric starting differs somewhat, in that only
direct cranking is used at present. Cartridge starting is used for the same
reasons as in U.S.A. For certain new engines the Eclipse series 45 shows
considerable promise and the study of its general utility should prove of
much value. On the matter of specific requirements British policy demands
that the electric starter must be self-contained in the aircraft and must
function within the scope of the aircraft battery, and that hand barring-gear
for engine turning will be fitted without exception to flying boats,
but not to any aircraft an which the propeller can be • turned by hand except
when it is necessary to provide an "unsticking'* torque or to avoid
"hydraulicing". Also where possible a self-contained starter must be used
on fighters and if it should be impossible then it is permissible to revert
to an electric starter.
As regards engine starting in winter weather the technique is not suffic-
iently developed either in Britain or America, although the investigatory
work carried out in Alaska last winter and to be continued during next year
will go far to enable the Americans to reach a practical solution. This
aspect has been discussed in item No. 5.24 on winterisation of aircraft.


Conclusions. It is not sufficient to leave the matter as it now stands
"because present British engine starting is not entirely satisfactory and
it would be serious at this stage to contemplate new engines with present
starters•
To meet the problems that will undoubtedly arise in the near future
on the larger engines the Mission advises a general technical review of
the subject, in all its aspects including winter operation, which is not
possible in the scope available in this memorandum.
20 Two Speed and Contra Rotating Reduction Gears. In America tjhere is very
considerable interest in two speed reduction gears and both Pratt & Whitney
and Lycoming have versions which are combined with counter-rotating
propellers.
The chief interest in two speed gears is in the improvement in eco-
nomy under cruising conditions rather than in the possibilities of ob-
taining better take-off, whereas in this coustry it is believed that they
have been considered primarily as aids to better take-off. The gear
ratio giving the best economy under low power conditions will not
necessarily be the same as that which gives the oest take-off*
To appreciate properly the position in -America it is necessary to
consider the rather .different engine operating conditions on the average
American and British bombers.
All four engined American Army Air Force bcmbers are fitted with turbo
supercharged engines and in general the maximum permissible weak mixture
cruising speeds are a slightly lower percentage of the take-off speeds than
corresponding British engines. The major differences, however, in the
use of turbo blowers which allows the boost tq be maintained at altitude
at relatively low r.p.m. whereas with the mechanically driven blowers on
British engines the supercharger compression ratios are a function of the
engine speeds. Even, with two stage mechanical blowers capable of main-
taining the maximum permissible economical cruising boost at 25,0CX) ft. the
power required for supercharging is such that the propeller shaft torque
available at this height will not exceed 55 to 6Cff a of the take-off torque.
This is shown clearly in the following tabulation which shows the relative
r.p.m. necessary to obtain typical cruising powers at 25,000 ft. altitude.
Typical Cruising Torques and R.P.M.
for British American Bomber Engines at
25,000 ft. Expressed as percentage of take-
off Torques and R.P.M
The American engines have turbo blowers and the British two speed single
or multi stage blowers with the lower ratio designed to give maximum power
at or near sea level.
Condition
Engine f
Percentage of
take-off R.P.M
Percentage of
take-off Torque
45$ of take-
off power
British
86
52
American
68
66
33$ of take-
off power
British
68
48.35
American
50
66
In the case of a number of* British engines the higher power condition
quoted represents about the maximum available at this height in weak mix-
ture. The lower would correspond to the economical speed after dropping
bombs. The much lower relative r.p.m. at which the desired powers can be


obtained on the turbo blown engines makes the use of two speed reduction
gears particularly desirable since, from an engine efficiency standpoint,
it is desirable to use the lowest practicable crankshaft speed, but with
single speed gears this may involve a loss of propeller efficiency.
Although, as will be seen from the above, there is more scope fbr the
use of two speed reduction gears in America than there is over here, it is
felt that their use should be re-examined with the emphasis on the
possibilities of improved cruising economy and particularly on aircraft
with a wide speed range.
Previous British investigations have shown that in general the use of
contra-rotating propellers is a more attractive method of obtaining im-
proved all-round efficiency than the use of two speed gears and it has
been felt that for this reason the first step is to develop these, and
that two speed gears will be the next step and will be used in conjunc-
tion with contra-rotating propellers. It is interesting to find that, to
a large extent, this view is held in- America and that, as already mentioned,
gears of this type are under development, and running experimentally.
Reduction Gears for Contra-rotating Propellers. There is considerable
development on reduction gears for contra-rotating propellers. The Pratt
and Whitney design i 3 shown dia-
gramatically at. Pig, 102. The
idler pinions are carried in a
fixed cage and are driven by a
large gear on the engine crank-
shaft or extension shaft and
drive respectively an annular
gear to the inner propeller and
a normal gear to the outer pro-
peller.
As at present constructed
the idler pinions are made in
three parts splined together so
as to allow the teeth to be
ground. Pratt and Whitney are
however, experimenting with the
production of these, gears in a
Fig. 102. Diagram of Pratt & Whitney
Contra-rotating reduction gear.
single piece made from tool steel and finished by shaving; after shaving
they are flame hardened.
Fig. .103. Lycoming contra-rotating reduction gear.


It will be seen that by providing another gear oh the crankshaft,
gearing with the 25 tooth pinion, it would be possible to obtain a two
speed gear. With this arrangement seme form of self synchronising
clutch would be necessary to engage the desired ratio.
The Pratt and Whitney contra-rotating gear for the R. 2800 engine,
is ife&de with ratios of either .577 or .5 and for the R. 4360 engine they
make a two speed single rotation gear with ratios of .500 and .290 and
a two speed contra-rotation gear with ratios of .500 and .390.
The contra-rotating gear used on the Lycoming H. 2470 engine is in
principle somewhat similar to the Pratt and Whitney gear although its
construction is different. This gear is made both as single and two
speed types, the type illustrated in being the two speed gear.
There are 16 sets of idler pinions and it will be noted that these are
held together on cane seats which allows adjustment for equalising the load
on the pinions. is not a very attractive feature and it is felt
that it would be better to try and obtain this by more simple construction
and accurate workmanship, than by providing adjustment in this way.
The weights of the Lycoming reduction gears for this engine are as follows:-
Single speed single rotation gear - 75 lbs.
Two speed single rotation gear - 315 lbs.
Two speed dual rotation gear - 404- lbs.
The two speed mechanism therefore, appears to be extremely heavy and it is
rather difficult to see how a gear of this weight can pay its way.
The gear ratios used on this reduction gear are .321 in low speed and
.435 in hisi speed. The engine performance is at present 2,200 brake h.p.
at 3>270 r.p.m. for take off.
It is known that the Warner Gear Division of the Barg Warner Cor-
poration are interested in the British Sinclair S.S.S. (synchro-self-
shifting) gear. It is believed that they are can tiering a design for the
Incoming engine and it is also understood that Pratt and Whitney and Wright
Field have shown interest in this type of clutch mechanism.
No drawings are available for the Wright Contra-rotating gear, but
the general construction consists of a ring gear on the crankshaft, driving
a number of fixed lay shaft a within the reduction gear housing. At the
end of these layshafts are two gears of different diameters, one of which
meshes with an internal gear fastened to the external propeller shaft and
the other meshes with an external gear fastened to the internal propeller
shaft. The choioe of gear sizes is such that the propeller shafts have
the same ratio to the crankshaft and rotate in opposite directions.
The reduction gear ratio is not an established value at the present time,
but the general design requirements are in the range from .35 to .45
crankshaft speed.
48-5.21 Long Shaft Drives. The Americans have built up a background of experience
on buried engines and shaft drive for single seater fighters in the Bell
"Airacobra 1 * and this trend is being energetically followed up} considerable
interest is being shown in buried engines, both liquid and air cooled, both
for single seater fighters and for large bombers in the search for reduced
drag. The Mission actually saw two fighter prototypes and one bomber
prototype under construction using buried engines and shaft drive.
As an example of work which has been done, Allisons have made and
tested various gear boxes which allow almost any arrangement of shaft
drive and these are illustrated in the attached sketches.
Fig.lo4 shows the power section of the engine and the alternative
blowers, Fig. 105 the alternative reduction gears,Fig* 106 the gearboxes,
and Figs. 107, 108 and 109 the possible combinations of these.


Fig. 104. Allison V-3420 alternative blowers.
Fig. 105. Allison V-3420 alternative
reduction gears.
Fig. 106. Allison V-3420 alternative
gear boxes.
Fig. 107. Allison V-3420 alternative
blowers standard reduction gear.
Fig. 108. Allison V-3420 alternative
blowers with remote reduction gear.
0870) Wt. 15922. 250, 7/-4-3, &p. 9 59, C* R~ L.TD-
Fig. 109. Allison V-3420 gear boxes
for wing propellers.


In connection with the Allison development, it is noteworthy that
this firm have gone to considerable pains in the damping of torsional
vibration* Not only do they employ crankshaft torsional dampers but they
also fit a hydraulic damper as shown in Fig* lin the main accessory
drive to insulate the rear end of the engine* This aspect should be care-
fully reviewed when considering ary shaft drive applications in this
country*
Fig. HO. Allison auxiliary drive hydraulic damper.
The centre bearing for the extension shaft on the Airacobra, which is
illustrated in -Fig *lll
is of interest in the
application of a rubber
lining in the bearing
housing to allow for
mal-alignment under
running conditions*
This shaft has been run
2" out of line on the
test rig and out on
the engine* At 8g on
the aircraft the shaft
moves up and down tj"
that is, it is safe
with l§r M misalignment.
Fig. 111
Centre bearing housing for Airacobra extension propeller shaft.
Pratt and Whitney have also done quite a lot of bench running with
long shaft drives on the 2800 cu* in. engine, for buried installations
in conjunction with a cooling fan* The Pratt and Whitney "Wasp Major"
engine is scheduled for installation in a large bomber with buried
engines employing 24 ft* long shafts to pusher propellers* One point
of interest in passing is that the remote contra-rotating reduction gear
for the Wasp Major engine which was seen, was encircled by a small dia-
meter pipe containing TNT which could be detonated by the pilot in case
of emergency to Jettison the entire propeller and reduction gear*
It is not too much to say that almost every aircraft constructor in
America is thinking in terms of shaft drive for the future* Proposals
along these lines have been put forward in the past in this country but
these have not so far been proceeded with and it is considered that buried
engines and shaft drive have a considerable future both for high speed
fighter type machines and for large bombers and transports*


+B-5.22 Bearings,
Crankshaft Journal Bearings. Under wartime conditions there is diffi-
culty in maintaining the quality of ball and roller bearing steel, of the
standard required for high duty radial engine crankshaft bearings. The
success of these bearings depends on the cleanness of the steel and the
freedom from inclusions on or just below the surface, those just below the
surface being the most serious because they cannot be discovered by normal
inspection methods.
For this reason the continued successful use of plain crankshaft jour-
nal bearings on the latest Pratt and Ihitney engines, including the R. 2800
18 cylinder engine ana the new Wasp Major 28 cylinder engine is of interest.
Apart from the excellent operation results which are obtained with these
bearings, it is believed that their use permits some saving in weight.
Wk l -!® it is, of course, out of the question to change over existing
types of radial engines from rpller bearings to plain bearings, it is re-
commended that thei use of plain bearings should be considered in future
designs.
Supercharger, Jmpellor Bearings. The use of plain irapellor bearings on a
number of -American engines appears to be entirely satisfactory and it is
believed that they give a higher standard of reliability than the ball
bearings used on corresponding British blowers. With the introduction of
blowers for increased duties, it is felt that the development of super-
charger bearings of this type may become important.
Silver Bearings. The Mission was impressed with the success obtained with
silver bearings on American engines, particularly Pratt and Whitney radials
and the Packard built Merlins. The silver is for the most part plated on
and this is the process used by the Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co*, and by
Allisons, but Pratt and Whitney inform us that equally good results can be
obtained by casting on, and they use both types. One of the most important
processes is the application of a lead plated coating to the bearings.
This lead plated coating is protected from corrosion by a flash of indium
or tin which is diffused into the lead by heat treatment.
Pratt and Whitney shotblast the silver before lead plating and the
degree of roughness obtained by this process has to be accurately controlled
to get the best results. It was found on enquiry that the information
which had been sent to this country on the Pratt and Whitney process was not
up to date, but at the time the Mission left the United States this infor-
mation had been sent by Pratt and Whitney to Wright Field for transmission
to the British Air Commission, although it had not actually been received by
them.
The manufacture of silver plated bearings was seen at the Cleveland
Graphite Bronze Co. The plating shop has a high roof and is reasonably
well ventilated, although no special precautions are taken in regard to
this and the shop is not outstanding for its cleanness. The process for
plating bearings is as follows:-
1. The shells are degreased in trichlorethylene.
2. They are given a mild electrolytic alkali etch for further
cleaning.
3. They are then given a non-electric hydrochloric acid etch.
Next they are flash plated with nickel.
5* The bearings are then given a silver strike at 150 amps, per
square foot in a ,non-ci*rculating plating bslh. (
6. The next operation which consists of plating to .030*’thick
at 80 amps, per square foot and takes four hours, is
carried out in one of two types of plating apparatus.
In the first method the shells are rotated in the plating solution.
This has given good results but the maintenance of the overhead gear for
turning the bearings has been rather troublesome. The latest method is to


build up all the shells into a tut>e with an electrode accurately located in
the centre and to pump the plating solution down the tube so formed, at a
very high rate.
Vandervelle Products have full details of this process in this country*
The plating with lead or indium and tin is not normally carried out by
Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co.
Allison also use a nickel strike which is preferred to the copper
previously used because it allows the silver to be annealed at a higher
temperature without loss of adhesion. If a higher temperature is used
with copper it diffuses into the silver and completely destroys the bond.
On the other hand, purely from a question of plating technique, it is
easier to get good adhesion with copper and this is why it was/used prior
to the introduction of the higher temperature annealing process.
Allison use a .025 thick finished lining of silver which is said to
have^bet ter work handling qualities than thinner linings. Lead is plated
.001* thick and the indium or tin is plated on this to give an alloy of Jjfo
indium or tin and 3~1% lead after heat treatment. The annealing process
shows up bad adhesion by causing blisters and further inspection for cracks
or bad adhesion at the ends of the bushes is carried out by the use of
"Black Light" as explained in part A, chapter 4.
General Motors Silver Bearings. These bearings which have been developed
by the General Motors Research Laboratories and are used on their experi-
mental two stroke aero engine and the two stroke pancake Diesel engine, con-
sist of a silver lining which is machined and knurled. The depressions
formed by the knurling are -then filled with an alloy of 3% lead and % tin.
The tin not only prevents corrosion, but aids in obtaining a good bond with
the silver. The advantages claimed for these grid bearings as they are
called, compared with solid silver bearings, are:- First the lead filled
indentations allow dirt to be embedded without undue wear of the steel parts
and secondly these indentations provide a source of lead to reduce the
scoring tendency of silver. A bearing of this type is shown on Fig. 112.
Fig. I 12. General Motors Bearing.
The silver coated steel for producing these bearings is obtained from
two concerns. The- Revepe Copper and Brass Co., of New :Bedford and the
H.A. Wilson Co,, of Newark. The material supplied by the former company
has the silver bonded directly to the steel without any intermediate layer
and can be hot rolled to any required thickness and oat on one or both sides.
The material supplied by the H.A. Wilson Co., has an intermediate bond of
silver solder and must be cold rolled. Half bearings are pressed or bent
from strip cut fran sheet supplied by one of these firms, but bushes must be
deep o drawn Between each draw an annealing temperature of
1150 Pto 1200 F (6l7°C to 650 c> C} for 15 minutes is used. Although anneal-
ing in air for a long period is detrimental due to the occlusion of oxygen,
this may be done for a short period wi-thout too serious an interference to


its physical properties. However, it is important to realise that silver
which has onoe been heated in. an atmosphere containing oxygen, if re-heated
in a reducing atmosphere containing hydrogen, is completely ruined, the hydro-
gen combining with the previously dissolved oxygen and forming water vapour
at the grain boundaries which greatly reduced the strength of the silver.
Drawings of the General Motors grid bearings were obtained by the Mission
and further details are available.
Plating of tin base bearings. The Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co., are doing
a great deal of work on the development of plated bearings and believe that
this method will entirely supersede the casting of bearings for automobiles,
etc. , because of the reduction in cost and the saving in material. They have
a large plating laboratory working an this project. plating is done
both on silver and also direct on to steel. An alloy of 6$ copper and
tin has been plated, using a copper cyanide, sodium stanate solution. An
alloy of 2J| tin, 2$ antinomy and 96$ lead has also been used. These
coatings are plated .005* thick and are broached to .002* thick.
In connection with the finish broaching of bearings the Cleveland
Graphite Bronze Co., use broaches which are built up from a number of
individual "washers". These washers are plated on the cutting face sides
with a thin flash of chromium.
Casting of Copper Lead Bearings. On high duty copper lead bearing , it is
the practice in this country to manufacture rather expensive mild s „eel
moulds for the bearing eastings which have to be machined and cause con-
siderable waste of material and labour. In certain cases the cost of these
moulds has been reduced by spinning the parts together instead .of welding,
but the waste of material, and machining time still exists. Developments
in the United States have shown that it is practical to make high grade
bearings, using oores of petroleum carbon and clay binder which results in
a considerable saving of steel and machining capacity. Bearings manufac-
tured by this method were seen at the works of the Cleveland Graphite
Bronze Co.
The carbon cores when heated act as deoxidizers and since they are
porous they allow the free escape of gas. Two methods are used; in the
first method the copper lead is put into a reservoir in the mould, in the
form of shot and it is melted in this reservoir by putting the mould into
a suitable furnace. The mould is then taken out of the furnace and turned
upside down so that the copper runs into the space between the bearing shell
and the core•.
In the second method the metal is moulded in a high frequency rumace
under an atmosphere of nitrogen and hydrogen. It is then poured into the
mould. There is a depression formed in the top of the mould into which the
metal is poured and it overflows and runs from this depression into the
annular space between the shell of the core, which mhkes for smooth running
and prevents the trapping of air in a similar way to the practice commonly
adopted in pouring sand casting^.
With both methods of casting, the bearing is quenched by lowering it
into a solution of water and soluble oil. This quenching medium has greater
wetting power than plain water and is said to give more consistent results.
Since very little machining is required it,is possible to use steel
with ,high carbon content if required. Contrary to the usual accepted view,
Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co., do not consider that carbon has much,effect
on adhesiop and where finishing by grinding has been permissible, .74$
carbon steels have been successfully used.
The Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co., also manufacture bearings by the
centrifugal method and by their continuous strip process. The centrifugal
process is not considered suitable for high duty aircraft engine bearings
and the strip process also seems to be mainly used for relatively low duty
bearings.


In spite of the length of time for which the continuous strip method
has heen in operation, it does not appear to he working smoothly and it
produces a considerable amount of scrap. This seems to be largely due to
poor methods of control of temperatures and rates of metal flow. • These
remarks refer to the manufacture of copper lead bearings only. The prod-
uction of tin base and lead base bearings by the continuous process seems
to be entirely satisfactory providing steel of suitable ductility can be
obtained when flanged bearings are required.
2*3-5.23 Cockpit and Cabin Heating^
Technical Summary. The present policy in America is to use combustion
heaters and exhaust heat exchangers for cockpit and cabin heating, though
this may be modified on completion of the tests of the comprehensive
heating systems which include wing de-icing discussed in 5*25 below.
The information obtained from every aircraft constructor, however, was
that combustion heaters of all types are unsatisfactory at altitude and
although Improvements are undoubtedly to be expected, there may be some
difficulty in getting the altitudes required.
Combustion heaters. The Stewart Warner heater burns petrol and transfers
the heat in a ventilating air supply which carries the warmth to the cabin
etc. The firm produced an automobile heater before the war and now have a
wide range of aircraft models in production; brief descriptions will be
given of the two representative types.
Detailed description of Stewart Warner Heaters. The "hermetic” heater
burns a controlled fuel-air mixture in a leakproof combustion chamber.
The Model N 0.789 "spot" heater of the above type is useful for heating
cabins.and inaccessible parts of the aircraft.
Some illustrations are given to show their adaptation for heating per-
sonnel, wing guns or cockpit heating, wind shield defrosting and for a
variety of special applications such as the heating of cameras, gun breeches
and other relatively critical items.
The rated heat output of the Model 789 is approximately 8,500 B.T.tJ,
per hour and the weight is approximately 8 lbs. The size is about si” wide,
9i n deep and 7j” high.
A master switch governs the flow of electric current to the ventila-
ting fan motor on the top of the heater, and also to a micro-switch inside
the heater shell, and at the same time operates a solenoid valve on the
fuel/air mixture supply line. the control switch is closed elec-
tric current flows. When the heater is cold this switch is kept closed
by a bimetal strip. A hot wire ignitor is used for starting and the flame
is confined within the anall volume of the hermetically sealed combustion
chamber, the gases circulating round the heater unit before passing out to
atmosphere. The fan blows air across the hot finned surfaces and the
heated air passes out through a hole in the base of the heater body.
After a few minutes running the electric ignitor is automatically
switched off by the bimetallic strip and ignition continued from a hot fire
clay disc.
There are three basic types of installation:-
(1) The closed system in ifoich the heaters are fed by fuel-air nixture
from the main engine’s supercharger and the exhaust pipes from
the heaters are led back to the carburettor adaptor. This
system is light in weight and it was claimed by the makers that
it will operate satisfactorily to reasonable altitudes.
(2) The overhead system in which the fuel-air mixture comes from the
engine supercharger but the exhaust pipes of the heater are taken


overboard; a pressure difference of 2" Hg. is stated aslhe
minimum for operation. This is used where the exhaust pipes
cannot be connected back to the carburettor adaptor, but it is
understood to be unsatisfactory because there is not always a
sufficient differential between boost and atmospheric pressures
to feed the unit.
(3) The independently supercharged systtem in vhich the supply of
”fiiel-a r rnTyture obtained f rom a spedal auxiliary super-
charging unit - the Model 782-AM - and the exhaust is led over-
board as before. The advantage of this method is that it is in-
dependent of the main engine * s operation, and can therefore,
•provide caibin heat while the aircraft is on the ground or
water.
Fig. 113 is a view of the Model 789 series heater, Fig. 134 shows the
independent unit for supplying the fuel-air mixture under case (3) des-
cribed above. It comprises an engine driven supercharger suitably gov-
erned to maintain a constant supply pressure regardless of change in alti-
tude or in mixture flow. Such a device permits the heaters fed from the
unit to be controlled individually.
Fig. 113. Model 789 series heater.
Fig. 114. Model 782-AM auxiliary supercharging unit.
Fig. 115. Performance curves for Model 789 heater.


The size of the supercharger unit is:-
Height 18|"
Width Ilf"
Length 20| H
Base 10§" by 14§t" long
Weight approxlmately 47 lbs.
Horsepower 1.4 h.p.
Speed 3,600 r.p.m.
Piston displacement s*9.cubic inches
Compressor capacity 20 c.ft./min. at 4” Hg. at 2,400 r.p.m.
The rated heat output of the heater is 8,500 3. T.U./hr. with a fuel-
air pressure of 50 inches Hg. absolute and a differential pressure across
inlet and exhaust of 8" Hg.
Fuel consumption Is 0.643 lbs. per hour and any ordinary grade of fuel
will suffice. The electrical consumption is 24 or 48 watts depending on
the size of motor used.
Fig. 115 shows a graph of the heat output of this Model 789 heater.
To avoid the critical combustion region indicated the absolute pressure
at the inlet should not be less than 20" Hg.
A particular difficulty on this type of heater relates to satisfactory
combustion under the low pressures corresponding to high altitudes. The
fim is carrying out development work in a low pressure chamber where
heaters can. be run up to 50,000 feet. The firm stated that the difficulty
can be greatly minimised by employing greater turbulence and increased
rate of burning in the combustion chamber and keeping the burner at a
higher temperature by suitable jacketing.
Finally Figs. 116, 117 and 118 show diagramatically the installation
of these Stewart Warner heaters in the Consolidated EBTSA flyii\g boat.
There seems to be a good case for a small 10,000 8.T.U./hr. ram-oper-
ated spot heater being developed for gun heating. It is 2% ft. long 3"
diameter with an-electric motor taking 10 amp. at 24 volts for starting and
48 watts running at 2" H2O pressure. The weight is 6 lbs. and the maxi-
mum output can be of the order of 15,000 B.T.U/hr.
Fig. 116. Installation of Heaters in PBY-5A Flying Boat.


Fig. 1 17. Installation of Heaters in PBY-5A Flying Boat.
Fig. I 18. Installation of Heaters in PBY-5A Flying Boat.
Development is proceeding however on air ram-operated-heaters instead
of blower operated and the results of tests operated by air ram from the
forward speed of the ar craft afe promising.
Another Stewart Warner heater is the Model 782 which develops 80,000
8.T.U./hr. and is intended primarily for aircraft cabin heating in the field;


it comprises a power.-plant for providing the fuel-air mixture, a heat
exchanger, and a fan for forcing the air through the exchanger. The
unit weighs complete 105 lbs. and is mounted on a framework with
rubber shock absorbers. The power unit is the same as the 782-Alt.
A thermostatic control is set for 200° F. ventilating air temperature
but can be adjusted to any heat output between 100° P. and 300°P.
Pig. 119 shows a side view of this model.
There is also another interesting piece of ground equipment used
for a number of heating purposes such as
(1) pre-heating aircraft engines before flight.
(2) pre-heating aircraft cabins.
(3) heating repair tents in the field.
It consists basically of the same units as the 782 Model and
develops 80,000 8.T.U./hr. with 3-6" flexible outlet pipes with 4"
reducing nozzles which can be used to duct the hot air to any desired
point. Two hoses are 11 feet long and the third 23 ft. long.
Fig. 120 shows a view of this unit which weighs altogether 250 lbs.
More detailed information about these units is contained in the
Appendix.
Suftflcsted future developments. The present types of combustion
heater, as developed by Stewart Warner for example, operate on a basic
system that is capable of much sound development. Existing units are
limited in the pressure at which they can operate but there is no reason why
the burners should not run under relatively high pressure and with ram ope-
rated air supply, or even ram plus blower feed, a small and light heater
of great output may well result. The ideal form of this type of
heater would appear to be self-operating without the need for an electric
motor and would comprise a blower; a combustion chamber; a turbine
driving the blower; and a gas/air heat exchanger built around the whole
unit so that all the heat developed can be utilised. It is probable
that such a machine could be built efficiently in sizes small enough
to act as heaters and exchangers and, the weight should be much lower
than the present non-pressure types which according to Mr. Robert
should weigh about 1 lb. per 10,000 8.T.U./hr. of output, which is
the figure nearly approached by a number of present day heat
exchangers.
If* such self-operating heat exchangers were developed now it would
relieve the installations of much exhaust system complexity and would
permit the full utilisation of exhaust ejector thrust.
Another important point arising from the development of this new
heater conception is that such units would serve ideally in addition
as auxiliary power units for the generation of electrical power
supply. This application of a basic producing unit is dealt with
in item 5-26.
A Photocell type carbon monoxide detector is available in which
the necessary circuits enclosed in a rectangular box 10" x 6" x
3" with a total weight of 3*75 lbs. It acts as a relay for closing a
valve on the hot air supply in the cabin when a limiting C 0 con-
centration is detected.
Operational requirements for both wing de-icing and cabin heating,
together with the desirability of extracting heat from the exhaust


Fig. I 19. Model 782-C space heater. 80,000 B.T.U. hour.
For aircraft cabins.
Fig. 120. Model 782-C ground heater. 80,000 B.T.U. hour.


Fig. 121. Internal fin
heat exchanger.
Fig. 122.
Fig. 123. Internal fin
heat exchanger.
Fig. 124. Tube bundle
heat exchanger.
Fig. 125. Internal fin heat exchanger.


and assisting in the flame damping problem on turbo supercharger installa-
tions, has led to a great deal of development work on exhaust-gas to air
heat exchangers whereby air can be piped throughout the aircraft.
The N.A.C.A. at Moffett Field; the University of California; the
Army Air Forces at Wright and the industry have combined their re-
search efforts. To this end the N.A.C.A. have established an Ice Research
Station at Minneapolis - St. Paul Airport where flight tests have been made
using a Lockheed 12A; B 17; B2A and 826 aircraft.
The heating system installations on the four experimental aircraft have
been very clearly described in an R.A.E. Report No. 5.M.E. Q.5Q51/JKH/128
dated January 1943 by Mr. J.K. Hardy who visited the U. S.A. and Canada during
November-December*l942 on the problem of protection of aircraft against ice.
A number of firms are now engaged in developing and producing in some
quantities, heat exchangers of their own particular designs, among them being
Stewart Warner Corporation, Chicago; Aire search Ltd., Los Angeles; Solar
Aircraft Co., San Diego; Trane Manufacturing Co., La Crosse, Wisconsin.
Stewart Warner Corporation was the only firm visited in connection with
heat exchangers and the following is a brief account of some recent work they
have done. Some earlier work is described in two excellent reports issued
by the Company and Figs. 121 to 125 shows some of the exchangers dealt with
therein. They are referred to in the-Appendix and are available for
reference.
The hew work had been completed just prior to the visit and concerned
tests to determine the durability of an 11” tube bundle exchanger N0.EX13600
and a steel-shielded extended surface type No. EX13648 when subjected to
intermittent operation with an exhaust gas inlet temperature of I6OO°F
and afterwards to determine the performance characteristics of the above
11" tube bundle (EX13600) previously tested and a multi plate type designed
and built at Wright Field.
Until the test of the steel-shielded heat exchanger was completed, the
two units were operated in alternative 3 hour periods, using a damper in a
"Y" to divert the exhaust gases from one unit to the other. Fig. 126 shows
Fig. 126. Heat exchanger test rig.


the burner and exchangers set up ready for testing. The burner is at -the
left. ‘Ventilating air was supplied fran one of the 50 h.p. blowers, through
the two ducts hanging from the ceiling (at top right). The instrument panel
is not shown in the photograph.
Airing all of the tests, the exhaust-gas rate was approximately 45 lbs./
min., (Maximum obtainable), and the exhaust-gas inlet temperature was about
I6OO°F. The average ventilating-air rate was 40-45 lbs,/min,, for the steel-
shielded exchanger, and 55“50 lbs./min. for the tube bundle. The ventila-
ting air temperature rise for each exchanger was abofut 500°F. at the start
of the tests. Performance data were obtained at regular intervals.
The steel-shielded unit was operated for approximately 230 hours and the
tube bundle for 1050 hours (not including off periods). Airing these tests,
approximately 25,000 gallons of gasoline were consumed by the burner.
(a) St eel-shielded extended-surface heat exchanger. After 230 hours of
operation the life test was discontinued because the inlet ends of the fins
had burnt through as shown in Fig. 127. Aside from this, the exchanger
was in good condition (Fig. 128)
Airing the life test of this steel-shielded heat exchanger there was no
consistent change in performance characteristics. The average operating
Conditions were as follows:
Eidiaust-gas rate, lbs./min 0 45
Exhaust-gas inlet temperature, F 1600
Exhaust-gas pressure drop, "H2O 1.9
Ventilating-air rate, lbs./min. 42
Ventilating-air pressure drop, M H2O 12*0
Ventilating-air temperature rise °F 310
Heat output, BTU/hr. 190,000
(b) Tube-bundle heat exchanger. At the end of 1050 hours, there were
about 15’ small cracks where the tubes were welded to one header plate.
Fig.l29 shows the tube bundle after 230 hours of operation.
A summary of the performance data obtained during the life test of the
tube-bundle exchanger is available in the Appendix. Each set of data
(except at 1057 hours) represents an approximate average for 10 to 20
hours on each side of the indicated operating time.
Total
Fuel
EXHAUST CASES
VENTILATING- AIR
Heat'
operating
time
Hours
rate,
Lbs./min.
Inlet
temp.
Op.
Rate,
# Min.
Press
drop
M H20
Rate
§ Min.
Press
drop
"H20
Inlet
temp.
°F.
Temp.
rise,
°F.-
Output
BTU/hr.
100
1.70
1600
44
3.1
57
3-3
100
300
245,000
400
1.69
1600
-
-
56
3.0
100
265
215,000
800
1.68
-
-
3.7
60
-
85
245
210,000
1000
1.68
-
-
3.4
59
3.7
35
215
185,000
Installed new exhaust-gas inlet thermocouples “before following
data;
1057
1.63
i 1600
-
|3A
58.5
3.5
76
| 222
| 187,000
Tool exchanger apart for photos. Cleaned insides of tubes by sand blasting
and using wire brush lbs. of deposits removed). Followed data then ob-
tained with exchanger set up as during last 500 hours.
1 .1 1 1 1 1 III
Cleaned inside of tube and direction of ventilating air flow was reversed
for following data (same direction as during first 500 hours).
1057
1.66
1600
-
2.8
59.4
2.1
85
283
242,000


Fig. 127.
Fig. 128.
Fig. 129.
Fig. 130. Multi-plate heat exchanger.
Fig. 131. Multi-plate heat exchanger.


Utilising the larger of the two laboratory exhaust gas generators,
thus having available a maximum heat liberation capacity of 9,000,000
BTU/hr., the multi-p Late. unit shown in Pigs. 130 and 131 was set-up and
tested in the heat exchanger test section of the laboratory. Two sets
of data were taken; the first at constant exhaust gas flow rate with
variable ventilating air flow rate; the second at constant ventilating
air flow rate with variable exhaust gas flow rate.
Following the tests of the multi-plate type, the 11” tube bundle
which has previously undergone 1050 hours of operation on.life test,
was installed in place of the multi-plate and the test were repeated.
Each exchanger operated a total of approximately two hours during
the tests.
Some typical individual results are given herewith and the remainder
are available in the Appendix for reference.
MULTI-FLATS AND 11 H TUBE
BUNDLE EXHAUST GAS HEAT EXCHANGERS
Fuel
Rate
lb/min.
ujcnaust
Gas
ventilating
Air
Press Drop Thru
Flow
Rate
lb/min.
Temp.
in
Op
Temp.
out
°p
Flow
Rate
lb/min.
Temp.
in
Op
Temp.
out
op
Temp.
Rise
op
Heat
Output
BTU/hr.
Exchan
ger "H20
Exh.
Gases
Vent.
Air
MULTI
-PLATE
HEAT EX(
IHANGER
(2-2 -l,
>■3) Bar
. 29.6"
Hg.
3.35
117
1595
1350
132
88
315
227
432,000
12.8
9.0
3.3
117
1590
1345
125.8
84
312
228
412,500
13.1
8.5
3.4
117
1595
1365
117.5
83
326
243
410,000
13.2
7.4
TUBE BUNDLE HEAT EXCHANGER - 11"
TUBES (2-4-43) Bar.
29.0" Hg
•
3.1
101
1605
1315
92
87
390
303
401,000
16.7
3.6
3.13
101.5
1595
1320
83.6
90
415
325
392,000
16.5
3.2
3.1
101
1600
1328
77.7
89
430
341
382,000
16.5
2.9
An interesting attempt by Stewart Warner to carry out cooling tests
along a wing leading edge is
illustrated in Fig. 132 which
shows a specially made air duct
and fan system for blowing air at
200 m.p.h. over-a full scale wing
whose skin may be heated by other
means. The apparatus is expec-
ted to yield some useful results
in a field where data is very
difficult to get in flight at the
present time.
Fig. 132. Test rig for cooling tests on a full scale wing.
Conclusions and recommendations. A really vast amount of development
work Has been carried out in America which has led to a satisfactory position
in the Services as regards cabin and turret heating etc.
Pending the advent of the complete aircraft heating system by exhaust
heat exchanger or more centralised means-it is recommended that full ad-
vantage be taken of the .American developments and use made of the Stewart
Warner type of heater.
It is suggested that the Mission should be allowed to reoonmend a
suitable selection of American equipment to be sent to Britain as quickly
as possible for examination and test.


2*3-5.24 Winterisation of Aircraft.
Owing to the severity of North American winter conditions exceptional
precautions have to he taken to ensure trouble free operation of aircraft
and although the ideal has by no means been achieved yet, a definite
technique has been established and with further experience and improvement
may ultimately prove successful,
American Technique.
Much consideration has been given to the problem and eveiy aircraft
company must now include, on the specified aircraft, the installation of
special winterisation equipment in accordance with the Arsy Air Forces
requirements. These requirements are numerous and comprehensive and are
contained in a "Record of Winterisation Items" applicable to the
particular type of aircraft.
Aircraft and Engines.
"Winterisation Items" by the Arsy Air Forces cover in general some
thirty five different features which mist be provided, or modified, for
cold weather use.
The complete list is given below: -
Item No. Name
1 Self-thawing engine oil cooling system
2 Oil radiator shutters
3 Prestone radiator shutters (full closing)
4 Oil dilution system
5 Carburettor heat 90 degrees F alcohol de-icing system
6 Fluid feed shoe and anti-icing system
7 Battery cart external plug
8 Cockpit heating system and windshield defrosters
9 Snow and ice tread tires
10 Wing and engine covers engine heaters
11 Non-channeling grease in control system
12 Lubricate propeller with special grease
13 Lag front row radial push rod housing
14 Long reach hot running spark plug
15 Immersion heaters in oil tank
16 Fuel tank drain
17 Engine cowl flaps
18 Light oil in pressure gauge line
19 Higjh capacity ignition system
20 Carburettor air thermometers
21 Change hydraulic oil
22 Use winter engine oil
23 Wing de-icing equipment
24 Full closing intercooler shutters
25 Supercharger regulator and its oil system
26 Pamphlet on cold weather furnished by A.S.C.
27 Windshield wipers
28 Windshield de-icers
29 Oil tank sump drain, cock
30 Provisions for priming with high volatile fluids
31 Lag non-self-sealing oil lines
32 Lag non-self-sealing oil tanks
33 Feathering line standpipe in oil tank
34 Propane tube to carburettor
35 Clear view panel
Typical operating and servicing instructions based on these items are
available for reference in the Appendix, relating to twc different aircraft
the P.SIA. and the A. having respectively a liquid cooled and air-cooled
engine. There is alko available a set of cold weather service and. handling
instructions for the 8.17 aeroplane which describe in detail the technique
to be adopted for the proper handling of the aircraft and cold starting of


the engines under different degrees of winter weather.
Regarding engine starting, oil dilution is the standard procedure to
facilitate easy turning and due attention is called to cylinder priming.
The Any Air Force have adopted propane priming by means of a small 10 lb.
cylinder fitted to a trolley with an engine driven pump. The propane
which is liquid at -44°F is vaporised by means of heat and pumped to the
carburettor adaptor of the main engine. It is used in the same manner as
petrol priming and the engine kept running on the primer until it reaches
a sufficient speed to begin operating on the automatic rich carburettor
supply r Emergency or extreme cold weather operation demands more drastic
measures involving double dilution consisting of an initial dilution, a
twenty to thirty minutes shut down to permit oil to cool, a restart, and
an immediate second dilution followed by immediate shut down. When the
temperature is -30°C or below either oil immersion heaters must be used or
the oil drained completely and stored In a warm place and when again
required, poured back at a temperature of 70° to 80°C if possible.
Below -23°C it is necessary to preheat the engines and Stewart Warner
heaters are normally used. These have been described in 5• 23 and provide
hot air for distribution round engines and accessory compartments etc.
Figs. 133 and 134 show a small hand operated portable heater which is
particularly useful for thawing-out individual aircraft parts. At least
Fig. 133.
Fig. 134.
two Hours are usually required to heat an engine at extremely low tempera-
tures so it will be seen that for military operations the satisfactory
servicing of the' aircraft is a matter of considerable importance.
Experimental work is proceeding and a Research station has been
established at Fairbanks, Alaska,where during this past winter a technical
Mission from Wright Field has been stationed for the purpose of testing
the aircraft and equipment sent there for the purpose.
The Mission was informed that the weather conditions had been most
severe, temperatures of -60° to -70°F (~56°C) being experienced. The
personnel had great difficulty in carrying out ary work at all during the
storms and mazy became ill due to the extreme cold. From a technical point
of view much was learned and a copy ojd the full report will be sent to
Britain when it becomes available. The Mission was informed that great
difficulty was experienced in keeping the auxiliary apparatus - Stewart
Warner heaters - propane priming engines etc. in working order and that
when starts could be obtained there was trouble With the oil dilution which,
although said to be nothing fundamental, concerned the fuel separating out
from the lubricating oil leading to Hearing failures metal particles
being found in the engine filters after running. Another point mentioned
to the Mission was that in Alaska the air was so cold, at the time under
review, that the engines would not run after being started - it was
impossible to generate enough heat effectively to warm the cylinders. It
should be noted that the original Any Air Forces requirement was "cold"
starting but it has since been realised that heat must be applied in
extreme conditions. Such conditions can be examined in a limited way by


starting tests carried out in the special cold chambers being provided at
Wright Field, where four cubicles will have a "freon* refrigerating system
to provide temperatures as low as -110°F.
British technique.
So far as winterisation items are concerned Britain is far behind
America but allowance must be made for the fact that British winters are
much 'less severe. On the other hand the course of the war has carried
British aircraft into all climates from North Africa to North Bnssia and
on this basis Britain, has failed to make adequate provision for cold
weather operation. The subject has never been taken re ally seriously and
considerable risks have been run each winter since the war began.
Fortunately we have never yet been compelled to fight a Battle of Britain
in mid-winter among snow and fog!
Winterisation of the aircraft on American lines is not carried out -
a few items are attended to but most of the work has been devoted to engine
starting tests in cold chambers. The official requirements are that engine
starting should be certain down to air temperatures of -20°C although until
comparatively few months ago it was only -10°C, which has been quite
inadequate. To assist in meeting the requirements the use of high
volatility fuel for priming has been introduced and rather complicated
priming technique has been evolved for some engines.
Oil dilution was adopted for all operational engines and ouch work
done in introducing the essential installations but little operational
experience has yet been obtained.
Experimental work is proceeding on starters - both electrical and
internal combustion - but no finality has been reached in achieving really
adequate turning rates.
Conclusions and Recomraendatifans.
The Americans are tackling this matter really seriously and their
efforts to solve the winter 'problem have been valuable and their
experiences during the past winter at the Research station in Alaska will
enable improvements to be made for trial again next, winter. The Hission is
not satisfied that the technique adopted for engine starting is the best
that can be done and believes it is out of such work as that in Alaska that
the solution will ultimately be found.
From the evidence collected in America the Hission is satisfied that
the procedure so far adopted in Britain of relying on cold chamber tests
of starting technique is quite inadequate by itself* It is essential that
the final tests be done in the actual weather conditions that have to be
met and the personnel must suffer the cold conditions in actual practice
otherwise fictitious conclusions are drawn from the results. For example,
a small adjustment or repair which normally takes two or three minutes in
average weather can take a long time in North American or Russian winter
weather. A case is on record and referred to in the memorandum on de-icing
where the ordinary preparation of an aeroplane for a flight including
removing snow and starting the engines after standing overnight took two
hours.
The Allies may have to operate military and transport aircraft round
the Artie Circle through Alaska in both directions and therefore it will
be absolutely necessary for a complete solution, to the problem to be found
quickly. To this end the Hission strongly recommends a serious effort to
introduce the best possible apparatus and technique on a number of
appropriate aircraft this summer and to send them to Alaska and Russia with
the necessary personnel *and experts for operational trials this coming
winter. Nothing less than this will suffice to see an early end to this
continually recurring problem. A small technical committee should be
forced at once to decide the extent of the experimental work necessary and
to co-ordinate the British effect on the subject which so far has never
been tackled in a realistic way in this country.


48-5•25 Aircraft De-icing.
Technical Summary. One of the biggest problems facing the aeronautical
engineer today from the standpoint of continuous operation, whether
military or transport flying, is the weather ana, in particular, icing
weather.
In America the Goodrich pneumatically-operated rubber overshoe system
was universally adopted on civil and military aircraft but the increased
speeds and certain functional difficulties revealed its limited utility
find forced the authorities to tackle the problem anew.
The fundamental problem is the prevention of ice accretion rather
than its removal after it has been allowed to form. The solution is to
keep the vulnerable surfaces at a temperature above O°C under impact icing
conditions preferably by the use of hot air. To this end the question
resolves itself into the supply of hot air in adequate quantities from
suitable sources and in so designing the interior structure of the wings
and tail units, control surfaces, windscreens, exposed portions of
instruments and radio equipment etc. etc. to enable the heating medium to
be effective with a minimum increase of overall drag or weight.
Germany appeared to be the first to make use of the hot air method of
de-icing on operational aircraft and we in Britain made preliminary studies
of the problem and carried out some limited full scale experimental work.
Work in America on a large scale was begun some years ago by the
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics at the Ames Aeronautical
Laboratory, Moff ett Field,on a full theoretical and practical investigation
and some considerable success has attended these efforts. By establishing
an ice research station at the Minneapolis Airport under the leadership of
Mr. Lewis A* Rodert, a programme of full scale flying has been in progress
each winter for the past two or three years, first with a Lockheed 19A
aircraft and latterly with a fleet including a 817, 824 and 826 aircraft.
The Mission found that the manufacturers were engaged on prototype
designs, incorporating the hot air de-icing system based on the work of the
N.A.C.A., for the following aircraft.
B 24L Liberator C6O Lodestar
B 17F Fortress C 698 Constellation
825 Mitchell C 74 Douglas transport
826 Marauder XC 97 8.29 transport version
829 Boeing bomber DC3 Dakota
B 32 Consolidated bomber
FBB-1 Boeing flying boat
FBI-5 Catalina
PB3I-3 Coronado
It is recommended that M.A.P. should review the position in the light
of American experience and issue a clear policy for the guidance of the
industry.
Detailed Description of Installation on 8.25 C Aircraft.
The following description of the system designed by North American
for their 825 c (Mitchell) aircraft is given as representative of the type
of work now proceeding as a general policy on all appropriate American
aircraft. A report on the heat flow calculations and drawings of the
installation are available in the Appendix.
It was desired to deal with the outer panels of the wings and all the
tail surfaces and not the centre portions of the wings, and to provide
protection for any normal condition of flight at any icing altitude and
also to cater for ground de-frosting of the wing only. Exhaust heat was
assumed to be available for heating the air and the following flight
conditions were chosen as representative:
It was assumed that the maximum altitude for icing would be 18,000 ft.


and that the miniiaim icing temperature would be O°P; a maximum of 300°F
was chosen for the air temperature in the duct shown as region 1 in
Pig. 135 to guard against excessive heating of the primary structure of
the aircraft. This design indicates the wing and tail sections with the
appropriate regions marked numerically and the points of discharge
indicated for wing and tail respectively. Table I gives the conditions
that fairly represent the range of operation of the B. 25 aircraft.
TABLE, I
Indicated Altitude Power
Condition Airspeed m»p.h. feet (one engine)
1. Long range cruising 170 18,000 675
2. Climb 140 18,000 1,130
3. Rated power 260 7,500 1,470
4. On ground - 310
5. Descent 210 18,000 700
Condition 1, for combined minimum airspeed and 30% power, was
selected as the desigji condition since it would give the greatest air
pressure drop through the system with the least ram and heat available.
Condition 2, for combined minimum airspeed and maximum power, gives
the least raitt but at the lower airspeed the heat transfer from the surface
and consequently the heat and airflow required may be less than in 1.
Condition 3, for combined maximum airspeed and maximum power, gives
the maximum air ram with however a greater airflow required due to the
higher speed and resulting greater heat transfer.
Condition 4, for removal of frost from wings before take-off is a
separate case because the heat transfer will be low but a large temperature
rise over all the surface will be required, and practically no ram will be
available. The pressure drop and heat transfer in the section of the wing
will, however, need close consideration. The following test results were
therefore required for the above conditions.
Total heat required BTU/hour
Total airflow required lb/hour
Air pressure drop inches of water
Maximum skin temperature degrees P.
Table II gives the details of the protected surfaces and Table 111
gives the results of the calculation.


TABLE II
Protected Areas
Wing Outer
Panel Sta. 157
Outboard
(one panel only)
Horiz. Tail
Surface
(one side only)
Vert. Tail
Surface
(one side only)
Span of protected
area feet
(Duct.lgth., Region 1)
20.9
9.4
7.65
Fig.l
Root Chord, Ins.
(Sta. 157)
120
86
73.5
Tip Chord, Ins.
(20.9 ft. from root)
66
61
58
(Above Horiz)
65
(Below Horiz)
Mean Chord Ins.
93
74
66
(Above Horiz)
69.5
(Below Horiz)
Protected Area back
to 12-|$ of chord,
sq.ft. (Region 3)
U3
15.8
10.9
Protected area aft
of 12-g$ chord,
sq.ft. (Region 8)
165
51.2
29.6
Total
protected area sq.ft.
208
67
40.5
Gap lgth. Root
12$ point to
1.48
1.00
#
.79
L.E. (Feet) Tip
0.63
.68
.60
TABLE III
1
2
?
4
5
6
JL
8
9
10
Condi-
tion
Ind.
Air
Speed
M.P.H.
RAM.
Avail,
H20
Alt.
Ft.
Power
Heat
required
btu/hr
Air
Flow
required
lbs./hr.
Through
surface
Ins.H20
Through
heat
Total
Ins.
H20
and ducts
Ins.H20
OUTER WING (CUE PANEL)
1
170
14
18000
1 675
167000
2300
0.890
2.67
3.56
2
140
10
18000.
1130
167000
2300
0.890
5.53 '
6.42
3
260
33
7500
1470
207000
2880
0.830
3.97
4.80
4
0
0
310
100000
1380
0.184
0.50
0.68
TAIL SURFACE (TOTAL)
1
170
14
18000
675
172000
2530
0.46
8.87
9.33
2
140
• 10
18000
1130
172000
2530
0.1)6
8.87
9.33
3
260
33
7500
1470
195000
2866
0.41
8.30
8.71
The eighth colunn does no % include exit losses, nor the tenth column
scoop or exit losses; any suction at air exit should be subtracted to give


net ram required. Regarding the ninth column, the heat exchange losses
■were calculated assuming a maximam temperature rise of 350°p with a 50°P
loss in the duct from exchanger to surface.
It was concluded that the system as designed for condition 1 will
also give satisfactory air distribution for conditions 2, 3 and 4, provided
the control limits the airflow to the quantity required for that condition
as indicated in Table 111. Also if the entering air temperature never
exceeds 300°P .then no part of the primary structure should exceed a
temperature of 225°F. In order-to gu&rd against the heat being left on in
ambient air temperatures warmer than a thermal switch is necessary
in contact with the surface skin and controlled by a by-pass valve.
Pig* 135 shows various details of the scheme together with the air
temperatures at the various points of the duct system. The double skin
construction in the nose area of the wing was adopted to give mjariimm
heating with a minimum volume of air and the integral duct should be
lighter and more easily made than a separate one.
It was accepted that there should be an equal mass of air discharge
chordwise in each foot of the span. The N.A.C.A. also recommended as the
result of earlier investigation that approximately 800 BTU/hour/square
foot of protected area would stiff ice, and this figure was used as a basis
for the calculations. Also the protected area was taken to extend back to
approximately 70$ of the chord, or to the moveable surfaces.
A matter now receiving attention from the N.A.C.A. and Trans-Canada
Airlines is the use of radiation instead of air convection heating. This
would appear to have some considerable merit,since it avoids; the disadvan-
tages of the low humidity of the warmed air, and in this connection it is
one of the unsatisfactory features of the hot air system that no humidity
control is possible - the weight of water required in a continuous air bleed
system being excessive.
The use of radiating surfaces, such as the air ducts themselves where
they pass through the cabins etc., is likely to bring some improvement in
this connection, and it would be well worth while considering the technical
aspects of such adjuncts to the general system.
Regarding the detailed construction of wing ducts etc* much remains to
be done to achieve the ideal air distribution, and contrary to the scheme
prepared by North American Corporation for the 8.25, the N.A.C.A. and other
firms have preferred to use chordwise internal corrugations at the leading
edge to ensure the passage of the hot air evenly towards the rear. This
form of construction is also of benefit in the wing structure itself from a
load c&rcying point of view.
Wing Controls.
The scheme provided for both wing systems to be operated by a series
circuit containing a manually operated main switch, 2 "Klixon" bi-metallic
switches and two Solenoid Controls
(a) The switch supplies current to the "Klixon" which in twin
controls the action of the solenoids
(b) The "Klixon" switch energises the solenoid at an air temperature of
320°F or. less which closes the by-pass valves and permits heated air to
flow to the de-icing ducts
(c) At air temperatures above 310°P the "Klixon" de-energises the
solenoid which opens the geared by—pass valves, thus spilling heated air to
the shrouds and simultaneously closes the wing ducts.
Tail Unit Controls.
One duct will have a "Klixan" switch which will control the action of
a spring loaded solenoid connected to the tail waste gate.
(a) Heated air from both inboard heat exchangers will be directed to tail


FIG. 135 AIRCRAFT HEATING AND DE-ICING FOR 8.25, (MITCHELL)


ducts when the sir in either duct is 310° F or less by the "Klixon" switch
energising the spring loaded solenoids.
(b) At air temperature over 310°F in tail ducts the gate will be open
being spring loaded, thus allowing heated air to be discharged overboard.
Forward Cabin Controls
(a) Heated air for forward cabin will be supplied by the air to air heat
exchanger in the port wing centre section, and the amount of heated air
will be manually controlled by the gate by passing the heated air from the
inboard heat exchanger over the air to air exchanger to the fuselage duct
leading to the .tail.
Radio Compartment Controls.
(a) A variable speed fan will be used with a heat exchanger to control the
temperature and amount of heated air in the radio compartment, and
atmospheric air will be brought in through the vent located on the starboard
side of the fuselage. The fan will circulate the cabin air through the heat
exchanger according to the amount of heat desired.
All the protected surfaces can be efficiently handled by a switch in
the pilotfe compartment, whether the cabin heat is on or off.
Atmospheric Air Switch.
Two air switches are provided - one for each circuit. They will be
located in the fuselage skin in the bomb bay, and at an atmospheric tempera-
ture of 75°F or more the switches will break the anti-icing circuits. At
atmospheric temperature of 55°F or less the switches will close thus
completing the circuits.
Importance of the problem.
Continuous development is the secret of success in this as in other
fields, and as a spur to greater effort the following extracts from a letter,
recently sent by a representative of Consolidated Aircraft to the firm as a
report on the results of a flight in icing conditions with Mr. Rodert at
Minneapolis, are quoted because they give a true and first hand picture of
the conditions that should be considered when developing counter-measures.
"Saturday, 1.9.4-3 -we had an opportunity today to test the 8.24 D
aircraft anti-icing system in severe icing conditions. Yfe prepared for take
off at 6:00 a.m. but did not' leave Wold Chamberlain Field until about 8:00.
The two-hour delay appears to be about the time necessary to prepare vne
four-engined ship for take off after it has stood without hangar overnight,
preparation consists of heating the engines with Stewart-Warner 80,000
B.T.U. ground jeeps, sweeping all heavy snow accumulations from wings,
tail and fuselage, and sweeping with whisk brooms snow from all control
hinges, flap tracks, etc. Due to the low temperature, warn-up periods are
considerably prolonged”.
”All Northwest Airlines* transports between Chicago and Minneapolis
were grounded because meteorology reported severe icing weather over the
entire area. We took off at 8:00 .in a blinding snowstorm with visibility
little better than zero. At 5,000 feet, the altitude at which our flight
plan had been filed, and the usual aircraft operating height, we almost
immediately encountered a quick icing condition. The system was immediately
turned to the "On" position and small accretions of ice which had accumulated
were removed by the slip-stream in less than a minute. Our entire flight of
two hours and five minutes to Chicago was done blind and in ice. Those
portions of the aircraft now thermally protected remained free from ice at*
all times. However, it appears that some form of thermal protection must
be given the engine cowl lips at all air scoop entrances. These lips
accumulated ice to the thickness of one inch and the manner in which the
ice formation was progressing indicated that a few more hours in ice could
have easily closed the scoops entirely."


"Navigation lights, radio antenna support brackets, antenna
insulators, pilot masts, and window frames with projecting edges
accumulated considerable ice. The antenna insulators became shorted out
to the fuselage by the ice forming over them. Radio antennas accumulated
approximately one-half inch to three-quarters inch of ice which on our
research aircraft is neatly taken care of by thermal means developed at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. During this flight a one-half
inch steel tube tell-tale strut which was erected off the trailing edge of
the wing just inboard of the aileron accumulated so much ice that it was
carried away and lost."
"The thermal windshield arrangement works very well. It is particu-
larly satisfactory as a source of radiant heat on the pilot’s and co-
pilot’s face. The supply ducts to the windshield which are overhead also
contribute considerable warmth to the forward cabin."
"I believe that we should also thermally protect the bombardier* s
window, for upon examination of the entire nose enclosure upon arrival at
Chicago I found it impossible to scrape or otherwise remove the one-half
inch of ice which had accumulated thereon. It is conceivable that were the
aircraft to arrive on target during or after having passed through ice,
there would be no way in which to get adequate vision for the bombs ight.
On the research aircraft, a wiper blade is installed. This is adequate for
snow and rain, but on yesterday’s flight froze solid."
"The N.A.C.A. has installed an air speed indicator arrangement on the
research aircraft to supplement our present masts on the nose. This system
consists of an electrically heated pitot tube projecting about eight
inches forward of the aircraft nose, with the static tubes flush on the
sideß of the fuselage a few inches ahead of both side gun doors. The
theory seem 3 to be that the fuselage of the aircraft makes a much better
pilot static head than those presently employed and also they are afraid
that the existing masts will cany away in severe icing.
The return flight to Minneapolis took somewhat longer than anticipated,
because of head winds. Severe icing as bad as that encountered on the
down trip was experienced. During most of the trip, the radio was
inoperative due to a phenomenon idiich is called snow static# When lying in
a snowstorm or ice bearing clouds, the static build-up within the aircraft
structure appears to blank out all reception. A discharge device
is being tested on this aircraft, however in its peresent form it is
unsatisfactory because it involves much external gadgetry which must also
be protected from ice formation. This device is s-cill in its early
development stage."
"In a total flying time of four hours and thirty minutes, we used
approximately twenty gallons of propeller de-icer fluid. This was on three
propellers, as the fourth, that is, N 0.2 engine, is equipped with an
electrically heated propeller. Electrically freated propeller appears to
perform excellently. At no time did ice form between the hub and the tip,
while those protected by the liquid accumulated considerable quantities of
ice which was intermittently slung against the side of the fuselage as
liquid was applied. The vibration induced by uneven removal of the formed
ice with the liquid system is terrific."
Conclusions and Recommendations.
The Mission feels that the subject is one of prime importance in aero-
nautics and that developments are more or less in their infancy at the
moment. Great advances will be made if the right attitude is adopted and
the energy and thought that the subject undoubtedly warrants are given to it,
since such development strikes at the very root of the problem of continuous
operational service.
The American authorities are very much alive to the importance of the
problem and have done much more research than we have. Therefore their work
should be followed up and we should collaborate closely with them in
developing the solution.
To this end, therefore, it is strongly recommended that greater facili-
ties for study and practical development be made available immediately in
Britain.


48-5*26 Auxiliary Power Units. The advent of large aircraft, both landplane
and flying boat, has brought a need for auxiliary power services, either
hydraulic or electric or both according to the auxiliary equipment chosen
for such functions as the operation of undercarriage legs, wheel brakes,
bomb doors, flaps, turrets, air compressors, radio services and for battery
charging, re-fuelling, bilge pumping and main engine starting.
So far as early British practice was concerned this# need led originally
to the introduction of a few small units consisting of a light type engine
driving the most essential auxiliaries common at the time, mounted in a
reasonably convenient position in the fuselage of the aircraft and used only
for servicing the craft at sea level.
The position now appears to be, however, one of some considerable
indecision on the electrical requirements, which it is expected will be
clarified by discussion between the appropriate M. A.P.branches, when con-
sidering the Mission’s recommendations arising from study of the American
viewpoint, and developments on the relative utilities of A.C. and D.C.current.
It is of interest to note that discussion with the American authorities
revealed a development in the policy situation regarding the use of A.C.
current. The matter had been investigated very fully some years ago by
both the Army and Nayy technical departments and as a result the Array and
Navy in 1940 abandoned the idea of a single A.P.U. as a unit for continuous
use during flight and the Amy, while keeping an open mind in the matter,
are looking to the introduction of 115/200 volts A.C. at 400 cycles for
future large aircraft. The A.P.U. sets developed so far in America have
centred round D.C. generators of 8 K.W. or less, at 30 volts, and there are
four firms which supply the bulk of the units now in use, or under develop-
ment for immediate requirements. These are:-
(1) The Eclipse Division of Bendix Aviation, New Jersey.
(2) The Homelite Corporation, Port Chester, New York.
(3) The Lawrance Engineering & Research Corporation, Linden, New Jersey.
(4) The Ruckstell-Burkhardt Manufacturing Corporation, Elmira, New York.
Some information concerning these units is given below, while full
details and specifications are available for reference in the Appendix.
Eclipse Type 698 Model 1. This small unit, used only by the Navy, com-
prises a single cylinder air cooled, two stroke, 4. h.p. engine, running at
3,800 to 4*>200 r. p.m. It is supplied with a speed control governor and
shock absorbers for mounting on a
rigid base. The overall dimensions
are length 16 inches, width 16
inches, height 20g- inches. The
generator has an output of 30 amps. j
at 30 volts and an appropriate gen-
erator control box is fitted.
Pig. 136 shows a general view of the
unit which weighs 109 lbs.complete.
The Eclipse Division is at present
developing a larger auxiliary unit
of which details will be available
at a later date.
Homelitc Model HRU-28. This is
the only plant in operational use
at present by the Army Air Forces
and is designed as an auxiliary
supply for installation in
Fig. 136. Eclipse auxiliary power unit.
bombers to operate in parallel with the 24 volt batteries when the aircraft
is grounded. It can be used with the batteries alone or in parallel with
the main engine generators. The unit is a self contained engine driven
D.C. generator with essential controls and having an output of 2,000 watts
at 28 volts.


The power plant-consists of a single cylinder air cooled, two stroke
engine, 2§" bore, stroke, governed for speeds between 3,200 and 3,700 r.p.m.
directly connected to the generator. Mounted on the generator yoke is an
automatic voltage regulator, and beneath the yoke there is a control*box
containing switches, voltmeter and radio filters. The entire assembly
is mounted on four shock absorbing foot springs attached to a channel-iron
base with thumb screws for
attachment to the auxiliary
base which is fastened per-
manently in the aircraft.
The engine is started
either by hand-operated rope
or by utilising the generator
as a motor from the battery.
The overall dimensions
of the complete unit are
height 21J inches, width
16J inches, length 24| inches.
The weight complete is 115 lbs.
A general view of the Hbmelite
unit is shown in Pig.l37,
Fig. 137. Homelite auxiliary power unit
Lawrance. This firm ha# at
present two types of air
cooled engine; twin cylinder opposed four stroke, of which there are two
models, the model 30 developing 15 h.p. at 4100 r.p.m. and the model 20
developing 15 h.p. at 6000 r.p.m. with cylinder diameters of 2f inches and
strokes 2* and 2j inches respectively, and a model 75, five cylinder
radial of 2§- inches 2f inches stroke developing 37 h.p. *at 4050 r.p.m.
A brief description is given here, of the 30C-2 and the 75-B models
which are illustrated in Pigs. 138, 139, 140 and 141 as representative of the
firms' products, although the 15 h.p. 20A model is the large scale produc-
tion engine made in the Lawrence N 0.3 plant. There is a No.l plant which
makes the model 30 and model 75 in "Batch" production by bench assemblv
because modifications are required quickly to suit the particular needs and
this naturally prevents "normal" production. In fact Lawrence are supply-
ing engines to so many users such as the armed forces, signals and medical
servioes etc., that they find £t difficult to meet the demand for the
variety of models.
Lawrance Model 3002. This is al5 h.p. horizontally dpposed air oooled
two cylinder engine. It has an axial flow ..cooling fan which cools the
generator and the cylinders. A remote and automatic control system relieves
the crew or flight engineer completely from the need for attention to the
unit. The engine crankcase comprises two aluminium alloy castings and one
magnesium casting in conventional design, while the cylinders have cast alloy
heads screwed and shrunk on forged steel barrels. Rocker boxes and cooling
fins are cast integrally with the head, and rearward facing inlet and exhaust
ports are oast in normal manner.
The design of all the Lawrance engines follows closely full scale aero-
engine practice and the firm admitted that they chose the best features of
the Pratt and Whitney or Wright engines and scaled them down as far as
possible to suit their own needs. Therefore, in examining one of these
small engine* in fctail one is struck by the up to date design and the high
quality finish.


Fig. 138.
Fig. 139.
Lawrance A.P.U.
Type 30C-2.
Fig. 140. Lawrance A.P.U.
Type 75-B.
Fig. 141. Lawrance A.P.U. Type 75-B.


The generator is General Electric Gol, model 2 CMIA4 and is direct
coupled to the front end of the crankshaft. The armature and the cooling
fan together act as a fly wheel and direct current is provided for the 24
volt aircraft system with a continuous output of 5 K.W. and an overload for
5 minute periods.
The cowling and baffles for the engine are well designed units of sheet
aluminium,,and the sound proof enclosure has a partition provided to separate
the entering and outgoing air. Cooling air enters over the generator to the
fan and thence over the cylinders whence the engine exhaust gases and the
cooling air are ducted overboard; stainless steel exhaust pipes are used and
silencer located in the outgoing air duct is also provided.
Lawrence Model 758 - U.S.Navy type 2A. This unit has a 37 h.p. air cooled
five cylinder radial engine operating a 30 volt direct current generator.
It is enclosed in a sound proof compartment, which permits easy accessibility
and rapid , changing of the whole unit, and cooling is by means of an axial
flow fan which takes in air from an aircraft duct system. As on the Model
30C-2 a remote and automatic control system is used. It is claimed that the
unit is a miniature of the «*** aircraft power plant and this particular
model certainly meets the claim.
Fig. 142.


Governor speed control, thermostat warm-up, pressure fuel feed at
3-5 pounds/sq. inch and dual ignition by two Scintilla type SFSHNI2 magnetos,
with impulse couplings for easy starting, carefully designed air cooling
baffles and ducts and stringent provision against fire risk are other factors
which enhance the utility of this auxiliary power unit for its purpose, the
last named being shown in Fig* 142.
The generator is General Electric Co. Model 2CM9181, direct coupled
supplying direct-current. It is a six-pole, semi enclosed fan cooled,
compensated commutating pole design having the following ratings: 4*ooo r.p.nw,
8 K.W. 30 volts, 267 amperes continuous output, 100°C. rise in temperature
over 38°C. ambient. It has an overload rating of 15Q$ of normal at sea
level for five minutes with not more than inches water pressure between
the inlet and exhaust ducts with a flow of 60 cubic feet of air per minute.
The generator serves as a motor to start the engine and an attachment
is provided for hand starting. The fan is mounted on the engine shaft and
provides all the cooling air for engine and generator.
Overall dimensions of sound proof enclosure
Height with manual starter 39*5/1 6 inches
Height needed to remove manual starter 42* 5/16 inches
Diameter at base 30* 5/8 inches
Minimum total weight power plant dry with
all accessories and voltage control
equipment. 310 lbs.
These and other Lawrance units are giving good service in Navy aircraft
and it is interesting to note that the 2CM.41-A3 and 4 generators on the
30C-2 model have axial brushes on a face type commutator, instead of the more
conventional cylindrical type. This was done to save space. 300-2 models
are fitted to the BBM2C flying boats, although Glenn Martin found it necessary
to 7 change to the 758 five cylinder radial model to get greater electrical
output, and these are fitted to the B3M3C-4 and 5*
The 30 model was in fact designed for sea level and the 75 model for
20,000 feet and the FBI Consolidated series of flying boats also started with
300-2 units but similarly changed” to 758 on the H3Y2: EBY3 • H3Y4* EBY4A. and
FBYS for the new contracts. The Martin "Mars” has both the 754 and 750
together; these units are normally supercharged,the "A 1 * being fed from
pressure cabin air and the "C" has a scaled down cabin supercharger engine
driven. The generators give 2 K.W. 100 amperes D.C. at 30 volts and also
7 K.W. 70 amperes at 120 volts D.C.
The newest installations are on the Goodyear Blimps and the Sikorslsy
"Kxcalibur* 1 freight carrier which have 30C-2 units and the Consolidated
E 82138 and the Martin EBICC each with 758 auxiliary plants.
The cooling air flows for the models 30 and 75 500-800 c. ft./inn.
and 1200 c. ft./ran. respectively with only 1-2 inches water gauge pressure
loss in the ducts.
Tha demand so far has teen for a maximum operating height of 20,000 ft.,
although the units are used mostly at sea level by the Havy, for example tar
radio ot gun turrets. The model 30C auxiliary generating plants ate used by
the Havy in Fatrol Torpedo Boats, with a carburettor adjusted for sea level
operation^only, and i?i. of Interest to know that at Pearl
wSe used to operate the gun turrets of some of these boats while the boats
themselves were stowed on the deck of a freighter. The units are also run
while the galley cookers are in use.
The Array does not seem to be interested in very high altitude units, where
the same jSSlems arise as beset the main engine installations around and
above 30,000 ft.


Lawrance have designed a 30 K.W. unit but it depends ultimately on a
suitable generator being available. The five cylinder engine will be used
and a nine cylinder radial is also undergoing development. The cooling fans
are single stage bucket type, but a centrifugal design is under review and,
it is thought, will remove certain design difficulties they are experiencing
at the moment.
irmy Air Forces type D-2 unit. The Air Forces type D-2 power units are
now being tested. The specification is not yet finalised but the unit has a
two cylinder four stroke Engine with a 5 to fh K.W. generator and takes its
fuel from the aircraft main tanks. No altitude correction is provided and
no test results are available yet. The type D-2 is to be made by the
Lawrance Engineering and Research Corporation and Buckstell-Burkhardt
Manufacturing Corporation, and is shown in Fig. 145.
Fig. 143. Lawrance A.P.U. Type D-2.
Ruckstell-Burkhardt Manufacturing Corporation. Three main air cooled
models are at present in hand comprising two twin cylinder engines, a
horizontally opposed and a Vee. Both develop about 15 h.p. and the latter
is shown in Pig. 144* Further details regarding their specifications will
be supplied by the firm
when these are final-
ised.
The third model is
the WA. 3 for the Navy
Department. This is a
supercharged four
cylinder horizontally
opposed, with fan air
cooling and developing
about 24 b.h*p. at
3,500 r.p.m. on 87
octane fuel. A "Boots"
type supercharger
provides air to the
carburettor and an
aneroid regulator valve
maintains approximately
sea level density up to
the rated height. The
bore and stroke are
Fig. 144. Ruckstall-Burkhardt A.P.U.


inches the piston displacement “being 65 cubic inches. The rated power
is 24 b.h.p. from sea level to 10,000 feet and 15 b.h.p. at 20,000 feet.
The weight of the engine with tubular mounting and without generator is
172 lbs.
Two generating sets are built around this basic engine, one having a
10 K.W. I|oo cycle, 110 volt, three phase generator and the other a 5 K.W.
29 volt D.C. 175 ampere generator both made by Westinghouse Electrical &
Manufacturing Cos., East Pittsburg.
Future development. It will be observed from the foregoing that the
American Air Forces have gone into the matter of auxiliary generating sets
in same detail and have a considerable volume of production for Service use.
The experience they have already gained, while still limited, will enable
them to make rapid progress in the fitting out of the new large bombers
and transport aircraft.
Whether the forms of these plants will continue on the present lines
depends on the decisions taken in the next few months on the question of
A.C. or D.C. electrical supply, and it is here that British policy will
similarly have to be clarified. Fortunately we have not yet achieved in
Britain a large output of specialised units and benefit should be taken of
the present state of design to decide clearly for the future and to begin
3ome new designs that will meet the exact requirements. At present the
trend is towards a type of unit that is not efficient - weights of from Bto
15 lbs. per kilowatt being a very uneconomical way of generating electrical
power. The specific weights of main engine driven generators are so much
lower as to make them attractive, provided the amount of electrical output
required at rest on the ground or water can be settled within the compass of
a small auxiliary unit.
It is of interest to note that the Navy Department has a project for a
separate and distinct auxiliary power unit at each turret station, incor-
porating a small engine of 5 b.h.p. weighing 14 lbs., and these will run all
the time to supply either electric or hydraulic power to the turrets. This
scheme, if successful, would be installed in large boats and land planes for
Navy use.
Here then is a diametrically opposed trend of thought which although
apparently serious yet merely emphasises the lack of uniformity in this
field.
It is established, however, that there is a need for a considerable
amount of the electrical power to be available while the aircraft is
grounded and therefore, some really efficient alternative system to the large
reciprocating engine is required. Electrical power should be generated at
ultra-high speeds if low plant weight is desired and an investigation could
well be made of the application of an internal-combustion gas turbo-
alternator. In effect such a plant would develop say 50-100 h»p* and generate
A.C. current at about 12,000-24,000 r.p.m. and would provide also, through a
heat exchanger, cabin heating and wing de-icing. A number of these units
could be installed in the wings or actually in the power plant nacelles.
They might provide the lighest and most useful form of generator, which could
burn low grade fuel.
Mention is also made of this new conception in the cabin heating
memorandum Item 5.23 and in Section 5B Chapter 8 because it appears so aptly
to solve this important problem of auxiliary power units - including main
engine pre-heating and starting.
Conclusions and recommendations. The'American Air Forces have gone into
A.P.U* development in a fairly big way, and Service experience with production
types is rapidly building up,but nas not yet reached finality in policy.
Britain is fortunate in not having embarked on large production of any one
size of unit, is free now to develop along the exact lines indicated by the
electrical requirements and is also fortunate in having available the American
A.P.U. experience when formulating future policy. The Mission recomnends close


collaboration with America on such policy, and the provision under lend-
lease of samples of the latest aiid most powerful production types far trial*
27 Static & Rig Test of Engine Components*
Summary. The Mission was impressed by the amount of static and rig test-
ing of engine cou£>onents which was being carried out by all the engine and
propeller firms and by the Chrysler and General Motors laboratories, as well
aa Government establishments and the factories of the Altadnlm Company of
America*
A striking feature of the engine development work seen in America was
the extent to which electrical and electronic apparatus is employed at very
early stages* The old methods of ”cut and try” have given place to a
rational experimental technique whereby even long before an engine reaches
the full scale stage, much is known and recorded of the dynamic character-
istics of the components under operating loads*
For example, the Chrysler laboratory revealed this advanced outlook
applied in a remarkable way to the development of their new 16 cylinder
inverted liquid cooled engine* It was the aim to produce the *ncrln«* as
completely free as possible from vibration of any kind, and therefore, an
investigation was made initially into the layout such an engine should
follow* The result has been described in 2*04, and while at the laboratory
the Mission saw the engine on the test bed with pick-ups and strain-gauges
fitted at the salient points for a vibrational analysis of the whole engine
motion both torsional and translational*
The apparatus in use comprised a Miller oscillograph, Sperry piCk-up
for lateral and vertical movements, and electronic recording units for tensile
and compressive stresses in the crankcase and scantlings; Chrysler make full
use of a Bell Telephone Co* * s harmonic analyser which automatically sorts
out the components of desired orders from vibrational phenomena.
An interesting gas pressure recorder was seen on a single cylinder Diesel
using a pick-up consisting of a tube, with a wire strain gauge, screwed into
the cylinder. Another progressive research covered the determination of
turbine blade frequencies with strain gauges fitted on the blades.
An interesting and useful piece of apparatus was a Thyratron inverter or
oscillator for exciting forced vibrations in parts tinder examination. It
provided a 1 h*p* energy source of variable frequency alternating current.
An induction piok-up on a rotating shaft was demonstrated very neatly by
& Hookes joint and a toothed gear wheel* A carrier wave was applied to taro
opposed pick-ups and the modulated wave recorded on a cathode ray tube*
This principle has been extended to the phase shift torsiograph described
later in this item.
Similarly at Kinner Motors the Miller oscillograph and pick-up equipment
was in constant use for such jobs as engine mounting vibration investigation.
Cathode ray balancing machines for supercharger impellers were greatly in
evidence at the engine production enabling the operators rapidly to
check the out of balance and correct it by local grinding*
Even the Lawrence Co., making auxiliary power plants, use piezo crystal
indicators and Sperry M f I.T* vibrational equipment* They consider it invaluable
in their development work. There is no doubt that the exact information
obtained by such means as those described above, if sufficiently backed up
and co-ordinated with engine endurance and development testing, will prove
of very great value it is recommended that the British industry should
set up special sections with adequate equipment to exploit this art*
Motors phase—shift torsiograph* General Motors laboratory have
developed a torsiograph for use on engines where there is no drive available
for the normal type of instrument* With this new torsiograph all that is
required is sufficient room to fit a stationary wound iron core with two


poles close to a suitable gear on the shaft or, if no gear is available
f SpaC ® 121 which t 0 fit a thin g ear which need not be more thaA
1/Bth inch wide. Due to the fact that little or no modification to the
rotating, parts is necessary, there is no possibility of modifying the
the torsiograph and this, combined with its adapt-
ability in a number of cases where the normal type of torsiograph cannot
De used, makes it an instrument of considerable interest.
A diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 145* The principle of
operation is as follows.
The two coils which are connect-
ed in series cany D.C* current to
magnetize the core. As the gear teeth
pass the tips of the core the change
in magnetic flux generates A.C* volt-
age having a frequency equal to the
shaft r*p*m* times the number of
teeth. This A.C* voltage may be
applied to a cathode ray oscillo-
graph. If there is no torsional
vibration all the individual waves
Fig. 145. General Motors phase-shift torsiograph
are super-imposed and gives a clear sinuosidal picture. If, however, there
is vibration the individual waves are not super—imposed and appear on the
screen as in Fig. 146: the width shown in this figure being a measure of
the amplitude of torsional vibration.
Two coils and core tips are used so as to
cancel out the effect of wobble or lateral
vibration of the shaft so that only torsional
vibrations are shown.
As described above, the system only
shows the amplitude but by means of an elabora-
Fig. 146.
tion of the electrical system, it is possible to determine the frequency
and wave form; all this is described in General Motors Research Laboratory's
Report NO.ME6-8, Phase-shaft Torsiographs, which is listed in the Appendix*
Stress Coat, and Micro Bxtcnsometer Technique. The painting of components
with a brittle varnish and then straining them statically so that cracks in
the varnish will show up the points of high stress concentration has been
practised to a limited extent, both in this country and in America for the
past 10 years*
However, recently this process has been very much refined and a series
of special varnishes known as "stress coat" are now marketed by the Magnaflux
Corporation.
While ideally it is desirable to have a fully air-conditioned room
when using these varnishes, excellent results can be obtained if the
temperatures are controllable and the humidity can be measured. Several
Companies were in fact obtaining very useful results without air-conditioning
equipment and without very elaborate temperature control. Opinions did,
however, differ to some extent on the importance of this.
For example, the Aluminium Company did not control the humidity in their
laboratory although they have equipment for measuring it accurately, and
excellent temperature control. Drying is carried out at 75°F the
temperature is then reduced, if necessary, to make the varnish more brittle.
They claim that they can get results accurate to plus or minus 300 lbs. per
sq. in. on aluminlimu When testing, the load is put on for not more than
20 seconds and is then taken off and held off for at least five times that
period to prevent creep in the varnish.


When compression tests are made the load is held on for 3 hours which
produces a stress free condition in the varnish, and cracks then occur due
to a tension in the varnish as the load is reduced*
When a permanent record is required, the parts are washed in & red dye
which seeps into the cracks*
This stress coat technique has been applied to propeller hubs and the
Aero Products Co* have been able to carry out considerable lightening by its
use* It has also been used on connecting rods, pistons and crankshafts*
ALCOA have carried out a number of tests with stress coat on Pratt and Whit-
ney crankcases. They have found that if the stresses determined by these
means can be kept below 7000 lbs* per sq.in. satisfactory engine operation
will be obtained* This method has pointed to the desirability of shallower
and flatter webs on the crankcase diaphragms and to the reducing of the
section of the crankcase opposite the lightening holes, so as to even up the
stress distribution* Stress coat methods have also been applied to the
portion round the cylinder holding-down stud holes and has pointed to the
desirability of counter-boring these holes and well radiusing the top of the
counter-bore*
As & check on results obtained with stress coat, considerable use is
made of the General Motors Micro-Extensometer. This has a photo electric
instrument which is made to measure extensions over gauge lengths of either
1/1 6th, l/Bth or \ inch* These extensametars will read up to a strain
equivalent to 90,000 lbs* per sq*in* in steel with three re-settings and the
calibrating grid* Samples of this extensometer have been ordered by the
Mission and they have also brought back a set of manufacturing drawings*
The Mission considers that the combination of stress coat and this micro-
extensometer is a most valuable method of determining the stresses in
complicated parts and that considerable use could well be made of it.
It is inprih simpler and more accurate to use than photo-elastic methods
which are extremely difficult to apply to any but simple two—dimensional
problems*
Rubber Models* Chrysler were using rubber models which are marked off
with square grids; by deflecting these models a visual picture of the strain
distribution could be seen* Although because of the differences in the
Poissons ratio the results are not accurate quantitatively, they do allow
a useful picture of the stress distribution to be obtained. Such a scheme
was initiated some years ago in England for the investigation of aero engine
components but never followed up; in view of these recent developments of
Chrysler it is thought that the matter should be followed up again.
Use of Solex Gauge Brine iple. For the measurement of the distortion of
connecting rod big end bores under load General Motors used the Soj.@x air
gauge principle* The dummy crankpin used to apply the load was in this
arrangement made to act as the Solex gauge plug*
Tests* A great many fatigue tests are run on model conponents, on
conventional reverse bending machines and on special rigs built up for the
particular purpose*
General Motors have developed a most useful hydraulic push pull fatigue
testing machine for testing full sised engine components such as pistons
and connecting rods* This machine has been sold by them to a limited extent
and they quoted the Mission a.price of about £2,100 f*o*b. Detroit. This
machine will serve somewhat the same purpose as the Avery-Schenck machine.
Photographs are shown on Figs* 147 and 148.
«
It will operate at 1400 cycles a minute with a travel of .035 at a
load of 12,300 Its. tension to 14,000 lbs. at a llnwer speed
of 810 cycles per minute and a stroke of .060 at a load of 16,500 lbs. tension
and 33,W0 lbs; per sq, in. compression. It can, of course.
desired combination of compression and tension loefo cooled *
The Mission saw it running .on hot fatigue tests of full siz


cylinder ana piston assemblies, testing the cylinder head and piston simul-
taneously. For tests of this type suitable electric muffles are fitted and
arranged to give an approximation to the operating temperature distribution*
The effect of changes in gudgeon pin design have also been determined in
this machine*
Although at the higher loads the operating frequency is rather lower
than can be obtained with the Schenck type of machine which runs at 2,200
cycles per min* it is not subject to instability and is extremely adaptable,
and for a wide variety of applications would, in the opinion of the Mission,
prove more suitable*
An excellent paper on Stress determination in engine parts by C.Lipson
of Chiyslers appeared in the April S.A.E* journal, which describes the
various items inspected at the Chrysler laboratory and deals fully with their
vibration technique*
Fig. 147. General Motors Fatigue Testing Machine
Fig. 148. General Motors Fatigue Testing Machine


48-5* 28 Detail design*
Screw threads and studs etc* Standard American practice on studs is to
screw them in to a definite length and not hard up against the end of the
threads although this is done in certain special cases* In order to avoid
trouble with the loosening of studs, selective fits are used and certain
firms specify maximum and minimum torques for fitting studs* As mentioned
under the production review, Packards select all the taps used in multi
tapping machines in groups with a maximum variation of .0005* In spite of
this there seems to be more trouble with stud loosening on American engines
than occurs in this country.
Some experiments have been made with Whitworth fora threads on engines
of American design but the form has been slightly modified by topping the
threads giving an increased clearance on the outside diameter. Tests
carried out by the Aluminium Company of America, however, indicate that this
is a mistake as for high duty studs with fairly large interference on the
effective diameters the flow of the aluminium takes up ary small nominal
clearance on the top diameters and gives good lateral support to the studs
with the standard Whitworth form. With the modified Whitworth fora, however
this support is lacking and the interference of the stud is soon lost under
running conditions* Topped threads are of course used by Rolls Royce and
seem to require very close tolerances to give satisfactory service*
The Aluminium Company have carried out some tests on a special design
thread made by the Dardalet Company* This is not the Dardalet self-locking
thread and all the diameters are parallel* It is shown in Fig. 149* There
Fig. 149. Dardalet thread.
is an interference fit at the bottom of the stud
threads and this gives excellent support* Also
the design gives a strong thread in the female
portion* Fatigue tests so far carried out have
shown it to be at .least as good as the Whitworth
form and further tests at higher loads are in
hand; it is hoped that these will shoßr that it
is superior.
A thread of this type was tested some years
ago in this country in connection with a self-
locking thread at the nut end of the stud* The
self-locking design proved unsatisfactory because
of the tendency to withdraw the stud when undoing
the nut and the project was therefore dropped*
However, as a standard form of thread on the nut end has been used on the
American tests, this difficulty does not arise.
Fig* 150 shows a design of stud fast end which is intended to give
even stress distribution* This design was developed by Stress Coat methods
and it is understood that it has given good results on
fatigue tests and engine runs when applied to Pratt and
Whitney cylinder holding down studs*
The Wright Aeronautical Corporation practice for
tightening studs and cap screws is given in the
following tabulation* The figures are typical of
general American practice.
Fig. 150.
Pratt & Whitney cylinder
holding down stud.
CRANKCASE RECESSED
HOLE IN END OF STUD
TO GIVE EVEN STRESS
DISTRIBUTION IN
CRANKCASE


TX&HTECTTG OF TORQUE STUDS AMD CAP SCREWS BY
WBIOiT AERONAUTICAL CORPORATION
Size of
Thread
Nut Bnd
Min.
Dia.
of thread
Root or
neck
(inches.)
Min.
Rock-
well
Hard-
ness
Torque
Values
Driving Stud
Tighte
Nut, £
or Car
ming
Icrew
>screw
Sin.
In. lbs
Max.
In.Ibs
Mis.
In.lbs
Max.
In.lbs
Button Head
Screw
10-32
.1467
B-50
—
—
20
25
„tt it n
12-24
.1585
B-50
—
—
25
30
Studs, Bolts,
Screws and
Capscrews
10-32
,.1467
C-19
—
—
35
40
n N
12-24
.1585
C-19
—
—
45
50
N •
3/4-28
.180
c—26
50
70
80
85
n n
5/16-24
.229
C-26
100
.150
160
175
n it
3/8-24
.285
C-26
200
275
225
250
n tt
7/16-20
.331
C-26
300
425
350
375
ii n
1/2-20
.387
C-26
500
700
550
600
ii it
9/16-18
.436
C-26
750
975
825
875
« tt
1
5/8-18
.493
C-26
1100
1400
1125
1200
Standard Practices for Special Applications.
Cyl. Hold-
down Stud
3/8-2!,.
.313
C-32
325
450
350
375
Cyl.Hold-
down
Capscrew
7/16-20
.330
C-26
375 f
400
Cyl'.Hold-
down Stud
7/16-20
.331
C-32
400
500
425
450
Rocker Hub
Bolt
7/16-20
.371
C-32
__
250
325
NUN
15/32-20
.400
C-19
—
—
250
325
HUM
9/16-18
.488
C-26
—
—
300
375
Spark Plug
18 nm
MB
~ 1 *
450
500
Aero-threads with wire inserts are not yet used to any great extent.
One application, however, which was seen is the engine mounting holes in
the Allison crankcase. Another application is the use of a 9/1 6th aero
thread, with wire insert for the spark plugs on the Banger 12 cylinder engine.
This application lms caused considerable interest in America and tests are
being made with a modified aero thread wire insert designed to take
standard sparking plug threads.
A good quality American *V* thread is more difficult to produce by
rolling in a fairly high tensile steel than a Whitworth for* and probably
for this reason Packard seemed to be the only engine firm interested in
thread rolling.
Propeller Shaft Cones. The Curtiss Wright Propeller Division is carrying
out a development progranane on propeller shaft cones with a view to reducing
fretting and damage to splines. On certain installations a difficulty has
been experienced in getting sufficient friction to carry the cyclic torque
variation of the engines by the cones a lose with the result that the
propeller has worked on the splines and shaft failures have occurred. It
has been found that if static torsional tests produce a friction equal to
the cyclic torque variation no trouble will occur.


Phenol plastic cones have been tried and have given poor results,
due to their low friction characteristics, and four cases of propeller
shafts breaking have occurred* Spacing washers of this material have,
however, been successfully tried between the propeller shaft nuts and the
front cones* This spacer reduces the friction and allows a greater effec-
tive tightening of the nut with a given torque*
Good results have also been obtained with a rear cone of half the
normal angle* A cone of this type is self-locking on the shaft and will
not taove axially under tightening loads*
Piston Rings* On American high duly radial air cooled engines, cast
iron wedge section gas rings are used universally and parallel sided gas
rings for this type of engine are considered an anachronism* Parallel
sided gas rings are, however, still used on the Allison engine, although
they have had quite a lot of trouble with ring sticking and it is possible
that they may go over to the wedge section type*
Pratt and Whitney wedge section rings have an included angle of 8°
while Wright use an included angle of 15 • Hings of this type have excellent
resistance to gumming, as well as to flutter and blow by at high piston speeds*
The one possible disadvantage of the wedge type of ring appears to be its
sensitivity to side clearance, whioh has given some trouble under desert
operating conditions due to wear caused by sand* It is believed, in this
connection, that the Wright engines have given much more trouble than tljte
Pratt and Whitney and that this is probably due to the wider angle* It is,
however, known from British experience that the finish of the sides of
wedge section rings has a very marked bearing on the wear of the ring grooves
and it is not thought that the American rings have a sufficiently good finish*
It is considered, therefore, that with better air cleaning, correct
side finish and the best angle, the service performance of wedge section
rings can be considerably improved and they will continue to be used*
Certainly both Wrights and Pratt and Whitney would never willingly go back
to the parallel sided cast Iron ring*
The alternative to the wedge section cast Iron ring, which is being
developed in America, is the narrow steel ring; . due to the higher modulus
of steel, these have a greater stiffness for a given weight, and therefore
have a greater resistance to flutter and blow by and in addition they can
be made narrower and lighter without experiencing handling and fitting
difficulties*
Steel rings and special alloy oast iron rings with properties and
compositions bdr&ering on those of steel,have been tried in this country
and have given trouble due to their poor bearing properties. In America
this problem is being tackled by either silver or chromium plating*
Chromium plating has, on some engines, given excellent results on a oast
iron ring and it should give equally good results with steel. A silver
plated steel scraper' ring is already used as standard on another engine
so that there is a considerable background on these forms of finish.
Another interesting steel ring is made from nitrided at pel by Brariberry and
according to the Navy Department has given excellent results when running
in an air cooled nitrided barrel. Bedding in is understood to be satisfac-
tory and it has also been resistant to wear and scuffing*
It is recommended that both wedge section cast iron rings and specially
treated parallel sided steel rings should be energetically developed in this
country* For engines of very high piston speeds it is felt that the steel
ring is the only practical alternative to the wedge section -type.
It is also recommended that so far as possible service trials of
pis tom ring sets should be carried out on sandy airfields which are known to
have produced trouble with ring wear. For these tests normal service
types of air cleaners should be fitted for use on the standard aircraft
at these stations, so that the tests are comparative.
With regard to scraper ring design and oil control du^ g^ e
running of the engines, it is believed that the Americans are in


trouble as we are in this country. They do, however, have the advantage
that because of their longer initial testing periods there is more time
for the rings to bed in correctly and for a stabilised oil consumption
to be obtained, whereas in this country, due to the much reduced production
testing periods, there has been a tendency to design piston rings from the
point of view of giving quick bedding in and low initial oil consumption
so as to help production, rather than to design exclusively far service
operating conditions. This desire, for a ring set which will give a low oil
consumption after an extremely short amount of running in, has led to the
use of gas rings with no lands.
Roller Bearing Cages. Pig. 151 shows the design of cage development by
Packards for the Merlin reduction gear roller bearing* They are adopting
Fig. 151. Packard bearing cage.
this design as standard on all suitable
applications* On spherical roller hearings
objection has been raised to the use of
broached cages because they do not retain
the rollers during assembly. However the
application of the Packard design would over-
come this objection and would make a much
stronger design than that normally used.
Ouno Oil Filters. These oil filters,which
are similar to the Auto-klean type but with
an oil operated motor which rotates the
cleaning device automatically, are adopted
as standard on all American engines, includ-
ing Merlins built for the U.S.Army. The
general opinion was, however, that they did not give a sufficiently fine
degree of filtration and Allison in particular consider that they are not
worth having. The importance of better filtration is very well realised
but no new developments were seen.
Gear Stressing. An opportunity was taken to discuss gear stressing with
bright Aeronautical and a comparison was made of the methods used by Bristol
and of the specific case of the Hercules VI blower drive.
It was found that both Bristol and Wright base their calculations on
the Lewis and Herts type of formula but that Bristol applies speed and zone
factors while Wright does not. In general allows 35$ more stress for
ordinary gears, and in some cases 100$ more than Bristol allows.
Where multiple layshafts are used and the geometry of the system is
sound, Wright assume that there is equal load distribution to all layshafts.
Gears tested by the I.A.E. have failed at surface stresses lower than
those estimated for the Wright blower and while Wrights cannot give a definite
answer to this, they believe that gear systems are capable of operating at
considerable overloads for short periods.
Wrights investigated the Hercules VI blower drive and estimated that it
was capable of transmitting 700 h.p. with standard tooth form and 1,250 lup.
with special tooth form i. e. more than 100$ more than it has to transmit in
practice.
The foregoing indicates that reductions in weight should be possible by
allowing higher stresses in gear systems. and it is recommended that further
investigations should be made with this in view.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA
1. Engine Instruction BookB
Allison VI7IQE
" VI7IOP
Ranger 12 cylinder
Wright Cyclone 9 cylinder (2 books)
n M 14 M
it « 1 8 "
2. Engine Drawings
Wright Cyclone Steel Crankcase Assembly 417966 N
” M Crankshaft n 417889
" "18 Installation Drawing 417830
Lycoming Two Speed Contra-Rotating Reduction Gear
3* Power Plant Inst all at ions Drawings
Douglas A. 26 Engine Installation 5153328
" M Mounting Detail 5122337
” SBD2D (Dive Bomber) Engine Installation 5156328
« « " " Plash Welded Engine Mounting with
Dural Ring. 5126336
North American XB2B Engine and Turbo Installation 63“40001
" " 825 Engine Installation 82-40031
" H 825 Engine Mounting 62-32901
Boeing 829 Engine and Turbo Installation K-33P002
4. Installation Weights.
Boeing Power Plant Weight Analysis for 817 and 829«
5. Flexible Engine Mountings.
Wright Field Report (Col. Dent) Vibrations of an engine in
flight with two engine mounts.”
Wright Field Reports on Defiant
Wellington IC
Spitfire
Hurricane
Republic P 43
H 847
Fortress 817
Curtiss P4O (two reports)
Mustang P. 51
General Aircraft Model Gl-80
Gooctyear Mounting far P.& W. R. 985 Engine
Junkers 88
6. Engine Cooling.
Ranger Report Development.
Pratt & Whitney Report on Model Nacelle Tests of Single Stage
Axial Flow Fan*
Pratt & Whitney Report on Model Nacelle Tests of Tuibine Type Fan.
7. Superchargers and Turbo Blowers.
Ranger Report R. 501 on Planiol Supercharger,
Test of Stratos Allison Supercharger.
N.A.C.A. Sub-committee on Compressor Research,
Report on Comparison of several engine superchargers.
Lycoming Arrangement Drawing of two stage blower with Hydraulic
Drive.
Bendix Report on ires sure Drops In Merlin Supercharger Elbow.


Boeing report on use of Twin Turbo Blowers, H e port No. D-3268
" « n Limitations of Power Output of 817 with Exhaust
Turbo, Report No. D-4349
" " n Engine and Turbo Supercharger Performance on
BI7F, Report No. D-4339
General Electric Curve Sheets LL 1090310-6 and LL 1090310-4, on
Turbo Supercharger Performance.
Minneapolis Honeywell, Electronic Turbo Control Manual*
Boeing Specification for Automatic Power Controls D-3808
General Electric Plight Test Summary on Bl7> Engine and Turbo
Supercharger Acceleration Characteristics.
8. Carburettors and Fuel Injection.
Bendix, Booklet on Direct Fuel mjeotxon.
'* Discussion on ” " n
” Excerpts from an Investigation of the Air Metric Elements
on the Bendix Carburettor.
” Report on Production Inspection and Testing Procedure
" Discussion on the effect of Fuel Gravity and Viscosity.
9. Ignit ion.
N.A.C.A. Survey of Engine Ignition Developments.
10. Bearings.
Drawings of General Motors Crankshaft Front Bearing Shoving
"Silver Grid" design.
Drawing of General Motors Slipper Connecting Rod for Experimental
Two Stroke Radial.
11. Exhaust Systems and Flame Damping.
General Electric Co. Bulletin No, DF 80966, Research on Flame
Suppression.
Curtiss Wright Flight Test Investigation of Flame Damping
Exhaust Stacks on P. 40.
United Aircraft Corporation, Research Division,
Tests of exhaust propulsion nozzles, Report R. 309
Jet ejectors and augmentation, " R. 74
12. Heat Bxcnangcrs and Cabin Heaters.
Test No. 209 - Stewart Warner Model N0.789-F Heater
288 - 793 Heater
377 “ Tube Bundle Heat Exchanger I-D and Steel Shielded
extended surface heat exchanger $ 20.
512 - Exhaust gas heat exchangers. Multi plate type
and EX. 13600 tube bundle with 11" tubes.
Report of performance characteristics of experimental cross flow-
exhaust gas heat exchangers, dated 23*8.42*
Circulars on South Wind Combustion Heaters.
N.A.A. Report 5393, Calculations for the design of Heated Surface
Anti-Icing for 825 c Aircraft.
13* Auxiliary Power Units.
Lawrance type 2A Instruction Manual
type 1 n "
Homelite Manual.
14# Static and Rig Tests.
Arrangement and complete detail drawings of General Motors strain
gauge (Micro Extensometer)
Drawing of General Motors Fatigue Test Machine.
General Motors Report on Phase Shift Torsiograph
Paper on Stress determination, by of Chrysler Ltd. in
April S.A.E. Journal.


15* Aircraft De-icing,
Drawing No. 82-953306 and 953307 of the wing de-icing system on
the North American 8.25 c.
N.A.A. Report N 0.5395,.5395, Calculations for the design of heated
surface anti-icing for Model B. 25c aircraft.
16. Accessories.
Eclipse (Bendix) Manual of Engine Starters and Electrical
Accessories.
17* Engine Testing.
Wright "Model Test" schedule
Allison "War Emergency Rating" test schedule
Detailed production test schedules


ENGINES, PCMER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
PART C REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol General
” I*o2 Application to British factories
11 I*o3 Type of equipment recommended
" I*o4 Speed Control for present eddy current plant
CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
Item 2.01 Objects
” 2*02 Proportion of power recovery
” 2* 03 Types of equipment
" 2*04 Other means of power recovery
CHAPTER 3 ~ METHODS OP ABSORBING- ENGINE POWER
Item 3*ol Propeller
M 3*02 Hydraulic dynamometer or brake
M 3*03 Hydraulic coupling with electrical generator
" 3*o)+* Eddy current dynamometer or brake
" 3*03 Eddy current coupling with generator
” 3*06 Dual eddy current brake and generator drive
M 3.07 Wound rotor induction generator
” 3* oB D.C. dynamometer with motor alternator
CHAPTER 4 ~ SPEED CONTROL
Item if. 01 General
H 4*02 Electronic control
” 4«03 D.C. systems
CHAPTER 3 - RELATIVE MERITS OP TESTING- PLANT AND METHCDS
Item s*ol General
” 5.02 Propeller
" 3*03 Hydraulic brake
" 3* 04 Hydraulic coupling with generator
" 3*03 Eddy current brake
” 3*06 Eddy current coupling with generator
B 3*07 Wound .rotor induction generator
” s*oB D.C. dynamometer with motor alternator
CHAPTER 6 - THE BUICK ARRANGEMENTS AT MELROSE PARK, CHICAGO
Item £>.ol Hainplant
" 6.02 Speed control
APEEHDIX - List of documents etc., brought from America




PART C REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING- PLANT
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
4C-1.01 General* The general conclusion reached is that electrioal
power re cove ly is only practicable in large shadow factories
which have been laid out on a suitably conceived plan for this
purpose and on a large production programme for a given type of
engine.
In the case of parent firms manufacturing several different
types at one time and developing new types, the prime considera-
tion is the facility for running engine tests expeditiously with
the minimum of distraction and maintenance. They prefer
therefore to dissipate the power from their test stands.
4C.—1«02 Application to British Factories. In existing British engine
factories it would not be practicable to adopt substantial
power recovery owing to the great differences in production anr?
test schedules compared with America, and no prospect is seen
during this war of laying down any considerable amount of plant
that would justify the cost in money, production capacity, time
and strategic materials, in an attempt to 3ave coal.
40-I*o3 Type of Equipment He commended. The Mission recommends that
ary new engine test plant required should be of the eddy
current type in preference to the older type and that
electronic speed control should be incorporated. The eddy
current units should be made large enough to accept the larger
engine powers which will be met during the next few years, and
should be designed as couplings fitted with locking brakes, so
that existing water systems may be used for dissipation and
conversions to alternator drives for power recovery would be
possible, if at some future date the developments justified
this additional equipment.
40-1•04 Speed Control for Present Eddy Current Plant. Consideration
should be given to the addition of electronic speed control on
eddy current dynamometers, existing or in course of manufacture,
as it is felt that this change would soon pay for itself in
improved testing facilities*




CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
4C-2.01 Objects. Since large quantities of aviation fuel have to be expended in
testing aero-engines, it is manifestly necessary to consider whether a
corresponding or partial saving of ooal could be effected by electrical
power recovery, accompanied also by a reduction in the water plant other-
wise required to dissipate the waste energy.
4C-2.02 Proportion of Power Recovery. Effective use is being made of recovered
electrical power in a number of American engine shadow plants which were
planned from the start on suitable lines, including the use of electricity
for many purposes which would otherwise have been gas-heated and so on.
The proportion of energy recovered is about half the average total consump-
tion of the works, so that no great problem has been encountered in connection
with the provision of special cables, or any commercial or political issue
in the utilisation of this amount of power; but as explained in Chapter 1
the scale of British output in the future is not likely to be comparable
with the American.
4C-2.03 Types of Equipment. There are several possible electrical methods
available. -Or these it is considered that the eddy current driven alter-
nator scheme is the best all round, the incorporation of electronic auto-
matic engine speed control being regarded as the most important development
in this field. This device will not only get over any tendency to
instability, thus facilitating both development and production testing, but
will also enable electrical indication and recording of the output to be
translated into engine output by simple proportion of speeds.
In oases where an alternator will not initially be installed it would
be preferable for the eddy current machine to be of the coupling type with
locking brake included, rather than plain dynamometer, to enable power
recovery to be adopted later if required. A measure of standardisation of
equipment can thereby be effected. Torque weighing should be adapted for
this arrangement.
40-2.04 Other means of Rawer Recovery. In addition to the general conclusions
given in Chapter 1, it is also considered that close attention should be
given to the possibility of saving ooal by other means than generating
electricity. It may be possible by running eddy current machines at
higher temperatures, and with other suitable fluids, to deliver a higher
grade heat which might be utilised in the works or offices adjacent to the
test plant, and so effect a direct saving of fuel in furnaces.
CHATTER 3 - METHODS Off ABSORBING ENGINE PQWER
4C-3*ol Propeller. The testing of an engine in conjunction with a suitable
propeller in a test cell equipped for the measurement of speed, torque,
airflow etc. is a natural choice for some types of test. The engine
power is invariably wholly dissipated, but it is usual to obtain cooling
from the air stream.
4C-3.02 Hydraulic Dynamometer or Brake. A Froude dynamometer, with means for
weighing torque reaction, has up to recently been the most common test
equipment. The power is dissipated by running the water to drain, or by
cooling towers with a dosed system in cases where softening treatment is
required to minimise scaling and reduce maintenance.
40-3*03 hydraulic Coupling with Electrical Generator. A synchronous A.C.genera-
tor operates at the system "frequency, voltage and phases. Power is only
returned to the electrical system at propeller shaft speeds above
synchronism, as the generator can only run at the synchronous speed. Con-
sequently a hydraulic slipping clutch is introduced to take care of the
difference in speed and dissipate power equal to the ratio of the slip to
the engine speed times the engine output. The synchronous speed of the
alternator should be chosen to give the best compromise between delivery of
no power at speeds below synchronism and the loss of more power as the


engine speed is increased. The choioe must be partly governed by the normal
programme of engine test speeds, the relative times spent at those speeds
.and the engine speed-output characteristic as well as the economics of the
generator design in relation to speed. On 60 o/s Amerioan supply system
a synchronous speed of 900 r.p.m. is usual, although 720 may be adopted.
A speed of 750 r.p.m. would be suitable for British 50 c/s supply. For
this purpose engine speeds are considered in terms of propeller speed as the
output is taken through the reduction gears.
In operation, the A.C. machine would be started from the supply line
either direct on line (American practice) or through starting reactor or
transformer (British practice) and used to motor the engine for starting.
This was the first method used for large scale regeneration and was
introduced at Pratt & Whitney several years ago with General Electric
alternators etc., and is at present extensively used in the newer Ford
plant. This involves the use of a large number of individual oil cooling
radiators to dissipate the heat from the hydraulic couplings. Descrip-
tions of the coupling and oil coolers are given at Item No.l of the
Appendix.
4C-3.04 Eddy Current Dynamometer or Brake. Operational difficulties led to the
introduction ofthe eddy ourrent type, designed by tne Dynamatic
Corporation of Kenosha, Wisconsin and manufactured also in Britain by
Fig. 1 . Eddy current dynamometer.
Heenan and Froude. In this type, illustrated in Fig.l, the hydraulic
impellor is replaoed by a cast steel rotor, with radial polar teeth to the
full axial length, which rotates inside a oast iron eddy current stationary
armature ring or drum, with circumferential water channels on the outside for
Fig. 2. Torque curves of eddy current
dynamometer.
dissipation of heat. Also
surrounding the armature
drum are one, or usually
more, field exciting coils
00-axial with the rotor,
and having a fixed mag-
netic cirouit to complete
an inductor system of which
the flux, varied by the
driven rotor, generates
eddy currents in the arma-
ture drum producing a
corresponding magnetic
torque reaction. This
reaction is weighed by a
balance in the usual dyna-
mometer manner. A des-
criptive bulletin D.l of
this dynamometer is given
at Item N 0.2 of the


Appendix from which it will be seen that an engine turning motor can be
incorporated for running-in, starting or measuring friction. Bynamatio
eddy current dynamometers are used by practically all the aero engine
makers in America and Britain, but not being regenerative, involve the
usual employment of circulating water cooling systems of either open or
closed circuit according to oiroumstanoes, but requiring much less
maintenance from wear than the water impellor type, as well as being of
more simple and rugged design and construction. Direct current for the
magnet coils is conveniently obtained from metal rectifiers and regula-
tion of this current controls the torque transmitted. The development
of automatic speed control is dealt with later. Typical torque curves
are given in Pig. 2.
40-3*03 Eddy Current Coupling with Generator. This has a better torque-
transmitting characteristic than other forms of slipping dutch. Normally
Fig. 3. Torque curves of eddy
coupling.
the armature of the eddy
current unit is allowed to
rotate, instead of having
its reaction balanced as
in the dynamometer, and
drives a synchronous
generator operating as
described in 3*03. In
addition a brake is fitted
on the secondary rotating
system so that the coupling
can act as a brake below
synchronous speeds.
Typical torque curves are
given in Pig. 3. A
2,000 h.p.coupling is
shown in Pig. 4. A des-
criptive bulletin N 0.3 is
given at Item N 0.3 of the
Appendix.
At the Buick Plant, Melrose Park, Chicago forty-one sets of this equip-
ment are in use and a further
twenty-eight are being added.
The couplings are by the Byna-
matic Corporation with rotor
locking brakes operated by com-
pressed air. Generators are
by Allis Chalmers, General
Electric and Westinghouse, some
operating at 0.8 p.f. and some
at unity, these latter being
also used for improvement of
total works power factor by
running as synchronous conden-
sers when not all required for
engine tests. The Buiok •
engineers are very enthusiastio
about this method of testing
production engines, partly be-
cause of the speed control
arrangements which are dealt
with later.
Fig. 4. 2,000 h.p. eddy current
coupling.
40-3*06 Dual Eddy Current Brake and Generator Drive. In a proposed Heernan & Froude
development, the armature drum is trunnioned and coupled to the engine and
the rotor coupled to that of the alternator, whose stator would in turn be
connected to the case of the eddy current member and adapted for the weighing
of torque reaction. The object of this arrangement would be to accept up
to, say 4,000 h.p. from the engine, all of which could be absorbed by the
eddy current member as a brake or any desired proportion of which oould be
taken through the alternator regeneratively, up to its designed rating.
This would allow maximum effioienoy of recovery to be obtained with moderate
capital cost for say, a present 2,000 h.p. engine, and enable the plant to


be continued in use for a larger engine when required, with or without
additional alternator capacity. It is understood that this method has not
yet been technically agreed with the Dynamatic Corporation as Licensors.
A blue print of the proposed arrangement is given at Item 4 of the Appendix.
4C-3.07 Wound Rotor Induction Generator. General Electric have made a case for
the use of induction generators either singly or in a pair for a contra-
propeller drive* and with no clutch be-
tween the propeller shaft and the genera-
tor. This is given in Item N 0.6 of the
Appendix. This method amounts to a
refined combination of electromagnetic
coupling and generator, since a squirrel
cage rotor would correspond to the eddy
current unit, but with a wound rotor the
slip currents can be led out of the
machine to be dissipated in a resistor
instead of requiring water cooling in
the brake. This condition applies both
below and above synchronous speed, but
the proportion of useful power is that
obtained from the stator, as in the case
of the synchronous machine with the
difference here that the slip takes
place electrically and the generator
only returns power when the rotor is
driven above synchronism. Fig.s shows
a schematic diagram of a dual asyn-
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of
dual asynchronous generators.
chronous generator, and speed torque characteristic curves are given in
Fig. 6.
This method is advocated principally for the case in which several
propeller gear ratios have to be taken care of, but owing to the fixed
Fig. 6. Torque curves of
asynchronous generator.
synchronous speed, low re-
generative efficiencies are
obtained. The logical
conclusion in such circum-
stances is that pole
changing should have been
included to give alternative
synchronous speeds for the
different gear ratios.
The proportions of power
recovered and lost in the
case of a 2,200 h.p. engine
under arrangements for three
different gear ratios is
given below, together with
the kilowatt hours of energy
per engine based on a
12 hour testing cyole.
Prop. Gear Ratio .35 *4-375 .5625
fo Reoovery 58 47 37
Kw-hrs. per engine 6443 5377 4085
% Loss 42 53 63
Kw-hrs. per engine 4545 5917 7055
4C-3.08 D.C.Dynamometer with Motor Alternator. The maximum return of power can
be obtained by arranging the engine to drive a direct current generator in
the form of a swinging field dynamometer, or two such machines for a oontra
propeller engine. The generator output is fed to a D.C. absorption motor
driving a synchronous generator connected to the system. The arrangement
is reversible in power flow so that engine turning can be effected.
A set of this type by Westinghouse is installed at Buick*s Melrose Park
plant and a somewhat more elaborate one has been recently completed by
English Electric Go., for Napier, London. In the latter, provision is made


for setting the excitation of the D.C. dynamometer machine to corresponding
propeller gear ratios, and the field of the absorption motor is excited to
Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of
dual D.C. dynamometer with
alternator.
reprpduce the propeller power-speed
relationsfiip with several alternative
settings for the index values 2.4*
2.6, 2.8 and 3*o. In the English
Electric scheme these values of ex-
citation in terras of the propeller
law are obtained by a combination of
one exciter output proportional to
the speed and another exciter output
proportional to the square of the
speed. It will be appreciated that
this involves a somewhat complex set
of v A descriptive report
or) the English Electric Go's "Con-
trolled Power" system is given at
Item No. 7of the Appendix. A schematic diagram for a contra-rotating set
is given at Pig. 7.
CHAPTER 4 - SPEED CONTROL
40-4*ol General. Accurate speed control of an engine on teat is necessary to
ensure uniform routine in production and also tc obtain satisfactory data
from development tests. The normal torque-speed charaoteristics of. aero
engines, propellers, hydraulic brakes and eddy current dynamometers are all
somewhat different, the greatest similarity being between the fixed pitch
propeller and the hydraulic brake.
4C-4-*O2 Electronic Control. With the eddy
current drive, torque absorbed can
be controlled by adjusting the field
magnetising current and this in turn
can be used to regulate the engine
speed. Manual operation is unde-
sirable but an effective automatic
means has been developed with elec-
tronic equipment. A basic diagram
and a more explanatory circuit
diagram are given at Pigs.B and 9»
The magnet current is derived
from the output of a single or
double pair of gas filled grid con-
trolled rectifiers. In this type
of electronic tube or thermionic
valve the flow of rectified current
is effective during the half cycle
when its anode is positive to
cathode, but the point of "firing"
at which current begins to flow can
be delayed by keeping the control
grid potential sufficiently nega-
tive. A feature of this tube is
Fig.8. Basic diagram of
electronic speed control.
that ono© current is flowing the grid potential loses control until the
alternating supply pressure returns to zero at the half cycle, which occurs
100 times a second on 50 c/s mains. Accordingly the grid potentials of the
output valves are controlled by a pilot generator whose output pressure
is sensitive to any variation in speed, and a combination of potentiometers
for supplying biasing potential for setting the desired engine speed.
This form of speed control can be applied equally well to an eddy
current dynamometer or to a coupling transmitting power to a generator for
power recovery, A useful working description written by H.M.Prottengeier,
electrical engineer at Buick Plant, Melrose Park, Chicago, is given in
Chapter 6 and a more detailed study in Dynaraatio ‘Power Recovery Testing
System* is given at Item No, Bof the Appendix. It is understood that
recent developments w.ill enable the propeller characteristics to be
simulated if required for development tests.


4.C-4-03 D.C. Systems. In the D.C. electrical dynamometer systems the special
exciter machines are designed to reproduce the propeller torque-speed
characteristics‘rather than to hold the engine speed at any setting
automatically.
CHAPTER 5 - RELATIVE MERITS OF TESTING PLANT AID METHODS
4-0-s*ol General* The requirements for production testing and development work
will largely determine the method most suited for a particular installation,
since the former calls for the minimum of observations and attention
combined with the best prospects of useful power recovery, while the latter
necessitates close attention to performance and may render effective power
recovery difficult to organise and of doubtful economy. For reference
purposes, a copy of M.A.P. specification DED.2OOO Part A giving require-
ments for type approval tests is given at Item ITo. 10 of the Appendix, and
schedules of production tests in operation at various American Plants are
given in the Appendix to Bart A of this Section.
In any case where electrical power recovery is required, the produc-
tion and cost, particularly in man-hours, of electrical generators is
involved and therefore the more simple methods employing the minimum of
direct current machines would be preferred. Moreover normal types of A.C.
machines, whether synchronous or induction type, would have a post war
value, and the foraer should be suitable for operating at unity or a lead-
ing power factor as a motor for best resale value.
In one or two larger new engine production plants about half the total
electrical power required is obtained by recovery from the test stands
operated on the most favourable schedules. In such cases the electrical
supply authorities have welcomed this generation of useful power owing to
the restrictions in force on extensions of their own plant. They axe,
however, not prepared to pay for any margin of power delivered into their
networks should occasion arise when the test bed generation exceeds the
demand of the engine factory. It must not be overlooked that the cost of
generating electricity on the test stands must in any case be greater than
in a modem power station, but it was found impossible to obtain specific
costs since the engine firms decline to publish this information, if in
fact they can actually adduce, it. Both the economic and the technical
aspects are considered in "power Generation by Aircraft Engines" by
R.L. Findley of Westinghouse Electrical Co. , given at Item No. 11 of the
Appendix.
• >
A study of some of the general considerations of power recovery in
engine testing has been made by Messrs. Wilfred Ratcliffe and Charles Hayes
(of Heenan and Froude, Worcester) in America at the same time as the Fedden
* Mission. The Mission had the advantage of conferring with them, and a
copy of their observations is given at Item No. 12 of the Appendix. Their
conclusions are believed to be a fairly close reflection of the opinion of
British aero engine test engineers, and the following is quoted from their
observations:
"In wartime especially, it is of the highest importance that the test
plant should enable engines to be dealt with as expeditiously as possible
and with the minimum amount of skilled personnel. The detailed design of
any particular plant is naturally governed by the test schedule with which
the engines have to conply and on this point there are major differences
between British and American practice which have considerable influence on
the type of plant used. In general, the American procedure permits the use
of a simple power-absorbing equipment without the provision of torque-
weighing gear, whereas British test schedules demand that accurate torque
readings shall be measured.
It is common practice in America to use test units having no torque-
measuring equipment and to determine the engine output by measurement of
the manifold pressure. The users of this system claim an accuracy of
plus or minus 2 %, and the U.S. Government authorities accept test results


obtained in this manner. In the absence of precise comparative tests, the
writers are not able to state what degree of accuracy is obtainable, but
doubt very much if it is as high as is claimsd. However, it should be
noted that the acceptance of test conducted in this manner makes possible
the adoption of considerably more simple test equipment with consequent
economy in money, skilled labour, material and construction time. The
retention of the more elaborate plant for use in carrying out research and
development work and for type-testing is undoubtedly essential in all cases”.
The relative merits and demerits from the engineering standpoint, of
the various power recovery schemes described in Chapter 3 are summarised
as follows:-
\ .
4C-5*02 Propeller. Although not regenerative, this method is capable of supply-
ing the cooling air required by the engine. The cost of civil engineering
for the test cells may be considerable in some cases.
40-5*03 Hydraulic Brake. The hydraulic brake is not regenerative, and seems to
have reached the limit of its power and speed range for the familiar design,
owing to the excessive wear at the very high water speeds now met with.
40-5*04 Hydraulic Coupling with Generator. The oil hydraulic coupling method of
driving alternators is simple, and therefore applicable for production
plants. The use of a number of separate oil cooler systems is a dis-
advantage and in a large plant using this method it is surprising that some
method of utilising the waste heat in the oil has not been adopted. It is
not susceptible to electronic speed control with its several advantages.
40-5*05 Eddy Current Brake. The eddy current brake or dynamometer by itself is
not regenerative, but when fitted with electronic speed control would be.
very near the ideal from the test engineer’s point of view for development
testing and for normal British production.
40-5*06 Eddy Current Coupling with Generator. For large specialised ”Shadow”
plants, the use of the eddy current coupling driving a generator in parallel
with the supply mains and fitted with electronic speed control for the
engine represents the ideal. This is the method in use on a large scale
by Buick for one type of engine, but their system is open to the criticism
that reliance only upon manifold pressure does not guarantee that every
engine is up to standard. It would however, be relatively simple and not
very costly to provide a torque weighing balance.
40-5*07 Wound Rotor Induction Generator. In the plant being laid down for the
Dodge-Chrysler Chicago works the slip power from the rotor circuit is to be
* dissipated by air blast through resistor cubicles and in the case of the
higher propeller gear ratios to be catered for, this power is 5!>% or 63 \%
of the total. It would, therefore, seem worth an attempt to utilise this
power, possibly in high grade heat for a manufacturing or other purpose.
The ratio of stator recoverable power to rotor waste power could also
be improved by pole changing in such a case. The amount of power wasted
in the rotor circuit when running at low speeds is probably not considerable,
but must be partly drawn from the mains in this portion of the test schedule
owing to the necessity to use rotor resistance for slow running.
A more important point is the inherently low power factor of this,
system necessitating close attention to the reduction of the Yfattless
K.V.A. demand under the usual supply tariff, which would necessitate
condensers or other phase-advancing plant.
*
40-s*oB D.C. Dynamometer with Motor Alternator. The D.G. dynamometer operating
on the Tfard Leonard principle is a serious effort on the part -of electrical
engineers to reproduce all the requirements of engine testing together 'with
the maximum degree of power recovery. The plant is relatively easy to
operate, but the manufacture of a considerable amount of electrical switch-
gear and machinery is involved, which could certainly not be produced in
Britain on a large scale in time for urgent war purposes including the
saving of fuel, and if produced would probably not redeem its cost during
its effective life. Maintenance would also be a considerable factor owing


to the number of D.G. machine... included in each set. An interesting
feature of the English .Electric scheme is tiie incorporation of acceleration
and deceleration control to reduce the effect of inertia of the electrical
machines to about that of the corresponding propeller. A disadvantage is
the large amount of. floor space required for machines and switchgear.
CHAPTER 6 - THE BUICK ARRANGEMINTS AT [?]LROSE PARK, CHICA CHICAGO.
4-C-6.01 I/lain Plant* The staff employed to maintain the apparatus comprise only
three electronic electricians and two plant electricians who also do noraal
inaintenance of the engine cooling electric fans etc. The engine test staff
carry out all the switching operations. A blue print of thm line circuit
diagram for a set of this test plant is given at Item b 0.13.13 of the Appendix.
The arrangements for quick changing of engines are particularly inter-
esting. The test stands have been fitted with all the necessary pipe
connections, brought out to gusset plates on either side, and the connec-
tions on the stand itself are wade to the engine in the preparation shwe
before brought to the test cell. In this way the actual change of
engine on the test cell can be effected normally in 15 minutes, and has
been carried out in as short a time as 12 minutes. This arrangement un-
doubtedly maxes for the most efficient flow of engines the test
stage.
The equipment is. fully protected by electrical interlocking,, the .re by
rendering the operation fool-proof and ensuring the correct routine being
followed. Tor example:-
(i) The whole plant is shut down (or prevented from starting up; if
the exhaust fan fails (or has not been started;*
(ii) The alternator cannot be run up electrically unless the coupling
brake is released and the coupling de-energised. The coupling
cannot be'energised after the alternator has started, until the
alternator is synchronised and excited.
(iii) The coupling cannot be energised until cooling water pressure is
adequate and the speed control tubes have been switched on and
wanned up for one minute.
A summary of the operation is given below, a full description being
included in Item No. 14 of the Appendix.
(i) The coupling is de-energised and the alternator put on the line
at 900 r. p.m. (900 r.p.m. is the synchronous speed of the
alternator, talcing its drive through the coupling from the
propeller shafts).
(ii) Operation of the speed control energises the coupling and the
engine is cranked with the necessary amount of slip.
(iii) Ignition is switched on, and when the engine is running the
coupling is de-energised, the alternator switched off and
allowed to stop.
(iv) The air brake is applied to hold the alternator stationary to
r allow the coupling to function purely as a brake.
(v; Tiie engine test is carried out up to 900 r.p. m. on the brake.
(vi; The coupling is de-energiseu and the engine throttled dam.
(viij The air crake is released and tne coupling energised, so that the
* engine drives the alternator.
(viii) Nngine and alternator are run up to 900 r.p.m. and the alternator
put on line.
A /


(ix) The engine test is completed above 900 r.p.m.
(x) The engine is throttled down to 900 r.p.m., the coupling de-
energised and the engine throttled down and stopped, leaving
the alternator on line.
It should be noted that when ■cne coupling is energised the engine speed
is set by the electronic speed control described below.
40-6.02 Speed Control. The excitation of the magnetic coupling is obtained from
an electronic direct current supply. The field of the coupling is in the
output circuit of a pair of gas filled grid controlled tubes, so connected
that full wave rectification of the A.C. source is effected. These two
tubes furnish the basic field excitation to the magnetic coupling.
With engine throttle set slightly below any given engine test speed, a
basic control potentiometer is adjusted to keep these tubes firing. This
Fig. 9. Circuit diagram of electronic speed control.
potentiometer, across the filtered output of a small rectifier circuit, is
connected in the grid circuit of these tubes and keeps a basic amount of
field excitation on the coupling. This is not critical but serves to keep
the engine and alternator coupled.
A second similar tube i 3 placed in parallel with each of the above
described basic current tubes. This second pair of tubes are the speed
control tubes. They obtain an adjustable grid control potential from a
second potentiometer across the output of the rectifier mentioned above •
This potentiometer can be adjusted .to bring the speed control tubes into,
or keep them out of control. When the basic field is first applied, this
speed control potentiometer is adjusted to prevent speed control tube
operation.
With the speed control potentiometer adjusted to raise this negative
grid potential to any point where it crosses the critical grid potential
of the tube, each tube will fire during the last quarter cycle of positive
anode voltage and any point on the first quarter cycle can be selected to
begin firing. However no point on the last quarter cycle can be selected
to start firing the tube as the controlled D.C. grid potential will cross
the critical grid at the half way point in the half cycle.


By super-imposing a rider wave on the potentiometer controlled grid
bias, it is possible to start the tube firing at any point on the half
cycle wave of anode voltage. This low voltage A• C. rider wage lags the
anode voltage by 90° and it is obtained by means of a Scott Tee connected
transformer arrangement.
The speed tubes have a second source of grid potential, obtained from
an Alnico speed governing generator, which is connected to the input shaft
of the magnetic coupling. This A. C, generator has a wide direct
variation of voltage within a narrow range of speed variation. The A.C.
potential generated is stepped up, rectified and filtered, before intro-
duction into the grid circuit of the speed tubes.
Y/hen the speed control potentiometer is adjusted to bring the speed
control tubes into operation, the following action takes place. An
increase of a few r.p.m. of engine input speed, increases the positive D.C.
potential of the. governor generator output, which is introduced into the
grid circuit. This has the effect of automatically raising the constant
negative grid bias, as determined by the setting of the speed control
potentiometer, toward zero cathode or positive grid potential and causes
the tube to fire. This tends to increase excitation of the coupling
momentarily and, so to speak, stiffen the clutch. As the alternator
speed cannot change, and increased excitation reduces slip, the engine
speed will decrease. In like manner a decrease of engine speed, with
governor in operating control, will decrease excitation of the coupling
and cause engine speed to pick up.
After adjusting the speed control potentiometer to any pre-determined
engine crank 3haft speed, it is possible to reduce greatly the basic
excitation control. The governor will still automatically hold the engine
speed constant because of the extremely rapid, sensitive response of the
control circuit.
It becomes apparent that, after setting the speed control at a given
3peed setting, the operator can adjust the throttle to any setting he
wishes. The engine will hold its pre-determined speed, and deliver any
power to the coupling, up to the capacity of the engine at the speed held,
depending on the throttle setting chosen.


APPENDIX
LIST OF DOCUMENTS BTC. , BROUGHT PROM AMERICA
1. Hydraulic Coupling and Oil Cooler: Descriptive Quotation.
2. Bulletin D.l Dynamatio Eddy Current Dynamometers.
\
3. Bulletin N 0,3 Dynamatic Eddy Current Variable Speed Couplings.
2*.. Blue Print of Heenan and Proude combined Eddy Current Brake and
drive for Alternator, with letter dated 15th April, 1943.
5. Pour blue prints of Heenan and Froude contra rotating eddy current
dynamometers with letter dated 12th April, 1943-
6. "Induction Generator Power Recovery System". Reprint from
General Eleotric "Industrial Engineering News".
7. English Electric Co, *s "Controlled Bower Scheme*, Descriptive
pamphlet.
3. Dynamatic "Bower Recovery Engine Testing System" Manual.
9. Dynamatic "Eddy Current Dynamometer" Instruction Book.
10. M.A.P, Specification DSD. 2000 Part A Test Schedule for liquid cooled
engine with two speed gear supercharger.
11. "Power Generation by Aircraft Engines" by R.L.Findley of
ffestinghouse Electrical Co.
12. Observations and correspondence from Ratcliffe and Hayes.
13. Blue Print Circuit Line Diagram for Eddy Current Coupling and
Alternator.
14. Description of Test Stand Control Sequence for Eddy Current
Generator Coupling.
15. Description of Electronic Speed Control System for Eddy Current
Generator Coupling.
16. "Power Recovery System of Testing Aircraft Engines", Reprint from
General Electric "Industrial Engineering News", and leaflet
GEA-3872.
17. A.I.E.E. Technical Paper on "Recovery System of Testing Aircraft
Engines".
18. Letter from 8.A.C., with Bibliography, and Data on Power Recovery
from Buick, Ford and Pratt & Whitney.




ENGINES, POWER PLANTS END PROPELLERS
PART D FUEL AND OIL
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol Reasons for discussion
” 1.02 Availability of improved fuel
” I*o3 Specification of 140 grade fuel
" 1.04 Post-war developments
" I*os Lubricating oils
CHAPTER 2 - PUSL
Item 2*ol • Dye content of 130 grade green fuel
” 2.02 Fuel volatility
,f 2.03 Lead content
" 2*04 140 grade fuel
,f 2*05 Probable availability of 140 grade fuel
” 2o 06 Put ure development s
" 2* 07 Post-war aviation fuels
CHAPTER 3 “ OIL
Item 3*ol Supply position
" 3*02 Detergent oils
" 3«03 Pilm strength dopes
" 3*04 Anti-frothing dopes
APPSUDIX - List of documents brought from America.




PART D FUEL AND OIL
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
klhl.Ol .Reasons for discussion. Fuels and oils were not amongst the
subjects with which the Mission had intended to deal, but
various questions naturally arose in connection with engine
development, and certain aspects directly concerning fuels were
discussed at the request of the authorities at Wright Field and
the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics, and with the Standard Oil
Company.
' V.
4D-1.02 Availability of Improved Fuel. In the opinion of the Mission
the improved fuel known as 140 grade will not be available
before the end of 1944.
Specification of 140 Grade Fuel. As at present intended the
improved fuel will allow a 10:& increase in maximum power which
will be of particular advantage to fighter aircraft. It will
not allow any increase in the economical cruising power which
is so desirable on certain bombers.
It is recommended that this specification should be
reviewed in relation to estimated 1944 operational requirements
in regard to the desirability of increasing economical cruising
powers at some possible loss in fuel production.
4D-1.04 Post-war Developments. Imnediately after the war fuels of
increased rating will be available. By the time that engines
can be developed to take advantage of them, it is believed that
fuels permitting an increase in specific power of 40£ will be made
available.
4D-1.05 Lubricating Oils. It is not expected that there will be any
great improvement in the lubricating oil available for service
use during the war. It is probable that the main technical
advances will be the introduction of inhibitors against ring
gumming or bearing corrosion. These will be used to improve
oils made from inferior stocks and so ease the supply position.




CHAPTER 2 - FUEL
4D-2.01 Dye Content of 130 Grade G-reen Fuel. Some trouble was experienced on
Allison engines with dye deposits choking the backfire dampers when modifica-
tions were made reducing the oil consumption of the blower to a negligible
amount. Since then these dampers have been removed, but in view of the
latest developments by Packard on the Merlin 61 blower which have made the
induction system absolutely free of oil, Wright Field are anxious not to
increase the dye content of the green fuel. It is thought that deposits
in the after dooler and blower may also occur.
The Allison trouble occurred with the blue fuel containing about 1 gram
per 100 U.S. gallons. The present 130 grade fuel contains 1 gram of blue
dye and 1 gram of yellow dye per 100 U.S. gallons, which gives a green
noticeably lighter than the British 100 octane supplies to which it is
equivalent. It is desired to increase the yellow to 1.5 grams which would
match the fuels and bring the total dye content up to 2.5 grams per 100
gallons.
Tests to see whether this dye content would be suitable on the Merlin
were proposed but had not been made when the Mission left.
4D-2.02 Fuel Volatility. Pratt 8z Whitney and Wrights are both somewhat apprehen-
sive of the proposal to use petrol with a Sor/j point of 150°C as in the
British specification. This seemed to be based mainly on the lack of
experience of this fuel under service conditions and a feeling that the
overhaul period might be affected.
4D-2.03 Lead Content. Both Pratt & Whitney and Wrights are prepared for an
increase of T.E.L. content from 4 to 6 oos per U.S. gallon (i.e. about 7 Qcs
per Imperial gallon). Allison on the other hand oppose any increase in lead
and its introduction appears unlikely.
4D-2.04 140 Grade Fuel. This fuel, which it is hoped will supersede 130 grade
next year, was originally referred to as fighter grade and will allow
approximately a 10;' increase in rich mixture power (by increase of boost)
compared with 130 grade or British "100 octane".
The specification has not yet been finalised and was the subject of a
good deal of discussion particularly in regard to the weak mixture rating.
The rich rating by 30 method is equal to S plus 2 per U.S. gallon.
It is now accepted that this fuel will, when available, be used for both
bombers and fighters, and it was explained that British engines could not
stand any reduction in the full scale weak mixture ratings as compared with
130 grade and that on the contrary a step up in line with the lucrease in rich
mixture rating could be put to immediate use to meet certain operational
requirements. The need for higher weak mixture powers on a fully loaded
Stirling to give sufficient manoeuverability for "jinking" without excessive
fuel consumption was instanced.
The Americans, however, have not found a pressing need on their bombers
for increased cruising powers, as existing ratings allow them to carry the
maximum load permitted by strength factors or take off conditions.
In addition it is considered the 1C weak mixture test method gives bad
correlation and it has been suggested that the 3C ratings at .10 Fuel/Air
ratio gives a good correlation with weak mixture engine the argument
being that fuels which have a high mixture response also have a high response
to changes in R.P.M. American engines cruise at rather lower relative R.P.M.
than British equivalents, and it is possible that this argument is more nearly
or more often true on American engines.
However, '//'rights agree on the need for a weak mixture test in the fuel
specification, and in view of the Mission’s support for this, it is unlikely
that it will be dispensed with. The form of the test can be:-


(1) The present A.S.T.M. 1C test conditions
(2) The AFT) 3C but at some specific weak mixture strength, or by
carrying out a 3C mixture response curve and specifying that
it shall not fall below that of the reference fuel.
(3) Some new test procedure, preferably making use of the AFD 3C
engine.
Since it is unlikely that any test will give equally good correlation
with all full scale engines it is desirable that the weak mixture requirements
of all important British and American engines should be accurately known, and
that any new test should be aimed to give correlation with the most critical
of these engines.
As well as agreeing on a test method, it is necessary that we should
settle the rating.
It is understood that any attempt to go much beyond the equivalent of 130
IC rating will limit the supplies of 140 fuel or in other words delay its
introduction.
The matter should be most carefully considered now in-relation to estimated
operational needs in 1944 to 43 and the relative importance of rich mixture
performance for fighters and higher cruising power for bombers. A decision
heed not, however, be made at once as the high octane fuel plant which is
being put down is very flexible and v/ill produce a wide variety of blending
agents, although the yield varies according to the product'required.
A comparison of a typical 125 grade fuel and the type of blend which will
probably be used for 140 grade is given below.
125 Grade 140 Grade
Composition, Yol. k 0 f 3c Rich- 3C Rich
S+l S + 2
virgin Base 45
Isopentane 11 11
Superfractionation I \\
Hydroformate (200-290°F.) - 18
Aviation Alkylate 44 18
Treated Cat. Cracked C 3 - 12
Heavy Aromatic Cat. Cracked Cut (225-350) - 11
4D-2.G5 probable availability of 140 Grade Fuel,. Doubts were expressed unofficially
to the Mission by several peorjle in the aircraft industry about the chances of
140 grade fuel being introduced next year, or indeed at any time during the war.
Officially, however, the view is that the estimated requirements will be
met. How accurate these estimates are is not known, but aircraft production,
which is a. factor in the potential fuel consumption, is unlikely to reach the
programmed figure.
The main bottlenecks in the equipment of the fuel refineries are
instruments and hig)i pressure valves, rather than steel supplies as was
generally expected. The ship building requirements do not therefore, affect
the issue, but the priorities for synthetic rubber plants do. However, the
rubber programme was planned on the assumption of the loss of Ceylon.
The Mission formed the view that 140 grade fuel would not be available
until the end of 1944*


4D-2.06 Future Developments. Increased interest is being taken in the properties
of Triptane, due to the discovery of what are believed to be practical
methods of producing it in quantity. A pilot plant to manufacture it on a
technical scale is being put up and Wright Field expect it to be available
in tank car quantities next year and possibly available for service use in
three years.
General Motors Laboratory have been testing Triptane and claim that at
zero boost they can use 14*4 : 1 compression ratio with weak mixture.
Wright Field have found it a good blending agent and in the range of
130 rating \% of Triptane will give an increase in rating of 1 number up to
about 15 % after which the increase becomes greater.
Tests are being made with Xylidene and commercial ethers', which are
very powerful blending agents. of Xylidene in 91 octane fuel raises
its rating to 125 grade. It is considered possible that fuels with a
rating of better than 160 grade could be made available for special projects
in a year*s time.
4D-2.07 Post-war Aviation Fuels. It is certain that in the immediate post-war
period the reduction in the consumption of aviation petrol will mean that
there will be a large excess capacity for producing blending agents, and in
order to keep this capacity as fully occupied as possible, fuels of very high
rating will be marketed. As engines become more fully developed to take
advantage of these fuels the rating will be progressively stepped up. Many
of the more powerful types of blending agents have high final boiling points
and as the percentage increases it will become desirable to adopt petrol
injection so as to widen the choice of fuels, even if this is not done for
other reasons.
It is believed that after the war fuels enabling increases in specific
power of k&;o will be available by the time engines are developed to use them
efficiently.
Characteristics of blending agents are given below:-
Characteristics of Aviation Petrol Blending Agents
Boiling Range ASB" ASTft! 3C Rich
% evap. at O.N. Avia. + 4 cc
Description Gray. RVP l67°F 221 u? 293°F Clear +4 cc S + TEL
Isopentane 95 20 100 100 100 90 Iso + 1.2 2.0
Neohexane (Phillips Tech.) 83.7 9.6 95 100 100 - Iso + 2.5 1.9
Neohexane (Isomate Cut) - - _ _ - 90.9 Iso +3.4 2.7
2,3 -Dimethyl Butane 79 8 * * * 95 iso + 1.6 6 +
Propylene Aik. B.A. 74.7 7.0 29 84 93 89 Iso + 0.5 1.1
Butylene Aik. B.A.(a) 74-4 7-0 28 58 100 92.3 Iso + 0.73 3*o (est)
Butylene Aik. B.A. 74-2 7.0 27 58 100 95 Iso + 1.2 3.1 (3-6)
Butylene Aik. B.A.(b) 73*2 7.0 17 56 100 94-4 - 5.0 (est)
Pentylene Aik. B.A. 72.8 7.0 22 38 96 89 Iso + 0.8 1.5
C4/C5 Alkylate B.A. 73*5 7.0 '2l 44 100 92 Iso + 1.0 2.5
C4/C5 Alkylate B.A. 74.0 7.0 19 45 100 93 Iso + 0.8 2.8
Catalytic Pentenes 72.4 7,0 22 42 95 89.1 Iso + 0.63 1.6
Aik B.A.(c)
Catalkylete B.A.(d) 70.8 7.0 47 76 94 83.9 98.7 0.3
Hydro-octane B.A. 73-0 7.0 21 59 100 97.1 Iso + 2.5 2.5
Hydrocodimer B.A. 72 7.3 26 43 100 95.8 Iso + 1.0 7.0
(a) This sample had 3C rating of S +2.4 with 3 cc TEL.
(b) This sample had 3C rating of S + 3.7 with 3 cc TEL and S + 6 + (265 Ref. BSP) with 6 cc TEL.
*
(c) Tinsley feed, 60-110°F.
(d) East Texas high acid heat 60-200°P feed - contains 18£ autogenous 75-ll^ 5 F cut.
+ Boiling point constant at 136°F


CHAFFER 3 - OILS
4D-3.01 Supply Position. The main difficulty is understood to be in getting
adequate supplies of bright stock. The use of lower viscosity oils which
contain a higher percentage of neutral stock, the supply of which is not
orifcical, would help to economise bright stock.
For English winter conditions therefore the use of winter grade oil
is more economical than using summer grade all the year round and relying
on petrol dilution to obtain good starting conditions.
A possible development is to blend oils of low viscosity and then to
use additives to increase their viscosity and visoosity index. Such a
method is not permitted by ourrent U.S. specifications but it is attractive
since it is possible that apart from easing the supply situation it might
lead to the introduction of better oils.
4U-*3*o2 Detergent Oils. A considerable interest is being taken particularly by
Wrights and Pratt and Whitney in detergent oils, and service trials are
being made by the Army.
There is a suggestion that these oils are rather more prone to foam-
ing troubles than straight oils.
Dopes of the paranox type are extensively used for ground vehicles and
permit satisfactory operation with oils blended without bright stock.
4D-3*03 Film Strength Dopes. Wrights in particular are interested in oils con-
taining dopes to inorease the film strength, and say that Dupont 410 is one
of the most successful in reducing piston ring wear and improving
reduction gear condition.
While the possibilities of reducing reduction gear size by the use of
higher duty oils is well appreciated in this country, the Mission felt
that .the use of doped oils cannot be expected to cure the Wright trouble
with piston ring wear which was considered to be due primarily to un-
suitable cylinder bore finish, oombined with excessive operating tempera-
ture due to inadequate barrel cooling.
Both Pratt & Whitney and Wrights are introducing special designs of
cylinders with improved barrel finning which should ease the lubrication
and ring sticking problems. They are dealt with in Part B.
4D-3.04 Anti Frothing Dopes. General Motors Research Laboratory are working on
anti-frothing dopes.
APPENDIX
LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT BACK FROM AM3RIOA
1. Fuel Volatility Studies.
2. Components of Aviation Gasoline and their characteristics.
3. Performance of Aviation Fuels.
4. Aviation Oils.
All the above memoranda were written by the Esso Laboratories Research
Division.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




