

The
AUSTRALIAN'S
FINE RECORD
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS
AND AFTER




The Australians’
Fine Record.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS
AND AFTER.
HOW THE GERMAN TIDE
WAS TURNED.
“ After the severe defeat of August Sth, I gave
up the last vestige of hope."
(LUDENDORFF)
Published by the A.I.P, Publications Section, London.


PRINTED BY PBINTISO-CRAFT, LTD., LONDON.


THE AUSTRALIANS’
FINE RECORD.
“ After the severe defeat of August Sth, I gave up the last
vestige of hope.”
(LUDENDORFF)
THE Australians opened their first war chapter at
Anzac; they closed it East of Amiens. The history
of the Corps during that period is replete with
feats of unparalleled courage and military skill, hut at
no time nor in any theatre of the war has the closing campaign
in front of Amiens been surpassed. For brilliance and bold-
ness of conception, for skill in execution, for efficiency in
organisation, for capable staff work, for bravery and resource on
the part of the rank and file, it is doubtful if any other military
operation in the war bears adequate comparison. The
finest troops in the or Id was the comment made by a
British Officer, whose Division assisted on the Australians left.
The French poilus were equally enthusiastic. The local popula-
tion affectionately call the Australians The Saviours of
Amiens," and propose to erect a memorial to the fallen
Australians in their far-famed Cathedral.
The title accorded by the French is not undeserved. The
onrush of the Huns was so overwhelming that they had
but to maintain their hold upon the heights of Villers-Bretonneux


to advance en masse upon Amiens and completely destroy the
city as they had destroyed Rheims, Albert and so many other
famous towns. That they were foiled was due to Australian
courage and strategy which completely dislodged them from
Villers-Bretonneux and compelled the beginning of a disastrous
and final retreat.
The value of Villers-Bretonneux from a military and
historical point of view is well known to both French and
Germans. In 1870 the German General, Mauteuffel, had
defeated the French troops there and obtained possession of
Amiens. The French General, Faidberbe, marched to the
relief of the city, but fought an indecisive battle at Pont
Noyelles near by, and to-day an obelisk erected by the French
commemorates the occasion. The period covered by the
operations under review was unique in at least one respect.
Prior to June, 1918, the several Australian Divisions had been
associated with various British Corps and Armies in various
localities. In fact during the earliest operations in 1916, whilst
the Ist, 2nd, and 4th Divisions were fighting the memorable
battles which resulted in the capture of Pozieres, the Fifth
Division was fighting, under a different English Army, the
mighty and heroic, yet ineffective battle of Fromelles, while
the Third Division was still undergoing its war training.
A happy inspiration, fraught with the most pregnant and
beneficent results upon the final issue of the war brought, in
May, 1918, all the five Australian Divisions into one Corps,
operating under a distinct Australian command. This in turn
brought into relief those distinctive attributes which have made
the fighting qualities of the Australian soldier famous the world
over. The result has conclusively shewn that effective national
units best obtain complete co-ordination in all their efforts by
operating within their own ranks. It was this co-operation that
accounted in a great part for the extraordinarily brilliant success
that attended these operations.
TRIBUTE FROM BRITISH AUTHORITIES.
The Australian soldier is keen and experienced. He is no
longer a novice at war. He had had his vicissitudes at the
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


hands of the Turk and the Hun; he had seen his mates go
under; but he was not war weary. Prior to 1914 Australia was
the only country in the world that had not been visited by the
horrors of war, but the troops never lost sight of the principles
for which they fought or the reputation their country had
attained. Sincere by nature, they had never sought for or been
misled by lavish praise.
It is also to “ the Diggers’ ” credit that whatever praise has
been showered upon him comes from the enemy and his own
friends —the former by way of warning, the latter by way of
gratitude. Captured Germans Intelligence reports them with
references, by way of adjuration, to ” these first-class assault
troops,” British journalists have exhausted their meed of praise,
and even terse official reports from the Highest Army Command
scarcely refrain from drifting into enthusiasm.
Sir Douglas Haig, for instance, in his latest despatch covering
these operations, referring to the various parts played by the
Australians uses such terms as boldly conceived, brilliant
and predominating,” ” gallant achievement, admirably
executed,” ” completely successful,” “ most admirable, and
summarising the five memorable days from August Bth to 12th,
and speaking of the combined efforts of the Australians and
Canadians, says “ The skill and determination of these troops
proved Irresistible, and at all points met with rapid and com-
plete success.”
What the operations of this victorious campaign meant in
stimulating the morale of the co-operating British troops and
destroying the morale of the enemy is clearly set out in the
Commander-in-Chief’s memorable despatch :
“ The effect of this victory, following so closely after the
Allied victory on the Marne, upon the morale both of
the German and British troops was very great. Buoyed
up by the hope of Immediate and decisive victory, to be
followed by an early and favourable peace, constantly
assured that the Allied reserves were exhausted, the German
soldiery suddenly found themselves attacked on two fronts
and thrown back with heavy losses from large and important
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


portions of their earlier gains. The reaction was inevitable
and of a deep and lasting character.”
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is not less eulogistic. After skilfully
slating the facts, he draws deductions which are extremely
instructive and illuminative : —“ The Australians had never been
involved in a disaster, and they had twice saved the situation
when it had been in an absolutely desperate condition. The first
occasion was about March 26th, at the end of Gough’s retreat,
when his Army, through no fault of his, was disintegrating after
enduring terrible hammer blows for six days in succession. . . .
There was nothing between the Germans and Amiens, and if
the Germans had got that place they would probably have
captured the Channel Ports. But the Australians were there and
the Germans did not capture the Channel Ports. When the
British resumed the offensive the Australians, in their victorious
career, captured Mont St. Quentin. Standing on that
hill one would think a rabbit could not get up it. How the
Australians ever got up there and put the Germans out was a
marvel
THE PERSONNEL.
The purely personal equation, from the highest to the lowest,
necessarily enters into the launching and execution of a great
military enterprise. From the beginning to the end of these
thrilling months of warfare the Australian Corps was commanded
by Lieut.-General Sir John Monash, who was not only with the
original Australian Gallipoli expedition, but whose name is
perpetuated in the topography of that brilliant but fateful
peninsula enterprise. A typical Australian, his intellect and
capacity for quick and effective decision secured the loyal
co-operation of his brother-Generals and his staff; his considera-
tion for the interests and the personal welfare of the men, who
are ever quick to perceive such qualities in the higher command,
led to complete trust and esteem. The General knows “ the
Digger ” off by heart, thoroughly understands his nature, and
has his unbounded confidence. Perhaps his distinguishing trait
is his recognition of ability amongst the juniors. When asked
by an English journalist about the Australian Army and its
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


efforts, he said: “ Our success is due in large part to the
devotion and skill of our junior officers. Of these 95 per cent,
are from the ranks. We have a democratic army. We were
told that our system of wholesale promotion from the ranks would
deprive us of an officer caste, and that this would be a bad
thing. We have found the exact contrary to be the truth. Our
democratic system has been a success in every particular. By
opening the way to ambition it has stimulated ambition, and we
have reaped the benefit of the enterprise of ambitious men.
There is only one doorway into our commissioned service now,
and that doorway is through the ranks. Many of our junior
officers who rose from privates have been dazzling successes.
Two of them have won the V.C., the D. 5.0., and the M.C.,
with a bar to each, thus doubling the highest honours in the
service. In the whole Australian Army at this moment there
is only one brigadier whose regular profession is that of soldier-
ing, The others are so-called citizen or civilian soldiers, like
the officers of the American Slate Militia.”
With Sir John Monash were associated men whose names are
not alone familiar to the British public, but whose exploits are
the pride and admiration of the Australian people. In the
particular enterprises here described, the Divisional Commanders
were :
Major-Gen. T. W, Glasgow, Ist Australian Division.
Major-Gen. Sir C. Rosenthal, 2nd Australian Division.
Major-Gen, J. Gellibrand, 3rd Australian Division.
Major-Gen. E. G, Sinclair Maclagan, 4th Australian
Division.
Major-Gen. Sir J. J. Talbot Hobbs, sth Australian
Division.
In the Corps General Staff Branch the following Officers were
responsible for giving effect to the magnificently conceived and
altogether successful enterprises:—Brigadier-General T. A.
Blarney, Lieut.-Cols. Ross and McColl, Major R. G. Casey,
and Major S. A. Hunn.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


The whole world, civil and military, is interested to learn of
every contribution to the mighty effort which brought about the
final overthrow of the Hun. Up to the present the distinctive
and authoritative Australian aspect has not been presented. Sir
Douglas Haig’s despatch, although extremely commendatory—
none more so —is necessarily partial and restrictive. His survey
was too large, his scheme of vision too broad to permit of
any adequate representation of the part played by the Australian
Army Corps. I have had the great advantage of perusing the
official documents relating to this part of the campaign, and am
happily able to give an authentic account of the operations
which, it is hoped, will prove of permanent interest and historic
value.
The particular period under review starts from August Bth,
when the Australians were in front of Villers-Bretonneux, and
concludes on October 6th, when the Beaurevoir defences, and
Montbrehain were captured, after which, the decisive result
having been achieved, the Australians were relieved and allowed
a very well-deserved and much appreciated rest.
The arrangement of this battle story is split up for convenience
into five distinct phases to enable the reader more readily to
perceive the salient features of the campaign and to grasp the
causes and effects of the various operations. These phases are
as follows :
PHASE “ A.”—Bth August, in front of Villers-Bretonneux.
Phase “ B.”—From 9th to 15th August.
PHASE “ C.”—lsth August to 4th September, Advance to
the Somme and Capture of Mont St. Quentin
and Peronne.
Phase “ D.”—4th to 20th September:—
(i.) The German Retreat.
(ii.) Capture of Hindenburg Advanced
System.
PHASE “ E.”—2oth September to 6th October, Capture of
the Main Hindenburg Line and of
Beaurevoir and Montbrehain.
THE AUSTRALIANS' FINE RECORD
THE OFFICIAL ACCOUNT.


PHASE “A.”
The result of the long series of minor operations undertaken by
the Australian Corps from Villers-Bretonneux to the Ancre
River during April, May and June, 1918, had given
the Corps a decided moral superiority over the enemy. The
most significant and important of these preliminary and prepara-
tory operations was the Battle of Hamel, fought on July 4th.
It was the first offensive on any substantial scale, undertaken by
any Allied Force in any theatre, since the outbreak of. the
German onslaught in the early Spring of 1918. It was
experimental, and it was a full-dress rehearsal for what was to
follow. The whole of this splendid little operation was con-
ceived and executed by the Australian Corps it introduced
new tactics and new applications of the latest tanks, aeroplanes
and other weapons. It was an unqualified victory, inflicting
severe damage upon the enemy at trifling cost. Its moral effect
upon the Allies and upon the enemy was startling and decisive.
The absence of any enemy reaction, the general condition of the
prisoners captured in this operation and subsequent minor
operations on the Villers-Bretonneux Front, and the condition
of the enemy defences on the Corps Front, led the
Corps Commander to the conclusion that operations on a much
larger scale on this portion of the front would lead to consider-
able results.
The Fourth Army Commander was therefore approached with
a view to carrying out considerably extended operations. The
conclusions drawn fortunately coincided with those already
arrived at by him, and arrangements were put in hand to attack
the enemy in great force on the important Front between the
Luce and the Ancre.
The position allotted to the Australian Corps was in the
centre, die Canadian Corps on the right, and the 3rd Corps on
the left. The Australian front extended from the Amiens-
Nesle Railway east of Villers-Bretonneux north to the Somme
Canal.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


These magnificent “ assault troops ” —to use the German
phrase—were to attack on a front of two Divisions and in three
phases; there was to be no preliminary bombardment or alteration
in the normal conditions of trench warfare before the battle, and
every effort was to be made to ensure secrecy as to the operation
prior to zero hour.
The first phase entailed the attack of the enemy s main position
by the Second Division on the right and the Third Division on
the left, under an artillery barrage and with the assistance of
tanks. These Divisions were to penetrate an average depth
of 3,600 yards, and pass beyond the enemy’s main line of field
artillery.
The second phase consisted of the Fifth and Fourth Divisions
(right and left respectively) moving through the Second and
Third Divisions, and advancing to the second objective, a
penetration of from 2,500 yards to 5,000 yards. This advance
was to be carried out in open warfare—(a form of warfare the
Australians were remarkably proficient in and fond of) —without
a barrage.
The third phase comprised the exploiting of the success already
gained by the Fourth and Fifth Divisions, and the seizing by
them of the old British defence lines between Morcourt
and Marcelcave. The capture and consolidation of this
line was the final limit laid down for exploitation, as far as
could be determined prior to the action.
The experience gained at the Battle of Hamel had brought
to light what were the best means for employing tanks to over-
whelm the enemy’s resistance with a minimum of casualties to
the infantry, and the methods of co-operation between artillery,
tanks and infantry employed in that battle were, therefore,
taken as a model for the operation of the Bth of August.
The success of the means adopted prior to the Hamel
operation to ensure secrecy also led to similar means being
repeated and extended.
The first knowledge of the battle plan was confined to the
Corps Commander and the Chief of Corps General Staff. A
little later, when the preparation of the artillery plans became
necessary, the G.0.C., R.A., was informed. Then Staffs and
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


Formations were informed as late as possible, but in ample time
to ensure that complete preparation could be made. All Com-,
manders received strict injunctions that, as far as possible, no
subordinates were to know of the contemplated operations until
action was required by them, and above all that troops detailed
to continue garrison duty in the line should have no intimation of
the action before the day prior to the attack.
One of the main difficulties in maintaining secrecy was the time
required for getting forward supplies. This particularly applied
to the assembling of large quantities of ammunition for the
opening of a set-piece operation. Time was essential for the
getting of it from the base and from railhead to the gun positions.
To overcome this, authority was obtained to increase the dumped
ammunition to 600 rounds per gun, and reasons were assigned
which did not suggest that operations on a large scale were
contemplated.
The wisdom of this course was soon shewn in a remarkable
way. On the night before the battle a post of the Fourth
Division in the vicinity of the Roye-Amiens Road had been
captured by a small enemy raid and prisoners taken by them.
As a result of the policy of secrecy these troops were not in a
position to reveal the fact that operations were proposed. It
should be stated, however, that later information obtained from
captured enemy documents showed that those prisoners could not
be induced to give any military information at all.
The date selected for the operation was the Bth August. The
first intimation had been given to Divisions at a conference held
by the Corps Commander on 31st July. At his second confer-
ence, on 4th August, all Commanders were required to state
their full plans, all outstanding points at issue were decided, and
final decisions affecting the operation given. The Corps Com-
mander laid it down that on no account should any alterations be
permitted in the plans as then approved. The result was that
Divisional and other Formation Commanders were able to set
about completing the whole of their detailed arrangements, and
felt confidence that there would be no harassing alterations.
The operations in view differed from similar operations carried
out in 1916 and 1917 in the following main particulars :
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


(a) Every possible effort was made to obtain surprise, both
strategically and tactically, and it was, therefore, determined that
there should be no preliminary bombardment or attempt at
destruction of the enemy defence systems.
( b) Careful concealment of our intentions, prohibition of move-
ment by day in back and forward areas and the careful policing
of the Corps area by observers in aeroplanes to ensure that this
was being carried out.
(c) Emplacement of a large proportion of artillery within 2,000
yards of the front line which enabled the advance to be covered
by an effective barrage to a depth of 4,000 yards into enemy
country.
(d) No registration of guns in new positions. This was made
possible by a new system of careful calibration of all guns as
new artillery came into the Corps area.
(e) The employment of a large proportion of smoke shells in
the barrage to enable the infantry to appear suddenly before
the enemy defences and rush them before the enemy was able
to realise what was happening.
(/) The employment of tanks. A new method of their
employment worked out by the Australian Corps had been tested
at Hamel, and it was determined to use light infantry skirmish-
ing lines and so conserve the infantry strength.
(g) The 17th Armoured Car Battalion of the Tank Corps was
also placed at the disposal of the Australian Corps Commander
and was given an independent mission to move direct against
enemy centres of communication, headquarters, etc. Its
operations were brilliantly successful, and its exploits read like
a tale of the old days. The full value of the action of this
Battalion will not be known until the German story comes to
light, but from such enemy reports as have come to hand it
undoubtedly had a most disturbing effect on the enemy’s rear
communications.
In view of the distance to which it was proposed to penetrate
and of the great depth of the infantry formations throughout the
attack, it was essential to organise the assembly of infantry units
in such a manner as to reduce the fatigue of the troops detailed
to the capture of the most distant objectives to a minimum.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


The assembly was accomplished without hindrance, no difficulty
was found in moving the Tanks to their positions and the infantry
were formed up during the darkness on their respective tape
lines without difficulty.
The method employed of assembling tanks at Hamel was
repeated, and this method has since come to be the recognised
system. Thus during the nights prior to “ Zero ” the tanks
were moved forward to selected concealed lying-up positions as
near as possible to their assembly positions. On the night prior
to “ Zero ” the tanks moved forward under full engines to
about 3,000 yards from the front line. From here the engines
were closed down and the tanks moved forward quietly and
slowly to about 1,000 yards from the front line. From this
starting position the tanks proceeded forward at such an hour
as to ensure that they reached the tape line exactly at Zero
hour. To cover the noise of the tank engines large type
aeroplanes with noisy engines flew continuously over the area.
An untoward incident marked the assembly of the tanks. One
Company of carrying-tanks allotted to the Fifth Division had
occupied its lying-up position in the orchard North of
Villers-Brettoneux. On the late afternoon of the 7th
August a chance enemy shot set fire to one of these tanks.
The enemy promptly brought the whole of this area under
heavy fire and destroyed nearly the whole of this Company of
tanks and their loads.
The incident created some uneasiness as to whether the enemy
had discovered their presence and was aware of the proposed
operations. This, however, did not prove to be the case.
The destruction of the stores which these tanks were carrying
made it necessary to hurry forward additional supplies of water
and engineering material. This difficulty was overcome through
the energetic action of the Staff of the Corps and of the Division
concerned, and all supplies were available for the Division next
morning.
Zero hour was fixed for 4.20 a.m. on the Bth August. The
attack was auspiciously begun. By 5 a.m. information had been
received that the approach marches had been carried out without
a hitch, the attack had started to time, the barrage was excellent
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


and there was practically no enemy artillery retaliation. The
Second and Third Divisions moved forward steadily with the
tanks under the barrage towards their objectives, although a
heavy mist and the smoke and dust of the barrage made
observation very difficult. By 6 a.m. German prisoners began
to stream in, and as far as could be ascertained from them the
attack had come as a complete surprise to the enemy. The first
objective was reached at the same hour, and later the Second
Division reported that Warfusee had been captured. At
6.20 a.m. the Second and Third Divisions had handed over the
command of the battle front to the Fifth and Fourth Divisions in
their respective sectors.
From the time that the Fifth and Fourth Divisions passed
through the Second and Third Divisions the battle assumed the
character of open warfare, and each of the attacking brigades
moved forward organised as Brigade Groups under the command
of Infantry Brigade Commanders. The Armoured Car
Battalion had also successfully passed through the barrage while
the First Cavalry Brigade, which was also under the orders of
the Australian Corps Commander, had moved forward with
patrols in contact with the advancing infantry. At 10 a.m. the
final objective had been gained on the right of the right Division
and on the whole front of the left Division. At 1.20 p.m. the
infantry had passed Harbonnieres and learned that the
roads further back in the enemy country were crowded with
transport. By this time the whole of the enemy’s defences in
the sector had been destroyed and the Cavalry Brigade had
passed through the infantry.
The troops of the Fifth Division pressed on to the line of
exploitation, and about two hours later the Fifteenth Infantry
Brigade were firmly established there. The opposition on this
part of the battlefield had practically ceased. Further to the
north the right of the Fourth Division pressed forward, but its
left was not able to push on to the exploitation line owing to
enemy fire from the northern side of the river. At the end of
the day the right and centre of the Corps, however, were all on
their objectives, although the left flank was thrown back towards
Morcourt.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


The final result of the day’s operations was the capture of the
whole of the objectives allotted to the Corps and the seizure of
the exploitation objective except on the extreme left. The
villages of Warfusee, Marcelclave, La Motte, Bayonvilliers,
Harbonieres, Morcourt, Gailly and the greater portion of the
village of Cerisy were in our hands. Some of the enemy troops
were still on the river side of Cerisy. We were in touch with
the Canadian Corps on our right, but the difficulties of the River
Somme as a boundary between Corps were already beginning
to make themselves felt.
The total captures for the day were: —Prisoners: 183
officers, 7,742 other ranks; 173 guns and many hundred machine-
guns, trench mortars and anti-tank rifles were also captured.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


PHASE “B.”
9TH AUGUST TO 15TH.
The operations on the Australian Corps front were resumed on
the 9th August. The role of the Corps was now to advance our
line on the right between Amiens-Nesle Railway and the
Amiens-Bne Road, and to form a defensive flank to the
further advance of the Canadian Corps on the right. The first
phase of the advance was to have been carried out, commencing
at II a.m., by the First Division passing through the left
Brigade of the Fifth Division, Owing to its inavoidably late
arrival in the battle area and the long approach march which
followed, the First Division was not able to reach the assembly
positions in time to co-operate with the beginning of the advance
of the Canadian Corps. Consequently, the right Brigade of the
Fifth Division was told off to continue the advance, and carried
out the initial phase of the operation entailing the capture of
Vauvilliers.
These operations were duly carried out, and without an
artillery barrage, Brigades of artillery being placed directly
under the command of the Infantry Brigadiers concerned. The
Second, Eighth and Fifteenth Tank Battalions co-operated with
the attacking Divisions, but with very reduced numbers owing to
casualties suffered on the Bth August.
Considerable opposition was also met with from the Lihons
Ridge, both from close-range field guns and from machine guns.
Direct fire was responsible for considerable casualties among the
tanks supporting the First Division. The advance of the Second
Division met with less active resistance, and the village of
Framerville was captured during the late afternoon.
Junction with the Second Canadian Division was made by the
First Division on the railway line about a mile North-East of
Rosleres, and our line at 7 p.m., on the 9th instant, ran practi-
cally due north round the eastern edge of Framerville, through
La Flaque to the Amiens defence line.
About 5 p.m., on the 9th instant, the 111. Corps on our left
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


attacked and carried the village of Chipilly and part of the
Chipilly Spur, enabling the Fourth Division to swing its left
forward to the outskirts of Mericourt.
The advance towards Lihons was continued by the First
Division on the 10th instant, in conjunction with the advance of
the Canadian Corps south of the main railway. Very consider-
able opposition was encountered and heavy fighting took place in
the old entrenched country on the Western slopes of the
Lihons Ridge. The First Australian Infantry Brigade was
counter-attacked very heavily and the battle swayed to and fro
during the day. As the result of the day’s operations our line
was advanced to the Western outskirts of the Village of
Lihons.
Lihons is situated on a low hill which rises in a glacis slope
for a considerable distance on all sides, and the country is
particularly open and is admirably adapted for defence. The
capture of this strong position under conditions of open warfare
was therefore no ordinary feat of arms.
Owing to the disadvantage previously alluded to of having
the valley of the Somme as an Inter-Corps Boundary, the
Australian Corps Commander prevailed upon the Army
Authorities to permit him to extend his battle front Northwards
so as to enable him to get astride of the Somme Valley. This
disposition had a most important bearing upon subsequent events.
Accordingly the Command of the Right Divisional Front of
the 111. Corps between the Bray-Corbie Road and the Somme
passed to Australian Corps during the early morning of
the 10th August. G.0.C., Fourth Division, was ordered to
assume command of the sector, and arrangements were put in
hand on the morning of the I Oth instant for the attack and capture
of the Etinehem Spur. The troops employed north of the
Somme consisted of 13th A.I. Brigade and 131 st American
Regiment, which latter force was taken over from 111. Corps.
The Corps Commander held another conference on the 10th
Instant, when his policy was outlined and instructions Issued with
regard to further proposed operations. The Third and Fourth
Divisions were to carry out an encircling operation on the night
1 Oth-11 th August in order to cut off the Etinehem Spur
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


north of the Somme and the ridge east of Proyart, south of
the Somme. The northern operation was to be carried out
by the 13th Infantry Brigade (Fourth Division) and the
southern operation by the 10th Infantry Brigade (Third Division).
The Second Division was to conform on the right and link up
with the Third Division, which relieved portion of the front
held by the Fourth Division south of the Somme earlier on the
night of 10th instant.
The general lines of the operation both to the north and the
south of the river were similar. Columns were to move along
defined roads, leaving the objectives well to the flanks and then
encircle the enemy positions. Each column was accompanied
by tanks, and was to move in an easterly direction and then to
wheel inwards towards the Somme.
It was recognised that this action involved certain risks, as
tanks had never been tried by night in this way, but in view of
the condition of the enemy’s morale at this stage it was con-
sidered that the effect of the advance of the tanks and infantry
would lead immediately to the collapse of the defence.
The action north of the river was entirely successful. South
of the river the enemy bombed the forward area heavily early in
the night on the Third Division front, causing considerable delay
in the preparations for the attack. The progress on the
Southern Sector of the attack was at first slow owing to heavy
enemy artillery and machine-gun fire and the disorganisation
caused by the bombing. Two of the tanks allotted for the
operations were destroyed or put out of action very soon after
Zero hour.
Heavy casualties having been suffered by units of the 10th
Infantry Brigade, it was decided that this Brigade, as it was
unable to carry out that operation as ordered, should co-operate
with the 9th Infantry Brigade by taking up a position round the
eastern outskirts of Proyart. The 9th Brigade was to complete
the capture of Proyart.
The advance of the Second Division progressed favourably
further to the right, but the delay in the 10th Brigade operation
left the flank of the Division somewhat exposed. The 10th
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


Brigade took prompt action accordingly to bring up its right
and re-establish the complete line.
On the 11 th August the advance was continued by the First
and Second Divisions between the Amiens-Nesle Railway
and the Amiens-Brie Road in conjunction with the Canadian
Corps on the South. Owing to the greatly increased enemy
resistance on the Lihons Ridge and the fact that there were
but few tanks left available to support the advance, it was
decided to employ a creeping artillery barrage. The enemy
fought hard to retain Lihons, but by 6 a.m. the villages of
Lihons and Raincourt had been taken and consolidation of
the captured ground was well in hand. The enemy made
numerous local counter-attacks, particularly against Lihons and
Raincourt, but these were beaten off by infantry fire.
Junction was made with the Canadians at the Railway about
a mile north of Chilly.
The enemy counter-attacked the Fourth Australian Division
during the afternoon of 11 th August and succeeded in regaining
a small portion of the Etinehem Spur. This counter-attack
was made possible by reason of the difficulty of holding the
steep exposed eastern slopes of the Somme bluffs against hostile
fire.
A provisional formation known as the Liaison Force was now
constituted on the 12th August, and placed under the orders
of Brigadier-General E. A. Wisdom, C.M.G., D. 5.0., to
take over the front north of the Somme from the Fourth
Division. The troops of this formation consisted of the 131st
American Regiment, the 13th Infantry Brigade, together with
the 58th Divisional Artillery and the necessary auxiliary troops.
The remaining American Regiment of the Brigade was allotted
to the Fourth Division in place of the 13th Infantry Brigade.
The Liaison Force was employed north of the Somme to
ensure that the control of both banks of the River Somme was
under one Corps Command and as a liaison formation between
the Australian and 111. Corps.
A successful local attack was carried out by the 13th Infantry
Brigade on the Liaison Force front at dawn on the 12th
August, whereby the whole of the Etinehem Spur was recaptured
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


and 200 prisoners and a large number of machine guns taken.
The Seventeenth British Division from G.H.Q. Reserve
was at this junction allotted to the Australian Corps in order to
relieve the Third Division, which was greatly in need of a rest.
It was not desired to employ this Division in any serious
operations, as it was required for action elsewhere. The
Division was in good form, however, and showed a very fine
aggressive spirit. The most marked incident of its tour was a
heavy gas shelling which it suffered and which caused numerous
casualties.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


PHASE “C.”
THE ADVANCE TO THE SOMME AND CAPTURE
OF MONT ST. QUENTIN AND PERONNE.
15TH AUGUST TO 4TH SEPTEMBER.
The command of the Canadian Corps front on the Australian
right passed to the Australian Corps Commander at noon on 22nd
August, the distribution of the Divisions then under his com-
mand being as follows from south to north :
Fourth Canadian Division, Fourth Australian Division,
Thirty-Second English Division, Fifth Australian Division,
Third Australian Division, with the First Canadian Divi-
sion in support to the Fourth Canadian Division, and the
First and Second Australian Divisions in Corps Reserve.
On the morning of the 22nd August the Third Division was
ordered to attack north of the Somme in conjunction with the
111. Corps on its left. The Third Division seized all its
objectives and the line was advanced to the immediate west and
north-west of Bray-sur-Somme,
During the nights 23rd-24th and 24th-25th August the Fourth
Canadian Division and the right-half of the Fourth Australian
Divisional Front were relieved by the 36th French Corps. The
Thirty-Second Division extended its front to the right and took
over the remaining portion of the Fourth Division Front, thus
releasing that Division from the line.
During this relief the enemy fired a very heavy gas concen-
tration, extending over some hours, on the front which was being
taken over. The unavoidable movement of troops led to a
very large number of casualties of both French and Fourth
Division. The concentration being unusually dense and drifting
over the area of the Thirty-Second Division considerable
casualties were suffered from this cause.
On the morning of the 23rd August a fresh operation was
launched on a front of four-and-a-half miles on the general
line Herlcville-Chuignes-Chuignolles. The attack was carried
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


out by the Thirty-Second (English) Division on the right and
the First Australian Division on the left. All objectives
were gained and the enemy’s defences penetrated to a
depth of one and a half miles. A proportion of tanks was
allotted to the advancing Divisions.
Good progress was made along the whole front of attack, and
except at one or two places strong opposition was not encoun-
tered. The attack was a complete surprise and the enemy was
caught in process of re-organisation as the result of his recent
reverses. The successes gained were fully exploited and our
line was considerably advanced.
The attack was carried out in three phases, the first phase
being supported by artillery and tanks; the second phase being
purely exploitation, was carried out without artillery support.
The third phase involved an advance into very open country,
and the attack on the left of a commanding position east of the
Chuignes Valley. The enemy, under the impression that
our attack had spent itself, had occupied the position in great
strength. The opposition proved much stronger than was
anticipated and the fighting was particularly severe. A light
artillery barrage fire was provided for the final phases by batteries
rapidly pushed forward during the early phases of the advance.
This was carried out by 3rd Brigade, which had very seveie
fighting throughout. By nightfall the line along the front of
attack ran approximately Herlevllle-Chuignes-Baraque. Eighty-
six officers and 3,006 other ranks, as well as 21 guns, were
captured as a result of the day s operations.
During the night 23rd-24th August the Third Division carried
out an operation north of the Somme with the object of con-
forming with the general line of the Corps front south of the
Somme. After overcoming strong enemy resistance, Bray
was captured and our line advanced to the east of the town.
This advance was continued during the 25th August in con-
junction with the 111. Corps.
The First Division also carried their line forward by means of
local minor operations, as a result of which Cappy was
captured on the 20th August. By this time the Third Division
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


had taken Suzanne, meeting with very little opposition, and
the enemy had retreated in great disorder.
A Conference was held at Corps Headquarters on August
15th, at which the Corps Commander decided to relieve the
First Division by the Second and Fifth Divisions, each of these
to be on a single brigade frontage. The policy to be followed
was to keep a continual pressure on the enemy, to advance by
means of fighting patrols and infiltration; but to avoid such
fighting as would incur heavy losses.
The order of the battle from south to north on the 27th
August was as follows : Thirty-Second Division, Fifth Division,
Second Division, Third Division, and the line ran approximately
Foucaucourt (exclusive) Fontain-los-Cappy (exclusive) Suzanne
(Inclusive). Patrols pushed out during the early morning
of the 27th August and found the enemy’s posts unoccupied
at several points on our front. Immediate advantage was
taken and the advance was continued rapidly. Opposition was
encountered, mainly from machine guns on commanding tactical
features. These held on till the last.
Serious opposition was also met with from formed infantry
and artillery fire, on the Second and Fifth Divisional fronts,
especially at Foucaucourt. This was overcome after stiff
fighting. .
Throughout August 28th the advance was continued and
opposition encountered in the form of machine guns holding on
to Important features to cover the retirement of the enemy s
main body.
Early on the morning of the 29th August the advance was
continued with the object of forcing the enemy across the
Somme. As the attack was vigorously pressed, the enemy
was forced to put up a stubborn fight in order to cover his
withdrawal across the river.
The line of the Somme Canal was finally reached on August
29th, south of Peronne, by the Thirty-Second (English)
Division, the Fifth Division and the Second Division.
North of the Somme our line ran about 1,000 yards west of
Clery-sur-Somme. Patrols crossed the Canal in several
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


places but found the marshy ground east of the Canal impassable
for larger bodies and for artillery.
Seven officers and 577 other ranks, together with 5 guns, were
captured in the period 24th-29th August. On the morning of
the 30th August the Australian Corps front was held by the
Thirty-Second Division, the Fifth Division, the Second Division
and the Third Division from south to north, the line being
the line of the Somme Canal as far north as Clery. Clery
had been cleared of the enemy with the exception of a few
houses in the eastern outskirts, and we held the high ground
north-east of the town.
The Somme Canal and marshes were impassable south of
Clery. Hostile machine-gun fire from concealed positions
on the eastern bank kept all possible crossings continually
engaged. It was determined not to force the passage south of
Peronne as this could only be done at very heavy cost.
The only immediate possibility of gaining a footing east of
the Somme and of continuing our pressure on the enemy was
from the direction of Clery, and with this in view the sth
Infantry Brigade of the Second Division was ordered to cross the
Somme at Feuilleres, pass through the area and front held by
the Third Division, and make good a bridgehead south-east of
Clery to enable the Omiecourt crossing to be exploited, and if
intact to be utilised. This was successfully accomplished during
the 30th August, but the Omiecourt crossing w'as found to have
been destroyed.
The Corps front was re-adjusted on the night of 30th-31st
August, the Thirty-Second Division extended its front north-
wards by taking over a brigade frontage from the Fifth Division
as far north as Farm Lamire, the Fifth Division extended
northwards from this point to a point on the Canal 500 yard's
north of Biaches, by taking over a brigade frontage from
the Second Division. The Second Australian Division was
given a front from this latter point to the village of Clery.
The Third Division held from Clery to the Corps northern
boundary.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER
MONT ST. QUENTIN.
The capture of Mont St. Quentin stands out in bold relief in
a war that had hitherto largely consisted of monotonous trench
warfare. Its story reads more like a military romance of the
olden times, though in certain respects it was not unlike the
famous Gallipoli landing. Sir Douglas Haig, using strictly
official language in his recent despatch, says it ranks as a most
gallant achievement.” Other writers, unfettered by the strict
necessities of Army formality, use language of a much more
eulogistic character. The Germans, as we learnt after the
attack, knew the formidable character of the forces operating in
front of them. An order signed by the Commanding Officer of
a German Battalion, and subsequently captured, contained the
following warning to the enemy :
Forces confronting us consist of Australians who are
very war-like, clever and daring. They understand the art
of crawling through high crops in order to capture our
advanced posts. The enemy is also adept in conceiving
and putting into execution important patrolling operations.
The enemy infantry has daily proved themselves to be
audacious.”
Even with this fine tribute, it was, however, never conceived
possible by the Germans that this great natural fortress, supple-
mented by the aid of every clever device of skilful leaders,
would in a few hours not only fall, but that the whole of its
garrison would be killed or captured. On that eventful day of
31st August our troops, in addition to the large number killed,
took 1,500 prisoners of the Prussian Guard, and, as Sir Douglas
Haig states, left the way open for the subsequent capture by the
Australians of Peronne.
The importance of this victory is perhaps better appreciated
by the French than ourselves. Our gallant Allies are closely
familiar with the topography of this area and they knew the
consequences of its successful defence or capture. The Special
Correspondent of ” Le Journal ” writes :
” It required a forest-trapper or a hunter versed in the
art of ambush and bush-craft—and the Australians, bold


seekers after adventure, are these—to venture to attack on
a stormy night a strong position like Mont St. Quentin.
At the back of their barbed wire defences the German
machine-gunners thought themselves impregnable and
immune from capture. Their sentries watched behind
their parapets. The citadel, with its three rows of trenches,
stood like a dark shadow on the banks of the Somme.
Only a few hours were necessary for the Anzacs to conquer
this impregnable mountain, and of the garrison of 3,000
who defended it, more than one-third are to-day lamenting
in the prisoners’ cage behind the line.
The operations for the capture of Mont St. Quentin were
arranged at a Conference held at 10 p.m. on the night of
the 30th August. As rapid action was necessary, and the time
available did not permit of a detailed creeping artillery barrage
being worked out, artillery support was arranged in the form of
successive engagement of selected localities.
The sth Infantry Brigade was formed up for the attack on the
limited area in our hands immediately south-east oi Clery,
and the attack was launched at 5 a.m., on 31st August, in
conjunction with the advance of the Third Australian Division
up the slopes south of Bouchavesnes.
In spite of very considerable opposition and a complex system
of hostile trenches covered by exceedingly strong lines of wire,
the attack was successful, and by 8 a.m. the hill and villages of
Mont St. Quentin, Halle and Feuillaucourt were in our hands.
This was a most brilliant feat of arms on the part of the Second
Division. It was, however, rendered possible by the very
vigorous action of the Third Division, which, by its energetic
advance, cleared the ground to the north and gave elbow room
to develop the action of the Second Division.
Owing to repeated counter-attacks and constant heavy enemy
shell fire on the village of Mont St. Quentin, our troops were
temporarily withdrawn to a line which was consolidated just
west of Feuillaucourt, and Mont St. Quentin and east of Halle,
and this line was held during the night 31st August-Ist
September.
The capture of the Mont St. Quentin position and the
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


enemy’s efforts to recapture it led to a most sanguinary struggle.
The importance of this position to the Germans was fully realised
by them and they made repeated efforts to retake it and
to prevent our further advance and seizure Peronne.
There is no doubt that the whole system of the enemy’s defences
on the British front was rudely shaken by this important tactical
success*
Between the 29th and 31st August feints were made by the
Fifth Division and the Thirty-Second Division to effect a crossing
of the Somme south of Halle, in order to attract the attention
of the enemy to this part of the front. These were unsuccessful
owing to the width of the marsh to be bridged and to the fact
that any attempt at bridging were met by immediate artillery
and machine-gun fire from the eastern bank.
To enable any attack on Peronne to be developed it was
necessary therefore for the Fifth Division to cross the Somme
between Feuillers and Clery and to pass in a south-easterly
direction through the Second Divisional area.
During the night 31st August, the 6th and 7th Infantry
Brigades of the Second Division and the 14th Infantry Brigade
of the Fifth Division crossed the Somme between Feuillaucourt
and Clery, and passed east and south-east of Clery preparatory
to the continuation of operations on Ist September.
The enemy realised that the majority of our movement must
be through Clery, and in consequence the area was shelled
very considerably during the period 30th August to 2nd Septem-
ber, thus making the passage of any large bodies of troops
towards the battle front south-east of Clery a slow and costly
matter.
The attack was continued on the Ist September, on the fronts
of the Fifth, Third and Second Australian Divisions. The 14th
Infantry Brigade and the 6th Infantry Brigade attacked at 6 a.m.
and the Third Division at 5.30 a.m.
After very severe and continuous fighting, which lasted
throughout the day, our line on the evening of Ist September
included the greater part of Peronne, passed east of Mont St.
Quentin, just west of Allaines, and joined with 111. Corps
midway between Moislains and Bouchavesnes.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


The hard fighting on this front finally forced the enemy to
give up the whole Somme line and to undertake a retirement
to the Hindenburg Line, apparently, much earlier than he was
prepared to do.
Arrangements were now made for the Second Division to
attack on the 2nd September towards Aizecourt Le Haut, with
its left flank on the Canal Du Nord, with the object of secur-
ing the ridge south-west of that village and protecting the
right flank of the Seventy-Fourth Division and 111. Corps, which
was to attack in the direction of Moislains. The Thircf Division
was to be released from the line by the convergence of the
Second Division and Seventy-Fourth Division in the vicinity of
Haut Allaines and consequent shortening of the front.
At the same time the Fifth Division was to complete the
capture of Peronne and to gain the commanding high ground
north of Doingt.
The Second Division gained their objectives after very severe
fighting. At the outset the infantry were temporarily held up
by enemy machine-gun fire, with the result that the barrage soon
outpaced them and the fighting developed into an infantry attack
against numerous and well-sited machine-gun positions. These
were readily and skilfully dealt with by platoon and company
leaders, and the village of Haut A.llaines and the ridge south-
east of Aizecourt were gained to a large extent by reason of the
initiative and skill shown by these junior commanders.
The attacking battalions of the Fifth Division were
ably disorganised through a heavy enemy barrage falling on
their assembly positions just prior to the attack. At Zero the
attack commenced, and was immediately met by hurricane
machine-gun fire from the Ramparts on the east of Peronne, from
St. Denis and from Windmill.
After heavy hand to hand fighting a footing was gained in
the Brickworks (between St. Denis and Mont St. Quentin), and
by vigorous action the enemy was forced to withdraw from St.
Denis. Meanwhile the Ramparts and the north-east end of
Peronne were cleared of the enemy and an attempt made to
exploit towards Flamicourt and Chair Wood, but this was
frustrated for the time being by heavy machine-gun fire.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


The day’s fighting had been very severe, the enemy fighting
stubbornly and never yielding until forced to do so.
A large number of the enemy was killed and a considerable
number of prisoners captured. The prisoners for the three days’
fighting for Mont St. Quentin and Peronne amounted to 45
officers and 1,621 other ranks. Six guns and a very large
number of machine guns were captured.
During the course of the 3rd and 4th September Flamicourt
and Chair Wood were taken by the Fifth Division, and the
enemy was finally cleared from the neighbourhood of Peronne.
The result of the operations during the latter part of August
had so disorganised the enemy that a general retreat on his part
became imperative.
The operations of the Corps up to this date had been carried
out with the five Divisions and Thirty-Second Division (English).
The latter Division, most ably commanded by Major-General
T. S. Lambert, C. 8., C.M.G., had borne its part with great
resolution and gallantry.
The total number of enemy divisions engaged and defeated
by the Australian Corps from Bth August to 4th September was
twenty-eight, of which six were engaged twice, one three times
and four have since been disbanded.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


PHASE “D.”
GERMAN RETREAT AND CAPTURE OF
HINDENBURG ADVANCED SYSTEM.
4TH SEPTEMDER TO 20TH SEPTEMBER.
During the first days of September the enemy retired on the
front of the Armies to the north. There was every indication
that the retirement would extend to the front of the Corps at an
early date. Consequently preparations were made and instruc-
tions issued that the two Divisions in the line were to press the
retreat with strong advanced guards and maintain contact with
the enemy. Meanwhile the front was to be re-organised and
the advance continued on a three-Divisional frontage, each
Division being covered by an advanced guard consisting of a
brigade of infantry with a proportion of artillery. A squadron
of Australian Light Horse was attached to each Division. On
the sth September the Corps had two Divisions in the line—
the Third Division on the right and the Fifth Division on the
left, each on a frontage of two brigades.
During the early morning the enemy commenced to retire,
covered by strong rearguards. Doingt, Le Mesnil, Brie, ft.
Christ, Athies Wood and Bussu were captured, severe fighting
taking place east of Doingt and in the vicinity of St. Christ.
Opposition was mainly from machine gun, but isolated field guns
held up the advance temporarily. About 150 prisoners were
captured.
The steady pressure on the enemy was forcing his retirement
at a much more rapid rate than he could afford to allow himself
to gain time to occupy his old lines of defence, and between 10
a.m. and 11 a.m., on the 11th September, the enemy carried out
a strong local attack against the left battalion of the First Division
under cover of a heavy barrage, with the result that our advanced
posts were forced to withdraw a few hundred yards in this place.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


CAPTURE OF THE OUTER HINDENBURG
DEFENCES.
On the 13th September the Corps Commander issued
instructions for an attack to be made on the enemy s defen-
sive position in front of the Hindenburg Line, in conjunction
with the 111. Corps on the left and the IX. Corps on
the right. The First French Army and the Third
Army were also attacking the outer defences of the
Hindenburg Line. The attack was to be carried out under
a creeping barrage by the Fourth Division on the right
and the First Division on the left. A Section of four tanks
was allotted to each Division, and the Fifth and Third Austra-
lian Machine Gun Battalions were placed at the disposal of the
Fourth and First Divisions respectively for the attack.
Zero hour was fixed at 5.20 a.m. on the 18th September.
Divisions arranged for tape lines and direction boards to be
erected in the vicinity of assembly positions, and these proved
invaluable in assisting the troops to get into position with the
minimum amount of trouble. The darkness and the incessant
rain made the ground very sodden and added to the difficulties,
but Brigades were in good time on the forming-up tape in spite
of this and the men were in great heart.
Each Division attacked on a frontage of two brigades under
cover of an artillery barrage, which lifted 100 yards every three
minutes until the twelfth lift, and then at the rate of 100 yards
every four minutes. Some sharp fighting took place round Le
Verguler, but apart from this no serious opposition was
met and the first objective was reached along* the whole of the
Corps front by 10 a.m. A large number of prisoners were
taken, and the fact that little heavy fighting took place was
primarily due to the dash of the infantry and the accuracy of the
artillery barrage. A proportion of smoke shell was employed
in the barrage, and this again appears to have created consider-
able confusion amongst the enemy.
Exploitation was at once commenced, and although opposition
gradually increased, the First Division on the left succeeded in
taking the whole of this part of the outpost line of the
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


Hindenburg System, which was of considerable strength. The
Fourth Division reached an average distance of 300 yards
from the line of exploitation. Touch was maintained throughout
with the Corps on our flanks. The Fourth Division was
time too exhausted to go on immediately, and the GO.C.
Fourth Division was instructed to rest his men for the day and
continue the action by night. This advance reached an average
depth of nearly three miles on a frontage of four miles.
At II p.m., on the night 18th-19th September, the Fourth
Division again attacked under a creeping barrage with the object
of seizing the front portion of their Divisional sector. Stiff
fighting took place at several points, but the whole of the
objective was gained and consolidated.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


PHASE “E.”
CAPTUR OF THE HINDENBURG LINE, THE
BEAUREVOIR DEFENCES, AND MONTBREHAIN.
20TH SEPTEMBER TO 6TH OCTOBER
PRELIMINARY OPERATIONS.
On the 20th September the Corps front was held by the
Fourth Division on the right and the First Division on the left.
During 20th-21st September strong fighting patrols were sent out
by both Divisions, with the result that they succeeded in
establishing a new line approximately 500 to 800 yards in
advance of their old line. During the following night the
Forty-Sixth English Division relieved the Fourth Division, and
command of this portion of the front passed to IX Corps on the
morning of 22nd September, leaving the Australian Corps
temporarily on a single Divisional front.
The 11. American Corps, comprising the Twenty-Seventh and
Thirtieth American Divisions, were now placed under the orders
of the Australian Corps Commander and commenced to arrive in
the Corps area by bus and train on September 22nd, finally
relieving the First Australian Division from the line.
The Second American Corps in this way became affiliated to
the Australian Corps for the contemplated operations against the
main Hindenburg Line. It established its advanced head-
quarters close to the headquarters of the Corps, and was
thus able to keep closely in touch with the situation.
An Australian “ Mission ” was formed and was attached to
this American Corps. The object of the Mission was to ensure
that all units and formations of the American Divisions were
placed thoroughly in touch with the battle methods and pro-
cedure of the Australians. The personnel was carefully selected
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


and included representatives of all branches and arms. The
scale of attachment of personnel was such that every unit down
to Companies had an Australian officer or senior N.C.O.
attached. On the night 25th-26th September the enemy carried
out raids in strength on the front of both the Twenty-Seventh
and Thirtieth American Divisions, and it is probable that he
secured identifications in each case.
Preparations for the main attack on the Hindenburg Line
were now well in hand. A Conference was held by Sir
John Monash at Australian Corps Headquarters, on 23rd
September, which was attended by Staffs and Commanders of
11. American Corps and the Divisions and Brigades of that
Corps. At this Conference full details and methods were
explained and his plan of operations for the capture of the
Hindenburg System was laid down by G.0.C., Australian
Corps. A subsequent Conference, attended by all Divisional
Commanders, Chiefs of Departments, Staffs, etc., of
formations concerned, both of the 11. American Corps and
Australian Corps, was held at Australian Corps Headquarters on
the morning of the 26th September. The Australian Corps
Commander outlined the whole scope and detail of both the
preliminary and the main operations, and such points as had not
previously been decided were discussed and final decisions
reached. The operations were dealt with at great length and
all aspects and possibilities were made clear to all concerned.
The Thirtieth American Division advanced its line at certain
points in order to secure a good line for the infantry to form up on
during the night 26th-27th September.
It had not been possible for the 111. Corps to secure the
proposed Infantry Start Line on the front taken over by the
Twenty-Seventh American Division, prior to this portion of the
front being handed over to the Australian Corps. It was, there-
fore, necessary to carry out a preliminary operation to gain this
line.
The Twenty-Seventh American Division endeavoured to
capture the proposed Infantry Start Line at 5.30 a.m., on the
27th September, with the assistance of a Company of Tanks and
under a creeping barrage. The attack met with strong opposition
THE AUSTRALIANS* FINE RECORD


and the final position reached was the subject of conflicting reports
from the troops engaged and from the air observers. Subsequent
events showed that small parties of Americans had reached the
vicinity of their objective and had very gallantly maintained
themselves there, but the line as a whole was not materially
advanced by the day s operations. The non-success of this
operation considerably embarrassed the preparations for the main
attack on the Hindenburg System.
The barrage could not be brought back on this flank owing
to the knowledge that parties of American troops, as well as a
number of American wounded, would be exposed to our own
fire. Also, any alteration in the barrage plans, which had
already been issued, would inevitably lead to confusion.
It was therefore decided by the Corps Commander that the
Artillery Start Line, as originally planned, would hold good,
and that the troops of the Twenty-Seventh American Division
should form up for the attack on a line as far forward as possible
and should be assisted by an additional number of tanks. The
strength in tanks was augmented to such an extent as should
easily overwhelm the enemy resistance west of the start line.
It was hoped that this, with the slow rate of barrage, would
enable the 27th American Division to carry out its task.
A concentrated artillery bombardment of our new mustard gas
of hostile defence and approaches (the first during the war) was
carried out during the night 26th-27th September, and the
general plan of attack was as follows :
The combined American and Australian Corps were to attack
the main Hindenburg System on the corps front in conjunction
with the IX. Corps on the right. The 111. Corps on the
north was to protect our left flank and, if opportunity offered,
capture Vendhuille and prepare crossings over the Canal
for the V. Corps. The attack was to be carried to the
Nauroy-Gouy line by the Thirtieth American Division on
the right and the Twenty-Seventh American Division on the left.
The Fifth and Third Australian Divisions were to pass through
the Thirtieth and Twenty-Seventh Divisions respectively and
gain Joncourt-Wiancourt-Beaurevoir line, whilst the Thirtieth
and Twenty-Seventh American Divisions were to push south
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


and north respectively in order to extend our bridgehead over
the Canal.
As surprise was no longer possible, the attack was to be pre-
ceded by a 48 hours’ bombardment of enemy defences and
approaches and delivered under an artillery barrage and so cover
the consolidation of the American Divisions on that line. Tank
units from the 4th and sth Tank Brigades were allotted to each
Division, and were detailed to infantry formations. Arrange-
ments were made for the rapid construction and maintenance of
roads in each Divisional sector and for the definite allotment of
infantry, artillery, cavalry and Tank units to definite roads,
which would be clearly signboarded throughout. Units allotted
to distant objectives were to have priority on certain roads
between prescribed hours.
The sth Cavalry Brigade was placed under the orders of the
Corps Commander for the operation. Its role was to be the
exploitation of success and dislocation of enemy organisation in
conjunction with the Whippet Tanks and Armoured Cars.
Zero hour was 5.50 a.m. on the 29th September. The
attack started well on the Thirtieth American Division front,
but on the Twenty-Seventh American Division front trouble from
hostile machine guns inside the barrage was experienced from
the outset. A number of the tanks supporting this Division
were put out of action by enemy shell fire and by anti-tank
mines, and with this support gone, the infantry rapidly lost
touch with the barrage. Enemy machine guns were thus tree
to harass the main weight of the attack, with the result that only
isolated parties were able to get forward. The attack on the
Thirtieth American Division front had meanwhile progressed
fairly well and the infantry had pushed forward. The intricate
trench system and the confusion of wire and dugouts, however,
was responsible for a certain amount of loss of cohesion, with the
result that by the time the village of Bellicourt had been
reached the attacking troops were some distance behind the
barrage and a good deal of the weight had gone out of the
attack.
Air teporls indicated that parlies of the American Divisions
pushed on beyond Neuroy and Oouy, but no information came
THE AUSTRALIANS' FINE RECORD


back from those bodies, and it was found that the enemy
resistance was as strong as ever along the Canal Line and the
trench systems. If these troops had penetrated through as the
Air reports indicated, they failed entirely to mop up the inter-
vening defences. It will be impossible to state accurately in
what strength these parties were until all evidence is available.
The leading Brigades of the Fifth Australian Division w'ere
therefore moved forward in artillery formation behind the
Thirtieth American Division. A certain amount of opposition
was encountered from hostile machine guns and snipers who had
been overlooked in the first phase cf the advance by the
Americans, but this was quickly overcome and they deployed
and moved through Bellicourt and took over the battle front
in this sector from the Thirtieth American Division. Their
advance was carried out by sheer hard fighting in the face of
tne most vigorous opposition. During this advance a great many
men of the American Divisions went forward with the Australian
troops.
The Twenty-Seventh Division had been held up from the
outset and free movement was impossible on this flank on account
of hostile shelling and machine-gun fire. The Third Australian
Division was, therefore, faced with the difficult problem of
carrying out the task originally set for the Twenty-Seventh
American Division as well as its own task, but without the
assistance of a barrage and in broad daylight. The fighting
was severe and the right of the Division advanced in conformity
with the Fifth Division, but practically no progress was made on
the left. The tanks detailed to assist the Third Division
suffered considerably from hostile shell fire, and it was soon
found to be impossible to continue the advance on this flank.
Overnight, therefore, the Corps Commander slightly modified
the later phases of his plan, and early the following morning the
T bird and Fiftn Divisions attacked in a north-easterly direction
along the Hindenburg Line and also along Railway Spur.
In this attack artillery action was limited owing to the
uncertainty as to the whereabouts of the advanced troops of the
Twenty-Seventh American Division. This made the infantry
task particularly difficult.
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


A considerable amount of opposition was met with and heavy
hand-to-hand fighting took place throughout the day. Progress
was made on the Bony Spur, along Nauroy Trench and also
east of Nauroy Village. By bombing along the Hindenburg
Line the troops of the Third Division entered the southern
outskirts of Bony and the mopping up of the town proceeded.
On the morning of the Ist October the Fifth Division made
an organised attack with tanks. Millridge, Estree and
Folenprise Farm were captured after severe fighting. The
Third Division completed the mopping up of Bony, and pro-
gressing along the Hindenburg Line northwards, secured the
northern entrance to the Canal Tunnel. Patrols were pushed
forward and by nightfall were operating on the high ground
east of Le Catelet.
The whole of the Hindenburg Defences along the whole
Corps front thus came into our hands. It was a stiff fight and
the endurance of the infantry was highly tested. Casualties
were severe, but this was mainly due to the enforced limitation
of artillery action already described.
The Second Division, who had been resting since they had
captured Mont St. Quentin, were now brought into the line
on the south of the Corps front, relieving part of the Fifth
Division. It was decided that the Second Division would attack
with the object of capturing the Beaurevoir Line on the
Corps front, and also seizing Beaurevoir Hill and obtaining
a footing on Prospect Hill. The XIII. and IX. Corps
were to attack at the same time on the 3rd October. The
troops of the Fifth Division in line were to continue to hold
the line until the battle troops of the Second Division had passed
through at Zero hour. The Fifth Division was then to be
withdrawn. Arrangements were made with the 15th
R.A.F. to drop smoke bombs on high commanding ground as
the attack progressed in order to conceal the movement of infantry
and to help to confuse the enemy. The 4th and sth Tank
Brigades co-operated in the attack. Considerable opposition was
met with along the Beaurevoir-Masnleres Line, which was
too wide on the front of the right Brigade for the
Whippet Tanks to cross. The Heavy Tanks also encountered
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


much anti-tank fire, but a few reached the line of La Motte
Farm and ably assisted the progress of the infantry.
At about 11 o’clock the enemy heavily counter-attacked and
temporarily drove in our advanced posts in the centre, but this
did not materially affect the situation. The day’s fighting had
been heavy, severe losses being inflicted on the enemy, and in
addition about 25 officers and 700 other ranks were captured,
together with a large number of machine guns.
During the night 3rd-4th October the XIII. Corps extended
its front, taking over from the Australian Corps as far south as
the Canal. On the 4th October the Second Division
improved their position by local attacks. That night, 4th-sth
October, the Australian Corps took over from the IX. Corps
to a line running south of Ramicourt-south of Montbrehain-south
of Brancourtle Grand, and so brought the advance back to its
original north-easterly direction.
At 6.5 a.m. on the morning of sth October, the Second
Division attacked Montbrehain, the IX. Corps co-operating by
keeping the high ground south of the town under heavy artillery
fire during the operation.
The attack was launched in co-operation with a company of
tanks of the sth Tank Brigade, and covered by an artillery
barrage. The enemy fought stubbornly, but the whole of the
objectives were gained and consolidated. About noon the
enemy counter-attacked the north-east corner of the village and
penetrated our positions to a depth of 400 yards. A subsequent
counter-attack completely restored our positions. About 20
officers and 600 other ranks belonging to seven different regiments
of three Divisions were captured, and a number of civilians were
liberated. The Second Division was relieved in the line by
the Thirtieth American Division, relief being completed about
2 o’clock on the morning of the 6th October.
At 9 a.m., on the 6th October, the decisive “ break through ”
iu Line having been completed, General
Monash handed over command of the Australian Corps front
to General Read, of the 11. American Corps, and the Australian
Corps then passed into Army Reserve to rest and refit. It was
THE BATTLE OF AMIENS AND AFTER


on this same day that the German Government, at last realising
the hopeless struggle, made its final offer of peace which led
shortly after to the granting of the Armistice.
SUMMARY.
The Australian Corps came into the line on the Somme
front at the end of March. It promptly commenced a series of
minor offensive operations which had the double effect of secur-
ing Amiens and of establishing the moral superiority of the
Australians over the enemy. The culmination of these operations
was the successful action at Hamel, and they were continued
by the seizure of the area east of Villers-Bretonneux.
Thus after considerable fighting, extending over a period of
four and a half months, the Australian Corps was called upon,
on August Bth, to open the Allied offensive, which has led to
such great results.
The Corps maintained this offensive from the oth August to
the 6th October, a period of approximately two months, and
therefore was engaged in active offensive operations for a total
period of six and a half months before being withdrawn from the
line to rest.
During this period the total number of prisoners captured was
610 officers and 22.244 other ranks. The total number of
enemy guns captured was 332. A total of 30 enemy Divisions
were engaged, many twice and a few three times. Of these 30
Divisions, six have since been disbanded. This was the
equivalent of 73 separate Divisions engaged and defeated, or
more than one-third of the whole German Army.
The advance of the Corps was pursued for a total distance of
37 miles. One hundred and sixteen towns and villages were
captured, and the total area recovered was approximately 230
square miles.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ FINE RECORD


