

p6TH
;*;• No. 4, ROSE & Co.’s Series of Cheap Guides.
Yu-
THE
GUIDE
T O
VICTORIA:
31 f ractiral Bankbook of Esrfnl Information
THE MANUFACTURER, CAPITALIST, FARMER,
STOREKEEPER, AND OTHERS.
WHERE TO GO.
WHAT TO TAKE.
THE DIFFERENT ROUTES BY STEAM AND SAILING SHIPS.
PASSENGER AND FORWARDING AGENTS.
BANKING AND INSURANCE COMPANIES.
COLONIAL OUTFITTEBS.
R. ROSE
(Fourteen Years' Resident in the Colonies of Australia
and New Zealand).
PRICE SIXPENCE.
LONDON:
Published by R. Rose & Co., 79, Leadenhall Street, E.C.
'l^


Established 63 Years. Established 63 Years. Established 63 Years.
Passengers and Emigrants are cordially ESTIMATES SUBMITTED FREE OF CHARGE
invited to call and inspect Goy’s stores— >71 For Outfits to all parts of the world, and
patterns and prices given with pleasure / J 1 f or a p Classes.
—the assistants are strictly cautioned not /'IN. \
. , , / HI \ r.HIFF RFnnwn inn THIRD
customers, but to answer questions and to y *W > C* A D 1 M Cl IDMITI ID[7
explain the use of various articles, &o. / Y \ wM D 1IM l"UKNI 1 UKt
Goy wishes to afford every facility, as he / * * \ AND 0 LOTH 1 N G
is confident of giving satisfaction in every / ft 11T C 1 TT C D \
department. / Ul# 1 T 1 1 1 kit \ For Single Adults and
, A1 ., ■ fz/fes Mamed Couples*
Cabin Furniture, Clothmq, Boots, ((((
And all necessaries for the voyage and n* 1 rant: MU ft
use in the Colonies, can be supplied and 7 LtflUtlllnf
put on board at a few hours* / &
notice, thus avoiding the trouble and J CA I 1 K/l CT
bother of Luggage to Town, and of going j L-l IVI L
from one Tradesman to another for the I • Alyl r\A
multitudinous articles comprised in an / 1—w mt/v
_ \y) DELICACIES or HOME COMFORTS.
ll Street, y
’ I Luggage and Insurance
\ Instructions.
STREET \
* \ CAB FARES AND REMITTANCES.
N ’ E ‘ C ' A H0SICRr - MI R TS. TAILORING,
m —-■ —“ M
M MEDICINES.
carefully warehoused (for the niiTriTQ /ft
convenience of the Passengers) UUIMIO ///
without charge, until the arrival PARTS OF ''
of owner in London, or shipped
as directed. Ebtablishe
TO ALL Put on Board at a Few Hours'Notice.
THE WORLD. Li8ts, Patterns, and Self-Measurement
Instructions, &c., forwarded
o 63 Years, Post -


THE
VIGTOETA
GUIDE:
% Jjtanual of |l radical
HANDBOOK OF USEFUL INFORMATION,
FOR THE
CAPITALIST, MANUFACTURER, FARMER, STORE-
KEEPER, EMIGRANT, AND CONSIGNEE.
RICHARD ROSE,
Author of the “ New Zealand and Australian Guides,"
(Fourteen Years’ Resident in the Colonies of New Zealand
and Australia).
Ifcrnbon:
Published by R. ROSE & Co., at the Colonial Office,
79, Leaden hall Street, E.C.
1880.
[All Rights Reserved.]


' lr iv -i
Ifonbon:
W. H. & A. Nutting, Printers, 18, Newington Causeway, S.E.


PREFACE.
Immediately npon the publication of my New Zealand Guide, I received
numerous enquiries from all parts of the country, urging me to publish
a similar work of a practical character upon the Colonies of Australia.
Encouraged partly by the success which that work met with at the
hands of the public, and partly by the numerous private testimonials I
have received, I have, in accordance with those wishes, prepared the
following pages for publication. My sincere hope is that the informa-
tion they convey may prove as useful to the intending Emigrant as I
am assured my previous work has proved to others. The annals of
history offer no parallel instance of rapid progress when compared with
the amazing strides made by Australia in so brief a space of time.
The rise and development of her principal Colonies have been marked by
extraordinary vigour and activity. It clearly shows that a country
having such splendid internal resources is the most promising and pro-
fitable field for the intending Emigrant, whether he be a capitalist or
otherwise. To all such, I wish most sincerely that health and prosperity
may attend them in all their undertakings.
Colonial Office, Leadenhall Street ,
London, E.C., 1880.
' ";.T


CONTENTS.
THE COLONY OF VICTORIA.
Pages.
Geographical. —Description and History of the Country. Rivers,
Bays, Inlets, and Lakes. Revenue and Produce I—s
Climate and Meteorology. —Temperature and Rainfall. Fruit
Produce. Vine, Orange, and Cotton Growing 5—6
Land, Agriculture, and Produce. —Facility of obtaining Free- '
hold Land. Land Act. Offers to small Farmers. The lead-
ing Crops of Victoria. Average Results of Crops. Victo-
rian Wines. Silk Culture. Semi-tropical Fruits. Tobacco,
Flax, Linseed, Sugar, Tea. Timber: the various useful
woods, &c I—ll
Gold Mining, Mineralogy, &c.—Historical Review of the Dis-
covery of Gold in Victoria. Modes of Working. Returns of
Produce. Rates of Wages. Weights of Nuggets. Mineral
Industries, &c 11—15
Manufactures, Industries, and Commerce. —Boot and Shoe Fac-
tories. Agricultural Implement Manufacture. Coach and
Waggon Manufactures. Cabinet Work and Furniture. Iron
and Tin Works. Clothing. Saddlery and Harness-making... 16—17
Trade and Commerce 18
‘
Capital and Labour. —Rates of Wages. Cost of Provisions.
Agricultural Produce. Fruits. Clothing, &c 18—21
Roads, Railways, and Postal.— Railway Lines. Postal Arrange-
ments. Building Societies. Public Libraries, &c 21—22
The Author’s Advice to Emigrants : Shipping & Passenger Agents,&o. r.


THE COLONY OF VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA.
Q-eogbap iiical.
VICTORIA forms the south-eastern portion of the Aus-
tralian Continent. Its extreme length, from east to west,
is about 420 geographical miles, its greatest breadth being about
250 miles. Its extent of coast line is nearly 600 miles, forming
the extreme southern portion of the main land. Seaward it faces
the Island of Tasmania, formerly Van Dieman’s Land. The
entire area of Victoria is estimated at 88,198 square miles, equal
to 56,446,720 acres. To give an estimate of its size, it may be
well to compare it with the area of G-reat Britain, which contains
89,644 square miles, so that it is slightly less than the home
country. The boundaries of Victoria are as follows : —On the
north it is bounded by the noble River Murray, and by a line
running south-easterly from the Spring on Forest Hill to Cape
Howe. The western boundary is a line about 242 geographical
miles in length, and extending from the Murray to the sea. The
southern boundary is the Southern Ocean, Bass’ Straits, and the
Pacific Ocean. The southernmost point in Victoria is Wilson’s
Promontory, and the northern point is the place where the
western boundary of the colony meets the Murray; latitude,
34° 2' South ; longitude 140° 58' East. The furthest point east
is Cape Howe, and westerly the line of the frontier before
referred to.
Victoria is traversed with more or less regularity throughout
its length by a chain of hills, which divide it into two parts, and
hence designated the “ Dividing Range.” The eastern portion
of this range is known as the Australian Alps, and the other


portion, which extends northwards, is called the Pyrenees. There
are also many other ranges in the colony, which may be con-
sidered as so many branches of the main chain. The height of a
few of the principal mountains may be found useful for
reference: —Bogong Range is GSOB ft. above the sea level;
Feathertop, 6303 ft. ; Cobberas, 6025 ft.; Cope, 6015 ft.;
Hotham, 6100 ft.; Gibbo Range, 5764 ft.; Hewitt, 5715 ft,;
Wills, 5758 ft.; Torbreck, 4995 ft.; Tamboritha, 5381 ft. ; The
Twins, 5575 ft.; Juliet Mount, 3625 ft.; Kent, 5129 ft.
Referring to the Capes and Points on the coast line, the
extreme point of the western projection is Cape Otway, and the
eastern one Wilson’s Promontory. The former (Cape Otway) is
the principal turning point of vessels from the westward bound
to Port Phillip. There is a lighthouse, 300 ft. above the sea level,
on this cape for the guidance of mariners into the port. Again
at Shortland’s Bluff, at Queenscliff within Port Phillip Heads,
there is a lighthouse, 109 ft. above the sea; and on Cape
Schanck, between Point Nepeajf and Western Port, there is a
light of 278 ft. altitude. Wilson’s Promontory forms the turning
point of vessels bound to New South Wales from the westward,
and here there is a lighthouse, 383 ft. above the sea level.
Following the coast eastward, Cape Everard is seen. This is
supposed to have been the part of Victoria first seen by Europeans,
viz,, Captain Cook and his crew in H.M.S. Endeavour, and by
him it was named Point Hicks. Further to the north-east is
Cape Howe, where the dividing line between Victoria and New
South Wales meets the sea.
On the coast there are but few Islands over which Victoria
exercises jurisdiction. The principal, in point of population, is
Phillip Island, which is returned as having about 700 or 800
inhabitants ; it is situated between the East and West Heads of
the Western Port. The largest is French Island, also in Western
Port; it has only a few inhabitants. On Gabo Island, five miles


south-west o£ Cape Howe, is a lighthouse, 179 ft. altitude.
Many of the other islands are uninhabited, and do not require
notice. The rise and fall of the tide on the coast ranges from
9 ft. at Glennie Islands, near Wilson’s Promontory, to 2 ft. 8 in.
at Hobson’s Bay and Melbourne.
Of the Bays and Inlets on the coast the principal is Port
Phillip Bay, which forms an inland sea over 30 geographical
miles, from north to south, and about 35 from east to west. The
entrance is about two miles across, and a short distance within
are sandbanks and islands, which act as an excellent natural
breakwater. There are well buoyed channels between them, so
as to leave clear and safe navigation. The next inlet is Western
Port, in part of which there is good anchorage and shelter for
ships in all weathers. Hobson’s Bay forms a portion of Port
Phillip Bay; it is the anchorage of the port of Melbourne, and
is situated at the point where the River Yarra empties itself.
It is at this part that Melbourne is situated. There is also Corio
Bay, which forms the anchorage of the Port of Geelong. On
the shores of Port Phillip Bay are situated the city of Melbourne,
the town of Geelong, the boroughs of Brighton, St. Hilda,
Sandridge, Williamstown, Queensclilf, and numerous other
townships and villages.
Of the Rivers of Victoria, the principal is the Murray, which
is the largest in Australia; its total length has been ascertained
to be 2400 miles. Por G7O miles it forms the northern boundary
of Victoria. The metropolis is situated on the banks of the
■STarra, county of Bourke; its length is stated to be only
90 miles. The River Goulbourn, in the county of Anglesey,
forms a portion of its western boundary, and enters the Murray
six miles to the east of Echuca; it runs 230 miles in length.
The Glenelg, Normanby, is 205 miles long, and bounds part of
the west of the county. The Wimmera, running through the
Dividing Range, is 135 miles in length. The Hopkins, 110 miles


long (county Villiers), falls into the sea at Warrnambool. These
form the principal rivers worthy of note.
There are numerous salt and fresh water lakes, as well as
lagoons, in Victoria. Some of them are craters of extinct
volcanoes, and some become little more than swamps during the
dry seasons. The most important is Coraugamite, and is situated
in the counties of Grenville and Hampden. It is a salt lake,
covering 76 square miles, and has no visible outlet; and, notwith-
standing that it is constantly increased in volume by numerous
fresh water streams, it retains its extreme saltness, and does not
overflow. The approximate area of this inland sea is 48,610
acres. Only a few miles from Coraugamite is Lake Colac, which
is a magnificent sheet of pure fresh water, ten square miles in
extent, and containing in its area 6400 acres. In the county of
Grant, to the south-east of Geelong, is Lake CounewaTre; this is
a tidal lake, and is connected with the sea at Point Flinders. It
covers an area of 7680 acres. Another fine sheet of water is
Lake Hindmarsh, in county Lowau; it is fed by the Wimmera
river, and has an area of 35,840 acres. The salt lake Tyrrell,
county Karkarooc, is fed by the overflow of the Avoca river;
its area is 45,440 acres. Lake Victoria, county is a tidal
lake, having a superficies of 38,700 acres; while Lake Wellington,
in the same county, is 46,080 acres in extent. Lake Burrumbeet,
in the county of Eipon, is a fine sheet of fresh water, 8£ square
miles in area.
Victoria is divided into 37 counties, of which Bourke has the
largest population, and is officially returned at 236,778. The
number will, however, be considerably increased since this return
was made. The population of Bendigo is given as 46,109;
Tabot, 841,762 ; Grant, 73,828 ; Grenville, 60,917, —the other
counties varying more or less in numbers. The perusal of the
following will serve to give the reader a conception of the pro-
gress of the colony, from the proclamation of the Constitution,


Nov. 23rd, 1855, to tlie close of the year 1877. The returns are
official. The population of the colony numbered 364,000; it
now numbers 814,000. The land in cultivation amounted to
115,000 acres; it now amounts to over 1,000,000 acres. The
bushels of wheat grown in a year numbered 1,150,000; they now
number 4,850,000. The sheep numbered 4,600,000; they now
number 11,250,000. The cattle numbered 530,000; they now
number 1,000,000. The horses stood at 33,000; they are now not
less than 200,000. The public revenue amounted to £2,728,000;
it now amounts to over £4,000,000. The value of imports was
£12,000,000; it now amounts to £17,000,000. The value of
exports was £13,500,000; it now amounts to £15,500,090,
although the export of gold had fallen off from £11,000,000 to
£4,000,000. These figures speak for themselves as to the sub-
stantial and steadily progressive prosperity of the colony.
Climate and Meteoeologt.
An element affecting, perhaps more than any other, the
healthfulness and rate of mortality of a country is undoubtedly
the temperature. The three months from September to Novem-
ber are considered in Victoria to be the spring quarter; from
December to February the summer; from March to May the
autumn; and from June to August the winter quarters. January
and February are the warmest months in Melbourne; June
and July the coldest. During the coldest winters the thermometer
very rarely falls below three degrees of frost; during the hottest
days of summer the temperature may vary from 100° to 111°;
this is about the highest recorded. The rainfall in Melbourne
differs greatly in different years, but, taking the mean returns for
14 years during the four seasons, in spring rain fell on 40 3 days,
mean number of inches 7'79; summer, 24’4 days, 6’41 inches;
autumn, 28'9 days, 5 78 inches; winter, 4F9 days, 567 inches; —
total average, 1355. In the northern parts of the colony, the wet


days averaged 164 - 82; in the south-western portion 101’08 days.
The remaining portion of the year consists of fine, clear genial
weather. The mean temperature of the air at Melbourne, in
spring, is 57°0; summer, 65 Q 3; autumn, 58 Q 7; winter, 49°2.
These figures serve to prove the assertion that both colonists and
visitors have repeated again and again, that the climate of
Victoria is oue of the finest in the world. And speaking of it,
in reference to the growth of vegetable products, it may be
confidently asserted that within its area it will grow and bring to
perfection any of the products of the vegetable kingdom pro-
duced in either hemisphere. The southern part of the colony
has the mildest temperature, and is the most favourable for
growing wheat, and is also the vineyard of Victoria. On the
other hand, the northern half, with its higher degree of tempera-
ture, represents the olive, fig, and orange producing region. The
mulberry, almond, the raisin, and currant grape have become
thoroughly acclimated, and flourish luxuriantly. There has of
late sprung up a desire, on the part of some colonials, to extend
the cultivation of cotton in suitable districts, and since the
climate is in many parts so peculiarly adapted for its production,
every pains should be taken to procure the best varieties of seed,
and zealously extend the cultivation of a crop so admirably
adapted for the employment of the juvenile labour.
Land, Agriculture, and Produce.
The Government of Victoria offer to the immigrant the
utmost facility for obtaining his own freehold land. The Land
Act of 18G9, which is now in force, fixed the price of land
at £1 per acre, to be paid by ten instalments of 2s. each, the
extent of area being restricted to 320 acres. There must be
personal residence, after the first six months, for two years and a
half, and one-tenth of the land must be cultivated during the first
three years; also enclosing it with a fence, and effecting improve-


ments to the value of <fil per acre. Thus any man can hold land,
and become the proprietor thereof, by paying for it at the rate of
2s. per acre for ten years. With a view to select, he may apply
personally to the land officer of the district for a license to
occupy an area not exceeding 320 acres in extent. The license
is not transferable, nor has the licensee power to sublet. The
license extends over three years, at the rate of 2s. per acre, paid
half-yearly in advance. Within 30 days of the termination of the
three years, the licensee may, on payment of 14s. per acre, obtain
the Crown grant in fee-simple of his land; in other words, the
freehold, the 14s. and the 6s. during the previous three years
making up the £1 per acre. But should he not be able to pay
the 14s. per acre, he may obtain a lease of his allotment for seven
years, at 2s. per acre. At the expiration of the seven years (ten
in all), and having fulfilled the conditions, he will have paid £1
per acre, and be entitled to a Crown grant, without any further
payment. This easy mode of becoming proprietors of the land
has been productive of a wonderful change in the material wealth
of the Victorian colonists. There has thus arisen a large body of
small farmers, who, while improving their own positions, have
also added materially to the wealth, substantial good, and ad-
vancement of the colony. As to the extent of land now ready
and open for settlement, it may be stated that there are about
221 million acres, the whole of which is generally suitable for
agricultural purposes. There are nearly 8,000,000 acres of rich,
fertile black and chocolate soils, and about 23,000,000 of rich,
light loam, alluvium, and good clay. The black and chocolate
soils are found in the open, slightly undulating plains, -with
isolated wooded hills. The light loamy soil is to be found on
terraced flats along river valleys, and in narrow belts along the
sea coast; also in extensive plains with stunted timber, and thinly
grassed undulating country. Of all kinds of soil for agricultural
purposes, the alluvial and black vegetable moulds rank first; next


the black or chocolate volcanic soils. The vine, olive, fig, mul-
berry and other fruits flourish luxuriantly on these soils. The
loams follow next in order, being fertile and yielding good crops.
The granite soils are fair, but light and sandy; lastly, the clays
and adhesive loams. The leading crops of Victoria have always
been wheat, oats, barley, potatoes, and hay. Maize is used largely
for horse feed, but it comes principally from New South Wales,
where it grows freely. The small variety, or ninety-days’ maize,
would grow well in Victoria, and only requires to be better known
to cause it to be cultivated extensively. The average produce
per acre, in 1877, was—Wheat, 18T5 bushels; oats, 21-02 ; barley,
21-18; potatoes, 3-31 tons; hay, 1*22 tons. This is rather a
lower average than usual. The standard weight of crops in
Victoria is reckoned at 60 lbs. per bushel for wheat and maize ;
40 lbs. for oats; and 50 lbs. for barley. The weight, however,
varies in different districts, wheat varying from 58 lbs. to 64 lbs. ;
oats average 40 lbs.; maize 50 to 60 lbs. Average prices :
Wheat, ss. lOd. per bushel; oats, 3s. 7d.; barley, 3s. lOd.; maize,
4s. 4d.; hay, £4 13s. per ton; potatoes, £2 145.; mangel wurzel,
£1 11s. 6d.
A large amount of capital is invested in the culture of the
vine. In 1877 there were 4765 acres, on which were grown
7,938,512 vines, yielding 481,588 gallons of wine, and 3,725
gallons of brandy. Owing to the great variety of climate, and
the abundance of fine aspects for vineyards in the general contour
of the country, Victoria is fortunately capable of producing, and
does produce, wines which can be advantageously classified with
many of the European kinds. Melbourne took 99 prizes at the
Exhibition of 1875 for wines, there being 140 exhibits; New
South Wales had 45, and South Australia 66. There is, doubtless,
a great future for this branch of industry in Victoria, as the
wines command a ready sale, and the better the quality the more
eagerly they are sought after. Hence the necessity of growing


only those varieties o£ vine that are suitable to the particular
soil and climate in which the grower may be situated. On this
head the Colonial Government affords every possible facility and
information in extending culture of all kinds throughout the
colony. The emigrant has at his command, so to speak, the best
resources of the official departments.
The silk culture is an interesting branch of Victorian industry,
although at present limited only by the want of capital and
willing workers. The white mulberry (Morns Alba), the best
and richest ailment for the silk worm, grows luxuriantly, and the
silk worm (Bombyx Morns) thrives well. Samples of silk shown
at the Exhibitions at Melbourne were not surpassed, in fineness
and strength of texture, by any other rival productions. There
is abundance of land suitable for the cultivation of the mulberry
tree, for which a sandy loam soil is best suited. One variety of the
silk worm (Bombyx Ricini) feeds on the castor oil plant ( Ricinus );
and this grows with the luxuriance of a weed in the colony. The
medicinal oil is obtained by simple pressure of the seeds. Fig
trees flourish abundantly, the green and red varieties, but it does
not appear that the true white Turkey fig yet has been cultivated,
but it only needs introduction, and some knowledge of its manage-
ment to bring about a large production of this useful and
profitable fruit. Those valuable fruits, the orange, lemon, citron,
lime, and shaddock, all grow well in Victoria, and those with
practical knowledge of the subject, or who will be at the trouble
to seek the information, cannot fail of success, so well is the
climate adapted for the growth. Eaisins and currants have been
produced on a small scale, but quite sufficient to prove that, with
attention, they may be profitably cultivated to any extent.
Almonds, again, offer an inviting and promising field for enter-
prise in Victoria, which at all times is a valuable article of export.
The tobacco plant thrives wonderfully in suitable parts of the
colony, and has been most successfully grown in the northern and


north-eastern portion around the Beckworth district. The crop
of 1877, raised from 1,479 acres, produced 14,413 cwts. This is
mixed with American leaf, and worked up by Melbourne manu-
facturers. As experience and attention are more closely given
to its culture, so will the quality doubtless improve. The culti-
vation of flax is one demanding special attention, on the part of
those acquainted with its growth. At the close of 1877, the
import of linseed oil into the colony was upwards of 100,000
gallons ; and there is an immense demand for the dressed fibre,
both of flax and hemp. At present Victoria obtains her supply
mainly from South Australia. It has been proved, over and over
again, that in the colony, with an average soil and ordinary care,
the yield will be at the rate of 5 cwt. of dressed fibre per acre,
worth from £3 to £4 per cwt., the yield of seed being from 10 to
12 bushels, worth 10s. per bushel, and there is a large demand
for the cake. The manufacture of sugar from beet root only
requires capital to bring about an immense development of the
manufacture, for where it has been cultivated successfully near
Geelong, the manufactured article realised excellent prices. Hops
and arrowroot are grown with success in some parts, more par-
ticularly in North Gipps Land, where they have become staple
commodities. In the Botanical Gardens of Melbourne, the fol-
lowing plants will be found acclimatised, viz. : —The tea plant, the
cork, oak, cotton, &c., and all have been tried with more or less
success in different parts of the colony. "When the easy terms
upon which land may be obtained are considered, and the abun-
dant variety of its products, it needs no language of praise to
impress upon the capitalist, or the working man, the rich field
that is opened out to him.
Turning now to the indigenous or native timbers, Victoria
has a vast and almost inexhaustable supply of these, suitable for
the varied wants of the consumer. Over the southern and eastern
ranges of the mountainous districts, the forests extend in every


direction, and here the various kinds of forest timber flourish in
all their mighty grandeur. The Murray pine is a handsomely
marked useful wood, and is used in the northern parts for all
kinds of purposes. It yields an abundant supply of resin, which
is used for the same purposes as sandarac ; and in the summer
time the resin drops from the tree freely. The blackwood and
the lightwood, both are regarded as one, has a rich colour, and is
finely veined. It is exceedingly useful for cabinet work, and
takes a fine polish, and it combines strength with flexibility and
lightness. In the colonies the varieties of the Acacia are known
as the “ "Wattle its timber is much used for staves, and its bark
for tanning purposes, and the flowers give off a fine aroma.
Terntrcc and pencilwood are mainly used for veneers for cabinet
work. The red gum (Eucalyptus Rostrata') is a dense hard wood,
with handsome curly grain. It is an exceedingly valuable timber,
and almost indestructible, whether in damp ground, salt or fresh
water, being used for all kinds of engineering and building pur-
poses : it also makes the best of firewood. The blue gum
(Eucalyptus Glohulous) grows in southern and eastern Victoria,
and attains an enormous size. The wood is of a yellowish grey
tint, and possesses great strength and tenacity. It is specially
useful for building purposes, beams, piles, &c. The tree when in
full growth gives off a balsamic aroma, which has unquestionably
been shown to destroy malaria and miasmatic poison. The iron-
bark ( Eucalyptus Sideroxylon ) is the hardest and heaviest of the
Australian timbers, and is used for shafts and spokes. There are
several other species of the gum trees, which are more or less
used for various purposes. The soil and climate of Victoria being
so well adapted for the growth of timber, there is no reason why
foreign varieties should not be largely introduced, and this
increase will, doubtless, take place with the lapse of time; such
has been amply exemplified in tho case of the introduction of
British grasses for pastoral purposes.


Gold Muting, Mineralogy, &c.
The discovery of gold in Victoria, in 1851, gave an impetus
to the Australian Colony unexampled in the annals of colonial
history. The fame of the Californian gold fields had scarcely
been noised abroad, then followed the gold fields in Victoria, and
thither from all parts of the world there was a rush of excited
seekers after wealth. In Australia the effect was more than
marvellous; it changed, as it were, in an instant, the whole course
of commercial and industrial life, and half the male population
deserted their employment to go in search of the coveted metal.
Workshops stood idle, business places were closed, ships lay
empty at the wharves, trade came to a standstill, and business
was allowed to drift away anywhere. Still these evils were of a
temporary character, and it is doubtful whether, but for this
extraordinary impetus, Victoria, as it now is, would ever have
existed. It is estimated that, at least, one-third of the entire
area of the colony is auriferous, and that even now only a small
portion of it has been explored, and a still smaller portion of
it operated upon. Gold is found in a variety of minerals: it
occurs in granite and diorite, in soft yellowish and brown
claystone, and in sandstone; also in blueish white plastic
silicates, in veins with carbonate of lime, oxide of manganese,
and carbonate of manganese, and sometimes, but rarely, with
sulphate of barytes. The industry of gold mining is divided into
two branches, alluvial and quartz mining; the former is the
separation of the earth from the metal by washing. The digger
shovels a quantity of the gold-impregnated earth into a tub,
water is added, and the contents stirred until it is of a mud-like
consistency. It is then run into the “cradle,” a long box with a
finely perforated sheet of iron at one end, and the earthy matters
pass through, leaving the heavier of gold and “dirt” at the
bottom. The “ dirt ” is then washed in a tin dish, an operation
requiring skill and experience, until little or nothing is left in the


dish but the pure gold. This process is called “shallow sinking,”
and was followed by “ sluicing,” which consists in washing the
auriferous clays and gravels, lying in low grounds, in artificially
constructed channels of water. Soon, however, the miners began
to search for gold at lower levels, and here the metal was found
in much greater abundance, and “deep sinking” became a
distinct branch of mining. Shafts are sunk from the surface
to what is termed a “ bottom,” usually of pipeclay. The
auriferous earth is also sought for, or followed by tunnelling,
running galleries, &c., as in mining for coal, and many a splendid
fortune has been made by labouring men, who were but humble
miners at home, scarcely able to get their bread. Quartz mining
soon followed, for the gold obtained by the foregoing methods is
hut that separated or disintegrated from the parent rock. The
quartz reef or vein is bored into and blasted by powder or
dynamite; the shattered rock is brought to the surface, and there
crushed by machinery, similar to the treatment of the tin ores in
Cornwall. In many cases the quartz is subjected to a roasting
process to facilitate its being broken into small pieces, which is
then subjected to the crushing machine. This consists of a
“ battery ” of four, six, eight, or more stampers, actuated by
gteam power. The stampers are upright iron rods, keyed to heavy
steel shoes, which rise and fall in rotation, crushing the hardest
rock into powder. The stamp heads work in an iron trough,
which is kept supplied with a stream of water to carry off the
“ slush,” or quartz mud, and then passes through a grating in
front, when the gold, being heavier, sinks to the bottom.
Minute atoms of gold, however, are carried off in the muddy
water, and to arrest these the water flows over a sloping
platform, covered with a “ blanket ” of green baize, or other
coarse material, which retains much of the gold, and its escape
is further prevented by small grooves or ledges extending
across the platform, and charged with mercury; this metal lays


hold (chemically) of the finest particles of gold as they are
washed down. The contents of the iron trough and blanket, as
well as the gutters, are washed in hot water, and placed in a
vessel containing a quantity of mercury. Rotatory motion is
imparted to the vessel, and the gold becomes amalgamated with
the mercury ; the amalgam is put into a chamois leather, which
is put under pressure, so as to force a large portion of the
mercury through the pores. The amalgam is then distilled to
drive off the mercury through a suitable pipe, and leave the pure
gold in a cake in the retort. Bendigo, or Sandhurst and
Ballarat, have been long known as the chief centres of the quartz
reefs, they have a formidable rival in Pleasant Creek or Staweil,
the head-quarters of deep sinking. The general depth of these
sinkings is from 300 ft. to 400 ft., but some greatly exceed this
depth, and, on account of the costly nature of the machinery,
these workings are mostly in the hands of companies. At the
end of the year 1877 (the latest return) the number of gold
companies registered amounted to 1311, the nominal capital of
which represents the trifling sum of £23,732,029. From an
average taken over a series of years, the average yield has been
found to be 11 dwts. 3.28 grs. of gold per ton of quartz crushed,
and, comparing the quantity obtained relatively from quartz and
alluvial workings, the official surveyors estimate the quartz
returns at 64 per cent., and the alluvial at 36 per cent. Thus,
in 1877, 513,452 ozs. were obtained from quartz, and 286,161 ozs.
from the alluvial deposits. From 1851 to 1878 the total
quantity of gold passed through the official channels was
47,283,377 ozs., estimated at £4 per oz., amounting to the
magnificent sum of £189,138,508. These figures will give some
idea of what Victoria alone has done in adding to the world’s
wealth in this single branch of industry, leaving out of the
question her other valuable productions. Referring again, for a
moment, to the subject of deep sinkings, I will give the reader


a few examples. At the Magda!a mine, Stawell, there is a pro-
specting shaft 1700 ft. in depth, and has not yet struck gold-
bearing quartz. In other claims, which are being profitably
worked, there are shafts, one 1120 ft., another 1260 ft., and two
others are more than 1000 ft. From these deep levels, in some
mines, the quartz has yielded as much as 3 ozs. per ton. At
duties, the New North pumping shaft is over 1200 ft.
deep, with a level in the working shaft at 1012 ft., which has
produced excellent quartz. The yield from some of these deep
mines varies from 12 dwts. to 1 oz. per ton. The value of the
machinery employed was estimated by the Department of
Mines, at the close of the year 1877, at £2,029,962, and the
number of quartz reefs proved to be auriferous was 3328. The
area of auriferous ground worked is estimated at 1185 square
miles. Gold mining has now become a defined calling, and men
embark in it as they would in any other calling, the feverish
excitement having long since passed away.
The Rates of Wages are—General manager, £3 to £l2 per week ; legal
manager, £1 to £6; mining manager, £2 10s. to £5; engineer, £2 ss. to
£5; engine driver, £2 2s. to £3 10s.; pitman, £2 to £2 155.; blacksmith,
£2 2s. to £3 10s.; carpenter, £2 2s. to £3 125.; foreman of shaft, £2 2s,
to £3 10s.; surface man (labourers), £1 10s. to £3; boy, 10s. to £2 ;
Chinese, 12s. 6d. to £2. The cost of the Government license is £1 10s.
per quarter.
Although, as a rule, gold is found in very small particles, yet
the Victorian fields have yielded nuggets of extraordinary size
and value. The “ Welcome ” nugget, found at Bakery Hill,
Ballarat, was the largest. It weighed 2195 ozs., and was sold in
Melbourne for £9325. The “Welcome Stranger” was found
near Dunolly, and when melted yielded gold to the value of
£9535. The “ Blanche Barkly,” found at Kingower, was of the
value of £6905 12s. 9d. One found in Canadian Gully brought
in £5532. The “ Heron,” found near Mount Alexander, was
sold in England for £4OBO, and there are many other examples
of a similar kind.


Victoria is, however, rich in other valuable minerals besides
gold, the more extended working of which will benefit the
colony as much as her gold, if not more so. The return value
of a few items, from 1851 to 1878, is as follows: —Silver,
£26,130 ; tin, £310,692 ; copper, £10,987 ; antimony, £137,401 ;
lead, £4892; iron, £2111; coal, £13,505; lignite, £2320;
kaoling, £7444; flagging, £43,158; slates, £940; magnesite,
£l2; diamonds, £107; sapphires, £630. Besides these, good
specimens of the emerald, topaz, opal, garnets, cairngorms, and
others have been found, and would, doubtless, amply repay
systematic search. The mineral industries want only develop-
ment.
Manufactures, Industries, and Commerce.
The numerous industries which now exist in Victoria have
risen from very small beginnings, and have had to contend
with great difficulties and struggle against a large amount of
prejudice. Yet, with all these drawbacks, manufactures have
made good headway, so that the colony is no longer dependent on
foreign markets for any of her articles of everyday use; and
artizans, who are steady and willing to work, can always find
employment at good wages, while the capitalist may always ensure
remunerative interest for his investments.
Among the leading industries are boot and shoe factories,
which have sprung into a most important position, and are
carried on in most of the large towns of the colony. They
employ large numbers of hands, men, women, and boys, and
machinery of the newest designs is used for cutting, rivetting,
pegging, and sewing. In March, 1877, there were 67 of these
factories, employing 1831 males, and 433 females; the value of
the plant and machinery being £22,727. Wages are —Welling,
tons, 10s.; elastics, 7s. 6d.; closing, Bs. The clothing factories,
in 1878, employed 4128 people. There are 66 of these factories


in the colony. The machinery and plant invested is valued at
£181,127. There is a good and steady demand for labour in this
branch. Saddlery and harness making is a comparatively new
industry in the colony, but is very rapidly rising and daily growing
in importance; there are over 39 manufactories, two saddle-tree,
five saddler’s ironmongery and coach spring, and five whip manu-
factories, employing a considerable number of male and female
operatives. At the close of 1877, the approximate value of the
machinery and plant invested in this bi’anch of industry was
£78,836. In the coach and waggon manufactories there are over
1499 hands, employed in 127 factories. At the time we write the
official returns are not made beyond the close of 1878 ; hence a
goodly margin may be added to the figures we have quoted. In
this branch the value of the plant is returned at £165,453. This
is leaving out of the question the small masters, —the quiet prac?
tical men, whose assistance is all important in the development of
a rising nation. The branch of labour comprised under the
heading of cabinet work and furniture includes (irrespective of
minor works) 62 largo factories, involving a capital of considerably
over £IOO,OOO, and is a very prosperous branch in the colony.
The iron and tin works, together with the copper and brass
foundries, will ere long form a most important element of wealth
in the colony, and to these are to be added the industries arising
out of the combination of these metals with the native antimony
and lead. The capital involved in the raising and working of
these metals was, at the end of 1877, £6,665,510, and in these
fields of commerce there is an unlimited area for investment, safe
to make a most handsome return. The agricultural implement
manufacture is a branch that is rapidly increasing in "V ictoria,
which is self-evident, because the implements are made to suit
the special requirements of the local customers, and are better
adapted to their purpose than anything that can be obtained from
abroad.


Tbade and Commeece.
In addition to the principal port o£ Melbourne, there are the
several smaller ports of Geelong, Portland, Port Fairy, Port
Albert, Warmambool, and the Murray river ports of Echuca,
Swan Hill, Tocumwal, Wagunyah, Wodouga, and Kowlong, all
of which are regularly visited by trading vessels. There are
vessels also continually sailing between the Victorian ports and
India, China, Mauritius, America, and the European ports. At
the principal ports, comprising Melbourne, Sandridge, and
AVilliamstown, the imports for 1875 amounted to £13,015,552,
and the exports to £13,126,292. The total declared value of
the imports for 1877 was £16,362,304, and that of the exports
£15,157,687. In addition to this, Victoria has a large external
trade with the other neighbouring colonies, and also with Tas-
mania and New Zealand.
Capital and Laboub.
There is a popular fallacy abroad, and it is one that is
extensively traded upon by the obstructives of emigration, that
because wages are good in the colony, the necessaries of life
must bo more than in proportion; and it is argued, from this stand
point, that a man is equally well off at home upon 18s. a week as
he would be in the colony upon £3 or £3 10s. The indisputable
quotations I shall presently set before the reader give an un-
qualified answer to this absurd and baseless proposition. Again,
it is urged, what is the use of the capitalist going out if he is to
pay these high wages, and his contingent expenses are corres-
pondingly increased ? The answer is simple enough. In the
first place, the increased outlay of wages is met by a corresponding
debit on the work done. Secondly, the interest and returns upon
every farthing of investment is double, and more frequently
treble, what it would be in the old country. Again, the cost of


personal maintaiuance and family outlay is no larger on his part
than (in proportion) is that of his workmen. The will and
determination to prosper is the very backbone of success, whether
it be carried out either on the part of the employer or tho
employed. I will take, first, the rates of wages, and then the
cost of provisions, &c.; the figures quoted being from undeniable
sources :
Bakers, foremen, and firsfc-clasa workmen, £2 ss. to £3 10s. per week;
second hands, 355. to 40s. Building Trades —Stonemasons, 10s. to 11s.
per day; bricklayers, plasterers, and slaters, 10s.; carpenters, 10s. j
labourers, 75.; pick and shovel men, 6s. Butchers—Shopmen, 355. to
40s. per week; boys, 15s. to 205.; slaughtermen, 40s. to 505.; small
goodsmen, 30s. to 40s. with rations. Cabinetmakers—Wages vary greatly
with the class of shop and ability of the men. In the superior shops in
the city the amounts earned are from £3 to £4 per week; and in others
from £2 10s. to £3 10s. In country towns lower rates prevail. Coach,
builders—Smiths, £2 10s. to £3 155.; very superior men, £4; bodymakers
are mostly paid by the piece, and good hands can earn from £2 10s. to
£3 10s.; wheelers also work by the piece, and earn from £2 10s. to
£3 10s. Painters, 9s. to 10s. per day; trimmers, £2 10s. to £3 per
week; vicemen, from 30s. to 40 a. Coopers—Mostly paid by piece work,
but day work is 9s. for the day of ten hours ; casks (tallow) ss, for
thirds, and 4s. 6d. for fourths. Drapers—ln first-class shops, drapers’
assistants and carpet salesmen have from £3 to £4 per week; first-class
milliners, £3 to £3 10s.; second-class, 355. to 50s. Farriers—Firemen,
555. per week; doormen, 455.; inferior hands, 30s. to 40s. Gardeners—
Best men, near town, 30s. to 425. per week; in the country, 235. to 255.
with rations; inferior hands, 15s. with rations. Hatters —Bodymakers,
low crown, 12s. and 14s. per doz.; silk hats, 225. and 245.; ditto pull*
overs, 205.; ditto shapers, regulars, plain shape, 6s. per doz.; Anglesea,
125.; ditto low crowns, 4s. and 6s. per doz.; crown sewers, 3s. 6d. to
55.; trimmers, 6s. Jewellers —Manufacturing, average workmen, 555. to
655. per week; finer workmen, £5 to £6 per week; seal engravers and
enamellers are wanted, and can obtain from £6 to £8 per week. Miners
—For surface work, 40s. per week; underground, 455.; deep wet miners,
50s Painters and Glaziers—Average rates 9s. a day. Plumbers and
Gasfitters —Average £3 per week. Printers, &c. —Compositors, Is. per
1000; lithographers, £2 10s. to £3 15s. per week; binders, £2 to £3;
paper rulers, £3 to £3 10s. Sailors —In sailing ships, £5 per month;
steam vessels, £6 per month. Ship Carpenters —Employment very
irregular, average rate, 13s. per day. Stevedores —Lumpers get 12s, per


day; drivers of donkey engines, £lB per month. Tailors—The rate by
the log is Is. per hour, but in second-class shops the men earn from
£2 10s. to £3 per week. Tanners and Curriers —Beamsmen, 40s. to 50s.
per week; shedsmen, 425. to 455.; curriers (piecework). Watchmakers:
average rate, 41. per week—superior workmen, up to 6Z. Grooms, in
livery stables, 30s. to 40s. per week—coachmen, 40s. to 50s. —navvies on
railways, 9d. per hour. Domestic Servants, for Town —Housemaids, 251.
to SOL per annum —female cooks, first-class, 40Z, to 75Z.; second rate,
from 261. to 36Z. per annum—male cooks, from 30s. to 80s. per week —
nursemaids, 251. to 351. per annum —nursegirls, Bs. to 10s. per week—
laundresses, 35Z. to 45L per annum. For Hotels : Cooks (male and female),
50L to 150 Z. per annum—housemaids, 351. to 40L For Stations: first-
class, married couples, for home stations, 70 1, to 901. per annum—second-
class ditto, with children, 40Z. to 50Z. —cooks, 45Z. to 55L—housemaids,
35Z. to 40Z. For Farms : Men cooks, 50Z. per annum—married couples,
60Z. to 70Z. —women servants, 30Z. to 35Z.—farming men, 15s. to 20s. per
week —milkmen, 15s. to 25s ploughmen, 18s. to 225. 6d. —waiters, for
hotels,. 20s. to 355. per week —grocers’ assistants, 15s. to 30s.—general
store ditto, 20s. to 40s.—nursery governesses, 30Z. to 40Z. per
finishing ditto, 60Z. to 80Z. Station Hands Wages: Stockmen, 60Z. to 75Z.
per annum—shepherds, 15s. to 20s. per week —ordinary working men, 15s.
to 20s. —drovers, 255. to 40s.—gardeners, 15s. to 20s. per week with rations.
The following are the average prices in Melbourne of the
chief articles of consumption. The cost of groceries, wines,
spirits, &c., is generally somewhat higher in the country districts,
and of agricultural and grazing produce a degree lower.
Agricultural Produce —Wheat, ss. to 6s. 6d. per bushel; oats, 3s. to
45.; barley, 3s. to 55.; maize, 3s. to 65.; bran, Is., Is. 3d., to Is. Bd. j
hay, per ton, £3 10s. to £6; potatoes, £3 to £8; flour, £l4 ss. to
£l4 10s.; bread, per 41b. loaf, 6d. to 7d. Grazing Produce —Horses,
draught, £lO to £4O; saddle, £5 to £5O; fat cattle, £6 10s. to £l6 10s.;
milch cows, £4 to £l2 10s.; fat calves, £1 10s. to £3; fat sheep, 7s. to
225.; fat lambs, 6s. to 10s. 6d. Butchers' Meat —Beef, retail, per lb.,
3d. to 7d.; mutton, 2d. to 4d.; veal, 4d. to Bd.; pork, 4d. to 7d.; lamb,
per quarter, Is. 6d. to 3s. 6d. Dairy Produce —Fresh butter, per lb.. Is.
to Is. 6d.; salt butter, Bd. to Is.; colonial cheese, lOd. to Is. 2d.; im-
ported, Is. 6d. to Is. lOd.; milk, per quart, 4d. Farm-yard Produce —
Geese, per couple, Bs. to 125.; ducks, ss. to Bs.; fowls, ss. to 75.;
rabbits, Is. to 25.; pigeons, Is. 3d. to 55.; turkeys, 6s. to 125.; sucking
pigs, Ba. to 145.; bacon, lOd. to Is. 2d.; ham, Is. to Is. 3d.; eggs, per
doz., Is. to 2s. 6d. Garden Produce —Potatoes, wholesale, per ton, £2 to
£4; retail, per lb., fd. to Id.; onions, per cwt., 6s. to 125.; carrots, per doz.


bunches, 6d. to Is.; turnips, 6d. to Is.; radishes, 6d. to Is.; cabbages, per
doz., 6d. to 25.; cauliflowers, Is. to 45.; lettuces, 4d. to Is.; green peas,
per lb., Id. to 3d. Miscellaneous Articles —Tea, per lb., Is. to 3s. fid.;
coffee, Is. to Is. 6d.; sugar, 3d. to 6d. ; lump, 7d.; rice, 2d. to 4d.;
tobacco, Is. to 65.; soap, 3d. to 4d.; sperm candles, 9d. to Is. ; tallow
candles, 4d. to 6d.; salt, Id.; ceal, per ton, 20s. to 355. ; firewood, 12s.
to 18s. Wines, Spirits, pc.— Ale, per hhd., £4 to £9 55.; per doz., 6s.
to 11s, Porter, per hhd., £5 to £7; per doz., 7s. 6d. to 11s. Brandy,
per gallon, 4s. to 31s. Rum, 3s. to 3s. 6d. Whisky, 4s. to 10s. Hol-
lands, 2s. 9d. to 4s. Port wine, per doz., 255. to 555. Sherry, 255. to
85s. Claret, 10s. 9d. to 80s. Champagne, 265. 9d. to 100 s. Colonial
wine, per gallon, Is. and upwards.
Fruits of all kinds are plentiful in their respective seasons,
and may be had quite as cheaply and in most cases far more
cheaply than in Great Britain. Wearing apparel, slops, soft
goods, boots, &c., are reasonable; the imported articles are,
however, subject to a duty. .The colonial made goods of all
kinds can be purchased at low prices, and are of very good
quality. Taking into consideration the high rate of wages, and
the moderate prices of the necessaries of life, it is obvious that
the small capitalist, or the steady and industrious artizan and
his family, may live very comfortably, and yet save money,
either to purchase his own house, or to become the freeholder
of land.
Roads, Railways, Postal, &c.
It is but a few years ago when the roads of the colony
were but little more than mere bush tracks, cut through
the timber. But in a brief space of time railways gradually
extended in all inland directions from the Colonial Metro-
polis, and at present the number of miles of railway open in
Victoria is estimated at 950 miles. The Government has also
in course of construction the Melbourne and Gipps land line,
120 miles. The postal arrangements o£ the colony are very
complete, and communication by letter is as readily made to all
parts of the colony and to the outer world as at home. In close


connection with the post office is the electric telegraph system.
The telegraph lines extend over 3000 miles. The rate for tele-
graph messages within the colony is Is. for ten words, and Id.
per word additional. A number of building societies have been
established in most parts of the colony. At the close of 1877
there were 61 of these societies in active and prosperous operation,
embodying 21,824 members, and with an income of £1,182,718.
There are also numerous friendly societies to afford relief in
sickness, &c. Insurance offices are scattered all over the colony.
The public schools, at the close of 1877, numbered 1626, with
234,519 scholars, and of private schools there were 530, having
28,432 scholars. The colony offers to the very poorest parent
every possible opportunity of giving to his children a good educa-
tion. There are also public libraries, picture galleries, museums,
schools of art and technology, scientific and literary institutes; in
short, everything that can minister to the desires of a cultivated
or studious mind. In conclusion, it may be unhesitatingly asserted
that Victoria can not only vie with her colonial neighbours, but
with those of a more ancient lineage, who have enjoyed for ages
advantages of which she is only in her childhood. Long may she
prosper and rise to be a great and glorious colonial power, of
which there cannot be a shadow of a doubt.
