

AUTHOR'S REPRINT
FROM RECORDS OF THE THE SOUTH AUSTRAIAN MUSEUM, VOL. III, No. 3,
JUNE 30TH, 1927
THE TAVAU OR COIL FEATHER CURRENCY OF
SANTA CRUZ ISLAND
BY EDGAR R. WAITE, F.L.S., C.M.Z.S.,
DIRECTOR SOUTH AUSTEALIAN MUSEUM.
ADELAIDE
THE HASSELL PRESS, CURRIE STREET




THE TAVAU OR COIL FEATHER CURRENCY OF
SANTA CRUZ ISLAND
BY EDGAR R. WAITE, F.L.S., C.M.Z.S.,
Dirkctor, South Australian Mushum.
Text fig. 91.
Under the above title, the late Robert Etheridge (*) published a paper, wherein
he reviewed the literature of the subject dealt with, and also supplied a lengthy
description, so that with one exception apparently little remains to be written.
Fig. 91. Tavau, with Triad.
(i) Etheridge, Rec. Aust. Mus., iv, 1902, p. 289, pi. xliv.


The exception referred to is, however, somewhat important, and forms the subject
of the present note.
Early this year the South Australian Museum received from Dr. C. Mervyn
Deland, of Vanikoro, Santa Cruz Group, a small bird accompanied by the follow-
ing; note: “I am sending you a small Honey-eater, the bird that is used to make
‘feather-money’ in these islands; they are quite common.”
At the time Etheridge’s paper was written I also was engaged at the
Australian Museum, Sydney, and remembering the article, and the mention
therein of lorikeets’ feathers, I again referred to it. The point at issue is the
statement that the red feathers used are those of “a lorikeet ( Trichoglossus
massena Bonpt.).” It would appear, however, that the feathers were not critic-
ally examined, but that the statements of the Rev. Dr. R. H. Codrington (-’) were
simply accepted and quoted as follows; “Feather-money is peculiar to Santa
Cruz; it is made of the red feathers from under the wings of a parrot, Tricho-
glossus massena . . . . ” Edge Partington ( 3 ), whose note is also referred to
by Etheridge, probably likewise accepted Codrington’s statement, for in describ-
ing his figure of tavau in the collection of the Rev. Alfred Penny he wrote:
“Native money: made of a band of wood with parrot feathers sewn on to the
outer surface.”
The statement of Dr. Deland, supported as it was by an actual bird, led us
to examine the specimen of tavau preserved in this Museum, and Dr. A. M.
Morgan, our Hon. Curator in Ornithology, says that the feathers composing our
example are certainly those of a Honey-eater, and quite similar to those of the
bird sent, which is probably Myzomela boiei.
Just at this time I received a letter from another old colleague, Mr. W. W.
Thorpe, now Ethnologist at the Australian Museum, drawing attention to the
circumstance that an example of the rare feather-money currency of Santa Cruz
had come into his hands for disposal, and suggesting that'if our Museum did not
possess an example we might embrace the opportunity afforded of acquiring one.
With the previously mentioned information before me, I wrote to Mr. Thorpe,
and asked him to be good enough to examine the specimen originally described by
Etheridge, and also that now offered, in order to ascertain the bird of origin of
the red feathers used. His reply embodied the following: “Mr. Kinghorn
(ornithologist) identifies the feathers in both examples as of Myzomela, but is
uncertain whether to ascribe them to M. boiei or M. pulcherrima; at all events
they are not the Trichoylossus.”
When previously writing to Dr. Deland, and presuming that the feathers of
(2) Codrington, The Melanesians, 1891, p. 324.
(2) Partington, An Album of Weapons, etc., i, 1890, pi. 165.


the tavau in the Australian Museum were those of Trichoglossus, as stated, I
suggested to him that it would be interesting to learn if feathers of both the
Parakeet and Honey-eater were utilized in making tavau, or if, say, the former
had become scarce, and that the feathers of the Honey-eater were now being
substituted, or vice versa. I had inclined to the former Trichoglossus, later
Myzomela, view because in his letter Mr. Thorpe states that “the coil under offer
is probably the last obtainable, as it was reluctantly made to discharge a debt by
an old native, the last feather-worker on Vanikoro,” who would naturally use
the feathers then obtainable. Seeing that all the three tavaus that have been
critically examined with a view to ascertaining the source of the component
feathers, show that those of Myzomela were used, it will be interesting if
Museums or individuals possessing examples will similarly publish the results
of examination.
The late Sir Edward Stirling, my predecessor in the directorate of this
Museum, was aware with what feathers the tavau in the South Australian
Museum is decorated, as shown by his label thereon, which reads: “Coil of
Feather Money, made of pigeons’ feathers and the red breast feathers of a
Honey-eater fixed to a foundation of vegetable fibre similar to that used for
making the Santa Cruz fishing lines. The birds providing the red feathers are
caught alive, plucked, and released.’’ This information was supplied by the then
Bishop of Melanesia, the Rt. Rev. Cecil Wilson, who also donated the example
of tavau to the Museum.
On writing to His Lordship, now Bishop of Bunbury, Western Australia, for
further details about the tavau, he very kindly sent me the following information:
“A coil of the Santa Cruz feather-money, which has largely lost the red feathers,
corresponds to our copper coins. A new red coil is to Cruzians what gold is to
us. I once offered £2 for a new red coil, but the man refused it. Later I found
that a small Berkshire pig would buy one, and I imported one for the purpose.
A man buys a wife with one or two red coils and perhaps fifty worn ones.
At a dance, coils of money are hung on the coral slabs that surround the dancing
ground by the man who gives the dance. I saw a man on his deathbed, with his
money hanging on the walls of the house; probably it had been divided for legacy
purposes.
“This feather-money is made by the men; on a wooden spatula, about the
width of a coil, pigeon feathers are glued together and tipped with red. When
a sufficient number of these layers have been made, they are bound together with
string in such a way that only the red tips of the layers show.
“On the card yon sent me” (vide note on label above), “it is stated that
the foundation is vegetable fibre: I think this is wrong, for, as far as I remember,


the only foundation is the pigeons’ feathers. Is the ‘triad’ of which yon write
the same as what I have called a spatula? The latter was not triangular, but
more a square with a handle.”
In response to my further letter, His Lordship supplied the following
additional information, which has probably not been previously published:
“I understand now what the ‘triad’ is, but I do not remember ever having
seen one, but this must be because these coils of money are more stored than
current. They are brought out on great occasions. A rich man keeps his money
over the fire in the middle of his house to keep it dry. On one occasion, when a
fire destroyed a village, every man left his own house to be burnt, in order that
he might save the chief’s house, where there was a vast store of this money.
“The coils are unwound, and the money is hung vertically on the walls
round the body of the sick or dead man. Red is the colour of importance: at the
nose-boring of infants, and at nostril-boring a little later, at marriage, and at
death. A Cruzian is painted red when he dies, and he lies with all his ornaments,
nose ring, earrings, etc., a red body with red money all round it.”
Etheridge concludes bis paper by remarking that this feather currency
appears to be comparatively rare in collections, and he cites knowledge of the
depositories of three examples only. The “money” has been twice figured, first
by Edge Partington, whose pen sketch shows it partly uncoiled and as dissociated
from the “three-armed piece of wood (cut out of the solid) invariably found
with the ‘parcel’ of feather-money.” The second illustration is a photographic
reproduction by Etheridge; in this picture the tavan is also partly uncoiled, and
it shows the various accessories described in the text, but lacks the three-armed
piece of wood. Under these circumstances a third figure may not be out of place,
and the illustration now supplied is from the specimen referred to by Mr. Thorpe,
whom I have to thank for kind permission to reproduce the photograph he sent
to me. In this picture the tavan is fully coiled; there are no accessories, such as
Jobs’ tears (Coix lachryma), nautilus or mussel shells, but the three-armed piece
of wood is present, also a long length of sinnet, which, after passing through a
hole in the meeting place of the three arms, is secured by a knot. This is not
shown in Partington’s illustration, and indication of the bole, if present, was
omitted. It will be noticed that in both illustrations of the triad it is not a
tri-symmetrical, but a Y-shaped object.


