







to the English Bulle [?]
For Private Circulation only.
[?]
THE VOYAGE
OF THE
NORTHERN LIGHT.
Sydney:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER.
1896.




Voyage of the Northern light.
THE STORY
BY
MANY WITNESSES.
Recent local publications have made a sufficient excuse for sending out this
pamphlet to Captain Slocum’s host of friends in Australia. The matter is
not presumed to he of more than private interest.
“Australian Star,” October 10, 1896.
The important question whether Skip-
per Slocum shall be accorded a national
razzle-dazzle in Sydney seems to depend
upon whether he did or did not boot a
gentleman of the name of Slater some
thirteen years ago—or at least Mr.
Slater seems to think it should. As a
matter of concrete fact Captain Slo-
cum’s claim to public notice lies in
the circumstance that he has made a
very adventurous voyage in a very
diminutive craft. Whether at some
bygone period he “biffed ” Mr. Slater,
or Mr. Slater biffed Mr. Slocum, or
each gouged the other, has nothing
whatever to do with the matter in
hand. At the same time the whole
business is somewhat uninteresting,
and one hardly perceives why rather
more fuss should be made about it
than if the Slocum-Slater imbroglio
was a European war, or an Indian fa-
mine, or the loss of the entire British
Navy. Some thousands of Armenians
have been comfortably massacred at an
expenditure of not one-fiftieth part of
the cold type devoted to the thirteen-
year-old assault on Mr. Slater.
♦
“ New London News.”
Another Chapter in the Northern
Light Affair.
W. H. DIMMOCK SPEAKS.
He Tells what he Knows of the Alleged Brutal
Treatment—Shamming Slater—
Capt. Slocum Praised.
What a Northern Light Sailor Says.
The Telegram reporter had a talk
with William H. JDimmock, of this
city, in relation to the treatment of
Henry Arthur Slater by Captain
Joshua Slocum, of the ship Northern
Light. He was shown a copy of the
statement of Slater to the editor of
the Nautical Gazette , republished


THE NORTHERN LIGHT.


in the Telegram yesterday, which
showed that he had nothing against
the captain and was ignorant of the
nature of the proceedings against
Slocum. Mr. Dinnnock said ; I joined
the Northern Light in New London
harbour on the Bth of August, 1382,
in place of Francis Murrin, who stabbed
First Mate Marvel W. Knowles. I
shipped as seaman. I don’t think
Slater was cruelly treated. He was
a bad man on the ship, that’s certain.
Slater shipped at Port Elizabeth as
third mate ; captain took him on re-
commendation purporting to have come
from captain of the ship Charter Oak.
Since learned that Slater wrote his
own recommendation and forged a
signature which was on a dishonourable
discharge from the Charter Oak. We
had been to sea about a week when
Slater had some trouble with the cap-
tain on the poop deck. I was forward,
and could not hear what was said.
Later they were sending up mizzen
rigging. Slater had charge of men on
deck. The boatswain was in the
mizzen top, and he told Slater that the
rigging was sent up wrong, as it could
not bo overhauled aloft. Slater re-
plied that no man on the ship could
tell him his business. Captain Slocum
stepped up to Slater and told him that
ho must send up the rigging in the
proper way. Slater told captain that
ho was third mate of ship, and
knew his business. His language and
manner were insulting, and he took a
belaying pin out of rail as if to strike
the captain. Captain Slocum informed
Slater that he was disrated, saying :
“You are no longer officer of this ship;
take your things from the cabin and
go into the boatswain’s room.” Slater
refused to go, but after a few hours
went forward among the men. Cap-
tain called him aft, and ordered mate
to put him in irons. McQuaker, the
sail maker, was acting as second mate.
When ho told the men to do anything,
Slater would order them not to obey,
saying, “ I’m second mate of this ship.”
A pair of shackles was put on Slater’s
wrists, and he was placed down on the
half-deck, where there was plenty of
room. Boatswain carried down his
dinner, but could not find Slater,
and reported the fact to the captain.
A search was ordered with lanterns,
and Slater was found stowed away in
the port alleyway, a dark place filled
up with sails He had the shackles
on, and he said he didn’t want anything
to eat, but wanted to be left there to
die. The captain finally concluded to
lot him have his own way. He was
offered supper, but refused. That
night was very dark. Slater came out,
his hands free, and went on the poop
deck. No one on deck but mate and
man at wheel. Slater went into mate’s
room and took revolvers and case of
ammunition, and then went across to
second mate’s room, where McQuaker
and boatswain were. Told McQuaker
to hold up arms while he searched for
firearms. Slater told boatswain that
if he made any noise would blow his
brains out. Slater then went out of
cabin and went into the forecastle
among the sailors. I was carpcnterV
mate, and carpenter and I had all
night in. We were called up with
McQuaker and the boatswain by
Captain Slocum, who said that there
was more trouble A consultation was
hold, and it was decided not to go
forward among the sailors until day-
light. The mate was ordered to place
Slater in irons at all hazards, but not
to hurt him, unless absolutely necessary.
Slater was found in the starboard
forecastle. About time for watch to
come out. The watch were ordered
out, and Slater remained in forecastle.
Mate told him that he must go in irons,
and that it was useless for him to re-
sist. The men went about their duties,
most of them cheerfully, some sullenly.
It was evident that Slater had “stirred”
them up. Slater said he would go aft
and talk with the captain. Ho went
on the poop deck. Capt. Slocum told
him that ho must bo put in irons.
Slater said :—“ No man on ship
can put me in irons,” and started to
run forward to the sailors. Captain
Slocum shot at him twice as he was


running off. The captain then insisted
that Slater must go in irons, as he was
too dangerous a man to he left free.
Slater then went forward, and seeing
that he could not take charge of the
ship he returned aft and allowed him-
self to be put in irons Two pairs of
handcuffs were placed on his wrists at
that time, and he twisted them off as
if they were string. He broke seven
pairs of handcuffs which were given to
Capt. Slocum by Capt. A. A. Jfengar,
of the cutter Grant, when the trouble
on the Norther Light occured in New
London harbor I then had to make
shackles for his legs, to hold him. They
were soft padded with leather, so as
not to hurt. We shackled him that
day to a ring bolt on deck, while we
built a cabin for him in the lazaretto.
He would not have been safe unless
confined there. Otherwise he would
obtain access to the cabin. His prison
was six feet and a half long, four feet
wide and four feet high. It was the
height of the deck, and as large as we
could make it. We put him in there,
and chained him tothoafter-stanchions.
He kept breaking shackles even in
there. He would make all the noise
possible, and sing obscene songs that
(ho captain’s wife must hear them.
The smallest allowance of food he ever
had was three biscuits a day, with
plenty of water. This would not injure
health, but reduce a man. He was
not kept on that diet more than two
or three days at a time. On Sundays ho
was let out on the poop-deck to walk-
about at freedom, so long as he behaved
himself. There was no vermin in
Slater’s prison. On Sundays the place
was washed and dried as clean as any
part of the ship. Slops and filth were
cleaned out every day. Considering the
provocation, I think Slater was treated
very leniently. On Sundays he had
soup, fresh bread and the best of food
right from the captain’s table, as good
as any of us had. Once the captain
carried him some food, and ho threw a
plate at the captain’s head, cutting hi.s
face He threatened the captain’s life,
and swore he would have his
heart’s blood before the ship reached
New York. I don’t believe that the
captain ordered mate to show more
mercy towards Slater. Don’t think
there was any occasion for it I was
at work close hy Slater for days and
days. He was a very obstinate, bad
man. I don’t know what kindness he
could have expected. Slater once
wrote a note to the captain, asking to
be reinstated as mate, but the captain
did not dare to trust him. Slater said
one day, in my hearing, that he had
been in prison for “curing’’ one captain,
and he didn’t care if he was sentenced
again for killing another. The day
before he was released in Brooklyn he
broke two pairs of shackles. A weak
man couldn’t do that. His weakness
was all shammed, and the men on
the ship were all of one opinion
in that respect. He was a perfect sham
in every respect. See how quick he
got well. When we went down to
release Hm, Slater called for a clean
change of clothing, and the mate gave
it to him. He then went back into
hi.s cabin. He took off his pants and
shirt and came out naked. Thelazarotto
was full of reporters and other people,
and the cunning of Slater created
undeserved sympathy for him. Slater
came out trembling, and feigned so
much weakness that be reached the
deck with apparent difficulty. He
had good drawers, pants, stockings,
etc, if he wanted to wear them.
There was no vermin in his prison
except cockroaches, and they were all
over the ship. He used to catch them
and put them in a pan. AVhen they
were taken away from him he would
become very angry. He had some
reason for wanting to keep them. I
can truthfully say that Slater never
was injured or brutally treated on the
Northern Light. He was punished
for his actions,and that justly deserved.
Capt Slocum is as fine a man as ever
I want to have anything to do with.
He is a worker himself, and expects
everybody else to be. He hates a
loafer, and don’t want anyone soldier-
ing on him, hut he is kind, cheerful


and generous to his men. T have read
the evidence against the captain in the
New York papers, but very little of
the testimony favorable to the captain
was printed. They were one-sided
reports, and I was disgusted with
the reading of them.”
+
“New York Nautical Gazette.”
THE NORTHERN LIGHT CASE.
Judge Benedict last week very
promptly and justly granted the motion
for a new trial in the case of Capt.
Slocum, of the Northern Light. We
have often differed with the learned
judge, but we have had reason many
times to commend his acts ; none more
than in the present instance ; for we
think that Capt. Slocum can prove, on
a new trial, that his treatment of the
fellow Slater was not as harsh as it
.should have been; and, moreover, if
we are correctly informed, the Captain
did not have an opportunity to pro-
perly put his side of the .story before
the jury or the public. We say the
public, for the reason that his case was
prejudged by the press before his trial,
and public opinion was pointed in an
outrageous manner against him, and
the jury partook of this feeling very
naturally. Their verdict, consequently,
was, to a greater or loss degree, biased,
notwithstanding the charge of the
learned judge. Wo hold that it is
cruel, unjust and unmanly for public
prints to assail anyone as Capt. Slocum
was assailed. The newspapers actually
hounded him so unfairly that his liberty
was in serious danger before the
formal charges were laid at his door.
We have heard men whose standing is
unquestioned, and who are familiar
with things of the sea, say openly that
Capt. Slocum failed in his duty when
he neglected to allow Slater to carry
his desperate threats and acts one step
further than he did, and then shoot
him down, as they think he deserved,
and thus rid the sea of a dangerous
character. As we understand the case,
all that Capt. Slocum desires is a full
hearing, and to introduce testimony
that was debarred at his first trial.
He feels confident that his acts will be
justified, and that he will be no longer
forced to bear the odium of being an
inhuman brute, capable of torturing a
fellow-being, as was charged against
him. Who among men living on
shore would tolerate such acts as were
committed by a man like Slater, and
especially when surrounded by all that
was dear to him in life, as any man’s
family is, or would take the chances of
having his home wrecked and ruined
by an outlaw and tramp 1 It must bo
remembered that a shipmaster cannot,
at sea, call in a policeman, as landsmen
can on shore. Besides, by law and
custom ho is empowered to use force, if
necessary, to restrain a dangerous or
turbulent member of his crew. Even
if Capt. Slocum has erred in Iris judg-
ment, or been even harsh in his treat-
ment of Slater, is it not equally true
that judges orr the bench, with all
their supposed wisdom and justice,
have erred also 1 Instances are known
where innocent men have been sent to
the gallows by judges who have erred
in charging a jury. Wc expect that
the new trial in this case will show
that we have not erred in defending a
shipmaster of whom none speak but to
praise, except this unfortunate mart
who brought these serious charges
against him. We hope that the daily
press will endeavour, hereafter, trot to
run wild to produce a sensation at the
expense of an unheard and undefended
shipmaster, whose only crime, in our
estimation, was doing his duty in pro-
tecting his family, his property, and
the lives and property of others con-
fided to his care.


CAPTAIN SLOCUM EXONERATED.
Sailor Slater Makes an Interesting Affidavit
in the Northern Light Case.
Henry Arthur Slater, the sailor who compelled
tlio arrest of Captain Joshua Slocum, of the North-
ern Light, yesterday made the following affidavit
exonerating the captain :
CITY AND COUNTY OK NKW YORK, )
State of New Yoke, j
This 12th day of January, 1884, personally came
before me Henry Arthur Slater, seaman, of Boston,
Mass,, who deposes and says : I was late second officer
on board the ship Northern Light, of which Joshua Slo-
cum was master, on a voyage from Tort Elizabeth,
South Africa, to New York. I was confined as a pri-
soner b}' the said Slocum, and I was accordingly put in
irons and confined as above stated. I heard Chief
Mute Mitchell tell Captain Slocum that I had said I
would kill Captain Slocum and his wife if I ever got
out of irons,
I believe that was the reason I was so closely cun-
fined. Since I have been at liberty I have found out
that Captain Slocum ordered me to be brought up on
deck every day, and that I should have sufficient
food and water every day. -Mate Mitchell told Captain
Slocum that if I was brought up on deck 1
would create a mutin. and murder all the
after guards. I do not blame Captain Slocum
for the treatment I have received, but 1 blame
Mate Mitchell for not giving me the food Captain Slo-
cum had ordered for me. I fully believe that the suits
instigated against Captain Slocum have been mafic for
the purpose of blackmailing himand getting money out
of him by making mo the tool of those designing per-
sons. While being taken to jail in New York I was
told not to employ any lawyer until I had seen the
Deputy Marshal. The Deputy Marshal sent Mr. Angel
up to me, and told me to employ him to defend me in my
case.
The first I knew of the civil action for damages
against Captain Slocum was through the newspapers.
I never gave Mr. Angel any authority to enter a civil
suit against Captain Slocum and 1 do not wish the suit
to proceed. All parties concerned in tins matter do so
without my consent. Any papers that 1 have signed
1 do not remember about, for 1 was confused and sick,
and I knew not what 1 was signing at the time. While
I was lying in Ludlow Street Jail, the first day the
doctor gave orders that no person was to see me, hut
somehow .Mr. Angel came to sec me and had an
interview. I now sec that both Captain
Slocum and myself have been made the
dupes of the very men who ought to have protected us,
and that the whole affair is made to get money out of
('aptain Slocum to be distributed among them. 1 know
very well while we were on board the Northern Light
if I had said the word the crew would have mutinied at
once. I funned the opinion from their actions towards
Captain Slocum and Mate Mitchell.
The statement having been read to the said Henry
Arthur Slater, he declared the same to he true.
(Signed,) IIKNKY AktHUH SLATER.
Sworn before me this twelfth day of January.
BIIAHLEY S. OSKON,
Notary Public City and County of New York. No. 3(i-
«.
“The Sun,” Jan. 13.
BACKING OUT OF HIS LAW CASE.
Second Hate Slater Unaware he had Sued
Capt. Slocum till he Read it.
Henry Arthur Slater called on Mr.
15. S. Osbon, the editor of the Nautical
Gazette, yesterday, and said he had
suffered all he wanted to and had had
enough. He said that if Mr. Osbon
would hear what he had to .say he
would make a clean breast of every-
thing. Mr. Osbon knew Slater to be
the second mate of the ship Northern
Light, who had been imprisoned in
irons on that vessel for fifty-three
days for mutinous conduct, and whose
testimony in the Federal court had led
to the conviction of Capt. Slocum on a
charge of false imprisonment So Mr.
Osbon heard what Slater had to say,
and his words were taken down in
shorthand and sworn to before the
editor, who is also a notary public.
Mr. Osbon said that before he
ventured an editorial opinion on the
merits of Capt. Slocum’s action in put-
ting the second mate in irons, he had
the case investigated by expert nautical
men. As a consequence, his sympathy
is with the Captain. He said : “ Capt.
Slocum is an A 1 man, a genuine
Yankee captain of high reputation.
He went out with a hard crew, and
had to put in at Now London and call
upon a revenue cutter for aid, his mate
having been killed in a mutiny. The
same spirit that had led to that up-
rising remained with the crew through-
out the voyage. Slater shipped at
Port Elizabeth, and was guilty of in-
subordination. The Captain has been
tried and convicted, and is to be
sentenced in a day or two. He is
liable to imprisonment as well as a
heavy fine. At the same time there
was this suit for damages and another
suit by a sailor who has just arrived
on another ship, and who was in the
New London affair. Capt. Slocum is
a part owner of the vessel, and this
has not only cost him a groat deal of
money and obliged him to engage
another master for his ship while ho is
kept here, but it is calculated to hurt
his reputation. He is a bravo man,
and will not let these misfortunes
triumph over his future.”
Capt. Slocum seemed pleased with
the turn of events. He said that Slater,
had come out like a man and acknow
lodged that the crew was in a state of


insurrection and would have mutinied
at a word from him. - Slater and he
had had a misunderstanding upon a
point of seamanship, and Slater became
very insubordinate. There could be
no doubt that Slater intended to take
charge of the ship. However, now that
the man had shown a desire to do
what was right, there was no use re-
opening old disputes.
“N. Y. Nautical Gazette.”
THE “CRUELTY” ON THE
NORTHERN LIGHT.
We have investigated, as far as it is
possible for a thing of the kind to bo
investigated, and find that the reports
of the cruelty of Capt. Slocum are, as
usual, garbled by so-called marine re-
porters, men who have no ideas of ships
and maritime affairs. We find that the
cruelty came from putting a fraud and
a dangerous man in the only safe place
possible for him to bo confined on hoard
of a ship, in which he would he pre-
vented from endangering the lives of
all on board,
Notwithstanding all the newspaper
accounts (the daily papers should find
some better reporters on marine affairs),
Capt. Slocum has not been deprived of
his liberty for a single hour, and walks
the streets as a quiet gentleman, as he
always has been.
The more we hunt up Slater’s doings
the more dangerous and fraudulent we
find them.
The South Street Cruiser.
The above communication from our
well-known and exteemed correspon-
dent, an old shipmaster, one in whom
we have every confidence, with state-
ments made to us by other reliable and
disinterested persons, leads us to be-
lieve that Capt. Slocum is not as bad
as he has been painted, by long odds
and some time ago we felt certain that
there were reasonable grounds for be-
lieving that he was a victim of legal (?)
proceedings such as have been practised
in this port in years past by a class of
’long-shore lawyers known to the sea-
faring man as “ wharf-shysters,” who,
under theguiscof friendship to the sailor,
use him and his fancied wrongs to
wring largo sums from the .shipmaster,
and who have been cunning enough to
enlist the daily newspaper reporters
unwittingly in their schemes to inflame
public opinion before the trial came off.
We know of numerous cases where
the captains and officers of ships have
been held up as human fiends day after
day in the public prints, who, when
tried before an impartial jury and a
stern judge, were acquitted of any
shadow of inhumanity or wrong-doing,
and there are reasons for believing
that Capt. Slocum will yet be able to
show that he had good reason for his
acts, which have been too highly col-
ored to correspond with the facts when
brought out in the full investigation.
Slater’s condition may yet he proven
to have been the result of a determina-
tion to make out a case that should
enlist more than ordinary sympathy
and attention. Therefore it is wise to
suspend judgement until the case is
heard.
Condensed report from the New York
“ Times,” February 19th, 1895.
FAILING IN A LIBEL SUIT.
ISAAC ANGEL DEFEATED IN
HIS LITIGATION WITH
THE SUN.
The case of Isaac Angel against the
New York Sun, to recover $2,000 for
alleged libel, came up yesterday in the
City Court. It grew out of the trial
of Capt. Slocum, of the ship Northern
Light Angel appeared as
counsel for Slater. Meanwhile Slater
had signed an affidavit in which he
denied having authorized Angel to
bring the suit.
The Sun published the affidavit, and
Angel claimed that this publication of
the affidavit was libellous, ifec., &o.
Mr. Angel was then himself
called to the stand.


Mr. Bartlett asked the witness
whether, when he was in Cambridge,
M ass., he had been indicted for cheating.
“ I was indicted, hut don’t remember
why,” replied Angel.
“Were you indicted only once?”
“ There may have been fifty indict-
ments against me,” replied the witness.
“ Don’t you know that there were
two ? ”
“ I don’t.”
Mr. Bartlett then asked thewitnessif
he had not also been indicted in regard
to a transaction in cigars, hut the wit-
ness did not remember. Mr. Bartlett
then handed in copiosof the indictments
in evidence. The Judge reviewed the
evidence, and alluded to that part which
showed that the.S'im had sent a reporter
to show the plaintiff the affidavit, and to
get his version, and to the plaintiff’s
thanking the reporter for the fairness
shown to him. The daily papers were an
epitome of the world’s history, and while
no paper had the right to publish
malice or falsehood, yet, on the other
hand, if a paper published facts in
good faith, that must ho taken into
consideration in awarding damages.
The jury was out about an hour, and
then found a verdict for the defendant.
“N. Y. Sun,” February 19, 1895.
A VERDICT FOR “ITHE SUN."
A libel suit brought by Mr. Isaac
Angel, a lawyer of this city, against
The Sun, for the publication of an
affidavit made by one Henry Arthur
Slater, the former second mate of the
.ship Northern Light, was tried yester-
day in the City Court, Part 1., before
Judge Ernest Hall and a jury. At the
conclusion of the evidence the case
was summed up for the defendant
hy Mr. Franklin Bartlett, and for the
plantifl hy Air. Sutherland Teeney.
The jury then retired, and within
half an hour returned and rendered
a verdict for the defendant, The Sun.
H 5 Chestnut Street, Salem.
January IGth, 18!)0.
Dear Captain Slocum,
I take pleasure in giving you this letter,
which I trust may be of use to you.
During my residence in Manila, I had
frequent occasion to have business relations
with you, and both ray partners and myself
held you in high esteem, and always found
you a good specimen of the American ship-
master—honest, smart, and always acting
up to your promises.
As a mark of our confidence, w r e gave you
credits to enable you to purchase cargoes of
timber in the provinces, and when you left
Manila we gave you a letter, which was of
use to you in obtaining command of the fine
ship “ Northern Light.”
1 trust you may be successful in all your
undertakings.
I remain,
Yours very truly,
R. D. TUCKER,
late partner in the firm of
Pep.le, Hubble & Co.,
Manila,
Philippine Islands.










OOPr. The following letter explains itself.
To The Editor »Daily Telegraph."
Dear Sir,
Your attention was called through my Solicitor to the un-
just publication in your paper of statements made by one H. A. Slater
and to the moral support you gave the same.
You reply Sir, that as a mark of impartiality you did
not publish all of Slater ! s utterances and that, you withheld illus-
trations taken from an American Newspaper.
You did not name the “paper" I will name it for you. It
was not a Newspaper at all but a print of the "penny dreadful" stamp
A f ’
put down in the class called "obscene literature", and by law, prohi-
bited on the 1 News stands in the United States. Had you reproduced
that Illustration giving its authorship and printed ail of Slater's
utterances I oould have asked for no further vindication.
Yours was the only paper in Australia that could, apparent-
ly, afford to print the stuff at all.
Your apology for the part you have taken seems to be that
yo\i had in a large cargo of Slater wares:.
You unloaded a lot of the thirteen year old yarn on your
.readers.
You did not get a statement from me. What you gathered
through other sources was twisted to a wrong. construction. No self-
respecting person will be interviewed by a paper inclined to mis-
represent.
Why did not Slater if your story and his were true, get
heavy damages from the "Northern Light"? There is lav/ in the U. S. A
as well as in Australia. I think the laws in these countries are


about the same. Did you beam or a civil suit at all, and if so what
came of it ? oannyou tell your readers that ?
I was Master of the good ship 11 Northern Light 0 and was,
unfortuantely, also, one of the owners. IV partners in the ship en-
gaged only one Master and their confidence was extended to me. The
cargo in the ship was very valuable. My family was also along; and
other lives as well were in my care. IV Slaters views differed from
those of many deeply interested in the ship and the property and
lives•
There is never time to debate and harangue at sea. My ship
came into port with myself still Master.
Slater was no more to me then than he is now. His Counsel
was soon "taken care of" hy the dally papers when they got hold of
the right end of the story see page 7 "The voyage of the Northern
light" (pamphlet.i)
I have gone all over your case with legal adviee. You must
have seen from the first that it would interfere with my present
voyage to wait on you now - But I can come hack and this I have de-
cided to do being helpless now.
I am only sorry that I cannot stop in the Colony to have ray
character cleared, but all of my contracts shall-be filled In order.
I can defy you to,show truthfully a mark' against my charac-
ter as a Shipmaster and gentleman.
Yours sincerely.
Sydney November 1896,
