

ONE PENNY.
No. 6.
THE ENEMY
IN
AUSTRALIA.
The importance of the State-
ments made by both Sir Joseph
Carruthers and the Hon. J. D.
Fitzgerald on this subject, in the
New South Wales Legislative
Council on August 11, cannot
be too strongly emphasised.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1915.


THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA
In the New South Wales “Hansard” of August 11th appears
the following:—
The Hon. Sir Joseph Carruthers: It is with great hesitation
that I rise to speak to-night, but a sense of public duty impels
me to do so. During the past week we have been engaged
in promoting recruiting throughout the country, and arousing
the people to the gravity of the situation. To-day I wish to
call the attention of the Government to one or two matters in
which they might very well take action. There are in our
community a number of men holding licenses from the Gov-
ernment, who are either Germans, or naturalised Germans, and
they are engaged in the supply of liquors to our people and
our soldiers, whilst some of them conduct chemists’ S(hops.
I do not want to speak in extravagant language, but I think
that this war has shown to us that people of that race are
capable of going to any extent and of sinking to any depths
in order to injure us whom they consider to be their enemies.
I would not willingly permit any German, even a naturalised
German, to dispense medicines for our people or our soldiers,
or to sell beer to our people or our soldiers. I do not wish
to be harsh in my judgment, but I want to be fair to our own
people, and to our own cause. When we have regard to what
the Germans have done on the battlefield in poisoning our own
men, in using poisonous gases, and other scientific devices in
order to attain their purposes, it does not need a great stretch
of imagination to believe that if they got a footing in our
community and got an opportunity to practice their nefarious
methods they would do so. I have always had very grave doubt
whether in Servia itself, where the war ceased on account of
an outbreak of typhus, the epidemic was not introduced into that
country by Germans. And there is a suspicion in the minds
of many people that all is not well with regard to those mysteri-
ous diseases which are cropping up here. I do not want to
be considered hysterical, but it requires no great stretch of the
imagination to believe that we are facing an enemy who would
not hesitate to resort to any devilish device to injure either
our people or our cause. If we walk only a few yards from
this building we may see a chemist’s shop, on the plate glass
window of which appears, “By royal appointment to his Excel-
lency the Governor-General.” The royal coat-of-ajms is also
displayed. Now, it is a notorious fact that that man had a


house at Darling Point which was occupied *by an individual
who, after complaints made by Mr. Donovan, a brother of the
late Dr. Donovan, was removed and interned. Here we see this
man, whose house had been occupied in all probability by a
German spy, carrying on his business and displaying the royal
coat-of-arms and a royal warrant appointing him chemist to
his Excellency the Governor-General. His license should be
taken away—so far as a chemist needs any license —and in that
way he could be prevented from any longer carrying on his
business. It is no answer to say that the State Government
cannot take action. There is a large sphere of action open to the
State Government. The State, Government deals with these
licenses and these businesses, and it would be easy for the
Government, as a matter of urgency, to pass through both
Houses a law empowering it to close these shops. There is a
case at present before the High Court dealing with a business
man here, and there is a notification that we are not to con-
tinue to trade with that man. Yet it is a matter of notoriety
in the suburb in which I live that two sons of that man are
with our troops at the front. The position is altogether too
serious. Dr. Kane, who recently returned from the front, told
me that one man fighting in the trenches was found to be
signalling to the battleships to drop their shells 75 yards short.
This was noticed by those around him, and other men in the
trenches got hold of him, pulled him down and gave the cor-
rect signal. What would have been the result of the
shells from our battleships falling 75 yards short? It
would have meant that the shells would have fallen
into the trenches amongst our own men. That man
was taken away and court-martialled. Again, two spies were
brought in a ship the other day to be court-martialled here,
instead of being tried on the spot, where they would have
been subjected to better and more drastic methods.
An Hon. Member: Why did not they shoot them on the spot?
The Hon. Sir Joseph Carruthers: Let me give another
illustration. I am interested in a venture in the island of
Timor. A man who went down there, and who was partially
employed upon or connected with it, was a German. He took
up some other concession, or was supposed to have some con-
cession in the island, and he floated a company for plantation
purposes, and succeeded in getting a number of foolish people
here to provide the capital. He went down to the island,
wrecked his ship, and entered a claim for £4OO for loss of
property. What is the next we hear of him? Mr. Staughton,
a co-director of mine, who went to Timor, and whilst there
lodged with the Governor of Portuguese Timor, told me that
shortly after the war commenced the steamer “Eastern came
into Dilly, and two hours after she left a German man-o’-war,
the “Leipsic,” came in full tilt. But the “Eastern” had got
s.'wo.'y. Later on the Governor caused this man and anothei
to be arrested. Their papers were searched, and amongst them
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


was found the duplicates of messages in cipher whifh had
been communicated to the “Leipsic” on the other side of the
island, and which had resulted in bringing her down on the
heels of the “Eastern.” People on the “Eastern” did not
know of this until Mr. Staughton came back a few weeks ago.
These men were told to leave Timor. One of them came to
Sydney, and went up to the Liverpool camp for a time, and
at the date of Mr. Staughton’s return, he was still at large.
The incident has been reported to the authorities, but I do
not know what has since been done. All this goes to show
how dangerous it is that men whom we have taken by the
hand and trusted and credited with only doing what we our-
selves would do in like circumstances, are in many cases the
tools of a system of espionage, the like of which the world
has never seen before.
One other incident I should like to bring under the notice
of hon members. In 1898 a petition, which had been signed
by German residents in Sydney and sent to the German Reich-
stag was published in the press. I got it looked up in the
library, and caused it be republished the other day. It«,is just
as well that hon. members should understand the position I
take up, and it will be interesting if I read this petition. It is
a petition, sent to the German Reichstag, which was signed by
German residents in the different ports and business centres
of Australia. One might say, “Oh, that mine adversary had
written a book.” He has written it here, and signed it. These
petitioners say:
We have learnt that the Government will this session
lay before the Reichstag a bill for the increase of the
German navy.
I do not propose to read the whole of this document; it is here
for any hon. member to peruse who feels sufficiently interested,
but it proceeds:
We have here in Australia seen how England’s navy is
always ready and prepared to protect her commerce and
the merchant ships, and how the certainty of this pro-
tection of late years from England has called into exist-
ence a number of remunerative commercial and plantation
enterprises in the South Seas, We have also noticed with
regret and shame how the large sacrifices of the German
pioneers in the South Seas have been deprived of health,
life, and capital, and their well-earned reward lost to
them because our weak fleet was not able to protect at
the crucial period.
In this connection we have had to experience how, in
the time of the last revolution in Peru, the German Empire
had no ship at her disposal to guard the local interests, and
was obliged to ask another power to undertake this pro-
tection. Independent of that fact, as a second power of
the world it is unworthy that in the hour of danger the
protection of her subjects should be relegated to a rival.
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


If it becomes the principle of our Imperial policy to rely
orf the good services of another power to protect our in-
terests abroad, we must forego any serious opposition to
that power in her efforts at commerce and colonisation.
We, the undersigned, and many thousands who dwell in the
interior, and are therefore not able on account of the long
distances to sign our respectful petition—
Mark you, this is signed not merely by residents of Sydney, but
it is signed on behalf of many thousands who reside in the
interior of Australia—
are proud of being Germans, and will always be ready
with all our might to defend our country and guard her
honour. We may expect, therefore, that our grand Father-
land, for whose unity many of us have fought on the
French battlefields, will recognise as its duty the protec-
tion of its sons abroad, where not the right but the might
prevails; and such protection can only be afforded by a
formidable fleet.
In closing their petition the petitioners appeal to the Reichstag
to pass the navy proposals, including the proposal for a cruiser
fleet. As a consequence of those proposals we had a few years
ago in the South Pacific that fleet, consisting of the “Scharn-
horst,” the “Gneisenau,” the “Nurnburg,” the “Leipsic,” the
“Dresden,” and the “Emden.” The German Government also
sent out, shortly afterwards, a Consul-General, who travelled
not only through this State, but right through Australia, met
the Germans, and told them that he had largely been sent in
response to their petition. Later still we had the proclama-
tion by the German Government which the Consul-General com-
municated to the people here—a proclamation which amended
the regulations and provided that notwithstanding the natural-
isation papers signed by Germans here, they were not denatu-i
ralised; they belonged to a dual nationality, and their first
obligation was to their Fatherland. This is the real position.
The Germans who have treated as a scrap of paper that which
bound them in honour with regard to Belgium, have given an
example to every German to similarly treat every scrap of
paper, and only use it to his own advantage—even in the case
of these naturalisation papers. It is up to every German here,
as is demanded in England, that he should make clear his
loyalty and not cloak himself behind naturalisation papers.
A man who holds a license boasted to me a long time ago,
before the outbreak of war, that he was a member of the
German army. He belonged, I believe, to the Landsturm, and
the loyalty of that man to his country, his Emperor, and
his Empire was unquestionably higher than any loyalty he
ever admitted to the country in which he is naturalised. That
man holds a license, and is in such a position that there is
ho other licensed house within miles. He holds, if I may so
describe it, a strategic position where it would be in his power
by lights or signals to convey information to the enemy. I see
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


another place every day as I go to my home, a leading hotel
in one of the suburbs. It also is run by a German. I would
not put it in the power of any German to purvey drink or
food to our community when we know the extremes to which
the Germans have gone in fighting against our own men—
not fighting honestly but by every devilish method devised by
science or known to human ingenuity, I do think that, in
this case, the Government would be rendering a public service
—Parliament would assist them readily, by passing a Bill in
both Houses through all its stages in one day—in taking power,
notwithstanding the provisions of the Licensing and the Phar-
macy Acts, to temporarily withdraw these licenses, without giv-
ing reasons, during the period of the war. We see, in the
papers, the danger of a High Court decision under what it is
possible that a host of interned Germans may be let loose
again. The temper of the community is such that it would
not be safe to have these Germans at large, conducting busi-
nesses and running shops amongst our people. The danger
is that somebody may get out of hand. The larrikin element
may step in and go much further than any reasonable man
would like to see things carried. It has occurred in London, and
in many parts of England. The best way to protect these
men and to protect the country is to regulate them with a firm
hand, and give them no opportunity for malpractice even if
they are inclined to resort to it. Another thing I would like
to point out. A gentleman called at my house yesterday and
said, “I have been listening to the recruiting addresses of Mr.
Fitzgerald and yourself, but,” he went on, “what chance is there
of recruiting when in almost every workshop throughout this
city this placard was put up yesterday morning”—and he handed
me a copy. I am not going to advertise the contents of the
placard by reading them and putting them into “Hansard,” but
for men who are prepared to issue a placard of that character,
in which they try to rouse class hatred and cause every work-
ing-man to avoid his obligation in this country, there is only
pne place, and that is with their backs to the wall, and a squad
pf soldiers in front. No matter how influential the organisation
may be which is responsible for this production, I would not
sllow it to resort to tactics of this kirid. The Government should
take immediate steps to amplify its powers to enable it to deal
with matters of this kind. We should not merely look to the
Federal Government. The Federal Government has its powers
and its arena of action. But if we can amplify or extend its
powers or link up with the Federal Government we should do
SO.. !■ have made these remarks, as the Minister will under-
stand, in no unfriendly spirit, but with a desire to make a sug-
gestion, in which, I think, the Government will concur. I give the
Government every credit 'in this crisis for what it is doing in
a patriotic way to rouse the people to a just sense of their
obligations; but it is actions like those I have enumerated
which are sapping and undermining its efforts. How do we
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


know that that placard has not been printed and circulated by
some German spy in our midst?
The Hon. J. D. Fitzgerald: It has been undoubtedly!
The Hon. Sir Joseph Carruthers: The chances are that it is
so. But if we have these men at large, allowed to carry on
their business, with the hall-mark of Government approval upon
them, we are only giving them the opportunity to take an un-
suspecting public into their confidence and mislead them with
regard to their actions. I hesitated to take this step, but I
am actuated by a fear that we are treating too lightly the
danger which is in our midst. The Government will be well
advised to accept the suggestion which I have offered, and which
I am sure every hon. member here will heartily support and
put into practice in the way of legislation.
The Hon. W. J. Trickett: . . . Because I believe I am
justified in saying that to-day in the Town Hall, the Lands
Department, and the Post Office, will be found Germans occu-
pying some of the highest positions, I have no hesitation in
saying that to-day information is in the hands of the German
authorities which would come in very useful if the war unfor-
tunately terminated in favour of Germany—but I do not think
it will. .
The Hon. J. Wilson: . . . Now what happens with the
wharf labourers, even in regard to a pal beside whom they have
worked for years? They say to the employer “Dismiss him,
or we will knock off work.” What does the bottle-worker say?
“These Germans must go, or we will not return to work.” And
they did not, until the Germans were dismissed. . . . The
man who has associated during the last twenty years with
Labour men, and has been loved and respected by them, occu-
pying positions of trust, clever to a degree, and in the employ
at last of the Federal Government, is now interned because
his German blood became above all other instincts loyal to
his Fatherland. I am glad the hon. gentleman had the courage
—and that is what we often lack—to bring under the notice
of this House the questions he has raised. ... I ask, while
men have been on the platform using their time and their best
energies for the purpose of asking the flower of our manhood
to go to the front, why should we take the serpent to our bosom?
It is not fair, and it is certainly not sagacious. I do not know
what the Government will do, but I am sure they will give
serious consideration to the suggestion that has been made
by the hon. and learned member. I do not know whether, after
all, it is fair to destroy the liberty of one who only earns
enough, even though a German, to pay his rent and feed his
family, while we allow the rich German farmers of Albury
and the north to own the magnificent properties and earn the
fabulous fortunes they do in our country. If we are going to
deal with Germans, let us go the whole hog, not strike only at
the small men, but treat them all alike. This is not the time
to stand on ceremony, or to ask our people to sacrifice them-
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


selves while the Governments of our country continue to em-
ploy in high positions Germans who will, because of their in-
stincts, remain enemies to the grand country they live in, even
if they are naturalised.
The Hon. J. D. Fitzgerald, in reply: A few words with regard
to the subject that has been raised. I think the hon. and
learned member, Sir Joseph Carruthers, is to be congratulated
upon having referred to it/but hon. members must realise that
in all matters within the federal jurisdiction, the State Govern-
ment has to be very careful indeed. Therefore I am sure the
hon. member, Mr. Trickett, will realise on consideration that
it would indeed have been injudicious on the part of the State
Government to attempt in. any way to dictate the duty of
the Federal Government. We must assume in such cases that
the Federal Government is competent, and that it is as anxious
as anyone to do its duty. It was in that spirit entirely that I
suggested to the hon. member that it would be wiser for him
as a citizen to draw the attention of the Federal Government
to his complaints than for the State Government to become
an intermediary by doing so. The hon. member, as far as
that sphere is concerned, has just as good a locus standi as the
Government of New South Wales; in fact, his locus standi is
better, for this reason, that it is easily imaginable that the
Federal Government might say, “That is not your business
as a Government; you are a State Government, and this is
a matter for us. You must assume we are doing our duty.”
But the hon. member had a right to take action as a citizen—
to appeal as a citizen of the Commonwealth to the Common-
wealth Government, and that is the reason why this Government
feels that it is not justified in continually making suggestions
to the Federal Government. At the same time, however, I can
assure the hon. member that the centralisation which unfortu-
nately exists in connection with the war administration is
becoming so detrimental to the people that we are making repre-
sentations, and representations have been made with regard to
the case of the chemist who has been mentioned. If hon. mem-
bers will look at the royal coat-of-arms in this Chamber, and
will go down to Hunter-street, they will there see a replica
of it, with the added inscription that this gentleman, who is
a German, and who is under the observation of the police,
is “chemist and druggist, by special appointment, to his Excel-
lency the Governor-General.”
The Hon. Sir T. Hughes: Is that the same person whose name
was removed from the commission of the peace?
The Hon. J. D. Fitzgerald: It is the same person.
member has mentioned two classes of commodities—chemists’
goods and food and drink, and now I desire to add a third,
namely, the commodity of scent. It has come to my knowledge
that a German firm, although it is-suppqsed to have gone out of
business here, is still trading in scent in this community, and
with an Australian firm. I hold the same opinion as my hon. and
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


learned friend, that any Australian who will during this ter-
rible crisis in the history of the Empire make a penny-piece
out of trade with the enemy at all is a man who is not the
citizen we expect him to be. I hope that my words will go
outside of this House to-night, for I strongly protest,
and I made a public protest to-day on my own
account, without seeking the protection of the privi-
lege of this House. I feel so strongly on this question of the
enemy in our midst, and as regards the desperate position that
the whole world and its civilisation are in through the attacks
of the Germans, that I took the opportunity of putting a ques-
tion through the courtesy of the press to Senator Pearce and
his Government. I put the question in a friendly spirit, because
during the present crisis party ties do not exist, and we are
all at one, excepting the Germans and the 1.W.W., so far as the
war is concerned. I asked why it was that a German subject
who was a trader in Australia had been allowed by the Federal
Government to leave Australia and come back. At the very
time this citizen left these shores, our men were in training for
the expedition which resulted in the glorious operation on Gal-
lipoli. This man and others were allowed to be loose because
they were Austrians and were regarded as insignificant. I
want to protest as strongly as I know how against any differen-
tiation being made at all between Austrians and Germans. They
are our enemies in this war, and they have proved to be the
most despicable and deadly enemies the world has ever seen.
Under arms they have done disgraceful things, which
will forever prevent a decent man from offering his hand to a
German or an Austrian. I shall myself make strong repre l
sentations to the Government in the matter. While treating
these Germans with every possible courtesy—not for their sakes,
but for our own, because we have a reputation to sustain as
a courteous nation—l would intern every one of them. They
have a right to be shut up and not to be loose in the community.
As a rather interesting sidelight I might mention a personal
experience of my own some two months before the war broke
out. A visitor to Australia., from the United States, Dr. Werner
Hegemann, brought letters of introduction to me from the town-
planning people' in the United States. I showed him
our own experiments in town - planning, and, ‘ with
some friends, took him over the city and its en-
virons in a motor - car. Before he went away he
made a proposal, at first viva voce, but afterwards thought it
important enough to put it in writing, and this letter bears out
the remarks of the hon. member that the Germans desire to
get a footing in this country, irrespective of naturalisation,
and to take advantage of the sleepiness and almost criminal
negligence and easy-going nature of British rule to establish
their flag. His proposal amounted to this, that Germans should
be allowed to establish colonies on the Australian continent
under their own flag. I told the doctor that that was abso-
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


lutely impossible, and that I thought he must be joking; but he
said no, and he wrote this letter in which passages occur to
the following effect:—lt is a great idea; you will have German
culture introduced into Australia under the German flag, and
he said, “I want you to be associated with it. It is a great
idea, and out of it we will get great credit.” That is the sort
-of thing we get. The loyalty of the Germans in Australia
is based upon this miscalculation: —They have always been under
the impression that eventually Australia would fall under the
sway of Germany. They had not the slightest doubt that their
fleets in these seas would at once overpower ours, and that
they would easily take possession of an unprepared country,
just the same as they thought they would gain possession of
England.
I turn from that to the question which the hon. member,
Sir Joseph Carruthers, has brought before the House. It is
with regard to those posters. I am not going to be so modest
as the hon. member, Sir Joseph Carruthers, but am going to
read the document, and afterwards ask the hon. member, to
allow me, as a trustee of the Mitchell Library, to have posses-
sion of the document, to hold it there as a historical docu-
ment. I am also going to promise the hon. member that I
will take the poster direct to the Chief Secretary and draw
his attention to it, and from what I know of him I am sure
that twenty-fours hours will not elapse before action is taken
to deal with these people, who ought to be placed in a German
internment camp. One can understand a feeling of pride
in the German in his great country which has made such pro-
gress in feats of arms. One can easily understand their having
true loyalty to their own country, but who can understand
an alleged Englishman or an Australian who uses devices such
as the poster I have in my hand to prevent our young men
from taking their share in the cause we are combating for.
This is what the poster says:—
To Arms! Capitalists, parsons, politicians, landlords,
newspaper editors, and other stay-at-home patriots, your
country needs you in the trenches. Workers, follow your
masters.
The imprint is “I.W.W. Print.” I do not know whether hon.
members are aware of the constitution of the International
Workers of the World. International Workers of the World are
a body of persons, who, so far as the labour movement is con-
cerned, are absolutely negligible. They are hostile and mis-
chievous to the constitutional labour movement. Their methods
are those which you, Mr. President, know were tried in Aus-
tralia twenty-five years ago, and abandoned as ineffective—the
weapons of the strike and sabotage. They were tried here in
the old days. One of the devices to enforce the old trade-unionist
ideas was to strike and to destroy property. It was never carried
very far here, because the trade-union leaders were opposed
to sabotage or the destruction of property, and generally had
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


their men very well in hand. After the great strike of 1890-91
the Labour party deliberately decided that the old weapon of
the strike was a failure, and that through it the workmen suf-
fered more than the capitalists, and resolved to abandon the
methods, crude, imperfect, and brutal, which are now being
advocated in our midst by the I.W.W. It was the abandon-
ment of these methods for the peaceful one of political action
which has brought, our party into the dominant position it
occupies to-day, a position which is not only dominating, but
respectable and respected. We have adopted constitutional
means, but the I.W.W. have taken the other course, and have
fomented strikes in this community, against the avowed policy
and legislation of the workmen’s party. But so far as the
effect of the doctrines of these men making themselves felt
on the minds of working-men of this country is concerned, I
challenge these men who distribute posters of this character to
go into any workshop and preach their creed or display such
posters. They would be dipped in the nearest pond, I say that
the working-classes of this community, and every man who is
worthy of the name of a man, are with the British Empire,
because they know that we are fighting for something that
means everything to us, and that we can get all we want in
the industrial sphere by constitutional means under the British
flag,
. . . we will say deliberately and unhesitatingly that
any municipality, any Government, any public concern what-
ever, accepting a contract from any firm representing German
interests, will lay itself open to a very grave suspicion of
having bad its honour tampered with. Tt is notorious that
some of the German firms trading in Australia set aside sums
of money for use hy their agents for purposes of bribery. Let
it be made quite clear then that anybody, when this war is
over, accepting the contracts of such firms, will be open to the
suspicion of having been induced in this way to consent to
the placing of a contract with a nation which has shown itself
to be the deadly enemy of the Empire to which we belong! r
Statesman and Mining Standard, October 1, 191k-
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


ENEMY FIRMS.
List of names declared to be enemy firms up to August 6th
by the Attorney-General: —
Kirehner and Co., Sydney.
Tudor Accumulator Co., Culwalla Chambers, Castlereagh-st.,
Sydney —Manager, Wilhelm Heintze.
Poldi Steel Works, Clarence-st., Sydney—Manager, Reginald
Hans Rosenthal Wilson,
Falk, Stadelmann and Co. Ltd.; Agents, David Blyth and
Co., 366 Bourke-st., Melbourne, and 412 Kent-st., Sydney
-—Attorney, S. B. Morton.
A. Berwin and Co. Ltd., Indent Agents, York-st., Sydney.
The Export and Import Co. Pty. Ltd., Olderfleet, Collins-st.,
Melbourne.
Continental C. and G. Rubber Company.
Australian Metal Company.
Steffens and Hoelle Ltd., Sydney.
August Blumenthal Ltd., Sydney.
Stevedoring and Shipping Company, Sydney,
Polack Tyre and Rubber Company, Sydney.
Horddeutscher Lloyd, Sydney.
German-Australian S.'S. Company, Sydney.
Bohler Bros, and Co. Ltd., Melbourne.
Th. Goldschmidt Ltd., Sydney.
The offence of trading with any of these firms is punishable
by fine up to £5OO or imprisonment for 12 months in the case
of a summary prosecution, or a fine of any amount or im-
prisonment for as much as seven years if the offence be prose-
cuted on indictment.
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


WAR AND TRADE.
The Illustrated Penny Supplements to “THE STATES-
MAN and Mining Standard” are issued primarily to kill
German trade in Australia. We will endeavour to root out
the German cum Australian cum English firms which exist
in this country for the purpose of extending German trade
after the war.
There is a subtle influence amongst us on behalf of the
German trader; but the individual who is, after the war,
willing to buy and sell with that Nation of Assassins deserves
to be driven out of every Club, Hotel, Chamber of Commerce,
and Exchange in Australia.
Our belief is that ultimately the public, the daily press,
and, finally, the politicians, will be brought to see the folly of
permitting German goods to be sold in this country after the
war (unless under a heavy tax) or of allowing German
Houses to continue business in Australia on equal terms with
our own people.
It is a crusade that should be entered upon as a duty.
CRITCHLEY PARKER.
THE PRESS AND GERMAN TRADE.
The press of Australia may be held to have done good
work, in certain directions, in the exposure of the constitu-
tion of certain firms trading here as British when they are
in reality German, but their conduct still leaves much to be
desired. This is a time when German trade is to be abso-
lutely shut out; and, therefore, it behoves newspapers asking
the public to adopt this attitude to see that they themselves
are free from all taint of suspicion of doing that which they
call on others not to do. No honest, patriotic Australian
paper ought to accept for insertion any German advertise-
ments whatever.
Without advertisement, German trade would not hold to-
gether a twelve-month; and we feel sure that, once this fact
is pointed out to the great press of Australia, it will recog-
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.


nise its duty and act as it asks the public to act. If it should
not do so, it may rely upon it that, sooner or later, the
public will call it to a reckoning, and that the Government
will take steps to face it in the direction in which it would
be well for it to go voluntarily.
Statesman and Mining Standard, Nov. 19, 1911/-.
REMEMBER THE ENEMY HERE.
And His Agents—Australian or Otherwise.
The following “Remember” notice appeared in the London
“Evening News,” and has its application here as well as “at
Home”:—
Remember that London is already invaded by 20,000 Ger-
mans.
That Antwerp swarmed with Germans before it fell, and
that these Germans betrayed the city.
That every German here knows what to do should the
enemy attempt to land.
Remember that the people who scoff at the spy danger in
our midst are those who confidently declared there would be
no war.
That German spies here would not do less than they did
in Belgium and France.
That Naturalised Germans led the German forces into the
towns and villages of Belgium and France, in which they
had been resident for many years.
Remember that your German customer, your German
employee, your German neighbour, • baker, hairdresser
tobacconist, waiter, hotel manager will do to this country as
their compatriots did to France and Belgium, and more
also, if they get the opportunity.
NEVER FORGET the horrors through which the people
of Dinant passed as the result of the work of German spies.
Insist upon the internment of. every German in this coun-
try, and so, for the time at any rate, cleanse Britain of the
brood.
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA .


A NATIONAL POLICY FOR AUSTRALIANS.
Germans in this country should have no vote in Common-
wealth, State, or Municipal elections.
No German, whether naturalised or otherwise, should be
eligible during the continuance of the war for election to
either Federal or State Parliaments, to any Municipal body,
or to any Water Trust.
No German should be permitted, so long as the war lasts,
to hold any position in any branch of the Federal or State
Government Service, or in the service of any Municipality or
other public body.
No men of German birth should he permitted to hold com-
missions as Magistrates or as Justices of the Peace.
No German firm should be permitted, now or hereafter, to
trade here under a title that conceals its nationality.
Heavy duties should be imposed on all Enemy goods, and
should be made irremovable by statute for a period of 10
years after the conclusion of the war.
No newspaper should accept advertisements from German
firms or from any local firms acting as agents for companies
in which there are German shareholders.
THE ENEMY IN AUSTRALIA.
