

tti^h
Wilke, Mitchell and Co.. 7 Flinders-court, Melbourne.


<■ <5 s> -•am***- ~ .*>•
Australian Women’s National Australian Women’s National
Club
League
Mercantile Chambers, 349 Collins-street,
Melbourne.
Telephone No. 4174 Central.
President —MRS. F. G. HUGHES.
Organising Secretary —MISS ELEANOR
CAMERON.
Annual Subscription, 1/- per annum.
The OBJECTS of the League are:—
1, To Support Loyalty to the Throne.
2. To Combat State Socialism.
3. To Educate Women in Politics.
4. To Protect the Purity of Home Life.
The League is strictly national; it takes in all
classes of women, high and low, rich and poor.
It does not matter what their employment or
what their denomination is, if they love Aus-
tralia and want to work for her prosperity and
for freedom of thought and action, the League
will welcome them as members. The platform
is a broad one and the work disinterested.
The members of the League do not seek place
or power; they do not wish to send women into
Parliament. They wish to educate themselves
and others to use consciously and intelligently
the vote the country has given them, and they
wish to keep their homes pure and united, their
faith in God undisturbed and unshaken, and to
see their country free and prosperous.
HOW TO JOIN THE LEAGUE.
Send your Name and Address with is. Annual
Subscript on to Secrelary of nearest Branch
(which yon will find on inner cover) or forward
it to Secretary, 349 Collins-street, and you will
immediately be enrolled as a Member.
Council meets First Monday of the month.
Executive meets Second and Fourth Mondays,
Finance and Organising Committee meets
weekly.
Leaflet and Publication Committee meets First
Friday.
349 Collins-street, Melbourne.
President—Mrs. S. T. Staughton.
Hon. Secretary—Mrs. Robert Jolley.
Country Members Invited to Join,
Yearly Subscription, 10/6.
Country Members and Girls under 21, 5/-.
The - Club is not a social Club only, but helps
in carrying out our third object, addresses be-
ing given on subjects of current political interest
once a month. It also is the working centre of
onr League where all information necessary is
obtainable.
“Cbe Moman.”
Official Organ of Australian Women’s
National League.
Order from your News Agent.
Price —One Penny per Month, One Shilling
per annum.
Annual Subscription, One Shilling and Sixpence,
Posted.
NOTICES:
Correspondence and all Communications to be
addressed to the Editress.
Short Reports of all Branch Meetings, New
Branches, etc. (about 120 to 130 words), should
be forwarded not later than 15th of the month.
Questions on Political Topics are invited.
Sole Distributing and Advertising Agents for
Australia —Gordon & Gotcb.
Supply of Leaflets on “ Objects of the
League,” “ Reasons why Women Should Join
the League,” “ The Women’s Vote,” “ Need
of Continued Organisation,” also Papers on
Socialism and other topics suitable for reading
at Branch Meetings, to be had on application to
Secretary. 349 Collins-street.


TTAe Progress of d\[hill and
lj?
Written and Compiled by ]. Edward pobertson
'ilik
HILL is a very fine, modern town, at
jul the present time surrounded by a
\vw I Vml r ’ "’heat and wool growing dis-
trict. It has shared with other por-
f] tions of Australia disastrous sea-
) sons > where much hardship, battling
against heavy odds, and endurance
1)1 O werp necessarv. Still, after all.
( the present time surrounded by a
rich wheat and wool growing dis-
trict. It has shared with other por-
t/7 lions of Australia disastrous sea-
sons, where much hardship, battling
against heavy odds, and endurance
were necessary. Still, after all,
those fine, hardworking, big-hearted
settlers have in most cases now se-
cured suitable reward, and are
sharing with the majority of Aus-
tralians prosperous seasons, and are living in com-
fortable circumstances in the latter years of their
lives. A pioneer in any industry is a man to be
admired, and he can well feel proud in remem-
bering the extreme hardships gone through, with
the knowledge that he has eventually conquered,
and has dene much for posterity. The majority
of early settlers in the Nhill district are most pro-
gressive men, amongst whom might be mentioned:—
Messrs. Harry and A. Dahlenburg, George Batson,
Thomas Ervin, Miller, Gladigau, Pilgrim, W. San-
ders, E. W. Sallmann, Roediger, W. Krelle, Dart,
Dorringtcn Bros., Schultz, Dufty, Hicks, Cunning-
ham, Crouch, Webb, Vivian, Lannin, Anstey,
Schmidt, King, McCracken and Sherriff. The late
Messrs. Robert Rintoule and Mark Kozminsky are
also men who did in their lifetime much to build
up the town and district of Nhill.
Since 1880, when settlement was commenced in
earnest, until to-day, a large portion of the Western
Wimmera has been gradually cleared and cultivated,
and in recent years handsome homesteads have
been erected on scores of farms in lieu of the old
slab huts or humpies. Improvements have and are
being gradually carried out on many farms in the
Western Wimmera, which have made them equal in
up-to-dateness to any in the State. Some ten years
ago a splendid idea was conceived by the Nhill
Agricultural Society of holding farm competitions.
Prizes are awarded for the best worked and man-
aged farms. In deciding the merits of the respec-
tive farms the following points are taken into con-
sideration: —The best system of cropping, includ-
ing cultivation, methods, rotation, and manures:
cleanest and best crops, including oats; the fallow-
ing in best order, area considered: best quality of
working horses; brood mares’ results; sheep: cattle,
pigs, and poultry; implements and machinery:
boundary fences, gates, sheep yards; orchard and
vegetable garden; water storage, dams, windmills;
dwellings and outbuildings; fodder; tree-planting;
insurance. These competitions have led to much
keenness and healthy rivalry, and the practical re-
sults derived from them have been of immense
benefit to the farmers of the district generally.
With a continuance of splendid seasons enjoyed in
recent years settlement will continue on rapidly,
and probably in another fifty years it will only be
a legend that Mallee scrub ever existed between
Nhill and Pinnaroo.
The publisher, in conversation with Mr. George
Batson, of “ Boxdale,” one of the most progressive
farmers in the Wimmera, secured many interesting:
details concerning the hardships of an early Wim-
mera settler’s life. For a considerable time he had
vainly sought suitable land to select on, but as it
has since proved, with commendable foresight on
March 11th, 1876, he pegged out a selection on
the place where he still resides. A settler at that
time could only “ take up ” 300 acres, and it would
certainly have been more judicious had the Govern-
ment allowed at least 500 acres, for in 1876 a
300-acre block over 100 miles from a railway sta-
tion was far too small to make a reasonably decent
living on, though it certainly provided an existence.
Had the Government allowed settlers larger blocks
it would have been far better, and many of the
original selectors would have been on their holdings
to-day. Severe droughts were experienced in 1877-
78. and the small area under wheat cultivation re-
turned about five bushels per acre and nine cwt.
of hay. The rent paid to the Government was 2/-
per acre, the lease being granted at the end of three
years. Mr. Batson had decided to dispose of his
block to Mt. Elgin station’s owner, the freehold
portion of which property adjoined. However, the
third year, 1880, was a splendid one, the yield
being two tons hay and twenty-eight bushels -wheat
per acre, which was carted by bullock team to Hor-
sham at a cost of 1/- per bushel. This continued
for some ten years, and was the greatest handicap
to the district’s progress. One trip to Horsham
and two to Dimboola took the whole week.
The railway reached Nhill in 1886, but no mate-
rial progress was made by the farmers. Wheat
went down in price about that time, and during the
next few years many settlers sold out, and, there
not being a great demand for land, it was purchased
cheaply by those farmers who stayed, and they
combined wheat-growing and grazing on a larger
scale, and were enabled to give their land a longer
“ spell,” as it were. With the advent of the super-
phosphate actual, solid and gradual progress on a


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
SOME PICTURESQUE VIEWS OF NHILL.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
large scale really commenced in earnest. However,
to go back to the early days before Nhill was a
township, when the kangaroos made a favourite
camp between Nealy’s and the spot where that fine
building, the Bank of Victoria, now stands; when
wild turkeys were shot on the present golf links;
when sheep purchased from Mt. Elgin station were
in such poor condition that a candle placed inside
the carcase made an excellent lamp on a dark night.
Mr. Batson, in common with many of the early
settlers, found" kangaroo minced with a small piece
of bacon was far preferable in those days to the
miserable quality mutton obtainable. And to-day
the Wimmera ranks as one of the best and largest
districts in Australia for the quality of sheep and
lambs reared for freezing purposes. In 1876, as an
instance of the severity of the drought, which was
far worse than those of 1897 and 1903, the sheep
were in such a pitiable state that they would leave
their newly-born lambs immediately at birth for the
crows to pick out the lambs’ eyes before they could
even rise.
Eyre, the great explorer, passed near the Nhill
district in 1840, naming Lakes Hindmarsh and Al-
bycutya; but the first white men to enter the West
Wimmera were those hardy, plucky and enterpris-
ing pioneers, Dugald McPherson and Charles F.
Bulcher, who had started from Longerong in 1842
in search of suitable grazing country. They
travelled far before eventually arriving at the lake,
where they discovered traces of Eyre’s camp.
They were not satisfied with the country, however,
and struck south-west, passing through fairly
heavily-timbered tracts. On the third day they
passed over a red rise (now Langtry’s Hill), and
came upon a big lagocn and a camp of blackfellows.
McPherson and Bulcher managed to get informa-
tion from Davey, their own black boy, who in-
quired, in native dialect, the name of the locality.
He said it was known by the name of “ Nyell,” or
“ the abode of evil spirits.” It was explained that
the blackfellows had observed, early in the morn-
ings, the white mist rising. Thev said it was the
spirits rising from the water. The exact locality
is a little to the south of the present homestead,
near the swamp, not very far from Mr. Molls’
woolshed. McPherson tried the depth of the lagoon
with a pole. There was a big sand rise on his
right, faily well-timbered with box and buloke;
mallee existed to the west, and heavily-timbered
box country to the south-west. They passed over
the Lawloit Ranges, and returned across the
Winiam run, thence crossed over the Wimmera at
Vectis. McPherson formed a good impression of
the country, and eventually the place became
McPherson’s Nhill station. In 1879 Frank Oliver
built a mill on the water-course in Victoria-street,
adjacent to the National Bank. A small slab hut
erected near by was the first building erected in
Nhill.
NHILL OF TO-DAY.
There is a decidedly healthy go-ahead style con-
nected with the people of Nhill and district, and one
that carries a good impression to an observant
visitor immediately on entering the principal thor-
oughfare, Victoria-street, which has been wisely
and splendidly laid out with ornamental trees.
Then the business houses on both sides are built
cn modern lines, with large plate glass windows,
exhibiting up-to-date stocks of various goods, and
practically illustrating that the owners are men of
the progressive stamp. The several other principal
streets are also well laid out and planted with trees,
the roads are excellent within the town boundary,
and the footpaths have been well formed. At night-
time the town is brilliantly illuminated by electric
light, each street, and practically every business
house, also many private residences, having been
installed with electricity.
Nhill is very favourably situated, being on the
main line, 218 miles from Melbourne and 235 miles
from Adelaide. Although the bulk of the wool
wheat, etc., gees to Melbourne, and the bulk of
goods is purchased there also, yet farmers and
business men secure' obvious advantages by compe-
tition from Adelaide. Also, from a standpoint of
convenience, Nhill’s position is excellent, both ex-
presses meeting there. Nhill is likely to be a far
larger manufacturing centre in the near future, and
one thing is certain—it should be, for it is sur-
rounded by not only miles upon miles of the richest
black and red soil in Victoria, but by a fine pro-
gressive stamp of farmer, who is each year securing
better results from the.soil by working it with his
brain in addition to muscle.
At the present time two industries are in a very
healthy state: —Messrs. Noske Bros.’ flour mills,
wffiere a large number of hands are engaged. They
have two distinct mills, which are working night
and day, and continue uninterruptedly throughout
the year. Messrs. Noske Bros, purchase the greater
quantity of wheat grown in the Nhill and Kaniva
districts, and their relations with the farmers are
very cordial. One would naturally expect to see
vigorous, well-equipped modern implement fac-
tories in a great wheat-growing centre, and the
expectation is quite realised. Mr. E. C. Davis and
the executors of the late Mr. .1. R. Sporn’s estate
employ a large number of workmen in their fac-
tones, and each business is expanding every year.
Nhill is in the Lowan Shire, which was created
in 1875, and, after several redefinings, was made
into four ridings in May of 1901. The area of the
Lowan Shire now is 1623 square miles, and the
population 4100. Dwellings, 850. The valuation
for 1910-11 was £38.500. and the general rate 1/6.
The revenue was £4600; assessments, 1830; rate-
payers, 915; and voters' roll, 626.
The president of the Lowan Council is Mr.
Lharles William Huf. and his allowance is £75.
The following are the councillors: —East Riding:
Messrs. A. P. Dufty, David Bone. West Riding:
Messrs. Wm. Farmers, Richard Dickinson, J. L.
Tudd, South Riding: Messrs. Charles W. Huf, G.
Westerndorf, J. Clark. Nhill Riding: Messrs. Wm.
A. Gunn, J. Bond, and Thomas H. Mackwood.
The secretary, engineer, collector and valuer is
Mr. A. F. Magill, C.E.; Mr. T. Swale is treasurer;
Dr. Shanasy, health officer; sanitary and health in-
spector, Mr. .1. MacPherson; and Messrs. Proudfoot,
Stedman and Douglas are solicitors to the council.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
Members of various Organisations, and the Nhill Hospital.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
The following are Justices of the Peace: —Messrs.
W. G. Bolwell, John Bond, A. P. Dufty, Wm. A.
Gunn, T, P„ Panaan, A. S. Rusden, and John
Young.
The ratepayers are fortunate in securing capable,
far-seeing representatives on the council, and the
present body of men, by their progressive policy,
have secured the appreciation of the town and dis-
trict.
NHILL FIRE BRIGADE.
The Nhill Fire Brigade, when formed in 1888,
was a very primitive one, indeed, but to-day it can
be said to possess an enthusiastic body of men,
with equipments equal to that of any Victorian
country town of equal size. The captain is Mr.
James Rintoule, and it is in a great measure due
to his enthusiasm (which he imparts to his men)
and strict attention to duty that this brigade have
Been able to win innumerable prizes at various
Wimmera and Mallee fire brigade demonstrations.
The full complement of 25 men is easily maintained.
Mr. R. Fisher is lieutenant of the brigade, and Mr.
George Lewis secretary.
NHILL BRASS BAND.
The father of the band is Mr. E. C. Davis, whose
son, Mr. James Davis, is the present bandmaster.
The band has gone through many vicissitudes since
its being formed 20 years ago by Mr. E. C. Davis,
who has worked hard right through to keep the
men together and the band in funds. Fine music
is rendered frequently, and through the band’s
agency the townspeople are thus enlivened. Also
a considerable amount of money has been collected
for the hospital and other charities—in fact, their
services are practically always at the call of any
function where the aim is to benefit a charitable
object. The Nhill Brass Band have an excellent
bandmaster, and have won on two occasions the
West Wimmera competition, and last year added
further laurels by annexing the championship of
the Wimmera.
NHILL RACING CLUB.
The Nhill Racing Club, which has been formed
many years, has four “ good things ” —a popular,
enthusiastic president in Mr. Owen Edwards; an
energetic, painstaking secretary (Mr. J. Kierse); a
splendid body of committeemen; and a good run-
ning track. These are some of the reasons that
the club always provides an enjoyable, successful,
and improving meeting each year. Liberal prize-
money is offered, which attracts support from
owners of good horses in both South Australia and
Victoria. No doubt the Nhill Racing Club will con-
tinue with a progressive policy now that they are
on such a sound footing.
THE NHILL HOSPITAL.
If there is one thing more than any other that
Nhill is well known for it is their splendidly-
equipped and well-managed hospital, with its
modern operating theatre, its large staff of trained
nurses, its comfortable airy wards, and excellent
position on the highest and healthiest portion of
Nhill. Patients are received from all parts of the
West Wimmera and portions of the Mallee. Last
year 171 patients were received for treatment frcm
me Lowan, Dimboola, Lawloit, Horsham and other
shires. A few facts concerning the infancy of this
institution may be of interest. In December, 1881,
the idea was conceived and acted upon. Chief
amongst the founders were the late Mark Koz-
minsky and the late Robert Rintoule, David Bone,
William Macdonald and John Haycroft. Naturally
the hospital was somewhat primitive then, but some
grand work was done by this institution in the early
pioneering days in relieving necessitous cases. Dr.
Edward Ryan, now of Collins-street, Melbourne,
was practically the first medical officer, and his skill
and attachment to his work while in charge will
be long remembered. In 1901 he retired, and the
position was accepted by his brother, Dr. T. F.
Ryan, who has carried on the work so well begun
by his brother. Dr. T. F. Ryan has not only se-
cured general appreciation for his great profes-
sional skill, but also for his kindliness of nature
and administrative ability as medical officer of an
institution that is each year growing more impor-
tant. It is distinctly creditable to the people of
Nhill, the West Wimmera, and Mallee to find they
are giving so freely and well to the institution.
Mr. W. A. Gunn has taken a keen interest in the
hospital for many years, and he is now president,
a position he occupies with dignity and distinct
credit. The vice-president is Mr. John Young, who
also has been closely identified with the institution,
and has done much practical and good work for
many years. The committee of management (town)
are:—Messrs. A. Mclntosh, W. E. Goldsworthy,
T. F. Blackburn, O, H. Douglas, E. C. Davis, W.
A. Gunn, W. Brooks, P. Walther, T. Gall and T.
R. Walters. Committee of management (country):
—Messrs. W. H. Bond, Wm. Stockings, C. Huf, T.
P. Pannan, J. D. Scott. PL E. Dahlenburg, W. G.
Cooke, Wm. Smith, and C. Sherwood. The matron
is Mrs. S. Mclver. Mr. Charles H. Towns is one
of the most enthusiastic, painstaking and popular
secretaries and collectors any institution could pos-
sibly desire. He is a true missionary wherever he
goes, and never loses an opportunity to obtain sup-
port. He obtains it, too, chiefly on account of his
sincerity and faith in the belief that it is everyone’s
bounden duty to support a hospital that is carrying
on such great and humane work as the Nhill insti-
tution certainly is doing.
THE ELECTRIC LIGHT CO
Nhill can justly lay claim to being the best-
lighted town in the Victorian provinces. This fact
is due to the enterprise of several leading towns-
men, who, in 1901, formed a company and installed
a large modern plant. Electric light is in general
use in the streets, business premises, and private
residences. The cost is distinctly reasonable, and
the results are satisfactory to all. Mr. J. C. Lock-
ley is managing director.
SPORTING CLUBS
Tennis is much indulged in, and there are four
clubs in the town.
Cricket.—The Nhill C.C. has a strong member-
ship, and matches are played with adjacent towns
each season.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Some of Nhill’s most handsome Private Residences
1. Mr. W. A. Gunn.
2. Mr. A. Mclntosh
3. Mr. George Mclntosh.
4. Mr. W. E. Goldsworthy.
5. Mr. Coles.
6. Mr. Barnes.
7. Mr. C. H. Towns.
8. Mr. John Young.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Football Club.—The Nhill F.C. is usually a strong
combination, and this year is no exception. The
club has proved signally successful is competition
games. The membership list is a lengthy one.
Mr. O. H. Douglas is the enthusiastic president,
and Messrs. W. Eastick and G. Deans are joint
secretaries.
Golf Club.—lt is not usual in country towns to
find such a strong golf club as Nhill possesses.
The links are conveniently situated adjoining the
town, and, judging by the enthusiasm displayed by
members, it is a distinctly popular pastime. Mr.
John Young, a great supporter of all kinds of sport,
is particularly so of golf: in fact, most of the lead-
ing townsmen are.
Bowling Club.—Likely to bloom next spring.
Gun Club.—There are a large number of shooting
enthusiasts, and not unnaturally they have formed
a club, which is a strong one numerically. Matches
are held at intervals, with the result that many inte-
resting afternoons’ enjoyment are found. The pre-
sident is Mr. J. C. Macdonald, and Mr. T. Swale
carries out the secretarial duties energetically.
Rifle Club.—The Rifle Club’s range is an up-to-
date one distant about one mile from Nhill. There
are several fine individual shots in the team, which
has won many prizes in various competitions and
matches. The president is Mr. W. A. Gunn, and
secretary Mr. D. Mackenzie. Nhill is the military
headquarters for the Wimmera, which is designated
“ Area 73A.” Captain T. Matson is the popular
officer in charge, and Sergeant-Major Duffey mili-
tary instructor.
Coursing Club.—The Nhill Coursing Club has
been established five years, and each succeeding year
they are securing fresh supporters of this interest-
ing and healthy sport. The country surrounding
Nhill is eminently suitable for open coursing, and
hares being plentiful the various meets held during
the season are enjoyable without being fatiguing.
Liberal stakes are provided. Mr. Arthur Edwards,
who is a great coursing enthusiast and an owner of
greyhounds, is the president, while Mr. James Kilpatrick
carries out the secretarial duties satisfactorily.
LODGES.
The Nhill A.N.A. branch have a strong member-
ship, and the same remark can be applied to the
M.U.1.0.0.F. and the Masonic Lodge, who possess
a very fine hall. The 1.0.0. R. (Star of Lowan
Tent), whose secretary is Mr. I. V. Whitehead,
have now a membership of ever 60.
CHURCHES.
There arc four churches—the Methodist, the
minister in charge being the Rev. T. J. Payne; the
Church of England, vicar Rev. J. Best; Presby-
terian, Rev. H. Swan; and the Roman Catholic
Church, Father Jones. Each church has a large
number of adherents, who are able to worship in
handseme edifices, and fortunate to possess worthy
and excellent shepherds to guide them in their
spiritual lives.
There are three banks in Nhill—the Commercial,
Bank of Victoria, and the National. The respective
managers are Messrs. A. S. Rusden, T. Swale, and
Scott. A large banking business is done in Nhillj
and each bank receives its fair quota.
“ The Nhill Free Press,” established in 1882, is
published bi-weekly. It is the recognised news
organ of the West Wimmera. The proprietor is the
Hon. Pharez Phillips.
There are five excellently conducted hotels in
Nhill—a town that is singularly fortunate in this
respect. They are as follows:—The “Commercial,”
the “Union,” “Farmers’ Arms Hotel,” “Royal
Hotel," and the “Treasury Hotel.”
STOCK SALES.
Nhill is a great sale centre, and therefore it is
not surprising to find several auctioneering firms
carrying on successful businesses. Also much land,
totalling probably £70,000 to £lOO,OOO, is bought
and sold each year in the West Wimmera. The
firms carrying on business in Nhill are: —Messrs.
Young Bros., Ryan and Bond, T. W. Durant, Laid-
law and Co. (Mr. M. F. Swan, representative), and
Hagelthorn asd Bolton (Mr. O. Sutherland, repre-
sentative).
THE NHILL PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The Nhill Library is net only a well-stocked one,
containing thousands of volumes and a creditably-
supplied newspaper reading-room, but it is also a
recreation institution, there being a finely-appointea,
comfortable billiard room, reading room and smok-
ing room attached. Billiard tournaments are held
at frequent intervals, and all kinds of interesting
indoor games are encouraged and indulged in. The
library and recreation room are a great convenience
and comfort to the Nhill residents, more especially
the younger generation, who pass away many plea-
sant hours, which would otherwise be wearisome, at
this institution. Miss Swan is in charge of the
library, and carries out her duties capably, cour-
teously and satisfactorily. Mr. John Young, who
takes a keen interest in its welfare, is president, and
Mr. Bertram Wood secretary.
SCHOOL OF ARTS.
The Nhill School of Arts is an excellently-
equipped one, and the curriculum embraces engineer-
ing, carpentry, painting (scenic and signwriting),
drawing, geometry (practical), etc. The director in
charge is Mr. C. F. Mudie, and the secretary Mr.
A. F. Magill. Classes are held in the Masonic Hall.
Mr. Mudie has a splendid reputation, not only for
Mi. 5 talent, but the creditable manner in which the
pupils at the school progress under his masterly
style of tuition.
THE NHILL AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.
The Nhill A. and P. Society is now in its 27th
year, and the next show promises to be the best on
record. Although there has been a hard struggle
during the drought years to hold the annual show,
yet the record points to one of gradual progress,
until to-day it i s in a most flourishing state. The
Nhill horse parades have been publicly stated by
chief officers of the Agricultural Department from
the public platform to be the best held in the coun-
try districts of Victoria, and it would be impossible


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT,
to find a better class of draught stallion in the whole
of the State. This society was the first one to go
in for experimenting with superphosphate manures
drilled into various classes of soil, and with different
workings of the land. These interesting and prac-
tical experiments were carried out under the super-
vision of Dr. Howell, and so successful were they
that an experimental farm has now been established
on Mr. James Pilgrim’s property at Winiam. The
society has one of the largest and best-improved
showgrounds in the Wimmera, the improvements
carried out being the erection of modern sheep, pig
and cattle pens and sheds, a large grand stand, and
seating accommodation around the ring for 1000
people. The popular president is Mr. H. E. Dahlen-
burg, one of Nhill’s most progressive farmers, and
the secretarial duties have been excellently carried
out by Mr. C. H. Towns, one of the most popular
men in the Wimmera, and one who has gained the
admiration of all, especially at show-time, for his
never-failing courtesy and adaptability.
A Review.
It can easily be deduced from the compiler’s ar-
ticle on Nhill and district, which is by no means
an exaggerated one, that the future is very bright
indeed. The farms are equal to the best-managed,
best-worked, and most-improved in any district of
Victoria; while during recent years many handsome
homesteads have been erected, surrounded by beauti-
ful orchards and flower gardens. Also the breeding
of sheep and draught stock has become an impor-
tant feature during the past few years, and the Nhill
A. and P. Society’s annual show is amongst the lead-
ing ones of the State. A great deal of credit is due
to the Agricultural Society for its energy and fore-
sight in inaugurating the Wimmera farm competi-
tions some ten years ago. These competitions have
given the farmers a great stimulus to improve and
keep on improving the quality of their stock and
their farms.
The illustrations in this production demonstrate
without doubt the class of stock on the farms, the
modern style of the homesteads, and the magnifi-
cent crops grown in the district. The value of land
at the present time is from £5 to £8 per acre, and
is cheap at that price, when one remembers that the
rich black and red soil will grow wheat which is
recognised as equal to the best for milling purposes
in Australia—in fact (it may seem an exaggeration,
but it is not), equal to any the world can produce:
also this soil can grow prolifically barley, oats and
rye. In a case which came under the compiler’s
notice one year’s crop of barley grown in the Nhill
district paid double the price given for the land.
There is also a great future for the wine-making
industry, which is as yet in its infancy. Wine
grown in the district is credited by the Government
viticultural expert as being amongst the strongest
natural wines that have ever been analysed by him
in any part of the world. The district is eminently
suited for vine-growing, and it is to be hoped that
some of the more progressive farmers will enter
into this class of cultivation on a more extensive
scale. If they did so it might easily become an im-
portant industry.
Mr. C. H. Towns, popular sec. Nhill
Hospital and A. & P. Society.
The greatest drawback to cultivation of any kind,
however, is the shortage of suitable labour. Many
farmers are likely to cultivate less and go in for
grazing on a larger scale if the labour conditions
do not improve. It is to be hoped, not only for the
sake of this district, but also other parts of Vic-
toria, that the Government will go in for suitable
immigration on a far larger and more enthusiastic
scale than at present. Provincial Victoria is calling
out loudly for farm labourers, and until reliance
can be placed on their obtaining the necessary sup-
ply the land will not be utilised to its fullest possi-
bilities.
The district under review is also ‘noted for the
quality of lambs raised for the freezing trade. The
market is always on the lookout for “West Wim-
meras,” and they invariably command top market
rates.
The town of Nhill is progressing gradually and
surely. Building is brisk, and improvements have
been carried on apace during the past two years.
The prosperity of the district means the town’s
also, and both are materially showing it at the pre-
sent time. Nhill is fortunate in having a large num-
ber of solid, public-spirited men, who have done
much to make the town not only a hospitable place
to live in, but a pleasant up-country town. The
fact that there are so many well-supported institu-
tions, clubs, lodges, churches, etc., conclusively proves
the social nature of the Nhillites. Given reason-
ably good seasons, with the possibility of securing
suitable farm labour, the future of the progressive
and prosperous town of Nhill and district is indeed
a bright one.
MR. J. BROWN, General Storekeeper.
Although the compiler of this work has not been
able to secure photos, of Mr. J. Brown’s large gene-
ral store In Nhill, he must mention that this old-
established store deserves illustrations. Also it is
a general store in the truest sense of the word, and
the various departments are worthy of a visit. Mr.
Brown has been before the residents of Nhill and
district so very many years, and is so favourably
known, and retains the esteem of his customers so
well, that further remarks would only be superfluous.
Mr. John Young, who takes a keen,
practical interest in the welfare o( Nhill.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
YOUNG BROS.,
Auctioneers,
Stock and Station Agents,
Horsham, Hamilton, Nhill,
Terang, Penshurst,
Strathdownie, Lake Bolac,
Casterton, Ararat, Goroke,
Banyena, Rupanyup,
Murtoa, Dimboola, Kaniva,
Donald, Minyip,
Warracknabeal, Jeparit, Beulah,
Hopetoun, Rainbow.
It is now some 35 years ago since the late Hon.
George Young, M.L.C., laid the foundation at Hor-
sham of an auctioneering, stock and station agency
business that has gradually grown to one of the
most important and largest ones of its kind in the
Commonwealth. The building up of Messrs. Young
Bros.’ business has not been the work of a day nor
a month. It has gone on gradually and solidly just
as the foundation was laid, until to-day the influence
of the firm is found in every State in Australia,
though more materially in Victoria, where over a
score of branches are firmly established. Their
three chief offices are at Horsham (in charge of
Mr. Thomas Young), Nhill (Mr. John Young), and
Hamilton (Mr. James Young). This article, how-
ever, must deal principally with the Nhill branch.
Young Bros, have very fine modern sale-yards at
Nhill, and their weekly sales are invariably well
attended by both buyers and sellers, and satisfactory
prices to both are thus assured, also full yardings
of stock. It is not only from a business standpoint
that Mr. John Young, of this firm, has been a good,
staunch friend to the farmers in their years of
adversity. He has also been a good townsman in
every respect. Amongst the many positions he has
occupied with credit and ability might be mentioned
that of first president to the “ old ” Shire of Lowari
and Lawloit, Government representative on the
Lowan and West Riding Water Trust, commis-
sioner of the Nhill Water Trust, president of the
Agricultural Society and one of the foundation
members, and chairman of the hospital committee.
In fact, in every object benefiting Nhill and towards
its advancement Mr. Young’s assistance has been
cordially, practically and freely extended. Sales are
held at the following towns, which are under the
supervision of the Nhill office:—Kaniva, fortnightly;
Rainbow and Jeparit, weekly; Lorquon, monthly:
Lillimur, every sixth week.
View of the Nhill Yards on Sale Day.
YOUNG BROS., Auctioneers, Stock and Station Agents, HORSHAM, NHILL, HAMILTON, lliX”


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
The UNION HOTEL, NHILL.
E. S. RINTOULE, Proprietress.
Sparkling Ballarat Ales drawn. A first-class Hotel managed in a first-class style. Cab meets all Trains.
Splendid accommcdation for the travelling public. All correspondence promptly attended (o.
The Union Hotel was established many years ago
by the late Robert Rintoule, and has remained in
the family ever since. Its birth dates back to
practically that of Nhill, when “ The Union ” was
then a somewhat primitive hotel, typical with other
buildings cf the early pioneering days. The hote’
under review has always been a popular one with
die farmers and travelling public, and, although ad-
ditions were continuously being made from time to/
time, 15 months ago it was decided to build a large
two-storied brick hotel, and furnish same right
throughout with new furniture and furnishings. The
contract was secured by Messrs. Arnold and Barnes-
builders and contractors, of Nhill, and, after four-
teen months’ labour have been expended, the ap-
pearance is now enhanced by one of the finest, most
conveniently designed and handsome hotels in
provincial Victoria. Every modern idea has been
profited by, and the foresight and cleverness of the
architects, Messrs. Clegg and Miller, of Lydiard-
street, Ballarat, are everywhere manifest, and reflects
the greatest praise on their professional skill and
ability.
There are five well-furnished, comfortable par-
lours on the ground floor, and the one which is re-
served for ladies is a great comfort and convenience
to them. There is also a large “ commercial ” par-
lour, where writing material and current daily and
weekly newspapers will be found. Then there are
two well set-up, excellently managed dining-rooms,
under the supervision of Mrs. Rintoule, assisted by her
two daughters, who supervise the dome'dß arrange-
ments most satisfactorily and smoothly. These rooms
being so commodious, no difficulty is found in serv-
ing the big “ rushes ” of customers on sale and


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
other busy days. The meals are excellent ones,
well served and most satisfying to the person pos-
sessing a good appetite. The billiard room con-
tains a first-class table, and good cues are provided.
In fact, the splendid appointments of the room as-
sure an enjoyable game. Every care was evidently
taken in designing the large, airy bar, where the
best of spirits, wines and cigars are only stocked,
and sparkling Ballarat beer drawn, to be able to
cope with the maximum of business with the mini-
mum of labour, as the various parlours are so
situated that a slide enters into every one from
the bar. A spiral staircase leads on to the taste-
fully decorated lounge on the first floor. Here one
can enjoy a quiet smoke after meals amongst the
palms. It is a splendid innovation. The many
bedrooms, each one so built that they receive the
largest possible share of daylight, are beautifully
clean and neat. A great number open on to the line
large front and side balconies. All are nicely furnished
in every detail with modern bedsteads, chairs, ward-
robes, dressing tables, etc. On the second floor
there are also cosy parlours for ladies and gentle-
men; while the lavatory accommodation cannot be
too highly spcken of. There are cold and hot baths,
also a pleasant novelty in the shape of a hot water
shower, which is a fine invigorator. Including many
other minor improvements, “The Union” is lighted
by electricity, and the hotel cab meets all trains.
The accommodation yards are well-arranged ones,
and are found a great convenience by the farmers
and others. Over 250 vehicles can be accommo-
dated, and there are 100 stalls, with 17 modern
loose boxes. Mrs. E. S. Rintoule is the proprietress,
but the general management of “ The Union ” is left
chiefly in the hands of Mr. James Rintoule, assisted
by his brother. Mr. Thomas Rintoule. They are
both very popular at this great farmers’ hotel, and
are both earnest patrons of all kinds of sport. The
former is captain of the Fire Brigade, a body he
has been intimately connected with during the past
15 years. Also he has been president and vice-
president of various sporting clubs.
“ The Wimmera Agricultural Works ”
NHILL.
E. C. DAVIS, Proprietor.
Horses carefully Shod. Vehicles of all kinds Built to Order and Repaired.
AGENT for HORNSBY’S BINDERS and OIL ENGINES.
In the year 1888 the first hammer was lifted
at the Wimmera Agricultural Works, though it
was not until 1892 that the present proprietor, Mr.
E. C. Davis, took over the business, which at that
time employed but one hand. In spite of tem-
porary set-backs, through the lean years, this estab-
lishment has prospered, and to-day over twenty
skilled workmen are hard at work in the up-to-date
factory manufacturing ploughs, vehicles and farm
implements of almost every conceivable kind. These
agricultural works are well equipped with the finest
modern machinery, the motive power for which is
obtained from an 8 h.p. oil engine. A pattern-maker
is employed at the factory, and all castings are done
locally. A feature worthy of mention is that far-
mers are enabled to obtain duplicate parts for all
the various makes of harvesting and other machines
at the Wimmera foundry. Recently Mr. Davis has
secured the patent rights of a new ploughshare,
which has proved a distinct improvement on any
other yet manufactured. The results obtained from
the use of this share are most satisfactory, and the
orders to hand are so heavy that the greatest diffi-
culty will be found in supplying the demand.
Numerous prizes have been taken for the excellence
of the vehicles manufactured by Mr. Davis, and for
six years in succession first prize has been taken for
waggons at the Nhill Agricultural Show. The pro-
prietor, who is a good townsman, has devoted much
of his life to assisting in forwarding the interests of
the town and district. In business matters farmers
recognise that they can rely on receiving fair and
straight treatment at the hands of the proprietor of
the Wimmera Agricultural Works.
Interior View of portion of “ The Wimmera Agricultural Works.”


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
GOLDSWORTHY, COLES & CO., General Merchants
Agents for Royal Insurance Co., Sunshine Harvesters, etc. Furniture Repaired and Pictures Framed. Undertakers.
Leading Departments and features at
“THE BIG STORE,” NHILL
Drapery, Grocery, Boots and Shoes, Millinery, Ironmongery, Crockery and Glassware, Stoves, FURNITURE (a large and well
selected stock), Tombstones. Windmills, Iron Tanks, Paints, Paperhangmgs and Linoleums. Building Material of every kind.
Interior Views of the Grocery, Furniture, Millinery, and Drapery Departments.
“ The Big Store ” caters for everybody with every
article required for the home, and is a general store-
keeping business in the true meaning of the word.
“The Big Store,” which is one of the largest con-
cerns of the kind in the Wimmera, was established
some twenty-five years ago by Mr. T. Mackwood, and
later on passed into the hands of Mr. George Coles.
Eight years ago Messrs. J. -H. Coles and E. Goldsworthy
became proprietors, and the successful and excellent
management shown by this firm has raised it to the
high pinnacle attained, and justified very fully the trade
sobriquet of .“The Big Store.” The volume of trade
has expanded so rapidly during recent years that con-
siderable additions have been made to the premises, and
rt now fairly ranks not only amongst the best conducted
of Victoria, but one of the largest. Messrs.
Goldsworthy and Coles are both men of high repute
in private life, as well as in all their business dealings.
They are keen buyers, and study the interests of their
customers in every detail. Quality, fair prices, cour-
teous treatment, and consideration, with a heavy, well-
selected stock in every department, are the principal
factors in the great success achieved by “ The Big
Store,” Victoria-street, Nhill.


“ The Big Store,” Nhill, one of (he most progressive and largest in provincial Victoria.
D. MUIR’S Butchering Establishment,
VICTORIA ST., NHILL.
Mr. D. Muir, although a resident of the Nhill
district during the past- 30 years, did not establish
his modern well-equipped butcher's business in Vic-
toria-street, Nhill, until two years ago. He
certainly laid down his foundation solidly, and for
cleanliness m every detail and quality of meat
offered to the public he is to be complimented. A
(Linde) refrigerating plant has been installed, and
other modern machinery, including a “ Buffalo ”
silent cutter, mincer, etc., which are necessary in
the manufacture of small goods “ Muir” has obtained
such a splendid reputation for, and secured at the
1910 Nhill show first prize for small goods, hams,
sides of bacon. Mr. W. Middleton is foreman of
this progressive and creditably managed business.
“The Lowan Bakery.”
W. N. TASSICKER’S Bakery Establishment,
VICTORIA ST., NHILL.
Nhill is glad to welcome Mr. W. N. Tassicker
as a business man amongst them, not only from a
personal standpoint, but because he is also demon-
strating the high quality it is possible to manuiac-
ture bread and small goods. His list of customers-
is assuming larger dimensions each week, and even
now a large share of this particular trade is securea
by him. Catering is carried out in its entirety
and wedding and christening cakes are a real speci-
ality. A trial at this establishment will convince
anyone that the manufacturkig of bread and small
goods has been brought to its greatest perfection.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Messrs. A. & J. McINTOSH £sl NHILL & JEPARIT
THE UNIVERSAL PROVIDERS
Grocery, Ironmongery, Crockery ware, Men’s and Boys’ Tailoring, Drapery,
Furniture, Boots and Shoes
Large Stocks of Building Material on hand. Estimates given


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
The large and important business of Messrs. A. and
J. Mclntosh was established in May, 1889, and since
that year the record is one they may well feel proud
of. The business is, in strict truth, a large one, pro-
bably one of the biggest in the whole North-West; in
fact, A. and J. Mclntosh might be styled the Foy
and Gibson of the Wimmera. Everything they do
is done thoroughly on a large scale. The drapery,
grocery and furniture departments, for instance, are
so extensive that one wonders if there is sufficient local
population to use up such a large stock. As a matter
of fact, there is not, but the operations of “ Mclntosh’s”
have an ever-widening scope. The firm keeps pace with
the march of settlement in the Wimmera and Mallee.
Scores of miles north and north-west of Nhill town-
ships are springing up, and “ Mclntosh’s ” are assisting
to build them. To meet the requirements of such a
vast field of operations it is essential that huge stocks
should be held at the Nhill headquarters. Several
times it has been found absolutely necessary to enlarge
the premises to core with increased trade, and in 1904
the firm under review purchased the premises and
stock-in-trade of Mr. P. P. Fraser, general merchant.
These commodious rremises are used solely as a
furniture arcade, whmh is one of the latest and most
important features of the business. Many lordly
homes have been erected during the past few years,
and “ Mclntosh’s ” are able to furnish them in lordly
style. With the advent of successive good seasons there
became a great demand for houses and buildings of
various kinds in Nhill and surrounding districts, and
this enterprising firm decided to erect large timber
yards, with all necessary adjunct's. A competent staff
of workmen was engaged, and this additional branch
is now a very important one. The drapery, grocery,
boot and shoe (made to order if preferred), iron-
mongery, crockery departments carry an enormous
stock, and “ Mclntosh’s,” who buy in the best markets
of the world, defy competition, even from the Drgest
city houses. The millinery department is so well known
and under such capable management that it hardly
needs more than passing mention. It is fully stocked
with the most stylish goods, ecu.al to that displayed
in any millinery showroom in Melbourne. Dressmaking
View of A. & J. Mclntosh’s Timber Yards,
is also carried on extensively, and the firm have
secured an excellent name for their high-class, fashion-
able ladies’ tailoring. Workmanship, perfect fit and
style are guaranteed at “ Mclntosh’s.” All dress
lengths are carefully selected, both as regards quality
and colour, and there is always a fine range for ladies
to select from. The men’s and boy’s tailoring depart-
ment is one of the fastest-growing branches, and their
“ made to order ” trade is responsible for nearly all the
well-dressed men of the district. In 1807 “Mclntosh’s’
supplied a long-felt requirement at Jenarit in opening a
large, well-stocked general store, which has proved a
great success —so much so that recently the firm pur-
chased extra space, and are now busily engaged enlarg-
ing the store. Jeparit has gone ahead by leaps and
bounds during the past few years, and great credit
is due to Messrs. A. and J. Mclntosh for their energy
and enterprise in establishing such a large business
there. Until their arrival, business tW rightly be-
longed to Jeparit had been going to Warracknabeal,
Rainbow and Dimboola. Both as business men and
private citizens, Mr. A. Mclntosh and Mr. George
Mclntosh have earned and well merit the appreciation
and esteem they are held in by residents of the
Wimmera and Mallee districts.
a. & j. Mclntosh
Agents
All kinds of
WOODROW’S HATS
FARM MACHINERY.
and all leading Colonial Makers.
Our aim is to thoroughly satisfy every customer.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT,
“ Ihe‘3 Premier [Hairdressing Saloon,”
NHILL.
Mr. W. COOPER, Proprietor.
Full Stock of Tobaccoes,* Cigars, etc.,
and Smokers’-Requisites.
“ The Premier Hairdressing Saloon,” Victoria-street,
Nhill (adjoining Rintoule’s Union Hotel), is carried
on successfully by Mr. W. Cooper, one of the most
courteous and expert barbers in the State. Although
a lengthy resident of Nhill he possesses city experi-
ence, and has evidently profited by that experience.
His saloon is a well-equipped one in every de-
tail, and he is assisted by a competent staff.. A full
stock of tobaccos, etc., and smokers’ requisites are
on hand. For a quick, easy shave, where one hardly
feels the touch of a razor, or an artistic haircut, beard
trim, etc., “ Wattie ” Cooper’s hairdressing saloon can
be strongly recommended.
“The Premier Hairdressing Saloon’’
(Adjoining the Union Hotel) NHI
NHILL.
HICKS & CO.
Saddlery Depot, NHILL.
Carry one of the largest and most complete slocks
of Harnessware, Saddlery, Whips, Collars, etc., in
the Wimmera and Mallee districts of Victoria.
... Agents for ...
GUARDIAN INSURANCE CO.
GRIFFITHS’ INFLUENZA CURE FOR HORSES.
“ACME” HARNESS AND BOOT POLISH.
Messrs. Hicks and Co.’s saddlery “JTtT*" j M
establishment has now been favour-
ably known to the public during the fj
past 15 years, and the present pro-
prietor. Mr. G. E. Dodd, some 10 Hpfjßftti
years. The splendid reputation they /
enjoy has !icon gained by the merits
of the leather Is which are maim- '** ' |f
facturcd at the factory. Nhill. Trade
has gradually extended, and now
embraces practically the whole
of the Wimmera and Mallee
districts. Repairs ’ are executed
promptly, and the “ mail order ” business of this
firm has become an important factor in the success
of the firm. Farmers can rely on their require-
ments being fairly, thoroughly and promptly at-
tended to in every detail, whether by writing or
calling personally. For price, quality and up-to-date
goods call on Hicks and Co., the Nhill Saddlery
Depot.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Spo6oatt6oeCBCeoeoeoeCeoeoeCtteCfttt^


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Mr. H. E. Dahlenburg, late President Nhill A. & P. Society
One of the most prosperous and energetic farmers
in the Wimmera to-day is Mr. H. E. Dahlenburg, of
" Oakdene Estate,” situated in the Nhill district. In
1878, when land was first taken up, fanning as then
carried on was a very strenuous life indeed, and one
that had many drawbacks. The country was mostly
heavily timbered, and the nearest railway town was
Dimboola. Wheat was carted to Horsham gene-
rally—a journey that occupied often over three days.
Cartage cost lOd. per bushel. In 1881 the rabbits be-
came a pest, and did great damage to the early pio-
neers’ crops, so much so that in Mr. Dahlenburg’s
case he erected a stubb fence 3ft. 6in. high around
his cultivation paddock, costing from £5O to £6O per
mile (wire netting was unknown then). In 1883 the
rabbits’ greatest harbour, the brush fences, caught fire,
and miles upon miles were destroyed. Then the Go-
vernment came to the settlers’ assistance by laying
poison and making it compulsory for everyone to
poison each season. The Mallee allotments were also
thrown open about that time. The rabbit plague hav-
ing been overcome in 1889, red rust showed in the
wheat. The yield was poor, and the price worse still,
the price obtainable being in the neighbourhood of
1/6. However, many “ battled on, while others, dis-
gusted and down-hearted, left the district. Stock de-
preciated in value, also land, and really good draught
horses changed hands at £lO to £12 —animals that
to-day would easily bring £5O in Messrs. \ oung Bros,
yards.
Better seasons were in store for these hardy, perse-
vering pioneers, however, and from 1890 the seasons
can be said to have been fairly good. Even in the
drought year Mr. Dahlenburg reaped nine bushels to
the acre, and has had a yield of nearly double ever
since. The compiler has secured from Mr. Dahlen-
burg some results of his experiments, and they may
prove of interest to Mallee and Wimmera farmers.
He says: “Of course the splendid wheat yields of
recent years must be credited to superphosphates and
a better system of farming and rotation of oats after
the wheat crop. From experiments on my estate I
have found ‘Federation’ the best, with ‘Yondilla’ se-
cond, for wheat yield. ‘ Hegenuth ’ has a solid stem,
is a prolific grower, and good for hay. In all I have
experimented with thirteen different kinds of wheat.
In 1906-7 I sowed three acres of linseed, and harvested
in the former year eight bags of seed. In 1907 the
result was not so good on account of the frost injur-
ing the blooms. From three samples of malting bar-
ley—Duck Bill, Chevalier, the Maltster —the latter
gave best yield with 43 bushels to the acre. It was
rather thin for brewers’ use, but sold at 2/10. The
straw is excellent though, and is worth the extra cost
to the farmer of threshing and carting.
“Oats.—l have tried Algerian Dun, Danish, Calcutta
(for hay or threshing, the straw being sweeter) ; Algerian
the best to strip. I also tried the different white
oats, Bonanza, New Zealand Carton, Storm King and
Manitoba, but none of them yield like Algerian or Cal-
cutta.
“ I ploughed and sowed in June, 1907, ten acres of
peas, and fallowed land alongside, keeping it as a bare
fallow. In October we ploughed the peas under for
green manure and harrowed same. The following
year put both lots in the same day, and when harvested
the land that was kept in bare fallow gave three bushels
to the acre more than the other ten acre plot.
“ Grasses. —I have tried Paspalum Dilitates, Sorghum,
Kaffir corn, Japanese millet and maize. All above thrive
well if one only irrigates. I have sown 50 acres with
lucerne, which does fairly well. Melilotus (Mr. Dahlen-
burg was the first one to introduce it into the Nhill
district) is a trefoil variety which gives a great quan-
tity of feed. By sowing 1 lb. of seed mixed in the
manure when sowing wheat the following year you
have abundance of feed, and it enriches the land for
wheat-growing. The nodules it formg produce nitro-
gen, and it is easier got rid of than oats, as it is a
small seed. Italian rye grass seems to do best on red
soil, growing in big bunches, and is green with the first
rain. Rape.—l find rape, mixed with a little rye, does
best sown in March, so that it grows quickly with the
first autumn rains, which means plenty of feed for
sheep in the winter. I have several times sown it in
the middle of August, but has turned out a total failure.
“ Ensilage.—l have built a silo and filled it with Algerian
oats (chaffed) to feed sheep, but they would not eat it
while they had grass; they eat hay or chaff though.
Cattle are very partial to it, and thrive well. To have
good ensilage all the time you require to take off every
day at least two or three inches, however.
“ I generally harrow my wheat crop in July with
poppy harrows or weeder to kill poppies and grass
that comes up with the wheat, or directly afterwards,
at the same time making the land firm to maintain
the moisture. In fact, I have harrowed ten days
after sowing where the rubbish came up before the
wheat, with good results. You could see it to a line
where I stopped the harrow and gave three bushels
to the acre more. I tried, as an experiment, sowing
one cwt. of salt to the acre. In the wheat crop there
/•was no improvement, but in the oats crop it gave about
f two bushels to the acre extra. These trials were both
on stiff red soil. I believe in putting fully y 2 cwt.
manure and one bushel of wheat on black ground, and
70 to 80 lbs. manure on red soil. I find it pays hand-
somely for the cost of the extra manure.”
Mr. Dahlenburg is noted for the quality of his stock.
He is a great believer in having everything well bred,
and he is quite right when he says a good horse doesn’t
cost as much to keep as a “ rough ’un,” and you get


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
more work out of him. Breed them right, feed
them right, and the farmer has spent his money right.
The same remarks apply to pigs, sheep and cattle. Mr.
Dahlenburg finds Shorthorn cattle the best for Nhill
district. They are good milkers, good for beef, and
thrive well. In sheep he believes in merinoes and
Lincoln-Merino cross for freezing purposes. In pigs
the Yorkshire and Berkshire mature the fastest and
find a ready sale, there always being a good demand
for these breeds.
There is an enormous quantity of modern machinery
on “ Oakdene Estate,” and, although the cost is heavy,
yet the up-to-date farmer of to-day must have it, and
if it wears well and gives a good return the money
has been well spent. There is a great deal in buying
the right kind of machinery, however, and looking after
it well when in and out of use. It is worthy of men-
tion that Mr. Dahlenburg in three years won the £3O
prize presented by Messrs. Gaston Bros., through the
Nhill A. and P. Society, for the best managed farm;
in the Nhill district. He also secured the coveted
Nhill A. and P. Society’s £3O prize for the most suc-
cessful and best experimental work on any farm in the
district.
Church of England, Nhill.
M . Wallers’ Residence, Nhill.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
NOSKE BROS/ FLOUR MILLS
NATIMUK HORSHAM —*
NHILL
Head Office: 9 QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE
One of the most important enterprises of Nhill is
the milling industry carried on by Noske Bros. The
rise of this progressive firm has been gradual and
solid, and goes to show what can be attained by those
possessed of keen foresight, enterprise, energy, and
courage when applied on true business principles.
These characteristics are possessed in a marked
degree hy Mr. T. J. Noske, the founder of
the firm. In 1900 he purchased the Union
Horsham Mill.
Mill, Horsham, which had been idle and on
the market for several years. Like many other enter-
prises which look well on paper, the new business was
at first anything but successful. The plant was not
up-to-date, and Mr. Noske’s position was not an en-
viable one. There were but two things to do —throw up
the sponge or find a remedy for the state of affairs.
Mr. Noske was not long in making up his mind. He
realised that to turn out good flour he required first-
class up-to-date machinery and a first-class miller. The
first could be bought, and the second could be found.
Mr. W. A. Gunn, who had a splendid reputation as a
miller, w r as engaged. Mr. Gunn was a man of great
practical experience, and very soon had matters on a
better footing; and as time went on the excellence of
the flour turned out gained the confidence of the
trade. The turning point had been passed, and suc-
cess was assured. The mill was removed close to the
railway station, and thejflant remodelled right through-
out. Prosperity followed, and in 1903 Mr. Gunn and
Mr. Nichterlein, and later Mr. E. B. Noske, were
taken into partnership, and the Warracknabeal mill
was purchased and placed under the management of
Mr. Gunn. This, after being put on a good footing,
was sold, and the firm bought the Natimuk mill and the
two mills at Nhill, the two latter being worked as one
concern under the able management of Mr. W. A.
Gunn.
Nalimuk Mill.
Particulars of the respective mills may be of inte-
rest. The Lowan mill was erected in 1890 by Mr.
Henry Simon (tbe well-known English mill builder)
for Messrs. Fry Bros. It is a four story brick build-
Lowan Mill, Nhill.
ing, with a complete “ Simon ” plant, duplicate boilers,
high-pressure condensing engine, electric light, with
ample storage accommodation, and has a capacity of
fifteen bags of flour per hour.
The Wimmera mill is a roomy four-story building,
substantially framed, on a brick foundation. It has a
Wimmera Mill, Nhill.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT,
complete plant on the Hind and Lund English system,
with a Hornsby water-tube boiler, compound conden-
sing engine, electric light, ample storage accommoda-
tion and transit facilities. Both of these mills have
sidings holding thirty trucks running from the main
railway line, and lead direct into the trucks. The
capacity of this mill is twenty bags an hour.
Both of these mills are supplied with a complete
weighbridge weighing system, and there are duplicate
boilers. There is also silo accommodation for hand-
ling and storing of grain, and many other modern im-
provements. In fact, the compiler feels justified in
saying that the mills under review are amongst the
best and most modern in the whole of the Common-
wealth. The same remark applies to the quality of
produce manufactured.
These two mills have a storage capacity for some
30,000 bags of wheat; also various smaller storage
sheds which are fully utilised. This firm has agencies
throughout the Wimmera engaged in purchasing wheat
and distributing the manufactured product. Flour is
shipped to all portions of the world ; also there is a
great demand for “ Noske’s ” product right through-
out the Commonwealth.
A few facts concerning this huge live concern may
be of interest. They serve to show the importance to-
Nhill of this industry : —-
About 17,000 bushels of wheat per week are dealt
with, or say, 800,000 per year—sooo bags of flour per
week. £20,000 per year is paid in freight; £6OOO to
£7OOO is paid in wages, not including other trades,,
such as blacksmiths, carpenters, plumbers, etc., etc.
Firewood costs £l4OO per year. These are big figures,
and give an idea of the great importance of this in-
dustry.
The head office is at 9 Queen-street, Melbourne.
Mr. W. H. Nichterlein is manager. Mr. W. A. Gunn,
one of Nhill’s foremost citizens, is managing director
at Nhill. He is greatly respected both in and out of
business for his courteous manner and straight dealing
qualities. There is one thing predominant in Mr.
Gunn’s nature, and that is he gives even justice to
everyone, both as a citizen in private life and as a
business man.
NOSKE BROS.’ FLOUR MILLS
Head Office: 9 Queen St., Melbourne
NATIMUK, HORSHAM, and NHILL.
T. H. Laidlaw & Co
Stock and
Station Agents
UNION BUILDINGS, NHILL.
HEAD OFFICE: HAMILTON.
Branches :
Coleraine, Horsham, Macarthur, Warracknabeal, Jeparit, Rainbow, Willaura-
The name of Laidlaw and Co. is a household word
throughout the Western District, Wimmera, and
Mallee. It is a firm (that from the very start has
inspired confidence amongst its clients. That, is
why its field of operations has grown bigger and
bigger, till now, with its head office at Hamilton,
it has branches at Coleraine, Horsham, Macarthur,
Warracknabeal, Jeparit, Rainbow, Nhill, and Wil-
laura. This article has to deal specially with the
Nhill branch. With the reputation of the firm be-
hind it, and under the able management of Mr. M. F.
Swan, the branch has made wonderful headway.
Mr. Swan was connected with the Australasian
Mortgage and Finance Co. for several years as
travelling representative, and, not unnaturally, he
knows the trend of stock and land movements
thoroughly. This is a new branch, but since the
beginning of the year the business returns have
gradually and solidly increased. A$ practical proof
of the satisfactory support the firm under review
are receiving in Nhill, and their belief in the present
and future of the district, they have recently pur-
chased five acres of land in a central position in
Nhill, and intend to shortly erect modern, well-
equipped, and commodious sale yards.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
The Farmers’ Arms Hotel, NhilL
WILLIAM KEMP, Proprietor.
Views of Exterior and Interior of Dining-Room, Farmers’ Arms Hotel.
It is not often that a good farmer makes an ideal
publican, but in Mr. Kemp’s case he has proved
himself an excellent boniface in every respect, and,
since taking over “The Farmers’ Arms Hotel,”
Victoria-street, Nhill, he has not only greatly im-
proved the property, but has trebly improved the
trade since taking over the business four years ago.
This hotel is comfortable in every detail, and con-
tains some forty well-kept and scrupulously clean
bedrooms, while the dining-room is probably the
largest in the West Wimmera. Being almost essen-
tially a “ farmers’ ” hotel, not unnaturally large,
well-drained accommodation yards have been se-
View of the Farmers’ Arms Hotel, showing the recent
modern additions. In the near future this Hotel wall
be rebuilt on modern lines over the whole area.
cured. There are a large number of stalls, also
loose-boxes. Trade has increased so greatly of
late that in the near future Mr. Kemp intends to
erect a handsome two-storied structure, built on the
latest modern principle and style. Mr. Kemp has
lived in the Nhill district some thirty years, engaged
in farming pursuits, and no doubt his intimate know-
ledge of the farmers, and the manner in wliich they
prefer to be catered for, have been big factors in
the popularity and success which “ The Farmers’
Arms Hotel ” enjoys. Mrs. Kemp supervises splen-
didly the domestic arrangements, and in all fairness
a share of the success must be extended to her.
Photo of Plans, new building in Victoria Street, Nhill,
for Mr. J. Iv. Barnes (late Arnold & Barnes). This wall
be, when completed, a very fine modern structure.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Mr. William Krelle’s “Bonny View” Estate
NEAR NHILL
Comprising 2,600 Acres.
One of the most up-to-date in the District.
Mr. William Krelle is one of the pioneers of the
Nhill district, his first introduction to it being over
28 years ago. Not unlike many other old pioneers,
he saw much hardship—much “ battling ” against
heavy odds —and in the drought year 1902 he relates
the purchase of 2206 acres for £lOO which were
generally agreed to be useless. Those acres were
then unprofitable, but have since changed hands at
several pounds. Mr. Krellrs “ Bonny
View ” estate, near Nhill, comprises 2600 acres of
red chocolate and heavy black soil, and considerable im-
provements having been made during recent years,
it is now one of the most up-to-date in the district.
Mr. Krelle, who is one of the most progressive
farmers in the Nhill district, has gradually improved
the class of stock on his estate, and his sheep,
cattle and horses are amongst the best in the dis-
trict. He is a man who believes in obtaining the
best use from the land, and each year hundreds of
acres are sown under wheat, the average obtained
being about fourteen bushels.
Some interesting Views on Mr. Krelle’s “ Bonny View ” Estate.
BLOCKS and DESIGNS.
The blocks and designs for this publication were
executed by Charles E. Campbell, London Bank
Chambers, Ballarat. The quality is undeniable, and
equal to any similar work in the Commonwealth.
Campbell’s prices are reasonable. Quotations sent
promptly. Work executed rapidly.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT,
Mr. George Batson’s “ Boxdale Estate.”
Mr. George Batson.
There are many progressive farmers possessing splen-
didly improved farms in the West Wimmera, and Mr.
George Batson’s “ Boxdale Estate ” is amongst the
finest. Ever since 1876, when he first settled in the
district, improvements have been made from year to
year. At first it was a hard struggle, and had Mr.
Batson given up his farm, as he contemplated, in 18,81,
The Old Homestead.
trying new grasses, seeds, methods of farming, etc., so
that the best use can be obtained from the soil. Mr.
Batson has obtained the much coveted prize for best
wheat yield in the West Wimmera, and in the class of
machinery, stock, etc., “ Boxdale ” is well to the fore.
A new homestead has been erected, and it is a fine
modern place, giving all the convenience and comforts
The Handsome New Homestead cn “ Boxdale Estate.
Nhill and district would have suffered a great loss, for
it is not actually what has been done in the way of
improvements on “Boxdale,” but the energy in experi-
menting with different cereals and by various
methods of farming, that .Mr. Batson has helped along
the district and his fellow-farmers. He might almost
be termed the pioneer of experiments in the district.
He is certainly one of the most enthusiastic, and can
be aptly termed a scientific farmer, who is continually
/of a suburban residence. Personally, he is a staunch,
active member of the newly-formed political party,
" The People’s Party,” and also takes a keen interest
in the welfare of Nhill district —a district he is a great
believer in, and never fails to impress one of the ex-
cellent future which lies before it when the land is
utilised to its greatest capacity. At the present time
the greatest drawback is the inability of the farmer to
secure suitable labour.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Two Interesting
Views on
Mr. George Batson’s
Boxdale Estate.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
In Winiam, at a distance of five miles from Nhill,
is “ Clear Bank,” the property of Mr. C. A. F. Gladi-
gau. This estate consists of nearly 5000 acres free-
hold land, of which about 1500 acres has been trans-
ferred to H. A. Gladigau, the eldest son.
In 1877 Mr. and Mrs. Gladigau selected 560 acres; the
balance of the estate has been purchased at various
times since then. The progress of the district and the
increase in land values is shown by the prices paid for
this land, the first purchases being made at £2/10/-
the foxes do much damage amongst the lambs. It was
Mr. Gladigau’s desire to possess high-class merinoes,
but, like others, made mistakes at the beginning, and
paid for his experience. Thinking to improve his flock
he paid high prices for rams, but, unfortunately for him,
they were too wrinkled and folded on the body, w T hile
the wool was short; in addition to this, they were poor
doers in this part. To remedy this he obtained his
now well-known rams, which are big-framed, plain-
bodied animals, with wool of good length and fine
Views on “Clear Bank Estate.”
per acre, wffiile £6 was paid for later purchases. Since
the year 1900 Mr. Gladigau has let all his cultivation
land on the share system, and the remainder he is using
for sheep rearing.
It will be interesting to sheepbreeders to know of
some of his difficulties in raising his flock to its present
high standard. A year or two after settling in Winiam
he purchased a small flock, which was guarded carefully,
as the dingoes at that .time were very numerous, and
at one period killed as many as fifty in two successive
nights. Nov/ the dingoes are very nearly extinct, but
quality, and these have proved themselves to be su-
perior to the former strain in many ways. He obtained
/these sheep in South Australia. The Nhill A. and P.
Society always rely on an exhibit from this flock. The
visitor at “ Clear Bank ” woolshed will notice the walls
lined with prize tickets awarded to Mr. Gladigau for
the sheep he has exhibited at the local shows, and he
will no doubt also admire both the quantity and quality
of the vool in a fleece shorn from any of these first-
class animals. Mr. Gladigau always has some stud
rams, also a few young flock rams, for sale.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Mr. Thomas Ervin’s “Spring Hill Estate,” Woorak.
Views on “Spring Hill Estate,” Woorak
One of the most respected and worthy old pio-
neers of the Nhill district is Mr. Thomas Ervin, of
“ Spring Hill Estate,” Woorak. He fought hard
for nearly thirty years, and is rewarded to-day by
the ownership of one of the most up-to-date estates,
consisting of 1500 acres, in the district. A portion
is under cultivation, and the wheat yields obtained
have been excellent. Mr. Ervin is gradually im-
proving the breed of sheep on “ Spring Hill Estate.”
However, it is in a great measure due to his enter-
prise that farmers have been enabled to improve
the breed of horses in the Nhill district. He has
made this a hobby, and recently imported the three-
year-old draught stallion “ Lymm Menestral ” from
England at an expense of over £lOOO. This magni
ficently bred stallion is one of the most symmetrical
and perfectly proportioned horses in Victoria, carry-
ing a fine strain of blood on both the sire’s and
dam’s side, each of which have been prolific prize-
takers in England. Mr. Ervin, as is well known,
is also the owner of those two well-known sires,
“Young Native Oak” and “Acorn.” It is due to
the enterprise of such men as Mr. Ervin that the
Mallee and Wimmera farmers have become noted
for the quality of horses in use on their farms,
and the writer is pleased to find that Mr. Ervin’s
enterprise is securing recognition by the farmers of
the Wimmera district.
The handsome modern residence now in course of erection on “Clear Bank.”
The old homestead on Mr. Gladigau’s Estate, “Clear Bank.”


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
The Commercial Hotel, Nhill,
MRS. R. M. KOZMINSKY, Proprietress.
THE LARGEST AND MOST MODERN HOTEL IN THE WIMMERA
The Recognised C.T.A. House. Electric Light Throughout. Cabs Meet All Trains. Billiard
Room. Large Covered-in Accommodation Yards
Correspondence Receives
Prompt Attention, Over 60 Splendidly Ventilated Bedrooms
No. 1 and No. 2 Dining Rooms. Large
Sample Rooms, Lounge, Reading
Room, Comfortable Parlors.
The Commercial Hotel, Nhill, is not only one of the
finest hotels in provincial Victoria from an architec-,
tural standpoint, but also from that of convenience/
and supreme comfort. This large three-storied build-
ing stands in a commanding centra! position on
the corner of Victoria-street, Nhill, and is so happily
situated that a splendid -view of the surrounding coun-
try can be obtained; it also might very fittingly be
styled “The Sentinel’of Nhill,” so greatly does this
magnificent building stand out. “The Commercial”
was established over 30 years ago by the late respected
Mark Kozminsky, who was one of Nhill’s earliest
pioneers, and this property, which has since been re-
built, still remains in the hands of Mrs. Kozminsky.
As previously mentioned, the exterior of the hotel is
decidedly handsome, and an inspection of the interior,
its splendid conveniences, furnishings and the quiet,
smooth manner in which the domestic and general
management of the hotel is carried out only serve to
conclusively corroborate one’s first impressions.
The parlours are all delightfully quiet, comfortable
and elegantly furnished, while the lounge and reading


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
room is probably one of the finest and largest of its
kind in Victoria. There are two large dining-rooms,
and too much praise cannot be bestowed on the man-
agement shown in selecting the menu each day. Up-
stairs there are private sitting rooms, leading on to a
wide, lengthy balcony. The bedrooms are all splen-
didly and tastefully furnished, also scrupulously clean.
There are several pianos for the enjoyment of visitors,
and in every detail the comfort of the public has been
considered. The billiard room is well equipped with
a first-class table and requisites. The commodious bar
is built on modern principles, and there one will find
only the finest brands of liquors, wines, cigars, etc.
The- accommodation yards are much availed of by
farmers and others, and are found a great conve-
nience. A large portion of the yards are covered in,
which is a great advantage. The contract has been
given to enlarge the roofing, which will make the area
180 ft. by 66ft. Accommodation will then be available
for over 150 vehicles. There are also a number of
well-ventilated loose boxes, and upwards of 70 well-
designed and drained stalls.
On the general management of this admirably con-
ducted and important hotel Mrs. Kozminsky is ably
assisted by Mr, John Kierse and an exceptionally ob-
liging and competent staff. “The Commercial” is
strongly recommended to the travelling public.
T. W. DURANT,
Auctioneer, Land, Stock and
Commission Agent.
Valuator and Financial Agent.
There is no gainsaying the fact that Mr. Durant
has made considerable strides from a business stand-
point since settling in Nhill. The principal reasons
can be put down to his being so well and favourably
known throughout the Wimmera and Mallee, his na-
tural acumen for business, and the excellent manner
every client is treated. Mr. Durant, who before set-
tling in Nhill had been buying fat stock throughout
the Wimmera principally for freezing purposes, was
directly instrumental in the formation of an industry
that will prove a great boon to the farmers—the Wim-
mera Inland Freezing Works Ltd., Murtoa. In the
early stages of its formation, Mr. Durant worked
indefatigably to induce farmers to support this project,
and was very successful indeed.
Since Mr. Durant’s arrival in Nhill land values
have considerably increased, and he informs the com-
piler of this work that the record sale of land in the
district is held by him. This is indeed a feat worthy
of mention. Sales are held in any part of the Wim-
mera and Mallee on liberal terms, and in every branch
of the business, whether it be land, stock, finance or
valuating, Mr. Durant in his enterprising manner
gives it his prompt attention. As showing the impor-
tance of this business, it might be mentioned that
some £200,000 worth of property has changed hands
through Air. Durant’s agency, also a proportionately
large amount of live stock business. One thing is
certain—clients will receive every satisfaction and at-
tention when entrusting their business to him.
Mr. W. H. BOND, J.P.,
arrived in Kaniva in 1882, and
resided in Lillimur and Diapur
from 1884 to 1895. He has been
an active and popular member
of the Lawloit Shire Council
and Waterworks Trust during
the past 14 years. He has
occupied the president’s chair
of the Lawloit Shire Council on
three occasions, also chairman
of the Water Trust. He is an
energetic and liberal supporter
of all public and sporting bodies
in Kaniva, and has well earned
the goodwill of his fellow
townsmen.
Mr. CHARLES H. TOWNS
is one of the best-known and respected townsmen of
Nhill, and during his 20 years’ connection with Nhill
has been a man of many parts.' He was an ener-
getic member of the Lowan Shire Council for 11
years, president of same once, also has been chair-
man of the Water Trust. He is a great enthusiast
in anything savouring of a progressive nature. He
has been president of several sporting institutions,
and has presented many valuable trophies for com-
petition. He is secretary of the Nhill Hospital,
Nhill A. and P. Society, and secretary of that active
organisation, the Stallion Owners’ and Breeders’ As-
sociation.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
RYAN & BOND, Land, Financial & Commission Agents
Auctioneer:
J. P. RYAN
Agents for the Florida superphosphate, May Bros.
(Gawler, S.A.) harvesters and strippers, also Far-
mers’ favourite grain drill, Sudholz winnowers, Barger’s
discs, C. H. Smith’s cultivators and ploughs, Cliff
and Bunting chaffcutters and horseworks, J. Martin
and Co. (Gawler, S.A.), May and Millar (Horsham),
Palatine Insurance Co. Ltd. (fire), and National Mutual
Life Association of Australia Ltd. The New Zealand
Loan and Mercantile Agency Co. Ltd.
Established over 22 years ago by Messrs. J. P. Ryan
and the late G. H. Bond, it is not unnatural that this
successful land, financial and commission agency busi-
ns?s should be so well and favourably known through
out the Wimmera and Mallee portions of Victoria.
The reputation of the firm has been well maintained,
and as the district has progressed and met with success,
so have the firm under review. Sales are held at
regular intervals at the yards in Nhill, and clearing
sales are conducted throughout Victoria. The firm
under review have secured and retained the confidence
of Wimmera and Mallee farmers during the past twenty
years, and it is not surprising to chronicle the continued
success and the complete confidence that exists between
the farmers and the firm of Ryan and Bond. Mr. J
P. Ryan, who conducts all auctioneering work on be-
half of the firm, invariably secures satisfactory prices,
to both buyers and sellers at the regular Nhill sales
and the clearing ones held in various portions of the
Wimmera. Every client can feel assured of a strong
effort being made to promote and carry out his busi-
ness satisfactorily in every detail. On the face value
of being over twenty years before the public of the
Wimmera as an auctioneering firm, and the fact that
business is yearly increasing, it is surely an indication
that this firm have not only proved true to themselves,
but true to their many hundreds of clients.
J. M. ROBERTS
Fruiterer and Produce Store Proprietor.
Fresh Fruit and Vegetables Daily.
Highest Prices given for Hides, Skins, Wool, etc., for Cash
Although Mr. J. M. Roberts has been a resident of
the Nhill district during the past twenty-six years, it
is now only four 'years since he became well known
in the commercial world of the town. He is the pro-
prietor of a very well managed fruiterer’s shop, whe/e
the finest fruit and vegetables are invariably found,
also confectionery. Still it is in the produce portion
of this business that Mr. Roberts finds his time more
fully occupied. The fact that returns are increasing
each month points to the success attending his wise
business dealings with farmers in the purchase of wool,
hides, tallow, skins, etc. Two vans are employed tra-
velling throughout the district, calling on the farmers
at frequent and regular intervals. Cash is paid when
desired, and the highest price is offered as warranted
by the market. A large business is done in the hay
and corn store departments. Fodder isi delivered
promptly in town and district in any quantity. It is
pleasing to note the success of Mr. Roberts, who
adopts not only straight dealing methods in his business
but progressive ones, and no doubt his expansion in
business will be not only sustained, but increased.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Views on Mr. Dart’s Farm, “ Gleneva.”
Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Dart, aged 75 years and 71 years, who have 9 sons, 4 daughters, 66 grand-
children and 14 great grandchildren. Mr. Dart, sen., reared the “ Dart Imperial ” wheat in 1882, and it has
well held its own ever since throughout Australia for its weight and exceptional milling qualities.
Mr. Dart’s Farm, “ Gleneva.”
Situated about nine miles from Nhill is found the
well-improved farm “ Gleneva,” the property of Mr.
J. Dart, who is one of the oldest pioneers of the dis-
trict, his arrival dating back to 1881. This property,
although situated alongside a magnificent sheet of water
known as Lake Krelle, had for many years been looked
upon as almost useless, and it is solely through the
admirable and indomitable pluck and enterprise of Mr.
Dart that the red, black and sandy soil on “Gleneva”
estate has been put to profitable use. Feeling convinced
that both the climate and soil were highly suitable for
fruit-growing, a large area was laid out and an irri-
gation scheme was commenced. The results more
than justified expectations, and various kinds of fruit
from this estate have been much admired when exhibited
at district shows. The Cleopatra apple grows most
profusely, and many have been exhibited by Mr. Dart,
perfect in shape and flavour, weighing over a pound
each. Also some magnificent vegetables are grown—
onions of lb. weight each; while carrots, turnips,
Turk’s head, tomatoes, etc., grow in profusion, and
very clearly illustrate the value of the soil when irri-
gated. Mr. Dart, who goes in for wheat-growing (the
average yield is 15 bushels) and sheepbreeding on an
extensive scale, intends to continue making use of the
water from the lake by irrigating his land still further.
It is not surprising to find such an energetic farmer as
Mr. Dart possessing a thoroughly modern farm, with
a comfortable homestead, good solid buildings, and an
excellent class of stock.
I thank all those who assisted me in the production
of this illustrated book, and trust it will be found inte-
resting, attractive, and an excellent means of advertis-
ing the potentialities and progress of the Nhill and
Kamva districts. j EDWARD ROBERTSON.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT,
J. R. SPORN’S NHILL FOUNDRY.
Established 25 Years.
The Nhill Foundry, which has played such an im-
portant part in the development of the Nhill dis-
trict in the supplying of modern implements to the
farmers, was established 25 years ago by the late
J. R. Sporn, who in his lifetime did much to forward
public and charitable objects in Nhill. This large
and extensive business is now carried on by the
Ballarat Trustees, Executors and Agency Company,
and the old-established firm employs some 20 hands,
who are busily employed manufacturing strippers,
scarifiers, ploughs, harrows, chaffcutters, scoops. A
few facts concerning Sporn’s manufactures are
worthy of note, especially by farmers.
Strippers are noted for lightness of draughty scoops
are sought for throughout the State. Castings of
every description are made at shortest ‘notice. Du-
plicate parts (all makes of machinery) are stocked
and a wide range—every sort of casting for agricul-
tural implements.
Grave railings and frieze work in any design.
Steel and brass castings. A speciality is “ Sporn’s
stripper combs,” which have given universal satis-
faction throughout the district. The motive force
for the fine, complete and modern machinery is
supplied by steam power. The Nhill Foundry have
won many prizes at district shows for the excellence
of their implements and vehicles, and the big repu-
tation for first-class workmanship, reasonable prices
for machinery and repairing work undertaken is not
only well sustained, but is being added to each year.
Interior and Exterior of the Nhill Foundry.
“ Boot Supply Store ’
Macpherson Street, NHILL
C. FRITSCH, Manufacturer of Strong Leather Boots.
I carry a
All kinds of
Well Selected Stock
BOOTS and SHOES
which is
kept in stock.
UNBEATABLE
REPAIRS
A SPECIALITY.
PRICE and
QUALITY.
Inspection Invited.
Established over 6 years.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
“ The Nhill Fruit Mart,”
Victoria St., Nhill.
J. & A. DAY, Proprietors.
Wholesale and Retail Fruiterers, Greengrocers and Confectioners.
Daily Supplies of Choicest Fruit and Vegetables in
Season. Orders promptly attended to.
During the past two years Messrs. Day Bros,
have gradually been improving their well-managed
fruit, refreshment and confectionery business in
Victoria-street, Nhill, so that to-day one finds it
a most progressive, flourishing concern, A full
stock of biscuits, the finest quality of confectionery,
and daily supplies of fruit and vegetables are always
on hand, also supplies of garden seeds and choice
pot plants. For the convenience of farmers, Day
Bros, also stock bread and small goods. The large
and growing support extended this up-to-date busi-
ness is sure proof that courtesy, first-class goods,
and fair market prices are big factors in building
up a solid business.
The Messrs. Day Bros, are both most courteous and
painstaking business men, and it is pleasing to be able to
record the continued and expanding success that is
meeting their efforts. A visit to “The Nhill Fruit
Palace” can be recommended.
Senior-Constable Drew, who has been 12 months
in charge of the Nhill district, joined the Victorian
police force in 1886. After 23 years’ service he was
promoted to senior-constable. His energy in secur-
ing practical, which means financial, support to that
splendid institution, the Nhill Hospital, will be
long remembered. He is a capable, energetic officer,
and one Nhill is glad to have met.
Mr. W. A. GUNN.
Mr. W. A. Gunn is President of the Hospital
Committee, a member of the Lowan Shire Council,
and has recently been elected President, of that
important body, the Nhill A. and P. Society. He
is an able business man, and ranks amongst the
finest public-spirited men in the Wimmera.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
JOHN L. BARNES, Builder and Contractor
(Late ARNOLD & BARNES)
Large Stocks of Timber and Building Material of every kind on hand. Estimates Given. Plans Prepared
The l.rra of Arnold and Barnes was established in
the Wimmera in 1;)02; since then a successful and
prosperous business has been carried on as builders,
contractors, timber and iron merchants. This firm
has built a fair portion of Nhill. Amongst the
numerous large contracts carried out by them are
the erection of “ The Union,” “ The Commercial,” and
“The Farmers’ Arms” Hotels; also the erection of
the National Bank, Natimuk, and public buildings, in-
cluding the Stawell State School. The firm has a
large and competent staff of practical tradesmen per-
manently employed in every branch of the trade, and
can carry out work at shortest notice expeditiously.
This firm has a special line in tanks and windmills,
which can be erected in any part of the Wimmera
district at shortest notice. Licensed plumbers; water
laid on. The large stocks of timber and iron,
etc., which is always on hand, cannot be excelled in
any part of the Wimmera district; only first qualities
of tl c various lines are kept in stock. The firm has
a thorough knowledge of the trade and requirements
of clients, and are always willing to give every assis-
tance, prepare plans and specifications, and give quan-
tities for the various kinds of buildings as may be
required. While this production was in the printer’s
hands the above firm dissolved partnershio by mutual
consent, William Arnold retiring, and John Leonard
Barnes now continues the business in his own name,
under the style of John L. Barnes. It is Mr. Barnes’
intention to erect a fine brick building on the old site,
at the corner of Victoria and Brougham streets, as
shown by block plan in this production, and in future
he intends to carry large stocks of general ironmongery
and farmers’ requisites, tools of every description, fur-
niture, linoleum and oilcloths, etc., plated ware of every
description, which will be sold at prices that will defy
competition. Mr. Barnes trusts that, with strict atten-
tion to business, the splendid patronage which existed
with the old firm will still continue; and will be pleased
to meet his numerous clients in the new premises,
which will be opened in about three months’ time.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
RODDA & PATTERSON, Family Butchers
VICTORIA STREET, NHILL,
Carry a large supply of the Coolest and Primes! Meat in the Wimmera. Small Goods and Bacon a Speciality,
The large and important butchering business car
ried on so successfully by Messrs. Rodda and Pat-
terson was established some thirty years ago by Mr.
Richard Ridgwell, and later on passed into the
hands of Mr. Owen Edwards, who carried same on
until two years ago, when Messrs. John Rodda and
William Patterson, both employees for many years
in the business, became proprietors. This butcher-
ing business is amongst the finest, most up-to-date
and well managed ones the writer has yet had the
pleasure of describing, and it easily ranks amongst
the most modern in e ; ther the cities of Adelaide or
Melbourne. The machinery installed in the refrig-
erating chambers is of the very latest pattern, and
the best ingredients only are used in the manufac-
ture of small goods. A 3 V 2 h.p. engine supplies
the motive power for the machinery. All meat is
kept in the commodious cool chambers. Mr. Pat-
terson, who does the buying of stock, visits all the
principal markets of Victoria in search of the primest
stock, which in many cases are topped up in the
firm’s own paddock adjoining Nhill. Pigs are also
bred and fattened by the firm, and their noted bacon
is cured and smoked on the premises. From every
standpoint this progressive and well-conducted busi-
ness is a distinct credit to the proprietors, and
Nhillites are distinctly fortunate in having such a
fine business of its kind in their midst.
Mr. E. BOUND of the .. or Lowan Sauce Factory
and “Spring Vale” Orchard, NHILL.
Situated about nine miles south of Nhill is the
“ Spring Vale ” orchard, owned by Mr. E. Bound,
who selected fourteen years ago, and has since very
successfully solved the problem of making a profit-
able use of this one-time despised land. The solu-
tion was in the production of fruit and vegetables,
27 acres now being under orchard. Visitors to
“Spring Vale” and to the Nhill Show are astonished
with the excellent products of this once unpromising
soil, which is now the chief source of Nhill s fruit;
supply. Tomatoes of first-class quality were grown
by Mr. Bound, who specialised this branch of in-
dustry, and he has established the Lowan Sauce
Factory. It is remarkable how quickly this branch
has extended. Mr. Bound was led to make a small
quantity of sauce at first, but as the demand for
sauce was always in excess of the supply Mr.
Bound had to erect a factory with up-to-date ap-
pliances to keep pace with the rush of orders.
A visitor to “Spring Vale” may see tomatoes
gathered in the morning, and before evening he
can see these tomatoes bottled up in the form of
sauce. Mr. Bound finds that it is essential to use
the fruit immediately to produce the high-grade
sauce which has made such a name throughout
N.W. Victoria and the eastern portion of South
Australia. Storekeepers will find it profitable to
stock this sauce, as they do not incur tlm heavy
freight on the city-made article. Mr. Bound’s prin-
ciple in this business is to sell a high-class sauce
with a low margin of profit, relying on the large
quantity sold to repay him.
The “ Lowan Sauce Factory’s ” product is an ex-
cellent one, possessing piquancy, freshness, and,
above all, is absolutely pure and wholesome. It is
strongly and genuinely recommended to the public.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
KANIVA OF TO-DAY .
The township of Kaniva was founded in 1880,
and was formed from part of O’Connor’s selection,
and cut into blocks and sold. The first building
that was erected w y as a flour mill owned by Messrs.
Fry Bros. It was built on the land where at pre-
sent stands Messrs. Young Bros.’ office.
Long before Kaniva was thought of a township
had been surveyed at Lillimur South, and the first
store built between Dimboola and the border was
and became obtainable at a very low figure. It was
impossible to realise on it, and so eventually it fell
into the hands of the banks. However, the turn of
the tide came, and with the new and up-to-date
methods of farming and use of artificial manures
land gradually increased in value, and to-day the
average price of land is £6 per acre, but in some
cases very much higher prices have been obtained.
The holdings are now much larger. Sheep have been
The Shire Hall, Kaniva. President (Mr. F. Sherriff) and Councillors, Lawloit Shire Council.
carried on by Messrs. Pomery and Hopkins, as the
early pioneers in those days were under the im-
pression that the line would tap the border that
way; but the Kaniva residents were alive to their
interests, and the line from Dimboola came through
Kaniva and Lillimur on to Serviceton, so that Lilli-
mur South became almost extinct. The business
centre became Kaniva, which is now a flourishing
town, being a good wheat and wool centre, with
two markets nearly equal distance apart. The first
stores actually in Kaniva were Palfrey, Phillips and
Co., and Bond, Taylor and Co.; while David Harris
opened at Lillimur, and later at Kaniva over thirty
years ago. Messrs. W. H. Bond and David Harris
still carry on successful storekeeping businesses in
Kaniva. The first hotel was conducted by Mr. Ed-
win Philp.
The settlers in the early days had their difficulties
and trials to contend with. With failures in crops
and a period of wet seasons land decreased in value,
an important factor, as well as wheat-growing in
making the land payable with mixed farming. The
seasons are good, and droughts are unknown in the
Kaniva district, the average rainfall being about 19
inches.
Kaniva is about 273 miles from Melbourne and
211 miles from Adelaide, with a good train service,
which could be improved upon though, no doubt.
The average wheat yield last year was about 16
bushels to the acre.
The Lawloit Shire Council meets at Kaniva
monthly. The president is Mr. F. Sherriff. Coun-
cilors W. H. Bond, J.P., Jas. McCracken, J. L.
Webb (East Riding); Thomas Henstridge, M. E.
Lowe, F. Sherriff (West Riding); B. J. Arthur, W.
F. King, W. Vivian (North Riding).
The Lawloit Waterworks Trust meets on the same
day as the council, and Mr. W. Vivian is chairman.
The commissioners are Messrs. W. H. Bond, J.P.,
Jas. McCracken, J. L. Webb, Thomas Henstridge,


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
M. C. Lowe, F. Sherriff, B. J. Arthur, W. Vivian,
and W. F. King.
The ratepayers are fortunate in having such an
earnest and capable body of men to represent them
■on the council and waterworks trust.
The sporting clubs are well represented here. The
Kaniva Racing Club bolds its meeting in February,
when the committee offer a very good programme.
The president is Mr. Joseph Bruder, with Mr. J. H.
Brodribb as secretary.
Football is represented by two teams —the Kaniva
Football Club and the “Warriors F.C. and great
interest is taken in the competitions, which are held
amongst the district teams. Occasionally special
trains are chartered during the season. The presi-
dent of the Kaniva Football Club is Mr. J. Bruder;
secretary, Mr. J. H. Brodribb. The “ \Varriors
F.C.: Mr. B. J. Arthur, president; Mr. J. Mason,
secretary.
Golf is represented at Kaniva. and great interest
is taken by the members, who are numerous. The
ladies arc also enthusiasts in the game. President,
Mr. W. J. Powell; secretary, Mr. W. Dawson.
Tennis is also indulged in, and the Kaniva club
has made rapid strides during the last twelve
months, due to the energy of the secretary, Mr.
W. J. Bishop. The courts have been improved, and
a shelter shed erected which is a boon to the mem-
bers.
The Rifle Club up to the present has been very
successful, and the captain, Mr. G. Crouch, who
is a great enthusiast, spares neither time nor trouble
in the interests of the club. Amongst the members
there are some excellent shots, and their reputation
has been proved at the V.R.A. matches in winning
cash prizes totalling a considerable amount; also
they have been successful at the District Union
matches. The range is an ideal one, and has the
disappearing targets and telephone communication
on the range. The secretary is Mr. J. Elsden, who
is a great enthusiast.
The Athletic Club hold their meeting in April,
which has invariably proved most successful. The
president is Air. J. Bruder; secretary, Air. Daniells.
Churches. —There are four churches, and the Sal-
vation Army is also represented. Kaniva residents
are fortunate in having such excellent ministers to
guide them in spiritual matters. Church of Eng-
land, Rev. C. O. Anderson; Presbyterian, Rev. Lyall
Hume; Methodists, Rev. Allen; Church of Christ,
Mr. Benn.
Kaniva is represented by the M.U.1.0.0.F. The
secretary is Air. D. Harris, dhe Masonic Lodge
is also represented here, and their place of meeting
is the Shire Hall.
“ Lawloit News” is published each Friday. It
has a large circulation. The manager and editor
is Air. H. Jory.
The banks are represented by the Victoria (Mr.
M. Ord, manager) and the Commercial (Mr. W.
Dent). Both do a good business.
The Alechanics’ Institute and Library was estab-
lished 27 years ago, through the energy and enter-
prise of the leading townsmen at that time._ The
Library has a very large and varied collection of
books 'and literature, and will compare favourably
with most country libraries in the State. The cour-
teous librarian is Miss Stephens. The hall is cap-
able of seating 250 people, and is lighted with acety-
lene gas, and also has an up-to-date Beale piano.
The president is Mr. W. Tolliday, and secretary
Mr. W. H. Bond, who for many years has energetic-
ally forwarded the interests of the Institute in
every possible way.
Hotels.—There are two well-conducted hotels —
“The Commercial,” Mr. Jas. McCracken, proprietor;
and “The Club,” Mr. Joseph Bruder.
The Post Office is in charge of Mr. D. Little, who
is a very obliging and courteous officer and a good
townsman.
The station-master, Air. W. Tolliday, who has
been in charge several years, is an excellent and
courteous official, always ready to assist in any
movement for the welfare of the town.
The Kaniva Glee Club has made rapid strides
during the last two years, and has a good member-
ship. The conductor, Air. W. Langlands, is an en-
thusiast in the work.
The Kaniva Brass Band ha s made good progress
during the last few years, mainly due to the energy
of the bandmaster, Air. Alason, also tq the support
of a few enthusiastic townspeople. The local band,
by frequent open-air entertainments and assistance
to various sports and gatherings, has done much to
enliven the more or less monotonous life of the
town. The secretary is Mr. D. Little.
Kaniva is noted for its stock sales, which are
conducted by Alessrs. Young Bros, fortnightly, and
this well-known firm’s turnover in this district is
considerable. Mainly due to the fine class of sheep
that are bred throughout the district, buyers attend
from various parts of South Australia and Victoria.
Air. Miles is Messrs. Young Bros.’ popular repre-
sentative at Kaniva.
The Progress Association was recently formed.
Air. AI. Ord is president, and Mr. J. C. Leason sec-
retary. The Progress Association are interesting
themselves for the benefit of the town, and are now
agitating for a new post office, which in the near
future will probably be an accomplished fact.
The Kaniva Recreation Reserve and Show Ground
is situated close to the town, and has an area of
70 acres, planted with an avenue of trees from the
gates to the hill where the show is held; also all
around the reserve stately gums to a height of
20 to 30 feet lend a useful and beautiful appearance.
Garden seats are scattered over the ground for visi-
tors, and on Sunday afternoons the local band ren-
ders selections. The president is Mr. W. J. Powell,
and the secretary Mr. D. Harris. The committee
are Messrs. W H. Bond, E. Sharp, I. AI. Golds-
worthy. F. E. ’ Anstey. Charles E. Daniells, and
George Crouch.
THE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.
The Agricultural Society—whose president is Air.
Geo. Lannin; vice-presidents, Alessrs. John Hicks
and J. AI. Goldsworthy: treasurer, Air. M. Ord; and
secretary, Mr. David Harris—has been now in exis
tence 27 years. As with men so with institutions.
Twenty-seven years is a long span of time to look
into the future, yet in the retrospective is but a day
that is past. The Kaniva A. and P. Society—or, as
it was then termed, the Kaniva and Lillimur A. and
P Society—has been in existence over a quarter of
a century, which has been one of useful endeavour


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
and hard struggle, but worthy achievement, justify-
ing fully the existence of the institution, which now
to-day is amongst the most popular of the West
Wimmera public bodies.
Kaniva 27 years ago was a town with a promising
future before it, and many changes have come over
the district during that period. The first show was
held where the present Institute stands, and the
pioneer secretary was the late J. Moore. The next
secretary was the late T. B. Dungey, who was suc-
ceeded by the late Jacob Golding, and he was suc-
ceeded by the late James Leason, who was secretary
during a most trying period from 1892 to 1897. In
the latter year, owing to a general depression, the
society found itself with a large overdraft, and it
was on the balance if it should close up or continue.
However, there were some stout-hearted members
amongst those who were left, and “ nil desperan-
dum ” was their motto. They immediately set to
work and appointed Mr. David Harris as their sec-
retary (who to-day still retains the office), and the
overdraft soon became a thing of the past. It was
the turning point, as each year the position
gradually improved, and during the last 13 years the
prize list has been increased considerably and the
appointments have been vastly improved.
A special feature of the show are the sheep ex-
hibits, which the Kaniva show prides itself are
amongst the best Victoria can produce. Money
has not been spared by such men as Messrs. Tully,
Lannion, Webb, Goodwin, Anstey and several
others to secure quality, and each year sees the in-
troduction of fresh blood. A fine collection of
draught stock and hackneys is a special feature
of the show. Poultry is another big section, and
the society has had the Government donations of
six gold medals for the above section. They are
again to have them for this year's show.
It can readily be understood from this brief ar-
ticle what a decidedly promising and energetic town
“Kaniva of To-day” is. Surrounded as it is by
some of the richest land in the Wimmera, and with
decent seasons, it will no doubt continue to expand
gradually and solidly. The townspeople and mem-
bers of the farming community work in harmony,
and every sporting club and institution receives
cordial assistance and general support. Since the
wave of prosperity came into the district farmers
and business men have not been afraid to spend
money on improvements in buildings, machinery
and sheep. Hence to-day one finds a very credit-
able up-to-date town and splendidly-appointed
modern farms, where the stock can compare favour-
ably with any portion of the Wimmera and Mallee.
THE CLUB HOTEL, KANIVA.
Exterior and Diningroom of the well conducted Club Hotel, Kaniva.
One could hardly desire a more comfortable hoteL
than that Carrie" 1 on so successfully and well by Mr
J. Bruder (The Club Hotel) at Kaniva during the past
three years. Some men are born bonifaces, and Mr.
Bruder is one of them. He is also fortunate In being
assisted in the management of the hotel by the Misses
Bruder, who superintend the domestic duties so
smoothly and well. There is an air of “home, sweet
home ” about the hotel, and comfort is predominant
everywhere. The many rooms are comfortable to a
degree, and the meals are not only excellent, but are
excellently served. A billiard-room is attached to the
hotel, and the various parlours are cosy, comfortable,
and well furnished. In the bar everything will be
found of the best quality, and, generally speaking, this
hotel is not only a credit to the town by the manner
in which it is conducted, but to Mr. Bruder also. It
is a pleasure for the writer to mention the comfort
and general excellent management which exists at “ The
Club Hotel.” where the traveller and farmer at once
find that they are catered for liberally and satisfactorily
in every possible manner.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
Mr. W. Sanders’
Bunyip Estate,
Kanira.
Mr. H. H. Sanders, Manager.
I.unyip Estate, containing some 5000 acres of red
and chocolate soil, was portion of the old Bunyip
s ation, and is situated some 10 miles north of
Kaniya. iVlr. William Sanders settled in the dis-
trict in 1886, and proved to he amongst the most
energetic and progressive pioneers in the Wimmera.
through his energy Bunyip Estate is now one of
the finest in the State. Wheat-growing is exten-
stallion, Simon I. The homestead is a modern one,
surrounded by a fruit garden containing some 200
fruit-bearing trees, and a beautiful flower garden*
which, together with a large lucerne area, is irri-
gated from a spacious dam tilled by aid of a wind-
mill. Improvements are continually being made to
Bunyip Estate, which secured Ist, 2nd and 3rd
three successive years in the Wimmera Farm Com-
sively carried on, and the average yield during the
past 5 years has been in 'the neighbourhood of 17
bushels. The highest recorded on the estate is 19
bushels. An exceptionally high-class breed of meri-
noes is also raised, and last year the price realised
for wool from Bunyip Estate was 14k+d. per lb
Horse-breeding is carried on extensively, the prin-
cipal sire being Simon 11., a sen of that well-known
petitions held in November annually. It is intended
to go still more largely in for irrigation and lucerne
growing in the future, and, with this idea in view,
another large dam is being scooped out and another
windmill erected. Mr. William Sanders resides
principally m Adelaide nowadays, and the manage-
ment of this model and progressive estate is left
in the capable hands of Mr. Hurtle H. Sanders.
Mr. W,
Sanders’
Bunyip Estate,
Kaniva.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
Wheat Stacks at Kaniva.
Mr. H. Schmidt selected land in the Kaniva district
in 1880, and his estate, “Annavale,” comprising 25C0
acres, is one of the best improved in the district. A
large portion is cultivated, and the average wheat yield
during the past seven years has been 17 bushels. Mr.
Schmidt breeds many pure-bred merinos, and wool from
“ Annavale ” usually brings top market prices. There
is a fine wool-shed on the estate, and the shearing is
done by machinery. During the past few years Mr.
Two interesting Views of Mr. Schmidt’s Homestead, “ Annavale.”
Schmidt has considerably improved his draught horses,
and last year at the Nhill Horse Parade one of his
yearlings took second prize in the district competition
and third in the open championship. It is possible that
this youngster may be kept as a sire on “ Annavale
Estate.” Mr. Schmidt has won 21 first prizes in the
show ring with his champion buggy pair of horses,
which are probably the most handsome in the district.
A Fine Old Pioneer, Mr. T. R. Walters.
Another worthy, hale and hearty pioneer is Mr.
T. R. Walters, who arrived in Australia in 186'J,
and subsequently settled in the Nhill district in
1878. He selected at Worack, and later also pur-
chased land. He went through the privations gene-
ral with other pioneer Wimmera farmers. He has
in recent years shared the spoils of bountiful years
and consequent prosperity. He has now retired,
and is resident in the town of Nhill. His sons,
Messrs. T. H., F. R., and W. T. Walters, are en-
gaged in farming pursuits on the property, a portion
of which has been allotted to each. In another
part of this book appears a photo, of Mr. Walters’
comfortable residence.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
Mr. W. F. King can be numbered amongst the
early pioneers* of the Nhill-Kaniva district, having
arrived in 1888. He has battled hard, like the ma-
jority of early settlers, but to-day possesses a fine
farm. He goes in principally for wheat-growing, a
cereal the rich black and red loamy soil is excel-
lently adapted for. He has also commenced to cul-
tivate lucerne. Mr. King has been president of the
Lawloit Shire on four occasions, and is me oldest
councillor, having been a member for 18 years. He
has been Deputy Grand Master of the M.U. Odd-
fellows’ Lodge. He was elected a J.P. at Hawker,
S.A., in 1877, and opened the local court with the
late J. P. Buttfield, S.M. He was also a colleague
of the late C. C. Kingston, and sat on the same
bench in several important cases.
Mr. FRED. T. SHERRIFF,
The President of the Lawloit Shire Council.
Mr. Fred. T. Shcrriff, the energetic and popular
president of the Lawloit Shire Council, has been
farming in the Kaniva district during the past 27
years. His farm is some 10 miles from the town,
and gradually modern improvements have been
made, so that to-day Mr. Sherriff has a fine farm
that is being utilised to his greatest advantage. He
takes a keen interest in the welfare of the town
and district, and has been a member of the council
during the past five years, rendering good service
to the ratepayers, honourably and unselfishly.
Mr. J. L. WEBB’S ESTATE.
Mr. J. L. Webb is noted in the Wimmera chiefly
for the splendid class of sheep raised on his estate,
some few miles from Kaniva. He has made a prac-
tical hobby of sheep-breeding, and has spared no
reasonable expense in improving the breed of sheep
which have been such prolific prize-takers in the
West Wimmera. Flis estate is a splendidly-improved
one in every way, with a decidedly comfortable
homestead. The land consists of rich soil, and the
average wheat returns from this property are a
good deal above the average for the whole of the
district. To such men as Mr. Webb, for the improve-
ment of stock in the district, a distinct word of
praise is due and is therefore extended.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
Mr. William Hicks is an old resident
in the Xhill district, and it is in a
great measure due to his energy and
enterprise that the Wimmera has
gained such importance as a horse-
breeding centre. He has always been
an enthusiastic believer in improving
the breed of draught horses, and in
purchasing “ Klemscott,” who is re-
cognised as the finest horse in the
Wimmera, he did great service to the
farmers. Klemscotf’s progeny can
now be found in every portion of the
Wimmera. They do great credit to
a great sire. Mr. Hicks’ well-improved
farm is situated some 9 1 /z miles from
Kaniva, where a good class of merino
sheep is bred.
KLEMSCOTT. This powerful, symmetrically built,
and magnificently bred Stallion is generally recognised as
the champion ot the Wimmera and Mallee, and his owner is
Mr. W. Hicks, of Kaniva.
A Class of Stock raised by Mr. Hicks on his farm near Kaniva.
Mr. W. Hicks’ magnificent prize-taking Draught Team, which is one of
the best in the Wimmera.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
DAVID HARRIS, General Merchant, “Beehive Store,” KANIVA and LILLIMUR.
Established 1872. Telephone No. 3
The cheapest and best General Store for every article required in the Home and on the Farm.
View ot Lillimur Establishment.
David Harris represents the undermentioned firms:—
International Harvester Co., harvesters, binders, drills,
and their other lines. Buckeye Harvester Co., patent
rotary disc'scrapers, and Myers’ force and lift pumps.
Messrs. Bagshaw and Sons’ winnowers, horseworks and
chaff cutters. Messrs. J. and D. Shearer’s strippers and
ploughshares. John Buncle and Son’s horseworks
and chaffcutters. W. G. Barger’s disc ploughs and cul-
tivators. James Alston’s patent windmills and trough-
ing. J. Bartram and Sons’ acetylene gas plants,
Ericcson telephones, Alpha Laval cream separators,
pneumatic horse collars, ocean wave washing machines.
Wischers and Co.’s celebrated manures, Strachan, Mur-
ray and Shannon, Geelong, wool brokers. The Per-
petual and Trustees’ Agency Co. Executors. Fire In-
surance—Victoria and North British Co.’s Life Assur-
ance, Mutual Life Association.
All agency business conducted with utmost prompt-
ness and on liberal terms. Price lists on application
View of Kaniva Establishment.
Duplicates of all machinery supplied at shortest notice.
My motto is—Don't buy what you don’t’want. Don’t
sell what you have not got.
Mr. David Harris, so favourably known throughout
the length and breadth of the Wimmera, has been inti-
mately connected with the commercial world of Kaniva,
Lillimur and Serviceton during the past 31 years, and
his reputation in the commercial world never stood
higher than it does to-day.
His actions speak loudly in the district, and words
of laudation are quite unnecessary, the many excellent
qualities possessed by Mr. Harris being only too well
known and recognised by the townsmen and farmers of
Kaniva and district" His general stores at Kaniva and
Lillimur reflect credit,, on the proprietor; and while he
continues to give IhemJsuch a comprehensive and well-
stock, carrying quality in every line, marked
ft reasonab.e prices. Mr. Harris’ business will con-
tinue to expand, and retain the popularity now enjoyed.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
WILLIAM CORONER
General Commission Agent
Agent for Noske Bros. Flour Mill.
Views of Mammoth Wheal Stacks.
Mr. William Cordner is associated with the well-
known Cordner family, and has been closely connected
with the setbacks, drawbacks, and prosperity of the
Kaniva district during the past thirty years. He has
had a lengthy and various commercial experience dur-
ing his life, and for the past three years has controlled
a very progressive commission agency business. He is
also the local agent for Messrs. Noske Bros., and
secures a large share of the wheat grown in the dis-
trict for his firm. He is also agent at Miram and
Kaniva for Mt. Lyell Supers, the Vacuum Oil Co., and
the Norwich Fire Insurance Co.
Mr. William Vivian, who is an active member of the
Lawloit Shire Council, has been some 2S years in
the Kaniva district. His estate. “ The Meadows ”
situated about a mile from the town —is a splendidly
improved one, and cleanly demonstrates the energetic
and farseeing policy of Mr. Vivian, who is one of
the first Wimmera settlers and the first man to use
the stump jump plough. While seeing that everything
r\s carried'out in a utilitarian manner, yet he has not
forgotten to also beautify his estate, which comprises
some 5900 acres, a portion of which has been given to
his son, Mr. P. J. Vivian. Wheat-growing is exten-
sively carried on. the average yield obtained being 13
bushels. A fine breed of merino sheep is raised, and
the same remark applies to the other stock, notably
horses. The homestead is a decidedly comfortable one,
surrounded by a large, healthy orchard.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT.
“ The Kaniva Store ” - W. H. BOND, Proprietor
Draper, Grocer, Ironmonger and General Merchant.
Boots and Shoes, Tailoring, Fancy Goods, etc. Highest Price allowed for Dairy Produce.
Agent for Commercial Union Fire Assurance Co. Ltd.
Interior and Exterior View of “The Kaniva Store.”
The oldest business man in Kaniva is Mr. W. H.
Bond. This business was established in 1881 by
Messrs. Bond, Taylor and Co., Mr. Bond assuming
the management in 1882. It was disposed of to
Messrs. E. and J. H. Paterson, and ultimately Messrs.
Moon and Bond bought it. In 1898 the partnership
was dissolved, and Mr. Bond carried on the business.
In 1899 he removed to his present central position
(The Kaniva Store), which had been the principal
store, and was also founded in 1880 by Palfrey, Phil-
lips and Co., and later conducted by Messrs. J. Ebbilson
a n rl Co.
He has there carried on a steady, progressive busi-
ness. In common with a number of other store-
keepers Mr. Bond went through trying times from
1890 to 1900, but has survived that critical period.
As a business man Mr. Bond has always endeavoured
to supply a good article at a reasonable price, to treat
the public fairly, and the success attained has been due
to value- and merit.
Mrs. LAMBERT’S Bakery & Grocery Store
KANIVA.
Suppers, Balls, Tea Meetings, etc., Catered for on a liberal scale.
Fair Market Prices for Butter and Eggs.
GLASSWARE, GROCERIES, IRONMONGERY, BOOTS and SHOES
The business now so successfully carried on by Mrs.
Lambert during the past few years has been estab-
lished over twenty years. There are two distinct
departments—the store, which with the exception of
drapery is a general store in every way, and the stock
carried is not only a large and comprehensive one, but
well selected. Mrs. Lambert also controls the bakery
trade of Kaniva, and the quality of the small goods
and bread is excellent, and gives thorough satisfac-
tion to the residents of town and district. Both in
business and as a good townswoman she carries the
esteem of all.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
Messrs. YOUNG BROS., Kaniva,
AUCTIONEERS, STOCK & STATION AGENTS, Etc.
Mr. WM. J. MILES, Representative,
One of the best known and respected men in the
Kaniva district is Mr. W. J. Miles, who has been
intimately connected with the early misfortunes of
the district, and its recent (during the past ten
years) good fortunes and consequent prosperity.
He has been some twenty-eight years a resident, and
during the past five years has been in charge of
Messrs. Young Bros.’ Kaniva branch, which is
steadily progressing. Sales are held fortnightly at
Kaniva, which can always be relied upon to be a
satisfactory one both to buyers and sellers. The
Kaniva district is noted for the high-class quality of
sheep reared, and that is the chief reason that there
is usually such a large attendance of buyers from
South Australia and various portions of Victoria.
Messrs. Young Bros.’ yards, though capable of ac-
commodating many thousands of sheep, are often
taxed to their very utmost. A large amount of busi-
ness in land is also transacted through the Kaniva
branch, and no man in the district has a better
knowledge of “values” than Mr. Miles, who en-
deavours to act fairly and squarely to every client,
whether he be buyer or seller. The farmer improves
his stock at considerable risk, and naturally appre-
ciates an auctioneering firm that will give and
gain for him the fairest and most complete oppor-
tunity of selling to the greatest advantage. Young
Bros, have done this by erecting modern, well-
equipped yards both at Kaniva and Lillimur, and,
with the good name they carry through the State
and judicious advertising, have attracted buyers and
sellers from every portion of the Wimmera for the
simple reason that they know a Kaniva sale is in-
variably a good one, and well worth attending; also
where a painstaking auctioneer in Mr. Sutherland,
who sells both at Nhill and Kaniva, manages to
carry through sales in a happy and satisfactory
manner.
View of the Kaniva Yards on Sale Day.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
THE
Commercial Hotel,
KANIVA.
Mr. McCracken
Proprietor.
The proprietor of the “ Commercial Hotel,”
Kaniva, is an old resident of the district, having
been engaged in farming pursuits since. 1881. He
has, however, been a worthy, popular and much-
respected landlord during the past 18 years. The
Commercial is a C.T. house, and is a decidedly up-
to-date and comfortable one in every respect. It
contains a large number of airy, well-ventilated
and beautifully-kept rooms, a first-class dining-room,
billiard room, and large accommodation yards.
The premises have recently been enlarged, and there
are now some 40 rooms. Ballarat ale is drawn, and
the wines, spirits, etc., are of the best. The aerated
waters and cordials are manufactured on the pre-
mises. Mrs. McCracken supervises the domestic
portion, and both she and her husband have not
only won the respect and admiration of the distirct
residents, but everyone who has stayed at or visited
'‘The Commercial.”
J. C. LEASON’S
Saddlery Depot,
KANIVA.
Some six months ago Mr. J. C. Leason took over
the progressive and prosperous saddlery business
that had been some twenty years in the hands of.
Mr. Wm. J. Powell, who has now retired after a
strenuous life. Mr. Leason has had a lengthy ex-
perience in the saddlery business, including a
lengthy engagement with Messrs. Holden and Frost,
of Adelaide; also he was a partner with Mr. Powell
for some two years before buying his partner’s
share. For a country saddlery depot the one under
review is heavily stocked with well-selected goods,
consisting of saddles, harness ware, whips, hames,
collars, rugs, etc. There are only two recognised
collar-makers in the Wimmera, and Mr. Leason is
one of them. Collar-making is a speciality, and each
horse can be measured, so that there is no danger
of chafing, which is so often caused through ill-
fitting stock-made collars. Repairs are carried out
promptly, and farmers can rely on the strongest
and best work being put into the job. Mr. Leason
has earned the respect of the farming community
for his sincerity and straight-dealing methods in
business. With such characteristics he deserves all
the success met with, and no doubt his business
will continue to expand gradually and surely.
Exterior View of Mr. J. C. Leason’s Saddlery Establishment.


THE PROGRESS OF NHILL AND DISTRICT
LEONARD N. SMITH,
Builder, Contractor,
Timber Merchant, etc.,
KANIVA.
Leading lines: Timber, iron, paints, glass, iron-
mongery, wall papers, bricks, lime, cement, pumps,
baths, tanks, spouting and ridging, galvanised pipes,
brass taps and fittings.
Estimates given for paperhanging, graining, sign
writing.
Agents for Metters’ windmills, stoves, New Zealand
Fire and Accident Insurance Company.
Kaniva is a progressive town, and not unnaturally
it can boast of a progressive builder and contractor.
Mr. Leonard M. Smith is more than progressive though,
for he is' supplying building materials at Adelaide
or Melbourne prices plus freight. T 1 e residents and
farmers appreciate this, with the result that big busi-
ness takes place, with a beneficial outcome to all.
His commodious yards carry a heavy stock of all
classes of timbers, and a point well worth noting is
this—when purchasing locally one has the advantage
of seeing exactly what he is buying. Considering
the well-selected stock and general manner in which
this progressive business is managed, the support
accorded is well merited.
Mr. Smith’s Timber Yards and Private Residence.
The Kaniva Implement Factory—J. ELSDEN, Proprietor
Shoeing and General Blacksmith.
Agent for International Harvester Co.,
Patriotic Fire Insurance Co.
Mr. J. Elsden is not only one of the oldest and
best-respected residents of the Wimmera, but one
of the first makers of implements in that portion of
Victoria. At his factory in Kaniva he makes a spe-
ciality of manufacturing light steel implements, par-
ticularly stump-jump ploughs, a class of work he
was the first maker of in Kaniva, and in 1890 was
successful in securing first prize for this class of
implement at the Kaniva and Lillimur Agricultural
Society’s Show. Later on, for 5-furrow skim-jump
ploughs, he became the possessor of the coveted
“ Rintoule and Society ” prize at the Nhill show. In
fact, wherever Mr. Elsden has exhibited he has
Invariably secured first prize for his light steel im-
plements. His splendid name for solid and honest
work has spread, not only throughout the Wimmera,
but to the other States, and many orders are con-
stantly being received for implements from old and
one-time Kaniva farmers. That is surely a good
recommendation. Mr. Elsden, who possesses a most
inventive -mind, has recently perfected a one-way set
and stump-jump disc cultivator, and the farmers
of the district are so favourably impressed from
practical use that there is quite a rush of orders
coming in, and Mr. Elsden’s staff is kept extremely
“ hard at it ” manufacturing this splendid and modern
implement. Repairing work of all kinds is carried
out expeditiously, also blacksmithing work, while
horses are shod promptly and with the greatest care.


Chairman—Mr. Duncan McLennan.
Secretary—Mr. A. W. Glencross.
COMMITTEE:
Duncan McLennan, Geelong.
A. P. Chanter, Euroa.
W. Kenclell, Geelong.
H. E. Rowe, St. Kilda.
Arthur S. Rodgers, Horsham.
J. A. Troup, Tourello
U. Weldon Rower, Horsham.
Jno. McDonald, Maffra.
J. Bennett, Warracknabeal.
A. H. Dowie, Carisbrook.
H. J. Vernon, Btminyong.
Arthur Robinson, Melbourne.
W. Stevenson Fraser, 94 King-street,
Melbourne.
Basil Lyon, Coleraine.
W. Lade. Alexandra.
Archie Ritchie, St. Arnaud.
]as. Menzies, Jeparit.
H. V. McKay, Sunshine.
Thomas Martin, Barnawartha.
Dr. Barclay Idiompson, Dandenong.
A. W. Glencross, Stawell.
Geo. Martin, Flinders.
A. R. Clarke, Melbourne.
Mrs. F. G. Hughes, St. Kilda \ (A.W.N.
Mrs, R. G. McCutcheon, St. Kilda J League).
H. A. Luke, Sale.
The PEOPLE’S PARTY
Office, No. 13 Fifth Floor, Equitable Building, Melbourne.
The Party exists to combine in one organisation all Electors outside the ranks of the
Socialistic Labour Party.
The basis of Union is a covenant to stand by the decision of the majority in matters
political.
OBJECTS
1. To uphold Federal Union.
2. To preserve to the State matters reserved
to them by the Constitution, including Land
Settlement and State Industrial Control.
3. To maintain the right of puvate enterprise
and security against the confiscatory methods of
socialistic legislation.
4. To provide for the amendment of the Elec-
toral Law, and to maintain the system of voting
by post.
5. To give effect to the present Fiscal Policy
and to support the establishment of a Board of
Trade for that purpose.
6. To organise and maintain effective defence.
7. To develop the Northern Territory.
8. A White Australia.
9. A Vigorous Policy of Immigration and
Land Settlement.
10. Vigorous road and railway extension and
development of seaports.
11. To develop Water Conservation for Irri-
gation and Mining.
12. To promote Legislation of a humanitarian
character —a living wage to all workers—health-
ful conditions of employment—a pension system
for the aged and afflicted.
13. To raise our Education System to the best
standard obtaining in modern communities.
Liberals should combine for their political safety
Information for Branch Establishment will be
furnished by the Secretary.
DO IT NOW.
All information may be obtained from the Dis-
trict Secretaries or from the General Secretary,
District Beards are established at —
NHlLL— Secretary, Mr. G. Batson.
KANlVA— Secretary, Mr. C. E. Daniells.
LORQUON —Secretary,. Mr. Geo. Bolwell.
NATlMUK— Secretary, Mr. W. C. Schmidt.
A. W. GLENCROSS,
Equitable Building, Collins-st.,
Melbourne.


NOSKE BROS.’ “Si”! FLOUR
No blending with cheap soft Wheat
LOWAN
NHILL
MILLS:
First Quality
Head Office :
HORSHAM
NATIMUK
Look at the location Tl 111? 4QT f■! 11/IMMCD A WorW renownecl for
of our Mills in .... 100 lit AKI 01 100 WllVllVltKA its excellent Wheal.
