

iss
THE
IRISH LAND QUESTION.
A REPRINT OF LETTERS
THE LONDON DAILY NEWS,
liar i mmm*
aro nx? f r\ m on'C r n v t/ n
DAJu. vXAAJiI X y JlLxOxXl)*
\ ■ \
■r “But if the State is harmed, thou must not be angry with him who does
gr harm to the State. Show him where his error is.” —The Emperor M. Aurelius.
FRIGE THREEPENCE.
AUCKLAND, N.Z.:
w. McCullough, general printer, high street.


\ , ' '


THE
IRISH LAND QUESTION.
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.G.B.
“But if the State is harmed, thou must not be angry with him who does
harm to the State. Show him where his error is.”—The Emperor, M. Aurelius, c 5.
AUCKLAND!
Wm, McCullough, Book & General Printer, High Street,
1889.




INTRODUCTION.
A despatch from Earl Granville dated the yth inst., which raises
very grave questions, has induced me to republish a letter I wrote
upon the state of Ireland, which was printed in the Daily News of
the 27th of last March.
Earl Granville has in that despatch stated in telling language some
general views of the highest possible importance, and capable of the
widest application. Although he there applies them solely to the
case of New Zealand, their utter inapplicability to the state of that
country, and other causes, must ensure the ulterior object being
gained, of ascertaining with what degree of favour the opinions
expressed will be regarded by the public of Great Britain, and to-
what extent they will desire to see them applied in Ireland, and in
other parts of these islands.
The general principles laid down by Lord Granville, as the basis
for his subsequent arguments, may be stated as follows :
That there is a part of the Queen’s dominions in which it is mani-
fest that the deep and wide-spread discontent which there exists,
arises mainly from the lands of the original owners having been con-
fiscated. That it is the opinion of the Government, that in such a
country, the larger and more generally operating incitement to
rebellion, is the hope of recovering land and status, while it finds
that the restoration of the large extent of land originally confiscated
is often unequivocally put forward by the inhabitants of such a
country as a condition necessary to ensure their pacification.
The Government has further remarked that an independent people
very unwillingly see their nationality pass from them, and not un-
naturally long for some recognition of their national authority.
Lord Granville then observes that the causes above alluded to
being the real sources of great dangers, to which the country he
alludes to is exposed from its inhabitants, it is evident to Her Majesty’s
Government that the task of continually keeping down the people of
such a country by military force is beyond the strength of the Empire.
This is conclusively shown by the experience of many years past,
during which time, in the island spoken of, a strong local force has
always had the assistance of a large body of regular troops, yet such
is its present state, that the discontented amongst its inhabitants
suffice to impose a ruinous insecurity on a large number of land
holders, and a ruinous expendiure on the local and British treasury.


In such a case large concessions are, from the causes above stated,
unavoidable to appease a pervading discontent, with which it is
otherwise difficult to cope, and still larger concessions will be neces-
sary to insure the respect of the inhabitants of the country when
the large reductions contemplated in our military expenditure have
been carried out.
It is then stated, that in the case of the island alluded to, the
abandonment of the confiscated lands to its people, the recognition
of a national Government, and the maintenance of larger and expen-
sive local forces, however indispensable some or all of them may be,
are remedies which would be distasteful to many people, and which
will not be resorted to so long as they continue to expect assistance
from British troops. A decision, therefore, to maintain the past and
present policy, would be injurious to the people of the country, as
tending to delay the adoption of those prudent counsels, on which
its restoration depends.
These remarks are not made in any spirit of controversy. Lord
Granville would not gratuitously have criticised the proceedings of
another Government, but a case has arisen in which Her Majesty’s
present Government is asked for assistance—it is asked for assistance
to sustain a policy which it does not choose to assist, and is not able
to foresee.
Upon such a state of facts many questions arise, and among them
it becomes material to enquire whether the assistance expected by a
portion of the people is for the real advantage of those who seek it
Earl Granville, in judging from the best materials at his command,
is satisfied that it is not so, and that it is not the part of a true friend
of the inhabitants, by continuing a delusive support, to divert their
attention from that course in which their safety lies —the course of
deliberately measuring their own resources, and, at whatever im-
mediate sacrifice, adjusting their policy to them.
It is not without a full sense of the responsibility which attaches
to Her Majesty’s Government in deciding on such an important
question, not without a firm belief that they are discharging that
responsibility in a manner most conducive to the interests of the
country that they have determined to carry out the line of policy
pointed out in Earl Granville’s despatch.
Such are the undoubted general truths which have been put for-
ward by Earl Granville in reference to New Zealand alone. I cannot
but hope that in writing them he must have thought of Ireland, that
country which at the present moment engages so largely the attention
of her Majesty’s Government and of all thoughtful minds, for it is
hardly possible for language more truly and accurately to describe


the state of Ireland, than the language used by Lord Granville, yet
it could easily be shown that his language has little or no true refer-
ence to the state of New Zealand.
The measures and principles inculcated by such high authority
may, therefoie, be probably meant for the wide scope which they
legitimately embrace. Are they intended, then, to be bounded in
their application to Ireland ? or are they intended to be extended also
to England, where such vast tracts of Church land, once the un-
doubted heritage of the poor of this country, and so great an extent
of public land, once the heritage of the entire nation, have been
confiscated for the use of private persons. In both these countries
it has been seen that from the confiscations made, a small number
of persons have been constantly, yet rapidly, growing into inordinate
wealth, whilst the number of landholders has been rapidly diminish-
ing, and the mass of the nation is sinking into helpless and inde-
scribable misery, which the heart sickens in contemplating, and the
eye grows sad and weary in looking on.
Lord Granville truly states that the content of a people and the
strength of an empire would be vastly augmented by large con-
cessions, in the direction which he has traced out, and that still
larger concessions would insure the respect of a people, even if very
great reductions in the military expenditure were carried out.
It is possible that the Government carrying one degree farther the
ideas they have expressed in reference to the more distant colonial
possessions of Great Britain, may have thought that in the case of
Ireland it is wrong that the miseries and poverty of the productive
classes in England should be augmented by their being heavily
taxed, to pay for the maintenance of a large military force in
Ireland, to prolong the wretchedness of that country. The people
of England and Ireland have all interests in common. It is only
those who have self-interested views to advance who strive to make
them enemies. In Lord Granville’s words : It is not the part of a
true friend of the inhabitants of such countries, bv continuing a
delusive shadow of support, to divert their attention from that
course in which their true safety lies—the course of deliberately
measuring their own resources, and, at whatever immediate sacrifice,,
adjusting their policy to them.
To show how truly Lord Granville’s description applies to the state
of Ireland, I now proceed to reprint my letter of the 27th of March
last.


THE AGRICULTURAL LABOURER IN IRELAND.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY NEWS.
March 27, 1868.
Sir, —The state of the poor in Ireland so largely influences the
welfare of the poor in England, that a short discussion is necessary
for the purpose of considering the condition of the Irish labourer.
Mr. W. Stewart Trench has recently written a talented and in-
teresting book on Ireland, which affords precisely the information
which is required for such a purpose. It will be found that in 1576
Queen Elizabeth granted to the Earl of Essex the territory of Farney,
in the county of Monaghan, 68,000 acres in extent. It is stated that
at that time it was a wild and almost unenclosed country, covered
with coarse pasturage and low scrubby woods. The country was
then only partially subdued, and its inhabitants must have been
numerous, for even in times of the best peace and security, no
Lord-deputy did ever venture into those parts without an army of
800 or 1,000 men. Now as the partially conquered race must have
been inferior to their conquerors in weapons, armour, discipline,
and organisation, such a state of things shows a numerous and war-
like population. Even thirty years after this district had been
granted to the Earl of Essex the Chief Justice did not dare to
venture into it without a body-guard of 130 infantry and 55 cavalry.
The inhabitants of this tract of country had, prior to the grant of
it, by Elizabeth, been ruled by their own nobles, and were with them
conjoint owners of the soil. Such was the district which, in 1576,
was granted to the Earl of Essex. Not the smallest portion of land
was reserved, either for the chiefs or people who occupied it, not
•even for those guiltless of any offence, for childhood and infancy
must have been innocent. No provision whatever was made for the
[future wants of the population ; no voice or influence was left to
them in making the laws to which they were to be subjected, or in
the imposition or distribution of the taxes which they were to pay,
or in devising measures for the welfare of themselves or their
descendants. Ireland being also an island, inhabited in all parts,
these unhappy people had no large districts of unoccupied fertile


land to which they could remove. The Macmahons were the
original chiefs of the country, and in 1606 the whole estate, with all
its profits, was leased to Ever Macmahon for a yearly rent of £'2so
payable in Dublin, probably because it was impossible to collect the
rent on the property. In 1633 the yearly rent had risen to £ 2,022,
and the number of tenants was 38, but it must be remembered that
those tenants, whatever was their number, were middlemen, or inter-
mediate tenants between the English landlord and the occupier of
the soil.
In 1646, on the death of the third Earl of Essex, he was succeeded
by his twosisters, and the property came into their joint possession, and
in 1692 when the division of the property was actually made between
the respective heirs male of each of these sisters, the eastern moiety,
alloted to Thomas Thynne, ancestor of the present Marquis of Bath,
was worth £ 1,300 a year, and the value of the western moiety alloted
to Robert Shirley, Lord Ferrars, was about the same. Each half of
the property then continued to descend, in accordance with existing
law and the existing custom of entail and settlement, in unbroken
bulk to the next heir male.
The next date at which I take the Farney property up, is the year
1843. For 267 years a succession of one, or of two persons at a
time, of one family had then been in possession of the property.
They had not, originally, the smallest natural claim or right to the
soil, they had never during their possession of it laboured in its
cultivation, they hardly ever visited it. The people on it were
strangers to them, these people were the creatures, the Celt in his
purity. Yet for many years these foreign landlords had year by year,
drawn large revenues from these neglected beings which they had
expended in another country upon their own caprices and pleasures.
But during the same period of time a vast population, the des-
cendants of the original proprietors of the land (few or none of
whom were ever displaced by the aristocratic owners of the soil)
had been at work upon it, they had fenced and enclosed, and
ultimately brought under cultivation, the waste and wild lands;
they had so raised the value of the property from what we have seen
it, that the valuation of the property, including Church land, in 1843,
was about £4-6,39$ per annum, and their own numbers had increased
to 44,107 souls. Yet, during all that number of years, whilst these
toiling, thousands were creating wealth, almost fabulous in amount,
for a foreign landlord, and were ever and ever adding to the value
of his capital in land, but the barest subsistence was left to them,
they were without the power of legislation, or means of removing
the evils of their condition. During all that time, it is stated by


competent authority, that numerous statutes had been passed to en-
force the rights of the landlord, and that not one had been passed
in favour of the tenant, their state had indeed been for nearly three
centuries and then was most pitiable. Upon thosj multitudes of
thousands, succeeding each other in successive generations of many
thousands each, no ray of hope ever dawned from their cradles to
their graves. In all those multitudes no fathers were born that
could press their children to their hearts with a knowledge that they
could leave to them even the very humblest heritage, won for them,
by their toil. All they or their children could hope for, was to
obtain, after the keenest competition, the temporary use of a spot
of land on which to exercise their industry. The tenants’ very im-
provements went to swell the accumulations of the heirs of an
absentee, not of his own. Of all the produce of his industry he
could retain barely sufficient to feed himself, his wife and children
on the meanest fare, and to clothe them in almost rags. He could
save nothing to meet times of dearth or want, if such came. From
having been denied all power of legislation, and of considering and
providing for his necessities as a citizen he had lost the faculty of so
doing, and was, as it were, paralysed. In such evil days of want
people succumbed to their fate almost without a struggle. They
died in their mountain glens ; they died along the sea coast; they
died on the roads ; they died in the fields; they wandered into the
towns, and died in the streets ; they closed their cabin doors, and
lay down upon their beds, and died of actual starvation in their
houses, and this sometimes although food was abundant within a
few miles of them. The people held holdings from the landlord in
the average of about fifteen acres in extent, but these were again
much subdivided, and huts and sheds were erected on the new sub-
divisions for the young people to marry and settle in, but these
young couples could, from the nature of the tenure of the land,
make no farther provision for their subsistence than a shed to lie
down in, and a small plot of land to grow potatoes. If there was
a failure in the payment of their rent, every power conferred
on the landlord by the law could be brought to bear; they
could be served with notices to quit, with processes for rent,
with a legal document called a latitat, and, besides all these,
“Driving” upon an extensive scale was adopted as the quickest
and most effective mode by which the rents could be hurried
in, and grippers, process-servers, keepers, and drivers were brought
into full requisition. When a tenant say of five or six acres of land
was unable to pay his debts, the rule on these large absentee
properties appears to have been, that his interest in the farm as yearly


tenant was sold to a new tenant, selected by the landlord’s agent to
succeed to the farm. The landlord’s rent being the first charge upon
the land was paid in full, and the residue, if any, was shared at so
much in the pound between the other creditors. The money paid
by the incoming tenant was given simply and solely for the oppor-
tunity of occupying the land as a spot on which to exercise industry,
or to induster upon. From the little left to the tenant, a part was taken
by taxation; they had no real voice in the amount to be so taken, or
as to the mode in which it should be taken, or as to the objects on
which it should be expended : hence, although they thirsted for
education, it was neglected ; schools for the young were few and far
between, and gradually a people were called into existence who were
so strange in figure, garments, speech, and manner, that if they
appeared in numbers, even in towns in Ireland, they occasioned real
terror to the inhabitants. Yet these people were docile and obedient
to their superiors until assembled in masses and roused by some
common cause. Crime, considered in reference either to indictable
offences or murder, was and is rarer amongst them than amongst an
equal population in England, and the morality of their women has
become almost proverbial. One thing which tends greatly to cloud
the mind, and to influence the imagination, in considering transac-
tions of the kind before us, is the language in which they are
described. The estate granted to the Earl of Essex is called a
“princely property.” The new grantees are “the aristocratic
owners of the soil.” If the landlord drives along, he is “the noble
occupant of the carriage his disbursement for the improvement of
his property, of small portions of the wealth won by the toil, priva-
tions, and suffering of others, is “ unbounded liberality on his part
involuntarily one’s sympathies become drawn to so much rank,
wealth, and ease, whilst the original princes, chiefs, and people are
the native inhabitants, the creatures, the Celt, in his purity, uncon-
sciously one thinks less of the trials and sufferings of such beings.
In 1865 the eastern portion of this property is described as being
still held in small portions by 1,600 different tenants. The landlord
was still a being of a different sphere from those who toiled for him ;
he “had extensive estates in England, the most beautiful demesne
and the noblest mansion in England,” not to talk of his high duties
in the council of the nation —how could he, therefore, possibly
undertake the duty of attending to the many, many thousands in
Ireland who toiled for him ?
The state of the poor in Ireland continues to be most miserable.
The population is diminishing, as it has been steadily diminishing
for the last twenty years ; yet, in the face of this decreasing popula-


tion, there were 70,763 paupers in December, 1868, that is 2,647
more than December, 1867. The falling off of amounts invested in
Government securities and banks, and the stoppage of increase in
aggregate investments shows a total change for the worse in the year
ending in June, 1868, of £2,440,000.
The most miserable portion of the Irish population is to be found
in the grazing districts ; if we take as an illustration the present
state of the poor in the city of Limerick, which is the centre of a
rich grazing district, we shall find that the poor who live chiefly in
the old town, generally dwell in large decayed houses, a single
family rarely occupying more than one room, sometimes three or
four families living together in the same room. There is seldom
more than one bed for a family, and this consists frequently of straw
with an old quilt or blanket, to which are added at night the day
garments of the family.
But it is quite common to meet in rooms grown persons who are
unable to go out for days and weeks on account of want of clothes ;
yet these dismal rooms are exposed day and night to cold winds
and rain, and in the hearth there is seldom more fire than is neces-
sary to keep seed for meal time. The furniture is made up of an
iron pot, a few old saucepans, a rickety table, and one or two old
stools or chairs. Very often there is neither table or chair. When
the minister of religion goes to visit the dying he is often, when he
requires a table, obliged to use his hat as a substitute
As the naked dying Christian sinks away from the dismal fireless
room penetrated by the cold and wind and rain, what to him are the
echoes which have but faintly reached him of the beautiful demesne
and noble mansions in England, which the privations and sufferings
of himself and his forefathers, continued through so many genera-
tions, have mainly if not altogether created. As he looks his last at
the naked or half-clad three or four families in the room, and at the
children he is leaving behind him, does some faint hope brighten up
his last moments that quickly, instantly, some statesman will have
the courage to do that which it is so easy to do—bid such miseries
cease to be. Perhaps he whose hand wrote down the account of
the poor in the city of Limerick, which I have borrowed, will stir
himself with those whom he is now in power to accomplish this
noble work. I must quote a few more words of his.
“ These are painful facts. Upon this picture, however habit, may
dull its impression on our minds, every foreigner that comes among
us looks with horror and astonishment.”
And so it has been in Ireland for many, many years. Some years
since a noble-minded and accomplished foreigner, Count Strzeleckie,


whose habits of close observation and experience, acquired in far-
extended travel, peculiarly fitted him to form a judgment on the
subject, gave this evidence before a committee :
“I consider the peasantry in Ireland very much below, in their
domestic comfort, any other peasantry in Europe, including Russia,
because the Russian peasantry have a higher standard of food rye
bread, and they are much more comfortable, both as regards clothing
and habitation. All these things combined together render him—the
Irish peasant —morally and physically, the most unhappy man on
earth.”
We have seen how such a state of things as has been described
gradually raised up a people strange in garments, figures, speech, and
manner even to the inhabitants of towns in their own country; but it
did more than this. The number of years they had been held in
bondage which prevented them from taking any share whatever m
the management of their own affairs, had so paralysed their faculty
for organisation that they had lost all power of providing in any new
emergency for their own wants ; and in the time of famine the
position of affairs was this :
“ The people dying, plenty of food within reach, plenty of money
to purchase it, plenty of fish in the sea adjoining; but no one with
fore-thought and arrangement enough to cook the victuals, catch
the fish, draw the corn across the mountains, and bring the food
■and people together.”
Yet these people are the race who possess the faculties of legisla-
tion and administration in an equal degree with any other nation on
earth. They are the people who, removed to a new sphere, in
-colonies or elsewhere, where fair scope is given to their talents, have
yielded many men who have governed the outlying portions of the
empire with dignity and success, who have produced from among
their own body ministers and statesmen who have founded and are
consolidating new nations, and legislators who have devised, framed,
and introduced laws which Great Britain herself is beginning to
copy, and who yield in their citizens a mass of voters who have
shown their discrimination in choosing the men who have done
these things. I do not mean that it is only their leading men who
have shown such high faculties. No. I mean the actual creatures,
the Celts in their purity. These have been the voters, sometimes
the legislators, who have done these things. Conceive 44,000 such
• souls compelled to labour on for successive generations to enrich
two men of one family at a time), constantly succeeding each other,
the toilers having nothing but the barest subsistence left to them
what a wealth of energy and genius is strangled, what intellect and


power is lost to the nation—what must be the yearnings and agonies
undergone by very many noble minds that felt capable of great
things, perhaps even of rescuing their country from the misery in
which it was sunk.*
Again, a people kept for generations in the manner we have been
considering, must acquire a passionate desire to possess in the only
manner they can, as tenants, a little plot of land, the having or not
having which will appear to them to be just the difference between
life and death. They will also form a public opinion of their own,
peculiar to their masses, different from that of the outside public,
and they will adopt sentiments which will fashion their code of
honour, the violators of which will be infamous amongst their
fellows. Hence must arise agrarian outrages, and men will be
formed, who, having committed what we naturally regard as murders,
will refuse to purchase their lives by implicating others, because, as
they say, “ Let me alone. You’ll never get another word out of me.
I am content to die for my countr) 7 .” In their belief they die a good
death, and they know that those whose opinion they most value, and
in whose memories they desire to live, will view it in the same light.
Again, families living together in masses, yet each with their
separate cabins, and separate allotments of land, on which the
family jointly labour, unconsciously develop in themselves intense
* Ihe Bishop of Lichfield made the following observations on this subject in a
speech in the House of Lords on the Irish Church Bill ; —“ I must express my
opinion that the Government are beginningat the wrong end by adopting a secondary
instead of a primary remedy. The real difficulty and danger in Ireland is the land.
Why do not the Government go boldly to the question of the land on the sound
and solid system of assisting the intelligent farmers to acquire portions of the land
in fee simple ? I believe very many of them desire that; and in what I think was a
very sensible letter Mr. Bright proposed a plan for accomplishing it. The light horn
gentleman goes on to say that he doubts whether this measure could be carried out
in the then Parliament, but that when the voice of the people should have been
heard in the new Parliament he believed it could be done. Now, my lords, either
the voice of the people is not expressed by the present Parliament, or else, accord-
ing to Mr. Bright, the land scheme could be carried by it. And, indeed, I myself
do not see why that should not be the case. In New Zealand, Englishmen, Scotch-
men, and Irishmen live together upon the best of terms ; the qualities of each
particular class become blended with each other to the improvement of all. No
dissension as to tenant right can arise, because every tenant has the right of purchas-
ing the land he holds at a fixed price. Under these circumstances the tenants,
instead of being lazy and drunken, strain every nerve in order to save the money
which will enable them to become the proprietors of the land they occupy. In this,
way it happens that the most irregular people of the Irish race become steady and
industrious people, acquiring property and losing all their wandering habits, until
it becomes almost impossible to distinguish between the comparative value of the
character of the Irish and Scotch elements. Of their loyalty to the Crown I can
speak from my own observation, for the only regiment that is employed in keeping
order in New Zealand is her Majesty’s Royal Irish. (Cheers.) Now, my lords, I
have not the slightest hope that any of these suggestions of mine will be adopted,
but I think it right to say that one member of the Cabinet has suggested similar
remedies, and that is Mr. Bright.”


family affections, and some of the finest domestic virtues. Once
these are formed, no wants or poverty can destroy them ; misery
seems rather to expand and confirm the love of one for the other;
hence, as Mr. Jenkins states, when the miserable, redundant pauper
population emigrated from Ireland to the United States, this took
place.
“ So the great waves of population, which took their impulse from
Ireland finally broke and scattered themselves at the base of the
Rocky Mountains. When the first emigrants succeeded, moved by
the faithfulness and affection whereby the Celtic race is ennobled,
they sent home money to take out their friends ; these again trans-
mitted funds to their relations, and thus the great circle has been
kept moving, money home and people out, until there is needed in
Ireland no artificial action to keep the movement at a pace which is
sufficient even to alarm a political economist.
The amount known to have been so remitted since 184.8, not in-
cluding the large amounts which cannot be traced, is about
sterling. Nearly the estimated value of the whole
property of the branch of the English Church in Ireland has by
misery and poverty been contributed to enable poor relations to
escape from their wretchedness. Truly, this is an affection and
faithfulness which would ennoble any race. Then their domestic
virtues ! Look at their attachment to their religious faith. They
thought not that Christianity, unaided by State support would
perish ; they believed that their form of it would, under perse-
cution, only burn more brightly and more purely. From their
little they found the means, in all times of want and misery to keep
alive that flame which was to them a sacred flame. Again, the
faithfulness and purity of their women upon the whole has been
such that he who searches reports of English commissions upon the
state of the poor in this country will every now and again meet with
such passages as the following :
“Only the high moral principle by which the unmarried Irish
girls are distinguished could be proof against such degrading
scenes.”*'
It should be remarked that this fact affords strong evidence to
* In contrast with the misery and purity of these poor creatures one reads with
wonder such statements as the following-.-Evelyn’s Memoirs, Vol. 1, p. 5»5,-
168 c. —“ I can never forget the inexpressible luxury and prophaneness gaming and
all dissoluteness, and, as it were, total forgetfulness of God (it being1 Sunday even
ins) which this day se’night I was witness of, the King (Charles II.) sitting and
toying with his concubines, Portsmouth, Cleveland, and Mazarine, &c., a Frenc


prove, what is proved, indeed, from other sources, that whatever may
be the crowding of the population in dwellings, if the family relations
are carefully preserved intact, if children are not separated from
parents, purity of morals may still be protected ; but that it is the
taking children and young persons from home, and from the control
of parents, and forcing both sexes, in extreme youth, to labour
together, under no proper supervision, and exposed to the worst in-
fluences, which produces a moral degradation, the effects of which
will not die out in one generation.
It is evident that a population living in such a state as the Irish
population we have been considering, could not be intruded upon
by people of another race. Even if a different people had been dis-
posed to share such extreme of misery, the difference of language,
manners, religion, and the fierce tenacity with which the Irish cling
to their allotments of land, must have prevented any number of inter-
lopers from obtaining a footing amongst them ; whilst, upon the
other hand their miseries, exceeding those of any other European
people—even those of some barbarous races —the difficulty they
found in procuring land on which to dwell, the cruel contentions
which arose between themselves about land, would all have had a
tendency to drive them forth to other countries. For years they-
flocked to England, at the times of harvest, haymaking, hop-picking,
and at such-like seasons when extra labour was in demand ; then
they could obtain no settlement in England, because the English
labourers who sufficed usually for the culture of an estate, resided in
scattered cottages upon it, and when these labourers were expelled
from those properties, and driven into open villages, from which
the farmers engaged labour at such moments and in such proportions
of age and sex as they required it, the Irish began to establish
colonies in those villages, and in some country towns, colonies
which have been allowed to grow up, and which now can never be
eradicated, and which continue to increase and spread.
Tire farmer employs the people, because he can get rid of them
when lie has done with them; he will not even see them, he pays
boy singing love songs in that glorious gallery, whilst about twenty of the great
courtiers were at basset round a large table, a bank of at least in gold before
them, upon which two gentlemen who were with me made expressions with astonish-
ment.” But the wonder one feels at first is increased, nay, it is changed into shame,
upon reflecting that every one of these pure poor Irish girls are allowed to be born
into the woild, subject throughout her life to contribute, year by year, her mite,
wrung forcibly from out the wretched pittance earned by her starvation and toil,
towaids the payment of an annual sum of about 1,900, for the support of one of
u^es ’ sprung from the scenes which Evelyn describes, in consequence of
illegal grants from the public revenues, made by that King, to one of his illegitimate
offspring.


their foreman or sub-contractor, and this man divides their earnings,
to each his share. The farmer goes away awhile, and when he
returns his work is done, the people are gone, and no vestige of
them remains. But it may be questioned whether he would be
tempted to employ them were it not that all the disagreeables fall on
other people. He has the profit; but the dirt, the mendicity, the
nakedness, the fevers, the Sunday brawls, and the Poor Rates which
the unfortunate race take with them wherever they go—these are not
the portion of those who employ the Irish, but of the country towns,
lately respectable, and once genteel, in whose back streets the Irish
colonies have grown up,
In the meantime the English peasant, who from habit cannot stoop
to beg, and to whom to fail to cover his nakedness, would be to lose
all, in his own estimation, and in that of others, is forced to compete
in the labour market with these new immigrant residents, and to
lower himself to their scale and standard.
They can move from Irish colony to Irish colony, as a demand for
labour encourages them, living with and on their friends as they
move. The farmer, who only uses their labour, asks no question
regarding them, for it is with their foreman alone that he deals.
The English peasant resides in the parish or union where he serves,
and where he has a settlement; he is forced to produce a character
when he changes hie service—hence on him is forced a caution, a
responsibility, from which his competitor is free. And when the
English peasant complains of all this, he is laughed at, as one asking
protection from competition. For him, as for the Irish, there is no
free trade in land, but his labour, his sole property but his life, must
be subjected to the principles of free trade under such unjust
circumstances.
From these causes two populations, differing in religion, in feelings,
in manner, in nationality, in aspect, in degree of civilization, almost
in language, are being brought into competition with each other.
They are both being forced into this dangerous position from causes
over which neither of them have any control. The late elections
showed how fierce a spirit between these two races is rising in some
parts of England. For the sake of the English, no less than that of
the Irish, a remedy should be applied to the state of Ireland. It is
needless to say that the contemplated disestablishment and disendow-
ment of the Irish Church, however necessary and just some fitting
measure for this purpose was, has in no degree relieved Ireland, or
helped the English labourer. Nor will a large emigration of Irish
labourers alone give permanent relief. Those left behind will soon
increase to their former number, and the present land law and


customs regarding the descent, tenure and entail of lands, remaining
in force, the same evils as now exist must still continue to afflict the
mass of population in England as well as in Ireland.
I am, &c.,
G. GREY.


CONCLUDIMG REMARKS.
In conclusion, I would now say, let her Majesty’s Ministers fairly
apply, so far as they are applicable, their own principles to Ireland,
to a country close to them, regarding which they have complete
knowledge, instead of a distant dependency of the Crown regarding
which they know nothing. Here, before them, in their presence, they
have a misery, a wretchedness, which is a disgrace to mankind and
to civilisation. All future times will look with wonder on statesmen
who could speak as some of the present Government have spoken, or
who could write as Earl Granville has written, if whilst in the very
presence of want, and woe, and ignorance, exceeding, in some respects,
the want and woe and ignorance of barbarism, they hesitate to act;
or who, whilst looking at a deep and wide-spread discontent, fre-
quently almost approaching to revolt, and who, seeing under such
circumstances that in one island the discontented amongst its inhabi-
tants suffice to impose a ruinous insecurity on a large number of
landholders, and a ruinous expenditure on the public treasury, should
yet hesitate to use the powers they hold to put an end to such a state
of things.
I would suggest one mode in which I believe they might most bene-
ficially apply in part their own principles to Ireland without delay.
Let them at once give to that country a State Legislature, sitting in
Dublin, composed of two elective Houses—a House of Pepresenta-
tives and a Senate, and having the same legislative powers as a State
Legislature in the United States of America. Let them leave in the
British Parliament the Irish members as at present, but without
power to speak or vote upon any such question as the State Legis-
lature sitting in Dublin is competent to legislate upon. In this
manner the Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland sitting in London
would have the power of settling all Imperial questions, such as the
strength of the Army and Navy, Customs’ Duties, Postal Services,
&c., &c. The State Legislature sitting in Dublin would have the
power of dealing with all local questions, such as the Land Question,
Education, &c , &c.
Many advantages would spring from such an arrangement, such as
Irish members no longer interfering in English domestic affairs, and
English members no longer interfering in Irish domestic affairs.
The domestic affairs of each of the two countries would then be con-
ducted far more with a view to the welfare of the inhabitants of each,


than to the passions of party warfare, and to the desire of making'
or pulling down Ministries.
It should also be remembered that the union of several Parliaments
in one, charged with the duty of minute special legislation upon so
many points in different countries, has thrown upon that one Parlia-
ment an amount of labour which it cannot perform. Hence its atten-
tion is distracted from its really important duties. Each determined,
party can force its own job through a distracted and bewildered
Assembly. Matters of the highest interest are neglected. All legis-
lation is crude and unsatisfactory, and little or no explanation can be
asked or afforded regarding the expenditure of the public funds,
which are often squandered at the caprice of the party in power for
the time. Whilst confused Ministers frequently, indeed generally,
new to their different offices, occupied with their duties in the Cabinet,
in leading the two houses of the Legislature, and torn and worn by
the enormous mass of duties of every kind thrown upon them in their
respective offices, from the most important to the most trifling, in
their efforts to attend to all, are forced to neglect all, and the Govern-
ment of the country has fallen into the hands of irresponsible clerks
in the different offices, who care nothing for ruining Ministries, or
individual statesmen, if they promote views of their own, or advance
the interests of their relations or friends. Hence is arising a dis-
order and an insubordination in the Empire such as has never before
been seen.
Mr. Disraeli roust have felt the necessity of some such arrangement
for Ireland as I have proposed when he made his speech on returning
thanks at his last election. He then said:
“I admit that there is a certain degree of morbid discontent per-
manently in Ireland. But you must look a little to the race, and
probably that will account for it. The Irishman is a very imagina-
tive being, and he lives in an island with a damp climate, and
contiguous to a melancholy ocean. With extraordinary talents he
has no variety of pursuits open to him. There is no nation in the
world leading such monotonous lives as the Irish, because they have
only the cultivation of the soil before them. Men are discontented
when they are not occupied. But put an Irishman in a country
where there is a fair field for his talents in a variety of occupations,
and you will see the Irishman not only equal, but superior to most
races.”
In the latter half of this quotation lies its main truth. Give to
Ireland a State Legislature and a Stale Executive in Dublin; secure
thereby the residence of its ablest men in the country. Open a fair


field as ministers, legislators, orators, to its best and wisest men.
Afford, from the same source, as would necessarily and certainly be
done, occupation to Irish architects, sculptors, painters, and secure
a resident aristocracy, of worth, talent, and wisdom, and you will
at the same time restore the wealth, trade, and commerce of Dublin
and Ireland. Dumb Ireland will then speak again. Half inanimate
Ireland will again awaken to national life, and breathe the breath
of hope and freedom. Whilst by again accustoming the Irish people
to the management of their own affairs, and to administrative duties
of the highest order, a willing people will be educated in that
political knowledge which will enable them to put an end to the ills
which afflict them, the causes and cure of which none can understand
so well as themselves.
Ordy those who have lived in populations accustomed to manage
their own affairs can realise the dignity under such circumstances im-
parted to the mass of the people. The highest education in earthly
matters that can be given to man is lhat education which trains him
to consider his duties, position, and rights as a citizen of a corporate
community 5 to reflect on his duties to others, and their correspond-
ing duties to himself; upon the effect which every existing law or
new measure may have upon the community of which he is a mem-
ber ; and upon his own interests, to exercise that self-restraint and
generous countesy even to the meanest, which is necessary to secure
the affection and regard of those who have not only a free voice in
the choice of men who are to direct affairs, but who, from knowledge
and position, have gained the political knowledge necessary to form
a sound opinion upon the value or worthlessness of measures pro-
posed to them. To give such power and consequently such know-
ledge to a people is a really conservative step in the right direction.
All this can be done for Ireland without taking from England any
power she wants, or which can be of the least use to her, and if her
Majesty’s Government really hold to the principles laid down, and so
earnestly insisted upon, by Earl Granville, there is reason to hope
that they will at once do something in this direction for suffering
Ireland.
And what they do for Ireland will be equally done for the trade
and commerce of England. It is impossible to benefit one country
v iihout benefiting at the same time the other. The miseries of
Ireland now hang like a millston© round the neck of England,
Restore Ireland to contentment, proaperty, political knowledge, hope
in the future, and England will receive an impetus which will impel
her onwards to a course of commerce, greatness, and happiness far
surpassing anything which she has yet been able to achieve, liaise


the condition of the Irish labourer, render necessary to him the food,
the clothing, the dwellings, the comforts which the very lowest order
of civilisation requires, and you will save the English labourer and
the English working man from that cruel competition which is ruin-
ing and deteriorating the nation. Such an enactment as the following
would at once give effect to what I mean:
“An Act to Grant a Provincial Parliament to the Kingdom of
Ireland.
“ Whereas, large numbers of her Majesty’s subjects, natives of
the Kingdom of Ireland, have from time to time rendered most im-
portant military and naval services to the Crown and Empire, and
have shown their capacity for Government by administering with
great ability the Governments, or conducting the affairs of the
Legislatures of many of Her Majesty’s Colonial possessions, and
whereas it is desirable to foster and restore the commerce and trade
of the said Kingdom, and to encourage the residence therein of pro-
prietors of land and others, and to open a field for the development
of the talent, and patriotism of its inhabitants which does not now
exist, and to restore contentment and prosperity to its people, by
allowing them to exercise that control over the management of their
local affairs, without the possession of which no nation can be either
contented, prudent, or prosperous.
“Be it therefore enacted, by the Queen’s most excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Tem-
poral, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows ;
“ There shall be within the Kingdom ol Ireland a Provincial
Parliament to consist of a Viceroy, a Senate, and a House of Kepre-
sentatives.”
I have here suggested this one mode in which immediate effect
could be given in part to the principles put forth by Lord Granville;
but it is evident that other and most important modes of giving
speed}' relief to Ireland could be also suggested. In some of these
I hope to inquire at a future time.
Belgrave Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens ,
October 21, 1869.
Wm. McCullough, General Printer, High Street, Auckland.


1508
010 7156


I ■
J
. U W
- 1 ' : ■;> ' ti £.: f S ■'<. ■ - ■ I
,
'
