

=tm
r JCJW ■<: iw
WIDOWS’ PtTUI)
Exceptionally Large Reserves. Absolute Security.
Prompt Settlements.
ATST ADDRESS
DELIVERED RY
At Ashton-under- Lyne, England.
Published by the
PORT ADELAIDE
Pvice-Oivn: nBMJWY-
WALTER & MORRIS,
UPSON STREET AND
All orders attended to with despatch at lowest rates.
PORT ADELAIDE:
Kennedy & Jonhs, Printers and Stationers, St. Vincent Street.
LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY, Limited.
Branch. Office—Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
New Business during Last Five Years Exceeded FIVE MILLIONS
STERLING.
JNO. FAIRFAX CONIOKAVF, Resident Secretary.
Wlst fox t
HENRY GEORGE
TAXATION REFORM LEAGUE.
TIMBER AND IRON MERCHANTS,
COMMERCIAL ROAD, PORT ADELAIDE,
And at MORPHBTT STREET, ADELAIDE.
4


THE PORT
!H4f I®S ISIOII UMII
Invites everyone to attend its
MEETINGS HELD EVERT ALTERNATE THURSDAY at7.?op.m.
(AUGUST 8, 22, &c.,) AT
84sriAr$ aoo m s,
and to take part in its discussions or to ask questions It is established for the
purpose of removing l Taxation from the necessaries of life, and the products of
industry, and placing - it on the land value created by the energy and expendi-
ture of the people. Communications or enquiries respecting Taxation Reform,
The Singh Tax, Land Nationalization, or any kindred topic, may be addressed
to —Mr. L. H, Berens, Stephen Place, Adelaide; Mr. Ed. Ward, 19 Royal
Exchange, Adelaide ; Mr. J. N. Birks, Port Adelaide; Mr. R. L. Driver, Port
Adelaide; Mr, E. LeMessurier. Port Adelaide; Mr. A. T. Saunders, Port
Adelaide.
|ScFOf/\A.GOUE\ &
PRINTERS & LITHOGRAPHERS,
ACCOUNT BOOK MAKERS. &
IM h GENERAL STATIONERS,
89 KING WILLIAM STREET,
ADELAIDE.


*i WILLIAM MARSTON, I*
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
OPPOSITE TOWN HALL,
ST. VINCENT ST.. PORT ADELAIDE.
AND
tfor really good value in every line go to the above address,
lone hut the best class of goods kept.
Ozzr teccs cccnnot he sizrpcLSsed, for* vcLlixe
cutxcL excellence of flcuv'OTi.T.
We draw special attention to our Is. 6d. and 2s, Teas, which
are choicest blends of India, Ceylon, and China, and are
well known to the public of Port Adelaide, In 61b. parcels
the above lines may be had at Is. 4£d. and Is. 9d. per lb.
GOOD FAMILY TEAS from lOd. per lb.
Boxes from Bs* 6d.
A jSpECIALITY.
Country Orders (accompanied by cheque or post-office order)
will receive our best attention.


JAMES MURRAY & SON,
Tailors, Outfitters, Hatters. Mercers. &c.,
CORNER OF
p>T. yiNCENT and Commercial
PORT ADELAIDE.
All Goods made on the premises by a competent staff of Tailors, and under the
supervision of'Mr. W. D. Murray, A Trial Solicited.
Hamiay’s Temperance Hotel,
COMMERCIAL ROAD, PORT ADELAIDE,
Three minutes’ walk from Railway Station.
J. St. jpyopri&tssy.
Excellent Accommodation for Travellers, Visitors, Private Families, &c.
Plunge and Shower Baths,
3WTO RJKIICJUD'V
For Piles has been so invariably sue
cessful as
J3lrk3* Pule X-<ijmctu3
It is very heartily recommended by hun-
dreds who have benefitted by it.
Price, 2s. 6d,
CHILBLAINS
SPEEDILY CURED BY
BIRKS’ NEW REMEDY.
Price, Is.
Please Give it a Trial.
BIRKS’
GLYCERO-PECTORAL
COUGH MIXTURE
Is not only a wonderfully effective remedy
for Coughs and Colds, but in a great number
of cases has given Great Relief to patients
suffering from Chronic Asthma.
Price, Is. 6d.
BIRKS’
RINGWORM ERAOICATOR
Never fails immediately to check the growth
of this unpleasant affection, and a very few
applications will effect a perfect cure.
Price, Is. per bottle.


THE LAND FOR THE PEOPLE.
FEDERAL AUCTION MART
H. J. PUDNEY.
AUCTIONEER, VALUATOR & COMMISSION AGENT,
FEDERAL AUCTION MART,
COMMERCIAL. ROAD, PORT ADELAIDE,
In those large and commodious premises lately occupied by the Salvation
Army, next to the Sussex Hotel.
Sales conducted and valuations made in any part of the colony. Account sales
promptly rendered. Advances made on goods. Furniture and goods of
every description purchased for cash. Rents collected and statements
as usual prompt.
IFH!&&>s£*s OH <& Co**
STOCK AND SHARE BROKERS,
EOEAE EECIIANGfADELAIDE.
/«. Crveaftl: HouselKoldl
THE LATEST IMPROVED SEWING MACHINE.
We have pleasure in announcing that the NEW DOMESTIC SEWING MACHINE
is now introduced into South Australia. This splendid machine has rapidly taken the
leading position in America, where it is now regarded as The £ewillg Machine Of the
Day. The improvements introduced into this Machine are marvels of mechanical skill—
The Self-Threading Shuttle, Automatic Tension, Vibrating Foot Combination, and other
Appliances combine to make “ THE DOMESTIC ” a Perfect Family Sewing Machine. The
new Foot Combination works the Machine with such ease that a child or the most delicate
lady can use it. Every one of these Machines is not only a Sewing Maching, but is also a
BRAIDING MACHINE, performing the operation of Braiding without an attachment.
Treadle Machines from £6 18s., Hand Machines from £3 ss. Inspection of these
Machines is cordially invited.
CROOKS & BROOKER, Agents for South Aus fro ltd,
38, BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE, and PORT ADELAIDE.


THE LAND FOB THE PEOPLE.
BUSY ! BUSY !!
BUSY!!!
AT THE
BONANZA DRAPERY WAREHOUSE
CORNER OF
Semapkeve and ASiliiasry 'Keais.
Every Department of the Bonanza is moving with the bustle and excitement of “ Good
Business,’’ unprecedented in extent.
W. FISHER BEARD & Co
Have certainly struck the “ key note ” of the wants of the community so forcibly that
in all Departments we are literally besieged with customers all daylong. We should
be very much surprised indeed were it otherwise, so surprisingly exquisite are the
various and varied
■- » gft C* M m -y fir » « rt. s
Shown in our windows and on our shelves and counters, and all at prices that have only
been possible through months of constant energy and painstaking, in which were com-
bined the very essence of business shrewdness and PROMPT CASH PAYMENT.
MR. BEARD has not the least hesitation in saying that in no other house in or out of
town will there be found such a collection of rich and artistic
IMIIIL.LXItTEIIR.Tr
As we are displaying in our new Millinery Saloon. Ladies frequently assume that in
buying in the city at the best houses they obtain Hats and Bonnets that are unique
and select, and are perfectly satisfied to pay the exorbitant prices demanded for these
•hoice lines. Now, we can assure the ladies of the Semaphore that there is not a single
type of fashion that we have not in stock at about half the prices charged elsewhere.
If a lady buys a hat at say 80s. in the City, we undertake to produce an exact
fac-simile for 16s. 9d.
At prices in touch with the times. Ladies daily remark to us, “It is not ihe price of
the material now-a-days, it is the making up which runs away with the money in buying
a new dress.” At the Bonanza we make a full fashionably made costume of Biege,
Cashmere, Merino, Fancy Stripe, or any other Black or Coloured Fabric for 1 2/6.
OUR HEAD DRESSMAKER is a lady who knows her work thoroughly, and is of
long experience and first-class ability, so ladies may place their orders in her hands
with the assurance of being well satisfied with the result—Perfect Fit, Good Taste,
Exceptionally Low Charges—which must secure the pleasure of every visitor.


WHO HATH ORDAINED THAT A PARCHMENT SCROLL
SHOULD FENCE ROUND MILES OF LAND,
WHILE MILLIONS OP HANDS WANT ACRES,
AND MILLIONS OF ACRES WANT HANDS.
The aims of the Land Nationalization, Single Tax, and Anti-Poverty Societies, and the
Taxation Reform League, and the ultimate results of the attainment of their desires, are so
frequently misunderstood and misrepresented (sometimes wilfully so) that the opportunity
afforded by the issue of this pamphlet to briefly state what their objects really are,
and what the results of the adoption of their proposals would be, is gladly availed of.
The aims are :—lst. The abolition of the Land Tax now levied on the amount received
by the Government for land, thus relieving the farmers of an iniquitous tax, as most farming
land has been, or has to be, paid for (to the Government) at its full value, or is held on some
kind of lease. 2nd. The abolition of Customs duties on all goods which cannot be grown,
produced, or manufactured in South Australia. 3rd. The abolition of the present system of
municipal and district council rating, and in its place levying municipal and district rates on
unimproved land values only. 4th. The ultimate levying of a Land Tax of five per cent,
per annum on the unimproved value of all alienated land, deducting from such value the
amount paid to the Government for the land as before mentioned.
The results will be :—lst. The freeing of the masses (especially the farmers) from the taxes
now weighing on them, and the transference of the. burden to the wealthy holders of valuable
town and suburban lands, and of large areas of valuable country lands, for which the
Government has not had full value. 2nd. Perhaps the most important, the unlocking of
lands now held for speculation, and the compelling of the holders of valuable land, on which
a few sheep now graze, to put it to a use more profitable to the community, or give place to
those who will.
It is often said and written that the farmers will have to pay the proposed
Land Tax, but this is untrue, the tax will fall on the rich man who now fattens on
his town rents, his country rents, and his mortgages. For instance, a farmer holds!
400 acres of laud for which the Government received £3 per acre, the present unimproved
value being £3 per acre; under the Single Tax system he would not pay one penny, on
the contrary his present Land Tax of Jd. in the £ on £1,200, his district council rates, and
the duty on his tea, sugar, coffee, tobacco, &c., would be abolished ; but the squatter who
holds thousands of acres which he bought at 12s. 6d. per acre, the unimproved value of which
is now £lO per acre would have to pay five per cent, on £9 7s. 6d. or 9s. 4£d, per acre per
annum, and the owners of such as the potato lands of Mount Gambier, for which £3 per acre
is now paid in advance for the right to use it for nine months, would have to pay about £3 10s,
per acre per annum. Again, the man who bought a township allotment, or suburban section
for which the Government has had full value would pay nothing, but the wealthy absentees
who own so many town acres in Adelaide, now worth £lOO,OOO, each would have to pay
£5,000 per acre per annum. „
The last Land Tax valuation of the colony was about £30,000,000 ; of this £10,000,000
has been received by the Government, principally for farming land, townships, and sections
suburban thereto, which, under the Single Tax scheme, would be exempt from taxation,
leaving £20,000,000 (the unearned increment) taxable, which at five per cent, would bring
into the Treasury £1,000,000 per annum, and allow the abolition of the following
taxes, viz.:—
Customs... ... ... £650,000 Income Tax ... £30,000
Present Land Tax ... 60,000 Licences ••• 27,000
Corporation Kates • ... 50,000 Light Dues, &c. ... ... *^,ooo
District Council Rates ... 60,000 School fees ... ... 26,000
Probate and Succession Duties ' 25,000
Stamp Duties ... ... 30,000 . Total ... ... £863,000
Of course this tax would destroy the speculative value of land, and would therefore
temporarily lessen the total land valuation, but much of the wealthy man s land is now
under-valued and this, when remedied, would materially reduce the deficiency.
In discussing this question most people think and speak of the proposed tax on land as
a tax which is not now paid, but will have to be if the Single Tax is adopted, ignoring or not
recognising the fact that the tax is now being paid by the community to people
in the form of ground rents. The real question is—“ Shall ground rents continue to
flow into the pockets of private people (many of whom are absentees), or shall they be
diverted into the Treasury by a 5 per cent, land tax, and simultaneously with this diversion
shall the Customs duties and other taxes be abolished 2” Farmers who support a Property
Tax and object to the Single Tax surely cannot know that the amount psid, or to be paid, to
the Government for their land will be exempted from taxation under the Single Tax scheme ;
but under the Property Tax they will have to pay not only [on the full improved value of their
jand, but also on the value of their houses, farm buildings, dams, stock, &c., in excess or £SUO.


THE LMD FOR THE PEOPLE.
A Typical Meeting of the Single Tax Cam-
paign Across the Water—The Kind of
Sentiments to Which the Liberal Party is
Lending Us Approval—Radical Utterances
of the chairman oj a Liberal Association —
Questions and Answers.
The Standard has repeatedly been asked
to publish a full account of one of the typical
meetings of the single tax campaign which
Mr. George has been for the past two months,
and is now, so successfully conducting in
Great Britain. The following verbatim re-
port of the proceedings of the meeting at
Ashton-under-Lyne, for which we are in-
debted to the Reporter of that city, is pre-
sented. The meeting, which was a large and
enthusiastic one, was held under the auspices
of the Liberal Association of the district, at
the Ashton Town Hall, on April 13. The
chairman of the Liberal Association, Rev.
Thomas Green, M.A., presided, and a num-
ber of city officials and representative men
occupied places on the platform.
On calling the meeting to order the chair-
man said he was very glad to see so large an
assembly met to consider so large a subject.
He continued : The subject is one of very
great and increasing importance. (Hear,
hear.) It is one of those subjects that affects
all classes of the community. All of us will
be disposed to regard the question as one
that will bear a great deal of discussion, and
one on which some of us, at any rate, will be
glad of a good deal of information. For my-
self I will make a great many admissions to
begin with. I will admit that the same God
Almighty that created the earth created the
human beings now living upon it, and that
it is quite obvious that He intended the earth
should be the possession of the men and
women who are here. (Hear, hear.) Nor
do I mind admitting that, remembering the
selfishness of human nature, those who have
annexed, as I think very unfairly and un-
wisely, a very large portion of the earth for
their particular use, are persons of whom it
will be true to say, in regard to many of
them, that if they could they would annex
the air and the sky and the sunshine and the
sea—(hear, hear) —and would extract rent
for these things if they possibly could. I
will make another admission, that most of
us, at any rate, in time gone by, would have
been so silly that we would have paid the
rent if we could. (Laughter.) Some persons
seem to have a very great desire to possess
land. I must confess I have not. I will be
content if 1 can possess about six foot of it
when I am dead. (Laughter.) Indeed I
am not very ambitious for that. (Laughter.)
T am in no hurry to enter upon that inheri-
tance, and for that matter I have no very
great desire to enter upon it at all, as I
would rather be cremated, (Cheers.) One
thing I know quite well, and that is that we
live in a country that is densely populated, a
country where, with shame be it said, land
is largely lying waste (hear, hear) and I am
perfectly clear that those two things ought
not to exist together ; and 1 do not see any
reason why they should. Our land laws
have been made by landowners, and have
been made very largely in their own interest,
and any justice that has been obtained has
been got with great difficulty after prolonged
argument, and sometimes only on the very
brink of revolution.
Now, though lam a radical, I am not a
revolutionist, and it is precisely because I am
not a revolutionist, but-yet a believer in the
necessity of some very great changes that I
find myself here to-night. Ido not want to
see our people swayed by passion or governed
by ignorance. I want to see everything done
with intelligence, with reason, and with
equity ; I am sure that it is on these lines
that true progress ought to be made. (Hear,
hear.) To-night we shall have a valuable
contribution to the subject. We hare met
to hear a well-known speaker and lecturer, a
gentleman of wide influence and very great
power, and who deals with a subject that he
has long paid the very greatest and closest
attention to and the audience are prepared to
listen attentively and intelligently to every-
thing he may say, I call upon Mr. George,
(Cheers.)


MR. GEORGE’S ADDRESS.
Ido not want to talk to a class, I would
like to talk to the whole people. What I ad-
vocate is for the benefit of the whole com-
munity, land owners as well as landless, rich
as well as poor. (Hear, hear.) I have not
come here to attempt to excite the cupidity
of any class. 1 have not come here to advo-
cate the pulling down of any class, and I
have not come here to uphold self-interest so
much as 1 have to uphold a duty, to uphold,
above all, the sentiment of religion ; to ask
women and men to do what they can to up-
lift the oppressed and to relieve those who
suffer. There is everywhere poverty and
distress ; where wealth is greatest, where the
inventions and discoveries that have made
this century so wonderful, have had their
fullest application, we find a class of peo-
ple on the very verge of starvation ; a class
I consider the problem that confronts our
nineteenth century civilization ; (hear, hear)
who themselves, by the hardest toil, can
make but a poor living, a living which will
only serve to supply animal needs. We find
in a country such as this, and in countries
across the Atlantic, a class of people even
below that point who, if they live at all, are
only supported by degrading charity. We
find hundreds of thousands of little children
growing up under conditions that forbid their
full development ; under conditions in which
it seems that only a miracle can save them
from the brothel and penal prison, and which
inure and educate them to vice and crime.
If we look we shall also see hundreds of
thousands cf little children dying before
their time—literally crowded out of the
world because the things necessary to healthy
life cannot be got. Here is the question :
Whose fault is it ?
Those who contend that this must be so—
that poverty and vice and crime are the
results of natural laws—what answer are
they giving to this question—Whose fault
is it ? They say, though not in words, that
it is the fault of God Almighty, the Creator.
Either it is His, and it must be if it cannot
be remedied, or it is ours—not of any select
individuals, not of any class, but of all of us.
All are responsible. Yon remember that
parable In the Gospels, to my mind the most
awful of them 311, where, at the Last Judg-
ment, the Judge asked those who were before
Him, “ When 1 was sick and in prison, did ye
visit Me ? when I was hungered, did ye give
Me food ? when I was athirst did ye give Me
drink ?” And they said, “Lord, Lord, vfaen
did we see Thee, and not to do this p and He
answered, “ Inasmuch as je did knot to the
least of these, ye did it not to Me.”
all are responsible for present social
ILLS,
Through all society there is a dim con-
sciousness of some general responsibility.
Look at the enormous sums that are lavished
in charity. Look at the enormous sums not
merely paid out of the public money, but
drawn from the churches, from the charitable
individuals for the relief of the poor, for the
education of their children, for the care of
the destitute. There are some who carry to
my mind unconscious blasphemy to its very
last pitch when they say that it is the intent
of the Creator that poverty should exist
among men in order that the well-to do may
gratify their sympathies by relieving the
poor. No man who believes that this is the
result of the Creator’s laws can help but think
the Creator is rather lower in His feelings
than a good man, or that He is a bungler.
No good man, had he the power, would have
created a world in which some of the in-
mates should be condemned to the conditions
that so many are condemned to in our very
highest civilization. (Cheers.) But it is
not the fault of the Creator. (Hear, hear,
•and cheers.) No, whoever looks will see
that He who made all things—He who made
this world, and who has brought men upon
it, was not a bungler, has not been a niggard
—that there is enough and to spare for all—
(hear, hear) —and that there is no reason why
any child of God on this earth should, with-
out his own fault, lack either the necessaries
ox the conveniences and moderate luxuries of
life. (Cheers.) Anyone who looks will see
that, if we were but to obey the fundamental
laws of justice, none should worry about any
of the necessities of physical life, any more
than the lillies of the field worried about
their clothing.
What sort of a world is this, and what sort
of a being is man ? Physically considered
man is one of the weakest of animals. He
has not the speed of some, nor the clothing
of others ; his natural w,'apons with which
to defend himself from other animals are
weak, and he does not, like some of them,
find things provided for him here. His cloth-
ing does not grow upon him ; there are very
few natural products that he can use fcr food
without chemical changes produced by cook-
ing. He has want upon want, but he has
that power which shows that he was made
faintly and dimly and afar off in the likeness
of God. Man is a maker ; man is the pro-
ducing animal. His muscles, guided by his
mind, can set forces in motion that can alter
the relations of the things that he finds here.
He brings forth his food, he produces his
clothing, he constructs his dwelling places,
and he makes his living by his labour.
Now, what is work ? Everything fitted to
man’s needs is procured by work. We say
for instance, that this country is richer than
it was a thousand years ago. What do we
mean i Do we mean that there is more land
than there was a thousand years ago, or do
we mean that there are more people here I
When we speak of that we use a different
phrase. We mean that there are more things
produced by human labour, more houses, more
machines, more clothing, more ships, more of
all those numerous things that man works to


produce, and though we sometimes speak of
a man as a wealthy man when he is a share-
holder or land owner, or something of that
kind, it all means, if we analyse it, simply
that he has the power of taking the things that
labour produces. All wealth is the product of
labour. Some one has worked for it. There is
not wealth enough in our communities to-day.
Some have more than they can profitably use,
but even if we were to make a general ave-
rage, and divide up all equally around, there
would not be enough. The vast mass of the
population are under clothed, under fed, and
under housed' have not conveniences not to
say elegancies, enough. And yet we are told
that in all civilized countries there is a
surplus of labour. The supply of labour, it
is said, is in excess of the demand for labour,
and in this country there are people who say
that the only remedy is in emigration, that
there are more hands in this country than
can be employed : and yet if they will go to
the other <=ide of the water, they will find
the same problem confronting the nations.
Men willing to work and anxious to work
yet find difficulty in obtaining it. Even in
what we call good times there are many such;
but when industrial depressions sweep over
the civilized world then the hundreds of
thousands of unemployed mount into millions.
What is the reason 7 It is not God’s fault.
When man first appeared upon the earth what
he found was simply the earth. There was no
capitalist to give him employment. It was
from the earth that man’s labour brought all
that we call wealth. Has the earth grown
too narrow 7 Is there not land enough that
we cannot find employment ?
HEAVEN’S answer to an appeal fob
WORK.
We have committees and inquiries, schemes
'for giving employment to labour, and for
relieving the poor. What answer would we
/get if it were possible to send a committee
'up to the high court of heaven, and there to
jtnake a complaint that there were people on
'the earth ready to work, and willing to work
'but could not find employment 7—that there
'were hands condemned to involuntary idle-
tifess, and that the wants of men were not
'satisfied 7 What answer would we get 7
Would we not be asked “No employment?
Save you no land ? Is your land all in use 7
s tmtil it is all in use—until it is all put to its
there is no natural reason why there
shpuld. be any willing hands idle. Why
shtffilsi 1 there be any want 7 (Cheers.) What
“reason ? Why, it is clear and plain.
The 1 * Creator has been no niggard. Here in
the'Parth is all we can use, and more. There
exhaustless reservoir for us to draw
from, What we have done is to make the
ptbperty of a few that which by natural
right, that which by the law of the Creator,
'is intended for all. (Cheers.) Why, let us
mSßSider—l do not say it irreverently—but
let' tas consider, so long as God’s law s are
what they are, it will be utterly impossible
for the Almighty Himself to relieve the pov-
erty that festers in the midst of modern
civilization. (Hear, hear.) When we parcel
out the earth as we do ; when a certain class
under the planet, the great minority, take
all they can, what can we expect 7 (Hear,
hear.) Supposing God were to undertake
the relief of poverty. Supposing he were to
rain wealth down from heaven, or make it
gush up from the bowels of the earth, who,
in a country like this, who, under our laws
would it belong to 7 (Hear, hear.) Why,
there would be poverty in the very kingdom
of heaven if it were treated as we treat
this earth. (Hear, hear.) Now what would
happen in heaven, no matter how fruitful,
no matter what the natural abundance was,
if the people who get to heaven first were to
divide it up amongst themselves—(laughter)
—and the people who got there afterwards
were to find it all taken ? (Applause.) Why,
were wealth to gush up from the bowels of
the earth, as it has done in recent times—you
have heard of those great oil wells of Pennsyl-
vania and Ohio, from which a great spout of
oil comes, and of those wells of gas—which
makes the finest kind of fuel—to whom does
this gas and oil belong 7 Why, under our
laws, to the owners of the earth. And even
if it were to pour down a stream of groceries
or ready-made clothing, or anything of that
sort, it would belong to them all the same—
(laughter and applause) —and would even
though it fell down from heaven.
THE ISRAELITES AND THE MANNA.
Why, you remember how it is written, that
in the journey of the Israelites across the
desert, manna was sent down to feed them.
If that desert had been divided up like
England who would have owned the manna 7
—(Hear, hear.) Though enough and to spare
came down, how could the common Israelites
who had no legal right to use one square inch
of that desert, have got any manna. Why,
only by selling their labour. They might
have sold their labour to the rich Israelites,
gathering up the manna, and got in return
part of the manna they gathered. That
would not have been enough for theu. Then
they might have given in return for more
manna all they brought out from Egypt
Whenjthat was exhausted, how then 7 Why,
here would have been great heaps of manna,
and there would have been Israelites want
ing manna ; and then the mannaed class
in all probability would have talked about
the overproduction of manna. (Laughter,)
Now, labour produces all wealth. That is
perfectly clear. What, then, is the basis of
the right of property 7 There is only one
basis, and it is a curious thing that if you
look through all the apologists for the rights
of property in things that are not produced
by labour you will find that they all come
to that basis. The sure foundation of the
right of ownership is in the right of each
individual to himself, the right to use his
own powers and to enjoy what he can fairly


obtain by them. It is a natural principle
that the man who produces a thing—that is,
brought it forth from its natural reservoir
and fitted it for the satisfaction of human
wants—has the right of ownership in it, and
to it the sacred right of property attaches.
What a man produces is and ought to be his
—his against all the world, to use, give away,
sell, bequeath, to make any use of that he
pleases, so long, of course, as he does not
use it to the injury of others. This is the
foundation of the right of property. Now
the right of a man to himself, to the produce of
his labour, in itself condemns the right of any
one- to ownership in the earth. If he has
the right to what his labour produces would
he not be robbed if anyone were to take a
part of it from him as a return for the privi-
lege of allowing him to breath the air, or to
warm himself by the sun ? Does he not do
the same thing when he takes part of the
produce of that same labour for the right to
use the earth. The chairman has said that
there have been classes in the past who, if
they had thought of it, no doubt would have
made a property of th-- air and water. But,
the reason they did not was perfectly plain.
WHO OWNS THE LAND, OWNS THE AIR
AND WATER.
The man who owned the land owned the
air as well. (Laughter and applause.) The
man who owned the land owned the water,
the man who owned the shores owned the
sea. There has been only one attempt that
I have ever heard of to make air property,
and that was by a man who could not make
a claim to the ownership of the land. Near
Strasburg, in Germany, about the 12th or
13th century, there was a convent of monks,
who put up a windmill. One of the lords in
that neighbourhood—they would be called
robbers now—(cheers) —finding he could not
get any tribute from them, set up a claim to
the ownership of the air, and when they put
up their windmill said, “All the wind in
these parts belongs to me.” (Laughter)
The monks rent in hot haste to the bishop,
and told him of this claim. The bishop ‘ ‘got
up on his hind legs”—(laughter)—and cursed
in ecclesiastical language. (Renewed laugh-
ter.) He said the baron was a son of Belial;
that he did not own the wind in that province;
but all the wind that blew over it belonged
to Mother Church—(laughter)—and if the
baron did not take back his demand for r-nt,
he would launch at him with bell, book, and
candle the curse of Rome. (Laughter.) Mr,
Baron backed down. But if he had owned
the land he would not have needed to set up
a claim to the wind. Men cannot breath the
air unless they have land to stand on. What
would happen to the men who went down to
the sea in ships if, while they were away at
sea, the land were to disappear ? (Laughter.)
(Chairman : “Can you answer the question”)
(Laughter.) Well, they would have to keep
on sailing (laughter) and after a little time
they would die. Why, some peoplQ [( tbw}s
that land is only one .of the elements of
production. An English statesman recently
told the people of Southwark that they had
no concern with the land question, which was
purely an agricultural question—a sort of
three acres and a cow question (Laughter.)
It is natural to think of land as the super-
ficies of the globe, but you will see, if you
think for a moment, that it really means to
us the materia] universe. Land as a term of
political economy includes everything outside
of man himself.
It is only on the land and through the land
that we can dive at all. All our productions,
our manufactures, our wealth consists but in
bringing forth from the land the raw ma-
terials, of working them up, and changing
them either in place or form. Without land
no man can work. Why, our very bodies
come from the soil, and to the soil they re-
turn again. Take from a man all that be-
longs to the land, and there remains but a
disembodied spirit. Therefore it is that this
land question is not merely an important
question ; it is the important question.
THE FACTS THAT MUST BE CONSIDERED.
Out of the primary wrong in our treatment
of the land have grown all those social difficul-
ties which perplex men, and will perplex
those who dare not look the facts in the face.
(Applause.) Consider that while invention
after invention, and discovery after discovery
have increased, during this century, the
productiveness of labour, multiplied it a
hundredfold, pauperism still exists, and vast
classes are suffering through poverty. These
great inventions seem to have only widened
the gulf between the rich and the poor. We
prate about the abolition of chattel slavery,
but to-day, in our so-called free countries,
there exists an industrial slavery.
The chatteled slave was at least sufficiently
fed, the children were taken care of, and the
old had the comforts they had been accus-
tomed to. Look in the country at the
labourer, who has worn away his life in toil,
and who comes in the end to the wcrkhouse
or degradation worse still. Children were
torn from their mothers, wives from their
husbands, in chatteled slavery. Mothers even
killed their children to escape slavery, but
they did not kill them for the sake of a few
shillings of insurance money. We might do
worse by men or women than put them to
death. There is a death of the soul that is
worse than the death of the body. Go
through London and see in its streets the
thousands of young women who ought to be
happy wives and mothers. Is there a man
here who would not rather see his daughter
in her coffin than that she should come to
such a fate ? We have abolished slavery on
my side of the Atlantic, and we are proud of
it now. but I remember the time when a man
who dared to say a word about property in
flesh and blood was deemed everything that
was bad, was ostracized in society, was con-
sidered an infidel in the church, Rut now,


no man is found, from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, that will say a word in defence of
of chattel slavery. We are proud that under
the American flag to-day no longer is the
clank of the slaves’chain heard. (Hear, hear.)
We have abolished that form of slavery,
that crude rude form that only grows up in
countries where population is sparse and land
is plenty, and never where population is
dense and the land can be fenced in. Why
did the men who went to Ireland refrain
from making slaves of men they found there ?
Simply because they knew a trick worth two
of that. (Laughter.) When they took the land
then they were the masters of the men who
had to live upon it. (Cheers.) The chattel
slave owner, if his slave ran away, had to
chase him ; if his slave would not work, had
to whip him ; but the man who owns land
that other people must live on, if they live
at all—his slaves do not have to be chained
upi No, they come with hats off to beg per-
mission to work. (Cheers.) He does not
have to whip them, nor does he have to take
care of their children, nor has he to provide
for them in old age when they have been his
servants and worked hard all their lives. You
have heard in that English classic how
Eobinson Crusoe drove off the cannibals, and
how Friday came up to him and put Crusoe’s
foot on his neck in token that he was from
that time Crusoe’s chattel and slave. Now,
supposing Eobinson Crusoe had drawn back
and told Friday that they were equal, but
that that was his island (laughter), what
would have been the difference ? Friday
would have been his slave, and he would
have been Friday’s master. If there had been
a number of Fridays, if inventions had been
made, Eobinson Crusoe would have profited
by them. The value of the island would
have risen, rents would have risen, and by
and by it would have been found that they
were suffering from a want of wealth by
labour going to waste.
A NATURAL RIGHT IN THE LAND,
Now, I think every one who thinks can see
the importance of this question, every one
who thinks of it will see that no matter what
our ancestors did in the past, in the present,
to-day, every human being has a natural
right in the land of his birth—(cheers) ; that
every child that comes here, comes here with
a title from Almighty God, not merely to the
equal right to live, but to the equal right to
the use of all the necessaries for life and for
labour, (Hear, hear.) The question is how
can we apply it? There is no difficulty about
it. Let us make sure of this, if we can make
up our minds to follow justice, we will find
a straight and easy way. All difficulties arise
from the indisposition to do justice. (Hear,
hear.) The way? Why it is easy. We
cannot, in a state of civilization like this, di-
vide up the land. There was a primitive state
of society in which land might have been di-
vided up—for instance, that state of society
contemplated by the Mosiac code—in that
primitive state of society where each family
was self-contained no complexity in the sys-
tem of industry and no great towns, the sim-
pie device of alloting to each society a suf-
ficiency of land and making the lots, as the
Mosaic code did, unalienable would have
secured for every child that came into being a
foothold on the earth. But this will not do now.
Let us make no mistake ; the people who
are asking them to buy the land of Ireland
from one set of owners and sell it again to a
larger set of owners do not propose to do
justice. (Hear, hear.) They are proposing a
scheme that cannot last, a scheme that will
merely make for the time being a larger class
of landowners instead of a smaller class of
landowners. It will do nothing whatever for
the people who are not agricultural tenants,
nothing whatever for the artisans of the
towns, nothing whatever for the agricultural
labourer or for the poor of the slums of Bel-
fast and Dublin ; and it will not do anything
permanently for the agricultural tenants. In
the United States we know that. We started
from a condition of things in which land was
fairly and equally divided, but we saw that
as population increased, as the arts developed,
as the country grew, that inevitably land
ownership tended to concentration, that
inevitably labour was divorced from the abso-
lutely necessary element of land. That will
happen in Ireland, no matter how many
millions of debt the people of England take
upon themselves for the purpose of convert-
ing Irish agricultural owners. No, it cannot
be done in that way. But it is not necessary
to divide up the land. And while it is not
necessary to divide up the land and maintain
equality, it is perfectly possible to divide up
the rent. (Hear, hear.) Not even is that
necessary to secure equality. The only thing
that is necessary is to take rent for any pur-
poses that will be for the benefit of all, and
to do that it is not necessary to formally dis-
possess the land owners—to take possession
of land and let it out. It is only necessary
to so shift taxes as to abolish all the taxes
that now fall upon industry and thrift, all
taxes that now fall upon labour or the pro-
ducts of labour, and concentrate taxation
upon land values. (Cheers.)
A TAX THAT DOES NOT BEAR ON INDUSTRY.
Taxes are necessary. That is to say, as
civilization advances public revenues are
necessary. What we take in public revenue
is always the product of labour. But there is
a natural law by virtue of which, as civiliza-
tion increases, there is a great fund constant-
ly increasing that can be taken for public
purposes without bearing at all upon industry,
without diminishing the rewards of thrift,
that can be taken for the use of society.
(Hear, hear.) Consider this national fact,
the value of the land. Why is land more
valuable in Ashton than it is in the Highlands
of Scotland ? Simply because there are more
people here. Why is land more valuable in
London than in Ashton ? Simply because


there is a still greater concentration of human
beings. The value of the land is not pro*
duoed by afiy one individual. The owners of
London, the owners of the land of this town,
did not make its value. What would be the
value of the land if all but the owners of the
land emigrated 7 (Laughter.) The value
comes from the common growth. Every
child that is born, every family that comes
and settles, and every great public improve-
ment adds value to the land. (Hear, hear.)
Here is a fund that can be taken without
injury to anyone for public uses, and it seems
to me to be the intent of natur, and the
intent of the Creator that it should be used.
To me it was the most striking proof in the
whole range of facts which showed the bene-
volence of that power which was above and
beneath all. Go out, for instance, into a new
country. You might put up a most valuable
building, and it might create a great value in
the land. But a fire comes and sweeps all
your improvements away. (Hear, hear.) No
value would remain. But in one of your
cities let a fire come and sweep the improve-
ments away, the great value would still
remain attached to the land. (Hear, hear.)
As villages, towns, and cities rise, so do
these land values grow. That to me was as
clear an evidence of design as that provision
which brings into the mother’s breast proper
nutriment for her child. Just as civilization
advances, so do the needs for public revenues
grow, and with them grows this land value, a
value which does not belong to any individual
—(hear, hear) —but which belongs to the
community. (Applause.) This land value
can be taken for public purposes without
taking from an individual that which is his,
without lessening capital, without a conflict
with labour. It is the land value that must
be taken if we want to prevent speculation
in that most indispensable of all the things
that men need. (Applause.) All we have to
do is to take it. It is not that we should get
a vast fund for the use of society so much as
this, that in doing this we will break up the
monopoly in land.
THE HOUSING OP THE POOR.
Talk about the housing of the poor, when
it is clear and plain that there are not enough
houses to accommodate the people. Why are
not more houses put up 7 There is plenty of
land that would be valuable for building
purposes, which is kept idle because its own-
ers do not want to use it themselves, but are
holding it until they can get higher prices.
(Hear, hear.) No community should be taxed
for its capital and labour and wealth. Why
should we fine a man for getting rich unless
he robs someone else 7 The richer a man gets,
the better for everyone. Why should we tax
a man for getting a large income 7 Why
should a man who puts up a house, builds a
factory, or does anything else to increase his
wealth, have the tax-gatherer come down
upon him and demand a tax from him 7
Abolish such taxes and put taxes upon the
value of land ; charge a man who is holding
land vacant just as much as if he put the best
house upon it. (Hear, hear.) Charge a man
who will not use a coal mine, and will not
let anyone else, just as much as we charge
the man who is working his mine. Charge
the great land owners who hold two or three
thousand acres of land idle and will not let
it to the agricultural labourer just as much
as if it were in use. (Applause.) If we
charge the full annual value of the land how
long could the owner afford to let it stand 2
(Hear, hear.) I cannot hope to-night to
convert anybody, but what I hope to do is to
set you thinking. (Applause.) Try and
throw yourselves into the question, and see if
it will bear the test, and if you can find
anything in these propositions that conflicts
with morality or is opposed to the best public
policy, anything but that which will bring
benefit to the whole people, then oppose it,
but in the meantime I entreat you to search
and try. (Loud applause.)
ANSWERING QUESTIONS.
When the lecturer had ceased speaking the
chairman read some questions which had been
handed up for Mr. George to answer.
Question ; Is not private property in land
the means whereby the workers are robbed
directly or indirectly of one half the profits
vhey produce 7
Mr. George : Yes, and they are robbed of
a still greater amount; that which they might
produce and do not produce.
Question ; If the producers roused them-
selves to independent thought and acted
unitedly, could they obtain and sustain their
fair share of what they produce 7 In other
words could they keep the muzzle off 7 Is
the parable of the labourers coming to pass in
this day f Are the wealthy com ing in at the
eleventh hour to show the people how to give
a fair pennyworth of laud in their democratic
house 7
Mr. George : I do not know that I rightly
catch the question. Does the gentleman
mean that the labourers ought to unite to-
gether to go forward as labourers 7
The Chairman : Let us say, yes.
Mr. George : Weil, 1 thinx the struggle
ought to be for the rights of all people.
What I condemn in all these efforts to do
something for the labourer is the assumption
that labour needs to have something done for
it. Labour don’t want charity. (Applause.)
All that labour needs is freedom and justice.
I ask that for everybody. lam not making
fun in saying that I believe this scheme
would do something for the landlords. I do
not believe that obedience to God’s law in-
jures any member of the community.
Question : I am the tenant of a house for
vyhich I pay £l6 per annum and the rates.
Ihe owner of the house pays £6 per annum
chief rent. Does Mr. George propose to tax
the above ground rent, and if so, at what


rate ; and what advantage would the imposi-
tion of the tf x be to me as tenant ? The
house referred to is in the country, and situ-
ated about two miles from the nearest rail-
way station.
Mr, George : If the tax were imposed it is
clear that he would have less rent to pay.
A tax upon ground value will not enable land
owners to raise the rent of the ground. On
the contrary, it would stimulate them to let
it at a lower rent, because, if all those who
had vacant land were taxed they would be
compelled to let it.
Question : In Mr. George’s system for the
taxation of land for national and local pur-
poses, what difference does he make between
land which has cost the present proprietors
nothing, or next to nothing, having been in
the same family for several generations, and
land which has been bought by the present
possessors within the last twenty or thirty
years, and for which the full market price
has been paid ?
Mr. George : I would make no difference
between the two. The man who buys gains
no better title than the man who inherits.
We propose to let men keep what they have;
only in future we would prevent them taking
any more from labour.
Question : What is the probable relation
between the unimproved value of the land
in any town or district and the sum total of
the national and local taxation of the same
district 1
Mr. George : I cannot tell in a district,
but as a whole it is estimated that the land
values would do more than pay the imperial
and local (taxation.
Question ; Is there at present any country
in which the whole of the national or local
taxation, or both are levied on unimproved
land values f
Mr. George): No, unfortunately. South
Australia is making a great step forward,
and will probably be first.
Question : How would you ascertain the
annual value of a mine for purpose of your
proposed *• single tax ?”
Mr, George : By ascertaining what any-
body would reasonably give for it, as I would
with land values.
Question : A manufacturer, an alderman
in a neighbouring town, who says “ the
merest tyro in political economy can refute
your arguments,” claims that his firm pay
more in local rates than the whole of their
work-people. Is not the amount of rate
added to the cost of their goods, and paid by
the consumer J
Mr. George : If they are the products of
human labour, yes. As to the statement re-
peating the tyro, I should like to have your
manufacturer here. You cannot tax capital-
ists by taxing capital. 'Taxes upon all things
that are produced by labour are added to the
cost, and ultimately fall upon the con-
sumers.
Question : Why not nationalize the mine-
rals on the same principle as the land, seeing
that the minerals are a constituent part of
the land 1
Mr. George : The minerals are a part of
the land. Does the gentleman think I have
been only talking of agricultural land ?
Then followed a long and involved ques-
tion, which the chairman interpreted thus :
Must not the incidence of taxation, put it
how you will, fall ultimately upon labour ?
Mr, George : No, I do not think it must.
The greater part of the incidence of taxation
does fall upon labour, and bears more heavily
upon the poor than upon the rich. But there
is a tax which labour does pay for the use of
land. If you take that away you are taking
nothing from the share of labour. If the in-
come of £60,000 a year, which I am told a
lady receives for the rent of the land of this
district, were taken for the use of the state,
and taxations were abolished, labour would be
the gainer.
Mr. A. E. Eeyner took temporary posses-
sion of the chair, and called upon Mr. John
Hanna, who moved a vote of thanks to the
chairman.
Mr, Kerfoot seconded the motion, and said
he could not withhold his consent from all
Mr. George had said, and he thought all who
were present had been converted to Mr.
George’s views—even though they might not
have started in perfect agreement with him.
The motion was carried and the Rev. Tho-
mas Green in replying said some ten questions
had been asked ; he should himself have
liked to ask twenty-one questions, but he felt,
whether their patience would be exhausted
or not, the strength and endurance on the
part of Mr. George would be rather unfairly
dealt with. He hoped those who had not
given attention to the subject would have
their minds set thinking in the right direction;
and especially that they would pay attention
to that very important point with which Mr,
George dealt in closing his remarks. That
was the one that ought not to be delayed.
Wide schemes in connection with the land
would take time to mature ; but the idea of
taxing fairly the property that was held on
dog-in-the-manger principles was one that
ought to come to the front at once, and if
working men would take the trouble to think
about it they might keep it in the front, and
insist on those who represented them having
a clear opinion of it. He should like to know
where the member of Parliament for Ashton
was on that question, and it was information
which he thought they ought in a proper
maimer to ascertain. The meeting then ad-
journed.


Policies Issued.
Amounts Assured
Five years ending- 31st October, 1876
2,557
£544,337
(t
u
“ 1880
3,264
689,576
44
(4
“ 1884
13,657
2,913,394
44
(4
“ 1888
18.795
4.507.040
38,273
£8,654,347
THE AUSTRALIAN WIDOWS’ FUND
Life Assurance Society (Limited)
rEf-rcLTtcTx Office ; —
GIEIFELL STiEETs ADELAIDE.
(ESTABLISHED 1871) CONDUCTED ON
PTOEI.T WSVTTJAX. PKtWCirtES.
THE WIDOWS’ FUND
Against Liabilities than any other Life Assurance Society
established in the Colonies during the last thirty-five years.
New Business for fifth year in succession (1888) again
EXCEEDS ONE MILLION STERLING.
Progress of the Society—
Good Agents Wanted. Apply personally or by letter to the
indersigned,
CToKrt IPcLt~rfcLJC Contgreeve,
Resident Secretary.


FAMILY & DISPENSING CHEMIST,
IfPiilTß RAILWAY STATION* Silif 1811*
All orders by post or telegram carefully and promptly executed, and forwarded
according to instructions.
Sol'e Proprietor of the undermentioned Invaluable Medicines
DR. MARSH’S CELEBRATED
WILD CHERRY COUGH ELIXIR
Unequalled as an Elegant, Agreeable, and Speedy Remedy for Coughs,,
Colds, Hoarseness, Asthma, Whooping Cough, Consumption, and all
affections of the Throat, Lungs, and Chest.
Sold everywhere at Is. 6d. and 2s. per bottle.
JDtt., :>s
NEURALGIA dINVIGO RATING NERVE TONIC
Approved by the most eminent physicians as the Tonic Medicine. Cures Neuralgia,
Exhaustion, Worry, Fatigue, ; Sieeplessnqss, and Nervousness. For Gaining
Strength, Enriches and Purlfjeg ;the; Blopd, Strengthens the System,
and Imparts Tone and Energy to the Digestive Organs.
This celebrated preparation is a Specific Remedy for Neuralgia, &c., and may be administered
with the greatest advantage in all conditions indicating tonic treatment, and only requires a trial
to prove its virtues. The Proprietor of this preparation is daily receiving tokens of general
satisfaction from those who have taken this valuable remedy. Price, 2/- and 3/6 per bottle.
Coifn.
EASE! COMFORT! GOOD HEALTH !
THE AMERICAN MAGIC CORN CURE
A CERTAIN CURE for Hard and Soft Corns, Warts, and Bunions. Quick
Relief, Painless, and Effectual. It is the best and most saleable article
in the market, and the confidence it once gains it never loses.
PRICE, Is. per bottle, or Is. 3d, thr ugh the post to any part of the colony.


THE LAND FOR THE
A. C. EVANS,
STOCK, SHARK & LAND BROKER,
Lipson Street, Port Adelaide, and
MOTAL £XCHAH6E, Adelaide,
■Vi’ OS
(Formerly Chief Draughtsman in the Lands Title Office, Adelaide),
o xm. ■ S -
LAND BROKING IN ALL ITS BRANCHES. LOANS NEGOTIATED,
Agent for Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Office.
ST. VINCENT STREET, PORT ADELAIDE.
DESLANDES BROS.,
UNDERTAKERS. CONTRACTORS
AND BUILDERS,
SEMAfttOftt f*OAB, atAWVI
WARD'S
BALSAM OF ANISKKD,
A Certain and Safe Remedy for Coughs, Colds, Shortness of Breath, Asthma, &c, Sold by
all Chymists and Storekeepers throughout the colonies, in bottles, at Is. 6d.
Gr . F . WARD,
PHARMACEUTICAL GHYM/ST, SEMAPHORE, S.A.
(Established 1878.)


«®T- . B" IS "9kT,
STHGI AID SHAIEBiOIEij
ROYAL EXCHANGE,
ADEILAIDI!
D. & J. WILLIAMS,
IjAMD agemts.
INSURANCE in Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company effected at lowest
Rates.
Central Chambers, Lipson Street, Port Adelaide.
S 3. iTAC
BOOT & SHOE DEPOT,
SEMAPHORE ROAD, SEMAPHORE,
A large and well selected stock of Boots and Shoes always on
hand. Repairing in all its Branches neatly and promptly
executed.
SEMAPHORE BAKERY.
s* e. wss%
BAKER, GROCER. AND CONFECTIONER,
Opposite Railway Station, Semaphore.


(rpTTT? T2ID T^PTQTT
X XXJfet SO UX XX JdXaX X Xoxl
FIRE AND MARINE
INSURANCE COMPANY.
CAPITAL~£S.OOO,OOO.
Local Directors s
QIEIFELL STBfiET,
3 1508 01845244
ADELAIDE
AGENCIES THROUGHOUT THE COLONY.
E. M. ASHWIN, Manager.


