

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, N.S.W.
THE RABBIT MENACE
. . IN . .
NEW SOUTH WALES.
An Abridgment of the Report by Mr. David G. Stead,
who was commissioned, on 30th April, 1925,
to inquire into matters connected
with the rabbit menace in
New South Wales.
SYDNEY:
Alfred James Kent, Government printer.
1928.
StS2


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE RABBIT MENACE
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
An Abridgment of the Report by Mr. DAVID G. STEAD, who
was commissioned, on 30th April, 1923, to inquire into
matters connected with the rabbit menace in New South
Wales.
Sydney:
Alfred James Kent, Government Printer.
1928.
♦8252 —A




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Part I.—General Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Part II. —Synopsis of Report ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Part 111. —Rabbits in Relation to Live Stock 17
Part IV. —Fencing and Netting in Relation to Rabbit Destruction ... 19
Part V. —Destruction of Harbour ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Part VI. —Rabbit Traps and Trapping ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Part VII. —Poisoning of Rabbits 46
Part VIII. —Destruction of Rabbits by Fumigation ... ... ... ... 60
Part IX.—Other Methods of Destruction ... ... ... ... ... 69


Poisoned Water’s Deadly Toll,


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Rabbit Menace in New South Wales.
PART I.
General Introduction.
The following- is an abridgment of the report issued under a commission
granted by His Excellency the Governor of the State of New South
Wales, on the 30th April, 1925, by which Mr. David G. Stead was authorised
to inquire into the following matters connected with the rabbit menace: —
(1) The investigation of the various methods of controlling and
exterminating rabbits, such as trapping, poisoning, fumigation,
digging-out, fencing and netting, destruction by disease, shooting,
ferreting, hunting, &c.
(2) The effectiveness of the various methods and their relative costs.
(3) A close study of the life-history, habits, &c., of the rabbit with a
view to endeavouring to evolve a more effective method of control.
(4) The effect (as far as it is practicable to ascertain) upon other
animals as well as birds, useful insects and aquatic life throughout
the country, of any of the destructive agencies utilised; and the
determination of whether any deleterious effects (if any) are
outweighed by the benefits derived directly and indirectly from the
consequent rabbit destruction.
Probably it will be agreed that no single circumstance in the history
of Australia has so profoundly affected the economic development of our
pastoral and agricultural industries as the introduction of the European
wild rabbit.
The cost of the rabbit to even the State of New South Wales in the
forty-five years that have elapsed since the animal first began to be
reckoned a serious pest is beyond all calculation. Without taking into con-
sideration the millions of pounds sterling which have been expended in
fencing, netting, poisoning, fumigating, digging out, and other direct
methods of prevention and destruction, the cost to the country in loss of
pastures and their deterioration in value, with the consequent loss of output
of wool, live-stock, and fodder crops certainly runs into many scores of
millions of pounds. Perhaps it would not be too extravagant to say “ hun-
dreds of millions,” as is often stated by farmers and graziers.
The Special Committee of the Graziers’ Association which made some
inquiries into the rabbit menace in 1924, estimated that the actual live-
stock carrying capacity of this State would be increased by approximately
25 per cent.; and, further, that our so-called “ drought troubles ” would
disappear with the elimination of the rabbit.


As regards the present status of the rabbit menace in New South Wales,
notwithstanding the immense advances made towards immunity in a
number of districts, the State as a whole has made no appreciable advance
towards the elimination of the rabbit. And this in spite of the fact that
a vast annual destruction takes place, and that the knowledge of ways and
means of dealing with the pest has greatly increased in recent years.
Put shortly, the present position is that, allowing for seasonal variations,
there are at the present moment, in most parts of the State, as many rabbits
as there ever were; while in those parts of the State which were first invaded
by the rabbit forty-five years ago, the pest appears, on the evidence avail-
able, to be even more abundant than formerly. At least it is certain there
has been no permanent decrease.
PART II.
Synopsis of Report.
Historical.
iNVKSTKiATiox shows that the European rabbit was a “ First-fleeter ” in
Australia. An account of live-stock in the settlement-of Port Jackson for
Ist May, 1788, lists five rabbits, three of which belonged to the Governor.
There were many subsequent introductions of rabbits into New South
Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and islands in the vicinity of Bass Strait, but
from none of these did the rabbit menace of Australia develop until the
year 1859, when the Black Ball clipper “Lightning” arrived in Hobson’s
Bay with twenty-four wild rabbits consigned to Mr. Thomas Austin, of
Bar won Park, near Geelong, where they were delivered about four days
later. The rabbits were soon well established at Barwon Park, so much so
that as early as three years later they were reported as “becoming a pest.”
About that time rabbits were flourishing at The Warren, 'Cook’s River
(Sydney), but they do not appear to have spread inland from that locality,
owing to the dense bush of the coastal and mountain lands. As showing
the marvellous power of the rabbit in adapting itself to the new conditions,
and in the face of natural enemies and climatic difficulties, it is interesting
to note that six years after Mr. Austin, of Barwon Park, released thirteen
only, their progeny had increased to such an extent that he had killed off
his estate 20,000, and there still remained, according to his computations,
at least 10,000 more. As indicating the high value put upon the rabbit by
many people, and the keen desire that the animal should prosper, it may
be mentioned that soon after their introduction a man was charged in the
Coolac Police Court with having shot a rabbit, the property of John Robert-
son, of Glen Alvie, and was fined £lO. A few years later Mr. Robertson’s
attempts to stamp out the rabbit cost him about £5,000.
Rabbits rapidly spread over the face of inland Victoria from Barwon
Park. Northwards, north-east, and west towards the end of the “seventies”
they had crossed the Murray River into the Riverina district of New South
Wales and had successfully established themselves therein. In 1879 appeared
the first mention of them in official reports of New South Wales, when it
was stated that they were fast spreading on the Lower Murray and had even
obtained a footing on the Murrumbidgee as far up as the Yanco Creek.


From that time onwards unending warfare was waged by the landholders-
against a pest which threatened their very existence. Within a very few
years of their crossing the Murray River into New South Wales they had
traversed thousands of square miles in New South Wales and crossed into
Queensland.
The basic factor contributing to the astounding spread of the rabbit over
the western country of New South Wales was, curiously enough, a geologi-
cal one. As is well known, there is a wide strip of practically continuous
“ alluvial ” running up through the Western Division of this State. Chiefly,
this is red loamy or sandy soil, in which the rabbit finds his ideal strong-
hold. Once having safely ensconced itself there, the rabbit rapidly invaded
every district in New South Wales as well as a large part of Queensland,
the whole of Victoria, South Australia, and a considerable part of Western
Australia. Rabbits have now penetrated probably two-thirds of the Aus-
tralian continent. They are in every district of New South Wales, even
in the far North Coast area.
Legislation and Administration.
Immediately after the rabbits were officially reported to be spreading in
the Riverina, they were referred to as “ noxious animals ” in an Act of
1880, for pastures and stock protection. From this time onwards a suc-
cession of enactments was passed. The first one of importance was the
Rabbit Nuisance Act of 1883. In this Act the Government appointed a
rabbit administration with inspectors who had power to enter upon all lands
to enforce rabbit destruction. Destruction was also carried out under
these inspectors on Crown lands. During the period of this administration
hundreds of thousands of pounds were paid out for rabbit scalps—a dis-
astrously wasteful and useless expenditure as it turned out. In seven years
(1883-1890) the total expenditure by the Government was no less than
£1,543,000. A sum of £917,000 was paid out for scalps alone from 1883
to 1887.
Under the Pastures Protection Act, 1902, the Pastures Protection Dis-
tricts as now known were constituted. The present administration is
through Pastures Protection Boards working under the Pastures Protection
Act of 1912, with amendments of 1918 and 1920.
The Pastures Protection Boards.
There are sixty-four Pastures Protection Boards throughout the country,
each eoihposed of eight directors. They employ field staffs consisting of
stock inspectors and rabbit inspectors. The stock inspector is controlled
also from Departmental headquarters, but the rabbit inspector is under the
sole control of his board. Rabbit inspectors are only to be found in some
districts, but stock inspectors are assigned to every district. The method
of administration is considered by the Commissioner to be very unsatisfac-
tory, and he suggests that a future properly organised Rabbit Bureau with
a Rabbit Menace Commissioner in charge, would carry out the work more
satisfactorily.
The system of granting half rates to landholders who have “ rabbit-proof ”
holdings is shown to be pernicious, and its discontinuance is recommended
by the Commissioner.
Assistance to Settlers.
Under the Pastures Protection Act, assistance has for some years past
been given by the Government to landholders through the Pastures Protec-
tion Boards. Rabbit-proof wire-netting has been supplied on easy terms of
repayment. Under the Advances to Settlers Act of 1923 (Commonwealth),


provision was made to supply necessitous settlers with wire-netting on very
■easy terms, and free of interest. The Commissioner states that inquiry
into this matter showed that it was not working as intended. He formed
the opinion that many necessitous people desiring assistance are not obtain-
ing it —to the detriment of landholders in general who are fighting the
rabbit pest.
Rabbits and Live-stock.
While there is a universal recognition of the rabbit as a menace, the
many ways in which it affects the land and its products are not so well
known. Familiarity has bred contempt amongst many people. The rabbit
is a more insidious than picturesque robber. Where it does not remove the
pastures altogether, it eats the heart out of them, leaving only the poorer
grasses and herbs. In the far western country many barren “ gibber
plains,” bare “ quartz downs,” and “ jumping ” sandhills are produced
by the regular and insidious attacks of the rabbit. The rabbit ringbarks
the larger timber and kills it. It eats, also, millions of seedlings of trees,
including the best natural fodder kinds like Mulga, then the wind gets
in and sweeps away all the surface (red sandy) soil. Then nothing
grows, or the rabbit eats the growth as it comes. By selective feeding the
rabbit may gradually alter the whole of the natural production of a piece
of country, and only by slow stages will the land “ come back.”
The full report shows that so-called “ rabbit-sick ” lands are frequently
not properly so-called, but merely lands on which the vegetation has been
completely altered or cleared out by the attacks of the rabbit. An attempt
ivas made by the Commissioner to go into the question of the order of
plant succession on rabbit-blasted lands, but there is little exact informa-
tion thereon. Much investigation is required here, as in so many other
aspects of the rabbit question.
The vastly increased production of lands where rabbits have been eradi-
cated is also dealt with in the full report, and a number of specific cases
are given. These indicate very clearly how small a thing to the country—
at large—is any rabbit trade (present or even potential as far as can be
seen) compared to the increased value of the land for live-stock and crop
production when the rabbit is absent.
Live-stock and Rabbit Poison.
Investigation shows that there has been destruction of live-stock inci-
dental to use of ralbbit poison. Horse, cattle, sheep, and pigs have been
killed in considerable numbers. As many as 800 sheep have been poisoned
m one lot.
The most serious development, however, has been the destruction of live-
stock from the use of cyanide of potassium, illicitly laid for opossums.
Very strict supervision over the sale of this deadly poison (which may not
he lawfully used for rabbit destruction) is required. Legislation in this
direction has been contemplated for some years.
Rabbits and Blow-flies.
It has been alleged that one of the great contributing factors in the
increase of the blow-fly pest in recent years was the presence, throughout
the country, of myriads of decomposing rabbit carcases. An endeavour
has been made to ascertain to what extent this was true. Close investiga-
tion is required, but there appears to be no doubt that the dead rabbits
have been responsible, to a considerable extent, for the maintenance of the
fly trouble; while the breeding up of the more “ delicate ” breeds of
wool-sheep has also been an important factor.


Rabbits on Public Lands.
In the Commissioner’s opinion, one of the most vexed questions con-
nected with the history of the rabbit menace in Australia has been that
of dealing with the rabbits on Crown lands. He considers that the Crown
and the various public bodies interested should co-operate with the land-
holders generally in their efforts to clear the rabbit out. These holders
of land contiguous to areas which are owned directly by the Crown, or which
are vested in some public body, are frequently penalised to a much
greater extent than their fellows because of the proximity of heavy rabbit
infestation of areas over which they have no control. Public bodies should
enter into a system of combining with landholders wherever possible,
to net off publicly-owned rabbit-infested lands.
Diggling-out Rabbit Warrens.
These men are working on burrows outside their own boundary. Isolated rabbit warrens are sometimes
found on stock routes, roads, &c.. just outside the boundary fence. To deal with these is generally “no
one’s business,” but these landholders think differently.
Rabbit Fencing and Netting.
Whatever measures are taken for the ultimate eradication of rabbits
on the greater part of the lands of the State, nothing really effective can
be achieved without the provision of rabbit-proof fences. This does not:
include the so-called “ barrier ” fences. In some parts of the country,
notably the far west, and in places where mountain torrents abound, netting
may usually not be effectively maintained (within economical bounds);
but over the greater part of the most productive lands of the State netting"
could be erected and maintained and must be pushed forward on every
hand if the rabbit menace is to be permanently controlled. Only a small
percentage of present fences are really maintained in a rabbit-proof
condition.
The Great Barrier Fences.
With the advent of the rabbit scourge into New South Wales a great
demand set in for the construction of long stretches of barrier fencing. It
was hoped that these fences would be the means of segregating the rabbits
so that they might be more readily dealt with. Great fences were con-
structed at a very large cost to the country, but without achieving the results
aimed at. Other States went through a similar experience, notably Western.


Australia, where no less than 2,023 miles of fencing was erected (in three
fences) at a cost of £413,531. It is claimed that a case has been made out
for a. complete discontinuance of the policy of building such great barrier
fences; while, at the same time, every possible assistance should be given
to aid in the eifective fencing and maintenance of rabbit-proof netting
on individual runs or holdings, or small groups of such.
Common Methods of Rabbit Destruction.
The various methods of rabbit destruction, dealt with at length in the
full report, are summarised in the following paragraphs:—
Destncction of Harbour , including demolition, by some means or other,
of the burrows themselves, is regarded—speaking generally—as a necessity
to the ultimate clearing of a holding of rabbits, whatever other methods
are used. Deprive the rabbit of a home and the rest is simple. Unfortu-
nately there are many rabbit-infested districts which contain areas where
the natural physical conditions of the country make destruction or removal
of the rabbits’ harbourage impracticable; but on the whole it is within the
range of economic possibility. As stated, the destruction of harbour can
hardly be considered as a separate method, but only as a natural con-
comitant to practically all other forms of eradicatory work.
Trapping. —One of the simplest and most used methods of rabbit destruc-
tion is that of trapping. This has had a wide vogue in recent times because
of the great increase in the value of rabbit skins. Many a method may
be more satisfactory and far cheaper to follow, but does not give the hunter
the skins which he is after. The old-fashioned “ gin ” or spring trap is that
principally used throughout the country, although many properties have been
largely cleared by the use of wire-netting traps inserted in the mouths
of the burrows. Landholders who are bent upon the complete eradication
of rabbits from the holding do not make a practice of using the steel
traps, though most of them are not averse to the presence of the trapper
on their properties. The trapper, working for a living, does not exter-
minate the rabbits. It would not pay him to do so. He can be likened
to a man working a crop of lucerne—-he cuts down the crop to a certain
extent, knowing that the healthy plants are there and that he may shortly
come back and take yet another crop. Still, the trapper is a very useful
adjunct in clearing operations; but the landholder, wishing to clear his run
or holding, must carry on simultaneously on general follow-up work.
Poisoning of Babbits, both by poisoned water and by poisoned baits of
various kinds, is (and has been) greatly used throughout the country.
Unfortunately, as pointed out, the destruction which has ensued has not
been restricted to the rabbits, but has included both wild life and live-stock.
Poisoned Water has been essentially a method of the dry districts, and
a vast aggregate destruction has been wrought by this means. Ho doubt,
had the run-owners paid attention to the destruction of rabbits in between
drought periods, there would not have been the vast numbers to destroy
when droughts came, and extensive areas of pasture lands would have
been saved —in many cases to withstand the drought.
Poisoned Baits. —Amongst poisoned baits, the best known (because the
most widely used) has been that of phosphorised pollard. While its use
has been maintained right up to the present day, strychnine baits have come
more and more prominently into use because of the rapid-killing effect —
thus enabling the rabbit hunter to secure the coveted skin. Again, as in
the case of the great recrudescence of the use of the steel trap, here we
have a method which is largely an outgrowth of the rabbit trade.


Decoys. —Various decoys used with one poison and another attract the
rabbit. There is grave dissatisfaction in the State with the present law
relating to the sale of poisons, and a very necessary protection of the people
who use rabbit poisons largely is indicated.
Fumigation with various compounds is one of the oldest methods used
for the destruction of rabbits in their burrows or' in other enclosed spaces.
Of the older fumigants carbon bisulphide is the best known, and has been
until recently a most widely used method. It is found to be very effective
as a lethal agent, but is not likely to “ stand up to ” the work in the face
of what is being done with more modern fumigants—notably calcium
cyanide. Sulphur dioxide is another old fumigant which is still used
economically and with effect in some parts.
Calcium cyanide, also known as cyanogas calcium cyanide, has only
come into use as a fumigant for rabbit burrows since 1924. In that time
it has come rapidly to the fore. It is considered to be far and away the
best thing that has been so far evolved for the destruction of rabbits in all
mixed country, and probably even in the wide, open areas of the far west.
Fumigating with a gas known as carbon monoxide has also come into
considerable prominence recently. One machine in particular appears to
carry out extremely effective work at very low cost in open country. The
carbon monoxide gas used is produced by way of ordinary combustion of
odd materials taken from the farm and run.
Other fumigants, such as motor-car fumes, smoke mixturSs, use of carbon
dioxide, &c., are discussed in the full report, but they are of little
importance.
Role of Dogs in Rabbit Destruction.
Although large numbers of rabbits are destroyed by dogs alone, the use
of dogs may be regarded as an adjunct to various other types of rabbit
destruction work. In hunting with the gun, in locating haunts of rabbits,
in driving rabbits to burrows preparatory to fumigating, in general rabbit
drives, and so on, the dog is, of course, invaluable. Various kinds of dogs
are used in rabbit destruction work; small and large, well bred and mongrel.
The most important use of the dog is in the final clearing up of a holding,
and the keeping of it “ clean.” The registration of dogs in its bearing upon
rabbit destruction and the question as to whether any laxity in control of
dog packs and their progeny helps to swell the danger arising from the
spread of wild dogs (other than pure dingoes) is discussed in the full
report.
Shooting of Rabbits.
Outside the destroying of rabbits for “ sport,” shooting may be considered
as unimportant as a means of rabbit eradication on a large scale. After a
run or holding has been cleared up, shooting in company with a dog or two
is found very useful.
“ Driving ” of Rabbits.
On badly-infested lands large catches of rabbits are made through the
agency of “ drives.” The method is made use of often at the opening of
concerted operations for the clearing of an area. Otherwise the presence
of large enough numbers of rabbits to make it worth while to have a
“ drive ” indicates a general absence of restrictive work.
The Use of Ferrets.
This animal has been a regular aid in rabbit eradication from early
times, but is of no importance in rabbit destruction on a large scale. As
the ferret is not necessary to organised rabbit destruction its use should be
discouraged in every way, as there will, of course, be an increasing danger,
with the further opening up of the country, of ferrets adapting themselves
to living in a wild state and destroying useful birds, poultry, &c.


The Rodier Method.
Rod i it's so-called “ method ” of destroying rabbits, particularly by the
elimination of the females, and the encouragement in every way of the
spread of the bucks, has been more widely discussed than any other single
thing connected with the rabbit menace. It is pointed out that this is a
fetish which should have been long since laid to rest if suitable tests had
been made. Even if Rodier’s arguments were sound, biologically speaking,
the use of such a method on a large scale is found to be quite impracticable.
Rodier has held, and still holds, it is understood, that Ms system is equally
applicable to rats, sparrows, starlings, and so on. He would have the health
and civil authorities throughout the world re-liberate all the male rats that
were caught in the course of their clearing up of cities! It is considered
advisable, the Commissioner thinks, that some tests should be made of the
scheme to prove (or disprove) its scientific value, and to prevent further
waste of time in public discussions by unqualified people.
Coleman Phillips’ Plan.
Mr. Coleman Phillips was a New Zealander whose name was nearly as
well known as Mr. Eodier’s because of his pertinacious advocacy, for more
than forty years past, of his so-called “ method ” of destroying rabbits by
means of natural enemies and certain diseases. Like Mr. Rodier’s scheme.
Rabbits on Crown Lands.
Rabbits are frequently to be found burrowing into railway embankments. In this illustration can be
seen great warrens in the deepest part of the bank.
those of Mr. Phillips hare been constantly in the mouths of Pastures Pro-
tection Boards, and of others associated with rabbit administration; as well
as finding' great publicity in columns of the daily or weekly press. Not-
withstanding Mr. Phillips’ claim as to the wonderful results achieved by
his methods in New Zealand, investigation shows that there is no evidence
to support him. The matter was investigated fully, as this is still another
fetish or bogey to be laid at the earliest possible moment.
Group Systems.
The grouping of landholders for rabbit destruction has been tried in
various parts of the country. This has not, necessarily, any connection


with the surrounding of a group of holdings with a ring fence. While good
work has been put in by such groups, it is found that, on the whole, they
have not persisted as useful agencies for combined work for very long.
This does not mean that the idea is not a good one. Every possible means
of encouraging community work should be availed of in the future. It
is thought that with an efficient system of control, well organised from a
■central headquarters, a considerable amount of effective group work would
be carried out.
Apart from the formation of groups, simultaneous action by landholders
has often been requested by Pastures Protection Boards in various parts
of the country. As a rule it has not been found a very practical proposition
for men over a wide area to so order their work as to fit in completely with
such a scheme. In any case, all such schemes can only be looked upon as
adjuncts to a complete organisation for regular preventive and eradicatory
work.
Cost of Rabbit Destruction by Various Methods.
In a land in which the conditions —climatic and physiographical—are so
very dissimilar, and where accessibility, cost of transport, &c., are such
important factors, it is found to be difficult to get out any general table of
costs of employing various methods of rabbit destruction. In the long run,
however, it is seen that preliminary fencing in of the area, followed by com-
plete removal of rabbit harbour, and fumigation, accompanied by extinction
of the burrows, is the cheapest method. There seems to be no doubt that
the new fumigant, calcium cyanide, is far and away the cheapest and most
satisfactory so far produced. On the great open lands, the use of the gas,
carbon monoxide, by the aid of a new machine, is being found very
economical. Quite cheap and effective work has been done in the clearing
■of some stations after netting in, by the use of burrow (netting) traps.
Drought and the Rabbit.
In the drier parts of all the States of Australia drought is the greatest
enemy of the rabbit, and almost countless numbers are removed in this way
after having bred up in good times. Prior to their death, however, they
have frequently removed every vestige of grass and herbage, have destroyed
many young trees, and have ring-barked many others. This destruction
of rabbits by drought has, unfortunately, had a kind of sedative effect upon
many people in the areas affected. When they see the rabbit prospering
(and at the same time destroying their pastures) they comfort themselves
with the assurance that the drought will soon come and kill the rabbits,
and so they often do little or nothing in the way of regular extermination
work.
Diseases of Rabbits.
Investigation in this direction is very sorely needed. Several diseases
are known, notably the microbic one caused by a micro-organism known
sometimes as the “ Yalgogrin microbe,” similar to that made use of in the
experiments of Dr. Danysz. There is evidence that large numbers of rabbits
are killed by this disease from time to time.
Coccidiosis, a parasitic disease caused by a sporozoan parasite is also of
common occurrence; and, at times, causes many deaths among wild rabbits.
The Bladder Worm causing rabbit hydatids is also very widely distributed
and occasionally causes many deaths. Other disorders are known.
The “ Seven Years’ Plague” of rabbits, which occurs in North America,
has, on several occasions, been suggested as a likely medium for the killing


of rabbits in Australia. It is found that there is no very exact data in
regard to the disease. It appears that the organism causing the disease
may be closely allied to our own “ Talgogrin ” microbe.
The possibility of there being some connection between some rabbit dis-
orders and diseases in man was inquired into, but no exact information
on this point is available.
The Danysz Experiments.
The Danysz experiments in rabhit destruction by microbic diseases are
discussed in the full report in the light of reports by Dr. Tidswell and
others. Infectivity of the virus as regards native animals, stock, &c., is
mentioned, as is also the nature of the virus. The agitation following
the Danysz experiments, having as its object the utilisation of disease in
the destruction of rabbits in Australia, is also mentioned. It is found that
there has been a repetition of this demand from time to time, practically
up to the present. In view of this the Commissioner is of opinion that
scientific investigations in such matters should proceed continuously.
Destruction of Rabbits by Chicken Cholera.
This means of destruction, which caused so much attention after the
New South Wales Government (in 1887) offered its reward of £25,000, is
discussed in the Commissioner’s full report in the light of the investigations
carried out by the Royal Commission of Inquiry of 1888, and by Mr. C. J.
Pound, of Queensland. It was not realised, when the Royal Commission
was making its inquiries (they attracted world-wide attention), that the
disease of chicken cholera was already in Australia. Mr. Pound made this
discovery shortly following the Commission’s work. The disease was found
to be highly destructive of rabbits, but would be far more costly to handle
than some modern methods of rabbit destruction —quite apart from the
danger of the dissemination of disease.
Natural Enemies of Rabbits.
These are divided into two groups—(l) Indigenous and (2) Introduced.
The most notable native enemies in this State are the dingo and certain
Dasyures or native cats among the mammals, and the wedge-tailed eagle
or “ eagle hawk ” among the birds. Among the introduced enemies, the
principal one is considered to be the domestic dog, followed by the fox, and
the domestic cat gone wild. Wild dogs have played a great part in rabbit
destruction; they have also, unfortunately, caused an immense destruction
of sheep.
Proposals to Introduce Natural Enemies.
The most notable of the animals which have been mentioned are the
mongoose, stoats, and weasels. It is seen that while very little help may be
expected from such animals, the danger to wild life and to domestic poultry
would be very great indeed.
Carnivorous ants have also been suggested on a number of occasions.
Such an introduction would be an extremely dangerous experiment, without
promising any benefit.
Natural History of the Rabbit.
' A good deal of information was collected in regard to this important
aspect of the question. Had continuous observations been made upon the


rabbit, its life-history, fecundity, adaptation to environment, &c., from the
beginning of the ravages of the pest, the rabbit eradication work of later
years would have been greatly assisted.
The swimming habits of the rabbit have at present, and have had in the
past, the most important bearing upon the division of the rabbit throughout
the land.
Wild Life Destroyed by Rabbit Poison.
A great destruction of wild life has taken place as an incidental to the
use of poison for rabbit destruction. Phosphorus poisoning has been one
of the principal causes of death amongst native birds; but in the far western
parts poisoned water has destroyed large numbers. In recent times the
deadly cyanide of potassium, used purposely for wild life, but frequently
ostensibly for rabbits, has resulted in much killing of the native opossum.
Throughout the country districts there is a widespread feeling of resent-
ment and anger against those who carry out this nefarious practice, and
any measure taken by the Government to bring about its cessation will cause
intense gratification everywhere.
Aquatic Life and Rabbit Destruction.
Though it has been claimed in some quarters that fish had been destroyed
through rabbit poison having been washed into streams, there is no evidence
in support of this contention. Such a thing is considered to be unbelievable,
as under no circumstances, occurring naturally, could the amount of poison
in solution he more than infinitesimal.
Relation of Rabbit Trade to Methods of Destruction.
The importance of the rabbit trade in promoting certain methods of
destruction is here emphasised. The widespread use of the steel “gin”
trap, and of -baits like strychnine and jam, and strychnine and thistle root,
&c.. is to be traced to the value of the skins rather than to the particular
utility of these methods as a means of permanent eradication. In the ten
years, 1915 to 1924, 124 J millions of frozen rabbits and hares (nearly all
rabbits) were exported from New South Wales, out of a total of 157 J
millions exported from the whole of Australia in the same period. The
great rise in the trade of rabbit skins is spoken of. It is found that for the
same period of time a total of 539,687,880 skins were exported from New
South Wales, out of a total of 717,088,184 sent from the whole of Australia.
It is obvious that the experience of the State during the development of
the rabbit trade is quite opposed to the view held by some that with increased
prices the rabbit would disappear. The economist, even knowing nothing of
the rabbit trade, will see that such is an unsound argument in any case;
while the man on the land realises that it is a most detrimental thing to a
general and widespread campaign for the complete eradication of the rabbit
because so many are lulled into a false sense of security by the efforts of the
rabbiters.
Some attention was given by the Commissioner to skin pools and market
-control, as it has been held by some that stabilisation of prices would so
encourage the killing of rabbits as to cause them to cease to exist in pest
numbers. All such proposals are believed to be economically unsound in the
present state of the trade, and are certainly not calculated to permanently
diminish the pest.
Suggestions have been put forward also as regards the imposition of a
tax on skins; the proceeds of such to be used to reduce the price of netting


to landholders. It does not appear impracticable to carry out such a
suggestion. If a royalty were imposed on skins as they passed through the
dealers’ hands much money might be raised to give relief to landholders on
raibbit-infested country. If such is done it should be carried out directly
under the eye of the Government. The inquiries do not suggest that a small
royalty would adversely affect the sale of skins out of this country at the
present time. So long as the trade exists—and it will persist for many a
day—encouragement should be given to the development of the local
industry of preparing the furs for the world’s fur market. At the present
time only a very small proportion is dealt with in Australia, though a con-
siderable number of skins are used by the felt-hat makers.
Taxation and Rabbit Expenditure.
The Commissioner considers that the fullest deductions possible should be
allowed by the Taxation Commissioners on account of expenditure incurred
in rabbit eradication.
Rabbit Invasion of North Coast Districts.
Great concern is manifest in the far North Coast districts because of the
great advance made by rabbits in the past few years. Investigation shows
that they have actually invaded the area in question to as far north as the
Murwillumbah district. Infestation in the Tweed-Lismore Pastures Protec-
tion District, however, is sparse, and if landholders generally do their duty
it will not be difficult for them to keep the rabbits out. Natural conditions
assist them to fight the rabbit more than in any other part of New Souh
Wales; while the land is very populous. The point is stressed that now is the
time to eradicate rabbits in that area. The Casino and Grafton Pastures
Protection districts are not in such a favourable position, and must spend a
great deal more on rabbit destruction. In the Grafton district especially
the rabbits have strongly “ dug in,” and netting of holdings must proceed
apace if the pest is to be effectively coped with. A very large part of the
country in this district is quite suited to the use of netting, although its
life will be much shorter than in dryer districts; and, because of heavier
rainfall, the cost of upkeep will be much higher.
Tweed-Lismore Barrier Fence.
In the original idea of a rabbit-proof barrier fence in the North Coast
area it was intended to construct such a fence in the more open lands of the
Casino Pastures Protection District. Compared with the present proposals
this was quite a practicable proposition from the constructional standpoint
and the point of view of maintenance. But while discussions went on for
several years, the rabbit was spreading through the district. The land-
holders, as a whole, took but little interest, comforting themselves with the
oft-repeated statement that the rabbit would not “do” in their district.
The present proposal to construct a fence running chiefly over precipitous
and almost impassable mountain forest country is seen to be highly im-
practicable. In the event of a great movement of rabbits eastwards and
northwards in the districts concerned (and it must be said at once that such
is not imaginable under the special circumstances), such a movement would
go by the easiest route, and that would not be through the area to be
traversed by the proposed fence, but through the country immediately to the
south of where the fence would end. In other words, the rabbit would
execute a turning movement, completely ignoring the extraordinarily, costly
fence —as costly to maintain as to erect.


The 'Government should, discountenance in every way possible expenditure
on Jhis fence, which will be of no avail in staying the spread of t|re rabbit.
White .there is no .doubt that the promoters of the idea 'are acting in the
best of faith, they are not armed with any special knowledge iri the matter.
The conclusion is come to that the proposed fence would not only be
nseless in itself, but would again promote, as elsewhere, the conviction that
everything has now been done that need be done, and the landholders would
relax all further effort to their ultimate undoing. The total annual ex-
penditure on upkeep would be in the vicinity of £B,OOO. Eor a very small
portion of this expenditure rabbits may be permanently kept out of the
Tweed-Lismore district.
Commissioner’s Recommendations.
The voluminous report, of which this bulletin is only a summary, contained
certain recommendations made by the Commissioner for consideration by
the Government.
PART III.
Rabbits in Relation to Live-stock.
The destructive work of tlie rabbit is frequently most insidious. He comes
literally as a thief in the night. His work, at first, is not spectacular when
compared with that of the dingo, arid so he often “ hardens ” the landholder
to his presence. When a dingo comes he leaves bloody traces behind; and
perhaps kills a sheep or two. The hue and cry is raised, and quite a good
price is put on the dingo’s head.
Even where the rabbit does not immediately show its effect upon ordinary
pasturage by eating it right out, it has a most deleterious effect because of
its halbit of eating out the most succulent and most nutritious of
grass and herbage. This process of selective feeding by rabbits can readily
alter a large area of country in a short space of time, converting it from
good to almost useless pasturage. This is quite well known, although no
very exact data is available as to the precise order in which fodder grasses
and other plants are taken by the rabbit, when it is able to pick and choose.
Plant Succession on Rabbit-blasted Lands.
Obviously the order of plant succession on any lands will depend to some
extent upon the amount of destruction of pasture plants that has already
taken place prior to the removal of the rabbits. But many other factors
would count. Some general information on the point supplied by the De-
partment of Agriculture is of value here, but it should be remembered that
no detailed investigations have been made. The Department says:—
Babbits soon clear out many annual plants, but seed of our native grasses,
especially Panicum spp., often remains dormant in the soil for some years before
germinating. If the rabbits are thinned out, even though they destroy many of
the perennial pasture grasses which were firmly established at the time of the
invasion, many species will be re-established by means of the seed lying dormant
in the soil.
♦8252 B


Be the matter of plant succession in western, north-western, central-western and
south-western districts; Boly Poly (iSoZsf?Zo, MM), Caltrops or Yellow vine (Tribute*
terresiris), Pig Weed (PoftMba cilerddea), Spear grasses \Btipa sppO, Thfee-
awned Wire grasses (Aristida spp.), Barley grass (Hordeum murmum), Stink
grass ( Eragrostis major), and Burr clover ( Medieago denticuXata) , appear in the
qrdef mentioned.
S 'H areas are then netted, the better class of feed, such as Burr clover, Crowfoots
(Erodium spp.), Star or Windmill grasses (Chloris spp.),' Wallaby (Danthonia
spp.), and Panics (Panicum spp.) make headway.
Babbits always pick the most succulent feed and in pastures prefer the young
shoots of trefoils and clovers to all other plants. It is expected that they would
cat the most important pasture plants in the following order: —
Common Name. Technical Name.
Clovers:
White Dutch clover Trifolium repens.
Perennial Bed clover Trifolium pratense var. pcrerme.
Cow Grass clover Trifolium pratense var. perenne.
Burr clover Medieago denticulata.
Ball clover Trifolium glomeratum.
Spotted-leaved medic Medieago maculata.
Subterranean clover Trifolium suhterraneum .
Woolly clover Trifolium tomentosum.
Hare’s Foot trefoil Trifolium arvense.
Grasses:
Perennial Bye Lolium perenne.
Toowoomba Canary Phalaris hulbosa.
Awnless Brome Bromus inermis.
Tall Oat Arena elatior.
Barley grass Hordeum murtnum, in young stages
of growth only.
Flinders IseUema Mitchelli.
Cocksfoot Dactylis glomerate.
Star or Windmill Chloris aeicularis.
Chloris truncate.
Bull Mitchell Astrehla pectinate.
Curley Mitchell Astrehla triticoides.
Hoop Mitchell Astrehla elymoides.
Brown Top or Sugar Erianthm fvlvus.
Wallaby Danthonia semianniUaris.
Queensland Blue Andropogon sericeus.
Satin Top Andropogon erianthoides.
Prairie Bromus unioloides.
Couch i Cynodon dactylon.
Paspalum Paspalum dilatatum.
Stock Inspector Dowling, writing from Forlbes, offers some remarks from
which the following are taken: —
Once you get rid of rabbits, and of course, “ spell ” for a while to let the plants
recuperate and seeds germinate, the natural pasture will become more prolific for
a time than it was prior to such invasion; both from roots not entirely destroyed,
and from seed.
The indigenous plants have wonderful capacity for reviving. As an instance
take a large rabbit warren which has been occupied by numerous families of
labbits (so much so that the sides of the holes become polished and not a vestige
of plant life visible to the naked eye for chains round it). Dig out this warren
and kill every rabbit occupying it and see that no more take possession. In three
or four months time, if there is any moisture, the feed will be inches high al!
round it; and with all the same plants that occupied the land before. Of course
this fertility is induced by the manuring and tilling the land" gets by scratchings,
and then again both the rabbit dung and urine is rich in ammonia. This makes to
prolific growth.
Plants, individually, are killed by the rabbit. First they eat the plant to the
surface of the soil (and their scissor-like teeth enable them to go right on to the


surface), and if it is a succulent rooted plant they grub the roots out and consume
but there is always some , seed'“piioed,” .and, only requiring moisture to
germinate it.
The same result comes after a drought. Nature puts the soil to sleep; the longer
the drought the bigger the sleep it gets and the more refreshed when it wakes,
that is, when sufficient rain falls. The rapid and abundant growth of pasture is
phenomenal for a season or so, with all the same plants that grew before, and often
many come under notice that have not been seen for some years back.
The Australian rabbit prefers the indigenous plants to foreign ones, provided
they happen to be equal in succulence. Take the wild carrot as an instance, A
rabbit will stop on that until every vestige is eaten, and with young Crowfoot it
is the same, and all the plants of the same family even if those plants be thriving
alongside a field of lucerne, and they prefer them to Bye grass and clovers. In
limes of stress they will flock on to cultivated plants.
I do not think the rabbit can convert fertile land into a desert for all time,
although it will do so temporarily if not destroyed. It will make the owner of
such land an absolute beggar in a short period if his sole dependence is in that
land for his sustenance and well-being.
This evidence seems to support the Commissioner’s observations that most,
if not all, of the lands which have been declared “rabbit-sick” in this
"State are merely lands which are eaten out —the rabbit leaving those coarse
plants which it did not have a liking for.
PART IV.
Fencing and Netting in Relation to Rabbit
Destruction.
With all our knowledge of ways and means of destroying rabbits in Aus-
tralia, it is a fact that up to the present time no system of rabbit destruc-
tion (and no combination of systems) has been introduced which does not
require the preliminary erection of a rahbit-proof fence. This means that
there can be no guarantee of permanent freedom from the rabbit menace
to any holding in any part of the country unless it is completely sur-
rounded by sound fences and gates effectively netted, and always main-
tained in that condition.
Throughout the history of rabbit destruction there have been, every now
and then, promises of some “ grand process ” which was going to be the
salvation of the country and which would do away with the costly necessity
of having individual or group holdings netted — or even of using netting
at all. Coleman Phillips’ and Rodier’s plans, mentioned elsewhere, and the
introduction of bacterial diseases, among many other things, were dangled
before the suffering landholders who were assured that their troubles, which
the rabbit had brought upon them, would soon be at an end. Yet what do
we find? In the Wairarapa district of Hew Zealand where, Coleman
Phillips declared, his plans of introducing natural enemies and certain
diseases had effectively wiped out the rabbits, the reports from the Hew
Zealand authorities showed that whatever success had been reached had
only followed upon a more and more extensive use of wire-netting fences.


In Eodier’s case we find that he admitted —even while saying that it wag;
unnecessary to the success of his schemes-:— that he had netted.his own run.
As regards the diseases —“ Danysz,” “ Talgogrin,” “chicken cholera,” and
others —nothing has been demonstrated beyond the fact that isolated bodies
of rabbits have been affected at some given time.
Those holders of runs who are in country where it is practicable to net
in, and who are not prepared to do so, must sooner or later face the problem
of destroying not only their own rabbits, but those of their neighbours,
as well as the "'overflow’’ or the "'migrating’ horde,” from stock routes
Both Dog-proof and Rabbit-proof.
This is a well-kept fence, but the panels are a little too long for economical
maintenance. There is too much “give” in the centre of the panel, with
the attendant probability that the bottom of the netting will pull out of
the earth, or, if it does hold, that it will gradually break off at the surface
level.
and reserves, Crown lands, &c. Yet while this is undoubtedly so there are
many landholders of experience in this country who, for many years, have
persisted in carrying out only the most meagre work of destruction on their
unnetted lands, or who have continued to use only the most antiquated
methods- —often at great cost. It is among these that we find most com-
monly at the present time the men who are agreeable to leave it to the
itinerant trapper to deal with the rabbits on their rims. Leaving out the
more or less arid country in the Western Division of the State, there is very


little badly infested country worth holding in this State which is not
worthy of being maintained in at least a fairly rabbit-proof condition as
regards boundary fences and gates.
If it were possible, as has often been suggested, that operations for the
eradication of the rabbit, on a grand scale, could be undertaken by the
whole of the landholders of the country, or even of a large district, simul-
taneously, then there might be some chance of avoiding the use of wire-
netting fences. But experience and a knowledge of the conditions ruling
in this country (or in any large country for that matter) indicate the
absolute futility of all efforts to bring such a thing to pass. There are a
score of good reasons —economic, industrial, and even domestic —which
would preclude such a thing. This does not for a moment mean that we
should discourage group or zone destruction or any measures for simul-
taneous destruction in sections of country which are to some extent self-
contained; but even in such areas no complete eradication can be attained
by any such measures. We are forced, therefore, upon the slow but sure,
methods of eradication which find their begininng in a good, sound, rabbit-
proof fence, constructed without the dangerous “ flaws ” so frequently
to be seen (and to be mentioned later).
In some parts of New South Wales, notably in portions of the far west,
there is a type of country where, owing to the “ geological layout,” it is
practicable during normal periods of rabbit infestation to deal with the
rabbits fairly successfully without the use of wire-netting. I refer to areas
in which the red ridges (particularly the sandy ridge type) are isolated
from the main “ red country,” and from each other, by great stretches of
low-lying black soil plains. Under such circumstances these plains may
form a sort of temporary partial barrier. The rabbit does not like them as
a home —at least not as a regular home —and much prefers the sandy ridges.
These ridges act as magnets to attract the wandering rabbit and may literally
be turned into a kind of great trap. On an ordinary run of the type sug-
gested, great execution may be done by constant destruction on these ridges.
But, unfortunately, it must be constant and without end.
In the open far west, where the climate is the hardest and driest in the
State, there can be no finality as far as we can see. And this is just because
in the main these areas cannot be effectively netted, owing to drifting dust
and sand and general absence of water. It may be appropriate here to refer
to a statement received from the Stock Inspector (at Tibooburra) of the
Milparinka Pastures Protection District on the “ life ” of a netted fence
in this district. He says; “ The average life would be hard to calculate, but
a fence can be completely buried here within twenty-four hours after erec-
tion.” If it were otherwise, i.e., that the whole of the country could be cut
up into workable areas for rabbit destruction, then it is certain that with
our present knowledge alone the rabbit menace in New South Wales might
be completely removed within a measurable period. At the same time there
is a good deal of land in the far west —including west of the Darling—
which may be netted and maintained so. In these cases the regular boun-
daries of runs must be set aside (for the purposes of netting only) and the
fence made to follow only hard ground—free from drifting sand. There
are quite a number of people, from Broken Hill up to the “ comer ” country,
who firmly believe in the practicability of erecting “group check fences”
for both rabbits and dogs, provided the plan mentioned is followed.
Netting Fences of First Importance.
It is considered wise to express, at some length, this need for effective
closing of holdings with netting, because it is the key to the whole position,
taking the country by and large.


In commenting on the resolutions and proposals emanating from a eon-,
leratwo of farmers'and graziers at Inverell in 1922, the Chief Veterinary
Surgeon of the Department of Agriculture said:
Viewing the question as a whole, both in the light of past experience and the
evidence of this conference, it would appear that the keystone of any scheme of
dealing with the rabbit problem in New South Wales lies in the supply of wire-
netting. Bat in order to make the use of netting possible to the smaller land-
holders it must be available at prices below the ones ruling at present, and any
action taken by the State to enable the farmer to obtain netting on better terms
would be amply repaid by increased yield.
Stock Inspector Itenss, speaking in 1922 of the Cobar district, refers
to the fact that no destruction work worth, speaking of was done “ owing
to there 1 being no rabbit-proof areas,”
A Well-guarded Post Stay.
The wire guard would have been hotter if placed behind, not In front of, the post, so that the rabbit
intruder would not have the advantage of standing on the post top.
Stock Inspector F. 11. Whyte says: “ Netting and digging out, although
at first expensive, is the only satisfactory method. Once an area is netted
it is easy for a conscientious boundary-rider to keep fences repaired.”
As far back as 1900, Mr. A. Bruce (then Chief Inspector of Stock) was
appreciating the value of wire-netting, when he said ( Agricultural Gazelle,
1900) :
There is a consensus of opinion among those who have had f loat to do with
fighting rabbits in the flat, unbroken country in the western and central land
divisions of the State (which contain about two-thirds of the whole area), that
enclosing the holdings with rabbit-proof fencing is one of the most effective
methods of dealing with the pest.
It can bo confidently recommended, therefore, that in the portions of the'Stale
alluded to, both pastoralists and agriculturalists should, if they have or can obtain
on reasonable terms the necessary funds, erect rabbit fences, either individually
or in groups.
In the eastern portion of the State;, where the greater part of the country is
intersected by creeks, gullies, and other watercourses, wire-netting could not bo
generally adopted, but even in that division there are portions which could and
should be enclosed by rabbit-proof fences.


■ Stock Inspector Dowling (1906) says: “On land to be dealt with, the first
thing to do is not to allow any house for him to live in, and to keep him
from making calls, net well.” ; '
Stock Inspector W. J. Smith, of Young, says: “With netting and sub-
division into workable areas . . . the rabbit problem would be a thing
of the past.”
A pastoralist, Mr. E. K. Rutledge, of Bathurst, writing in 1918, con-
siders that the only means for getting- ahead of the rabbit is by first netting.
To do the work of eradication effectively he asks the Department to
influence the Pastures Protection Board to “make landowners net in and
clean a small area each year.”
It should be obvious that it is a waste of time to attach netting to a badly
constructed boundary (or any other) fence, yet this is frequently done,
with the consequence that the upkeep of the fence is costly, and the amount
of attention required far more than it should be. In addition, with all the
attention it may receive, such a fence is seldom really rabbit, proof. There-
fore, where the fences around a holding are old and more or less rotted, or
Another Excellent Method of Guarding Post Stays.
Twin post stays are here guarded by a strip of netting carried from the ground, over the top and down
again, being then pinched in and laced on to the fence netting so as to make impassable funnels.
where the posts are too light —in the far west it is very difficult to obtain
suitable timber for posts, the desert trees (of suitable kinds) being of small
stature —it is better to scrap the lot and erect a substantial feiice on which
to hang the rabbit netting.
The posts are selected from the best hardwood available. Where ironbark
can be obtained it is used, but in the central and the eastern portion of
the Western Division cypress pine is often used. Frequently there is little
choice in the matter of timber. Quite a lot of fences in the west have the
posts of Budda (native sandalwood).
The Gate is often the Weak Link.
Too much care cannot be exercised in regard to the construction of
gates and gateways. They should be conveniently placed, and, above all,
arranged so that they will open and close securely with the minimum of
effort. That the natural break in a fence — the gate—should be well planned
and looked after, from the beginning, appears so obvious that it would


seem quite superfluous to even mention it. But experience shows that it is
the weakest link in the chain of action taken to keep the rabbit out of the
average holding. Of the thousands of gateways leading l into wire-netted
pastoral and farm holdings only a very small percentage of them are
rabbit-proof when closed.*
The habit of making a rabbit-proof gate and allowing it to deteriorate
into an open invitation to the “ roving curse ” to pay a yisit is so common
as to be the rale rather than the exception. It seems inexcusable that
people as experienced as are the general run of our landholders, should be
so lax about such an important thing. One may see in even a few days’
travel, through almost any section of the country, every imaginable type (and
many unimaginable) of gate, to be fastened and unfastened in every pos-
sible way. Reference is only made to gates on rabbit-netted holdings, of
course. One finds single and double gates. Some are provided with a
wooden sleeper, hut most are not. In the case of double gates one will
often hang quite well and effectively close its section of the gateway, while
the other is “ up in the air ” at one end or another, or all along.
Unguarded Post Stays.
One of the stays is inside, and the other outside the netting fence, so that rabbits can enter or leave
the property as they choose.
Some of the gates are very well finished and hung’, have good (and
simple) fastenings, and are fully covered with netting, yet they may have
a large aperture at one end or the other, or are hung so high, or else the
traffic and wind have blown away the earth to such an extent that the
rabbits simply pour in from the outside when there is any movement of
importance taking place—and there is always some movement. One excellent
type of netted gate was noticed which was kept religiously dosed (!), where
the space underneath was largo enough anywhere for a sheep or cattlc-dog
to crawl through.f While this was exceptional as regards the extent of
* In the full report the Commissioner states • —“ I, have actually passed through two double gates—
which were new and in newly constructed £ rabbit-proof ’ fences —which in one case left a clear aperture
of 4 inches and in the other left an aperture of 6 inches, when ‘ closed.’ An almost unbelievable thing.’ 6
t In one of the irrigation areas there was a great “ to-do ” about the closing of a certain gate in a fence
supposed to aet as a buffer between, the main irrigation channel and some badly infested hills. Heavy
penalties were to he w-ked for if convictions could be obtained for non-compliance with the order to 44 keep
shut.” But even this gate was of the common “ open invitation ” type—utterly useless as a protection
against rabbits. In addition, the many post-stays were of the usual kind that make the passage of the
rabbit in and out of the enclosed area as comfortable as possible. The area in question was (to use the
expression of the officer-in-charge) already “ riddled ” with rabbits. But with a good fence and good
gates it might have been “ free.”


tiie open space below the gate, t]he actual extent is of little momept so long
as such is large enough to allow, a rabbit to pass. The-gate way as well be
left open altogether as far as rabbits are concerned.
In these days of ever-increasing motor traffic on all roads and tracks
throughout the country it becomes more and more difficult to keep even the
best hung and the most easily handled of gates closed; but if there is any
difficulty in handling the gate it will naturally be more often open than
not. Everyone knows that, of course; but the knowledge makes little
difference to many landholders who often make the operation of both
opening and closing as difficult, seemingly, as possible. Of course, with all
a man’s care, and with the best of gates, he has continually to contend with
careless or even mischievous people, who leave gates open.* This was
always a great trouble throughout the country, but since the advent of the
motor, and with the increased population, the difficulties of the situation
have been considerably multiplied. In a recent tour of the north-west
districts the Commissioner came across several gates which bore the marks-
of having been deliberately pushed away from the fastening, and opened
by first having a motor (presumably a lorry) forced against them. Natur-
ally, no gate, however well constructed, or however simple its method of fas-
tening, will withstand that treatment. Where such practices go on, it is
hopeless for the landholder to even control the movements of his stock
effectively, whilst his rabbit destruction work may be almost nullified.
Keep the Fences in Good Order.
In the matter of applying rabbit-proof netting to a fence there are
numberless cases in which a great preliminary outlay has been incurred
by the erection of a soundly-constructed fence, completely enclosed with
the most suitable and best grade of wire-netting; and then, from the start,
the fence is neglected. Weeds and undergrowth are allowed to grow—and
stay there unhindered.! Eoly-poly may heap up against the fence and
collect dust and sand, holes go unheeded, fence burrows remain untouched,
and a condition of general neglect ensues. One can readily understand the
latter where expenditure on netting-in has not been incurred; but where
the first and greatest step in rabbit eradication has taken place it is difficult
to understand the absence of logical “ after-care.” In many districts one
sees good fences with, actually, hundreds of trees-rfrom the smallest
“ suckers ”up to good-sized trees — standing from 3 inches to 8 inches away
from the wire-netting and with every possible aid to the rabbit in its literal
“ walk-over.”
Then, again, there are the cases where the “ whole ship ” is spoiled for-
the proverbial “ha’porth of tar.” I refer to the numerous instances in
which the most complete fence is erected, with the one glaring, most
obvious, defect. The long, gently-sloping, wooden stays have no hoods, and
rabbits may ignore the wire-netting altogether by simply running up the-
stay, and over. From observations made of many hundreds of good fences,
it is no exaggeration to say that it is not the practice but the exception
(taking the country right through) to find the stays effectively “ protected ”
—even in a new fence. It is not at all an uncommon thing to traverse-
actually hundreds of miles of netting and several thousands of stays without
finding any hoods or guards. Obviously a fence with these grave defects
• In the Wagga Wagga Pastures Protection District a good style of gate was noticed, erected by the
local Pastures Protection Board, which displayed very prominently a notice re £lOO fine for leaving the
gate open. The gate was open! But it*was not rabbit-proof when closed, as the sleeper was out of position.
In addition to this, the post-stays wereV as usual, unguarded.
■i fin some districts, the southern half of the Eastern Division and notably in the Eden Pas tyres
District, there are hundreds of miles of such fences, dnd itMs quite exceptional to find any?
fences free of these later growths.


is not rabbit-proof, and no reduction of a Board’s taxes should be made
under the circumstances. But the reduction of the tax is of small moment
to the State as a whole. What does concern the State is that the whole
work, by this inattention, is rendered largely null and void, and work of
eradication of not only a man’s own rabbits, but of everybody else’s, must
persist, under the circumstances.
Then there are the strangest cases of all, in which a man seams to have
gone over practically every inch of his fence and turned out a fine job in
every way —almost every way. All his gates are good, and rabbit-proof, all
his ordinary post-stays are hooded, every stump or log within 3 feet of the
fence has opposite it, on the fence, an extra width of rabbit-proof netting-
A Useful Slump—to the Rabbit.
No wire-netting fence is rabbit-proof while stumps are allowed to
remain along the fence line.
{to obviate all possibility of rabbits jumping over) ; and still the stays
■against the gate posts are unprotected! Or, there will bo two or three
hooded stays in succession, and then far more easily climbed ones will be
unprotected! In other words, the principle is recognised but not followed.
Although most men experienced in the ways of the rabbit understand the
grave danger that even one hole in an otherwise rabbit-proof fence may be,
such is not generally recognised; and it is quite a common thing, in making
an examination of a fence, to find, here and there, that two or three meshes
have been broken to form a hole, insignificant-looking, perhaps, but large


enough for any rabbit to get through. Sometimes the rabbits may mate
these holes'themselves. For the present we are not so much concerned with
how they are made as with the danger they constitute to the run. So well
known is this danger in some places that traps, or portable “ trap yards,,”
are set at such places. Rabbit Inspector F. J. Orowe, now of Casino Pas-
tures Protection District, informed the Commission of a case in the
Merriwa district some years ago, where 100 rabits were trapped in passing
through one such hole in a fence. That was an “ accidental ” hole,, of'
course, of the type frequently being met with in all fences.
Most extraordinary of all u defects ” in a fence were several cases in:
which the old-fashioned “ sheep-baulks ” had been, left as large clear pas-
sages through an otherwise well-netted fence. It seems difficult to under-
stand the psychology of a mind which would cause a man to spend thousands.-
Remove Trees from the Fence Line.
Near where this photo was taken there were about 300 similar trees along a
mile or two of fence. Such trees act. as ladder for the rabbits, and finis
render the netting fence anything but rabbit- prom.
of pounds sterling on a fence, and then to allow a permanent break in that
fence in the way described. Similar in character and equally hard to under-
stand are the cases, now becoming fairly common in the west, of making-
the so-called “ ramps." or croi.s-»vers for motor-cars. These are grilles of
timber having an earthen ramp leading to them on each side of the fence.
Frequently there is no true ramp at all. Apropos to the foregoing, Rabbit


Inspector Brett reported to the Moroe Pastures Protection Board in April,
1935, concerning the same sort of thing. The Inspector referred to the fact
that a.station owner had *• erected ” shoe]) baulks on Ms netting fence on the
main Garah mad, and suggested that as the owner received an allowance
of half rates for a rabbit-proof fence “ action, should be taken.”
Standard Rabbit-proof Fence*.
Each Pastures Protection Board, from time to time, declares a “ stan-
dard ” for a rabbit-proof fence for its district.* These standard fence*
vary somewhat in different districts, especially as regards the length and
size of posts used. The latter is determined to a large extent by the avail-
ability of suitable timbers in the neighbourhood.
"Money Well Spent"
A gate that is rabbit-proof every respect. Note how it is hinged on to the post on to the post, and not inside the
post as is generally the case.
Following is the standard fence of the Armidale Pastures Protection
Board, as notified by the Board; —
Posts, — All fencing posts to lie of sound timber, '• feet long, not less than
7 inches by 4 inches at the small end, ami lo be sunk not less than 22 Indies
in the ground, and to be firmly ramm-d, and to be placed not more than
20 feet apart. All straining posts to bo of sound timber, S feet long and
not less than 12 inches through at the small end, to be sunk 3 feet in the
ground in a straight line and 3 feet 6 inches at corner. To be placed one
every hundred yards apart, and to be firmly rammed.
Battens and Droppers. — There shall be either throe battens of not less than
4 inches by 2 inches at the small end, to be 4 feet 6 inches long, or three
•droppers of an improved style and make, securely hung on the fencing wire
between each two posts. The said battens or droppers shall be an equal
distance from the fencing posts and from one another.
Fe7im-7ia Wire, —The fencing wire to be used to be not less than No. 10
gauge, to be -well strained, and not less than three plain wires to the fence.
4 The Klaiiu Protection Board lias adopted no standard fence. The fences In the district
are no worse, and certainly no better, than those of some districts which have adopted at least a nominal


Ways. —All stays to stringing posts, gates, or corner posts to be either
shielded with galvanised-iron or hooded with wire-netting.
Wire-netting. —The fence to be hung with netting 42 inches wide, a mesh
of IJ-inch and 17 gauge (42 x 1J x 17), all wire-netting to be well and care-
fully hung and tied so as not to leave any bulges or loose places. The netting
to be sunk 6 inches in the ground (vertically).
The Line. —The line of fence to be cleared level with the ground to a distance
of 4 feet on each side of the fence, and the line shall be kept continuously clear
of all trees likely to fall on or against the fence. Where it is impossible to
clear level with the ground, barriers of wire-netting of the width, gauge, and
jnesh specified may be erected.
Are Your Gates Like This Pair ?
There is a 4-inch opening between the closed gates, and the right-hand
gate is cocked up a little' The owner, like many other farmers, said:
“ No matter what you do, the rabbits get in.”
■ Gateways . —All gateways to be fitted with rabbit-proof gates, not less than
12 feet wide, to be hung on an independent gate post of not less than 12-inoh
> diameter, 8 feet long, anti sunk 3 feet 6 inches into the ground. A wooden
bed-plate to be sunk from the ground surface not less than 6 inches and to
be flush with the bottom of the gate when closed.
Flood-gates. —At the creeks, gullies, and valleys, and in other places where
flood-gates are necessary, there shall be erected rabbit-proof flood-gate to
be to the satisfaction of the inspector.


The Hay Pastures Protection Board, dealing with the semi-arid western
plain country, fixes a different standard, which is as follows: —
A substantia i four-wire, or three plain and one barb wire fence, the top
wire of which shall not be less than 3 feet 8 inches from thi ground, hung
with galvanised wire-netting at least 42 inches in width, of a gauge not
thinner than 18, and of a mesh not wider than 1 1 inches, such fence to be
furnished with rabbit-proof gates “ or other appliances ” at every necessary
break in the fence.
Posts must be sound and substantial, of dimensions not Ws than 5 feet
6 inches, by 6 inches by 5 inches, if in pine or gum, or 4 inches at the small
end if in box, to be sunk not less than 20 inches in the ground, and firmly
erected not more than 15 feet apart.
Straining Posts to be not less than 7 feet in length, by 8 inches in diameter
if in pine ox - gum, or 6 inches at the small end if in box, and to be sunk not
less than 3 feet in the ground, and well rammed, and erected at intervals of
not more than 5 chains. All wire-netting to be securely fastened to the posts
and wires, with four ties at the top and three ties at the bottom; and shall
be sunk to a depth of not less than 6 inches vertically in the ground, the
fence to be sufficiently rigid to stand ordinary wear and tear.
This specification was issued in August, 1925, and took the place of an
earlier and less satisfactory one.
Plan of a Rabbit-proof Gate.
Note how this gate doses on to, and not inside, the posts. It is hinged in the same way.
A further set of specifications for a rabbit-proof fence is worth quoting.
These are the specifications of the Federal Capital Commissioners at Can-
berra, and are as follows: —
Fence Line must be cleared of all overhanging dead timber, and of all
dangerous green timber. All fallen timber, hollow stumps, scrub and rubbish,
for a distance of 10 feet on each side of the fence line must be removed or
destroyed.
Posts must be not less than 8 inches by 4 inches at small end, split, top
end sawn, 5 feet 8 inches long, sunk 20 inches in ground and well rammed,
4 feet out of ground, spaced 22 feet apart* and at all rises. Where top wire
of fence is barbed, posts must be 2 inches above ground.
Battens must bo each 3 inches by 2 inches and 4 feet 3 inches long, 3 inches
resting in ground; battens must be tied to top wire of fence with not less
than No. 12 gauge wire, and must be equally spaced in panel; where top wire
is barbed, battens must be 2 inches shorter above ground.
Strainers must not be less than 9 inches in diameter at small end (which is
to be sawn), and 6 feet 8 inches long; large end of every strainer must be sunk
2 feet 6 inches in ground, and well rammed. Strainers must be placed not
more than 10 chains apart, and at depressions.
• In the Albury (Hume) District, the Board specifies the panels to be “ 10 leet from centre to centre
of posts.” Where timber for posts is available, this is quite a long enough panel for safe and permanent
construction.


Corner Posts must not be less than 12 inches in diameter at small end
((which is to be sawn), and 7 feet 2 inches long, and must be well stayed.
'Large end of corner post must be sunk 3 feet in ground.
Stays must be placed on the half-angle, and must be not less than 4 inches
in diameter at small end, 9 feet long, mortised into post at least 8 inches in
•diameter, 20 inches in the ground. A stay must not be placed on the road
side of the fence, but in this ease only a retention stay of four-ply wire must
be used, twitched from strainer to a butt 8 inches in diameter, sunk on the
slant 3 feet in ground, but well rammed.
Wires must be run through the posts and battens, and welt strained; in
the ease of netting fence the holes carrying the wires must be bored towards
side of posts but well into the solid wood; where top wire is barbed it must
be braced to posts and battens by passing a No. 12 gauge wire through holes
bored 2 inches from top.
Netting must be attached on the lower side of the fence to the wire, as
shown in diagram, with 1-inch ties, and sunk into ground 6 inches vertically,
and well rammed. All wooden stays must be properly hooded with wire-
netting.
A Staunch Gate, But Not Rabbit-proof.
This gate has no sill, and there is a 2-inch space between the gate and the post to which it Is hinged.
Netting over shallow watercourses, or flat areas liable to be flooded, must
be fixed to drop by setting 12-ineh netting vertically in the ground, straining
a wire through posts at ground level, securely attaching a sufficient length
of 36-ineh netting to the ground wire and to 12-inch netting, and hooking
temporarily to the wire 37 inches from ground so as to enable it to drop with
a moderate flow of water.
Water channels on division fences must be provided with flood-gates
approved by the Commission, or a person authorised by the Commission, or
apron netting attached by four-ply cable wire to post on each bank.
Gateways approved by the Commission, or a person authorised by the
Commission, must lie provided on roads except where otherwise specified.
Gates must be hung on special posts, not less than 12 inches in diameter at
small end (sawn), flattened on side, sunk 3 feet in ground, with flattened
sill at least 9 inches in diameter.
Although a standard is set by the Boards, there is no compulsion in the
matter of the various specifications set forth. On the 'whole, common
practice in the construction of new fences, follows fairly closely the Board’s
standards. There is a good deal of variation in the items dealing- with the
clearing of the ground on each side of the fence. In two closely associated
areas —Inverell and Glen limes — the clearing is to be, respectively, 8 feet
-and 16 feet on each side.


It will be noted that in the Armidale specifications all stays are to be
shielded with galvanised-iron or hooded with wire-netting. In the Canberra
specifications wire-netting only is mentioned. In no district, probably, are
the stay hoods of better construction than in the Armidale district, yet
even there, many of the fences are quite without them and openly invite
the rabbit to obey his roving instinct.
What Mesh of Netting?
In some cases, li inch is stipulated, but generally this is found to be too
large. There are many records of kittens, apparently up to three or four
weeks of age, getting through this mesh. Especially would this apply on
the poorer and drier “ back ” country where the rabbit is smaller than in
the country of more regular grass and herbage crops and higher altitude.
Although there is slight diversity of opinion on the point not only among
Boards, but among general landholders, the experience of the bulk of those
interested has led more and more to the use of wire-netting of II inch mesh,
of 17 gauge and 42 inch width. The Pastures Protection Act, 1912, sec-
tion 44 (a), defines a rabbit-proof fence as “ a substantial fence hung with
galvanised wire-netting, at least 36 inches in width, not less than 18 gauge,
with a mesh not wider than 1J inch, such fence being furnished with
suitable rabbit-proof gates or other appliances at every necessary break
in the fence,” &c. At the Pastures Protection Boards’ Annual Convention,
in 1922, the Armidale Pastures Protection Board recommended that the
following should be substituted for the above: —“ A substantial fence hung
with galvanised wire-netting at least 42 inches in width, not less than
17 gauge, with a mesh not wider than I,} inch.
There can be no doubt that long experience over most parts of the country
has shown that a 36-inch wire is altogether an inadequate protection to
pastures against rabbits, though it is of service for subdividing fences.
There is, indeed, much country, particularly west of the 20-inch isohyet,
where it is even advisable to use 48-inch netting.* The type of country
referred to is often liable, more or less, to suffer from shifting sand and
dust in summer storms. This heaps up round roly-poly and other dried
weeds against the fences in an incredibly short time, making the passage
for the rabbit very easy. Ordinarily, however, the regular 42-inch netting-
may be said to meet all contingencies with proper care. In sharp hollows,
along the course of a fence, and at torrent or creek crossings, the height of
the netting is often increased—sometimes to two, three, or even four times
the normal height.
Where a water “ run-off ” is encountered, special provision is made so
that the fence shall not be destroyed at that point. In many such places
there may be no water running usually, and only a sudden rush after rains.
In these instances, a sill of stone or wood should be built up, and a swing
gate made to fit down close to the sill. The gate is hung from the top, of
course, and swings away from the direction of the w r ater. Occasionally such
a “ run-off ” or torrent bed is of great width, carrying, during heavy rains,
a large volume of swiftly-flowing water. The ordinary swing gates will
not satisfactorily meet with the needs of such a case, and so special mea-
sures have to be taken if a run Is to be maintained in a rabbit-proof
condition. That the latter is possible, however, under very difficult condi-
tions, has been proved by many energetic landholders.
* In several places, notable in the Batlow end of the Gundagai Pastures Protection District , a number
of holdings was noticed with a narrow strip (1 foot wide) of wire-netting placed on top of the ordinary
netting. Thi? was all in hill country.


A very efficient torrent-bed crossing is to bo seen at Derra Derra Station
in the Warialda Pastures Protection, District. A distance of about 60 feet
of a flat dry bed of a creek or torrent, is crossed by suspending short lengths
of wire-netting from a heavy wire strained across about 6 feet above the
shingle bed. Each length of netting has a heavy piece of timber attached
to the bottom, which lies down stream. The edges of the strips of netting
overlap and are lightly fastened. Any sudden rush of water coining down
the torrent bed, carrying sticks and debris with it, may break the individual
strips of netting without injuring the whole width or without tearing the
strips from their main fastening. This arrangement is much better than
swinging gates would be in such a position.
As time goes on, the use of wire-netting becomes more and more universal
and places which, until recently, wore considered impossible to net in, are
being netted and maintained in that condition. The value of the pasturage
(in quantity as well as quality) has amply repaid both prime cost and
maintenance charges. Many extremely difficult places have been success-
fully netted. Of course, the fences have to be regularly “ ridden ’’ —
Rabbits Are Fond of fits Type of Gate.
And the owner couldn't understand the recent recrudescence of the pest in his district.
especially following- falls of rain—and repairs effected immediately. This
is found to be much cheaper than fighting rabbits continually on the
holding.
The battle at the- fence is a less costly one in. its first cost; while the
landholder has bis good pasturage which “comes” sooner and outlasts the
attacks of drought longer, because of the partial or complete absence of the
destroying rabbit. With all its severe cost of installation and maintenance
in the rougher country, it is quite extraordinary to see the rapid strides made
with netting in rough and uneven country in the Glen limes, Armidale, and
Tamwortli Pastures Protection Districts in the last few years. This is all
due to a realisation by the landholder that his land is good; a permanent
asset, not to be measured alone by its value of so much per acre; a mine of
wealth if protected from the arch-destroyer of pasturage, the rabbit.
There are two extreme type.- of country where no netting may be main-
tained. The first is the really mountainous country in regions of heavy
*8258—0


rainfall. As a rule, infestation by the rabbit is light in such places. Infesta-
tion may, of course, be very heavy in associated areas. Most of these it
will pay to net off from the precipitous or mountainous portions. The
second is the region lying, approximately, between the 12-inch isohyet
and the western confines of the State. This statement does not include
the whole of the region maintained. Geological lay-out has much to do
with the question. But wherever there is much drifting sand and soil in a
normal summer, there is little hope of getting control of the rabbit through
the agency of wire-netting.
Much wire-netting fencing has been erected in the country lying between
Cobar and Bourke, but none of it is of much use for its original purpose
at present. A large quantity seems never to have been really useful;
although, in the migrations of the rabbit, the starving swarms probably
died against sections of it in myriads. No doubt those would have died
anyway. Apparently they would never have had to travel very far to get
ever or under or through the fences. Fences were seen in the Western
Division which just raised their tops above drifted sand and dust, and it
has been stated on good authority that there were two other fences buried
beneath the one which was then just barely visible. It is quite believable.
To the eye of the trained outdoor naturalist it was clear that much of the
“ landscape ” in that country was wind-drifted. The only way to keep
fences from being drifted over in such country is by the frequent use of a
machine road-grader—a costly operation. In some cases, however, it is worth
while.
Type of Wire-netting Used.
At this stage it will be of value to mention that particular note was made
by the Commissioner, while on his field investigations, of the class of
netting used in the past and at present (altogether apart from any declara-
tions by the Pastures Protection Boards). In addition to these observations,
a search of Departmental records was made, and a statement obtained from
each of the Pastures Protection Boards throughout the country, dealing
with the general use of wire-netting, the type mostly used, the cost of
erection and “ average life ” of the wire.
In the early days of the fight with the rabbit in the western parts of
the Central Division of the State, and in the nearer parts of the Western
Division, several widths of netting and various meshes were used. On
the whole the mesh was large, while the width was frequently only 2 feet,
and 1 foot 9 inches of this was above ground. As this not infrequently had
a mesh of as much as 1J inches, or even 2 inches (!), its uselessness may be
readily imagined in the light of present knowledge. As time went on the
mesh was reduced to 1‘ inches, and the width of the netting was increased
to 3 feet, and even 3 feet 6 inches. Even many years ago there were a few
users of Ij-inch mesh. Nowadays the tendency, fortunately, is to use
the highest grade—42-inch by l|-inch mesh by 17 gauge, “A” grade.
This is rapidly becoming universal. It is part of the general recognition of
the outstanding value of wire-netting as the first step towards rabbit
destruction.
Naturally, cost of erection will vary greatly in even one district, where
there is diversity in the topography. Prime cost as well as maintenance
charges are heaviest in the mountainous sections; more particularly where
provision has to be made against the drainage from a fairly heavy rainfall.
The life of the netting - varies greatly, e.g., 17 gauge wire, which will
rot through, at ground level, in a warm, moist district and in “ acid ” soil,
in, say, two or three years, may last forty years or more in arid country,


PART V.
Destruction of Harbour.
It may be taken as a sine qua non that if there were no harbour for the
rabbits they would soon cease to exist. In fact, the primary reason why the
rabbit exists as a pest anywhere is because of its habit of burrowing and
of hiding in every thicket of brambles or weeds, in hollow logs, and, in
short, its way of taking advantage of every little bit of cover, whether per-
manent or transient, which is to be found.
In the systematic eradication of rabbits in any part of the country at
all, the first thing that should be considered is as to the feasibility (which
generally resolves itself into the economic practicability) of getting rid of
the rabbits’ harbourage. Not only should this apply to surface harbour,
but also to the burrows of the rabbits themselves. It would seem to many to
be quite unnecessary to refer to the latter; as, obviously, they should be got
rid of at the earliest possible moment.* It becomes necessary, however, to
stress that particular point because one can find many instances in which
unremitting effort has been made to get rid of all surface harbour, while
the burrows of the rabbits remain practically untouched.
There are many parts of the country, especially in the Central and
near-Western Divisions, where it is possible to effectively fence and net
the runs, and to subdivide with divisional fences. Frequently in these
areas (and in many others) there is nothing whatever to prevent a sys-
tematic destruction of the burrows —whatever the difficulties to be encoun-
tered in other places. Every man experienced in rabbit destruction—where
such is carried out with the one object of ultimate extermination- —■
emphasises the absolute necessity for getting rid of the burrows, if the work
is to be of any permanent value. Obviously, it would be foolish in the
extreme to attempt to get rid of all warrens and rabbit burrows which
exist on a holding while there still remained a great deal of surface har-
bour. The removal, therefore, of all harbourage has to be done as part of
a regular system of destructive work.
There are many holdings on which eradication of the rabbit has pro-
ceeded so effectively that there is hardly a yard of such holdings that would
offer the slightest cover for a rabbit. In such cases the rabbit must needs
burrow. If the holding is being well supervised, he will need to hurrow
very quickly, and at the same time not to make the burrow too obvious.
Once the work is done efficiently—starting with well-constructed fences and
gates, of course, then it is not a difficult thing, nor a costly one to keep
rabbits out of any area.
There are many rabbit-infested districts, unfortunately, which are so
rough, hilly, or mountainous that destruction or removal of the rabbits’
harbourage is impossible. In that case a different type of treatment is
necessary. But this article is addressed more to the question of dealing
with country in which absolute removal of all protection for the rabbit
is a “practical proposition.” Even the use of that term should not be
misunderstood. One landholder, bent on the eradication of the rabbit,
and fully persuaded that if the land is worth keeping, it is worth keeping
from the rabbits, finds it a practical proposition to clean up his land at
• This statement is intended to apply only in a general way. There are many eases where, after fumiga-
tion and sealing, the burrows may be left safely untouched —a visit being paid now and again to see if
any of the entrances have been opened up again. There are cases in which the burrow may prove quite
an effective asset in this way by attracting the rabbit to a spot where you may readily and cheaply deal
with him.


any cost, while hia neighbour, making much of the difficulties of the situa-
tion. is content to have the rabbits always with him, and to go on using
persistently the most antiquated methods of eradication, which, in the end,
become even more costly to him, altogether apart from the perpetual
“ drought ” upon his land, blighted by the presence of the rabbit.
Clean up all Surface Harbour.
Where land —rabbit-infested or likely to become so —is encumbered with
surface harbour in the shape of hollow logs, loose debris, or heavy under-
growth which may provide homes for rabbits, it is essential that a systematic
clearance should be undertaken. While this is being done, fumigation and
filling in the entrances of the burrows may be taking place. Possibly where
the modem system of fumigation is carried out, no further action beyond
the filling in of the mouths of the burrows (an essential part of the process)
will be necessary in the main operations. As in so many other aspects
of our dealings with the. rabbit menace, no hard-and-fast lines can be laid
Blackberries Growing on the Fence Line.
Tills is a common sight in the eastern division of the State, particularly in the Eden district. Dense
growths of blackberry, lantana, ferns, &c., provide shelter for the rabbits, and they then burrow under
the netting.
down. Each section of country must be dealt with according to its par-
ticular needs. It may be, for instance, a case of land such as is to be found
nowadays in much of the Dubbo Pastures Protection District where, in
many places, the rabbit has been so far exterminated that it is only neces-
sary to rim a pack of dogs with a gunner or two, and to occasionally use
the spade or the plough.
In all operations of the type under discussion, the assistance of the dog
is regarded as essential. The dog not only locates the homes of the rabbits,
but drives them in. so that their ultimate destruction in numbers is ren-
dered much easier. It will be readily understood and needs no particular
emphasis that the removal of encumbrances in the shape of bush debris,
large patches of noxious weeds, &c., not only deprive the rabbit of a home,
but naturally immediately increase the carrying- capacity of an area. Where
burrows are few and far between it is a common practice to use the spade
or mattock. Where they are more numerous and readily approachable, the


plough may be used. Sometimes the heavy plough is used for the purpose
of cutting up great warrens. Some persons recommend a pick and the axe
also —the pick for stony land and the axe for chopping the rabbits out of
logs or trees. But in the latter case it seems a great and needless waste
of effort; as under such conditions a very few puffs of a fumigant like
calcium cyanide would kill the rabbits.
Stock Inspector Gavel, lute of Dubbo, who has had much experience of
what one might term the final stages of rabbit eradication, writes as follows
(Agricultural Gazette, 1924) in regard to destruction of harbour: —
When this method was first adopted a good deal of unnecessary work was done
in burning all logs ami fallen timber, and in some cases standing dead trees, and
in digging out all warrens, no matter at what depth. It has now been found that
if hollow logs and hollow trees are destroyed, and warrens are ploughed' or dug to
a reasonable depth, that is all that is necessary, except that if warrens are not dug
to the full depth, they must be carefully watched and any openings found must
be followed and fumigated, or “ trapped ” and destroyed. In fact, all country
treated must be carefully hunted until the last rabbit is caught. This is a most
necessary auxiliary to the process. The ordinary spring trap will bo found very
useful in catching the last rabbit.
The Ancient Dog-leg Fence.
Many such fences are still to be found in some districts. They are a grave danger, providing, as they do,
such a fine harbour for rabbits.
Ploughing out is found to bo the quickest and least expensive method. Various
kinds of ploughs are made for the purpose. In some eases they are, drawn by
horses and some favour bullocks, but it may not be generally known that a plough
with a large disc made for the purpose and drawn by horses is Just as effective
and much quicker.
Unfortunately, rabbits have entrenched themselves in hilly, rocky country that
is difficult to treat, but if the flats and hillsides are treated where possible, and the
hiding places in the rocks are broken up as much as possible and plugged (pro-
vided the work is not too costly), much benefit will result.
It might be mentioned that Mr. Gavel stated recently that he was
against fumigation in Ms district, because he considered that it led to
neglect.* He considered that digging-out and ploughing-out were the
“ only methods.”
* Where such advice Is given, however, It is usually founded upon experience with the earlier types
fumigant, and not with such fumigants as calcium, cyanide and carbon monoxide.


Mr. S. P. Ward, of Frampton, in a letter published in the Graziers’
Association’s pamphlet on Baibit Destruction (1924), says:
We now come to the last, and in my opinion, the only effective means of
exterminating rabbits, viz., picking up all surface timber and burning it, and all
hollow logs or trees with holes accessible to rabbits, then digging-out or ploughing-
up all warrens. To accomplish this, it is essential that the holding, having first
been netted with 42 inch x 17 gauge x 11 inch netting, be subdivided into netted
areas, according to the nature of the country.
If the land be very rough and rocky, and heavily infested, none of these areas
should exceed 500 acres, because the rabbits invariably double back on the cleared
areas.
On country easier to deal with, the areas of paddocks netted may be increased to
thousands of acres, provided a well-handled pack of rabbit dogs is used after
effective digging or ploughing-out, Ploughing-out is more effective in dry, hot
weather than at other times.
Mr. T. Walker, of Warialda, says; “ Ploughing burrows is the best method
and the cheapest.”
Mr. D. A. Cameron, writing in support of Mr. Gavel’s contentions, said:
Ploughing-out burrows and ploughing-iu warrens have largely superseded
digging-out. I was told by oue man who had used both methods that two men and
a team of bullocks with a plough were equal to fourteen men digging-out.
Mr. B. J. Stocks, of Cunningar, says;
The only effective method is digging-out and destroying harbour to eliminate
the pest While burrows ami harbour exist you will always have
rabbits; destroy these and you have the problem solved. Bunny is an easy prey
without shelter.
Mr. C. W. Taylor, of Kentucky, says: “ I found this, that you must burn
all hollow logs and heaps of rubbish, and, above all, dig the burrows right
out.”
In an article (“ Hints on Rabbit Destruction ’’) by Mr. J. .1. Fiyen, in the
New Zealand Journal of Agriculture (1919), is the following:—
To my mind oue of the best methods of destruction is digging-out, and I do not
know of any instance where this work has been thoroughly carried out proving
otherwise than an entire success. As in everything else, half methods are useless,
and the work would be better left undone than carried out in the manner of some
cases that have come under my notice.
Rabbit Inspector Glennan, writing in the Agricultural Gazette (1918),
referring to an area of about .32,000 acres, said that poisoning and fumiga-
tion (with the compositions then known) were constantly in use, “but these
methods only served as a temporary relief.” He continues as follows: —
It was therefore decided upon to make a clean sweep of the pest, and to do this
Ihe work of total destruction of harbour was begun. All hollow timber, trees and
logs, were burned, and all burrows completely dug out.
Further on he says, in reference to destruction of harbour:
This may appear to be a costly undertaking, and to some practically impossible,
but I have yet to meet the man who, having adopted it, is not satisfied with the
result.
Burn all hollow timber and clean up all rubbish, tree-tops, etc., getting rid of
anything and everything which affords shelter.
Dig-out, thoroughly if possible, all rabbit warrens, and even the smallest burrows.
Never lose sight of the fact that the small burrow of to-day will, if neglected, be
the warren of the near future. Do it now, and save much worry and expense, and
more than likely prevent the formation of other underground workings in that
neighbourhood.
Such quotations could be multiplied to an almost unlimited extent; but
it is generally admitted that, where practicable, all surface harbour and
burrows should be eliminated. The only point on which there will be a


division of opinion is as to what is “ practicable.” One man finds it
impracticable to carry out certain work on a holding which another man
immediately does upon coming into possession. Cases have been met with
in which the ploughing was carried down to a depth of 4 feet; but, for
most cases —even in open country—this would not be necessary provided
that general measures for destruction were taking place simultaneously
and the rabbits were again prevented from taking a hold on the land.
“ Digging-in ” is the term applied to the process of digging-in the
burrows. Generally the earth is dug down to about 2 feet or so in depth
at the mouth of every burrow' or pop-hole. Then the burrows are filled in
as far as possible and the earth is w'ell rammed. The process is frequently
very successful as an aid to eradication.
PART VI.
Rabbit Traps and Trapping.
From the time that rabbits first occurred in any numbers in Australia, traps
of one kind or another have been used. Among these were wire traps of
many kinds, set in the open, and others which were set at the mouths of
burrows themselves. Then, again, there were the old-fashioned “gin,” or
spring traps, which were hardly different to the modern steel trap at present
used on such a large scale throughout the country.
In the early days of wholesale rabbit destruction, the trap formed only a
small part. Reliance was mostly placed upon poisoning, and, to a lesser
extent, fumigation with carbon bisulphide, sulphur, and “ smoking out.”
Increased use of the steel trap has not been because this method was more
destructive to the rabbits than other methods, but because it furnished the
best results to the modern “ rabbiter.” It will be evident to all that
methods of fumigation—however effective they may be in removing the
pest in any district —can hardly suit the aims of the trapper, working to
obtain the skins or carcases, or perhaps both.
The Steel Spring Trap.
The best known is the common steel spring trap or gin,” the use of
which we have already been discussing. The structure of this is so well
known as to hardly need any description. Suffice it to say that the prin-
ciple is that followed in many traps for rodents of different kinds, in that
we have a small platform, upon which the weight of the animal comes in
its passage over the trap. The depressing of this platform releases two
steel jaws (smooth or serrated) which are suddenly pulled up to meet each
other by a spring. Such traps are laid, for the most part, in the entrances
(sometimes well in) to the burrows themselves. But they may be laid
elsewhere, as is frequently done. Much used rabbit “ pads ” leading out
on to pasturage or to “ buck heaps ” are also made use of. The traps are


just about buried in soft earth, care being taken to see that there is no likeli-
hood of stones being caught in the angles of the jaws—or, indeed, anywhere
in the jaws—when they spring up. The rabbit moving along through its
accustomed haunts is gripped hy the leg by this trap.
This trap is, of course, unbaited, but occasionally decoys of one kind or
another are smeared over the frame with the idea of attracting the rabbit
to his doom. Some of these are said to be very attractive. Among these
may be mentioned oil of rhodium, cinnamon, and aniseed. A drop or two
of oil of rhodium on the plate of a steel trap is said by some to be irresist-
ible to the rahbit. Though this may be used, it is unusual for any such
decoy to be used. Trappers have become very experienced in recent years,
and many are wonderfully expert in setting the trap in such manner and
place as to secure a very large number of kills regularly. There are
several makes of these traps, varying a little in construction.
In setting the traps, great care is taken not to handle the soil, as the rabbit
is very shy of the “ scent ” of man. Earth used to cover up a trap is often
sprinkled on, out of a jam tin with holes in the bottom. A metal peg
(attached to the chain of the trap) is driven into the ground to prevent
the trap being dragged away. Sometimes small pits or burrows are made by
the rabbiters and the traps set in these. The rabbit is extraordinarily
anxious to see what is in newly-turned earth, and so steps into the trap.
How to Set the Spring Trap.
Crommelin, who had great experience of the early days of trapping in
Hew South Wales and Victoria, gives a considerable amount of interesting
information on this subject in his pamphlet, “ Eabhits, and How to Deal
with Them” (1886). As the methods which he describes are largely those
of to-day (with the exception that natural burrows and “ pads ” leading to
“ buck heaps,” to water, or to feeding grounds are more generally used),
the following is quoted from his description:—
Sow to Set. —The usual mode of setting is to cut a place in the ground large
enough to admit the trap, making the hole so that when set in place, the plate
will he all hut level with, hut lower than the surface. Then drive a strong peg,
which may he either wood or iron, into the ground, to which the chain is secured.
Next, place a piece of paper on the top of the plate, (the paper keeps the earth
from falling into the trap), and cover the whole trap, chain, peg, paper, and all
with earth lightly shaken over it.
*****
Another -way of setting traps is hy making what is called a false hurrow hy
digging out a narrow’ sloping cut in the ground, something longer than the trap
and chain, and about a foot deep at its deepest end; then in the face of the
bank formed hy the cut, scoop out something to resemble a regular hurrow, and
set the trap immediately under it. Rabbits ahvays make for newly-turned earth
and openings, and holes.
This method takes some time, and trappers generally prefer burrows made to
set their traps at, or drop heaps, near which they set them as first mentioned.
Another way of setting, well adapted for open plains, is to mark out. a semi-
circle 2 feet in diameter, dig out about 4 inches at the arc to nothing at the out-
side, and sot your traps in the dug-out part.
Where to Set. —lf you set traps at a warren with twelve (12) entrances, all
showing signs of being used, put a trap at each hole the first night, next night
close up six holes and set six traps; on the third night close up three more of the
holes and set three traps; on the fourth night you may shift all your traps to fresh
Xdaces.
*****
If you set at drop heaps, the traps are put down not exactly on the heap, but
ground it, about a foot or two off, If rabbits are very thick, so will thf heaps be


thick, then one or two traps at each will be sufficient; but if you can only find a:
heap about t-\ cry quarter dr half mile, then put from four to six traps around
each heap.
If vou find a nest or breeding burrow closed, put a trap at it to catch the doe,
and then having caught her, you can open up the nest and kill the young ones.
It is, of course, of the greatest importance to those working for extermination to
catch and kill the doe.
i if ->:■ * -v
Trappers have many different ideas about trapping, and where to set their traps.
I knew- two men who had worked together in Victoria, and in our colony for years
with great success, and, as you may suppose from following the business so long,
had gained a great deal of experience. One of these men would always set his
traps at the burrows; the other man would set his at the drop heaps. I saw those
men several times in my travels, and when I asked them if they had as yet found
out which was the better place to set traps —at burrows or drop heaps—they would
any: “ Blowed if 1 know, sir! Sometimes one of us gets most at. the burrows
one night, and the next night the drop heaps beat the burrows hollow,” So much
for diversity of opinion. These men worked 100 traps each. I have talked with
scores of trappers, camped out with them, and learnt all the different modes of
setting, and where to set, from some of the best trappers in the colonies.
A Good “ Set.”
The “ pad” between the rabbit warren and the river is clearly shown. A spring trap not visible, of
course-is set in the wide portion in the foreground.
In lightly-infested country a man cannot well work more than 35 traps, as he
has either to walk long distances to find drop heaps or suitable places to set at,
or has to make false burrows, which takes some time to do. In thickly-infested
country the trappers work from 50 to 100 traps. To find their traps after setting,.
it is usual, for a trapper to trail a spade or an axe after him from trap to trap,
in the morning he follows the trail up quite easily. I have also seen dogs trained,
to find traps; and it is astonishing to note the sagacity of the dog in this respect,
hording his master from trap to trap, and, when, close to it, standing still. There
is no fear of one of these dogs being caught in a trap.
.Far more traps per man are now handled than formerly. Babbit Inspec-
tor Eae, of Armidale, reports one rabbitor as working no less than 400 traps.
This rabbiter, he says, took mit of I’nnderan Creek 27,700 rabbits. Tens
of thousands of “ gins ” are regularly used throughout the country. Probably
the maximum has been reached in the last three to five years.


Wire-netting Traps.
Several burrow traps of wire-netting are used. Chiefly, these are on the
principle of a cone, with its narrow end pointing down the burrow. A
little way along from the narrow end of the cone is a flap door, or “ bob-
wires,” which allow of the rabbit rushing “ out ” into the big end, but not
back again. These are generally made up out of rabbit netting and are
very cheap indeed to construct. Many runs have been quite netted out,
some by contract, in this way, and at quite a low cost. In these cases, of
course, great attention was paid to the netting-in of the whole area, and,
in some instances, to subdivision as well. Trapping out in this way also
is generally accompanied by a certain amount of dogging and shooting, with
driving in the early stages.
For a trap of the pattern just mentioned, it is claimed by the maker that
the rabbits already trapped act as a decoy for others following. In using-
such traps it is the usual practice to gradually reduce the number of open-
ings as the warren is trapped out.
A trap advertised by Kodier, and much discussed in connection with
his theories, while not conical, is on the same general pattern as those
mentioned. This trap consists of a tubular wire cage, which is placed
at the entrance of the burrows. There is a door at the end to take out the
rabbits, leaving the trap set for future use. Eodier claims that it is a
common occurrence to get six at one time, and that on two occasions eleven
rabbits have been caught at one time in one trap, alive and uninjured.
These were all small ones.
The Pit Trap.
Pit traps are very commonly used in some parts. They are placed every
here and there along boundary (and perhaps subdivision) fences. Some-
times they are put through, i.e., on each side of a fence at the one spot.
In addition to many seen by the Commissioner on recent travels, a great
number of these were seen in use in the Eiverina and in the west and
north-west of New South Wales in his many journeys between 1905 to 1912.
They were very effective. Of course, in most of the cases at the time, there
was not much general eradicating work in progress—rather a perfunctory
use of the poison cart being the custom, with some carbon bisulphide fumi-
gation here and there.
Crommelin (1886) mentions this form of device under the name of “Fall
or Tip Trap.” He says:
It is believed that these “ fall or pit traps ” will be of very great service when
placed in the rabbit-proof fences which are about to be erected, as they will not
only make the fence very secure, but will catch large numbers of rabbits.
A good description of this device is that of Glennan in the Agricultural
Gazette (1918), which description was probably founded upon an earlier
description by Bruce, also in the Agricultural Gazette (1901). In the same
issue Bruce gives a very useful diagram illustrating the general lay-out of
this form of trap. This is reproduced below.
Glennan says:
The pit trap when properly made, and placed at intervals of about half a mile,
along netting fences, is very useful. Its readiness to catch at all times, when in
good working order, is its chief recommendation.


The double pit trap (i.e., one that catches from both sides of a fence) may be
made on the following lines; Select a place, if on an uneven surface land, where
stormwater will not drain into, and put down a hole about 4 feet deep, 4 feet
wide, and about 8 feet long. This gives a pit 4 feet square on both sides of the
fence. To make it secure from breaking away, or the imprisoned rabbits burrow-
ing into its sides, it is necessary to line it with strong, close-fitting timber.
The trap-doors (of which there are two on each side of the fence), should be 4
feet long and 6 inches wide, fitting closely, but not so as to jam or prevent their
easy swing on their pivot. The pivot, made of light iron, is fastened to the centre
of the tip-door (crossways), and the ends of the pivot should rest in auger holes,
which are made in the wooden frame at a point seen when the doors are placed in
position. The ends of each pair of doors should meet, and thus form a level track
or bridge.
A Pit Trap on each side of a boundary fence.
As soon as the rabbit attempts to cross, and arrives over the hole, the door tips
and ho will fall through. The door then falls back into position and is ready for
the next victim.
The doors may be made of light iron or light, tough board; but I prefer the
light iron door, as it is not affected by the weather, which causes the wooden ones
to swell and warp.
A couple of panels of wire-netting fence erected "V” shape at the ends of the
pit are necessary to guide the rabbits on to the doors.
The top of the pit must be covered, a portion only left unfastened, so as to
admit of a man going down to get the rabbits. The pits should bo regularly
visited and cleared. Leaving rabbits to die and decompose within the pit, or
leaving carcases close to the outside of it, will cause others to avoid it.
The sides of these pit-traps (when they are of a temporary nature) need
not be boarded if the pits are deep and the traps are regularly attended to.
Yard Traps Along Fences.
Yard traps are often placed at intervals along netted fences and in
corners. The general principle is that of two long wing leads bringing the
rabbits to a small aperture opening into a yard. In the yard is a smaller
pen for killing the enclosed rabbits. Many stock inspectors and graziers


speak, very well of these, but as a general thing they are not so effective as
the pit traps. In some places, whore rabbits are numerous, “ drives ” (dealt
with in another place) are undertaken in connection with these fence yard
traps.
Inspector White, now of Inverell district, stated that he has seen 1,100
yarded in this way in the Merriwa district. Nine thousand rabbits were
taken from one travelling stock reserve in the same manner. Where there
is any heavy infestation on a holding a good many rabbits may he taken in
this way without the agency of a drive at all. Rabbits frequently travel up
and down boundary (or any) fences, making little trial scratchings here
and there against the wire. It is prompted by the constant impulse to
spread outwards —apart from any consideration of feeding, which might
occur.
The sketch given below is after Bruce. At A and A are “ needle arches ”
which allow entry but forbid return. The wings are thrown out about
"30 feet beyond the yard.
Wire-netting Trap Yard against Fence.
In all such yards the netting should be carried well down into the
ground, and should, preferably, have the wire standing up at least 4 feet
from the level of the ground. Posts should be external to the yard, and
there should be no inner wooden stays. In a state of confinement, many
rabbits, which otherwise would never cross a fence, will get out. Some
extraordinary instances of this have been brought under notice.
Water Traps.
Water traps, i.e., netted yards containing water (poisoned or otherwise)
and enclosed tanks or dams, are frequently used in far western areas in
drought times. These are particularly useful when the rabbits are moving
in “ waves.” In most places, of course, the water is too precious to allow
of any large amount being enclosed for this purpose. In such instances the
dam is enclosed and the trapping yards are against the fences. Tens of


thousands of rabbits have frequently 'been taken in a short time by these
water traps. The two designs reproduced below ate taken from Bruce’s
article previously referred to.
(1) Water Trap at Enclosed Tank.
The sketch shows the fencing A, B, C, D, enclosing the tank—forcing
yards on the one side E, F, G, H, and I, J, K, L on the other; M and N,
the two killing yards; O, the needle arches or spiked funnels; and P G and
E S the wings.
A sufficient portion of the side A to D should be made so as to be easily
taken down in the day-time to water stock, and to be securely replaced at
night when rabbits always water. It should, of course, be rabbit-proof, and
should be carefully made and fitted, as it is to be put up and down daily,
while trapping goes on.
Fig. (2) is a very much more easily constructed and a less expensive trap
than No. 1, and if it proves equally effective, will take its place; but very
great care should be taken to see that the fences are of the proper height,
and that they, as well as the entrances and gates, are all thoroughly secure,
and that the necessary capping is provided and properly adjusted on the
fences. ,
Sides AB, BC, CD, and DA are wire-netting with entrances at the points
in the sides marked “ O,” fitted with needle arches, or spiked funnels, as
already described.


Gates of the necessary size to allow the stock to water in the day-time
should be made as marked at A to E, or any other suitable part of the
fence.
(2) Water Trap at Open Tank.
There are variations upon the above designs, but in the main they will
be found to be constructed on the same principles. The placing of poisoned
water in the troughs adjacent to enclosed tanks and waterholes has been
mentioned elsewhere.
PART VII.
Poisoning of Rabbits.
For many years past poisoning- by one chemical substance or another and
by various methods, has been one of the principal means of ridding the
country of rabbits. Untold millions of the rodents have been destroyed by
any one of the three deadly poisons—phosphorus, strychnine, and arsenic.
Poisons have been used with hand or machine-laid baits of various kinds,
and also, under certain conditions, in water.
Unfortunately, the destruction which has ensued from the laying of these
poisons has not been restricted by any means to the rabbits, but has in-
cluded, in the aggregate, vast numbers of our wild life, and also a consider-
able amount of stock. Much of the wild life destruction has been due to
carelessness, but more still to a callous disregard of the value of Australia’s
unique and beautiful bird and animal fauna. Losses of stock have some-
times been due to lack of proper precautions, but not infrequently they have
been brought about through droughty conditions causing the stock to eat
baits which ordinarily they would have passed by.


Poisoned Water.
The use of poisoned water for purposes of rabbit destruction has been
essentially a method followed in the great Western Division of the State.
It is, obviously, a plan which can only succeed in dry country. Inquiry
shows that it has seldom been used eastward of the western half of the
Central Division. Chiefly it has been used in the far west, and in drought
itime. Under such conditions the destruction of rabbits has been appalling.
The manager of Charlton station, Mr. Loughlan, informed me recently
that during the drought of 1906 as many as 100,000 per night were destroyed
on Boorooma station. A “ wave ”of rabbits from west to east was moving
at the time.
There are many records of slaughter on a vast scale by this medium, and,
that being so, it is hopeless to expect any abandonment of the method. It
is possible, however, to uso it so as practically to prevent the access of wild
life and of stock to it; and every possible precaution that can be taken
should toe insisted upon by the authorities if the practice is allowed to
continue. Landholders in the Western Division rely greatly on this method,
and some pin their faith almost entirely on it. This is quite unwise, and
sometimes disastrous. The grazier sees the rabbits breeding up in the
good time, when there is plenty of feed about, and does little or nothing to
eradicate them. This means that they have already constituted a “ partial
drought ” before the dry conditions actually come. When the real drought
comes the plague has taken the feed even before the stock gets a look in.
From that aspect, the poisoned water method is frequently a lazy' manfs
method and a grave danger. It should, therefore, never be used except as an
adjunct to the regular eradication work on the run.
The Methods Employed.
One very common method is to net in tanks and then put a trough outside
containing the poisoned water. From the Broken Hill Pastures Protection
District landholders are reported as “ waiting to make a wholesale slaughter
in summer by simultaneous poisoning at all tanks ” in the way indicated.
In many cases the rabbits are given “ free drinks ” of unpoisoned water for
several nights prior to the actual poisoning. Large droves are then enticed
to take the fatal draught.
Stock Inspector Gavel, of Dubbo, says that poisoning of water is “ a most
drastic means, because it poisons not only' rabbits, but everything else
gaining access.”
Stock Inspector Dowling recommended taking the troughs out of mud.
To my knowledge this is done in many places. The rabbits prefer to drink
from the more natural-looking pool made from the earth.
Babbit Inspector Grlennan (late of Moree), while agreeing as to the
effectiveness of poisoned water as a destroy'd', says “The risk of poisoning
stock, and, indeed, all animal and bird life is a great drawback.”
Contrast this with the remarks of Crommelin (1886), when he says:—
“ If no sheep are in the paddock and kangaroos are about, openings could
be left for them, and y'ou would destroy every' kangaroo in a dry' season by
these means.”
Writing as far back as 1900, Mr. A. Bruce, then Chief Inspector of
Stock, said, in reference to the risk of stock and other animal life getting
at the poisoned water that this had led the majority of owners in the Central
Division to resort to water traps (i.e., trapping on dams).


Both arsenic and strychnine are used extensively in the poisoning of water.
From the large number of recipes the following are selected: —
Water Poisoned with Arsenic.
(1) Take 2 oz. arsenic, 4 oz. washing’ soda, 1 gallon water. Boil till
arsenic is dissolved (about half an hour). When cooling, add 2 ox.
sugar and stir well. For use, add 2 gallons water.
(2) Put 1 lb. of arsenic in 2 or 3 gallons of water, and stir continuously
from then until 20 minutes after coming to a boil. Then add water
to make up to 3 gallons. This will do for 50 gallons of water.
Water Poisoned with Strychnine.
(1) One ounce of strychnine dissolved in a third of a pint of acetic acid
will poison 12 gallons of water ; or
(2) Ten grains dissolved in vinegar will poison 1 quart of water.
In view of the ever-present risk to stock and to wild life it is a fortunate
thing that poisoning of water is useless as a method of killing rabbits on our
rich coastal and upland country and over a large portion of the Central
Division of the State. As a matter of fact, rabbits are able to subsist
entirely without water where there is a sufficient supply in the herbage,
grass, roots, &c., on which they subsist, but in dry times they will travel long-
distances to water.
Phosphorus Baits.
Taking the country by and large, the best known poison for use in rabbit
destruction is phosphorus. This has been used in various combinations for
many years. It may be either machine or hand-laid. Sometimes it is laid
in a scratch pit or furrow—either open or buried.
Many machines, both portable and on carts, have been designed for the
laying of phosphorus and other baits. . It is not proposed to deal with these
in view of their being so well known and so easily accessible to all interested
persons.
Among a large number of recipes for the preparation of phosphorus baits,
the following are culled ; —•
Phosphorus and Pollard.
(1) Take, phosphorus 1 stick (4 lb.); bisulphide of carbon 2 tablespoonsful;
sugar (white) 2J lb., or molasses 1J pints; water (clean rain) gallons;
pollard, a sufficiency.
Half-fill a pickle bottle with water and add carbon. Break the pros-
phorus under water and place it in the bottle, making sure that it is
completely covered with water. Allow it to stand for at least 24 hours.
Heat the II gallons of water to a temperature that can be comfortably
borne by the hand, put it in the mixing trough and dissolve the sugar
and molasses. Then strain in the contents of the pickle bottle, allowing
it to pass through flannel into water. (Immediately on completion of
this operation throw the strainer on to a bare piece of ground as it will
take fire). Then add pollard until the dough is the right consistency
for the particular variety of cart to be used. During the mixing from
1 10 to 15 drops of oil of rhodium, aniseed, or cinnamon may be added.
The mixing may safely be done with the hands. The dough should be dis-
tributed before becoming sour. Extreme cleanliness should be observed
throughout. ( MacFherson .)


(2) Nearly fill a glass jar with water (a pickle bottle would answer), cut a
stick of phosphorus into about five pieces (but I may mention that in
cutting it, phosphorus must be covered with water in a shallow djsh,
otherwise, if left out of tlie water, it immediately takes fire); put tho
out phosphorus into the glass jar containing the water, and pour into
same 2 tablespoons of bisulphide of carbon and the phosphorus will bo
dissolved in a very short time. Dissolve the sugar in about 4 quarts of
hot water and mix it thoroughly with the balance of cold water, after
which pour in the dissolved phosphorus, stirring it well with a stick;
then gradually add the mixed pollard and bran, stirring all the time
until it becomes of the consistency of a thick dough so that it will not
stick to the fingers, and when in this condition it can be kneaded up with
the hands without any fear of its burning those mixing it. {Crawford,
Western Australia.)
(3) The ingredients are: Phosphorus, carbon bisulphide, molasses, oil of ani-
seed, pollard and bran.
Take a clean pickle bottle, and half fill it with water, adding two
tablespoonfuls of carbon (this is merely to dissolve the phosphorus and
a lesser quantity will do if it is allowed to stand overnight), then break
under water, and add to the contents of the bottle two sticks of phos-
phorus, and in an hour’s time the mixture will be ready for the pollard, &c.
Procure a tub (a wooden one is best) and put two gallons of clean water
into it. Then stir in a quart of molasses, and a teaspoonful of oil of
aniseed. Add the contents of the pickle bottle, straining through a piece
of chaff-bag or hessian (in ease of undissolved particles of phosphorus).
Stir well to thoroughly mix, then add the pollard which, if very fine,
will be all tho better for a few handfuls of bran. Keep stirring and
adding pollard slowly, until the right consistency is obtained. Your bait
is now ready for use. Be careful not to make it too stiff at first until it
is tried in the poison-cart. See to it that the cart is in good working
order and free from any old sour bait, also that no string from the
pollard bag gets into the mixture and interferes with the proper working
of the machine. The above mixture should be laid whilst fresh and sweet,
and on no account must it be allowed to become stale or sour before it is
distributed. It may, in cool weather, hold sweet for a day or two, but the
fresher it is the better.
There is absolutely no danger of fire if the above instructions are
attended to, and the above quantities will provide enough bait for a
full day’s work, if put through the usual form of poison-cart.
Great care should be taken in the keeping and handling of phosphorus,
and a few hints may be serviceable, to put those who have not used it
on their guard against possible accident or loss of property by its igni-
tion.
Always keep the phosphorus under water when out of use, and do not
store it in the dwelling or other outhouse, if you value their safety. It
should be always kept in a small detached shed, with an earthen floor;
a shed in which could be also kept the other bait-making material and
equipment. Dig a hole in the ground and thus lessen the risk of the
tub or oil-drum which contains the phosphorus being upset. Be mindful
of the necessity for keeping it well under water, as, should it be exposed
to tho air (the water having dried off) in a very short time it will
ignite.
It is advisable to keep this shed or depot locked and secure against
entry by children or others unacquainted with poisons.
Always keep a bucket of water- by when handling phosphorus. One
can, with safety, taken the stick of phosphorus and break it under
water with the naked hands, and put it into the pickle bottle to dissolve,
providing there is no delay in the operation, and that the hands are
washed afterwards. Phosphorus will keep an indefinite period while
under water, and retain its poisonous qualities, but as soon as it becomes
dry, it burns right away: hence the necessity for extreme care in
handling it, {Glennan.)


(4) The ingredients are: Two sticks phosphorus, 3 lb. brown sugar, 5 lb,
1 molasses, -J oz. ground cinnamon, 16 lb. pollard, 4 lb. bran.
Place the phosphorus in a pickle bottle or fruit-preserving bottle which
has been previously almost tilled with water, and add one tablespoonful
of carbon bisulphide. Let it stand for about twelve hours to dissolve
the phosphorus; dissolve the sugar and molasses in 5 pints of boiling
water, adding the cinnamon, and well mixing the whole.
Make up the liquid to 20 pints, including the contents of the phos-
phorus bottle, and place it in a large iron tub, gradually adding the bran
and pollard, and mixing the whole thoroughly with the aid of a wooden
paddle until it attains the consistency of thick cream. The hands may
then be used so as to remove all the material from the bottom of the
tub, this preventing any of the phosphorus from remaining there, and
so ensuring its complete admixture with the rest of the material. This
is necessary to prevent the risk of firing after distribution.
Continue adding the pollard and bran until the mixture reaches the
consistency of thick dough, when it will be ready for use.
The material should be laid when it is in a fresh condition, as it is-
more readily taken by rabbits.
An increase in the quantity of bran will correct any tendency to
stickiness and the inclusion of the cinnamon makes the baits more attrac-
tive to rabbits.
Phosphorus should always be cut or broken under water to prevent
the danger of ignition.
The quantity of material above described should place baits 2 feet
apart over a course of 25 miles.
The use of covering machines is strongly recommended, as, if driven
by a careful man, there is practically no risk to stock, and very few
birds are poisoned. Covered baits are more readily taken by rabbits
than those which are exposed, as they do not become stale and hard.
( McKeown .)
(5) Take two 3-gallon buckets, and before commencing to prepare the
mixture see that they are quite clean. Then have a supply of cold
water within reach; put the proper quantity of water (say 1 gallon in
one of the buckets, and 4 gallon in the other). Start the fire and place
the pollard or grain and phosphorus ready to hand. Put the buckets
on the fire and as the water in the bucket with 1 gallon boils, take it
off the fire, break as directed, and put the phosphorus in the water and
stir quickly. At that temperature the phosphorus, with constant quick
stirring, will be disseminated throughout the water in about five minutes.
The person mixing should be provided with a stick 4 feet long, with a
flat point to lift the bucket off the fire, and to stir the mixture.
Then, in the second bucket, with the -1 gallon of water, put the sugar
or molasses and when thoroughly dissolved add to the dissolved phos-
phorus, together -with, say, i gallon cold water and stir thoroughly.
Then add pollard in small quantities. The safer course would, however,
be, where the pasture will burn, to not adopt the mode here described
of dissolving the phosphorus, but to use carbon bisulphide and only to
dispense with that chemical when the grass is green. {Bruce.)
Laying the Baits.
As stated, the baits may be laid by hand or by machine. The general'
practice is to use one or other of the poison carts on the market, as the
hand-laying method is very slow and tedious. There are several good ones.
The baits are laid in both open and covered furrows.
The following account of the method followed is adapted as far as appears
desirable from a pamphlet by Stock Inspector MacPherson (Gundagai):—
A cart should be selected that allows of a good control being exercised over
the baits, cuts an even and clearly-defined trail, and is provided with a
funnel to drop the bait immediately behind the cutter. A disc cutter ia
preferred by many, but the views of landholders are very divergent on this,
point.


During- the spring, autumn, and winter months pollard may be laid
throughout the entire day, but in hot weather it is not advisable to com-
mence operations before 3 o’clock in the afternoon, so that the baits may
not get too dry before the rabbits come out to feed in the evening. Both
very hot and frosty weather are suitable for poisoning, but to get the best
results there should be a certain amount of moisture in the ground, so that
the trail is made attractive to the rabbits. Though this is a well-known fact,
much poisoned bait is wasted by careless users operating on hot, dry days.
Several instances of this have come under notice.
Generally speaking, rabbits take poison better when natural food is
scarce, but there are marked exceptions to this rule. Frequently they will
refuse the baits, even if on the point of starvation. This may be due to the
less cautious ones having already been weeded out (by taking the poison),
so that the remainder (the more cautious) are for the time “ poison-shy.”
From 15 to 20 points of rain will more or less destroy phosphorised pollard,
but this largely depends on the mixing.
In laying poison, the larger the area that, can be treated at once the
better. It is as well to commence operations at the outlying portions of the
run and work in towards the homestead, so as not to continually disturb the
country that has been treated. On level country trails are made at a more
or less uniform distance of from 50 to 100 yards apart, or even less, but in
rough lands or those encumbered with a great deal of surface harbour it is
often difficult to deal with more than the feeding grounds. During the
breeding season poison should be laid close to, but not in, the burrows, as the
does and young rabbits do not move far from home. It is useless to lay
poison on the “ buck hills.” A great deal of time and poison is wasted
from lack of discretion on the part of the layer. In most eases the best
results are got from poisoning those parts of the run where the rabbits con-
gregate to feed. One authority states: —
Some landowners are in the habit of covering trails to avoid the danger of
poisoning stock. This is effected either by a patent coverer attached to the cart
or by trailing the double of a heavy “marble link” chain behind. There is much
to be said for this idea, as it keeps the baits moist in summer time, reduces the
loss in stock and bird life, and prevents a rabbit from gorging more than its
fair share of pollard. The results obtained from covering are hardly so good as
from the open trail method, but they continue for longer. Using the open trail,
it will be found usually that 80 per cent, of the rabbits killed die during the
first three nights of laying the poison.
Matthams gives some useful advice wben he says:—
It is not advisable to draw the furrows close to the burrows when the country
close to them Is eaten bare, and polluted, as is often the case in the dry season
of the year, for the rabbits may, upon leaving the burrows, then travel some
distance towards the feeding ground without stopping. In the breeding season,
however, if the grass is plentiful about the burrows, furrows drawn close to them
often account for a number of kittens which are independent of their mother,
but do not travel far from home. Far more rabbits will cross the furrows when
they are drawn at right angles to the general movement of the rabbits than
when they are drawn parallel to the general direction of their movement. On
undulating country it will lie found that the general tendency is for the rabbits
to move up and down rather than across the face of elevations.
Notwithstanding what has been said of not laying the poison near the
warrens (when the regular feeding grounds are some distance removed there-
from), it is, not infrequently, found quite useful to run the poison-cart in
concentric lines round and near the warrens, so as to intercept the rabbits
going to and coming from the feeding grounds.
Although many users of phosphorus compounds prefer to prepare their
own mixtures, there are a number of well-known reliable preparations on the
market, which can be obtained in any city or town in Australia. It is not
necessary to mention any of these specifically.


Phosphorised Oats or Wheat.
Phosphorised grain has been used at various times in many parts of the
■country, and still is to somb extent. In wet, high country in [New Zealand,
it has been found very useful in winter time —the climatic conditions not
affecting the grain to the same extent as it would phosphorised pollard.
Most of the recipes in use are very slight modifications of one mentioned
by Bruce in the Agricultural Gazette, for 1901. One of these is the following,
taken from the New Zealand Journal of Agriculture (1919) :
Place 60 lb. of wheat or oats in a revolving machine. On a fire close at hand
place two buckets of water, one containing 2 gallons and the other If gallons.
When the water has been brought to the boil, into the 1J gallons put 4 lb. of sugar
and I lb. of phosphorus. Stir slowly for three or four minutes until the ingredients
are dissolved. Then pour the mixture into the machine, and add the water from
the other bucket as quickly as possible. Close the lid and turn slowly for about
half an hour. If the machine has not then cooled sufficiently to allow the hand to
be held upon it, pour a bucket of cold water over it and turn for a few minutes
longer, when the desired temperature will be obtained. Pour hours afterwards the
machine should be turned for another ten minutes, and again turned for the same
time immediately before opening to remove the poison, which should be at the
expiration of twenty-four hours. Don’t keep the poisoned grain for more than
two days before laying it. If it is desired to use salt instead of sugar, If lb. to
60 lb. of grain will be sufficient.
Bruce says that phosphorised oats prepared by this method “ are deadly
for at least two months ” In winter after they have been laid on the ground,
and “ have proved deadly after ten days’ exposure to warm rains and hot
winds.” lie says further: —“ Grain as a medium is less attractive and not
so cheap as pollard; but there are times when a change of medium is called
for. and then grain should be tried.”
A small circular churn is recommended for the mixing process.
Strychnine Bait.
Although strychnine has been used as a rabbit poison in combination with
various substances for many years, it has only recently reached a stage of
great importance—chiefly through its proved utility when applied to black
thistle root, carrots, apples, jam, &c. On the Northern Tableland of New
South Wales immense quantities of strychninised baits have been, and are
still being, used with the most deadly results to the rabbit. In some districts
it has for some time been the leading method of destruction.
Among many, the following are a number of ways in which strychnine is
employed :
Strychnine and Jam.
Although this combination has been in use for probably forty-five years,
only recently has it come into any prominence.
Jam is a medium of which the rabbits are very fond. It can be made
from almost any fruit —apples, quinces, or if these are not procurable, even
from pumpkin or pie melon. To prepare the jam, chop the fruit (skin,
seeds and all) into pieces half an inch square, and boil with half their
weight of sugar, until a thick jam is obtained. Care must be taken to keep
it constantly stirred while boiling, as rabbits will not touch it if burned.
When the jam is made, add strychnine at the rate of 1 oz. to 25 lb. of jam,
and mix thoroughly. The strychnine may be either dissolved in acid or
simply powdered fine. Arsenic may be used instead of strychnine—it is
cheaper, but the results are not so good.


The method of laying the jam is to turn up a sod and place a piece the
size of a pigeon’s egg on it. Six or eight lumps, 10 or 12 yards apurt, should
‘he put down in patches near the buck heaps, 100 yards between patches.
The jam should be laid on chips, or small pieces of bark, so that what is
not used can be lifted and relaid. Sheep, cattle, and horses will not touch
jam, according to Bruce.
Here is another method which has been used successfully in Western 1
Australia, and reported in the Journal of Agriculture of that State: —
Take 8 lb. of jam (any kind) and i oz. of powdered strychnine; mix well and
lay on a small piece of bark or wood in a ploughed furrow. In this connection
the use of the prepared jams on sale by manufacturing firms is recommended in
view of the fact that smaller quantities go a longer way, and the cheapness and
certainty of the manufactured article.
In country where ants are plentiful it is expedient to put the jam down as
late in the evening as possible, as this insect readily finds it, and is objectionable
to the rabbit.
A variation upon the two foregoing is supplied by MacPherson, and is as
follows: —•
As jam cannot be conveniently laid by machinery, this form of poisoning is
comparatively slow and expensive, but it will be found useful on small holdings,
in rough country where it is impossible to work a cart, and as a change of
material when rabbits refuse pollard. Its use also enables the dead rabbits to
be collected close to the trails and does away with the risk of fire. Jam is
usually laid in trails made by a. hoe, but on level country the empty poison-cart
may be run, followed by men laying the poison in the furrow. The baits should
be the size of a small marble (the rabbit seldoms does more than lick one) and
laid at distances varying from one to several yards apart. If laid on chips or
small pieces of board the unused baits may be shifted, which is a saving of
material. A couple of pieces of deal board shaped like miniature cricket bats
may be used for laying the poison, which should be kept constantly stirred. Jam
is not suitable for use in country where ants are plentiful.
Strychnine and jam has been largely used, at one time or another, at
Armidale, Brewarrina, Dubbo, Glen Innes, Gloucester, Kempsey, Mudgee,
Narrabri, Harrandera, Scone, Tenterfleld, and almost all Pastures Protec-
tion Districts except those in the far west.
A method described by Stock Pnspectov Fielder, of Armidale district, is
worth including here: —
The ingredients are thistle root, jam or brown sugar and strychnine. Collect
black thistle roots (which are more palatable to the rabbit after a few frosts),
wash thoroughly and cut up fine, preferably by putting through a mincing machine.
Allow to dry a little, then add a small quantity of jam and thoroughly mix.
Powder strychnine finely and add to thistle mixture in the proportions 4 drains'
(avoir, weight) strychnine (about a wax-match-box full) to one 2-lb. tin of
root mixture and thoroughly mix. If sugar is used in lieu of jam, the mixture
will become moist, in which case a small amount of flour should be sprinkled on
mixture and stirred in well. This form of bait is one of the best, and is taken
by rabbits practically the whole year, which is not the ease in respect to phos-
phorus. The bait is laid on a freshly turned sod cut with a hoe.
Strychnine and Thistle Roots.
In recent times the combination of strychnine and the root of the Black
or Scotch thistle has found an extraordinarily widespread use not only by
landholders, but by itinerant rabbit-trappers. Of all poisoning operations
it has proved to be one of the most- effefetike. Curiously enough, the rabbit,
by a process of selection of his food plants (mentioned elsewhere), encour-
ages the growth of this plant, to which he is not partial at any stage of its
growth. Very often the burrows themselves are to be found in a dense
“ thicket ” of these black thistles, through the rabbit having eliminated
practically every other plant in the vicinity.


In Northern Tableland districts, those parts badly infested with rabbits
mar frequently be observed at quite a considerable distance because of the
extensive growth of these thistles and accompanying “ Cobbler’s Peg' ”
(Erigeron linifolia).
The following is a method of using' black thistle root and strychnine as
recorded by Rabbit Inspector Glennan at Moree: —
Dig up green roots of the black thistle, and, having washed them free of soil,
and scraped off the “whiskers,” cut them into baits about half an inch square.
Then place them on a clean chaff bag to dry out most of the natural moisture,
and while this is being done the strychnine can be made ready for use. Grind to
a powder as fine as flour an ounce of the best strychnine, and have the roots
ready, the quantity of which can be measured easily by an empty 2 lb. jam tin.
Ten tinfuls of roots will yield approximately 2,500 baits, and by sprinkling them
with strychnine, and shaking them well, the poison will be well distributed over
the roots. A small tin of a “decoy" sprinkled over the baits prior to the addition
of the strychnine will help the roots to absorb the poison, and make the bait
more attractive and tasty.
Thistle root and strychnine may be laid by hand in trails made for the pur-
pose by a hoe or other trail-making means. Where extensive bait-laying is to be
done, the ordinary poison-cart is best. Take off the gear-driving chain, and fix
a large funnel above the spout of the cart, and the bait can be dropped through
it into the furrow as close or as far apart as desired. Again I say, “ make plenty
of trails and do not spare the bait.” This is a mistake too often made, and is a
false economy of time and money.
The bait has the advantage of quick action, most of the rabbits being killed
either right on the trail or at no great distance from it. This makes it an easy
matter to gather the carcases, and secure the skins, if so inclined. The bait
retains its destructive properties for several days, unless much rain falls on it;
longer under fine weather conditions.
Stock Inspector C. J. Woollett, late of Tamwortli, lias brought under
notice a method employed in the Tamwortli district, and from it the follow-
ing is taken:—
The best thistle roots are obtained from plants whose leaves are spreading on
the ground. When the stalks grow above the ground the roots become too tough
and fibrous for obtaining the best results.
When this bait was first used care was taken to scrape the skin off the root,
but many successful poisoners do not bother to do this, and get very good
catches if the roots are only well washed. After washing they are cut into
pieces about half an inch long, and if the roots are thick they are halved and
quartered. They should then be placed in a vessel, and, according to the quantity
of roots, sugar should be sprinkled over them, stirred occasionally, and left for
about two hours. The syrup should then be poured off, and the roots spread out
on a clean bag, and allowed to dry in the shade, not in the sun. Then to 2 lb.
of thistle roots add as much finely-powdered strychnine as will fill the top of a
cardboard matchbox, taking care, of course, to distribute the poison by well
stirring the roots while sprinkling the poison over the roots in the billycan or
jam tin.
Sometimes the baits are laid by means of a poison-cart with a funnel attach-
ment, into which the baits are dropped and directed into the furrow made by the
share. Other methods are used to make the trails.
In some cases the tine of a cultivator is fixed into a heavy forked stick, which
makes a good trail. When hand-poisoning, a hoe is often used to lift a sod, the
baits being placed on the top of the sod or in the hole. However, there is no
need to make a hole or trail to attract rabbits if they are at all numerous.
When hand-poisoning, the best places to scatter the baits are on the feeding
grounds where grass is short, on the buck or pill heaps, under logs where rabbits
camp, directly over burrows, along the tops of spurs of hills, and in hilly country,
especially round sheep camps. The best time of the day to lay thistle root baits
is just before dark.
Another successful method is to poison the tap-root in the ground. To do this
■dig round the thistle to a depth of about 2 inches, then cut the leaves off the
-top just below the level of the ground, split the root downwards to a depth of
-J to 1 inch, and put finely powdered strychnine in the split, using as much as


can be put on the tip of a pocket-knife blade. Rabbits eat down one side of
the split and then the other, and it is common to see seven or eight rabbits
dead in a heap round the thistle. Babbits will even be found dying from eating
it a month afterwards.
Stock Inspector McCulloch describes an effective method used in the
Balranald district: —
The roots are collected from young plants, washed well and cut into small
pieces. Powdered strychnine is sprinkled on, and generally a little brown sugar
added and the whole mixed together in the proportions of 1 oz. of strychnine to
24 to 26 lb. of roots. This is laid with the poison-cart in the evening. Results
in summer months very satisfactory. Bait should not be too wet or sloppy.
Strychnine must be powdered to flour.
The Rabbit Inspector of the Denman Pastures Protection District states
that strychnine and thistle root is used for nine months of the year in his
district.
Decoys Used with Strychnine and Thistle Roots.
In many districts in which strychnine has been used in combination with
various edible substances, “ decoys ” of one kind or another are not infre-
quently used. A passing reference has been made to this in the method
described by Mr. Glen nan. Several such came under the Commissioner’s
notice while making investigations in the field. One of the most interesting
of these is mentioned later under the name of “ Mepham’s Decoy.” Stock
Inspector Belschner (then of Nyngan) described, in 1922, a method used
in the Nyngan Pastures Protection District. He says that most effective
poisoning was done with black thistle roots together with strychnine and
the decoy known as “ TJrqhhartite.” The following method was adopted:—
The black thistle roots are collected, washed, surplus moisture removed, then
well scraped and cut up into finch sections. A small portion of Urquhartite is
sprinkled on the roots and absorbed by stirring. Portion of the strychnine to
be used is then added. This is powdered to the finest dust before using. The
whole is well stirred or shaken, then the balance of the decoy necessary is added,
and also the balance of strychnine, and the same process of shaking and stirring
repeated. The baits are then ready for destruction either by hand or the funnel
of poison-cart.
Strychnine with Apples, Quinces, or Carrots.
Another old method which has recently come into great prominence is the
use of strychninised apples, quinces, and carrots. Por each of these there is
much use in various districts from time to time. Chiefly they are looked
upon as offering alternatives when the rabbits will not take other baits which
are offering. They seem to have been used mostly on the Northern Table-
lands and associated slopes.
One of the oldest recipes, supplied by Bruce, is as follows: —Take 12 or
14 lb. of apples or carrots, cut into small pieces, and sprinkle with 1 oz.
powdered strychnine. Lay pieces in a ploughed furrow 10 or 20 feet apart.
Another recipe, taken from the Journal of Agriculture, Western Aus-
tralia, is worthy of mention; —
Cut into small pieces (an ordinary apple should make fifty or sixty baits) dust
with 1 oz. of strychnine to 10 or 12 lb. of fruit. It is a good plan to mix some
pollard or flour with the strychnine. Lay in the plough furrow from 6 inches to
3 feet apart, according to the infested state of the place. If the free baits are
taken, success is absolutely certain. The rabbit comes to the furrow eager and
unsuspicious, and falls an easy victim. On the other hand, if the free baits are
not taken, there is obviously no use in laying the poison bait, and some other
poison should be tried. In cases where the furrows cannot readily be made,
good work can be done by laying the poison on scratches similar to those made
when trapping. This also applies to other baits, grain or pollard. When poison
is taken, the furrows should be replenished until the rabbits cease to take it.
It is far better to have some poison wasting in the furrows than to have a few
rabbits left for future breeding.


Matthams gives a recipe for the use of strychnine and apples of which
the following is the substance: —
Use sound and sweet apples for preference. If sour apples only are pro-
curable, 1 lb. of sugar should be sprinkled on to about 12 lb. of bait. Cut the
apples into | inch cubes. After mixing the sugar with the baits, lay them out
on a bag and let them drain for a time, then place in mixing vessel and apply
the strychnine. The best plan is to place only two or three pounds of the bait in
the mixing tin, sprinkle a little of the strychnine upon them and mix well, and
then add more bait and sprinkle more strychnine until the whole quantity required
for poisoning is mixed. Use 1 oz. of powdered strychnine to every 12 to 16 lb.
of bait. The poisoned baits should be laid from about 18 inches to 5 feet apart,
according to the infested state of the country. One ounce of strychnine, if it
could be so distributed that each rabbit had sufficient to kill it, but no more,
would account for several thousands. It has been suggested that it would be
more economical to reduce the strength of the bait by putting less strychnine
to the 12 or 16 lb. of bait, or by using more apples to the ounce of strychnine;
but on the other hand it is contended that with 1 oz. to, say, 20 lb. the bait
would be less unpalatable and consequently more would be taken.
Strychnine with Wheat.
Stock Inspector Woollett recommends the use of strychninised wheat,
which has been successful in the Tamworth Pastures Protection District.
The directions are as follows;—
To three-quarters of a 7-lb. treacle tin full of wheat, add hot water. This
will cause the wheat to swell and fill the tin; add a matchbox lid full of finely
powdered strychnine and then lay out in a trail. This bait must not be put out
in a paddock where any class of stock is running.
Twigs Poisoned with Strychnine.
An old method which has been used with effect mostly on western lands
is that of poisoning sticks and twigs of various kinds. Bruce gives two
methods, as follows: —
(а) Dissolve 11 oz. of strychnine in 1 quart of vinegar, or of this quantity
of acetic acid; then add this to 5 gallons of water; add 2 lb, of flour
and 1 lb. of sugar to form a thin paste; or
(б) Use 1) oz. of strychnine to 1 gallon of water, and 2 lb. of flour and 1 lb.
of sugar to make a thin paste. In this case the strychnine should be
ground between two pieces of glass before being placed in the water, as
otherwise it will not be held in solution.
Inspector Woollett, of Tamworth, has mentioned that a very successful
poisoner in his district “ uses sticks of a shrubby, prickly bush that grows
on the hills in this district.” The bush referred to is probably Prickly
Furze, or Bursaria. When dealing with Mepham’s decoy, Mr. Woollett says
that the green branches are cut into pieces about an inch long. A thin
paste of flour and sugar is then made, and is covered over the stick by-
stirring. When the paste is well distributed and nearly dry, an ounce of
strychnine is added to a kerosene tin full of sticks, which are then used
like thistle root. On several occasions I have seen excellent catches made by
this method, and in one instance, when an alleged decoy was being given a
trial, the user of the sticks got the best results over all other methods.
Davis and Mepham’s Decoy.
Special prominence is given here to two decoys which have, in the last few
years, been the subject of much discussion in the Inverell, Glen Inncs,
Armidale, and Tamworth districts.
Davis’s Decoy. —A special decoy used in conjunction with the laying of
hand baits (consisting of jam and strychnine) is mentioned in off!cal files
for the year 1919. It was reported on by Stock Inspector Rees, of Inverell.
The area poisoned was a sandy ridge, about 25 acres of which had been
abandoned by trappers and poisoners as “ cleared up ” —to the extent that


results would now be insufficient to make wages. The owner, Mr. Kemp,
had run his cart over the area, and the result was four rabbits dead. In-
spector Rees’ report concerning the use of Davis’s decoy was as follows: —
Mr. Davis laid his preparation consisting of quince jam, strychnine, and decoy,
with a mattock, and 360 baits were laid; the party then returned to Inverell.
Next morning I visited the paddock and followed the bait trail and picked up 196
dead rabbits. lam perfectly satisfied that Mr. Davis’s method is phenomenal in its
results, for the following reasons: (1) the bait laid will be taken by all ages and
sexes of rabbits when they will not take the other well-known poisons; (2) that the
rabbit dies on or near to the bait; (3) that skins may be saved at all times, and the
rabbits gathered and burned on the spot, which is of the greatest importance in
a country where the blow-fly is such a menace to the stock-owner.
Up to this time the company interested in this decoy was employing its
own gangs of men, but in November they ceased this practice and devoted
themselves to manufacturing the special decoy only. The Inspector of
Stock at Armidale, reporting on this, gave one instance—at Greenhills,
Guyra—in which it was reported that the decoy had given no better results
than when essence of lemon had been used.
The Rabbit Inspector of Armidale reported the results from three places
treated with Davis’s decoy. Six men in five weeks destroyed 2,500 rabbits at
Woodville; but the inspector added that rabbits were still plentiful. At
“ Stanby,” twelve men in three weeks, followed by three men for another
two weeks, destroyed 2,500 rabbits. At “ Herbert Park,” ten men in five
weeks destroyed, by this poison, and also using traps, 9,000 rabbits. The
Rabbit Inspector found that on the country which had been treated, rabbits
were still very numerous. He said, from what he had seen, the decoy was
very good, but just as good work was being done by other decoys on the
market. In one instance, reported in the Walcha Witness of Ist January,
1920, portion of an area on which strychnine and jam had been laid un-
successfully two days previously was chosen for the use of this poison and
decoy with very good results, and at a comparatively low cost. In another
case, reported in the same paper, a demonstration which took place at
Tiara station was also very successful. This area was said to have been
poisoned, “ dug,” and shot over continuously for three weeks, and was
declared to be practically free of rabbits. The laying of the bait occupied
three-quarters of an hour, and seventy-four rabbits were gathered next
morning. The Inspector of Stock at Armidale confirmed the reports in
the newspaper quoted. Apparently nothing has been ascertained as to the
constituents of the decoy.
Mepham’s Decoy. —ln May, 1922, a somewhat uncommon form of decoy
was received by the Stock Branch of the Department of Agriculture from
Mr. G. A. Mepham, of Elsmore. Mr. Mepham said in his original letter;
“ I am enclosing a specimen of the leaf and hark which I use in the
poisoning of rabbits. This shrub grows plentifully around Inverell and in
the New England district, and the bark, leaves, and brown seeds, when
ground up through an ordinary mincer—sugar added—then, of course,
strychnine, make it a lure, and proves very disastrous to the rabbits. This
poisonous mixture I have used for four years or more and find it the best
of all poisons.”
Prior to this letter being received, Inspector Rees, of Inverell, had written
(in April, 1922) stating that he had visited the holding of a soldier settler
on Moorakyne subdivision to see the result of an exhibition of rabbit
poisoning by a local resident, A trial had been laid over-nigbt. The
machine was a primitive affair, consisting of a forked slide with an old
share so fixed that it acted as a “ stump jumper” when it struck any solid
obstacle. One horse was used to draw the machine, and a well-deepened
furrow was cut to attract Ihe rabbit.


The bait was hand laid. The area of 300 acres was thoroughly treated,
nnd the specific used (a “ scrub ” preparation of the operator) appeared to
he chiefly treated with some boiled decoction of roots or bark, while the
poisonous agent was strychnine. The experiment was most successful, 2,200
carcases being picked up on the trail. In places it was possible to count
thirty carcases within sight, or within 100 yards from where one stood.
As there were a number of warrens around where a trail had been laid,
it was reasonable to suppose that the catch was much better than the
account indicated.
Mr. Eees stated that chaff was treated by adding a decoction made by
boiling “ a certain bark,” and adding the liquor to the chaff, then sweetening.
He said that the mixture was the best bait he had ever seen, and in open
country it had this advantage, that the carcases were easily picked up to
burn, as they were found so close to the trail. One of the visitors pur-
chased 1 lb. for £l, and as he knew there were eight rabbits in his wire-
netted garden he laid baits and secured seven of them. This appeared to
indicate that the mixture was palatable and would be taken even in a
lucerne patch.
In a later letter sent by Mr. G. A. Mepham, junior, to Mr. Drummond.
M.L.A., it was stated that the bark, &c., had been used for four years or
more. Mr. Mepham said that ho came to use it through noticing the
rabbits gnawing it. He said:
I decided to try it as a bait for rabbits. The bark was put through an ordinary
mincer (1 added sugar to cause the bark to adhere) and then the strychnine.
The first trial, my brothers were astounded with the result, for never before had
I such a haul, and I have kept the idea going and even gave the secret to friends,
as the rabbits are such destructive creatures. This last week I poisoned one
paddock—about H oz. strychnine used —and, roughly speaking, have killed over
800 rabbits. You may think they are thicker here than most places, but not so —■
to the best of my belief I had no more rabbits than other places. The effects of
the hark are truly wonderful.
In June, 1922, Inspector Eees wrote with further reference to the matter,
and sent a parcel of 10 lb of the decoy material. He said it was a fair
sample of the shrub. Some of the sticks which he sent were devoid of bark,
showing plainly that the rabbit was fond of the material. He stated further;
Owing to the armour of sharp spikes that usual ly protect the hush it is not
easy for the rabbit to got at the bark, but if a bush is cut and left on the ground
every particle of bark is eaten. On cutting a bush yesterday, bark was eaten in
places 6 feet from the ground. Babbits evidently scaled a leaning limb to get the
bark. There is an exudation of resin from injured patches of the limbs, which
has an odour somewhat resembling sandalwood oil.
From the material supplied, Mr J. H. Maiden, then Government Botanist,
identified the plant as the well known Bursaria spinosa, often called white
thorn or black thorn, or prickly furze. Mr. Maiden makes the interesting
observation that it is one of the few native shrulbs or small trees that are
looked upon as weeds —interesting, because it was a case of using a weed
to destroy an animal pest.
During- the month of September, while in the Inverell Pasture Protection
District, the Commissioner met and talked with Mr. Mepham in regard to
his decoy. He gathered that it had not been used much lately, and is only
used occasionally in small quantities at present. lie said that he had some
difficulty in supplying the quantities that were required at first, and now
there was no demand. He informed me that he used a matchbox-top full
of strychnine to a 2-lb. tin of his black thorn bark with great success.
The Bursaria referred to previously grows abundantly in many parts of
the Inverell district, to a height of 18 or 20 feet.


The Stock Inspector of the Warialda district in 1922 also reported upon
this decoy as follows: —
I personally witnessed a demonstration of a new preparation named “ Dinky
Die,” in appearance like rough-cut tobacco. Necessary to make a trail and take a
small quantity of stones, bark, and overturned sods. The latter appeared most
attractive. Baits placed between 6 and 7 feet apart.
The use of the baits in paddocks of Myall Creek station, on boundary
of Warialda and Inverell districts, where 2,000 baits were laid out, resulted
in a catch of 1,000 rabbits. In this district rabbits would not take baits
of any kind previously. The manager of Myall Creek station said he had,
prior to the demonstration, put out 3,000 baits (thistle roots), with a catch
of only 150 rabbits, and had also used poisoned grass with very poor results.
Wherever one goes in rabbit-infested districts he hears of this or that
decoy. Whatever their value—even the best—they appear to be’only of
transient interest to the rabbit. This is on a par with general experiences
in the matter of poisonous compounds. Every experienced hand will tell
you that the rabbits “ like their poison changed ” now and again.
ARSENIC BAITS.
Arsenic is used principally for poisoning water, as before described; and
has been so used for many years. It has been also used for poisoning
pollard now and again, but is not in much favour; partly because of its
corrosive character. It is applied to grain, chaff, carrots, apples, &c. When
used with grain or chaff it is usually laid in poison yards cut off from any
danger of stock taking the baits.
The following recipes for the preparation of arsenical baits are taken
from Bruce (1900). With only slight variations they are the methods of
preparations usually followed where this poison is adopted;—
Dry Arsenic and Grain.
Take 50 lb. of any grain of good quality, 2 lb. of arsenic, 4 lb. of brown
sugar, and 1J gallons of water. Put the grain into a tub or boiler; boil
the water in a bucket and dissolve sugar in same; pour the mixture over the
grain in the boiler and mix, using a shovel for the purpose; then sift the
arsenic on with a dredger, or by such means as will thoroughly disseminate
the arsenic through the mass; keep stirring with the shovel until the whole
is thoroughly mixed. In this case also the mixing could be more thoroughly
done with a machine or churn. This poison should be prepared in the
afternoon and used three or four hours after mixing, as rabbits will not
eat anything sour or musty.
Dry Arsenic and Chaff.
Take 30 lb. best green chaff, 2 lb. arsenic, 3 lb. sugar, and 1 gallon water,
Obtain a large zinc-lined case and spread about 10 or 12 lb. chaff evenly at
the bottom; boil the water and mix sugar in it; then sprinkle the water over
the chaff and shake in the arsenic in pepper-box fashion and mix thoroughly.
So in this case, too, the mixing should be with a machine or churn. It is
only necessary to damp the chaff sufficiently to make the arsenic adhere
to it. This mixture, on being prepared, should be spread at once and dried,
as rabbits will not eat poisoned food which has changed its natural appear-
ance from fermentation or any other cause.
Dry Arsenic and Carrots, Apples, &c.
Take 20 lb. of apples, pumpkins, or carrots, cut in small pieces (about
i inch square), and 1 lb. arsenic. Sift the arsenic on dry with a dredger.
When using carrots it is advisable to lightly damp them in a thick solution


of sugar. With apples this is not necessary, as there is sufficient acid in
the apples to absorb the poison. Here also the machine or churn should be
used; but it should be used very gently and slowly.
To give some impression of the use of such things, it may be mentioned
that during the latter end of January and the beginning of February of
the present year (a period of only three weeks), one fruit commission agent
in Sydney despatched over 3 tons of apples tp one district in the Eiverina.
Arsenic in Solution and Grain.
Use i lb. arsenic to 2 gallons water; boil until there is only 1 gallon left,
then pour in 2 lb. of common sugar and 25 lb. of oats or wheat; stir it about
until the mixture is absorbed, then cover it over until cold before you lay
it out.
Arsenic in solution is also prepared with bran, hay, ensilage, cut chaff, cut
sorghum, carrots, apples, pumpkins, &c. Bruce thinks that it is the “ best
poison for carrots.” The carrots are only parboiled and have a thin layer
of pollard sifted over them.
Cyanide of Potassium.
This deadly poison is often heard of in connection with rabbit destruc-
tion, and is frequently made use of by certain rabbiters in parts of the
country, although its use for rabbit destruction is forbidden under the
Pastures Protection Act. There is a good reason for fearing, however,
that but little of it was ever used (within recent years) in a bona fide effort
to destroy rabbits. Undoubtedly the poison is frequently purchased as
rabbit or vermin poison, and this has given rise to a widespread idea that
it is used for the destruction of the rodents.
Much loss of stock has been occasioned by the use of this poison. Among
stockmen and stock inspectors throughout the country there is a universal
detestation of this poison. Nothing would give greater, or more widespread,
satisfaction throughout the pastures protection districts generally than
that the sale of this dangerous substance should be so hedged in as to make
it practically unpurchasable.
The point is stressed that there is very frequent confusion of the highly
useful fumigant (non-dangerous to either stock or wild life) known as
calcium cyanide and this dangerous poison cyanide of potassium. There
is, of course, no relation between the two substances or in the manner of
their use.
PART VIII.
Destruction of Rabbits by Fumigation.
Fumigation by one agency or another as a means of rabbit destruction
has been used practically ever since the invasion of this State by the rabbit.
In the earlier days of fumigation “ smoking-out ” was largely used.
Sulphur also was freely used in many parts. Almost at the beginning of
the work carbon bisulphide was used likewise, and is still very largely used.
The latest of all fumigants, calcium cyanide, appears to be the most
effective medium known.


In considering the value of any particular material, or any appliance
for the fumigation of rabbit warrens, one must needs take into considera-
tion the general layout of the country, the class of soil, the presence or other-
wise of surface harbour, and a number of other things.. Primarily, of
course, the thing to be considered is the value of the fumigant as a lethal
agent. Still there are quite a number of fumigating materials which are
very deadly when introduced into the rabbit burrow, but which it is imprac-
ticable to use as a general thing because of the degree of handling required
and ultimate cost of the process.
Fumigation with Carbon Bisulphide.
The most widely known fumigant for rabbit destruction is carbon bisul-
phide (CS2), which has been used on a large scale for long past, certainly
for more than forty years. Everywhere that one goes in rabbit-infested
districts, he finds that this substance is being, or has been, used to a
greater or lesser extent. It is known familiarly to all and sundry as
“ carbon.”
That very great success has attended the use of carbon bisulphide as a
rabbit destroyer is undoubted. Of all the older fumigants carbon bisul-
phide stands practically alone both for its lethal value and economy of
handling. Among modern fumigating substances it still holds its own to
a large extent, though it cannot compare with calcium cyanide, Ca (ONO,
for general utility, ease of handling, and economy of expenditure; or
perhaps with the gas carbon monoxide (00) as produced from one or two
machines at present on the market, but in which the sphere of useful-
ness is more limited than in the case of calcium cyanide.
Notwithstanding the great amount of use to which carbon bisulphide has
Teen put, and the good work frequently done with its aid, its field of utility
(like that of all other lethal agents) has been strictly limited by weather,
•climate, and types of environment of the rabbit burrows, as well as the
structure of the burrows themselves.
Stock Inspector Gavel, writing in the Agricultural Gazette (Ist No-
vember, 1924), says;
This is a most alluring method and must be used with caution. There is no
method that gives greater promise and that in the end proves a more dismal
failure. Instances could be quoted where, by fumigation, hundreds of rabbits
were destroyed in a single warren, and yet within a short period the warren was
well tenanted again. No fumigation, no matter how thorough, can account for
every rabbit over any given moderate-sized area. All the rabbits in old warrens,
or in the majority of them, may be destroyed, but there is always the percentage
where the gas fails to be entirely fatal, and in these and the rabbits which manage
to hide outside, lies the danger. They soon reinfest the warrens, dig deeper, and
learn to protect themselves against the next fumigation. Therefore, if it is at all
possible, destroy warrens and harbour.
Mr. S. P. Ward, of Gilgal station, in the Graziers’ Association’s pamphlet.
Babbit Destruction, in referring to the various methods of using carbon
bisulphide, says:
These methods are successful to the extent of diminishing the numbers of rab-
bits, provided the ground is damp or wet, but eradication is impossible, on account
of some rabbits blocking up some of the leaders from the main burrows, and
preventing the fumes from reaching the farther ends. Further, this is only a
partial remedy, because the rabbits remaining on the property, or others getting
thereon, have all the burrows remaining ready for re-occupation.


Mr. T. P. Glennan, Rabbit Inspector, Moree, -writing in the Agricultural
Gazette (3rd June, 1918), says:
This is a method which, if carefully attended to, accounts for many of the
pests. The best time to fumigate is during the winter months, as there is less
likelihood of the gas or smoke mixtures escaping, the ground being less porous
than it usually is in dry, hot weather.
Where burrows are not large, bisulphide of carbon is a good medium, and can
bo used in several ways.
There are many like Mr. Glennan who claim that carbon bisulphide is
only suited to the fumigation of small borrows. On the other hand, there
are large numbers of users who claim to have had the greatest success
with even the largest warrens.
The most commonly adopted method is to saturate balls of cotton waste,
cotton wool, or pieces of jute (or any sacking) with the carbon bisulphide,
then to thrust the ball into the opening as far as possible. Every opening
to a burrow or warren is so treated to make sure of the deadly work being
done thoroughly. Therein lies one of the weakest points of this system.
Whereas with some other fumigants like calcium cyanide, there is an imme-
diate visible “ back-fire ” from a short or “ blind ” burrow when the substance
is pumped in; the system of treating each opening with a hand-placed
substance, the mouth of some labyrinth passage only receives the same
treatment as a short, recently-excavated burrow, perhaps not more than
3 feet in length. After each burrow is treated in the manner described,
it is immediately closed.
Sometimes the charge of the carbon ’’ is immediately exploded—a
lighted match being thrown in for this purpose—but there is a great diver-
sity of opinion among users in various parts of the country, and among
Stock and Rabbit Inspectors as to the utility of this; but, on the whole,
experience seems to favour leaving the unexploded fumes to do their deadly
work alone. Of course, all haste has to be made in sealing all treated
boles owing to the volatile nature of the substance. Great care is necessary,
also, owing to its highly inflammable nature. It should never be exposed
within oven a few feet of a naked light or fire, and under no circumstance's
should smoking by the users or attendants be allowed. Supplies should be
always stored in a cool place. Especially in warm weather, the drums or
jars containing carbon bisulphide should bo handled without shock as the
liquid is explosive.
Handle Carbon Bisulphide with Care.
Notwithstanding the precautions which it is necessary to take in dealing
with this fumigant, the accidents are astonishingly few—owing to its wide
use over a long period of time. Crommelin gives some general directions
for handling- carbon bisulphide in the field which are worth quoting-. TTe
says:
Get two common tea billies, one four and one six quarts; the lids must, of
course, fit properly. Put a lining of cotton waste, tow, or old rags in the 6-quart
billy; then put the 4-quart billy inside the 6-quart; fill the smaller one with
carbon and you have a cheap and ready means of carrying it.
When you find a working burrow, break off a piece of stick about 3 or 4 feet
long, and wind round the end of it a bit of cotton waste of the size of a small
apple; dip it into the carbon, thrust it as far into the burrow as possible; close
the entrance quickly with earth closely trampled into it, and your work is done.
If you find a large warren or bilbee* hole with fifteen or twelve entrances, close
up all but the main ones, and those which you think are independent holes (by
independent holes I mean those which from their appearance are leading away
from the main burrow), leave about six in twenty to be carboned.
* The bilbee or rabbit bandicoot. one of otir indigenous marsupials, now unfortunately nearly extinct


A warren with twenty entrances will take two men (two men are sufficient
for this work) about ten or fifteen minutes. If the men are working in open
plains where sticks cannot be got, they should carry some with them—a long thin
sharp-pointed stick to place and leave the carboard cotton waste in the burrow.
Carbon should be stored in a shed, or put in a hole underground, and covered
over with boughs to keep it cool.
I have put as few as five charges of carbon into a bilbee hole 15 yards in width,
which showed evident signs of being occupied, and next day when the men opened
it all the rabbits were dead. We carboned a large warren under an old house, and
when wo dug it out next day we got twenty-two rabbits, eighteen kangaroo rats,
and five cats, all dead. We carboned a warren which had 170 entrances to it
with the most successful result.
We caught three rabbits, made a hole and put them in. Then we took 22 feet
of tin piping, put one end to the mouth of the hole in which the rabbits were,
and then applied carbon to the further extremity of the piping; in six minutes the
rabbit nearest the piping was dead.
One day on a station in the Balranald district, having a little carbon in a
bottle, and no tow or cotton waste, I took a piece of dead wood, put five charges
of carbon into a large bilbee hole, and two into another. Next day we opened
both holes and got a dead rabbit out of each. We did not dig them out clean, as
they were very large, and we only wanted to see if the charges were effective.
I have proved the efficacy of carbon to numerous sceptical people, and obliged
them to acknowledge its undoubted superiority over any large means of dealing
with the pest in warrens, burrows, and hollow logs.
In the presence of ten persons, I put carbon into a large bilbee hole; imme-
diately after the carbon had been put into the last entrance, the men opened up the
burrow, and in five minutes came on to a dead rabbit; we dug on until the
whole burrow' was opened, and we got thirteen more dead, and one old doe which
was gasping. I laid her out in the fresh air, and in thirty minutes she had not
recovered sufficiently to stand on her feet. I then held her head over a pannikin
with some carbon in it, and in two minutes she was dead. This was the most
successful experiment, showing as it did that carbon can bo used effectively on
copi eountrj'.
Croimnelin gives an instance of the use of carbon bisulphide in the
“ white copi porous country.” He writes:
One of the overseers, Mr. Brennan, in working his country, came on a large
flat containing some hundreds of bilbee holes, and surrounded with inallee and
other scrubs which he worked with a large pack of dogs until he drove the rabbits
to the burrows, and they could be seen in scores sitting at the mouths of the
burrows on the flat.
He then got a number of men with carbon, and in one day carboned the whole
flat. It was thought at the time that by this one raid some thousands of rabbits
were destroyed. Five drums of carbon were used, and in the morning not a single
burrow had been opened by the rabbits, showdng all must have been killed.
Crommelin concludes rather quaintly ;
Bisulphide of carbon should be of the best sort, and to insure this should be
only ordered from respectable houses.
At that time the use of this substance w r as in its infancy. There has,
however, been some houses connected with various machines and specifics
associated with rabbit destruction wbich might have caused many since
Mr. Orommellin’s time to issue the same warning.
Mr. G. M. McKeown, then manager of Wagga Experiment Farm, writing
in the Agricultural Gazette (2nd April, 1909), recommended that the neces-
sary supply of carbon bisulphide for a day’s work should be carried in glass-
stoppered bottles. Ho preferred the alternative method of igniting the


material immediately after it was placed in position, as lie said, this “ will
rarely fail to canse an explosion which will instantly fill the burrow with
the poisonous fumes.” He said further:
The treatment has always proved most effective, as we have never yet found
a treated burrow to have been opened from the inside.
Burrows opened up for test purposes within three minutes after treatment have
disclosed numbers of dead rabbits, but never a living one, and rabbits taken from
treated tree trunks in which there have been vents have expired within a few
seconds.
Stock Inspector Rochfort, of Jerilderie, writing in 1922, described the use
of bisulphide of carbon as being the “ least expensive.” His method was to
dig a hole 2 feet across and about 2 feet deep over the main entrance to a
rabbit warren. An old bag or sheep skin was then saturated with the liquid
and thrust into the leads, the mouths of which were closed with paper,
bark, or any rubbish that would prevent the earth from covering the charged
sheep skins. He said that where this method was properly carried out it
was most efficacious. In the sandy country in his district it was “ absolutely
the cheapest and quickest.” “Experience indicated,” he said, “that to
explode the charge of bisulphide of carbon was a waste of time and money.”
During the long' period of its use in Australia there has been little, if
any, chang'e in the manner of such use, except for the development of certain
machines.
Fumigating with Calcium Cyanide (Cyanogas Calcium Cyanide).
During the last two years much has been heard of the product known as
calcium cyanide (now being called Cyanogas calcium cyanide) as a fumi-
gant for the destruction of rabbits. The advent of this substance is regarded
as the most important event so far in the whole history of rabbit extermina-
tion
Calcium cyanide is of great interest, inasmuch as it is one of the products
of modern scientific knowledge applied to the extraction of chemicals direct
from the air. The factories whence the calcium cyanide comes are situated
at Niagara Tails (Canada), and are controlled by the American Cyanamid
Company. Air-nitrogen products are being used in many departments of
commercial work at present throughout the world in mining, in the treat-
ment of steel, in electroplating, in dye and colour making, in refrigeration,
in chemical research, and in fumigation.
In view of the general scientific and popular interest of the manner of
producing these air-nitrogen products, a description is given as printed by
the manufacturers:—The greatest heat (obtained in an electric furnace)
and the greatest cold (liquid air) are utilised in the fixation of atmospheric
nitrogen. In the electric furnace lime and coke are fused at a temperature
of 4,000 degrees Fab., forming calcium carbide. Air is liquefied by the
application of high pressure, and the expansion of the compressed and cooled
air to below the critical temperature. At about 300 degrees Fah. below zero
the air liquefies. Pure nitrogen is then distilled off as a gas. The nitrogen
so obtained is pumped into cylindrical electric ovens, each holding about a
ton of powdered calcium carbide, -which is kept at a white heat by means
of a central electrically-heated pencil. The white-hot powdered carbide
greedily absorbs the nitrogen, fixing it in the form of crude calcium
cyanamid. The fixation operation takes about twenty-five hours. The
product, in the form of a solid ingot, contains about 28 per cent, of nitrogen,
present in the form of calcium cyanamid (CaCN 2 ). The calcium cyanide
used in fumigation is prepared from calcium cyanamid. When calcium
cyanide is acted upon by atmospheric water vapour, hydrocyanic acid gas is
given off.


Tlie use of calcium cyanide as a rodenticide, insecticide, and vermicide
depends upon this reaction. It has been well known for many years that
hydrocyanic acid gas is an effective economic poison, but its use was limited
by the necessity of generating the gas by the action of acid and water upon,
sodium or potassium cyanide in regular fumigating pots or jars. The pro-
duction of liquid hydrocyanic acid was a step in the direction of ease of
application, but the use of calcium cyanide has made possible the use of
hydrocyanic acid as a killing agent in many fields where neither sodium
cyanide or liquid hydrocyanic acid could ever be used.
Grades of Calcium Cyanide.
Calcium cyanide is made in various grades to suit different purposes, as
follows:
Calcium Cyanide Flakes, containing not less than 40 per cent., not
more than 50 per cent, calcium cyanide. Large pieces about of an
inch in diameter.
Calcium Cyanide Granules, containing not less than 40 per cent., not
more than 50 per cent, calcium cyanide. Small particles about like
coarse ground coffee.
Calcium Cyanide “G ” grade, containing not less than 40 per cent.,
not more than 50 per cent, calcium cyanide. Particles very small, about
like sea sand.
Calcium Cyanide “ A ” Dust, containing not less than 40 per cent.,
not more than 50 per cent, calcium cyanide. Pine dust about 80 per
cent, through 2'oo-mesh screen.
Calcium Cyanide “ B ” Dust, containing not less than 17' per cent,
and not more than 25 per cent, calcium cyanide.
Calcium Cyanide Citrus Dust, containing not less than 30 per cent,
and not more than 37.5 per cent, calcium cyanide; sulphur 25 per cent.
It is not the intention of this bulletin to give details of the early experi-
ments with this highly effective medium, but merely to indicate how very
successful even the first trials were with what at the time was an unknown
and untried thing. During the years 1924 and 1925 calcium cyanide
rapidly came into use, as shown by field investigations and reports from
stock and rabbit inspectors, in which testimony was given as to the groat
efficacy of both the flake and dust forms of calcium cyanide, but particularly
the latter, when blown into warrens with a machine blower. The great
advantages of the system are (1) the deadliness of the gas generated, (2)
cheapness, and (3) the portability of the outfit.
While the calcium cyanide is so deadly, it is perfectly safe to handle, and,
unlike alkaloid poisons, within a short time after being laid becomes
innocuous. In regard to this substance Mr. Max Henry, Chief Veterinary
Surgeon, says;—
So far the calcium cyanide has proved most effective. It is extremely cheap,
very easy to apply, and quite safe with reasonable care. Of course, it is poison,
and must be handled with respect; but if the operator is careful there seems to be
no danger —except to the rabbits.
Even from their point of view there is much to be said for it. Most forms of
death are rather messy, but this is quick and apparently painless. If you are
going to kill rabbits this is a humane way of doing it.
The last point mentioned by Mr. Henry is well worthy of some attention.
There is no doubt that the method of killing rabbits with the steel “ gin ”
trap is really most cruel and inhumane—inflicting, as it does, much suffer-
ing upon the unfortunate rabbit. In fact, the screams of the entrapped


rabbits, gripped by the steel jaws of the “ gin,” have much to do with
frightening- rabbits away from one part of a run to another, thus rendering it
more difficult to eradicate the pest. Stock inspectors and rabbit inspectors
agree as to the cheapness and effectiveness of calcium cyanide dust.
Calcium cyanide was used in the Grafton Pastures Protection District,
As a result of the satisfactory work done on Yulgilbar station, on the Upper
Clarence, the Grafton board decided to purchase twelve dust blowers, to
lend, as occasion demanded, to small settlers with limited capital “ whose
areas threaten to be overrun.” In the Daily Examiner, of Grafton, an
account appeared of a meeting of the Grafton Pastures Protection Board, in
which mention was made of the use of calcium cyanide. According- to this
report, the Stock Inspector said;—
If they could get the landowners to realise the value of the calcium cyanide dust
blower, and get these machines in their district, the question of the appointment
of a rabbit inspector might be deferred for the present.
The great spread of the use of calcium cyanide is all the more remarkable
because of the drop in the use of the older fumigants, owing to the price of
skins. This, indeed, can be the only obstacle to its use on a grand scale.
The Narrabri Pastures Protection Board freely uses it on stock routes,
travelling- stock reserves, &c. They consider it very effective and inexpensive
as compared with the alternative method of clearing- up the ground first and
putting poison in. The poison-cart cannot be run in on to the land until
it is clear of all sorts of debris, most of which, in such districts, is really
not a harbourage for rabbits, and which would not, otherwise, have to be
cleared up at all. This adds greatly to the cost of poisoning. In treating
with calcium cyanide such matter may remain where it is.
In the Tamworth Pastures Protection District it has been used to a very
large extent on the routes and reserves, as well as by landholders. The
opinion of one stockowner, himself a member of the district board, is typical
of nractically all those who have used the substance for any length of time,
and where the work bad not been left entirely to more or less prejudiced or
naturally conservative farm or station hands. This man said that he had
used “ everything under the sun,” and there was “ nothing like it.”
The trouble is that frequently the work is in the hands of men who
have known only one or two methods for many years, and find it difficult to
adapt themselves to a new idea. The deadliness of the generated gases also
produces in some a certain amount of fear as to the consequences to them-
selves. This is quite unwarranted, although readily understandable. The
strange thing, though, is that these same men will handle strychnine and
arsenic as though they were so much flour. Where a man has become used
to handling- the calcium cyanide dust blower he finds the work of eradica-
tion by this means very simple indeed.
Suggestions for Using Calcium Cyanide Dust.
In view of the absence of general knowledge on the subject, some general
suggestions in regard to the field use of calcium cyanide are given;
]. Carefully examine the warren openings to make sure that there are
not two, three, or even four channels running into one chamber
near the surface. If this should occur the opening should be dug
back with a shovel to expose each channel so that clearer observa-
tion can be made to distinguish from which opening the dust issues.
It can be understood that if the original openings were closed
before preparation, the dust might bo coming from only one of those
channels, and an entire section of the warren would be thus cut -iff
from the application of the dust. Each channel has to show the
dust cloud before being closed.


2. Pop-holes or openings over channels should not be filled up, or broken
in, as by doing this the run of dust to other parts of the warren is
blocked. The best way to prevent this is to put a tussock of grass
or some other solid substance over the top of the hole before cover-
ing it with soil. It can be rammed when fumigation is complete.
S. Fumigation of a warren should be done from the side from which the
wind is blowing, commencing at the farthest opening in that direc-
tion. If there is much breeze it is not necessary to close the open-
ing where the blowing is taking place until it is found the dust is
coming back.
4. Do not attempt to treat a whole warren from one opening. If there
are a number of openings widely distributed, apply the dust to
several, but do not attempt to force dust from one end of the
warren to the other if it is a large one.
5. Always allow a fairly dense cloud to appear before closing; just a
mere appearance is not sufficient.
6. Calcium cyanide releases hydrocyanic acid gas on exposure to air,
and in coating the walls of the warren it continues to give off gas
over a long period. As moisture has the effect of releasing this
gas, if the ground is damp, the gas will he given off more quickly
than if the ground is dry, but even if the ground is very damp l it
will give off gas over a period long enough to kill the imprisoned
rabbits if a sufficient charge has been blown in.
7. In the generation of hydrocyanic acid gas from the calcium cyanide,
a certain amount of air will be displaced. If tbe opening’s that
have been closed have not been rammed, a certain amount of gas
will escape. Tightly ramming ensures that tbe gas shall, to a cer-
tain extent, be forced or helped in its diffusion towards the dead
ends. Ramming makes it more difficult for a rabbit to escape
should it only move after the fumes are weakening', and the time
taken to burrow out being prolonged, might prove fatal, where,
otherwise, with an insufficient charge, the rabbits might escape.
8. Do not open warrens for inspection the same day on which the
warren is treated. Many rabbits might then be found alive.
Although dead rabbits have been found in warrens that have been
opened up an hour or two after application, positive results cannot
he expected unless the mirren is kept closed for twenty-four hours.
9. If rabbits are driven into a hollow log, just block sufficiently with a
piece of wood to prevent their escape and blow with machine,
using enough dust to force it through the cracks and hollows of the
log. The rabbit will collapse within a few moments, and will
shortly die.
10. Although the ramming of the soil at the entrances of the burrows
is considered essential, remarkable results have been obtained in
“ blowing ” open crevices and rocky country where rabbits live,
which cannot be closed, and the rabbits are evidently killed in the
same way as they are killed in open logs. A larger charge of dust
is necessary in such cases.
Fumigation with Carbon Monoxide.
There are several machines in operation in various parts of the country
which rely for their lethal effect upon the production of the gas carbon
monoxide (CO). It is well known, of course, that this gas is extremely
deadly to all animal life. It is produced, to a greater or lesser extent, in
every fire—open or enclosed —but in the open air the oxygen of the air
quickly renders it, and the associated carbon dioxide (CO,), harmless.


In a number of the more crude machines which have been developed';
for the propelling of smoke from ordinary combustion into rabbit warrens,
carbon monoxide, and to some extent carbon dioxide, are probably the-
lethal agents, but because of their crudity in construction and in opera-
tion, combustion is uneven and the consequent gases produced vary greatly
in their effect.
The following is a description of the best machine which has come under
notice for the production of carbon monoxide:—A four-wheeled frame-
work, strongly constructed, which carries, attached to the back axle, the
cylinder wherein the gas is produced, and a fan driven by a li-h.p. oil
engine. The cylinder is of cast metal about 4 feet in height and 18 inches
in diameter. The top portion consists of the fire chamber lined with fire-
clay bricks. Beneath is a water chamber for cooling- purposes. The
cylinder is stoked from the top. As stated, this exterminator depends for
its destructive properties mainly on the production of carbon monoxide, a
gas which not only suffocates, as does carbon dioxide, but actually poisons
by uniting with the haemoglobin of the blood to form carbonyl-haemoglobin.
Wood fuel is used preferably as being- most favourable for the production
of gas. ISTear the top of the cylinder are a number of vent holes through
which air is drawn. As the air passes over the burning wood at the top of
the chamber, carbon dioxide is formed; and this gas is then drawn by
means of the suction of the fans down through the red-hot charcoal at the
bottom. The result is that the gas is disintegrated, one of the atoms of
oxygen unites with a further atom of carbon, and carbon monoxide is pro-
duced. The gas is then drawn past the fans and forced into the warrens
through a long, flexible steel tube. With it are drawn such by-products as
pyroligneous acid, acetone wood spirit, &c., produced by the decomposition
of the wood in the fire chamber.
It is claimed that one advantage of the suction draught is that tar pro-
ducts are drawn through the hottest portion of the furnace, and being thus
gasified do not tend to block up the outlet. It is also claimed that the
running cost of the plant is remarkably low: as the wood consumption is
slight (said to be about 1 cwt. for eight hours). The principal costs as
regards material are tor petrol and lubricating oil required for the 14 h.p.
engine which drives the fans. The exhaust from the engine finds its way
into the g - as pipe and this adds its quota to the poison fumes.
Being of a specific gravity of .967, the carbon monoxide has but a slight
tendency to rise, and is thus easily pumped down into the burrows.
Although carbon monoxide is of itself a colourless, odourless gas, the pres-
ence of impurities gives the mixture of gas a bluish colour. The bluish
color of the gas mentioned enables its escape from communicating burrows
to be detected within a few seconds.
The Inspector of Stock at Balranald, reporting to the Department of Agri-
culture, 25th November, 1924, said that a public demonstration of this
apparatus had been given upon several warrens on the town common before
a large gathering’ of landholders. The warrens were fumigated for five
minutes, and then dug out. One set of burrows, about 20 feet square, when
dug out, contained eighteen dead rabbits. Then the machine was taken to
a much largen warren, which was thoroughly treated —time not stated —
“and the number of rabbits already dug out number sixty.”
This Inspector also mentioned that a very fine feature of the machine
was that it would drive the fumes to a length of 40 yards underground,
through the numerous net-work of burrows —Tie said further;
I carried out several post-mortems, which showed all the organs, with the
exception of the liver, normal. The liver was congested and distended, also the
blood vessels. The blood was of a dark colour and the carcases generally showed
evidence of atoxic poisoning.


He adds that this was not the first machine to be used in the Balranald
district, as two had been in use by the Paika group, with great results.
Satisfactory tests of this machine were made by the Stock Branch of the
Department of Agriculture at Tarana in April of 1925.
Destruction of Rabbits by Motor-car Fumes.
A great deal has been hoard, from time to time, about the utilisation of
the exhaust gases of internal combustion engines (such as those of the motor-
car), for the purpose of destroying rabbits in their burrows by fumigation.
From inquiries made in many parts of the country it has been ascertained
that Ford cars have frequently been put to such a use.
In view of the great recent advance in the use of other fumigants, it is
clear that the use of the motor-car for fumigating work is both cumbrous
and expensive. Motor spirit would need to show a very great reduction in
price for such a practice to be economically sound. In addition, it has to
be remembered that the capital value of a motor-car makes it a very costly
‘‘fumigating machine” indeed; apart from the need for using the car for
the ordinary purposes of a landholder. Then, again, there are many
places on an average holding (other than open plain country) where the
rabbit burrows are quite inaccessible to the motor-car.
In our western district a number of instances came under notice in which
the motor-car had been used for clearing out occasional warrensi—but never
as a regular means of clearing up runs, as it was too costly.
PART IX.
Other Methods of Destruction.
Use of Dogs.
The use of dogs as an aid to general methods of rabbit destruction has
been mentioned here and there. In digging-out operations the dogs are
essential both for driving in and for the capture of the rabbits as they are
exposed. In hunting the rabbit with the gun very little success would be
reached on the whole without the aid of at least one dog. In locating the
haunts of rabbits amongst surface debris or in places where burrows are
hidden by grass, weeds, or brushy undergrowth, or in driving the rabbits
to their burrows preparatory to fumigation operations, dogs, operating
singly or in packs, are invaluable. When, ultimately, a holding has been
netted and subdivided, and is cleared of rabbits, then, also, the dog is of
the greatest value for getting the stray rabbits that will surely appear from
time to time.
Some people carry a large number of dogs for rabbit work when general
clearing-out operations are in full swing. One pastoralist in the Warialda
district had four teams of fifteen dogs each when he was exterminating
rabbits on his holding of 7,469 acres. “ The noise of the dogs and the con-
stant chasing kept the rabbits away from the sections being cleared up.”
What Breed of Dog?
In rabbit work no particular breed of dog is used. The packs frequently
represent the weirdest assortment of the species Canis domestica that it is
possible to find. Big dogs and little dogs, slow dogs and fast dogs, short-
haired and long-haired, well-bred and mongrel—all find their places in the


work of rabbit destruction. There are many thousands of nondescript dogs
doing the most useful rabbit work regularly throughout the State. But
some landholders have their own ideas as to “best breeds.” One at Cotta
Walla says that kangaroo dogs, collies, and fox terriers are best. Fox terriers
and Irish terriers are good for following the scent, while the kangaroo dogs
are naturaly speedy and of use for capturing rabbits turned out of burrows
or loss.
Crommelin (1880) suggests that beagles, fox terriers, retrievers and
spaniels, English terriers, and light, well-bred collies —in the order stated —
are best for hunting the rabbit. Further, he adds;
A splendid cross of dogs for rabbits is that between the beagle and greyhound,
staghound, or kangaroo dog. Another fine cross is between the beagle and English
terrier. Still another cross I have tried and found good is between the kangaroo
dog and bloodhound. The first cross mentioned combines speed with scent. The
next cross gives a dog of great endurance; he seems never to tire. And the last
cross mentioned combines speed with an unerring scent.
Care and Management of the Dogs.
Bruce, later (1901) repeats Crommelin’s statements in general concerning
the use of dogs in rabbit extermination and the types most suited.
Most of Crommelin’s remarks are well worthy of being reprinted here, as,
in the main, they are supported by the experience of many landholders
throughout the country. He contends that whether the country is lightly
or heavily infested the work cannot be properly carried out without the
dog-s. These remarks are quite true to-day as regards all methods other than
poisoning and trapping. Crommelin says further:
Dogs require to be properly looked after and handled with care to be of any
use. They should also be properly fed, and medicine should be given when
required, as they are very liable to worms and mange. When they arc always in
camps, calico, stretched so as to form a shelter for them from the sun and rain,
is required; and in very hot country a shed of boughs should bo put over the calico.
They should be in charge of the same men—the huntsman and his assistant —and
should be tied up every night, except when they are kept at a station, and then
a yard with bark hutches or sleeping-places should be provided for them.
Those not at work may be let loose at the camp during the day, after the
working pack have gone out some little time, as then they find shelter and water
for themselves, and rest better.
Their food should consist of boiled rabbit, kangaroo, or emu, cut up roughly,
and when boiled some little time add 1 lb. pollard to every 1 lb. of meat; boil
all -well until it gets quite thick, and then stir in about \ lb. of sulphur; let it
get cool, and at night when the dogs return from their work, turn the mess out on
a sheet of bark or iron to keep the food clean and off the ground.
An empty carbon drum, after being well cleansed, may be used to boil dogs’
meat in. One rabbit (or equivalent) with the pollard is sufficient for one dog.
Thus ten dogs would require ten rabbits and 5 lb. of pollard a day; this regimen
should be followed for five days in the week, the other two days raw meat must
be given, say, a rabbit and a half to each dog per day.
Care should be taken when hunting not to let them eat the rabbits with the
fur on, as this gives them mange. It is very difficult at times to prevent this,
for when a crowd of dogs catch a rabbit, it is frequently torn into pieces and
eaten in a minute. So the huntsman requites not only to have a good command
over his pack, but it is also requisite that he should be smart and active.
For worms the best cure is to give as much “reka* nut” to each dog as can
be put on a sixpence, and give it in a piece of meat overnight before feeding
time, and in the morning let the dog have a couple of courses after rabbits; two
or three doses are quite enough, one every third day.
For sore feet, cuts, and bruises use black oil. A bottle of this should always
be kept in a camp, as it is useful for men, horses, or dogs.
For mange use sulphur. Dogs carefully fed, as I have described, hardly ever
get mange. If they do, give them more than the prescribed quantity of sulphur
in their meat, and also put some in the water they drink. Mangy dogs should be
kept separate from the others.
* No doubt arena nut is meant.


The hunting pack should consist of ten —seven dogs for finding and hunting,
and three fast dogs to do the catching.
The reason for hunting dogs in packs is: (1) to increase the chance of finding
rabbits, (2) to make certain of killing, and (3) to kill without distressing the
dogs.
A rabbit, on being flushed, twists and turns so when running that if only a
couple of dogs are hunted they would be brought to a stand-still before the day
was half over; while with a pack of dogs the rabbit is no sooner started than
it is caught. In this way, too, the slow dogs have nearly as good a chance of
killing as the fast, and the slow always have the best scent.
Matthams (1921) raises the question as to whether the use of dogs and
the driving of rabbits on to adjacent lands may not he regarded as a means
of unfairly forcing the obligation to destroy them, on to the shoulders of
neighbours. He then says:
Certainly, whatever method is employed, should, for the general welfare, be
employed for the purpose of destroying them, but as the duty of destroying them
certainly rests upon the owner of the rabbits, the question of ownership must be
taken into consideration.
Where rabbits have a settled place of abode the owner of the harbour wherein
they actually live may justly be regarded as the owner of the rabbits; but with
tho homeless rabbits that, under certain conditions, are for the time being migra-
tory and live nowhere in particular, the owner of the land whereon the rabbits are
for the time being, may justly be regarded as the owner.
References made in this bulletin to the general utility of dogs, however,
are confined to the work done within the “ four walls ” of a rabbit-netted
fence.
Sheep-killing Dogs.
Crommelin says that he has heard many owners and others condemn dogs
for their sheep-killing proclivities, but thinks that under those circum-
stances dogs are neglected.* On this point, he says:
I knew an owner who got up a lot of mongrels on his station, gave them to Jack,
Tom, Bill, and Harry, and these men, instead of taking them out singly in the
first instance, and trying them, took out the whole lot together, even before the
dogs knew their names. What was the consequence? One man returned to the
station with two or three of his pack missing, and the others with only a few- of
theirs, and when asked about them, the answer was, they did not know where they
had gone. The outcome was the poor brutes, in order to find food, went sheep-
killing.
Hunters again, when leaving a run, have a couple or more dogs worked out, and
instead of destroying, leave them behind; they take to sheep-killing, and then the
outcry is “look what wo lost by the dogs/’ I know one man who left six worked-
out dogs behind him when he left the station.
The Commissioner bad this matter of sheep-killing in mind when he asked
the following question recently of the various Pastures Protection Boards: —
Has tho widespread use of dogs in rabbit eradication led to a greater loss of
stock by wild dogs (other than pure dingoes) than formerly ?
On the whole, tho replies indicated that no destruction of sheep had been
set down to the use of these dogs, hut some of the boards gave some evidence
in the affirmative.
Inquiries made by the Commissioner in various parts of the country
undoubtedly show that domestic dogs gone wild do account for a consider-
able amount of sheep destruction. Hybrids of various varieties of the
domestic dog and l dingo constitute a very grave menace indeed.
Shooting of Rabbits.
Shooting rabbits as a method of eradication and not as a “ sport ” may
he looked upon purely as an adjunct to various individual methods, and
also in the general work associated with driving, destruction of harbour,
♦ Notwithstanding this statement, it is of interest to mention that in the animal reports of the Stock
and Brands Branch for ten years, from 1884 to 1893 a total of 566,238 sheep is mentioned as
being destroyed by tame dogs; 802,369 were recorded as destroyed by wild dogs, dingoes. Ac.


•digging and ploughing out, ferreting, dogging, &c. In the aggregate, quite
a number of rabbits is shot during the course of a year to keep dogs sup-
plied with food. To employ men to shoot rabbits on infested holdings as a
regular method of “clearing up” those holdings would be an extremely
costly affair and is never done. Notwithstanding this, the gun has proved to
be of no mean assistance, chiefly in the final stages of extirpation. On the
smaller holdings, where all surface harbour, like logs and brush debris, &c.,
has been cleared up and burrows have been got rid of, a shooter, with a dog
or two, can keep the place clear —provided fences and gates are in order,
of course. Under such circumstances the method is economical and effective.
One writer says pithily: “ Shooting is simply useful to save your dogs’
legs.”
The Rabbit “ Drive.”
Rabbits are often driven with dogs, cracking of whips, shouting, beating
tins, and other disturbances, until at last they are yarded and killed. At
times, many thousands of rabbits are taken in one drive by such means.
On badly infested lands, catches of 7,000, 10,000, and even 20,000 or more
have been reported—and this at other than migration times. The best
results are obtained when surface harbour is absent, but there are circum-
stances when this is not of moment.
Like many other mammals (including man), rabbits may be set into a
state of panic and stampeded. Probably nothing strikes such terror into
the heart of the rabbit as the sudden appearance and barking of dogs.
Once a goodly number of rabbits is set in motion by this means, on heavily
infested country, the numbers of .the frightened rodents are swelled at every
few yards, until sometimes thousands are on the move at the one time.
They are then driven towards fence-traps, or some specially prepared wire-
netted yards, with long, projecting wings converging into a Y-shape.
In such a yard the posts and stays should stand outside the netting.
The netting should be at least 4 feet or 4 feet 6 inches high from the ground,
and should be well let into the ground, or, otherwise, have about 18 inches
lying flat on the ground, with earth thrown over it. Generally, such a
corralling yard leads into one or more smaller killing yards, through small,
Y-shaped or funnel entrances.
It must be remembered that the use of this method of destruction argues
at once that no regular eradication work has proceeded. And while the
rabbits were increasing sufficiently to make it worth while having a “ drive,”
they were “ eating the heart out of the holding.”
Rabbit drives are generally community affairs, people, old and young,
combining from several holdings. No shooters should be allowed to take
part in such operations, as every one is more or less excited at the time,
and there is grave danger of one of the hunters being shot.
In America, the drive is one of the principal means of destroying the jack
rabbit—a species of hare that does not make burrows—before the advent
of the crops in the spring. Generally speaking, the drive may be looked
upon as more a method to be made use of at the beginning of determined
operations in the complete clearing out of rabbits on large holdings.
Other methods of extermination are dealt with at some length in the
Commissioner’s full report. These include the use of ferrets, the much
discussed “ Rodier method,” the Coleman Phillips’ plan for rabbit destruc-
tion, the group system of dealing with the pest, &c.; but it is considered
that, in so far as these are of interest to the man on the land, they have
been sufficiently explained in the synopsis, which comprises Part II of this
bulletin.
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, Government Printer —1928.
