





CONTENTS.
Australia .. ... ... ••• 3 Mining in Victoria ... ... ... 43 to 60
Agriculture ... ... ... ... 9to 23 Orchards... ... ... ... ... 23
Agricultural Education ... ... ... 31 Population ... ... ... •• 4
Ballarat ... ... ... ... ••• 6, 50 Prices ... ... ... ... ••• 61
Bendigo ... ... ... ... ••• 7, 45 Vineyards ... ... ••• ••• 25
Cheap Money ... ... ... ■*• Various Industries ... ... ... 19 to 23
Dai 7 in S 15 ’ I! Victoria Ito 7
Fruit-growing ... .. ... Victoria compared with America ... ... 29
Facts and Figures ... ... ... o r
Gold Mines 43 to 60 Wages 63,64
Lands of the Colony 25 to 38 Wines
Lands on Easy Terms ... ... ... 37 Why I settled in Victoria ... ... ... 39 to 42
IS3-155, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.


SCENE AT THE FLEMINQTON RACE-COURSE, MELBOURNE.


THE AUSTRALIAN COLONY OF VICTORIA.
AUSTRALIA.
The island continent of Australia was the last great division of the world to claim the attention of the
navigator and the explorer. Nothing definite was known of this vast and important section of the globe until about
300 years after the discovery of the “ New World,” and it was not until Britain had lost her American colonies that
she turned her eyes towards the lands which her brave navigators had found in the southern seas. A little more than
100 years ago, viz., in 1788, the first settlement of the continent was made on the eastern shores; and to-day
Australia, with the adjacent island of Tasmania, comprises six prosperous self-governing colonies, whose agricultural
and mineral wealth is a potent factor in the commerce of the world. Situated in the south-western portion of the
Pacific Ocean, Australia lies between the parallels of 10° 40' and 39° 11' of south latitude, and the meridians of 113*
and 153° 16' east longitude. The length from north to south is 1,970 miles, the width 2,400 miles, and the area
2,944,628 square miles. The areas occupied by the different Australian colonies are as follow :
Queensland ... ... ... ... ... ... 668,224 square miles
New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... 309,175 ~ ~
Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 87,884 ~ ~
South Australia... ... ... ... ... ... 903,425 ~ ~
Western Australia ... ... ... ... ... 975,920 ~ ~
Total —Australia
2,944,628 „
THE COLONY OF VICTORIA.
Victoria, so named after Her Most Gracious Majesty, although the smallest, is one of the richest and most
prosperous of the various colonies situated on the Australian Continent, of which it occupies the south-eastern
portion. It is bounded on the north and north-east by the colony of New South Wales, and on the west by the
colony of South Australia. On the south and south-east its shores are washed by the ocean. It lies between the


34th and 39th parallels of south latitude, and the I4lst and 150th meridians of east longitude. Its extreme length
from east to west is about 420, its greatest breadth about 250, and its extent of coast line nearly 600, geographical
miles. Its area is 87,884 square miles, or 56,245,760 acres. The whole continent of Australia is estimated to contain
2,944,628 square miles, and therefore Victoria occupies about a thirty-fourth part of its surface. Great Britain, ex-
clusive of the islands in the British seas, contains 89,644 square miles, and is therefore somewhat larger than Victoria.
Population.
Notwithstanding its size, the colony now contains one-third of the inhabitants of the whole continent, and is
more populous than any other colony except New South Wales (which is three and a half times the size), its density
of population being 13 4 persons to a square mile as compared with \\ in New South Wales, and a little over 1 in
Australia as a whole. The population at the last census, which was taken on the sth April, 1891, was 1,140,405.
Between that period and 31st December, 1898, the inhabitants increased to 1,175,457, consisting of 595,402 males and
580,838 females. These numbers show an average of about 97 females to 100 males. Inclusive of the suburbs,
Melbourne, the capital of the colony, and the most populous city in Australasia, contained 469,000 inhabitants at
the end of 1898.
Nationalities and Religions.
According to the census of 1891, 97 per cent, of the colonists are British subjects by birth, and only 3 per cent,
are foreign born. The native Victorians numbered about 714,000, or 63 per cent, of the population ; the natives of
other Australian colonies numbered 80,000 ; the English, 163,000; Irish, 85,000; Scotch, 51,000; Germans, 11,000;
Chinese, 8,000; Swedes and Norwegians, 3,200; Americans (U.S.), 2,900; Italians, 1,700; Danes, 1,400; French, 1,300;
Swiss, 1,300; Russians, 1,200; and the natives of other countries, about 15,000. The religions of the people, as
returned at the census of 1891, were as follow : —Protestants, 837,000 ; Roman Catholics, 248,000 ; Jews, 6,400;
Buddhists, &c., 7,000 ; persons of other sects or of no denomination or religion, about 19,000; and unspecified, 23,000.
Occupations.
The occupations as returned at the census are first classified under two main divisions, viz.:—Breadwinners,
numbering 494,000, including 114,200 females ; and dependants, 629,800, including 425,500 females. The former were


again subdivided into Professional classes, 29,600, including 9,700 females; Domestic, 57,000 (42,431 females); Com-
mercial (distributors), 98,500 (9,300 females); Industrial—including commercial and industrial combined (modifiers),
167,100 (28,700 females); Primary Producers (grazing, agriculture, mining, &c.), 124,000 (10,900 females); and
Indefinite (pensioners, &c.), 17,800 (13,300 females). These figures are exclusive of Chinese, Aborigines, and the
unspecified.
Facts and Figures.
The public debt of Victoria represents sums borrowed by the Government from time to time for the purpose of
carrying out reproductive works intended to develop the resources of the country. The amount of the debt is
£45,000,000, and of this sum £36,000,000 have been expended on railways, £5,000,000 on country waterworks, the
balance being represented by expenditure upon docks, harbours, public buildings, and other permanent works.
A moderate estimate of the value of public works and Crown lands shows a total of more than £73,000,000, or a
credit balance of over £25,000,000. The private wealth of the colony is estimated at between £400,000,000 and
£500,000,000.
About 58 per cent, of the interest on loans is provided by the earnings of public works. The estimated revenue
of the colony for the year ending 30th June, 1899 was £6,907,439, and the estimated expenditure £6,873,529, showing
a surplus of £33,910. The Treasurer, however, has recently stated his belief that in consequence of the large increase
in revenue, owing to the good harvest, the surplus will really prove to be about £150,000.
The yield of gold shows a steady increase, that for 1897 being 812,766 oz. The colony has produced
62,206,916 oz.
The City of Melbourne.
Melbourne is now one of the most beautiful capitals in the world, and it is also the most populous and important
city in the Southern Hemisphere. Including its suburban municipalities, all lying within a radius of 10 miles from the
Town Hall, it contains 469,000 inhabitants. Mr. Anthony Trollope well described it as “ one of the most successftd
cities on the face of the earth.” It is well laid out with wide and regular streets, with broad side-walks well paved
and lighted. Tree planting in the streets has been extensively carried on, giving a pleasant shade as well as refreshing
the eye. The buildings are not only handsome, but many are of great architectural merit. The cathedrals and
churches, schools, Parliament House, Treasury, Town Hall, Post Office, Law Courts, Custom House, University,
Museum, Free Library, National Gallery, clubs, theatres, and other public institutions, are worthy of special


admiration. The banking corporations are settled in buildings which would adorn Threadneedle-street. The wharfs
on the banks of the Yarra now give accommodation to large ocean-going steamers. The shops and warehouses are
equal to those of most cities in the Old World. Everything necessary to make life content and easy can be procured
in Melbourne. And the mansions in the fashionable suburbs are only less gratifying evidences of the prosperity of the
people than the thousands of pleasant cottages which one sees on every road within a few miles of the city. Any
visitor to the colony must be struck with the perfect arrangements for water supply. There is hardly the smallest
cottage without its bath-room. The most important reservoir is the Yan Yean, which is an artificial lake at the foot
of the Plenty Ranges, nearly 19 miles from Melbourne proper. The numerous parks and reserves and public gardens
in and around Melbourne are heritages sacred to the health and enjoyment of the people, which astonish the “new
chum ” from crowded European cities, where one is taxed for space to breathe, This is above all a place for the
people. In no large town of the world has a working man so many enjoyments as in Melbourne, or so many privileges.
The Free Library, Museum, and Picture Galleries, and the Botanic and Zoological Gardens afford free recreation and
instruction to the labourer and mechanic, as well as to the clerk or shopman. Melbourne is plentifully furnished with
provident, charitable, literary, scientific, and social institutions to suit all classes and creeds.
The City of Ballarat,
Victoria, however, should not be judged only by its metropolis. The inland towns deserve mention. Ballarat,
the second city in the colony, is situated 74 miles from Melbourne. It well bears the title of the “Golden
City.” In the early days, the gold-yielding powers of Ballarat were simply marvellous. No district in the world
produced so much gold in such a short space of time. It has been stated that, in many instances, “ claims ” not more
than 8 feet square, and about the same depth, yielded from £lO,OOO to £12,000 each. At the Prince Regent mine men
made as much as £16,000 each for a few months’ work. At one claim a tubful of dirt yielded £3,325. Anthony
Trollope, some 24 years ago, said with justice of Ballarat, that it struck him with more surprise than any city in
Australia, that, “in point of architectural excellence, and general civilized city comfort, it is certainly the metropolis
of the Australian gold-fields. ” Sturt-street, the principal thoroughfare, is a mile and a half long, AH) feet wide, and
has a fine double row of trees in the centre. The principal buildings on either side are the City Hall, Post Office,
Mechanics’ Institute, banks, theatre, hospital, and several large churches. The population is 46,137.


The City of Bendigo.
Bendigo is a little over 100 miles from Melbourne. It has about the same population as Ballarat —or exactly 43,075.
In 1851, shortly after the first gold discovery, Bendigo was found to contain that precious metal in such abundance that
in a short time it became famous for the number of its immense nuggets, the best known of which was the “ Victoria
Nugget,” which was bought by the Victorian Government and presented to Her Majesty. In 1872, Bendigo took rank
as a principal Victorian city. It is certainly equal to any European city of the same size. The most prominent
buildings are the Post Office, the Masonic Hall, the Town Hall, and Hospital, together with a very fine theatre. The
streets of Bendigo are beautifully planted with English trees, the cool shade of which is as pleasant tovisitois as to the
residents. Pall Mall is the principal business thoroughfare. The streets have a total length of about 100 miles.
Bendigo is rich in other ways besides gold. The district produces yearly more than 1,000,000 bushels of grain, 1 1 ,000
tons of hay, and some 60,000 gallons of good wine. Fruits of all kinds grow most luxuriantly in the surrounding
districts. _ .
Geelong, Warrnambool, and Port Fairy, are important towns on the seaboard, and inland there are Castlemame,
Maryborough, Beechworth, Hamilton, Sale, and many other prosperous towns.


STRIPPING WHEAT.


AGRICULTURE IN VICTORIA.
The agricultural resources of the colony, although only yet developed to a comparatively limited extent, have
contributed in a marked degree to place Victoria in its present proud position, and the best guarantee for its future
progress is to be found in the agricultural expansion capable of resulting from its rich soil, genial climate, and various
other advantages. In the past all the difficulties connected with canning on agricultural operations in a new country
have had to be overcome. The pioneer farmer had to learn the peculiarities of the soil and the special conditions
of climate with which he had to cope in an unknown and untried country, and all this had to be done under special
difficulties. Seeds, plants, tools, and implements bad to be imported from distant countries ; horses, cattle, sheep,
swine, and poultry had also to be brought from abroad, while the breeds best suited to the new conditions, and the
peculiar treatment necessary, had to be learned by experiments more or less expensive. There were but few large
towns, so that the markets for produce were limited, and it frequently happened that when a successful harvest was
obtained the farmer would find the port glutted with foreign products. Not only were markets limited, but they
were difficult of access. There were no roads through the forests, over the hills, or across the plains. Rivers had to be
bridged and roads had to be made before the farmers’ produce could be taken to market. All this up-hill work had
to be carried on by farmers who were far from schools, churches, and social institutions.
Farming Prosperity Assured.
Those who commence farming now, either upon Crown lands or upon farms purchased from settlers, have none
of these difficulties to overcome. The large cities provide markets for produce, and supply implements and machinery
of the most approved kind, manufactured locally and in Europe and America ; seeds and plants of every kind have
been brought from all parts of the world; all the best breeds of live stock are available ; and the conditions of soil
and climate have been so well ascertained that all branches of agriculture can be carried on with a complete knowledge
of the most suitable treatment to be pursued. Roads have been made in every direction, the rivers have been bridged
at all necessary points, and railways have been extended to all settled portions of the colony, with the certainty that
they will follow the settlers to the districts not yet occupied. In addition to all this, schools have been established
in the midst of every group of settlers, churches have been built in every village, and even the most distant portions
of the colony enjoy social advantages not surpassed in any country in the world.


DOOKIE AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE.


Fertility of the Soil.
It was soon discovered that the soil of Victoria was exceedingly fertile. Only a few years after the landing of
the first settlers “ Port Fairy ” potatoes won fame, on account of their superior quality, in older-established parts of
Australia, and other products were soon afterwards grown with equal success. The potatoes were grown at Belfast
and Warrnambool, on the south-west coast of the colony, districts still famed for the production of root crops. A
yield of from 12 to 15 tons per acre of potatoes is sometimes obtained, and 10 tons per acre is a frequent yield. The
Lancefield, Daylesford, Kyneton, Ballarat, and Gippsland districts contain land of the same kind, and all over
the colony a large proportion of the soil is exceedingly fertile. Even in those parts of the colony where the yield of
the crops is smaller the defect is not so much in the soil as in the supply of moisture. There are in the inland
northern portion of the colony districts which do not enjoy such a liberal rainfall as others. In such localities the
yield of the crops is generally comparatively light, but the soil is rich, a fact that is proved from the large yield
obtained in a moist season. Having extensive areas of fertile soil in all parts of its territory, and consequently under
different conditions of climate, the products of the colony are both abundant and varied.
The Genial Climate.
“ The finest climate in the world.” Such is the verdict of all observant colonists who have travelled enough to
give weight to their opinion. There is no winter, in the English or American sense of the word. The time called winter
is merely the season in which there is more rain and less heat than in summer. Very few Australians have ever seen
snow. Upon the inland mountain ranges and the elevated land in their vicinity a little snow falls occasionally, but
only sufficient to make the ground white for a few hours. The native trees are evergreen, not casting their leaves
in the winter, although English trees and others indigenous to cold countries go through the form apparently out of
respect to old-established family customs, and altogether the winter is only a modified summer. Stock are neither
housed nor fed in the winter. The merino sheep, which produce the finest wool in the world, run out on the pastures
all the winter, generally without even a hedge to shelter them ; cattle in the same way are not only able to live on
the pastures through the winter, but to fatten fit for the butcher. The dairy cows also are kept milking without
being housed or fed, and when horses are not at work they spend the whole winter in the open fields. Any farmer
who knows what it is to provide for housing and feeding his live stock through the winter in England, Scotland,
Ireland, or America will be able to understand what special advantages Victoria possesses in its winterless
climate. The rainfall of Melbourne, which may be taken as representing the coast districts of the colony, has


A DAIRY FARM


averaged for 30 years 25*44 inches. This is more than the rainfall of London (24 inches), Nottingham (23'7 inches),
and Paris (22• 9 inches). In the northern or inland districts the average rainfall is generally below 20 inches, and
some specially dry localities do not average more than 10 inches. In the less dry sections of the northern districts,
where the annual rainfall varies from 15 to 20 inches, oats, barley, and wheat are cultivated, and satisfactory yields
are obtained, but root crops are rarely grown with success, while in the drier portions of the inland districts, where
the rainfall varies from 12 to 16 inches, the wheat crop is the only cereal that can be depended upon to yield a fair
return without irrigation in average seasons.
Cheap Methods of Production.
It is important to note that the largest number of Victorian farmers are settled in the northern or inland
districts, and, if the climate may seem to be too dry, it must be remembered that there are special advantages which
compensate in a great measure for a deficiency of moisture. The land is generally ready for the plough, and even
when some clearing is necessary the work is light and inexpensive. Stock of all kinds thrive remarkably well in
the warm climate, and the Australian system of harvesting, viz., “stripping,” or reaping and thrashing at one
operation, by far the cheapest in the world, can be adopted. The climate is, no doubt, drier than might be desired in
these districts, but, with the advantages referred to, the farmers are able to carry on their industry successfully.
If we examine the driest sections of Victoria, we find that the settlers are in a prosperous condition, arising from
other advantages which tend to compensate for the deficiency of moisture. The cheap system of cultivation and
harvesting which is carried on enables the farmer to make good profits from light crops. There is comparatively
little timber in the dry districts. Trees enough grow in patches or belts to provide fencing timber, but every farm
contains a large area of open plain land which is ready for the plough. This land is more fertile, and as easy tilled
as the praries of Western America, while a cheaper system of harvesting is adopted. The peculiar dryness of the
air enables the stripper, which is a combined reaping and threshing machine, to be used, while on the American
prairies the grain has to be reaped, bound, stooked, carted, and threshed.
Crops and Yields,
The rich soil and warm genial climate combine to render the colony’s productions abundant and varied. In
the coast districts, where all kinds of cereals and leguminous and root crops are cultivated, the yields obtained from
the unmanured land are all that could be desired. The average of the whole colony is always lower than the results


EXPORT OF RABBITS.—COLD STORAGE DEPOT, MELBOURNE


obtained by farmers who understand their business. The system of farming carried on stands much in need of improve-
ment. The majority of those upon the land have had no training as farmers, and the system, like that of all new
countries, is not calculated to produce the best results. Farmers who understand their business, and give the land
reasonable cultivation, obtain from 35 to 45 bushels of wheat, oats, and barley per acre in districts where the general
average is not more than from 15 to 20 bushels per acre. Much heavier yields than those stated are frequently
obtained, but from 35 to 45 bushels per acre are common when the land is well cultivated. With potatoes,
mangolds, beets, and peas, the same difference is observed between the average obtained by a rough system of farming
and upon land properly cultivated. About 5 tons of potatoes per acre is a payable crop, and from 12 to 15 tons per
acre are frequently obtained. Hay, which is made from wheat or oats, yields from 2 tons to 4 tons per acre, and
English grasses for pasture are successfully cultivated in all the coast and elevated districts. Maize is a crop which
grows well in the more moist portions of the coast districts, and as much as 100 bushels per acre is frequently
obtained.
High Dairying Pastures.
That the colony is peculiarly well suited for dairy farming follows from what has already been said in regard to
the soil and climate. Rich natural pastures covering a fertile soil are sources of wealth in any country, but where the
climate is so mild that stock require no shelter even in winter, special value attaches to well-grassed land. Just as
the sheep farmer or the settler, who fattens cattle for the market, allows his stock to graze all the year round in the
open fields, so the dairy farmer will take no special care of his milking cows. There are here and there farmers who
take their cows into sheds on winter nights, feeding them upon straw or green fodder, but they are exceptions, the
dairy cows in general, as all other stock, finding all their food and what shelter they need in the open fields. Those
who add some straw, hay, or green food in the winter are rewarded by extra returns, and larger profits would be made
if farmers did more in the way of growing supplies of winter feed for dairy cows, but the natural advantages of the
country are indicated by the fact that dairying is generally carried on without resorting to any system of artificial
feeding.
The fact that Victorian butter is made from cows thus fed upon natural pastures gives to the product a special
value in the London market. The attractive flavour of our butter, its firm grain and small proportion of moisture,
results of our natural pastures, have been specially noted by buyers, while our geographical position confers upon us
another special advantage.


BUTTER FOR EXPORT-COLD STORAGE DEPOT, MELBOURNE.


A Unique Geographical, Advantage.
This geographical advantage consists in our situation at the Antipodes, As our summer is at the time of the
English winter the produce of our spring and summer, cheaply produced by the bounty of nature, finds an open market
during the winter of the Northern Hemisphere. This special advantage is not shared in by any European country,
Canada, or the United States. Any farmer in the Northern Hemisphere knows the difference between producing
butter in winter and in spring. It is surely unfortunate for the British farmer in his struggle against the competition
of cheaply-produced imports that nature should have armed a competing country with this unique advantage. While
the long rigorous winter is placing all kinds of natural difficulties in the way of the British producer, the farmers of
Europe, Canada, and the United States are being met by similar climatic disadvantages, but at this particular period
of adverse conditions nature is lavishing her richest gifts of sunny skies, genial warmth, and luxuriant pastures upon
the favoured dairymen of the Antipodes. It is the possession of these incalculably valuable natural facilities that has
enabled Victoria to so rapidly, and with such comparatively little effort, secure a respectable place in the British
markets for a product which is destined to figure with increasing magnitude among her leading exports.
Inspection of Dairies and Exports.
The Hon. J. W. Taverner’s administration has been largely concerned in improving the cool storage arrange-
ments in Melbourne, making better terms as to freights with steam-ship companies, and securing more effective
inspection of exports, as well as providing for improved methods of examining herds and dairies in order to insure the
soundness and wholesomeness of the produce. The exports of butter, which in 1890 amounted to only 400 tons,
increased under the new system to 1,000 tons in 1891. In 1892 they were 2,140 tons, in 1893 3,611 tons, and they
increased rapidly till 11,584 tons were reached in 1895, the value of butter and cheese exported in that year being over
a million pounds sterling.
Room for New-comers.
There are openings for large numbers of dairy farmers in all the districts containing factories as well as in many
localities where factories could be profitably established. Dairy farms can be purchased at low prices or leased for
reasonable rentals, so that only a small capital is required by freehold or tenant farmers. The “share system ”of
farming has lately been adopted in connexion with dairying, and the results have been so satisfactory that there is now
a demand for dairymen to take land and cattle on shares-in different parts of the colony. In some cases the farms


POULTRY FOR EXPORT.-COLD STORAGE DEPOT, MELBOURNE


alone are taken under this system, but the most common method is for the owner of the land to supply land, cattle,
and other requisites, the tenant providing only the labour. Large estates formerly devoted to the keeping of sheep or
the fattening of cattle are, in suitable dairying districts, now being turned to more profitable use in supplying milk to
the butter factories under this form of the share system. The plan is one which suits the land-owner where workers
of a suitable kind are scarce, and it opens up a profitable field for the employment of families whose only capital is
their labour.
A Promising Industry.
Pig-keeping in this colony is one of the most profitable branches of agriculture, the genial climate being specially
favorable, and it is likely that in the immediate future the industry will be largely extended. Like all departments
of production confined to supplying local markets, the raising of swine has been seriously kept back by the periodical
occurrence of over-production and low prices. The attention which is now being paid, however, to opening up markets
for more or less perishable products in London and elsewhere is likely to result in an outlet being found for our
surplus of pork, bacon, and hams, so that an industry which is so profitable to such countries as America and Denmark
will probably show a rate of expansion akin to that of the butter trade.
Poultry Raising.
The interest of the poultry fancier in the colony is an important one. All the best breeds are represented by
birds of the highest quality, and through the importing and stud-breeding operations of the fanciers, those carrying
on the ordinary poultry business of the colony are able to obtain the stock most suitable for their purposes under local
conditions. While there are a few poultry farmers who carry on the production of table birds or eggs as a separate
business, the bulk of the produce of the colony comes from farmers, orchardists, vignerons, or gardeners who make
poultry-keeping an adjunct to other branches of rural industry, and the poultry yard is generally a profitable and
reliable department. The Department of Agriculture has rendered great service by organizing the export trade. It
gives directions as to suitable breeds of poultry, and the methods of management, while it also undertakes the proper
shipment of eggs and birds through the Government Cool Storage Depot. The industry is one requiring very little
capital, and, as suitable land for the purpose can be readily obtained near railway stations and large towns, it offers
promising opportunities to new settlers.


BEE FARM. GIPPSLAND.


Bee Farming.
Bee-keeping is receiving increased attention in the colony, and owing to its profitableness it may be expected to
extend to large dimensions. The natural forests which surround the various farming districts provide excellent bee
pastures, and the sunny climate of the colony provides a long working season. Under these circumstances it is not
surprising that bee-keeping is a profitable business. At times, the prices of honey have been discouraging, owing to
the local and other colonial markets becoming temporarily over-supplied, but already something has been done in the
way of finding markets for exports. In 1895, 204,435 lbs. of honey was exported, 180,055 lbs. having been sent to the
United Kingdom. The bee business requires very little capital, and it is one presenting special inducements to settlers,
either for their exclusive attention or as an adjunct to other branches of rural industry.
Hop-growing.
Hop-growing has had a long and checkered career in the colony, much money having been both made and
lost during the various phases of the industry. The soil and climate in the hop-growing districts have been proved to
be specially suitable, and much heavier crops of hops can be relied upon than in England, but as the industry is one
involving much hand labour, there has been a difficulty, owing to our limited population, in keeping the cost of
production down to the level required in the carrying on of an export trade. Our exports are principally confined to
the neighbouring colonies, and the hop-growers, with all their natural advantages, have yet to accomplish the feat of
producing cheaply enough to compete in the markets of the world.
Flax and Linseed.
That flax would grow luxuriantly in the colony has been known from the earliest times, but owing to the labour
involved in managing the fibre crops, very little attention was, until recently, given to the growing of flax or linseed.
During the last few years, however, a stimulus has been given to the industry by the action of the Hon. J. W. Taverner
in importing fibre working and oil-making machinery, and employing experts to give instruction in the various
manufacturing processes. In all but the very driest districts of the colony flax grows well, producing a good yield of
both seed and fibre, and as a market is being found for the products, it may be expected that the area devoted to its
culture will rapidly increase.


A HOP GARDEN


Olive Culture.
Olive culture is one of the most promising industries in the colony. Trees planted in various parts of Victoria
grew so well and yielded so freely, that settlers were impelled some years ago to take note of a product of which they
possessed little knowledge. An olive grove also, which was planted twenty years ago at the Dookie Experimental
Farm, in the north-eastern district, began after the establishment of an Agricultural College at the farm to produce
olive oil of excellent quality. Later on olive culture and the making of olive oil were established at the Lougerenong
Agricultural College, in the north-western district, and that was followed by the successful production of olive oil at
Mildura, the irrigation settlement on the Murray River. As the result of these and some other local experiments,
it has been demonstrated that the extensive inland areas of the colony are specially suitable for the growth of the olive.
Market Gardening.
The business of growing vegetables for market has attained a high degree of proficiency in the colony, more
especially in the neighbourhood of the metropolis, where a large area of land is devoted to it, and whence supplies are
sent to up-country towns, as well as to the neighbouring colonies, nearly 2,000 tons being yearly exported. The bulk
of the gardens are situated to the east and south-east of Melbourne, where the soil is almost pure sand, and easy to
work. Some of the yields of vegetables obtained are simply marvellous. Cabbages averaging 26 lbs. weight, and
parsnips 36 inches in length, are common ; while mangel-wurzel are grown turning the scale at 56 lbs. 'I he land is
highly manured, and heavy yields are obtained. The produce is also of excellent quality. Two crops a year, or three
crops in two years, are generally grown.
Fruit-growing.
Fruit culture is practised throughout nearly the whole of the colony. In some of the more densely-populated
districts orchards of 100 to 150 acres have been planted, and their numbers are rapidly increasing. They are very
numerous in the neighbourhood of the metropolis, where they generally exist in conjunction with market gardening ;
these range from Bto 20 acres in extent. Owing to the variety of climatic conditions, all the fruits of temperate
regions can be cultivated. A large number of varieties are grown, all the best to be obtained in Europe and America
having been imported and propagated. Numerous varieties of fruit have been raised from seed, the parent blossoms
being, in mogt cases, carefully intercrossed. In apples, varieties of great excellence, both dessert and cooking, some
of the former almost equalling the best of the imported sorts. While in pears, some colonial varieties are unsurpassed
by the best European sorts. Peaches, plums, cherries, and strawberries of excellent quality have been also raised.
The industry is now expanding owing to the opening up of an export trade.


A VINTAGE SCENE,


Vine-growing in Victoria.
The production of wine is unquestionably destined to become one of Victoria’s greatest industries. Receiving
attention from the earliest days of the colony, the progress of wine-growing has been slow but sure. Measured by the
volume of production, development has been only moderate; estimated by the extent to which the colony’s resources
have been successfully tested, and the manner in which the superiority of the wines has been demonstrated, it has been
immense. It was from the first recognised that with a limited population wine production could not become a, great
industry without depending upon an export trade, and consequently improving the quality of the wine has always
received more attention than the extension of the vineyards. The result has been that Victoria, with a comparatively
small area under vines, has since 1851 been represented at all the great exhibitions of the world. Having proved by
the honours won at the various exhibitions that wines of the highest quality could be produced, the extension of the
vineyards was commenced about twenty years ago. The area under vines now reaches 30,000 acres, yielding annually
about 2,500,000 gallons of wine. As wine is not the ordinary beverage of the local population, a surplus of from
200,000 gallons to 400,000 gallons is annually exported, and as our wines become better known to the contemners of the
old world the demand for them will gradually increase. The consumption of such superior wines as our vineyards
produce is upon such a large scale, that, with the footing already secured in the world’s markets, our vintages will
rapidly take their places among the most valuable productions of the colony. Raisin-making has been developed up to
the point of supplying local demands, and fresh grapes have been sold in London at prices profitable to growers. The
perfecting methods of reducing the proportion of damaged fruit will bring about a great development in the exporta-
tion of fresh grapes.
The Sugar-beet Industry.
The production of sugar-beet has received attention at various times during the last 25 years, but from different
causes arising out of the peculiar nature of the business the several attempts to establish the industry have proved
unsuccessful. The suitableness, however, of extensive areas in Victoria for the production of heavy crops of beet
prevented the expectation of successfully introducing the sugar-beet industry from being entirely abandoned, and a
company is now operating which is likely to establish this important branch of production upon a sound basis.
Recognising the peculiar nature of the case, the Turner Government resolved to render the necessary assistance. The
Beet Sugar Works Act of 1896 was accordingly introduced and passed into law, under which liberal encouragement to
the industry was provided. Under this Act advances are made to companies which carry out the sugar-beet business
upon stated lines, and in a manner satisfactory to the Government. Any company establishing a factory in an
approved district where there is an area of 10,000 acres of suitable land within a radius of 10 miles, and which has


FRUIT FOR EXPORT.—COLD STORAGE DEPOT, MELBOURNE.


entered into contract with fanners for the cultivation of at least 2,000 acres of beet crop for three years, is entitled to
claim advances which ultimately reach the value of £2 for every £1 expended by the company. These advances are to
be repaid in 46 half-yearly instalments, the sum bearing interest at 4 per cent., and the property of the company being
security under a first mortgage for the loan. The only company as yet established under the Act is the Maffra Sugar
Beet Company Limited. The capital is £50,000, in 50,000 shares of £1 each.
Tobacco-growing.
Tobacco-growing is carried on successfully in various districts for which the soil and climate have been found
to be specially suitable. Progress, however, has been retarded by a variety of removable circumstances. Beyond
growing a comparatively limited quantity of tobacco for local manufacture, the industry has not advanced, and it was
recognised that the principal cause was a lack of knowledge on the part of growers as to the best methods of cultivating
the plant and treating the leaf. The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. J. W. Taverner, in order to overcome this difficulty,
some time ago engaged an American expert, Mr. A. J. Bondurant, of Virginia, who has already done much to place the
industry on a satisfactory basis ; and Mr. Bondurant, who is well pleased with the prospects of tobacco-growing in the
colony, writes as follows :—“ Many thousand acres of suitable soil for tobacco-production are not yet under cultivation,
and upon these a settler with small capital upon a few acres, by employing intelligent methods, should make a competent
support for a family. Under the aid of this enlightened Government, that is doing what is necessary to aid this new
industry, there is good reason to hope that before many years it will attain that prominence that the dairy, mine,
fruit, &c., occupies.”
Oil Seeds and Scents.
In addition to the growing of linseed, such plants as sunflowers, castor oil beans, and pea nuts are beginning to
receive attention. That they grow well in different parts of the colony has been fully proved, for settlers from early
times have been led to make trials of nearly every known kind of useful plants. While sunflowers and castor oil
plants have been found to grow well and yield heavy returns the absence of a market for the produce has prevented
their extensive cultivation. The Department of Agriculture, however, has done much to encourage these cultures by
importing an oil mill, and thus assisting to create a market for the seeds. The results so far have been highly
encouraging, and there is no doubt that castor oil plants, sunflowers, and other oil-producing crops will in a few years be
extensively cultivated. Flower farming for the production of essential oils is another industry which has recently been
receiving attention, and which is likely to be developed under the highly favorable climatic conditions of the colony.


JERSEY CATTLE


Silk Culture.
Natural conditions are exceptionally favorable to the silk-growing industry, which is so great a source of wealth
to different countries; but as a dense population with an abundance of cheap labour is necessary for its development,
only limited progress has been made. This interesting industry, however, has received attention from sanguine
persons from early colonial times, and at present an active society is pushing its interests with considerable success.
As silk culture is suitable for profitably employing the members of a settler’s family who cannot engage in the heavier
work of rural life, the industry is likely to make gradual progress and ultimately assume considerable importance.
Victoria compared with America.
North America receives a constant stream of population from the United Kingdom and Europe, and, in most
cases, emigrants have bettered their condition by going to the newer country. Can Victoria offer equal inducements
to the agriculturist who is seeking a new field of operation ? Happily, an authoritative and satisfactory answer can be
given to that question. In 1883, the two leading newspapers of Victoria sent special agricultural reporters to America
to report upon the condition of farming in that country. The writer of these pages, who was one of the special
reporters thus sent, reported that the colony had nothing to fear from American competition, and dwelt upon the
many superior advantages possessed by Victoria. Upon these points the special reporter of the other journal fully
agreed with the present writer, and thus the superiority of the colony was testified to by two independent experts.
In 1885, a member of the Government, as chairman of a Royal Commission upon Irrigation, visited the United States,
and he was accompanied by two reporters representing the same newspapers. The reports of the member of the
Government referred to, and of press representatives who accompanied him, all agreed in testifying to the superior
richness of the soil, and the more genial character of the climate, of this colony, as compared with those of the United
States. The verdict of all those independent and well-qualified witnesses was that, as far as climate, soil, and other
natural conditions were concerned, the balance of advantages was on the side of Victoria. California was the only
state in which the climate was anything like as favorable to agricultural and pastoral pursuits as that of the colony.
The severe winter in the best parts of the Mississippi Valley, or out on the Western Prairies, is a great drawback to
the progress of the farmer and stock-breeder. In America the farmer must house and feed his stock in winter, while
in Victoria the custom is almost unknown. The fine-woolled merino sheep, the horse stock, the fattening cattle, and
the dairy cows, all thrive throughout the year without shelter upon the open natural pasture lands.


MAIN IRRIGATION CHANNEL.—FROM GOULBURN RIVER


Irrigation in Victoria.
The most productive portions of America are those in which the rainfall is so deficient that it has to be supple-
mented by means of irrigation. The Government and Press Commissions from this colony to America, (see “ Victoria
compared with America ”) saw no districts in their travels which were so productive, or which were so profitably
cultivated or thickly populated, as the irrigated portions of California, Colorado, Utah, and New Mexico; and their
reports established the fact that irrigation can be carried on with great success even in thinly-populated new
countries. From this it is predicted that the inland districts of Victoria, in which the rainfall is lighter than on
the coast side of the Dividing Range, will ultimately become the most productive and the most thickly populated.
The Murray, the largest river in Australia, and the Goulburn and other Victorian rivers only require to be utilized in
order to bring about such beneficial changes as have taken place in some of the driest tracts of Western America.
Not only is the suitableness of irrigation founded upon American experience, but it has been fully proved by considerable
practical experience within the colony itself. The Government, a few years ago, completed a scheme of irrigation
which made the surplus water of all the principal rivers available for application to the land, and the results, wherever
the water has been used for irrigation, have been highly satisfactory
Cheap Money.
One of the principal difficulties in the way of successful farming in the colony has been a defective system of
obtaining financial accommodation. For Want of some means of obtaining capital on terms suitable for their
industry farmers and settlers have, in the past, been seriously handicapped, but recently Sir George Turner’s Govern-
ment introduced a Credit Fonder scheme for the purpose of removing this difficulty. Through the Commissioners of
the Government Savings Bank local loans are raised from time to time as required. The capital thus obtained is
advanced to farmers on the security of their land. Advances are made to the extent of 75 per cent, of the land
valuation. At present the rate is 6 per cent., and the amount includes interest, working expenses, and 1 per cent, to
a sinking fund, which extinguishes the debt by the end of the term.
Agricultural Education.
The importance of instructing the youth of the colony in scientific and practical agriculture has long been
recognised by thoughtful colonists, but little of importance was accomplished until 1885, when the Government set
apart 150,000 acres of land as an endowment for agricultural colleges and experimental farms. The endowment lands


THE MURCHISON WEIR.-QOULBURN RIVER.


were assigned to three trustees, and a Council of Agricultural Education, representing the Agricultural Societies of
the colony and the Government, was appointed. Two colleges have been established, at which students receive a
thoroughly liberal English education, combined with scientific agriculture, as well as practical experience of all
branches of farming industry. The instruction is free at the agricultural schools, as it is in the ordinary State
schools, and the charge for board and lodging, £26 per annum, is as low as the bare paying of expenses will admit of.
A Promising (Jutlook.
Those who are now engaging in agriculture will take part in the colony’s new career of agricultural progress,
and at the present time the colony offers special inducements to new comers. It would be difficult to find a more
promising field for the emigrant with capital, small means, or only his labour to depend upon. Wages are on a liberal
scale, living is cheap, and capital commands a comparatively high rate of interest. The capitalist can find a profitable
investment, be his resources extensive or limited, and the man who has no money can soon turn his labour into capital.
Land being cheap, the freehold of a farm can easily be acquired, and the farmer carries on his industry upon rich
soil, in a mild genial climate, under the security of the British flag, and in a country where the rough pioneering
system has given place to the comfort and conveniences, as well as the educational and social advantages of civilized
life.
For further information apply to Mr. J. M. Sinclair, the representative in London of the Victorian Depart-
ment of Agriculture.


PUBLIC WATER TANK,


THE LANDS OF THE COLONY.
Cheap Land.
Free land is generally worthless, and is only obtainable in inaccessible or badly-governed countries, where it can
be of little value to the settler. Even in the United States of America, where homestead farms are given to settlers,
there are no available State lands near railways which can be taken up for nothing. Every alternate block is granted
to the railway companies which have made the lines, and the remaining State lands within the area are raised to
doable the price of more distant areas. In a word, free land is not obtainable in any part of the world where railways,
markets, and other advantages, without which land is valueless, are provided. As the colony of Victoria has been
provided with railways, roads, bridges, schools, local government, and all the advantages of modern civilization, there
is no free land. There is cheap land, however, and that is more to the purpose. In the United States, where free
land is obtainable in distant places far from markets or railways, settlers prefer to purchase from railway companies
or private owners near railways, and within reasonable distances of large towns. It is considered better to give £2 oi
£3 per acre near a railway town, £l5 or £2O per acre near large cities, and from £2O to £4O per acre in fruit-growing
districts supplied with water for irrigation, than to go out into the wilds and settle upon free land. In like manner
there are distant portions of some of the Australian colonies where land is nominally much cheaper than in Victoiia,
but, when its inaccessibility and distance from market are taken into account, it is really dearer.
Government Land.
The colony of Victoria is 56,245,760 acres in extent. Of this area about 23,000,000 acres have been alienated to
private owners. Of the 30,000,000 acres available for settlement, 11,500,000 acres are what is known as the mallee
country, which occupies the extreme north-western portion of the colony.
Crown lands available for disposal may be acquired under the following systems :
1. Pastoral lease.
2. Agricultural licence and lease.
3. Grazing allotment licence and lease.
4. Grazing area lease.
5. Perpetual lease (agricultural, grazing, and swamp or reclaimed allotments).
6. Sale by auction.


w
UJ
u
a.
h
(-
z
<
o
HI
I
l-
u.
o
Hi
z
o


7. Lease for 21 years (swamp lands).
8. Conditional purchase lease (resumed and swamp lands).
9. Residence or cultivation licence up to 20 acres (auriferous lands)
10. Grazing licence (auriferous lands).
11. Grazing licence (Crown lands).
12. Licence or lease for garden, business sites, &c.
13. Mallee block lease.
14. Mallee allotment lease.
15. Mallee agricultural allotment, licence, and lease.
16. Mallee agricultural allotment perpetual lease.
17. Mallee improvement lease (100 acres).
18. Village community allotment.
Land on Easy Terms,
Any person who is of the age of eighteen years may select agrazing area underlease or an agricultural allotment
or a grazing allotment under licence or perpetual lease, or a mallee agricultural allotment under licence or perpetual
lease. All legal disabilities attaching to married women selecting have been entirely removed by the Land Act 1898.
Persons can take up under agricultural licence 200 acres of first-class land, or 320 acres of second-class land, or under
grazing allotment licence, 640 acres of first-class land. Of mallee land he may take up an agricultural allotment of
640 acres of first-class, or 1,000 acres of second-class land The resident licensees of agricultural allotments are
required to carry out improvements to the value of 20s. per acre on first-class and 15s. per acre on second-class land,
within a period of six years, and then a lease is obtained, the rent being 6d. per acre for first-class and 4£d. per acre
for second-class land. The same rates per acre are charged for the term of the licence. The rents and licence-fees
are counted as purchase money, and at the end of the lease the lessee obtains a Crown grant in fee simple. He can
at any time after the first six years of occupation obtain a Crown grant by paying the balance of the purchase money.
Leases of grazing areas can be obtained for a term of twenty-one years. Of first-class land 200 acres may be
taken up at a rental of 3d. per acre, or 640 acres of second-class land at 2d. per acre, or 1,280 acres of third-class
land at Id. per acre. Upon the termination of the lease the incoming tenant must pay the outgoing tenant the value
of all improvements within a limit of 10s. an acre in the case of first-class, 7s. 6d. in the case of second-class, and ss. in


the case of third-class land. The holder of a grazing area may select out of it an agricultural or grazing allotment
and make it freehold in the manner described as applying to agricultural allotments, or he may hold such allotment
under perpetual lease.
Where the mallee area is first-class land the purchase money in full is £1 per acre, and the residence licence will
be for a term of six years, at a yearly rental of Is. per acre. If all the conditions be complied with the licensee will be
entitled at the expiration of the licence to a lease for fourteen years at the same rental, or to a Crown grant at any
time thereafter by paying the difference between the amount paid and £1 per acre. The improvements at the
expiration of the licence must be of the value of £1 per acre. If the applicant prefer he may obtain a licence at a
reduced rental of fid. per acre per annum for the same term—six years. The improvements must be of the same value,
but the lease will be for 34 years at fid. per acre per annum. In other respects the conditions are the same. When the
mallee area is in the second class the purchase money in full will be 10s. per acre, the licence will be for a term of six
years, and a yearly rental of fid. per acre, or a licence may be issued with conditions varied in this respect that the
rental shall be 3d. per acre yearly for six years, subsequent lease for 34 years at the same rental. The improvements
at the end of six years must be to the value of 10s. per acre.
Perpetual Leases.
Agricultural, grazing, and mallee lands may be taken up under perpetual leases, The rent on every such lease
(outside the mallee and swamp or reclaimed lands) to the 29th December, 1909, is to, be charged as though the area
were unimproved freehold land, the annual payment is to be £1 ss. per cent, (i.e., 3d. in the £1) of such value, and
land of the first class is to be deemed to be worth £l, second-class land 155., and third class 10s. per acre respectively.
For every successive period of ten years the value (exclusive of all improvements made by tenant) will be such amount
as may be fixed by the Board of Land and Works, and the annual rental shall be £1 ss. per centum of such value.
That the lessee fence within six years, and reside for six months on the land or within 5 miles thereof during first
year and eight months during each of the four following years, provided that if he will cultivate one-fourth during the
first two years and one-half before the end of the fourth year the residence covenant shall not operate. That the lessee
make improvements to the value of 10s. per acre first-class land, 7s. fid. second class, and ss. per acre third class
before the end of the third year, and further improvements to the value of 10s. per acre first class, 7s. fid. per acre
second class, and ss. per acre third class before the end of the sixth year of lease.
Reclaimed and auriferous land can be occupied under favorable conditions, and the Land Act of 1898 contains a
provision for the purchase of land by the Government, to be resold to settlers in small areas upon easy terms.


WHY I SETTLED IN VICTORIA.
What an English Farmer Says.
The agricultural depression in England has lasted about twenty years, and no means has yet been discovered
by which the British farmer can successfully compete with the cheap produce of the colonies and new foreign countries.
A Yorkshire farmer, who gave up the struggle fifteen years ago, and emigrated to Victoria, has favoured the editor
with the following views upon the subject; —
Why I Emigrated.
I had been bred a farmer, and I knew my business, but I was rapidly losing money. My landlord was a
reasonable man, and he made all the reductions in the rent that any one could expect; but it was all the same. My
capital was disappearing, and I made up my mind to do something before it was all gone. The cause of my losses was
the low markets brought about by the cheap produce coming in from Australia and America. I was making a little
out of cattle, but I could see that would not last; and as for butter, although it was not coming from Australia at
that time, it was coming from somewhere cheaper than I could make it. As I was being ruined by cheap production,
I reckoned I would go out and be a cheap producer myself. And very glad I am that I did it in time. I have not
made a fortune, nor have I done quite as well as I expected, but I have done a lot better than stopping at home.
Things have been getting no better with the farmers at home. Rents have been reduced from time to time, but
markets have been getting lower and lower, and the farmers getting poorer and poorer. It is not only grain and meat
that pours into London now from abroad, but butter, cheese, poultry, pork and bacon, fruits, and everything. My
neighbours would have done well to have come away with me, for most of them have lost all they had. What little
capital I had left bought me the freehold of a farm, so I am my own landlord at any ihose who have less than
I had would do well to come out, for this is a better country for making a fresh beginning in than England.
Little Capital Required.
A man who has capital enough to be a tenant farmer even on a very moderate scale in the old country can buy
a good farm right out in Victoria. The value of farms in settled districts close to railway stations is only about equal
to from one to two rents in England. That is, the freehold prices range from 30s. to £3, and up to £4, £5, and £6
per acre. Farms at these prices consist of good average land, and they return a profit upon these prices. There are
also limited areas of specially productive land, fetching up to £2O, £3O, and £4O per acre, but they are not more


A FERNY GLEN,


profitable than my own farm at £5 per acre. Not only is the freehold at the level of a rent or two in the old country,
but the working capital required is also much less than that required by the English tenant farmer. The expenditure
upon manures is insignificant, and although the system of farming would not be thought much of in England, it
returns a profit, and that is more than can be said for the system under which I lost about £1 per acre per annum for
some years in Yorkshire. An English tenant farmer can easily start as a freeholder in this country, and a labourer can
become a tenant farmer. Many labourers have become freeholders here by settling on the lands which were granted
on easy terms by the Government, and others have rented farms, some making money enough to buy out the land.
Making a Start.
It suited me better to buy a well-improved farm near one of the large towns than to go inland and settle as a
“ selector,” but the selecting system offers good opportunities for those who have less capital, and who want to become
land-owners at the beginning. As the Government undertakes the making of railways, the new settlers are soon
followed by the lines, so that their produce is carried to the sea-board at low rates. There are plenty of opportunities
for men of very small capital to get on to the land. Good farms near the large towns can be taken at low rents by
men who have little more capital than their labour and that of their families ; while by going to the more distant
districts opened up by the railways, the selector can obtain land at 20s. per acre, being allowed twenty years to
complete the purchase, or he can obtain perpetual leases from the Government at a few pence per acre. And then
there is the “ share system” of farming, under which a start can be made by men of no capital. Under this system
farms are taken for one, two, or three years, the tenant doing the best he can, and the landlord taking a share of the
crop as rent. The landlord’s share is from one-third to one-fourth of the crop, according to arrangement. The
advantage to the tenant is that the rent is in proportion to the yield of the land. When it is remembered that in this
country land is plentiful and the population small, it will be understood that there are many opportunities of entering
into the business of farming. Things are cut very fine in England, but here most of the settlers were not bred to
farming, so that carrying on under easy conditions, they could not be expected to have developed a high system of
agriculture. Skilled farmers from older countries are not likely to fail where so many untrained settlers succeed.
Neither Frost nor Snow.
There is no doubt that cheap land was the principal cause of the great fall in the values of agricultural produce,
but the cheapness of the fertile lands of Victoria is only one of the advantages which the colony possesses in competitive


production. There are cheap lands in Canada and the United States, but it is only in Australia that a genial climate
prevails. There is literally no winter here in the English sense of the term. Snow is a rarity seen only on the highest
mountains, and all that is known of frost is an occasional hoar-frost, which does not injure ordinary crops. The
climate is even milder than that of the Mediterranean coast, and growth continues all through the winter. There is
no housing or feeding of live stock, but the flocks and herds remain in the fields throughout the year, growing and
fattening upon the rich pastures provided by nature. This natural pasture, which is very abundant, is highly nutritious
and fattening, and it produces the best butter in the world. It has only recently been proved that the butter made
from the natural pastures of Victoria possesses qualities of firmness and flavour unequalled by the best in the London
market.
At the Antipodes.
In speaking of the immense advantages possessed by Victoria in her wonderful climate, the Yorkshire farmer
missed out a point of great importance, viz., the unique good fortune of the colony in being situated at the Antipodes.
It is often referred to as an interesting fact that Victoria is on the opposite side of the globe to England—that it is day
in Victoria when it is night in England; winter here when it is summer there, and so on ; but the vast practical
importance of this state of things is seldom recognised. It is evident, upon reflection, that our position at the Antipodes
confers upon us a unique advantage as competitors in supplying the world with agricultural products. If, by some
miracle, the rigorous winters of North America could be exchanged for the warm genial climate of Australia, the Great
Southern Continent would still retain its unique advantage of an antipodean situation. While the severity of the
winters would have been removed, its season of abundance would still occur at the same time as the spring and
summer of Britain and Europe. Victoria has not only a mild winter, but its prolific spring and summer produce
their abundance at the very time when Europe and North America are passing through their annual periods
of suspended vegetation and destructive cold. Successful competition in agricultural production depends upon three
dominating conditions, viz.:—l. Cheap productive land. 2. A favorable climate, 3. Seasons of maximum
productiveness occurring with the annual periods of scarcity and maximum prices. The first is possessed in common
by Victoria and North America ; in regard to the second, the colony’s frostless and snowless winter places her at
an immense advantage ; while the third, with all its incalculable potency, is the exclusive possession of the antipodean
competitor.


MINING IN VICTORIA.
James Stirling, Government Geologist.
Although territorially Victoria is the smallest state in Australasia, covering an area of 87,889 square miles,
yet its variety of physical features, climatic conditions, soils, &c., and more especially the proved stability of its
splendid auriferous resources, render it at once the premier colony of the continent. When it is stated that
since the early gold discoveries in 1851-2 no less a sum than £246,400,000 has been won—the bulk of this from a
relatively small portion of the proved auriferous area—and that the gold-mining industry is only approaching a
condition of permanancy, through a better knowledge of auriferous matrices, economic methods of mining and treating
the ore, it will not be difficult to realize how important a factor the mineral wealth, both actual and potential, has
been, and will continue to be, in stimulating all other forms of production. Not only in the highest altitudes, over
6.000 feet above sea-level; in the deep recesses of the valleys, only a few feet above sea-level; but at depths of over
8.000 feet from the surface—or 2,000 feet below sea-level—are mining operations being profitably carried on. New
discoveries in the depth of the dense forest-clad mountainous areas, as tracks are being cut into their secluded recesses,
are constantly being made. Deep leads, concealed beneath extensive basaltic flows, are being traced over hundreds
of miles of territory by boring operations. And as the areas over which the metallic substances are extended, and
the methods of productions cheapened, together with a constantly increasing feeling of greater stability in the mineral
resources as fields for investment, so will the progress and prosperity of the colony proceed pari passu with the
development of its gold-mining industry.
Gold-bearing Formations.
The principal gold-bearing formations, covering one-half of the entire area, consist of Silurian slates and sand-
stones, which have been intruded upon by plutonic rocks, such as granite, porphyry, diorite, &c., and which are
overlain in the western portion of the colony by extensive lava flows—the basalts of Tertiary age. Roughly speaking,
there are 29,000 square miles of exposed Silurian rocks, which are almost everywhere intersected by auriferous quartz
veins or covered in the valley by auriferous drifts, while there cannot be less than 15,000 miles of Silurian sedimentary
rocks concealed beneath the Tertiary lava flows or Tertiary sedimentary rocks. In short, the older gold-bearing
Palaeozoic rocks extend from the western portion of the colony, in the Glenelg Valley, to the boundary of the colony
on the east, a distance of over 500 miles. In the eastern part of the colony the Silurian formations are in places
overlain by massive Devonian rocks, and in the southern by Jurassic rocks; while in the west are remains of an


GOLD MINE BENDIGO.


extensive formation—the Grampians—whose age is still uncertain. With the exception of one locality in the Devonian
area of limited extent, these formations are not known to be auriferous. The relative areas covered by the different
rock masses at the surface may be estimated as under :
Sedimentary formations : Palaeozoic Devonian, lower, middle, and upper, 8,500 square miles; carboniferous,
TOO square miles ; Cambrian, 100 square miles ; Silurian, upper and lower, 28,300 square miles.
Mesozoic: Triassic, '2OO square miles; Jurassic, 3,684 square miles.
Tertiary: Eocene or oligocene, miocene, pliocene, pleistocene, recent, 30,000 square miles.
Plutonic and Igneous rocks: Basalt, 11,000 square miles ; granite, 4,000 square miles; porphyries, diorites,
2,000 square miles.
Bendigo Gold-field.
The principal reefs in this field occur in the fissures produced by the arches formed by a buckling of the strata
into a series of folds ; or, in other words, the prominent feature of the field consists of numerous more or less parallel
axial lines, having a strike of N. 16 deg. W., along the course of which the great mass of slate and sandstone rocks are
bent over into a series of anticlinals, with corresponding synclinals or troughs between. The dip of the beds to the
east and west is about 60 feet. These axial lines or centre country do not continue horizontal for any distance, but
have an end-long dip or pitch. The reefs are called saddles, and thicken and diminish in size as they are traced along
the axial lines. The eastern and western extensions are called legs. The saddles are often from 20 to 50 feet across,
while the legs are from Ito 4 feet, but frequently become attenuated in depth. A succession of such saddles occurs at
different levels, not generally immediately below the other, but listed to one side, principally to the west. In a limited
area of about 7 miles in length by 3 miles in width there are no fewer than twelve distinct lines of saddle reefs, known
as centre country. Mining operations have extended to a depth of over 3,000 feet with profitable results. No less a
quantity than £18,009,150 worth of gold has been won from this limited area, and from the Bendigo district up to date
£53,063,356. The deepest shafts on the field include :
Feet.
Lansell’s 180 Mine ... ... ... 3,350
New Chum Consolidated ... ... 3,267
Lazarus Co. ... ... .. ... 3,210
New Chum Railway ... ... ... 3,037
New Chum and Victoria ... ... 3,100
Shamrock ... .. ... ... 3,000


The enormous wealth realized from a few of the Bendigo saddle reefs may be estimated from the following figures:—
The Carlisle Company (now amalgamated with North Garden Gully, Carlisle,
and Pass By) has produced over 350,000 oz., value ... ... ... £1,400,000
Garden Gully United, 346,000 oz., value ... ... ... ... 1,384,000
Johnson’s Reef, 281,000 oz., value ... ... ... ... ... 1,124,000
Great Extended Hustler’s, 235,000 oz., value ... ... ... ... 940,000
Catherine Reef (on New Chum line, Eaglehawk), 162,000 oz., value ... 648,000
Although the reefs in the central area of Bendigo occur in the form of saddles, yet to the north-west, as at Marong ;
north, at Sebastian, Raywood, &c.; or south, at Mandurang, they assume different forms. At Marong, where gold
occurs in the slates near the surface, slightly inclined or even vertical veins occur in places forming irregular seams of
quartz in a band of sandstone. At Mandurang, towards the Crusoe reservoir, flat veins occur ; and where such veins
intersect a particular band of strata which contains a thin, almost parallel band or seam, of slightly different mineral
composition to the enclosing strata, the richest gold is found. I have no hesitation in affirming that there is work for
centuries to chine, not only in exploiting the saddle formations down to as great a depth as 4,000 feet, but in tracing
the auriferous belt to the north and south, or developing such parallel belts as Ellesmere to Axedale on the east, or
Marong to Lockwood on the west. It is estimated that, making due allowance for the increased cost of haulage and
deep sinking, quartz containing 5 dwts. of gold to the ton can be made to pay in the deep levels at Bendigo.
Ballarat.
At Ballarat there are at least four well-defined lines of reef, such as the Guiding Star, Star of the East or
Consols, the Indicator on the Llanberris and Speedwell line, and the Fire Brigade line. It is believed that the Indicator
belt of country on the eastern side of the field will be found to extend past Creswick and Allendale towards the
Moolort Plains, Some idea of the enormous value of the gold mines within a limited area in the Ballarat district may
be gleaned when it is stated that the yield of gold up to the present has been £71,886,080. One mine alone, the Star
of the East, carried to a depth of 2,000 feet, has yielded over £520,000 worth of gold, declaring dividends of about
£220,000 ; while the Band and Albion, with which is now incorporated several smaller mines, has produced £2,078,325,
and declared £900,000 in dividends. The Silurian slates and sandstones of the Ballarat field differ slightly in
composition from those at Bendigo, and are intruded upon by granitic and felsitic dykes in places. Here several
alluvial lead systems trend southerly, westerly, and north-westerly, noted for their richness and for the occasional


MINERS’ HUT,


discovery of large nuggets in such tributary leads as Little Bendigo, Canadian, and Hiscock’s—such nuggets as the
Welcome, found at Bakery Hill, which realized £9,325; the Lady Hotham, at Canadian Cully, £3,000 ; the Nil
Desperandum, £1,050 ; and another at Canadian Gully of £5,532. During 1855-6 such leads aslnkerman, Red Streak,
Frenchman, Esmonds, Malakoff, Milkmaids, and Redan were opened out and proved very rich. It is estimated that
as much as 1,637 oz. of gold was obtained from one day’s washing at the Band of Hope. My colleague, Mr. Lidgey,
who has made a detailed survey of the field, estimates that from twenty mines £5,902,050 has been won ; that
dividends to the extent of £2,500,000 have been paid ; the total amount of calls only reaching £594,914. The tracing
out of the Ballarat lead systems to the west, north-west, and south-west still offers a field for mining development.
Auriferous ■ Contact Zones.
The influence exerted on the Silurian strata by the enormous masses of eruptive rocks, such as granites, porphy-
rites, diorites, felsites, &c., and which now appear as bosses and apophyses, known as dykes, &c.; and the structural
and chemical changes of the mineral components along the planes of the contacts has for sometime been the subject
of critical research; but it was not until the relation between the occurrence of auriferous quartz veins formed at or
near the contacts, both in the eruptive rocks, and to a greater extent in the sediments they invaded, that the
attention of practical miners was drawn to the value of following out the contacts in the field as a guide to prospecting
operations. In the north-eastern district, in an area hardly yet touched by systematic prospecting, it is estimated
that there are fully 300 miles of contact rocks intersected by auriferous quartz veins.
Maldon.
The Maldon gold-field is principally to the east of the granitic rocks at Mount Tarrengower. The alteration
of the sediments has produced rocks of the hornfels type. A well-defined elvan dyke traverses the field, and in the
case of the Derby mine is flanked on either side by auriferous veins. Fully 47 reefs have been described on this field,
which strike N. 12 to N. 30 W. Several of the mines are now approaching a depth of 2,000 feet. Such examples of
permanency as the South German, &c., may be referred to as illustrating the stability of mining on the field, which,
within a small area, has already produced £2,306,620 worth of gold.
Stawbll.
At Stawell the anriferous quartz veins intersect a belt of country margining the granite of the Black Range.
The rocks are very much indurated or altered by contact metamorphism, and the sediments are penetrated by


PUDDLING MACHINE


numerous dykes of porphyrite and diorite. The auriferous quartz veins strike from south-east to north-west, and
generally underlie to westward at an angle of 45 degrees. In almost every instance, except the Magdala-cum-
Moonlight, a flat reef has been found abutting against the vertical on the eastern side, with a northerly underlay, and
the richest quartz has for the most part been found at no great distance eastward from the line of junction. The
principal mines include the Magdala, Oriental, Sloane and Scotchman, Perthshire, Hampshire, New Chum, Cross,
&c. From this group of mines no less a sum than £4,018,884 worth of gold has been won. A considerable amount
of boring has been carried on over this field, and auriferous quartz veins proved in advance of the actual workings.
There is no reason why the reefs should not extend still further to the north-north-west of present workings. At
present the Magdala, Oriental, and North Magdala are working at a depth of 2,409, 1,832, and 1,640 feet respectively.
Diorite Dykes.
In this case the principal bed rock is of Upper Silurian age, and the dykes intersect the strata both with and
across the line of strike. The quartz veins traverse the dyke in various ways, either vertically from wall to wall
across the dyfye parallel to it; either along the wall or in the body of the stone, and horizontally or nearly so from
wall to wall. In places where the dyke stone is absent, the space between the walls is filled with broken-up rubbly
shale or slate with thin quartz leaders. Typical examples of such dykes are seen at Wood’s Point, Walhalla, Foster,
Tanjil, Raspberry Creek, Costerfield, &c.
Walhalla.
At the celebrated Long Tunnel mine, Walhalla, the dyke trends parallel with the strike of the strata west of
north. It is impregnated more or less with iron and arsenical pyrites. Two quartz lodes meeting in an apex or cap
accompany the dyke along or near to its walls on either side, while others intersect the body of the dyke. The shoots
of auriferous quartz dip northerly, the underlie being westerly. This mine is a splendid instance of the permanency
of the auriferous veins associated with the dykes ; it has yielded over 631,344 oz., or in value £2,525,376, and has
been carried to a depth of nearly 2,000 feet. The whole of the belt of country extending northerly from Walhalla
through the heads of the Jordon and over the Dividing Range at Matlock to Wood’s Point, and still further northerly
to Jamieson, is auriferous and of similar character, although on the Dividing Range, near Matlock, there is probably a
junction of the Upper and Lower Silurian beds, from the occurrence of fossil graptolites found there by my colleague,
Mr. Ferguson, 300 feet or more below the saddles.


A WHIM


Wood’s Point.
The Morning Star dyke, which trends on the surface 54 deg. west of north, is intersected by quartz veins, which
are nearly horizontally disposed, inclining but slightly to north-west. They penetrate the adjacent slates, and are
richest near the contact. Several bores were put down, which proved floors of quartz at lower levels, and show that
the quartz veins occur to great depths in the dyke masses.
Foster.
Auriferous quartz veins penetrate into the adjacent rocks beyond the porphyritic dyke which intersects the
Silurian rocks at this place. Other localities where the dykes have associated with them auriferous quartz veins are
numerous in the country occupied by the Upper Silurian beds, as at Alexandra, heads of Big River, Tanjil, Cassilis,
Ovens Valley, Queenstown, &c., &c.
Meridional Belts of Reefs.
A feature which is common both to the Lower and Upper Silurian beds, no matter what the amount of local
variation in the direction or formation of the quartz veins may be, is the meridional belts which come into view when
the position of the quartz veins are plotted on the map, i.e., there is a general meridional trend of the gold-bearing
portions of strata. This significant fact was drawn attention to by Captain Panton, P.M., and C. W. Ligar, ex-
Surveyor-General, during 1858—by the former in the Mining Journal, and by the latter in the Transactions of the
Mining Institute. My predecessor, Mr. R. A. F. Murray, was able to direct special attention to their importance by
defining a number of auriferous belts or zones. Later discoveries go to confirm the prediction of Messrs. Panton and
Ligar in a remarkable degree, so that now fully thirty of such auriferous belts may be mentioned
Permanency of Quartz Mining.
Enough has been stated to demonstrate beyond the possibility of doubt the enormous extent of the gold-bearing
belts of strata, and that there is practically an inexhaustible supply of gold yet to be won; in not only following the
downward prolongations of the reefs already discovered, but in renewed search for further surface outcrops along the
extension of the belts I have indicated. No theoretical speculations respecting the genesis of gold-bearing veins need


SINKING SHAFT.


militate against successful mining enterprise in those districts where the downward prolongations of the auriferous reef
formation is at present a matter of conjecture. The fact remains that from the highest surface altitudes to a depth ot
3,000 feet below sea-level gold-bearing strata undoubtedly exists. The permanency of Victoria’s gold-mmmg industry
is an established fact so far as the quartz-bearing formations are concerned.
Alluvial Deposits and Leads.
There is hardly a single river in Victoria which does not contain alluvial auriferous deposits along some P°f* lon
of its course. These detrital deposits have been classed as ‘ ‘ surfacing,” comprising earth or thin layers of clay, rubble,
and decomposed rock on the slopes or summits of hills composed of Silurian rock. The gold is found free, or associated
with fragmentary quartz, from the surface earth down to chinks and crevices of the bed-rock.
River, Creek, and Gully Workings.—Deposits of gravel, drift, &c., resting on the Silurian.bed-rock, or on the
banks of water-courses ; in some cases terraces are met with on the rocky slopes high up above the present river
Leads.—Gravels, conglomerates, &c., deposited in the beds of ancient rivers, in some cases only covered by
recent accumulations, and in others by several layers of basalt. The beds of these ancient rivers are in some localities
above, and in others below, those of the existing streams, as the Dargo High Plains and Clunes or Ballarat districts
respectively, and are worked by tunnels or shafts accordingly. , , ,
In addition to the above there are widespread deposits of gravels, conglomerates, &c., believed to be due to
estuarine or marine action ; the gold is more patchy in its occurrence, though sometimes found in denned runs ; not
necessarily in the deepest hollows of the bed-rock, but often on the ridge or slopes thereof. Some of these deposits
cap hills of Silurian rock ; others constitute reef washes beneath the basalt, but at higher levels than the deep lead
gutters.
Localities op Lead Systems.
Commencing at the western end of the colony, the first is that along Mathers Creek, south of Balmoral,
although there is a limited extent of slightly auriferous gravel south-west of Harrow, on the Glenelg. The Stawell
leads comprise the deep lead and its tributaries, situated from 3to 5 miles north-west of the town; and the Commercial-
street lead and its tributaries, commencing at the reef and terminating at Seventy Foot Hill, about 3 ot the
town. The Great Western lead, from which over £IOO,OOO worth of gold has been obtained, has been worked for mer


0
z
1
(0
<
§


2 miles to a width which exceeds in places 1,200 feet. Ararat: A number of shallow leads trend towards the Hopkins
Valley, where they combine into one main lead, which extends southerly beneath the basalt. The borings put down
prove that this lead system extends in all probability for at least 8 miles, with a covering of from 230 to 300 feet of
basalt. Landsborough : This extends northerly from Barkly, past Landsborough to Navarre, and on towards the
Wimmera Valley. The tributary leads at Navarre were very rich; the depth of sinking from 50 to over 100 feet.
Beaufort. —This lead, known as Fiery Creek, has been worked from the head of Fiery Creek, through the
town of Beaufort, in an easterly direction, to its junction with the Waterloo lead.
Smythesdale.—Rising in the Hard Hills, the Linton lead trends southerly to its junction with the Standard
lead, and beyond that it is called the Happy Valley lead, which, trending rapidly to the east, enters the main
Smythesdale lead, which rises near Nintingbool, and trends southward through Piggoreet, Cape Clear, and on to the
Pitfield Plains. The Snake Valley lead falls northward from the Hard Hills, and junctions with the Preston Hill
lead. It is probable that these two leads will eventually join with the Haddon lead, and the latter junction with the
Midas leads. As an instance of the richness of portion of these leads, the Magnum Bonum claim, covering an area of
12 acres, yieldecfat a depth of 102 feet 6,639 ounces of gold, value £26,556.
Rokewood. —The extension of the Break o’Day lead, already worked through the township of Rokewood, still
further south, remains to be proved.
Bet Bet Valley leads.—This extends fromLexton, through to Caralulup, Lillicur, and Bung Bong, to Rathscar,
in the Avoca Valley. The course of this lead is unmistakably marked by a strip of basalt, from Ito 2 miles in width,
which follows the valley, and is bounded on the east and west by ledges of outcropping Silurian rock. The course of
the lead goes northward about 3£ miles into Rathscar, where it turns westward, and in about 2 miles further is joined
by the Homebush lead. Beyond here it passes into and down the Avoca Valley, where it is joined by the Avoca lead
system. It probably extends past Archdale and beyond St. Arnaud.
There is thus an average length of over 40 miles of main trunk lead traversing auriferous rocks fed by rich
tributary leads and with numerous rich shallow workings in the bordering country on either side. That portion
extending from the southern line of a series of bores put down at boundary of Lexton to the Homebush leads, a
distance of 20 miles, deserves special attention, being well defined by borings and being bordered by rich auriferous
country.
Amherst and Maryborough Leads. —A series of leads from Amherst, Daisy Hill, Alma, and Maryborough,
nearly all trend towards Timor, where the course of the main lead is marked by the deep leads worked by the various
Duke companies. The Sadowa lead extends for several miles towards Talbot.


Loddon Valley Lead.—This lead system, with its tributaries, is probably the most important yet worked in
the colony, extending from the Midas and Dowling Forest group of mines, a distance of 16 miles of unworked ground ;
then the marvellous Berry group of mines, with 4 miles of unworked ground. Northerly from the junction of these
two lead systems as far as the parallel of Carisbrook, the Mount Greenock, Majorca, and Carisbrook leads come in
from the west, and the Loddon leads from the east. The boring near Moolort proved a large and well-defined trunk
lead, which extends close to Eddington, where the Bet Bet system probably joins it. In the total length of this
system there are 60 miles of unworked leads. Dunolly and Burnt Creek Leads.—Leads trending down the Bet Bet
Valley, such as Chinaman’s Flat and Four-mile Creek, were very rich.
Daylesford Leads.—These leads are all above the level of the present stream. The most noteworthy are the
Wombat Hill lead, Headman’s lead, Italian Hill lead, O’Hara Burke lead, Fern Tree lead, and Jim Crow Creek lead.
Bendigo Leads. —The rich alluvial gullies fed by the Bendigo reefs trend toward Bendigo Creek into a main
lead near the White Hills, which has been traced a length of 7 miles. Several tributaries enter below the White Hills
from the westward, trending northerly towards Huntly. It is estimated that for a distance of 6 miles from the White
Hills the lead yielded £2,000,000 worth of gold. A minor lead system extends north-westerly along the Myers Creek
Valley, receiving tributary leads from Eaglehawk on the east. Still further north a lead system extends for several
miles past Neilborough. , , , , ,
Heathcote Leads. —Mclvor Creek has been worked for a number of leads ; most of the gold occurs in nuggets
—one of these weighed 658 oz. . , , ,
Castlemaine Leads.—Extensive gullies have been worked at Chewton, Maldon, Castlemame, and down through
Yandoit to Newstead. , , , i .
Malmsbury and Coliban Valley Leads.— I This system of leads extends from the Mam Dividing Range between
Trentham and Blackwood. It is fed by various tributaries from Trentham, Lauriston, Taradale, and Malmsbury.
A line of bores near Carlsruhe proved deep ground at 348 feet from the surface. Four and a half miles northward,
near Lauriston, a lead was proved, and 2 miles further north a third series of bores proved wash at a depth of 371 feet.
Near Malmsbury, the Taradale lead junctions with the main lead. Following down the valley of the Coliban, borings
at Redesdale proved the bed-rock to be 223 feet from the surface, the fall of the surface from Kyneton to Redesdale
being evidently greater than that of the lead. From Trentham to Axedale, on the general course of the lead system,
the distance is fully 50 miles, and from near Carlsruhe to a little beyond Redesdale the distance is 2o miles.
Plenty River Leads.—Rising in the Plenty Ranges, where several creeks and gullies have been worked with
satisfactory results, notably Jack’s Creek and Deep Creek, the lead extends to Whittlesea, while at South Morang a


SLUICING WITH CALIFORNIA PUMP.


tributary lead had been worked for some years by means of tunnels. Boring is now being carried on to prove the
position of the lead, which it is thought might extend still further south towards Collingwood. Tanjil Leads. Here
a lead has been traced for several miles along the valley of the Tanjil to a higher level than the present stream.
Neerim Lead.—A sub-basaltic lead extends for a distance of about 20 miles along the water-shed between the Tarago
River and the Latrobe. Moondarra.—This lead system extends along the plateau between the I'yers and the Thomson
Rivers for a distance of 16 miles. .
Rutherglen Leads.—There are two main deep leads now being worked—the Great Southern, which is a
continuation of the Chiltern Valley Lead, and the Great Northern. The principal companies now at work include
the Great Southern, Southern and Chiltern Valley United, Great Southern No. 1, Prentice United, North lientice,
Great Northern Extended, and the Wahgunyah. The yield of gold for the Chiltern and Rutherglen districts has been
£2 282 384
~Ovens River.— The Ovens River and nearly all its tributaries below Porepunkah have proved auriferous. In
the higher levels terrace washes, and in the lower there is evidence of a very extensive deep lead system, now being
proved near Palmerston by boring. Similarly, from the neighbourhood of Beechworth in the highly auriferous plateaux
situate on the water-shed line between the Ovens and the Little or Kiewa runs, a number of lead systems radiate
towards the main valleys on either side, as the Eldorado, Woolshed, and Staghorn Flat, and numerous others.
Cargo High Plains.—Round the edge of this basaltic plateau, at an altitude of between 4,000 and 0,000 teet,
gold has been found and partially worked for many years. Recently tunnelling operations by Ryan and Co. have
disclosed what appears to be a deep lead system extending for a distance of over 20 miles. In the Kiewa Va ey icre
are miles of terraces which should repay mining exploration. Similarly in the Mitta Valley and all its tributaries
alluvial deposits and leads occur. Towards the head of the Murray, Buckwong Creek, and Limestone Creek, along
the Tambo Valley, terrace washes occur in the Mitchell and all its tributaries, the Wongungarra Cargo \\ entworth,
Crooked River, Wonnangatta River, the Bemm River in East Gippsland, the heads of the Broadnbb, the Mackenzie—
in short, the heads of the Yarra, Goulburn, and all streams to the east rising in the Mam Cividmg Range—contain
auriferous deposits, either as creek and gully alluvium or as terraces.
Bright Prospects of Mining.
Who will dare to venture the assertion that Victoria’s alluvial deposits and leads are worked out in the face of
such overwhelming evidence to the contrary? When we realize how small a portion of the proved auriferous ground


has really been worked as compared with that awaiting development, there can be but one feeling, and that of
unbounded confidence in the future mining prospects of the colony. In one square mile of ground in the Madame Berry
area gold to the value of £1,586,758 has been raised, £848,700 paid in dividends, £433,000 in wages, and £130,000 in
royalty. There is no special reason why other portions of the unworked leads should not yield similar returns. They
intersect similar belts of known auriferous territory, and when the location of the known quartz-bearing auriferous belts
are mapped out, and also the courses of the leads which intersect them, a new mining era will evolve, and science and
practice go hand in hand towards a more rapid industrial progress and continuous prosperity.


PRICES IN
MELBOURNE.
Articles.
Prices.
Articles.
Prices.
Agricultural Produce.
Wheat ... ... per bushel
4s. 2d. to 6s.
3s. to 4s. 9d.
2s. Bd. to 3s. Bd.
2s. to 3s. Bd.
Dairy Produce.
::: ::
Butter
Cheese
Milk
per lb.
Bd. to Is. 3d,
6d. to lOd.
3d. to sd. *
Oats ... ... ~
3s. to 4s.
per quart
Maize ... ... ~
B£d. to Is. 2d.
£2 10s. to £6 ss.
£9 to £l5
to Bd.
Bran ... ... ~
Hay ... ... per ton
Flour, first quality ... ~
Bread ... per 4-lb. loaf
Farm-yard Produce.
Grazing Produce,
Geese
Ducks
Fowls
per couple
4s. to 10s,
Horses—
2s. 6d. to 6s.
3s. to 6s.
Medium to heavy draught each
Saddle and light harness ~
Butchers’ meat —
£l7 to £23
£lO to £35
Babbits
Pigeons
Turkeys
Sucking pigs .
Bacon
6d. to Is.
Is. to 2s.
ss. to 20s.
ss. to 10s.
7d. to 9d.
9d. to Is.
3d. to 6d.
l£d to 4d.
2d. to 6d.
3d. to 6d.
Beef ... ... per lb.
Mutton ... ... ~
9 9
per lb.
Veal ... ... ~
Pork ... ... ~
9 9
per doz.
Lamb ... ... per quarter
Is. to Is. 9d.
6d. to Is. 9d.
* In the country the price is only 3d. per gallon.


i — continued.
Prices in
Melbourne
Articles.
Prices.
Articles.
Garden Produce.
Miscellaneous Articles—
continued.
Potatoes
per cwt.
2s. to Bs.
Candles—Sperm .. per lb.
sd. to B|d.
|d. to Id.
16s. to 20s.
15s. to 20s.
Onions, dried
Carrots
3s. to 14s.
3d. to Is.
3d. to 9d.
3d. to sd.
... 99
per dozen bunches
Salt... ... ... ~
Coal ... ... per ton
Turnips ... \
Radishes ... *
Cabbages
Firewood ... ... ~
Gas (in 1898) ... per 1,000 ft,
9 9
per doz.
6d. to 2s. 6d.
Is. to ss.
3d. to 9d.
Id. to 3d.
Cauliflowers
Lettuces
99
per lb.
Green peas, retail
Wines, Spirits, etc.
Bs. to 10s. 6d.
ss. 6d.
6d.
Bs. 9d. to 10s. 6d
4s. 6d. to 6s.
4s. to ss. 6d.
12s. to 20s.
3s. to 7s. 6d.
Miscellaneous Articles.
Ale—English
~ Colonial
... per doz.
/
per quart
.. per doz.
.. per bottle
Tea ...
Coffee
per lb.
Is. to 2s.
Is. 3d. to 2s.
2fd.
3d.
3s. 6d. to ss.
2fd.
Porter—English
Brandy
Whisky
Wine Colonial)
Sugar, refined
Rice
99
per doz.
per gall.
Tobacco
Soap, common


WAGES.
Description of Labour.
I.—Domestic Servants (with Board
and Lodging). - Males.
Coachmen, footmen,! ,
grooms, gardeners jP erweek
Butlers ... ... ~
Females.
Cooks
per annum
Laundresses
Housemaids
Nursemaids
General servants
Girls ...
per week
3. —Farm Servants. — Males.
Ploughmen ... per week and found
Farm labourers ... ~ ~
Milkmen for dairies
Cheesemakers ... ~
Reapers * ... per acre
Mowers* ... ~
Threshers * ... per bushel
Cooks ... ... per annum
20s. to 30s.
20s. to 30s.
£4O to £75
£4O to £52
£3O to £4O
£3O to £4O
£2O to £35
Bs. to 10s.
15s. to 20s.
12s. 6d. to 15s.
10s. to 15s.
255. to 40s.
10s. to 15s.
4s. to 6s.
sd. to 7d.
£5O to £6O
* The greater part of the reaping, mowing,
Description of Labour.
3. —Farm Servants— continued.
Females.
Dairy milkmaids |P e . r a “| "7 th
J t board and lodging
Cooks ... ... ~ „
General servants... ~ ~
Married couples!
(generally useful) J ”
Hop-pickers ... per bushel
Maize-pickers ... per bag
4.—Station Servants.
Males (with rations).
Boundary riders per annum
Shepherds ... ~
Stockmen ... ~
Cooks ... ... ~
Labourers ... per week
Drovers... ... „
Sheepwashers ... ~
Shearers ... per 100 sheep shorn
and threshing is being done by machinery.
| £3O to £35
£3O to £4O
£2O to £3O
£5O to £6O
2d. to 3£d.
4d, to 6d.
£4O to £6O
£36 to £52
£5O to £6O
£6O to £7O
15s. to 20s.
255. to 40s.
15s. to 255.
15s. to 16s.


Wages—
continued ,
Description of Labour.
Description of Labour.
4. —Station Servants— continued.
Females.
n , f per annum, with
Looks ... | board and lodging
General servants... ~ ~
~ . i , fper annum, with
Married couples j* rations ,
10.—In Houses and Buildings.
Masons... ... per day
Plasterers ... ~
Bricklayers ... ~
Slaters ... ... ~
Carpenters ... ~
Labourers
Painters and glaziers ~
Sign writers ... ~
Paper hangers ... ~
16.—1 n Stone, Clay, etc.
Brickmakers—
Clay-hole men... per 1,000
Setters ... ~
Drawers ... ~
| £3O to £6O
£3O to £36
| £5O to £7O
6s. to 7s.
6s. to Bs.
7s. to Bs.
6s. to Bs.
ss. to 6s.
ss. to Bs.
7s. to Bs.
ss. to 7s.
Is. 9d.
Bd.
Bd.
16. —In Stone, Clay, etc. — continued.
Brickmakers—
Burners ... per week
Potters... ... per hour
Quarrymen ... per day
Labourers ... ~
Stonebreakers ... per cubic yard
Tarpavers ... per day
Asphalters ... ~
17.— 1 n Mines.
General managers per week
Legal „ ~
Mining „
Engineers ... ~
Engine-drivers ... ~
Pitmen ... ~
Blacksmiths ... ,
Carpenters ... ,
Foremen of shift ~
Miners ... ... ~
Surfacemen, Labourers ~
Boys ... ... ~
lOd. to Is.
6s. to Bs.*
ss. to 6s. 6d.
Is. to 3s.
6s. 6d.
£3 to £lO
£5 to £6
£2 10s. to £9
£2 Bs. to £5
£2 ss. to £3
£2 to £3 10s.
£2 to £3 10s.
£2 2s. to £3 18s.
£2 ss. to £3 6s.
£2 to £2 10s.
£llos. to £2los.
10s. to £2
Authority
Robt S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne, Victoria.




