

THE FATAL MISTAKE!
0R,
How New South Wales has lost Caste
IN THE WORLD,
THROUGH MISGOVERNMENT IN THE MATTER
OF IMMIGRATION:
And what is the present duty of the Colony in the case.
BY
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.,
Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and recently one of the Representatives of
the City of Sydney in the Parliament of Now South Wales,
Honorary Member of the African Institute of Fi ance, of the American Oriental Society,
and of the Literary Institute of the University of Olinda in the Brazils.
PSICE 03STE SHILXjIN G 3--




THE FATAL MISTAKE!
OR,
tjnm New Sout(| Indies l|as lost Caste
IN THE WORLD,
THROUGH MISGOYERNMENT IN THE MATTER
OF IMMIGRATION:
rul)flt is tl )t present i 311 * 1 ) °f % SWoui) in tl)e cnee.
BY
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.,
Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and recently one of the Representatives of
the City of Sydney in the Parliament of New South Wales,
Honorary Member of the African Institute of France, of the American Oriental Society,
and of the Literary Institute of the University of Olinda in the Brazils.
PRICi: OJSTIE SHILLING.




THE FATAL MISTAKE!
OR,
HOW NEW SOUTH WALES HAS LOST CASTE IN
THE WORLD THROUGH MISGOVERNMENT IN
THE MATTER OF IMMIGRATION.
Previous to the year 1831, it had been the policy and practice
of the Imperial Government to promote, what the great Lord
Bacon designated, the heroic work of colonization , in New South
Wales, by giving free grants of Land, with other indulgences,
to emigrants of suitable character and qualifications. There
were many abuses under this system, as the annals of this
colony, and especially the grant of a million- of acres to the
Agricultural Company, sufficiently attest; but in that year this
policy and practice was discontinued, at the instance of a school
of Colonial Reformers, headed by the late Mr. Edward Gibbon
Wakefield, who recommended, and succeeded in getting adopted
and established, the practice of selling the waste lands of the
colonies by public auction, at not less than a certain minimum
price, and devoting the proceeds to the work of colonization,
by sending out suitable persons and families to the colonial
field.
The minimum price was at first fixed at five shillings an acre;
afterwards at twelve shillings; and subsequently, under the Im-
perial Act of 1842, at a pound an acre, at which rate it remains
to the present day.
This mode of disposing of the waste lands of the colonies,
and of appropriating the proceeds of the sales for the promo-
tion of emigration, constitutes what is called the Wakefield
principle, as contradistinguished from all other modes of dis-
posing of colonial lands ; and I have much pleasure in express-
ing my belief and conviction, that that principle is one of the
most important discoveries of modern times, and justly entitles


its author, whom I had the pleasure of knowing personally,
to a distinguished place among the benefactors of mankind.
“ Human ingenuity,” observes a gentleman long ago well known
in Sydney (Mr. Thomas Horton James), in his evidence before
a committee of the Legislative Council of the colony, “Human
ingenuity never yet devised a more perfect plan of colonization
than the sale of the waste land of the colony, and peopling
it with the proceeds. This is the plan at present in New South
Wales, and it is to be hoped it will not be departed from.”
The Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, when this
great and salutary revolution was effected in the colonial sys-
tem of the British Empire, was Lord Goderich, now the Earl of
Ripon, under the Whig Ministry of the period. And one can-
not fail to observe, from the following letter of Lord Howick,
now Earl Grey, then Under Secretary of State for the Colonies, to
the Secretary of the Treasury, how deep and hopeful an interest
his Lordship then took in this colony, and how anxious he was
that the whole of the funds arising from the sale of the waste
lands should be appropriated for the promotion of emigration.
Extract of a Letter from Lord Howick to the Hon.
J. Stewart, dated July 16, 1831.
“ A consideration of the rapid progress which has already
been made, and of the natural resources possessed by New South
Wales, gives every reason to hope that at no very distant pe-
riod the whole expense, both of its civil government and of its
defence, may, without inconvenience, be defrayed by the colony.
In order, however, to accelerate the accomplishment of this ob-
ject, Lord Goderich is of opinion that it would not be wise so
to burden the colony as to check the progress of improvement
and the development of its resources for the sake of a small
immediate saving to this country; and he would more especially
call the attention of their Lordships to the impolicy of applying
to the ordinary current expenses of the colony that portion of
the territorial revenue which arises from the sale of land. The
funds derived from this source should be looked upon, not as
forming a part of the income of the colony and available for the
purpose of meeting its annual expenses, but as capital which
should not be permanently sunk, but invested so as to produce
a profitable return. As the best mode of investment, and in
order to remedy what is so very serious an evil in its present
condition, Lord Goderich would therefore propose, with the ap-


probation of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, to apply
the net revenue arising from the sale of land in encouraging the
emigration of females from this country.
“ The soundness of this principle is self-evident; for if the
whole of the land fund, which amounts already to somewhat
about £IOO,OOO per annum, had been judiciously expended for
the purpose to which it was originally and most judiciously
devoted, the population of the colony might have been doubled
in less than six years, while its produce and revenue would have
been increased in a still higher proportion.”
A committee, consisting of gentlemen of the highest charac-
ter, was formed in London by Lord Goderich, for carrying out
the new emigration policy of the Government; and that com-
mittee having referred to the Legislative Council of the colony,
as to what classes of persons should be sent out at the expense
of the land fund, the Council recommended that the persons
to be sent out in this way should consist of mechanics and
their families, and unmarried females. In the meantime, the
committee very imprudently entrusted both the selection of the
female emigrants and their shipment to the colony to a London
shipbroker of the name of John Marshall; who, having a strong
pecuniary interest in the concern, but no personal knowledge of
the colony, and no personal influence in procuring suitable emi-
grants, did the best he could to fill his ships with reputable
females; and when he failed in obtaining the requisite number,
he swept the streets of the great cities of England and Ireland
and packed off such as he found in hundreds to Sydney and
Hobart Town—Melbourne not being then in existence.
In the year 1835, having previously suffered much in con-
nection with certain educational efforts in which I was engaged
at the time, from the worthless convict press of the period, I
established a weekly journal called The Colonist, in which I
published a series of articles, demonstrating the transcendent
importance of appropriating the whole of the land revenue,
beyond what might be required for the survey of the land and
for the aborigines, for the promotion of emigration to the col-
ony from the United Kingdom, as such an appropriation would
not only increase the free population of the colony at a very
rapid rate, but raise the moral tone of its society, and speedily
obliterate all traces of its convict origin. The first of these
articles, entitled “ The Emigration Job,” was published on the
Bth of January, 1835, and the second on’the 15th, entitled
“ Emigration and No Job.” My qualifications at the time
for this service consisted in having brought out, at my own


cost and risk, tlie first considerable body of free emigrants that
bad ever landed in the colony, consisting of upwards of fifty
families of Scotch mechanics, amounting to a hundred and
forty persons in all, in the year 1831, and a second corps when
returning from a second educational mission to England in
1834. The following are extracts from these articles :
“ It was in the month of January, 1831, that His Majesty’s
Government determined, at the suggestion of Mr. Charles
Tennant, M.P., and several other gentlemen of high character
and respectable standing in the mother-country, to discontinue
the practice of granting waste land to emigrants in the Aus-
tralian colonies, and to dispose of all such land as might be
applied for in future by public auction, at a minimum price of
five shillings per acre; the funds accruing from such sales to
be appropriated in some way or other for the encouragement
and promotion of emigration. For this admirable principle—
that of rendering the waste lands in the colonies available on
the one hand to the mother-country, by relieving it of a portion
of its redundant population, and to the colonies on the other,
by supplying them with useful labourers to cultivate the soil
and to develop their latent resources—his Majesty’s Govern-
ment are mainly indebted to a gentleman subsequently well
known in the world and highly respected and esteemed, Mr.
Edward Gibbon Wakefield.
“ A considerable time elapsed before the principle which was
thus brought into operation enabled the Government to realize
any considerable amount, for the purpose of emigration, from
the sale of land in the Australian colonies ; and when such an
amount was at length realized from that source, there was some
difficulty experienced by the Home Government as to the man-
ner in which it should be appropriated. The Legislative Coun-
cil of this colony were referred to on the subject, and recom-
mended that it should be appropriated, in the first instance, in
aiding the emigration of married mechanics and unmarried
females: these being the classes of persons who, it was supposed,
were in greatest requisition at the time in the colony.
* * * * *
“ The adoption of the principle of disposing of all waste land
in this territory by public auction, and devoting the whole


proceeds of the sales towards the encouragement and promo-
tion of emigration, has placed in the hands of his Excellency
Governor Bourke, during whose administration this admirable
principle has been called into operation, a lever of sufficient
power to raise the character of the colony almost inconceivably;
and such, moreover, as none of his Excellency’s predecessors
were ever enabled to ply. Should his Excellency seize this
lever with a vigorous grasp, and ply it with a steady and
powerful hand, he will ere long assuredly enjoy the enviable
distinction of having conferred the most important benefits on
this colony, and adopted the best means for securing the
gradual reformation of its demoralized inhabitants ; he will be
styled the Father of the Country, and his name will be em-
balmed in the memory of future generations. But if, in this
most important crisis of the moral history of this colony, his
Excellency should rest satisfied with allowing things to
continue as they are, he will sacrifice the finest opportunity
that, any governor of New South Wales has ever enjoyed of
acquiring honourable and lasting fame for his services to the
community; and instead of enjoying the blessings and the
praises, he will expose his reputation to the well-merited
indignation and the bitter reproaches of posterity. * *
“We hasten then to lay before our readers the ideas we enter-
tain on this most important subject; and in doing so we would
merely submit certain principles which, we conceive, ought to
be kept in view in organizing an improved system of emigration
for this colony ; for as to the particular agency by which such
a system should be introduced, or the minuter details of its
subsequent management, it would be unnecessary to offer any
suggestions.
“ I.—Let the Government, therefore, ascertain, through a
board or committee of competent persons appointed for the
purpose, what classes of persons it is the interest of this colony
to encourage and enable to emigrate from the mother-country
to this territory, and in what proportionate numbers such classes
of persons should be introduced into the colony. * * *
There would thus be no danger of glutting the colonial
market with any particular description of labour, and thereby
occasioning the bitterest disappointment to the emigrants;


while every individual imported would be useful to the col-
ony in his own particular department of labour, and would
readily find his proper place and his proper level in society.
* * * * And to obviate the evils likely to
arise from the disproportion of the sexes in this territory, we
should recommend, further, that of any two families of any of
the classes, above-mentioned proposing to emigrate to this
colony, that family should be preferred of which the husband
or father had daughters or other female relatives whom he was
desirous of bringing out along with him. Unmarried females
emigrating in this way would have natural guardians on their
arrival in this colony ; they would be under no inducement to
accept of inferior situations in which their morals would be
endangered, and they would be much likelier to form eligible
matrimonial connexions shortly after their arrival in the colony,
than if they had come out like the female emigrants under the
existing system of management.
“ ll,—Let the Government declare the £2O, which is advanced
at present from the proceeds of the sale of waste land as a loan ,
to he repaid with interest by the free emigrant labourer from the
wages of his labour in the colony , an absolute and unconditional
free gift.
u lll.—Let the business of selecting emigrants for this colony
be entrusted to persons who are well acquainted with the coun-
try, and in whom the colonists can place confidence, —men who
have a character to lose in the colony, and who would feel in-
terested in getting out persons who would prove really useful
to the community,—and not to mercenary and unprincipled
London jobbers, who are. altogether unacquainted with the real
wants of this community, and who have no interests to study
but their own.”
Mr. John Blaxland, a very old colonist, and a member of the
Legislative Council of 1831, had, it seems, protested against
the change which was then effected from the system of grant-
ing to favoured individuals the waste lands of the colony to that
of selling them for the promotion of emigration. In reference
to this protest it was urged in The Colonist papers—
“ That the property of the soil of this colonial territory was
vested in his Majesty the King by the Imperial Parliament of


Great Britain and Ireland, to be alienated or otherwise disposed
of by his Majesty, as he should think proper, for the benefit of his
subjects generally; his Majesty’s ministers being, of course, re-
sponsible for the manner in which the said property should
actually be disposed of. * * * * We,,
as individual colonists, have, therefore, acquired no right whatever
to any part of this territory but the portion we have either bought
with our money, or received as a grant from the King, as lord para-
mount of the soil. And as a distinct community, forming an in-
tegral portion of the British nation, all we can in justice claim
is, that the revenues raised by custom-house or other duties from the
inhabitants of this colony shall be expended ivithin the colony, and
for the direct and exclusive benefit of its inhabitants. As to the
manner in which the Home Government shall appropriate the
funds arising from the sale of waste land within the colonial terri-
tory, we have just as little right, either as individuals or as a com-
munity, to require that these funds should be expended for our
exclusive benefit, as ive have that the funds arising from the
sale of the dockyard at Plymouth or the arsenal at Woolwich r
should such a sale ever take place, should be expended for our ex-
clusive benefit also.. * * * The property of the
soil of this territory was acquired by the British Government,
in trust for the British nation generally, by the right of dis-
covery in the first instance, and at a time when it was thought
not worth the having by every other government in the civil-
ized world ; and upwards of four millions of British money were
expended in improving the said property and in giving it value.*
In such circumstances, will any man say that the King and Par-
liament of Great Britain have not an absolute right, as trustees
for the nation, to dispose of the property they have thus created
for the benefit of the nation—that they have not an absolute
right to do what they will with their own ? ”
The idea put forth in the article quoted from The Colonist of
1835—the idea of the transcendent importance of appropriating
* This was the amount which the founding of this colony had cost the
Imperial Government at the close of Governor Macquarie’s administra-
tion in the year 1820. That expenditure had amounted to seven millions
sterling in the year 1837, on the estimate of the late Sir William Moles-
worth.


the whole of the land revenue for the promotion of emigration
took such hold of the colony at the time that a great public
meeting was held in Sydney, the Chief Justice of the period,
the late Sir Francis Forbes, in the chair, for the express pur-
pose of earnestly recommending to the Colonial Legislature to
maintain this important principle inviolate, and to urge its
adoption upon the Imperial Government. A Select Committee
of the Legislative Council on Immigration, of which Sir Francis
Forbes was chairman, was accordingly appointed in that year,
and the following was part of its first report:—
“ The first emigrants were induced to embark their fortunes in
this distant colony under the promise of receiving free grants
of land, and in the confidence that the same policy would be
continued as the best means of settling the country. If it had
since been deemed expedient to sell the lands in lieu of granting
them as before, it was considered by the inhabitants merely as
the conversion of capital into another form; and they thought
that the proceeds of the sale of land should be applied to the
same purpose to which the land itself was applied, namely, the
encouraging and promoting of immigration.
It was for these reasons that the Committee were anxious to
record their opinion, as well as that of the whole community,
that the funds arising from the sale of lands should be appro-
priated exclusively to the purpose of introducing a moral and
industrious population; that they consider this appropriation
alike indispensable to the present interests and future prospects
and character of the colony ; and that they regard the opinion
formerly expressed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies
on this subject, and approved by the Lords of the Treasury, in
the light of a pledge by his Majesty’s Government that the
Crown Lands should be held sacred to the promotion of immi-
gration.”
Unfortunately, however, Sir Richard Bourke did not respond
to the appeal that was thus virtually made to him in the arti-
cles in question. No committee of supervision was appointed
in the colony to stimulate and regulate the flow of emigration
to the colony, and no agents acquainted with the country were
sent home to select suitable emigrants; and while the Treasury
was overflowing with the funds accruing from the land sales,
and directly available for the promotion of emigration, associa-


tions were actually formed in Sydney for the importation of
Hill Coolies from India, of Chinamen from Canton and Shang-
hai, of South Sea Islanders from the Pacific Ocean, and of
expiree convicts from Van Diemen’s Land, at the expense of the
colonists, to supply the great want of labour throughout the
colony. Whether it was from the want of energy that usually
accompanies advancing years, or from his- temper having got
soured from the bitter and unmanly opposition he experienced
from the squatters of his time, Sir Richard Bourke certainly
took no interest in the promotion of immigration: insomuch
that while £439,652 4s. 4|d., or nearly half a million sterling,
was raised from the sale of waste land during his government,
only £91,167 13s. 2d., or less than one-fourth of that amount,
had been expended on immigration. Nay, the Right Honor-
able Spring Rice, afterwards Lord Monteagle, who then held
the seals of office as Principal Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies, on observing that the Treasury of the colony was overflow-
ing with funds accruing from the sales of land, directed his
Excellency to appropriate a portion of the land fund, if neces-
sary, for the maintenance of the police and gaols of the colony,
an item of expenditure which had previously been defrayed
from the ordinary revenue. This appropriation, however,
proved unnecessary, as the ordinary revenue was sufficient for
the purpose. But it called forth the subjoined very strong
opinion on the subject of the Land Fund and Emigration from
Lord Glenelg, who succeeded Mr. Spring Rice in the Colonial
office. The following is the Treasury Minute on the subject:—
Minute, of date August 13, 1838, from Treasury Board
to Colonial Office.
“ Expressing a hope that the whole of the land revenue will
not have been appropriated exclusively to the purposes of emi-
gration, unless it shall have been ascertained that the produce
of the other branches of the revenue will be such as to render
it unnecessary to apply any portion of the land fund to the
ordinary expenditure of the Colonial Government.”
Lord Glenelg, then Principal Secretary of State for the
Colonies, observed, in his letter to Sir George Gipps, transmit-
ting a copy of this Treasury Minute, of date Downing Street,
28th August, 1838: —
u lt must he distinctly understood that it is only in the event of a
deficiency in other branches of the revenue, in providing for the
ordinary expenditure of your Government, that her Majesty’s


Government can sanction any portion of the land fund being
diverted from the purposes of Emigration .”
In this way there was a vast amount of emigration effected
to the colony of a most valuable description, at the sole cost of
the land fund of New South Wales, during the next twenty
years,* there having been imported on one occasion during that
period upwards of twenty-five thousand emigrants, whose pas-
sage out was paid exclusively from that fund, in eighteen
months. There were, doubtless, great abuses allowed to prevail
in the Immigration department, through the neglect and mis-
management of the local Government, during the administra-
tion of Sir George Gipps ; hut the aspect and character of the,
colony were, wonderfully improved, and, as
convict immigration had in the meantime been discontinued in
the year 1840, there was no further cause of grievance from
that source.
But a fatal change was unfortunately effected in this admir-
able system—so beneficial alike to the mother country and the
colonies—through colonial cupidity on the one hand and Impe-
rial ignorance and folly on the other. And I have no hesitation
in stating it as my decided opinion, that that change was owing
entirely to the influence and efforts of a gentleman to whom the
colony is greatly indebted for many and most important services
rendered to the community—l mean the late Mr. Wentworth.
For by one fatal act —an act of alleged patriotism, in which, in
an evil hour the Imperial Government unhappily concurred, —
Mr. Wentworth has done incalculable evil to the colony, and
thrown it back in the march of imrpovement perhaps half a
century.
On the assembling of the Legislative Council in 1851, Mr.
Wentworth obtained a Committee to prepare a remonstrance
against the Constitution Act of 1850, which had then just
arrived in the colony; and one of the principal grievances
which that remonstrance submitted was the retention of the
whole power over the waste lands and land revenue of the
colony in the hands of the Imperial Government. That griev-
ance, or rather the claim founded on it, was as follows:
“2. That the revenue arising from the public lands, derived
as it was wholly from the value imparted to those lands by the
* The following are the correct items :
From 1888 inclusive to December 31, 1851, when Vic-
toria was separated £900,329 2 6
From January, 1, 1852, to December 31, 1859, when
Queensland was separated 996,726 11 5
For the next ten years 200,112 1 1


labour and capital of the people of this colony, was as much their
property as the ordinary revenue, and ought, therefore, to be
subject only to the control and appropriation of the Colonial
Legislature.”
Earl Grey’s reply to this remonstrance of the Legislative
Council was received in the colony in July, 1852 ; and I sub-
join that portion of it which relates to the claim of the Council
to the entire control of the waste land and the land revenue of
the colony,—in which, I am happy to state, I entirely concur
with his Lordship ;
“ With regard to the administration of waste lands, it was his
duty not to withhold the expression of his decided dissent from
the doctrine that the waste lands of New South Wales, or the
revenue derived from them, were, in any reasonable sense, the
exclusive property of the inhabitants, or that their representa-
tives ought to have, as of right, the control and disposal of that
revenue. The waste lands of the vast colonial possessions of
the British Empire were held by the Crown as trustee for the
inhabitants of that empire at large, and not for the inhabitants
of the particular provinces divided by arbitrary geographical
limits in which any such waste lands might happen to be situ-
ated. Otherwise, this consequence would follow, that the first
inhabitants of any of these vast provinces, if possessing those
representative institutions which arose, as of right, in ordinary
British colonies, would be indefeasibly entitled to the adminis-
tration of all the lands and land revenue of the great unexplored
tract called a province, of which they occupied the extremity,
wholly without regard to the interests of the nation which had
founded the settlement, perhaps at great expense, in order to
serve as a home for their own emigrants, and as a market
for their own industry.”
Returning to the charge, however, a petition to the Queen
and Parliament was carried in the Legislative Council, on the
motion of Mr. Wentworth, in 1851, to the following effect:—
“ In order that her Majesty’s confidential advisers might have
no excuse for the continuance of the abuses \_alleged~\, the Council
unhesitatingly declares that they were prepared, on the surrender


to the Colonial Legislature of the entire management of all the
revenues, territorial as well as general, and on the establish-
ment of a Constitution among the colonies similar in its out-
lines to that of Canada, to assume and provide for the whole
cost of the internal government of the colony, whether civil or
military, and to enact an adequate Civil List during the life of
her Majesty, and for five years after her Majesty’s demise,
instead of the sums appropriated in the Schedule to the Impe-
rial Act, 13 & 14 Viet.”
We have seen how Earl Grey would have answered such a
proposal, had it been made to him during his tenure of office;
but no sooner had his Lordship’s Government been subverted,
and the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington installed
in his stead, than this monstrous proposal was at once con-
ceded by these political worthies, and the hundreds of millions
of acres of waste land in this territory, with all the revenues
arising from them, were handed over without question and with-
out conditions to the local Legislature, or rather to the mere
handful of squatters who then formed the Legislature of the
colony.
Sir John Pakington’s Eeply to the Petition of the
Council in 1852.
“ Coinciding with Earl Grey that the transference of the control
of the lands to the local Legislature was a question of expediency
and not of right , he had arrived, after full consideration, at the
conclusion that, under the new and rapidly-changing circum-
stances of New South Wales, the time had come at which it
was his duty to advise her Majesty that the administration of
these lands should be transferred to the Colonial Legislature,
after the changes in the Constitution had been effected which
were adverted to in the petition.”
Sir John Pakington’s despatch was accompanied by one from
the Duke of Newcastle, confirming “the promise that as soon
as a New Constitution had been passed by the Legislature of
the province, and had received the approval of her Majesty,
the disposal of the waste lands, and the appropriation of the
fund accruing from their sale and management, would be placed,
without reserve, under the supervision and control of the
legislative authority of the colony.”


Schedule A.
Salaries of Public Offices
£20,550
Schedule B.
Pensions chargeable
£13,950
Schedule C
(In process of extinction since 1862).
Public Worship...
£28,000
The two clauses of the Imperial Constitution Act of 1855,
embodying the arrangement, are as follow :
“ Clause II. —The entire management and control of the waste
lands belonging to the Crown in the said colony, and also the
appropriation of the gross proceeds of the sales of any such
lands, and of all other proceeds and revenues of the same, from
whatever source arising within the said colony, including all
royalties, mines, and minerals, shall be vested in the Legislature
of the said colony.
“ Clause L.—The said several sums mentioned in Schedules
A, B and C, shall be accepted and taken by her Majesty, her
heirs and successors, by way of Civil List, instead of all terri-
torial, casual, and other revenues of the Crown (including all
royalties), from whatever source arising within the said colony,
and to the disposal of which the Crown may be entitled, either
absolutely or conditionally, or otherwise howsoever.”
The three Schedules above referred to are as follow :
For the paltry amount, therefore, of £62,500 a year, as a
Civil List to her Majesty for the payment of the salaries of
the civil officers of the colony, &c., the control of the waste
lands of the colony of New South Wales, and of all the revenue
to accrue from them in all future time, was bartered away by
the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington, in the paction
which the Act in question merely confirmed. Lord John
Bussell was Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies in
1855, when the Imperial Constitution Act embodying this
fatal arrangement was passed ; but his Lordship had no alter-
native in the matter, and could only ratify and confirm the bar-
gain which his predecessors in office had made.
The Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington could not
plead ignorance as to how the Colonial Legislators would dis-
pose of the land revenue, in the event of their obtaining the
entire command of it. This had been declared sufficiently in a
letter from Earl Grey to the Governor of New South Wales, of


date Downing Street, 27th May, 1851, embodying the resolu-
tion of the Legislative Council of that colony on the subject,
and placing the matter in its full and proper light before the
reader. The letter in question is to the following effect:—
“ I have received your despatch of the 81st December last,
forwarding an Address from the Legislative Council of New
South Wales to the Queen, setting forth the amount expended
on immigration from the land fund since the year 1836, and
the debt incurred upon it for the same object, setting forth the
advantages derived from that outlay to the mother country,
and urging that it is no part of the duty of the colonists to pay
for the importation of emigrants »”—Council Paper,
This allegation of the Legislative Council of 1850 virtually
embodied the three following propositions :
Ist. That the waste lands of the colony were as much the
property of the colonists as their own goods and chattels.
2nd. That the past expenditure of any portion of the funds
derived from the sale of these lands on emigration from the
mother country was a positive grievance to the colony, and a
misappropriation of its funds ; and,
3rd. That it was the mother country that derived the exclu-
sive benefits accruing from such emigration.
In short, the squatters, who then ruled the colony under the
leadership of Mr. Wentworth, in virtue of an electoral system
which I have no hesitation in stating was characterized by
downright chicanery and fraud, had no desire for the settlement
of the country with a numerous, industrious, and virtuous popu-
lation from the United Kingdom, They desired to have it
reserved exclusively for their sheep and cattle.
We have seen that the position which all the three Secre-
taries of State mentioned above—-Lord Goderich in 1831,
Lord Glen el g in 1838, and Earl Grey in 1851—uniformly as-
sumed and maintained was, that the waste lands of this colony
were the property of the Crown as trustee for the whole people
of England, and were to be administered for the benefit of his
Majesty’s subjects generally. ...
In accordance with this principle, I always maintained, during
the whole course of my parliamentary life—from the first of
August, 1843, to the close of the year 1870—that the waste
lands of the colonies were not the property of their actual in-
habitants, but of the whole people of the British Empire, and
that they ought to be administered by and for them exclusively.
I confess, indeed, I uniformly stood alone in giving expression


to such sentiments, and had to submit to many an ill-natured
and bitter taunt for my pains ; but I never hesitated to do so,
notwithstanding, on all suitable occasions. The waste lands of
the colonies I have always regarded as an invaluable possession
of the British people, to be administered, if we had only had
men of common sense and common honesty to manage them,
for the benefit of myriads of the British people. And I am
happy to be able to adduce the testimony of a highly competent
witness to the fact I have just mentioned.
The following passage from a very able pamphlet, entitled
“ Bush Essays,” by Capricornus, published in Edinburgh, by
Adam and Charles Black, in 1872, bears testimony to my uni-
form efforts in the Parliament of New South Wales, in favor
of the principle that the waste lands of Australia were the pro-
perty of the people of England, and not of the actual colonists
of any of the Australian colonies. I have no idea who the
writer is, but he is evidently a highly intelligent person, and
has in all likelihood been a resident in Queensland :—*
11 The point may here with propriety be raised—For what pur-
pose was the Crown title of the waste lands handed over to the
colonies by the Imperial Government ? Were the lands to be
held in trust for the purposes of colonization ? or were they
handed over merely as assets, to be managed for the profit of
the one million of people then in Australia? Every candid
mind must admit the first supposition to be the only just one ;
but this is a view of the matter by no means approved by the
colonists, and the different Governments have invariably acted
as if the main purpose for which the lands were held was to
raise money to be spent among their constituents. Only one
member of a Colonial Assembly has, to the writer’s knowledge,
maintained the contrary principle consistently. He who held
this honorable position was the Rev. Dr. Lang, of Sydney.”—
“ Bush Essays,” by Capricornus, p. 43. Adam and Charles
Black, Edinburgh, 1872.
In consequence of the repeated complaints and remonstrances
of the Legislative Council of the period, in regard to the waste
lands of the colony, Earl Grey had, during his term of office,
conceded and arranged that only one-half, instead of the whole,
of the land fund should thenceforth be appropriated for the pro-
* I have since ascertained who the author of “ Bush Essays” is; but I
have not been authorised to publish his name.


motion of emigration ; and had his successors in office—the
Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington—done their duty
in the case, as trustees for the people of England over their
splendid inheritance of the waste lands of the Australian colon-
ies, they would have stipulated, before handing over these lands
unconditionally to the local Legislature, that this arrangement
should be fully and faithfully maintained. And I have no
hesitation in expressing my belief and conviction, from my per-
fect knowledge of the state of public feeling on the subject
throughout the colony at the time, that if this condition had
been insisted upon by the Imperial Government, it would cer-
tainly have been carried out, however reluctantly, by the Colonial
Legislature, to the unspeakable benefit of the people of England
and the universal satisfaction of the colony.
Perhaps the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington
believed that the Legislative Council of 1852, to which they
made their unconditional surrender of the waste lands of the
colony, was a fair and equitable representation of the people of
New South Wales, and that its members consisted exclusively
of intelligent and patriotic men, who would administer the splen-
did possession that had thus come into their hands with equity
and justice alike to the people of England and to the colony at
large. If so, they were under a prodigious and fatal mistake.
The Legislative Council of that period consisted in great mea-
sure of a mere clique of squatters, and the representation of the
colony had been artfully cooked to suit their peculiar taste by a
very able manipulator, in the grossest injustice to the colony at
large. Unfortunately—l repeat it—the Legislative Council for
the time being was entirely in the hands of a mere clique of squat-
ters who, as we have seen above, were altogether opposed to
immigration or the appropriation of any portion of the land fund
for such a purpose—in short, men who cared nothing either for
the people of England and their rights over the waste lands of
the colony, or for the settlement of the country with a numerous,
industrious, and virtuous population, and who were determined,
if possible, that these lands should remain for ever in their
natural state, as a series of splendid Runs for their sheep and
cattle.
As this, however, was the grand turning point in the history
of the colony, for good or for evil—for elevation or for depres-
sion in the world—l shall state the case simply as it stood. In
the year 1844, the second year of the first Legislative Council,
or semi-representative Legislature of the colony, I obtained, as
a member of that Council taking a deep interest in all consti-
tutional questions affecting the rights and interests of the peo-
ple, a Select Committee of the Council on the representation of
the colony. Of that Committee, of which I drew up the Report


as chairman, which was approved and adopted by the Council,
the late Mr. Wentworth and the late Mr. Richard Wmdeyer were
both members. It was through that Committee and at my in-
stance that the squatters first obtained the franchise, which of
course entitled them to their proper share—although not to a com-
plete monopoly, as they actually obtained —of the representation.
In o-auging the representation of the colony for the future, in this
Committee, Mr. Windeyer moved that as Sydney had then six
wards, it should thenceforth have six members, while the other
more populous parts of the colony should have an increased and
equitable share in the general representation. The task ot
drawing up a new Electoral Act for the colony, after the passing
of the Imperial Act of Earl Grey for the better government of
the Australian colonies in 1850, devolved, as a matter of course
on Mr. (now Sir) E. Deas Thomson, then Colonial Secretary.
But how was this very important measure drawn up by that
functionary ? Why, the City of Sydney was only allotted three
members, while the Council itself, by approving of my Report
seven years before, had virtually assigned it six; and the other
populous parts of the colony were treated in precisely the same
manner; so that in round numbers fifteen thousand of the in-
habitants of Sydney and the more thickly populated parts ot
the colony were allowed no more political power and influence
in the Legislature than fifteen hundred in any of the squatting
districts of the colony. lam happy to be able to say, however,
that I did my duty to my constituents and the colony at large,
in that very important crisis of its history, as I am enabled to
Sli °As the Colonial Secretary, therefore, had bespoken the sym-
pathy and consideration of the Council for the great labor and
pains he had taken in arranging the Government scheme ot re-
presentation, I told him, to his evident mortification, that he
might have saved himself all that extra labor and pains, it he
had only gone about the matter, which presented the simplest
case imaginable, in an honest and straightforward way. The
peroration of my speech on the subject, delivered on the 15th
April, 1851, as reported by the contemporary press, was as
follows :
« In the existing state of the colony it was impossible that the
same obstacles could exist to the carrying out of a great princi-
ple, in the matter of representation, as at home ; and all they
had to do, therefore, was to bring the principle recognised and
established in the Reform Bill to bear upon the general distribu-
tion of the population over the country. Had they done this
they would have taken the census as their guide, and have


regulated the representation without any of these inconsist-
encies and absurdities. As he had before observed, he should
not have been disposed to have stuck out against small discrep-
ancies if the principle had been generally acted upon. With
such a guide as the census, the information which honorable
members possessed as to their respective localities would have
been made at once available with the most satisfactory results.
The honorable the Colonial Secretary, who was the author of
this bill, had had as fair an opportunity of achieving immortality
for himself as ever fell to the lot of statesman ; but he was truly
sorry to say he had neglected and abused that opportunity.
But it did seem to him that there was somehow a fatality about
the Whigs and all their followers, which prevented them from
consummating any great and glorious measure. No man had
ever had a more splendid opportunity of making his name illus-
trious throughout the British colonies than Earl Grey, when
the seals of office were first placed in his hands; and had he
only acted on the principles he professed in earlier years, he
would have realized the highest fame. The honorable the
Colonial Secretary had also had the fairest opportunity of jus-
tifying and perpetuating those golden opinions which had long
been entertained of him; and he earnestly hoped, for his own
part, that he would even yet rescue his reputation from the
opprobrium which this bill would assuredly fix upon it, if al-
lowed to pass in its present shape. It was his earnest wish that
the fame of the honorable Colonial Secretary should stand as
high as possible. He had no hostile personal feelings towards
him, notwithstanding the unworthy treatment he had himself ex-
perienced at his hands ;* but he must say that this measure was
On my return to the colony in the year 1850, after an absence of up-
wards of three years in England, there happened to be a vacancy in the
representation of the city of Sydney, which then returned only two
members to the Legislature. From their recollection of my previous
services in that capacity before I went to England, I was proposed by
certain citizens as a fit and proper person to occupy the vacant seat; and
although both the Government and the squatters put forth their utmost
efforts to keep me out, I was triumphantly elected by the constituency,
JJurmg my stay in England, I had forwarded to Moreton Bay in three
different ships about six hundred emigrants of superior character and of
my own selection, to form the foundations of society of proper materials
ln a-^. u * ur ® colon y ; and as Earl Grey and the Commissioners of Land
and Emigration, whom I had offended by certain writings of mine in


perfectly suicidal to tlie reputation of the honorable member,
as well as irreconcileably at variance with the liberal spirit
which he had always professed. It would be utterly subver-
sive of the peace of society—it would set one part of the
country and one class of the community at daggers drawn
against another, and would plunge the whole colony into a
state of constant irritation and political warfare, to which, he
confessed, he could see no end. On these grounds he hoped the
honorable Colonial Secretary would even yet reconsider this
bill, and establish the representation of the colony on the only
constitutional basis, that of population.”
But the powers of evil were much too strongly developed in
the Legislature of 1851, constituted as it was under Mr. Thom-
son’s Electoral Act of that year, to admit of anything like justice
being done to a large majority of the people of the colony, who
were thus virtually delivered over into the hands of the squatter
majority of the Council, and were absolutely powerless to pre-
vent the enormous evil that ensued.
As one of the main objects of colonization is to provide an
eligible outlet for the redundant population of the mother-
country, it might surely have been taken for granted that Great
Britain would never have denuded herself of the power which
the undisputed possession and ownership of the waste lands of
Australia had justly and legitimately placed in her hands, with-
out providing for the carrying out of this great national object,
so important alike to the mother-country and the colony. In
transferring, therefore, to the colonial Legislature, the un-
conditional control of the waste lands of the colony, so soon
after that Legislature had declared that it was no part of the
duty of the colonists to pay for the importation of emigrants , the
act of the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington was an
act of absolute folly and madness. Still, however, the trans-
ference of the control of the waste lands to the local Legislature
did not extinguish the right of the people of England to have
these lands administered for the common benefit of the nation.
It was still the duty of the colonial Legislature, as it had pre-
viously been that of the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Paking-
the interest of the colony, had preferred serious charges against me to the
local Government, founded on my procedure in the case, the very first
thing I did on taking my seat was to move for a Select Committee of the
House to investigate these charges and to report. But the Council, in-
cluding Mr, Thomson as the representative of the Government, refused
me that Committee , and afterwards condemned me unheard, without afford-
ing me the slightest opportunity either for defence or explanation.


ton, to have expended at least one-half of the proceeds of the
sale of these lands for the promotion of emigration. There was,
doubtless, a change in the Trusteeship, but no change in the
Trust; and, therefore, by ignoring the Trusteeship and appro-
priating the Trust funds for our own private purposes, as the
Government and Parliament of this colony have been doing for
twenty years past,—like so many dishonest trustees, —we have
been committing a gross act of injustice and perpetrating a
grievous wrong upon the people of England, to whom the Trust
funds really belonged. For the aggravating, the humiliating cir-
cumstance in the case is that the people whom we have thus been
literally robbing of their rights on this grand national scale are
the humbler but virtuous and industrious classes of England,
whom we might otherwise*have all along been transforming at
the rate of thousands and tens of thousands a year for the last
twenty years into the owners of happy homes in this noble
colony.
It so happens, indeed, that this most iniquitous case of the
wholesale appropriation of other people’s property, by the Gov-
ernment of this colony, has reached its climax only so recently
as during the past year; for while upwards of a million sterling
was realized from the sale of waste land during the year 1874,
only fifty thousand pounds, or one-twentieth part of that amount,
was voted for the promotion of immigration during that year.*
If the original Trust had been honestly carried out, to the ex-
tent even of an expenditure of one-half of the Land Fund for
immigration, there could have been landed in the colony, as the
equivalent for that particular year’s land sales, from ten to
twenty thousand immigrants of all classes; while all we get
under the existing arrangement is a few shiploads of semi-
pauper immigrants under the very objectionable system of
Assisted Immigration. In short, we are alienating the waste
lands, which form the capital of the colony, on a gigantic scale,
without receiving any adequate equivalent for the settlement of
the country by means of immigration.
The transition from the state of things during which the
* The following is a correct Return of the Land Revenue for the year
1874
£ s. d.
Amount received for Auction Sales .. .. 600,015 0 0
Amount received for Conditional Purchases .. 396,570 0 0
Balances of Conditional Purchases .. 43,643 0' 0
Interest on Conditional Purchases .. .. 63,344 0 0
Rent and Assessment of Pastoral Leases .. 181,000 0 0
Annual Leases .. .. .. .. .. 33,674 0 0
Miscellaneous .. .. .. .. .. 20,662 15 10
£1,398,908 15 10


waste lands were regarded as a Trust, to be administered for the
benefit of the people of England in the promotion of immigra-
tion, to the state in which all idea of a Trust was ignored and
disavowed by the Squatter Government of the colony, was
sufficiently rapid, but not immediate. During the eight years
that elapsed from the Separation of Victoria in 1851, to the
Separation of Queensland in 1859, the sum contributed from the
Land Revenue of New South Wales for the promotion of Immi-
gration was £996,726 11s. 5d., or at the rate of £120,840 3s. lid.
per annum; but during the ten following years when the Trust
was ignored and repudiated, and the Land Revenue was treated
as a Branch of the Ordinary Revenue, the contribution for the
promotion of Immigration was only £200,112 Is. Id,, or at the
rate of £20,111 4s. Id., per annum. How much smaller the
immigration expenditure has become since will appear in the
sequel.
Now I cannot but regard the ignoring of this grand National
Trust, and the consequent discontinuance of immigration to the
colony, except in miserable driblets and in the most contempt-
ible form, as a heartless and iniquitous proceeding on the part
of our colonial authorities —in short, as a grand national sin.
And as nations or communities will not exist and cannot there-
fore be punished for their misdeeds in a future state of being,
that punishment must be inflicted in the present world. And
signally, indeed, and most remarkably has that punishment been
inflicted by Divine Providence on the colony of New South Wales.
I.—ln the first place she has lost her prestige and the noble
position it gave her as the first and greatest, as well as the
oldest, of the Australian colonies. She no longer occupies that
position now in the estimation of the public at home, or of the
world at large. Since the fatal change of policy to which I
have adverted, in 1855, and the virtual discontinuance of immi-
gration to which it very speedily led, New South Wales has
been going down in the world, and is now regarded merely as
the humble and obscure appendage of the great colony of
Victoria, and is scarcely equal in public estimation even to
Queensland!
At the time when Victoria was separated from New South
Wales, in the year 1851, the resources of this colony were, in
almost every respect, incomparably superior to those of Victoria;
and had the waste lands of the older colony been duly adminis-
tered for the promotion of immigration and the settlement of the
country generally with a numerous, industrious, and virtuous
population from the United Kingdom, she would have main-
tained her pre-eminence unquestioned to the present day. No
such insult would ever have been offered to us as that implied
on the part of Victoria in the famous postal conference and its


result in 1873. No Secretary of State would have ventured to
treat us as Lord Kimberley did on that memorable occasion.
It was tantamount, I conceive, to a loss of millions to New
South Wales, to have lost her prestige, as she has actually done
through the grossest misgovernment in the matter of immigra-
tion these twenty years past.
There had, doubtless, been a powerful impulse given to emi-
gration to Victoria, previously to the gold discoveries of 1851,
by Sir Thomas Mitchell’s discovery and description of Australia
Felix; and that impulse was, doubtless, wonderfully strength-
ened by the richer character of the original gold-fields of that
colony. But if the greatly superior means which New South
Wales possessed, as compared with Victoria, in her waste lands,
for the promotion of immigration and the general settlement of
the country, had been turned to their proper account during the
last twenty years, not only would the population of Victoria
never have exceeded that of this colony, as it has actually done
to the extent of upwards of three hundred thousand souls, but
our population would this day have been upwards of a million,
while the wealth and material resources of the colony would
have been increased, perhaps, to double their present amount.
What an unspeakable benefit and blessing this colony would
have proved to England had the National Trust, which the Duke
of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington transferred so recklessly
to the colonial Legislature, been duly and honestly discharged,
agreeably to the strongly expressed desire and injunction of not
fewer than three successive Secretaries of State—Lord Goderich,
Lord Glenelg, and Earl Grey! Instead of the vast solitudes
which the colony still presents, thousands and tens of thousands
of families and individuals of all classes of society, and from all
parts of the United Kingdom, would long ere now have been
settled over its boundless territory—thereby affording a salutary
relief to the mother-country, and improving the circumstances
and position of her general population. But great and un-
questionable as the benefit would have been to the mother-country,
in having such extensive and eligible means of emigration for
her redundant population as the ownership of our waste lands
afforded her, the benefit to us would have been tenfold greater,
in the settlement of myriads of people of all classes of society
from the mother-country over all parts of our extensive territory.
ll.—The colony has been suffering the punishment of her
grand national sin in appropriating for her own purposes the
property of the people of England in her waste lands, in the
virtual cessation of emigration, whether voluntary or otherwise,
to its territory. The following is a Return of the Immigration
into New South Wales for the ten years ending December 31st,
1872, from the Statistical Register of that colony for 1873.


Decennial Return of the number of Immigrants who
ARRIVED IN THE COLONY FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM, FOR
TEN YEARS, COMMENCING WITH THE YEAR 1863 :
Year.
Immi-
grants
at the
Pu blic
Expense.
Immi-
grants at
their
own
Expense.
Religion of
Immigrants at the
Public Expense.
Native Country of Immi-
•• grants.
Protes-
tants.
R.
Catholics.
England.
Scotland.
Ireland.
1863
4,633
1,003
1,879
2,754
1,028
295
3,275
1864
3,977
1,199
1,616
2,354
732
275
2,951
1865
2,717
641
974
1,732
495
155
2,041
1866
1,204
648
369
830
190
64
937
1867
944
1,235
302
642
123
57
759
1868
470
753
187
282
99
41
324
1869
47
—
—
—
—
—
—
1870
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1871
357
755
281
76
259
10
75
1872
326
516
261
65
240
7
9
14,675
6,750
5,869
8,735
3,166
904
10,371
Statistical Register of New South Wales for 1872.*
Considering that the colony is as large as all Great Britain
and France together, and that it possesses lands of the first
quality and in the finest climate imaginable for settlement, to
the extent of hundreds of millions of acres, this Return is posi-
tively disgraceful to the colony. Only 1467 immigrants per
annum at the public expense, and 675 at their own, for every
year during the last ten years—such is the pitiful result of the
insane policy of the Legislature of 1850 in declaring that it was
no part of the duty of the colonists to pay for the importation of
emigrants !—for this has been the maxim of our colonial Gov-
ernment these twenty years past.
The greatest effort of any kind that has ever been made in
the colony for the double purpose of settling the country and
attracting immigrants from the United Kingdom was the Hon.
Mr. Robertson’s Lands’ Acts of 1861. In the matter of set-
tling the country, in so far as that obj ect could be effected with
our actual population, Mr. Robertson’s Free Selection Act has
been most successful and deserves the highest commendation as
* The blanks in the years 1869 and 1870 occurred in consequence of
the discontinuance of Assisted Immigration for those years, through the
speeches denouncing it of Mr. Parkes and myself, during the Robertson
Ministry of 1868 ; for I have always been opposed to it. How and why
it was resumed under the subsequent Parkes Ministry, I do not know.


being the first thoroughly patriotic Lands Act in the history of the
colony. But in so far as it was intended for the promotion of
immigration from the mother country, Mr. Robertson’s Free
Selection Act has been a complete failure; for although it has
attracted a few immigrants from the neighboring colonies, I
have never heard of its attracting even one from England.
The late Premier’s (Mr. Parkes) specific for attracting immi-
gration to the colony was to send home plenty of pamphlets and
papers descriptive of the colony (to which some enthusiasts
would add pictures of our notable scenery) for circulation and
distribution in the United Kingdom. In pursuance of this idea,
Mr. Parkes had actually sent home a hundred thousand copies
of Mr. Charles Robinson’s pamphlet on the colony for circula-
tion and distribution in England, But during my late visit to
the old country I saw myriads of copies of these pamphlets lying
in huge bales, like useless lumber, in the Agent General’s office
—nobody seeming to care for them at home.
But the most remarkable instance of the complete failure of
every attempt to attract immigration to the colony, under the
suicidal policy of the last twenty years, is the result of the
mission of Mr. Parkes himself and his able coadjutor, Mr.
Dailey, to England in 1861.
In the session of 1861, during the Cowper Government of the
day, Mr. Parkes moved in the Legislative Assembly, on the 2nd
of May, of that year, “ that this House will, on Friday next, re-
solve itself into a Committee of the Whole, to consider of an
Address to the Administrator of the Government (the Right
Honorable Sir John Young), praying that his Excellency will
be pleased to place upon a Supplementary Estimate for the
present year a sum of money not exceeding £SOOO, to estab-
lish Emigration Agencies and Lectureships in Great Britain
and Ireland; such money to be expended as near as may be in
the following manner:—£2ooo for salaries for twelve months
of two Lecturers and General Agents, £IOOO for travelling ex-
penses for such Lecturers, £SOO for Shipping Agencies in
principal ports, £ISOO for printing in cheap and popular form
copies of Lands Acts and other trustworthy information relating
to this colony.” This motion having been passed by a large
majority, Mr. Parkes and Mr. Dailey, two of our very ablest
men, were deputed by the Government of the day to proceed to
England as lecturers on the colony, as an eligible field for
emigration, and did so accordingly.
There was much —everything, indeed—expected from this
movement not only by the lecturers themselves, but by the
Government and the public; all classes of persons throughout
the colony confidently anticipating as its certain result a speedy
and extensive immigration from all parts of the United Kingdom


into New South Wales. But I felt assured from the fi st,
although I happened to be in England at the time, that the
effort would prove, as it did eventually, an utter failure ; for,
with all the imposing apparatus provided for them by Act of the
local Parliament, the mission of these gentlemen did not issue
in sending out a single emigrant to the colony.* There was
no blame attachable in the case to the lecturers. They were the
ablest and best men that could have been selected for their
mission, and they doubtless discharged their duty ably and well;
but, like the Children of Israel in Egypt, they were sent to
make bricks without straw ; for all they had, in addition to
their eloquent and graphic descriptions of the country, to induce
thousands and tens of thousands of the people of the United
Kingdom to come out to New South Wales, was a gratuitous
distribution of certain printed copies of Mr. Robertson’s Free
Selection and Land Acts !
It was long, however, before either the Parliament or the
public could be brought to admit the possibility of failure in the
great effort they had thus made. Anticipating, therefore, as I
did, the entire failure of Mr, Parkes’ mission, from what I had
myself seen in England in 1861, I moved in the Legislative
Assembly, on my return to the colony, on the 29th July, 1862,
after a speech in which I showed that there was something else
needed to induce an extensive emigration from the mother-
country to this colony than the passing of the Land Acts
of 1861, and the mission of Messrs. Parkes and Dailey to
England,—
“ I.—That in the opinion of this House, it is expedient and
necessary that additional facilities, besides those implied
in the Land Acts, should be afforded for the promotion
of the immigration into this colony of reputable and
industrious families and individuals from the mother-
country and the continent of Europe.
“ 2.—That it should, therefore, be enacted that every immi-
grant, whether male or female, of from fourteen to fifty
years of age, arriving in the colony direct from Europe,
or the person or persons paying his or her passage,
should receive, on his or her arrival, or be held entitled
to, twenty acres of any such land as may be open at the
time for free selection under the Lands Acts, as a free
gift, and to other ten acres at the end of two years
* It is alleged, indeed, that there was one emigrant to the colony, as
the result of this costly mission, but the fact has been disputed.


thereafter, if lie or she should then be resident in the
colony ; and that half that extent, or ten and five acres
respectively, should be allowed for each child of from
one to fourteen years of age ; provided that immigrants
arriving in the colony with five or more children shall
not be excluded from participating in this arrangement,
although upwards of fifty years of age.”
But this motion was negatived by fifteen to ten ; the House
being of opinion that they had done all that was requisite in the
matter by appointing the mission of the previous year. But
both the Parliament and the public were at length constrained
to acknowledge that the mission of Messrs. Parkes and Dailey
had entirely failed.
During the three years I spent in England, from 1846 to
1850, I was irresistibly led, from my own experience and obser-
vation in the matter of immigration, to the conclusion that
either a free passage out or a bonus in land, equivalent to the
cost of a free passage, was indispensably necessary to effect a
large emigration of reputable and desirable emigrants to New
South Wales. I laboured long and zealously, and at great per-
sonal sacrifices, both pecuniary and otherwise, to get this prin-
ciple recognised and established, especially at Moreton Bay,
which was then a part of this colony ; but unfortunately with-
out success.* But no sooner was that settlement separated from
New South Wales and the colony of Queensland established,
than the principle in question was recognised and established in
the first session of the first Parliament of the new colony, in an
act of the Legislature guaranteeing a bonus of thirty acres of
land to every adult person paying his own passage out, or to the
person paying it for him. And when Mr. Herbert, the first
Colonial Secretary of Queensland, was introducing into Parlia-
ment a Bill for the purpose, he acknowledged, as the papers of
the time testify, that the measure had not been suggested by
the Government, but by Dr. Lang. And what was the result ?
Why, at the period of its separation from New South Wales,
on the 10th of December, 1859, the population of Queensland
was 25,146; but, through the land system, established by the
first Parliament of the colony, which guaranteed a bonus of
thirty acres of land to every emigrant who had paid his own
passage out, or had it paid for him by others, the population of
the colony had more than quadrupled itself before the close of
* Had I been successful in this object, I could at that time have easily
either sent or brought out as many as 50,000 of as desirable immigrants
as ever landed on these shores.


the first decade of its existence; for, in December, 1869, it
amounted to 107,000.
Precisely the same result followed the adoption of the same
principle in the colony of New Zealand.. For, in a despatch
from Earl Granville to Sir George Bowen, the late Governor of
that colony, we are informed that whereas the population of New
Zealand, in 1857, was only 49,800, it had amounted, in 1867,
to 227,810, that is, considerably more than quadruple its
amount at the commencement of the decennial period. The
attraction, in both cases, was the land, the terms offered to the
emigrant in New Zealand being still more liberal than in
Queensland; for, instead of thirty acres, as in that colony, the
bonus in New Zealand was forty acres per head.
In New South Wales, on the contrary—a country with at
least twenty times the resources of Queensland, at the period of
its separation, and with an unlimited extent of waste land, avail-
able for the promotion of immigration, but in which there was
no bonus in land held out to the emigrant—the increase of the
population from immigration, during the same decennial period,
was only 34,817; that is, only about a tenth part of its popula-
tion at the commencement of that period. And of that increase,
16,623 persons consisted of what were called assisted immi-
grants ; that is, persons whose relatives in the colony had paid
about a third of their passage-money for them, the rest being
supplied by the Government.
Besides, while the immigration into Queensland and New
Zealand comprised a very large number of persons and families
of respectable standing in society, who, for years in succession,
introduced into Queensland, in particular (and, I believe, the
same thing took place in New Zealand), an amount of British
capital of not less than twenty thousand pounds sterling a
month, or nearly a quarter of a million sterling per annum—a
circumstance that sufficiently accounts for the rapid development
of the sister colony, and the successful formation of a whole
series of vigorous and promising settlements to the northward—
the great bulk of the emigrants into New South Wales, during
the decennial period indicated above, were of a semi-pauper class,
who, instead of coming out to develop the resources of the
colony with their imported capital and labor, like the immigrants
into Queensland and New Zealand, came out chiefly as candi-
dates for employment in the police force, or as turnkeys and
warders in gaols, or as mere messengers and menial servants in
every Government department in the colony. And being chiefly
Roman Catholics, of the humbler classes, from Ireland, they
came out also to subject us and our institutions to the domina-
tion of certain ultramontane zealots, whose main object is to
transform our noble colony into a mere province of the Popedom.


In short, from and after the fatal concession hy the Imperial
Parliament, at the instance of Sir John Pakington and the late
Duke of Newcastle, of all control over the waste lands of New South
Wales, to the Local Legislature, immigration at the expense of
the Land Fund virtually ceased ; and the Fund itself, having
thenceforth been regarded as part of the ordinary revenue of the
colony, has been expended on everything but its proper object,
immigration.
What then are the interest and duty of the colony in the pre-
sent emergency —now that the virtual cessation of immigration
for the last twenty years is so deeply and so universally felt by
the colonists ? Why, I have no hesitation in expressing my
belief and conviction that the course adopted by the Cowper
Ministry, at the instance of Mr. Parkes, in the year 1861,
should be adopted again in the present emergency, viz., that two
of our ablest and best men for the purpose should be sent home
to lecture for a twelvemonth throughout the United Kingdom,
and to bring the colony as prominently as possible before the
public in the mother-country ; for if such a measure was deemed
of necessity in the year 1861, the necessity for its readoption in
1874 is of tenfold greater urgency, since the colony has now been
virtually buried out of sight at home for fourteen years longer.
Let such gentlemen, if appointed for the purpose, divide the
United Kingdom into two portions, viz., Scotland, the North of
England, and the province of Ulster in Ireland for the one, and
the rest of England and the rest of Ireland for the other—ex-
plaining to the people whom they should come into contact with
there how this colony had been virtually blotted out of existence
in England, through gross misgovernment in the matter of emi-
gration for twenty years past, and setting forth in suitable
pamphlets, to be distributed gratuitously, the great advantages
which it presents, in comparison with other colonies, for the
settlement of a numerous, industrious, and virtuous population.
And lest this measure should prove as complete a failure as the
mission of Messrs. Parkes and Dailey, let these lecturers be
authorised to hold forth to all fit and proper persons throughout
the mother-country either a free passage out or a bonus in land on
their arrival in the colony. For I quite agree with Mr. Pidding-
ton in that part of his recent motion which proposed that a large
amount from the Land Fund should be expended forthwith for
the promotion of immigration, but whether £300,000 or not, as
Mr. Piddington proposes, I shall not say.
An extraordinary effort of this kind, like that of Messrs. Parkes
and Dailey under the Cowper Government of 1861, to give an im-
pulse to emigration to New South Wales throughout the United
Kingdom, should be followed up, as has been done in Queens-
land, by the appointment of fit and proper persons of known


ability and colonial experience as permanent agents for emigra-
tion to New South Wales in the mother-country—one for Scot-
land and the province of Ulster in Ireland, and other two for
England, and the three Southern and Western provinces of
Ireland.
These three permanent emigration agents would receive their
instructions from time to time from the colony, as to the num-
bers and classes of persons to send out, while the colony would
have a strong check upon their procedure in the general charac-
ter and fitness of the emigrants they should send out respectively.
A desirable feeling of rivalry would thus be created on the part
of the emigration agents, while their whole procedure would be
under the constant inspection and surveillance of the Agent-
General of the colony in London.
I would strongly recommend that under a general system of
immigration for the colony at the public expense, the ships to
be chartered for the conveyance of emigrants to the colony
should be chartered by the Home Government, and should sail
from the nearest suitable ports to where the particular groups of
emigrants have been collected by the emigration agents respect-
ively—from London, Liverpool, Portsmouth, and Hull, for
England ; from Leith and Glasgow, for Scotland ; from Belfast
and Londonderry, for the North, and from Dublin and Cork,
for the South of Ireland. We should thus, as far as immigra-
tion is concerned in future, have a thoroughly British population
sent out to us, which, I conceive, is the great desideratum for the
colony.
I do not suppose however, with Mr. Piddington, that it would
be either necessary or desirable for such a purpose to have an
Immigration Board created in the colony. Through the different
police magistrates, assisted as they would willingly be for such
a purpose by the local magistracy, and having the Colonial
Treasurer and the head of the Immigration Office to receive
and review their reports, the Government could very easily be
supplied with all the information requisite as to the number and
the qualifications of the emigrants required for each district of
the colony.
Arrangements, however, should be made from the first for
conveying the different cargoes of emigrants, on their arrival in
the colony, passage free, either by railway or by steam vessels, to
the particular parts of the colony to which they might be
directed at home; and depots should be established both along
the coast and in the interior where the immigrants might be
domiciled till they obtained employment in the neighborhood.
There might thus be depots established simultaneously at Goul-
burn, at Bathurst, at Maitland, and at Grafton, to the great
benefit of these localities, as well as of the emigrants themselves.


For emigrants are generally very strongly inclined to settle in
the port in which they are first landed, or the place to which
they are first conveyed, after landing in a new country.
From what has been stated above, as to the necessity for
a speedy and extensive immigration from the mother-country,
at the cost of the Land-Fund of the colony, it will scarcely be
necessary to spend much time in the consideration or refutation
of the objections offered in certain quarters either against immi-
gration altogether or against immigration at the cost of the land
fund. To those who object to immigration altogether, I would
simply state that God made the earth to be inhabited, and not
to be occupied permanently in splendid runs for the sheep
and cattle of squatters. Let these gentlemen possess it by all
means so long as it lies waste and unoccupied; but whenever it
can be used for the habitation and settlement of man, let them
give place to the nobler animal.
Then again, as to those who object to immigration at the ex-
pense of the funds of the colony, saying, with Mr. Driver,
M.L.A., on the 30th July last, “ I will never consent to vote
for the expenditure of a shilling of the public money for the pur-
pose of introducing immigrants into the colony,” it may be suffi-
cient to reply that the public money, in so far as derived from
the sale of the waste lands of the colony, is not the money of the
public of this colony merely, but of the whole people of Eng-
land, and ought, therefore, to be administered for their benefit
in the promotion of emigration to the territory. Mr. Driver
evidently takes his cue from the squatting majority of the Legis-
lative Council of 1850, who had given it as their opinion that
it was no part of the duty of the colonists to pay for the importa-
tion of emigrants, and who induced the Duke of Newcastle to
commit the Fatal Mistake of transferring to our Legislature the
entire control of the waste lands of the colony. The bitter
fruits of this grand mistake have been—lst, That the colony
has lost its prestige —a loss equivalent to many millions sterling ;
and 2nd, That emigration to its territory has virtually ceased for
the last twenty years.*
Thei'e are certain members of the Legislative Assembly who
are constantly crying up the merits of Assisted Emigration ; but
it is surely a valid objection to that system that from the ex-
perience of ten years it gave us an Irish instead of a British, a
Roman Catholic instead of a three-fourths Protestant, population.
The grand desideratum for this colony is a thoroughly British
* Had our Legislature been possessed of the same amount of common
sense and common honesty as those of Queensland and New Zealand,
when this transference took place, it would have been quite safe to have
entrusted it with the entire control of our waste lands. But it was our
great misfortune to have had such legislators as we then actually had.


population, coming out as nearly as possible in the proportions
of the population of the-Three Kingdoms. We have seen, from
the Statistical Register of the colony for 1873, that Assisted
Immigration for ten years gave us 12,219 Irish to 4,286 English
and Scotch ; and 12,296 Roman Catholics to 6,301 Protestants.
Are these the proportions of a thoroughly British population ?
The colliers of Greta, who petitioned the late Parliament
against immigration altogether, seemed to think that immigra-
tion would overwhelm them with a mere host of colliers to take
the bread out of their mouths and to leave them to starvation.
But if immigration were conducted in the way and on the prin-
ciples I have stated, it would bring us out a fair proportion of
all classes of industrious people—in short, a thoroughly British
population.
Trusting, therefore, that a Bill to originate an extensive
system of immigration, on some such principles as those I have
recommended in this pamphlet, will be submitted to Parliament
early in the ensuing session, I shall now most respectfully leave
the matter in the hands of those whom it concerns.
Sydney, October 21st, 1875.
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, JAMISON STREET.






