

THE
NEW ZEALAND
WAR.
[?]
1860


THE NEW ZEALAND WAR.
THE NATIVE DIFFICULTY—ITS CAUSES
AND REMEDY.
The following was published in the ‘ Lyttelton
Times ’ of May and June, 1860; and the writer be-
lieves that the line of policy therein recommended
might even now remedy the impending evils:
To the Editor of the Lyttelton Times.
Sir, —[Following up the rough hints for a scheme
of native policy which appeared in your issue of
the 30th ultimo, I purpose to enter more fully into
the subject if you will kindly permit me the use of
your columns.
,An enquiry into the causes of our present
unsatisfactory relations with the native race may
serve to show:
Ist. That the natives have some excuse for their
desire to prevent any further alienation of
their lands.
2nd. That had we been similarly treated, we
should probably do the same.
3rd. The propriety of adopting an entirely new
policy if we desire to have our relation
with them of a more friendly character.
When the New Zealand Company first proposed
to colonize New Zealand, the Imperial Government


did not purpose founding a colony here itself, and
would not let anybody else do it. The Company
was determined to colonize; and, fearing absolute
prohibition of their plans, felt compelled, under
the alternative of abandoning their design alto-
gether, to rush out and plant the colony without
taking time for proper organization or arrange-
ment. They secured to the British these fine
islands.
If the Imperial Government had favoured and
sanctioned the plans of the Company, this body
would doubtless have devised a scheme for the
occupation of the country and the treatment of the
aborigines. There would have been some organi-
zation. Whereas, the Company having taken
Trench leave to plant itself, the Government merely
sent out a Resident or Governor to keep the Com-
pany in check ; so that from the first the Resident
Government here was in hostility to the body of
settlers. There was also a second party unfavor-
able to the colonization of New Zealand, viz., the
Missionaries. Thus the native witnessed the undig-
nified spectacle of three disunited and mutually
jealous bodies of white men landing to take pos-
session of their territory. Of course the settlers
desired to acquire the unoccupied lands. The
Government and the Missionaries thwarted their
plans, and the Government at once sowed the
seeds of future dissension by questioning the validity
of the New Zealand Company’s titles, and in fact
put the natives up to some of the tricks which
have resulted in much bloodshed, hindered settle-
ment, and involved an outlay of at least £50,000
a year for military establishments for the last
seventeen or eighteen years.
The Missionaries, finding that the advent of the


combined to form one main cause of our present
unsatisfactory position with the natives, it appears
that the New Zealand Company was forced, con-
trary to the original intention of its founders, to
become a mere Land-Jobbing Society, trying to get
a slice of New Zealand territory: that the Resident
v 3
Government was not a colonizing body, but merely
a delegation from the Imperial Government, in-
structed to try and keep things straight, not to
favor progression at all; that the Missionary esta-
blishment was totally adverse to the influx of
Europeans ; and, generally, that there was no high
protecting power carefully watching the aboriginal
interests, and at the same time providing for the
cultivation and improvement of this group, which,
on paper, is the Great Britain of the South,
destined, I suppose, so to grow up spontaneously.
Twenty years have now elapsed since the period
of which I speak. Large portions of the Northern
Island and nearly all the remainder of New Zealand
have been acquired from the natives. Eighty or
ninety thousand Englishmen have made this their
home, and have established their government, laws,
and religion here, and the country has become an
integral portion of the British dominions. What
has been done for the 70,000 aboriginal population
of the country ? A few Missionaries, supported
mainly by the Church Missionary Society, and
other English societies which are supported by the
half-pence of the English poor, have struggled to
teach our religion to this heathen people. The
New Zealand Government’s dealings with them
have been almost entirely confined to the purchase
of fresh tracts of land from time to time. Cer-
tainly the Maories have been invited to adopt our
laws and imitate our customs ; but the first invita


whites was inevitable, and dreading their contami-
nating influence upon the savage race whom they
were trying to Christianize, adopted the policy of
endeavouring to separate the natives from them.
This separation policy was furthered hy the
invention of a new and bastard language, of Maori
and English mixed, into which the Bible was
translated. It may here he recorded that the
natives are a very superior people, far above the
ordinary savage in intellectual capacity. The
reading of the Bible was not to them, as too
frequently with us, an irksome duty, hut a great
intellectual treat; and hy its means the power of
reading and writing was acquired with wonderful
rapidity throughout the islands, and a new national
language was founded; so that the whites were not
likely to acquire their tongue, nor the natives ours.
This policy, futile as it was doomed to he, and
totally opposed as it is to the spirit of the Gospel
they were sent to promulgate, was perhaps dictated
generally hy a sincere desire on the part of the
Missionaries to spare the natives from the com-
mission of many of the sins certain to he intro-
duced hy the whites for their imitation. Not
venturing, then, to question the purity of the
motives of the Missionary body, one cannot doubt
the faulty principle of their procedure evidenced hy
the result, which has been—not that the natives have
been kept separate from the whites, hut that they
have been kept apart from the best principled
portion of their white neighbours, from whom they
might (hy mere imitation alone) have derived some
good influences, and have been consigned chiefly to
the companionship of the most degraded and ill-
principled of our countrymen.
So, summing up the circumstances that have


ti on was almost futile, owing to the creation of the
bastard language; and the second equally so,
owing to our having failed to impart to them a
knowledge of our trade and agriculture. Practi-
cally, we have ignored them as part of the com-
munity to he fostered : we have been quietly wait-
ing until they die out —in the meantime keeping
up a military force to check the occasional eruption
of their savage propensities. So long as the
natives have kept quiet, and we could obtain tracts
of land when required, our Government has not
shown much concern for their interests.
In the next place our conflicts with the natives
have resulted invariably in our coming off second
best, and in the ruthless unavenged murder of
inoffensive out-settlers. Patched-up peace has
satisfied them of our incapacity to conquer them,
and has fostered a defiant arrogant bearing towards
the whites. This, combined with the indifference
of the Government for the education and general
welfare of the natives and with the separation
policy of the missionaries, has engendered a feel-
ing of repugnance and disgust on the part of the
settlers of New Zealand towards their dark neigh-
bours.
The natives of New Zealand, then, who are a
superior and aspiring people, perceive that the
Government does not do anything for them but
purchase their lands; that the Missionaries do not
promote their material welfare ; and that the white
people generally entertain a profound contempt for
them. Told that her Most Gracious Majesty the
Queen holds them in high regard and shields them
with her protecting power—they neither see the
regard nor experience the protection. They feel
that they are left to die out; that their lands will


pass to the stranger; and they cannot realize that
there is any effort made for their moral or physical
welfare. They know that with the alienation of
their land their glory is departing; and that none
of their so-called friends, the white men, care how
soon that glory vanishes; and that they very
naturally make an expiring effort for the perma-
nence of their race and possessions. We, of all
people, cannot condemn such sentiments. With
us it has been a sacred duty to bleed for country
and friends, and we can sympathize with their
aspirations. It must he borne in mind that now,
for the first time, there is any thing like combina-
tion of the natives, hitherto a set of independent
hostile tribes, now a powerful body united for the
accomplishment of a common object.
Having now endeavoured to show some of the
causes which have led to the fact that we are not
on a friendly footing with the natives of the country
we have appropriated, I proceed to advocate the
propriety of adopting a new plan for amalgamating
the natives with ourselves, and to amplify upon the
suggestions contained in my former communication.
It is needless to prove that the mere conquest of
William King and the acquisition of the small
block of land at New Plymouth which has given
rise to the present war, would not really promote
our ultimate and reasonable objects : viz., the pos-
session of all the land in New Zealand not required
by the natives, and our thorough amalgamation
with them, so that we should be insured in quiet
occupation of the territory. I mean by amalga-
mation that the whites and Maories should be
under the same laws and bear allegiance with equal
loyalty to our sovereign.
But, before proceeding further, I desire to guard


against the impression that I impute any blame to
the Governor of New Zealand respecting the pre-
sent state of affairs. I believe that he has taken
the only possible course to put down with a strong
hand an attempt at gross defiance of Her Majesty’s
laws and Government. I believe that throughout
the islands his policy has been felt to be sound;
and that if need be, his hands will be strengthened
by our united assistance, physical and pecuniary.
Indeed, placed as he is with absolute power as
regards all native matters, I hold that it would be
traitorous publicly to call in question his acts, now
that he is engaged in conflict with rebels. But I
do consider that we are in a great measure indebted
to Sir George Grey for the present posture of
affairs. While entertaining great regard for his
character as a private individual, I cannot refrain
from expressing strong condemnation for his policy
respecting the natives of New Zealand. A slight
review of that policy is necessary for the proper
consideration of the subject in hand. Sir George
Grey was specially selected to take the helm in
New Zealand on the occasion of a former serious
outbreak. He proved himself perfectly capable of
dealing with the difficulties of our position, and he
had ample means for executing his plans : indeed,
at one time he had a body of the natives under
his power; he had the long desired opportunity for
convincing them that we were their superiors.
But if he had availed himself of this opportunity,
great slaughter of the natives ivould have resulted.
Intimately skilled in the native character as he
was, he must have known that such punishment,
however painful, was necessary to put a stop, once
and for over, to native rebellion. But the fear of
Exeter Hall, where the necessity for such severe
punishment would not have been understood,


perhaps stayed his hand, and he used his great
abilities to make a patched-up peace, which lasted
his term of office and gained him great credit with
the Home Government, With consummate skill,
and hy means of his great power of personal in-
fluence over the natives, he maintained temporary
tranquility. But I fail to discover any plan of his
for the permanent amalgamation and union of the
races heyond the expected bond of a common com-
mercial interest in preserving tranquility. He had
the ability, the means at his disposal, and knew the
necessity for administering wholesome correction.
He was the nurse who spoilt the child; and has
left to his successor the unenviable task of dealing
with a disposition educated to he troublesome.
All past experience has shown that mere tem-
porising with these natives will he of no avail.
The fire may he smothered, hut will not he ex-
tinguished. A future Governor would have to en-
counter the same difficulties as all his predecessors
have gone through; in the meantime the natives
are liable to further deterioration; and hut little
progress is made in settling the country. Some
new plan, whereby the natives should he interested
conjointly with us in maintaining peaceful progress
in occupying the land should he forthwith adopted.
It is our mission to cultivate the country and try
to civilize the savage inhabitants, not to possess the
land and push them out. Besides, if they gradually
die out, their landed possessions (even if they
retain no more than their present and former
cultivations) embrace a large extent of territory
which will descend to their heirs, the half-castes.
The half-caste race, if neglected, will probably
retain the harborous qualities of their maternal
ancestry with the vigour of their paternity, and so


become a more intractable people to deal with than
their progenitors of pure Maori blood.
In substitution for the temporising policy which
has hitherto been adopted as regards the natives,
it is recommended that there should be real punish-
ment inflicted, and, at the same time, a scheme
instituted for the permanent amelioration of their
condition and character. The punishment up to
this time has not been real; and, even if the
opportunities had been made use of for giving the
natives a lesson, only one tribe or so would have
been affected by it. The real punishment which I
propose to substitute is one which will affect the
whole Maori race —will leave a permanent impres-
sion upon them —and will most likely never have to
be repeated.
I will here briefly sketch out:—
Ist. The nature of the punishment;
2nd. The conditions under which it is to be dis-
continued; and
3rd. A scheme for promoting the permanent
amelioration of the native condition.
I. The punishment should be inflicted by putting
a stop to all commercial intercourse
between the Maories and the settlers or
foreign traders. Of course this prohibi-
tion must be absolute, and must be rigidly
enforced; but I refrain from going into a
detail of the mode by which it can be
accomplished, resting satisfied that if the
principle of this chastisement be es-
tablished as sound, the temporary injury
to commerce, the hardship of the inflic-
tion towards the native allies and the


Maories of the Middle Island, and the ex-
pense of the undertaking, would prove
difficulties not too great to he overcome,
and that the mode of its execution
would readily suggest itself to the proper
authorities.
11. It is proposed that this prohibition shall be
revoked so soon as the following conditions
shall have been complied with :
Ist. That the Treaty at Waitangi he cancelled,
and that all the tribes agree to a new
treaty, whereby they sell all the unoccu-
pied land of New Zealand to the Queen,
and whereby they authorise and promote
a survey of the Northern Island.*
2nd. That they become in reality British sub-
jects, by at once agreeing to conform
entirely to British laws, and taking the
oath of allegiance accordingly.
The conditions on our side should include :
Ist. That the purchase money should he paid
to them by yearly instalments extending
over a period of three or four years.
2nd. That all their present and former culti-
vations (excepting those situated at ports
and harbours necessary for the general
commerce of the country) shall be re-
served to them, and conveyed to their
owners by Crown grant, subject to the
*lt is meant that the natives shall be offered such a price as the land is
really worth as waste land after deducting for expense of survey,—say two
shillings per acre for all except inaccessible country. This would yield about
two millions of money, supposing there are twenty millions of acres. It is
conjectured that if, on the bargain being clinched and the first instalment of
over £OO,OOO paid to the natives, the remainder of the money would be soon
forthcoming on the terms proposed, so as to meet the next payments.


right of the Crown to lay off main roads,
railways, or canals, as is the custom in
England.
3rd, That over and above their present holdings,
there shall he reserved to the natives
as much land of average quality and
position value as shall make their landed
property equivalent (in proportion to the
population) to the freehold of the white
settlers of the Northern Island.
4th, That the principal chiefs should receive
a yearly pension from the Crown, and
have ample landed property secured to
them and their heirs for ever (unless for-
feited by treason on their part),
sth. That a general map of the North Island
shall be made and published; and that a
lithographed map of each district shall be
supplied at cost price, which shall distin-
guish the separate native properties.
111, It is proposed to try and promote the per-
manent amelioration of the race—
-Ist. By granting pecuniary aid for the further-
ance of religion among the natives. The
money to he allotted to the different re-
ligious denominations in proportion to the
numbers of their members, and to be at
the disposal of the recognized heads of
those establishments.
2nd. By establishing secular schools at the
native settlements (separating the sexes),
with a provision for their eventually be-
coming self-supporting.


3rd. By forming main trunk lines of road in
the North Island —say to connect Auck-
land with Wellington, and New Plymouth
with Ahuriri, and others.
4th. By providing that a due proportion of
the general revenue of New Zealand is
applied for the benefit of the natives.
sth, By considering as to the propriety of per-
mitting the natives to share in our repre-
sentative institutions by sending members
(not necessarily Maories) to the General
Assembly.
Having now set forth the outlines of this plan,
I venture with great diffidence, being no financier,
to suggest a means of raising the money for its
accomplishment. Pirst, I assume that the ex-
penses of the prohibitory part of the plan are
treated as military expenditure and must he
defrayed by the same means that would he pro-
vided for a long and bloody struggle or perpetual
preparation for the same. I submit that the money
required for the purchase of the native territory,
for the survey, for the furtherance of religion and
education, and for the construction of main roads,
can he raised by the re-sale of that territory in the
following mode:—
Ist. By providing that townships be duly reserved
and the remainder classified roughly ac-
cording to quality and position value.
That a price he fixed upon the town
allotment and upon the different classes,
of land, ranging, say, from 2s. 6d. to £2
per acre.
2nd. That the purchase money for required
blocks of the different classes, he paid


by a sum of twenty-five per cent, ready
money, and the remainder by three yearly
instalments, or by payment of the whole
sum, according to the option of the pur-
chaser. A discount of twenty-five per
cent, allowed for ready money payment.
3rd. Blocks applied for previous to the comple-
tion of the survey (the instalments there-
on having been duly paid) to be selected
in order fixed by ballot. After the survey
and map is completed and the allotments
are made as provided above, the land to
be open for purchase on application,
4th. An office for this purpose to be opened at
the chief town of each of the principal
districts of New Zealand for the sale of
the land of its district.
I now beg to supplement the above suggestions
with some remarks hy way of explanation. Of
course the success of this scheme, should it be
attempted, depends upon the effect which the pro-
hibition of commercial intercourse would have upon
the natives. My opinion is that they would see
through the working of it at once ; that they would
not wait long to feel its effect but would speedily
agree to the terms of the treaty—particularly as it
would confer on them advantages which their twenty
years’ experience of us has led them to despair of.
If this were the case, the prohibitory expenses would
soon be at an end, and our military expenditure re-
duced to the small amount required before the
outbreak. So soon as they agree to the terms
of the treaty, and money is required for the first
instalment of payment for the land and the survey
of it, confidence will be restored to the settlers, and


the re-sale by the Crown would soon commence.
It is proposed to conduct the survey on the recon-
naissance system, which would he very economical,
and would he sufficiently accurate for all the country
except townships and important districts; and, of
course, the proposed grants for religion, education,
and the formation of roads, would not he applied
until the land fund should justify the proceeding.
It is expected that the expenditure on the formation
of main roads would he very gratifying to the
natives, and they would doubtless take contracts
themselves for portions of the work. It would be
very desirable also to promote (except as regards
the principal chiefs, who should be confirmed in
the possession of large estates) the sub-division of
the native properties, the allotment of some portion
to each native, and the issue of a separate Crown
Grant for each lot. Their holding the land under
deeds, particularly if registration of them by the
Government were enforced, would operate as a
great check to rebellion.
In conclusion, I have to apologise for the
didactic manner in which my scheme is shadowed
forth. I had not time, nor could I claim space for
elaborate writing, neither did I think it worthy of
being given except in mere outline; for lam
conscious that, if there is anything in it, the hint
will be sufficient. At any rate I trust that some
information may be afforded to the southern settlers
of New Zealand, who, as a general rule, must be
very superficially acquainted with the native con-
dition and character; for the Maori people are not
to be judged of by the miserable remnant of slaves
which principally constitute our southern abori-
ginal natives ; and though these Maori disturbances
have not personally affected us in a direct manner.


except as to our sympathy for the difficulties of our
fellow-settlers in the North, we shall certainly have
to share in the expenses; and we should partici-
pate in the advantages of a general and permanent
peace throughout New Zealand. 3kt any rate, my
aim in this letter will he accomplished if this poor
attempt to find a remedy for present evils calls
forth a better one.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
SUAVITER-FORTITER.
The following suggestions from the pen of a
gentleman in this Province, whose acquaintance
with the Native race is of old date and very exten-
sive, may serve to throw new light upon the great
question with which the Government has to deal:
1. It is assumed that the present movement on
the part of the Natives of New Zealand for the
establishment of a king and for preventing the
alienation of more lands to the whites is genuine,
a fixed principle of action on their part—illus-
trated by the recent outbreak. If this is so, sup-
posing that those natives who have taken a part in
the war were conquered, and possession taken of
the block of land in dispute, the general condition
of opposition to the white race would remain the
same—ready to hurst out again at any time, and
impeding the settlement and progress of the
country.
2. Notwithstanding the known bravery of our
race, various circumstances have combined to cause
the natives to entertain a very humiliating opinion
of our powers; so that we are apparently reduced
to two modes of dealing with them, viz.: to try a


hand to hand struggle for the possession of the
country, or quietly to content ourselves with our
present holding. The first mode would be very
doubtful in its results, would be bloody and pre-
carious, and doubtless eventuate in the extermi-
nation of the aboriginal race —a result totally against
the spirit of the age, subversive of the uniform
policy adopted by the founders of the colony, and
very disgraceful to us as Christians and men of
business.
3. We have now occupied New Zealand by
regular settlement for about twenty years; and by
systematic indifference to the native race on the
part of our Government (as negotiating for the
purchase of their lands and making tardy payment
for those already acquired, alone, cannot be con-
sidered the whole duty of a parental government
towards the people whom it was their duty to
civilize) have failed to induce their confidence in
our Queen and her protecting power.
4 Space does not permit our discussing all the
reasons for this total want of confidence in us; we
all know the general result—that we have signally
failed in amalgamating with the aboriginal race.
This may have entirely arisen from our own faults,
or may have occurred owing to the rule of provi-
dence under which it appears that all savage
nations are doomed to disappear before the
civilized.
5. Be this as it may —it is manifestly wrong to
visit them for our own failings and proceed to
extermination; and it is against the ordained state
of progression to sit still without any further effort
to people and occupy the land.
6, The demonstrations of our military have such


a humiliating effect in advertising our weakness to
the natives —urging the whites to all sorts of hitter
and revengeful feeling, and the Maories to boastful
and arrogant notions of their own capabilities—
that the breath of war is liable to be blown into a
flame, and the process of extermination (for
thorough subjugation would infallibly lead to it)
would have commenced.
7. The judicious application of the rod in child-
hood has been neglected, and we are in the position
of a weak parent mourning over the failings of a
spoilt child. He is too big for us to flog now. We
feel too bitterly that our own neglect and want of
principle has brought him to this condition, and
dare not kill him to ease ourselves of the dis-
grace and expense and mortification we are
subjected to; then let us try the effect of stopping
the supplies.
8. By means of an Act of the General Assembly,
or by the Governor proclaiming the whole of New
Zealand under martial law, or by some other
prompt and decided means, prohibit all commercial
intercourse whatever between the native race and
the whites throughout New Zealand—allow no
business transactions to be held between the races,
from the Missionary to the merchant, whether by
loan or direct sale or barter, and from the foreign
trading ships to the coaster from the Middle
Island.
9. Let all merchants and traders be licensed to
sell goods, and under heavy bond to abstain from
any commercial transaction whatever with the
natives. Penalties to be fine and imprisonment in
all cases. Provide means for permitting the re-
tention of goods whose destination is at all


suspected; and, by a strong arbitrary power, ensure
that this prohibition shall be carried thoroughly
into effect.
10. This prohibition to be maintained until the
natives think proper to sell all the land not abso-
lutely required by them, care being taken to reserve
them an extent equivalent to that now possessed
by the same number of the white population of the
North Island, and to solemnly return to their
allegiance to the Queen.
11. The obvious objections to this scheme are:—
Ist. The great expense for preventive service.
This is fully admitted —but the struggle
would be bloodless.
2nd. Arbitrary interference with established
trade. This would be felt very heavily by
the mercantile interests. But it is better
that they should suffer for a time with a
view of being placed in a sounder posi-
tion eventually than that the whole colony
should be at a stand-still. And we must
not be too delicate in supporting the in-
terests of men so selfish as to desire their
own present aggrandizement at the ex-
pense of the whole community. Small
traders materially suffering by the prohi-
bition should be compensated.
12. To meet the obvious hardship of this prohi-
bition to the natives of the Middle and South
Islands—a gojAnmcnt officer (say in connection
with the department) should be provided
at each Port of Entry with blankets, slops, and
flannel to be sold to the natives at his discretion,


and with power to buy or take in exchange native
produce.
13. Having failed to quietly occupy this country
in conjunction with its aboriginal race, and having
failed to convince them of pur superiority by giving
them proofs of it when they have been in our power,
and by habitual neglect of them when we did not
want any thing from them, and when they did not
incommode us; let us try this peaceful mode of
showing them, now that i hey cannot do without us,
that the supply of their new set of wants must be
kept up. And it is believed that this principle of
action will bring about the desired end, and that we
shall within two years .Tiave obtained quiet posses-
sion of the country, with an acknowledgment from
the natives that we hive fairly beaten them, and
by a process that would tend to an intimate union
of the races; the only salt} condition for two sepa-
rate peoples occupying the same country; and a
condition which we must remember has been in a
great measure frustrated by those misguided men
whose profession and duty it was to promote peace
and goodwill.
14. The principle of the scheme is in accordance
with the policy adopted by those who have dealt
most successfully with the natives. Too powerful
to be taken by storm, the garrison must be starved
out.
CHRISTCHURCH : THE UNION PRINTING OFFICE,
GLOUCESTER STREET.
