

feTW PPrnn
i
t
* V
«* A
ISS2.
T H IS
RIGHT OF A BRITISH COLONIST
TO THE
PROTECTION OF THE QUEEN AND PARLIAMENT
OF ENGLAND
AGAINST THE ILLEGAL AND UNJUST ACTS OF A COLONIAL
LEGISLATURE OR GOVERNMENT ;
A LETTER
TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE,
HER MAJESTY’S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
THE COLONIES,
JAMES BUSBY, Esq.
AUCKLAND,
PEfNTED BY PHILIP KUNST, SIIOETLAND-STEMT-
18 6 0.




To His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, Her Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies.
My Lord Duke
Governor Gore Browne hag done me the favour’to send me a copy
of your Grace’s despatch to his Excellency, dated 13 July 1859, res-
pecting the petition of Mrs. E. Smithson, to the Queen in relation to
land purchased by her late husband from the Native owners, under
the authority of Governor Fitzroy, and seized into the possession of
the Crown by his successor Governor Grey.
Governor Gore Browne is aware that I brought the case of Mrs.
Smithson before the General Assembly of the colony, and the Pro-
vincial Council of Auckland, and that on failure of relief from these
bodies I assisted her in the preparation of her petition to the Queen.
I also embraced the opportunity which his Excellency was pleased
to afford me of submitting some observations relative to the report of
the Commissioner of Land Claims upon that petition before its trans-
mission to the colonial office for presentation to Her Majesty.
The same sense of moral obligation which induced me to take up
her case will not allow me to abandon it even now, when, having
tried every other means of obtaining justice, Mrs. Smithson has ap-
pealed to the source of justice and has failed in obtaining relief. That
this poor widow is weak, and her oppressors powerful would of itself
be a sufficient motive. But my Lord this case involves a principle of
momentous importance to which I entreat your Grace’s attention, I
am aware that some statesmen of the present day consider a matter of
this nature as a “mere personal question” beneath the sphere, and
unworthy of the notice of a cabinet minister, but I cannot look upon
it otherwise than as a public question immeasureably more important,
than those questions of what is called policy in relation to the institu-
tions or mode by which a colony is governed; inasmuch as the objects
for which all government is established are of more importance than
the mode by which those objects are to be accomplished. The end is
greater than the means. The ultimate object and true end of go-
vernment is the protection of the weak from the violence or craft of
those who have the power to oppress. If it can indeed, with truth,
be averred of the Queen’s ministers that “they judge not the widow
neither did the cause of the fatherless come unto them” then indeed
the stability of this vast British Empire is shaken at its very founda-
tions.
Having then, the most perfect conviction that this poor woman
and her daughters, have been deprived of their rightful property with-
out the shadow of a justification for so extraordinary an act, I could
not forgive myself If I left any means untried, or spared any efforts
which might obtain redress for them and relieve the administration,,
of British affairs from so grievous an Imputation.
The great difficulty of the case is indeed the incredibility of the
Civets upon which it rests. The mind, revolts against the belief of so,


strange a narrative. A British governor clothed with, and acting
under the Queen’s authority, deprives one of the Queen’s subjects of
his landed property acquired under an express and solemn agreement
that the title should be secured by a grant from the crown." This is
an injury for which the Queen’s ordinary courts of justice can afford
no redress. The British Constitution makes no provision for such a
case. It does not contemplate that robbery can proceed from the
fountain of justice. And yet whatever is done by the Queen’s au-
thority, it considers as done by the Queen. It is true that the law
holds the Actors accountable, but here the sufferer is removed by the
circuit of half the globe from the means of redress, and he is not only
ignorant as most of the Queen’s subjects are of the mode of seeking
redress for so extraordinary an injury, but destitute of the means of
obtaining redress, if he knew how it might be obtained. With others,
similarly situated, headed by the present Attorney-General of the
colony, he earnestly but respectfully represents his wrongs to the go-
vernor and petitions for relief. But in vain. After a time ho sinks
into the grave hastened, as there is every reason to believe ,by the
rain of his worldly prospects through the action of the government.
Brora his death-bed he makes a final appeal to the governor, praying
him to give to his wife and daughters who he tells him would soon be
a widow and orphans, only a portion of what was rightfully their own.
But he dies without the satisfaction which such . a promise would
have afforded.
The widow waits upon the governor who, she says, assures her that
it was impossible she could have the land, but offers to give her back
the money which had been paid for it nine years before, and this her
necessities compel her to receive. Bye-&-byo 'she learns that so far
from its being impossible that she should receive back possession of
her land, Sir George Grey had been expressly instructed to assure
it to her by a grant from the crown “be the inconvenience what it
may” that this was necessary “to keep the public faith inviolate.”
Her case is brought before the General Assembly of the colony, but
by the bill prepared by the Attorney-General for the relief of him-
self and others in the same circumstances, she is expressly excluded
from any relief on the ground that she had (misled by the false rep-
resentations of Sir George Grey, and compelled by her necessities),
consented to receive from the government the sum which had been
paid for the land ; a sum which if it had been invested in any other
way in Auckland under its then depressed circumstances would have
made her independent. She petitions the Provincial Council, who
refuse to entertain her claim for compensation. Finally she petitions
the Queen, and your Grace, as Her Majesty’s responsible minister, for
reasons recited in your despatch, can see no sufficient ground for ad-
vising Her Majesty to interfere.
I have examined with care the grounds upon which your Grace
has arrived at this conclusion, and, unsuccessful as I have hitherto
been in doing justice to the case, I do not yet despair of making it
appear in its true light, and of inducing your Grace to advise the
Queen to exercise those Sovereign powers which the constitution has


vested in her when inferior authorities have abused or have been
unfaithful to the trust which she has delegated to them.
The circumstances which your Grace recites as having led you to
the conclusion at which you have arrived are of several kinds. Your
Grace first alludes to the time at which the purchase of the land was
negotiated, as if inconsistent with the conditions, on a compliance with
which, the Smithsons were to receive a Crown Grant. Secondly,
you state that “ as far as the Home Government is concerned there is
the conclusive fact that the claim was investigated by the Attonery-Gcn-
eral of the Colony who was the proper authority,” and that “ it would
be impossible for the Home Government!at this distance of time and place,
and with the imperfect means of information at their command to enter-
tain an appeal against a decision pronounced by such an authority,
and solongacquiesced in;” and,thirdly that “the question belongs to the
local Government by reason of the surrender to them of the manage-
ment of the Crown Lands, and of the revenue arising from them”
Your Grace adds that “ if circumstances should appear to the Gov-
ernor and his responsible advisers to give Mrs, Smithson a claim to a
liberal consideration it is from' the Crown Land Revenue which has
received whatever benefit has' arisen from [the purchase of the Land
from the Natives that any additional compensation which may be
awarded to her should be drawn” and that “ Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment will make no objections to such a grant.”
With regard to the first point, I take it for granted, that, of the
many objections of a non - compliance with the requisitions of the
proclamation suggested by the ingenuity of the Commissioner of
Land Claims, the only one which has not been conclusively shewn to
be untenable by my remarks upon his report, is that to which Your
Grace alluded, —namely, that “ the Smithsons apparently before they
obtained the Waiver of the Crown’s right, negotiated "the purchase
from the Natives of the land in question.” Mr. Bell the Com-
missioner states that “ the proclamation had. pointed out that pur-
chases made before waiver were contrary to the conditions on which
the right of pre-emption was waived, and by a Gazette notice 7th,
(6th,) Deceraberlß44, express warning hadjbeen given that the Crowns
right of pre-emption would not be waived in respect of land of which
a purchase had been made previous to the consent of the Governor
being formally obtained in writing.”—The words of the proclamation
(10th October 1844,) arc that “ the terms and conditions set forth in
such proclamation (of 26 March 1844,) on which tho right of pre-
emption would be so waived, have, in some cases been disregarded
cither by persons making purchases of Land from tho Natives with-
out first applying for and obtaining the Governors consent to waive
the right of pre-emption.” The public notice (6th December 1844,)
explains that “the Crown’s right of pre-emption will not be waived in
respect of any land of which a purchase (however invalid in law) has
been made previous to the consent of the Governor having been for-
mally obtained in writing .” It is evident that Mr. Bell has confoun-
ded the “consent of the Governor formally obtained in writing” with
the “issue of a waiver of pre-emption,” as if thesewords, respectively,


indicated one and the same thing; whereas, as a reference to the
Government notice (6th December 1844) will shew, they were dis-
tinct steps in the process, the one being an authority to negotiate a
purchase, and the other a warrant to complete the purchase on the
negotiation having proved successful. The fact of the certihcate of
pre-emption having.been issued is conclusive of the authority to
negotiate having been obtained.
The objection thus made by Mr. Bell and alluded to, though not
stated as an objection in Your Grace’s despatch, having been thus
shewn to be groundless, there does not remain a shadow of proof that
the Smithsons did not strictly and literally fulfil the requsitions of the
proclamation.
Secondly. Your Grace appears to consider that as regards the
interference of the Home Government, it is conclusive against such
interference that the Attorney-General who was the proper author-
ity under Lord Grey’s instructions had reported that the Smithsons
had not complied with the requisitions of the proclamation. I have
not been able to trace in any of the public documents the report of
the Attorney-General on the particular case under review. But it is
capable of the most conclusive proof, by a comparison' of tbe pro-
clamations of Governor Fitz-Roy of 28th Marah an 4 10th October
1844 : the despatch of Lord Grey of 10th Febuary 1847 ; and the re-
port of the Attornery General thereon of August 7,1847 (Pari, paper
1848 p. 45) that the requisitions which the Smithsons had not com-
plied with, were not those stipulated in the proclamations, and insis-.
ted upon in Lord Grey’s despatch, but new conditions, unknown either
to the one or to the other. That they were conditions which were
not binding on the Smithsons, as being at variance with the original
contract: that they were, moreover, not conditions upon the fulfil-
ment of which Governor Grey engaged to keep the public faith by
issuing a Crown grant; but, on the contrary, what would have been
an acquiescence and a participation in its violation. In order to.
make the case more clear to Your Grace I will endeavour to place in,
juxtaposition its essential points.
1. Governor Fitz Roy’s procla-
mation (of the 10 Oct., 1844,) invites
parties to make purhases of Lands
from the natives (the Local Govern-
ment being without funds, and the
purchase being necessary to the
fulfilment of the conditions of the
Treaty of Waitangi,) promising un-
der the Sanction of a public instru-
ment, sealed with the Public seal
of the Colony, that grants from the
Crown of the Lands purchased
should issue after the expiry of
twelve months from the production
at the Colonial Secretary’s office of
Certified Copies of the Surveys and
deeds of purchase.
On the 27th June, 1845, Lord
Stanley instructs Governor Grey
1. As far as it appears, no case
was investigated or grant issued
when Governor Fitz Roy was su-
perseded by Governor Grey.
By a Public notice Rom Governor
Grey, dated 15th June, 1846, parties
are peremptorily called upon “to
send in on or before the 15th Sept,
next (after which no claim will be
received or entertained) all the
papers connected with their alleged
purchases, whether deeds or sur-
veys (for examination only) and*
they are further informed that “as
it appeared that in many cases the
regulations had been evaded, no
further steps would be taken until-
the views of Her Majesty’s Govern
ment had been ascertained,”


(Pari. pap of 21 May, 1846, p. 73,)
that he “ would of course recognize
any sales which Governor Fitz Roy
may have sanctioned under his last
proclamation (of 10th Oct., 1844.)
reducing the fee to one penny an
acre.”
2. On the 11th Sept, 1846,
William Smithson sent in copies of
his agreement with the natives for
the lands purchased by him under
the sanction of four Separate Certi-
ficates of preemption. On the 30th
of the same month he joined in a
memorial to the Governor with 44
other persons praying that the Go-
vernment would fulfil the engage-
ment entered into by his predecessor,
or institute such an investigation as
would make it appear that the
memorialists had not evaded the
requisitions of the proclamations,
or done any other act to disentitle
them to a fulfilment of the con-
ditions under which they received
certificates of preemption, and in-
vested their money in the purchase
of native lands (Pari, pap, of June,
1847, p. 66-)
3. On the 11th February, 1847,
Lord Grey instructs Governor Grey
that “to whatever extent the faith
of the Crown is thus pledged to the
purchasers it must be maintained in-
violate be the consequent inconveni-
ence what it may” that “he (the
Governor) will therefore refer every
such claim to the Attorney General
of New Ulster calling on him to report
whether it is in exact conformity
with the proclamation under which it
may be preferred” (Pari. Papers of
June, 47, page 30)
4. Mr. Smithson did not notify his
intention to relinquish his claims or
in any way acquiesce in the proceedings
of the Government, and he was kept
out of possession of his lands by the
Government and their assigns to the
2. On the 30th Sept, 1846, Go-
vernor Grey gave the memorialists
an evasive answer, and informed
the secretary of state that he “ did
not comply with either of their re-
quests.” (Pari. pap. of June, 1847, p.
66.)
Oh the Bth Nov., 1846, the
Legislative Council passed an or-
dinance to authorize compensation
in colonial debentures to the parties
who had purchased lands under the
authority of Governor Fitz Roy’s
proclamations and certificates of
preemption : and on the 15th Dec.
following Governor Grey issued a
public notice inviting parties who
might be desirous of relinquishing
their claims to the said land, on
receiving a Government debenture
for the amount of their disburse-
ments, to give notice of such inten-
tion: and warning them that “ if
they should attempt to enter into
occupation, or take actual posses-
sion after that date, they would be
proceeded against in due course of
law,” (Government Gazette).
3, On the 15th Dec., 1846, (See
Government Gazette) Governor Grey
had already seized the lands into the
possession of the Crown, the titles of
the lands purchased by the Smithsons
never having been disputed by the
natives, although in one out of the
four purchases the title was said to
conflict with another title acquired
by a different party to a portion of the
same land : and these lands (under the
strange assumption that a native title
acquired by an individual vested ipso
facto in the Crown) were thencefor-
ward dealt with as demesne of the
Crown : some parts having been leased,
other parts sold, and some being, as
it is believed, still in possession of the
Government.
4. Governor Grey told his widow
that it was impossible she could have
the land, but offered to give her back
the money which had been paid for it
nine years before. Which offer tha
widow’s necessities compelled her to


day of his death. From hia death-bed accept. Governor Grey Joes not pre-
he preferred a final appeal to the Go- tend in this or in any other case to
vernor praying for the “ Consolation have " kept the faith of the Crown.
vu ‘ . r J TT ;„ r- „i rvr> fVio anVnuftt
in his last moments” of a promise from
tho Governor that he would give to
his wife and daughters a portion of
what was their own property.
have " kept the faith of the Crown.”
His final despatch on the subject,
Dec, 4, 1847, (Pari. pap. of 1848, p.
43,) contains statements in justifica-
tion of his not having done so, which,
if admitted to be valid, would bo sub-
versive of every principle of morality
and good faith.
Having thus, by the incontestable evidence of official gazettes, and
despatches laid before parliament, made it clear that Governor Grey had
deprived the husband of this widow and her daughters of their rightful
property; and had, in violation of Her Majesty’s express commands
through her principal secretary of state, refused to restore the same ;
and being, as I believe, entitled to assume as proved that the ex-post
facto suggestion that they might not have been able to shew that
they had strictly fulfilled the conditions on which they were to be
entitled to agrant from the crown confirming their title to the property
they had purchased, are not entitled to any weight whatever, and would
have been entitled to no weight even had they been objected before
the act of confiscation was completed. The question seems to resolve
itself into this. Whether the obligations of the crown to protect the
rights of the subject have been sufficiently fulfilled when the crown
by a solemn public writing has once instructed a subordinate au-
thority to protect those rights. It will not be maintained that they
have been, when it can be clearly shewn that such instructions have
been violated. . .
Your Grace has stated that it would be impossible for the home
government at the distance of time and place of Your Grace s des-
patch, and “with the imperfect means of information at their com-
mand to entertain an appeal against a decision pronounced by such
an authority, and so long acquiesced in.” I respectfully submit to
your Grace that so far from such being the case, in this particular in-
stance, the facts which are patent on the face of the public documents to
which I have craved your attention, will be found to be of such a na-
ture that no additional information could alter their character or im-
pair their force. They contain a full admission and proof of the injury
complained of. If all that has been groundlessly alleged in justifica-
tion of that injury were true, it would amount to no justification.
I submit to your Grace that the widow s having, under the circum-
stances related, received back the purchase money, is no more an ac-
quiescence in the act of Sir George Grey, than the receiving of a
drink of water at tho hands of a robber, by the victim of a robbery on
the Queen’s high way, would be an acquiescence in the act of the
robber; and that the time which has elapsed no more deprives the in-
jured party of a right to redress in the one case, than would the in-
ability of tho victim of a robbery to reach the magistrate immediately
after it had been committed, be a reason for staying judicial proceed-
ings in the other case.
I further respectfully submit that it does not alter the case that,
“the question” as stated by your Grace “belongs to the local govern-


ment, by reason of the surrender to them of the management of the
crown lands, and of the revenue arising from them,” and that "Mrs.
Smithson’s claim to a liberal consideration” (if found good) "should be
drawn from the crown land revenue which has received whatever
benefit has arisen from the purchase of the land in question from the
natives.”
The obligations of allegiance and protection are reciprocal. That
the crown cannot convey to a subordinate authority, be it executive
or a power to deprive a British subject of his common law
rights, is a position which no jurist will dispute. Nor is it lawful to
do, or to permit to be done indirectly, that which cannot be done
directly. The powers of government and legislation are entrusted to
subordinate authorities for the protection of the Queen’s subjects—
not for their oppression, and, with all the respect due to your Grace’s
exalted rank and office, I submit the question to your Grace, whether
it is competent to a minister of the crown to decline entertaining an
appeal against an act of oppression or an abuse of trust committed by
persons to whom the crown and parliament have entrusted the powers
of government and legislation in a colony. As long as British colo-
nies remain under the dominion of the crown, so long are British colo-
nists entitled to the protection of the national laws, and also to the
protection of the sovereign power, in cases for which the laws make
no provision.
The system called "responsible government” which with the sanc-
tion of the secretary of state has been introduced into this and some
other colonies is not British government, in accordance with the
principles of the British constitution, nor can it relieve the Queen’s
ministers from the duty of interfering in colonial affairs. The princi-
pal fallacy consists in supposing the Governor to stand in the same
relation to the local legislature as the Queen’s relation to the Im-
perial Parliament. A most erroneous supposition, inasmuch. as
derivative authority is essentially different from original authority,
and by the constitution the Queen can do no wrong and is not res-
ponsible to the laws—whereas no power recognized by the constitution
can relieve the Governor of a Colony from responsibility to the laws;
while the powers of the Colonial Legislature, are of a subordinate
character, and are distinctly defined and limited by Parliament. By
this system of government however the Governor is made to abdicate
his proper functions in favour of what is called a " responsible minis-
try,” consisting,of whatever set of men may be most successful, by
whatever means, in obtaining the votes of a Majority of the Assembly.
And thus the Government of a British Colony is made more demo-
cratic than that even of the United States of America, which gives to
the President for the time being the right of choosing his Ministry.
But though the Queen’s Ministers may permit so great an abuse of the
powers of Government,Jthey*cannot transfer the allegiance of a Bri-
tish colonist to this new sp'ecics of sovereignty, nor close the door
against his appeal to his rightful Sovereign, against such of its acts as
are contrary to law, and contrary to right.


Your Grace will, I hope excuse the freedom of these observations
from a Colonist of thirty five years experience, the first fifteen of
which were spent, with approval, in offices of some responsibility un-
der the Colonial department. It is because I consider that the Ins-
titutions of British Government are of inestimable value to British
Colonists that I wish to see them preserved in British Colonies. All
publicists have awarded to the Constitution of Great Britain, the
praise of the highest excellence which the science of government,
has reached in the history of human affairs. The constitution of a
British Colony if true to the principles of the British constitution
would be more excellent still—because when irreconcileable differences
of opinion should arise—as arise they will and must —between its cons-
tituent parts, there is no necessity for the sacrifice of principle,
or the removal of the fittest men from office to prevent the Govern-
ment from coming to a stand. The balance of power is regulated and
its stability preserved by a paramount authority—not overthrown by a
coup d'etat. In such cases the Queen’s Government at home, than
■which a more impartial tribunal cannot be supposed to exist, steps in
and restores harmony, preserving, respectively, to the Governor and to
the other functionaries of government, their self respect; and to the pub-
lic, the services of men whose conscientious convictions of right might,
without such an appeal, lead to their being displaced by persons less
scrupulous about the means of acquiring, and retaining the power and
emoluments’©! office.
I have the Honor to be.
With the highest respect,
Your Grace’s most obedient humble servant,
James Busby.


APPENDIX.
The following is the Despatch referred to in the foregoing letter.
NEW ZEALAND.
Downing Street, 13 July, 1859.
Sir, — X have received your despatch,- No. 24 of the 23rd, of
February last forwarding, with other documents relating to the same,
a Petition addressed to the Queen by Mrs. E. Smithson on the sub-
ject of her claims to certain Land in New Zealand. Mrs. Smithson s
late husband, it appears, obtained from Captain Fitz-Roy in 1844,
for himself and other Members of his family, a waiver of the Crown’s
right over certain lots of Native Land, under the Proclamation
known as the penny an acre Proclamation.
That Proclamation was disapproved by the Home Government, and
Sir George Grey who had succeeded Captain Fitz Roy as
was directed by the Secretary of State in a despatch dated 10th, of
February, 1847, to acknowledge claims, arising under it, only so far as
the faith of the Crown was pledged but to interpret that pledge in the
strictest manner, and not to admit any claims in which the requisi-
tions of the proclamation had not been strictly and literally fulfilled. In
order to carry out this instruction Sir George Grey was directed to re-
fer every claim as it arose to his Attorney General. The Smith-
sons apparently before they obtained the waiver of the Crown s right,
negotiated the purchase from the Natives of the Land in question, and
paid for it sums amounting in all to one hundred and thirty four
pounds. But on preferring their claims for grants their applications
were, in conformity with the prescribed regulations referred to the
Attorney General, who reported (sth June 1848,) that they had not
complied with the requisitions of the Proclamation, and recommended
that their claims should be disallowed. This was accordingly done
by a notice in the Government Gazette. _ Q ,
Nothing more appears to have passed in the matter until the oth
of April 1858, nearly five years afterwards, when Mr. Smithson being
on his death bed, applied to Sir George Grey to grant a portion ot the
Land he had purchased to his wife and children. _
Sir George Grey was of opinion that he had no authority to make
such a grant but repaid to the wife and children the amount of the
purchase money given to the, natives.
The case was brought under the notice of the General Assemb y,
when the "Land Claims Act of 1856” was under consideration, and
also by Petition before the Provincial Council of Auckland. But


neitner of these Bodies entertained it. The General Assembly expressly
excluded from the operation of the Land Claims Act cases like Mrs.
Smithson’s in which the money paid for the land had been received
back, and the Provincial C mncilof Auckland refused to consider it,
on the ground as it is alleged that they were not responsible for'the
Acts of Governor Grey.
The Petition now sent home was referred to the Commissioner of
Land Claims, whose report was adverse to it.
The case appears to me to be one which must necessarily be
dealt with by the Local Government. As far as the Home Govern-
ment is concerned there is ilia conclusive fact that the Claim was
investigated by the Attorney General of the Colony, who was the
proper authority at the time when the facts were recent and could be
most easily ascertained, a.-d was disallowed -by him, as not com-
ing within the terms of Lord Grey’s instructions. -
It would be impossible for the Home Government, at this dis-
tance of time and place, and with the imperfect means of information
at their command to entertain an appeal against a decision pronoun-
ced by such an authority, and so long acquiecsed in.
The question moreover belongs to the Local Government by rea -
son of the surrender to them of the management of the
Crown Lands, and of the Revenue arising from them. If
circumstances should appear to you and your responsible advisers
to give Mrs. Smithson a claim to a liberal consideration, it is from -
the Crown Land Revenue, which has received whatever benefit has
arisen from the purchase of the Land in question from the natives,
that any additional compensation which might be awarded to her
should be drawn.
For these reasons I can see no suificient ground for advising Her
Majesty to interfere in this case, but if the Local Government should
be disposed to grant Mrs. Smithson any additional compensation, no
objection will be made on the part of Her Majesty’s Government to
such a grant.
I have &c. ;
(Signed,) Newcastle.
To Governor T. Gore Browne, C. 8., &c. ; &c
New Zealand.
