

HEATHENISM OE POPEEY,
PROVED AND ILLUSTRATED;
A LECTURE DELIVERED IN MAITLAND, ON THE 12th April, 1860, AND
PUBLISHED AT THE UNANIMOUS REQUEST OF THE AUDIENCE.
THE
.IIEY. WILLIAM McINTYKE, A.M.
second edition;
TO WHICH IS ADDED A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER ON THE IDENTITY OP THE I
CHARACTERISTIC PRINCIPLES OE HEATHENISM WITH THOSE OP POPERY.
“ IEAiIN KOT THE OF THE HEATHEN.”—I.,-. x. 2.
“ search the scriptures.” —John r. 39,
MAITLAND:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH STREET.
MDCCCLX.


rift'X
HEATHENISM OF POPERY,
PROVED AND ILLUSTRATED;
A LECTURE DELIVERED IN MAITLAND, ON THE 12lH APRIL, 1860, AND
PUBLISHED AT THE UNANIMOUS REQUEST OP THE AUDIENCE.
THE
hey. william mcintyre, a.m.
SECOND EDITION;
TO WHICH IS ADDED A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER ON THE IDENTITY OP THK
CHARACTERISTIC PRINCIPLES OF HEATHENISM, WITH THOSE OP POPERY.
“ LEARN HOT THE WAT OP THE HEATHEN.”— JtT. X. 2.
“ SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES.” — John ▼ . 39.
MAITLAND:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH STREET.
MDCCCLX.


PREFACE.
While I do not admit that a justification of the delivery of
the following lecture can on any valid ground be regarded as ne*
cessary, I deem it proper to state, with the view of correcting
erroneous impressions and of supplying information, the circum-
stances which led to, and attended, the delivery of it. Having
been requested to move, at a public meeting held at Hinton some
months ago, a resolution condemnatory of the system of State
Aid to Religion which obtains in the colony, I argued against
that system on the ground that it affords equal and simultaneous
support to mutually antagonistic creeds, —to protestantism on
the one hand, for I waved minor differences, and to popery on
the other. In illustrating and maintaining this argument, I ad-
verted to the fact that protestantism and popery are directly and
irreconcilably opposed to each other on many most vital points,
and observed that the adherents of both fully recognise that they
sustain this mutual relation, papists pronouncing the creed
of protestants heretical and their churches no churches, while
protestants regard popery as a gross corruption of Christianity,
and unscriptural in all that is distinctive of it. In this connec-
tion I spoke of the latter system as a “ baptised heathenism."
This expression and my use of it the Rev. Mr. Lynch made
the subject of a series of addresses which he delivered in his
chapel on two or three successive sabbath evenings. The contro-
versy thus initiated attracted considerable attention in the town,
and the purport of Mr. Lynch’s discourses became pretty generally
known. I thus, most unexpectedly, found myself in circum-
stances which, I conceived, imposed upon me an obligation to
justify the language I had employed, by presenting some of the
facts which suggested it and from which it derived its appro-
priateness. I, accordingly, announced a public lecture on the
“ heathenism of popery.”
This announcement was followed by attempts to dissuade
and even to deter me from delivering the proposed lecture. The
police magistrate took an early opportunity of intimating to me
that he was apprehensive that, if I would not abandon my inten-
tion of delivering it, a breach of the peace would be committed,- —
meaning, of course, by members of the Church of Roma. Ha


tad been in communication, he said, with no one on the subject,
and the apprehension he entertained must therefore have arisen
from his own estimate—not very favourable it would seem —of the
spirit of popery and the character of its adherents. Of course, I
could not for a moment think of agreeing to purchase even the pre-
servation of the peace, by basely surrendering liberty ofspeech in my
own case, and thus consenting and contributing to the loss of that
liberty by the entire Protestant community ; and I must confess
my surprise that a Protestant gentleman could have suggested
such a course. Others, however, went much farther. As many
as twenty-nine Protestants, —at least nominally such, although in
this matter they acted a most unprotestant part,—“ recorded their
protest,” in an advertisement in one of the local papers, not only
against the delivery of the lecture, which they most unjustly, and,
if they really meant what their words properly convey, i must
add, oalumniously characterised as “an attempt to disturb the
peace and harmony which pervaded the district,” but also against
every thing of the kind. They would have no religious discussion,
they are so considerate %nd pacific, that would be offensive to any
on e._ They “are strongly persuaded,’’ they say, that such dis-
cussion “ can only end in riot and confusion.” Is this, then, the
legitimate consequence of such discussion ? Or is it right and
proper on the part of those, to whom religious discussion in any
given case is offensive, to prevent or punish it by means of violence
and outrage ? If it is not, are we to acquiesce in a state of things
that would expose us to this use or rather abuse of physical force?
According to the protesters we are ; and errors on the subject of
religion, no matter how gross and pernicious, are to be left in un-
disturbed operation. They do not require that we extend this in-
dulgence to other errors, —-to errors, for example, within the
sphere of politics; for, I remember, their leader took a very
active part in a recent keenly contested election. Are errors
in political economy, then, more to he deprecated than errors
in religion? The tongue will not readily answer such a ques-
tion in the affirmative, but the practice often does; and here
we have the explanation of the issuing of the protest. If those, who
unwittingly exposed the flimsiness of their protestantism, by the
officious and most unprotestant protesting on which I am now re-
marking, rightly understood and duly recognised the functions per-
formed by religious truth, —the position it occupies and the office
it fulfils in relation to man’s highest interests both in the present
life and in a future state, they would have viewed in a different
light and met in a different spirit the recent attempt, to trace to
its real origin and present in its true character one of the grossest
corruptions of it which the history of Christianity records. They
proceeded, however, even farther than I have yet indicated. They


actually in their protest “ called upon all, who loved Christian
charity and the social bonds, to join with them in preventing the
proposed lecture.” Now, under what form did they expect the
assistance for which they thus advertised ? What could those to
whom they appealed, or any of them, do to assist them to prevent
the delivery of the deprecated lecture ? Nothing, that I can see, but
resort to violence, as some of them very soon did. Was this, then,
the sort of assistance they intended ? If it was, it was rendered to
them most effectively in the riot of the 29th March. I cannot, how-
ever, suspect them of intending this sort of assistance; and lam
therefore shut in to the belief that they attached no definite mean-
ing to their own words, and that, when they issued their “address
to the public,” as they call it, they did not know what they did.
But, while I cannot think that it was the design of their officious,
ill-advised, and ill-conducted interference, to direct or instigate
those, to whom the announced lecture was offensive, to prevent
the delivery of it by riotous proceedings, I feel constrained to
take the very opposite view of its tendency and effect. I have
no doubt that it exerted a considerable influence in producing the
state of mind on the part of the rioters of the 29th March, which
the outrages of that evening displayed.*
* In justification of these remarks I subjoin the “Address to the pub-
lic” in full, with the names of those who issued it attached ; for it is right
that others should be protected from the suspicion of having been parties to
it.
We, the undersigned, members of the various religious denominations
in Maitland, bea; leave to record our protest against any attempt to disturb
the peace and harmony which pervade the district.
We are strongly persuaded that an advertised exhibition, which is in-
tended to hold up to obloquy and contempt the conscientious belief-of any
section of the community, can only end in riot and confusion. And we there-
fore unite in calling upon all who love to cherish Christian charity and the
social bonds, to join with us in preventing the proposed lecture upon what is
termed the “ Heathenism of Popery
John Kingsmill, East Maitland
Arthur L. Kingsmill, East Maitland
A. J. Cobcroft, East Maitland
Charles Atkinson, East Maitland
John K O’Meagher, East Maitland
G. Close, Morpeth
G. M. Johnson, East Maitland
T. R. Browne, East Maitland
C. F. Hamilton Smith, Engien, Har-
pur’s Hill
C. J. Brackenreg, Maitland
John Abbot, East Maitland
G. F. Davidson, East Maitland
Jas. Cooper, East Maitland
W. J Riddulph, East Maitland
Jas. Curtis Eastmure, East Maitland
W. Sherwood, West Maitland
Joseph O’Meagher, Solicitor, East
Maitland
James N. Brunker, East Maitland
Thomas Crothers, Wollombi
Alex. Crothers, ditto
W. H. Mullen, West Maitland
Geo. Wigan, West Maitland
Edrvd. G. Cory, J.P., Paterson
W. P. Middleton, Pateison
J. B. R. Robertson, J.P., Morpeth
Henry Wilfred Ellis, East Maitland
Thos. H. Jones, West Maitland
Thos. K, Osborne, West Maitland
William Atkins, ditto
Mercury, March 27th , 1860.


But still greater influence in this direction, was ascribed t»
certain discourses which, it was said, the Rev. Mr. Lynch addressed
to his congregation on two or three Sabbath evenings immediately
proceeding the occurrence of the riot. It was reported and be-
lieved, as it is still, that in those discourses he used language that
was highly calculated to incite his people to commit a breach of
the peace. Special mention was made of an anecdote, which he
was said to have related or to have read from some publication, to
the effect that certain Protestants somewhere, having taken it into
their heads to burn the Virgin Mary in effigy, went to procure
sticks to make a fire for the purpose ; but that the “ Catholics ” of
that place, having become aware of their intention, went also to
procure sticks of a somewhat different character and for a different
purpose, and made such use of them for that different purpose, that
the Protestants were obliged to abandon their sacrilegious enter-
prise. The application was obvious; but it was said that it was
indicated by a reference to sticks and “ Catholics ” on the banks
of the Hunter. Mr. Lynch admits in his second address, that ha
read the anecdote referred to ; but declares “ that he never in-
tended any other application of the quotation than to give a
timely and friendly warning to the community.” He must mean
the Protestant part of the community ; but it was not Protestants
but Papists, —his own congregation,—that he addressed, when he
read the passage in question. And, then, how could the reading
of it be a “ warning ” to Protestants or to any portion of “the com-
munity,” unless it conveyed to them an intimation that “ the
Catholics of the Hunter River District ” would resort to their
“ kippeens ” as their co-religionists of Dr. Cahill’s anecdote did ?
And if it conveyed such an intimation to Protestants, what mean-
ing did his hearers attach to it ? If it conveyed to others the
intimation that the “ Catholics” of the district would take to their
“ kippeens ” or were likely to do so, did it recommend or suggest no
such course to his hearers themselves ? Strange that it should be
understood in one way by the former and in quite another by the
latter. To an application made to him, it seems, by Mr. Day, his
“ first answer,” he says, was “why should I compromise my people
by asking them to preserve the peace ; what reason have I to
suppose that they intend to break it?” If he had none, of what,
pray, did he give “warning-to the community ?’’ And why did
he give it any ? Thus, the account which be gives of his sole object
in reading Dr. Cahill’s anecdote lands him in glaring absurdity and
self-contradiction.
Notwithstanding the apprehension of the police magistrate,
the proclamation of the doctrine by the twenty-nine protesters,
that such an “ exhibition ” as the delivery of a lecture on the


Heathenism of Popery “ could only end in riot and confusion,” and
the reported bearing of Mr. Lynch’s discourses, I could not believe
there was any danger of a riot. While my opinion of Popery is
most unfavourable, I could* not acquiesce in the unfavourable
opinion of Papists, which the police magistrate and such others as
were apprehensive that they would resort to riotous proceedings to
prevent the delivery of the lecture must have entertained. Still,
I thought it might be proper to present to them some considerations
fitted to restrain them from adopting such a course; and accord-
ingly I addressed the following letter to the Maitland Mercury, to be
published either as correspondence or as an advertisement. The
proprietors of that paper, though they had published the address
of the twenty-nine protesters, emphatically refused to give it in-
sertion. It was offered for publication to the Northern Times with
the same result.
Gentlemen —A friend, for whose opinion I have great
respect, has expressed to me his fear that, if 1 deliver the lecture
I announced in your advertising columns, a breach of the peace
may be committed, —meaning, of course, by the members of the
Church of Rome, for it is to them only that the Lcture could be
offensive. One would hope, however, that their character does
not justify this apprehension. If it does, and the gentleman „to
whom I have referred must have thought so, the fact is most dis-
creditable to their religion; for protestants, with whatever free-
dom their religious sentiments and usages are discussed and with
■ whatever severity they are condemned, do not resort to violence
or outrage, but repel such attacks by legitimate means of refuta-
tion.
But, whatever course the character impressed by their reli-
gion would incline the members of the Church of Rome to pursue
upon such an occasion, they cannot fail to see, that, by committing
a breach of the peace, they would themselves do more to damage
their faith than any lecture could effect, exhibiting it as the
enemy of social order. Besides, by adopting such a course, they
would subject their spiritual director to grave suspicion, for few
would believe that it would be adopted in the face of his expressed
disapproval. —I am, &c,, —William Mclntyre.
Preceded by the activity of such influences, which, from the
policy adopted by the local press, could not well be counteracted,
the 29 th of March arrived. On the evening of that day, I reached,
about 6 o’clock p.m., the church in which the lecture was to be de-
livered, and found a large crowd assembled in front of the building.
This crowd, on my approach, raised a loud yell, and entered the
church enclosure by one gate as I entered by another. Passing on
to the High School buildings, I said to those who were next to me
“Good evening friends,” and, one of them answering “it will be seen


whether we are friends or not,” I replied, "for my part I cherish
no unfriendly feelings towards you.” Entertaining no apprehen-
sion that the crowd would resort to violence, and thus prove by their
own spirit and conduct the truth of the charge I preferred against
their creed, I returned in a few minutes to give instructions about
the lighting of the church. Not finding the door-keeper I proceeded
in quest of him along the skirt of the crowd, but without address-
ing any of those who composed it, and by the time I had reached the
farther extremity of it I was assaulted with sticks. Before I re-
ceived much injury, my brother, Mr. Donald Mclntyre, seizing
one of those whom he saw strike me, drew the attention of my
assailants to himself; and savage was the attention they bestowed
upon him. With great difficulty he was rescued from them alive,
not, however, till he had received a severe wound on the head, and
his face was, all over, covered with blood and bruises. He also
bore on several parts of his body marks of the violence of the
attack. One policeman assisted in rescuing him. After some time
they attacked a boy, my nephew, with great brutality.
The violence of the crowd continuing, the following resolu-
tion was adopted with respect to the delivery of the lecture:
“ That, a riotous mob having assembled in the yard around
. the Church, and having already committed a violent assault
on the Rev. Mr. Mclntyre, and on Mr. Donald Mclntyre, on
the latter to the imminent danger of his life, while it appears
to the committee that no efficient arrangement has been
made by the Police Magistrate for the preservation of the
peace, though he was previously aware that a breach of it
was likely to be committed, the delivery of the lecture should
be postponed till Thursday, the 12th April next, at 11 o’clock,
A.M., and that in the meantime the attention of the Executive
should be called to the facts above referred to, as rendering this
postponement necessary, and to the necessity, as illustrated by
those facts, of a more adequate protection on the occasion of
the delivery of the postponed lecture, than the local force will
afford.”
Before the 12th of April arrived effectual provision was made
for preserving the peace, —a step which many thought ought to
have been taken before the 29th March, seeing that the police-
magistrate was apprehensive a breach of the peace would be com-
mitted on that day, and, in view of this danger, considered, —so he
stated tome, —that the force under his command was "weak.”
On the 12th April, about an hour before the time ap-
pointed for the delivery of the lecture, it became evident that,
in order that all might have access to hear it, who assembled for
that purpose, it was necessary that the meeting should be held in
the open air. It was accordingly transferred to the High School


Plav Ground, where the lecture was delivered to an attentive au-
dience of probably 3000 persons. Dr. Douglas was in the chair:
and the Kev, Mr. Mayne opened the proceedings with prayer and
closed them with the apostolic benediction.
I have been blamed by a portion of the press, prostestant
in respect of proprietary, for using the term “ heathenism’’ in
describing the Character of Popery, and, indeed, for calling
popery popery. It so happens, however, that I consider the great
peculiarities of popery as heathenish, and the question therefore
is whether it is right that I should use the appropriate terms to
express the estimate of it which I have thus formed. But, if it is
right to express that estimate at all, it must be right to use the
appropriate terms to express it; and thus wo are led to the more
fundamental question, is it right that one should express the un-
favourable estimate that on the most valid grounds one has formed
of popery? If not, why not ? Such exemption from exposure to the
expression of the views entertained of it is not claimed on behalf
of any other system. Why should an exception be made in favour
of Popeiy? Is it because its character is such that, if our views
of it are at all just, the distinct and fearless expression of them
must convey strong condemnation, and will therefore be offensive
to those who obstinately adhere to its errors ? Strange that
what renders exposure peculiarly necessary should also render it
wrong.
In using strong terms, such as those objected to, in de-
cribing the corruptions of the Church of Borne, I am not singular.
Isaac Taylor, for example, in some of the extracts from his
“ Ancient Christianty,” given in the following lecture, speaks
of the “ Idolatry of Modern Popery,”—and of a “polytheistic
practice fixed on the Christianity of unreformed Europe,” which
“is admitted, by all who now witness it, to involve what is essen-
tially idolatrous.” What he here intends he immediately after-
wards designates “idolatrous superstitions.” Popery, even before
it had reached its final developement and the full maturity of its
corruptions, he describes, in language almost identical with that
which I employed, as a “ Christianised polytheism,” a “Christian-
ised heathenism.” Any number of instances of similar phraseology
could easily be adduced from the writings of the most distinguished
champions of Protestantism. This is only to say that multitudes
of writers, in describing Popery, have made use of appropriate
terms. And how could they describe it otherwise ?
Papists set Protestants the example of using even abusive
language in describing their faith. I would not degrade myself,
however, by following this example. At the same time I must
claim and exercise the right of using, particularly in dealing with
subjects on which it is of infinite importance that correct views be
held, the most appropriate language I can find.


As to genuine good-will towards the members of the Church
of Rome, it is easy to see which of the two displays it, he that
humours them in their errors, that he may secure their custom
and get their money, it may be, or even from indifference
and unfaithfulness, or he that endeavours, though at the risk
of incurring their displeasure and any inconveniences that may
result from it, to convince them that their errors are gross and
ruinous errors, and to condnct them to the knowledge and belief of
the truth, that is “ able to make them wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus.”
I have justified in the following lecture the designations I apply
to the Church of Rome, and to its members and its creed; but in
further justification of them, and as placing the point involved in
a clear and convincing light, I beg to submit the following pas-
sage.—“ Papist is the correct generic term; and the use made of
the word ‘ Catholic,’ in order to pervert unwary Protestants, is a
reason why precision should always be observed in the use of it.
With the uninformed and unsuspecting Prostestant, for instance, it
is argued, ‘ You believe in the holy catholic church, according to
your own Creed ; now ours is the Catholic Church, as both you
and we call it; you, therefore, believe in ours, as the true holy
Catholic Church : in order, therefore, that your practice might be
consistent with your faith, you should forthwith leave the Protes-
tant community, and come over to that Church, in which you
profess to believe.’ This artifice is often used, and it has
staggered some : the design is evidently to confound, ensnare,
and lead captive. Protestants may, therefore, without any cause
of oifence, with propriety use the words ‘ Popery,’ ‘ Papal,’
and ‘Papist,’ because the term ‘Catholic,’ without any qualify-
ing appellative, is too vague, and tends to deceive. Till this
practice, therefore, is relinquished, and the word ‘Catholic’
repudiated as pertaining to the Church of Rome, Protestants
ought to call those who adhere to Rome, Papists, their system
Popery, and their doctrines and acts, Papal or Popish. This is
a clear and proper distinction, on account of its derivation from
their spiritual father, the Pope of Rome, and because it is not a
name which Protestants have invented, but one which is taught
and recommended by Romanists themselves,”— Elliott's Delinea-
tion, p. 4'.i2 London, 1844.
In preparing the lecture for the press, I have recast some pas-
sages, and, in one or two instances, I have given additional or
different illustrations.
I cannot close these remarks without bearing grateful tes-
timony to tie decision and ability with which the Christian
Pleader and the Christian Advocate maintained Protestant views
in the controversy connected with the following lecture.


heathenism of popery.
1. PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
1. OCCASION OF THE DELIVERY OF THE LECTURE.
It is not necessary that I should trouble either you or myself by
setting forth the motives from which I have sought this oppor-
tunity of addressing you ; I shall only say that I would not have
sought it, but for antecedent circumstances, which, I conceived,
imposed upon me an obligation to do so. At the same time, the
subject, of which I have undertaken to treat, is one that urgently
claims the attention both of Protestants and of members of the
Church of Rome, but of the latter even more than of the former.
And, on this ground alone, irrespectively altogether of the antece-
dent circumstances to which I have referred, I might well have
deemed it my duty to make any and every legitimate effort in
mv power, to contribute to the enlightenment of the public mind
on that subject. The Protestants of our district, I apprehend,—
and I might give the statement a wider application, —fail exceed-
ingly to discharge, in this direction, the duty by
making them depositaries of his truth, has imposed upon them.
Instead of labouring, with all faithfulness and affection, to rescue
their brethren of the Church of Romo from the darkness and
bondage of that communion, and to conduct them to the light
and liberty of the gospel,—are they not chargeable, to a grievous
extent, with overlooking and even practically ignoring, that the
difference between Protestantism and Popery is of any great im-
portance, if of any importance at all, either to inwividjfals or to
communities ?
2. DESIGNATIONS APPLIED TO THE CHURCH OF ROME, ITS CREED, AND
ITS PEOPLE.
Before I proceed to deal with the subject of this lecture, I
deem it necessary for me to remark, that there are certain terms,
claimed on behalf of the Church of Rome, which the views I en-
tertain will not permit me to employ. I will not call that church
the Catholic Church, for I hold it is not the Catholic Church,


that is, the universal or entire Church of Christ. If it were the
Protestant churches would be no churches, and the allegation
that there is no salvation withiu their pale, would be well
founded. The Church of Rome by the assumption of such a de-
signation, in the very midst of Protestants, too, and in its inter-
course with them, virtually tells them to their face, what its
standards declare in direct and express terms,* —that they have no
church, no divinely sanctioned ordinances, and, as Protestants, no
access to salvation. This representation of the condition of Pro-
testants I emphatically reject, and I will not, therefore, concede
to th ir opponents an epithet which imilies it. By conceding it
I should proclaim, with reference to a point of vital importance,
that the Church of Borne is what it is not, and that the Protes-
tant churches are not what they are; and this I will not do.
And, while, for the same reasons, for which I thus decline to call
the Church of Rome the Catholic church, I decline to call its
members Catholics, I have the further reason for witholding from
t! era that title, that to apply it to them is really sheer nonsense.
Catholic means universal, and where is the sense of calling an
individual a, universal? But to call him a Catholic is exactly the
same thing. What adnrssible or rational meaning can be at-
tached to such an application of the term ? An individual may be
a universal genius or a universal favourite, for example, but in
what sense can he be absolutely a universal? He cannot be such
in any sense; and the application to individuals of an epithet of
precisely the same moaning with universal, affords a striking illus-
tration of the peculiar magniloquence of arrogant and baseless as-
sumption,—of the use of what the scriptures call “ great swelling
wmrds of vanity,”—a species of diction, however, which the
Church of Rome has carried much further than she does even in
this instance. Having stated that I will not call that chuich the
Catholic Church, or the members of it Catholics, 1 need scarcely
add that I will not call its faith Catholicism.
Neither can I acquiesce in the compromise of substituting
for those de ignations rcspecliveiy Roman Catholic Church,
Roman Catholics, and Roman Catholicism, —a substitution which
certainly does not mend the matter. None of the objections
against the original and more decided designations is removed
* The following words are used in a decree of Boniface VIII;
“ We declare, say, define, pronounce, that, on the part of every human being,
subjection to the Roman Pontiff is indispensably necessary to salvation
and of the creed of Pope Pius IV, to which the members of the Church of Rome,
according to their own testimony, “ assent without restriction or qualifica-
tion,” the 15th article begins thus, —“ this true Catholic faith,” —the popish
faith set forth in the proceeding articles of the creed.—“beyond which none
can be saved, and which I now freely profess, and truly hold, I, the said N,
promise, vow, and swear to hold entire and inviolate.”


by resorting to it; and the substituted and modified designations
are open to the further objection, that they involve a contradic-
tion; for what is Roman, and therefore limited, cannot, at the same
time, be catholic or universal.
Rejecting, on the grounds just indicated, the nomenclature
which has now been reviewed, 1 adopt in place of it a nomencla-
ture formed on the very same principles, on which we form the
nomenclature we apply to other churches. For example, the
church, of which I am myself a member, I call a Presbyterian
Church, because it is governed by presbyters as its highest func-
tionaries; and, applying the same principle to the Church of Rome,
I call it the Popish or Papal Church, because it is governed by
the Pope as is highest functionary. I regret that this designa-
tion should be offensive, if it is offensive, to the members of that
church or to any of them. But why should it be offensive to
them? Are they ashamed of the Pope ? If he is, indeed, as they*
hold, the vicar of Christ, and, when speaking ex cathedra, or
under any circumstances, infallible, they assuredly have no cause
to be ashamed of him. Why then should they object to a de-
signation for their church, derived from the position which he
holds in it? It is true, indeed, that when we apply this designa-
tion to it, we do not by applying it, acknowledge, and we may
seem to deny, that the body to which we apply it is the Catholic
Church ; and, if it be not on this ground that they regard the
designation as offensive, I cannot imagine on what ground they
view it m that light, But if there are any who, on this ground,
take offence at the application of it, they make a very large
demand on the courtesy and complaisance, or rather on the
simplicity and unfaithfulness of Protestants; but large and ex-
orbitant as the demand is, there are not a lew, humiliating though
it be to confess it, who will acquiesce in it and satisfy it. For
my own part, however, I cannot afford to do so. And, calling
their church the Popish or Papal Church, I shall call its members
Papists, audits faith Popery. There are also designations derived
from locality, namely Church of Rome or Romish Church, Ro-
manists, and Romanism, which I consider appropriate, and claim,
therefore, a right to use.
3. RELATION OF POPERY TO THE SCRIPTURES.
The charge which I prefer against Popery is, that it is
largely impregnated with heathen elements, —with elements de-
rived from heathen sources, —so largely impregnated with them
that they impart to it its distinctive character. lam aware that
this is a very grave charge ; it is one however which can be fully
substantiated.


If the Church of Borne professed to have derived its entir®
system from the scriptures alone, appealing to no other authority,
it would be difficult to believe that its system is corrupted with
heathen elements to any great extent, or indeed at all. It does
not however make any such profession. On the contrary, it
places unwritten tradition on the same level with the sacred scrip-
tures in respect of authority. And, as it is itself the sole custo-
dier of tradition, it can, of course, make it be, teach, and sanction
whatever it pleases. It is thus under no necessity of confining
itself within the limits of scripture teaching. It was, indeed, the
evident object of the elevation of tradition to the place and
authority assigned to it, to relieve it from this necessity. But,
in order that this object might be effectually accomplished, it was
not enough to place tradition side by side and on the same level
of authority with the scriptures; it was necessary further to
secure, that the teaching of the former should not be disproved
or counteracted by that of the latter. The scriptures represent
and describe themselves as a sufficient revelation. “ All scrip-
ture,” they testify “ is given by inspiration of God, and is pro-
fitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works.” —2 Tim. 111., 16,17. Of course
a revelation, intended and fitted to make all who truly embrace it
“ perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works,” is itself
perfect; and not as the doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome with respect to tradition imply, a defective revelation, to
which, that it may afford the requisite guidance to the Church,
a large addition must be made. But it is not only as involving a
rejection of their claim to be regarded and received as a sufficient
and perfect revelation, that tradition comes into conflict with the
scriptures; it comes into conflict with them also in its teaching,
and that in multitudes of instances. It is clear therefore, that,
if tradition is to be maintained in authority and is to do its
work, it must be protected from the direct and decided opposi-
tion which, from first to last, is offered to it by the scriptures. To
afferd to it this protection, two most effectual, but, at the same
time, most audacious expedients have been adopted. In the
first place, the sale, possession, and reading of the scriptures have
been laid under the most rigid restrictions. Thus the 4th of the
rules on the subject of prohibited books, drawn up by a committee
appointed for the purpose by the Council of Trent, and approved
of by Pope Pius IV, is in the following terms : —“ln as much as it
is manifest from experience that if the Holy Bible, translated
into the vulgar tongue, be allowed to all indiscriminately,
more evil than good will, from the temerity of men, arise from
such permission,—it is referred to the judgment of bishops and


inquisitors to allow, with the advice in each case of the pastor or
confessor, the Bible, translated by catholics, to be read in the
vulgar tongue by those, whose faith and piety, they have reason
to believe, will be augmented and not injured by such reading;
and the license thus granted the parties to whom it is given must
possess in writing. But, whosoever shall presume to read or
possess the Bible without such license, he shall not receive absolu-
tion until he has delivered such Bible to the ordinary. Moreover,
booksellers, who shall sell or otherwise dispose of a Bible in tha
vulgar tongue to one who does not possess the foresaid license, shall
forfeit the price of such book, to be applied by the bishop to holy
uses, and shall be subjected to other punishments, according to
the quality of the offence, as the bishop may think fit. Regulars,
unless they have a license to that effect from their respective
superiors, cannot read or buy Bibles.”* Such is the law of the
Church of Rome on the subject of-the sale, the possession, and
the reading of the Scriptures ; and I doubt if there is a single lay-
member of that church in the colony at this moment, who is in a
position to purchase, read, or possess them in accordance with it,
that is, who has from the proper authority a written license to
purchase, possess, and read them. This law, it is true, is allowed
to be very much in abeyance in this community, the presence of
protestants and the influence of protestant sentiments and institu.
tions rendering the enforcement of it inexpedient, if not imprac-
ticable. But, if it were enforced, it would not, probably, leave a
single lay papist in the colony in possession of a bible ; nor would
its operation stop here ; it would deprive protestants also of their
hibles, for the Church of Rome claims as her subjects all who have
been baptized. And it is enforced elsewhere, and the effect of
such enforcement is the almost entire expulsion or rather exclusion
of the scriptures. It is enforced, for example, in Rome, the head-
quarters of popery, and the effect there is, that, to use the words
of a recent traveller in Italy, there is not in that city, “ one copy
of the bible that is accessible to the people,”
♦ Cbm experimento manifestum sit, si sacra Biblia vulgari lingua
passim sine discrimine permittantur, plus indb, ob hominum temeritatem
detrimenti, qudm utilitatis oriri, hac in parte judicio Episcopi aut inquisitoris
stetur: ut cum consilio Parochi, vel ConftSsarii, Bibliorum a Catholicis
autoribus versorum lectionem in vulgari lingua eis concedere possint, quos
intellexerint ex hujusmodi lectione, non damnum, sed fLdei atque pietatis
augmentum capere posse : quam facultatum in scriptis habeant. Qui autem
absque tali facultate ea legere seu habere praesumpserit, nisi priiis Bibliis
Ordinario redditis, peccatorum absolutionem pereipere non possit. Bibliopoles
verb, qui praedictara facultatem non habenti Biblia idiomate vulgari con-
scripta vendiderint, vel alio quovis modo concesserint, librorum pretium, in
usus pios ab Episcopo convertendum, amittant, aliisque pcenis pro delicti
qualitate ejusdem Episcopi arbitrio subjaceant. Regulares verb non, nisi
facultate it Praelatis suis habita, ea legere, aut emere possint. —Canons and
Decrees, p. 337. Paris, 1823.


But, however rigorously this prohibitory policy might be
pursued, the scriptures might sti.l get into the hands of some, and
others might become acquainted with some portions of their con-
tents. To provide for such cases, and also for the rare cases in
which a license in writing to possess and read the scriptures might
be sought ar.d obtained, a second and most extraordinary ex-
pedient has been resorted to, —the expedient of imperatively
requiring that none shall presume to understand the scriptures.
“In order to restrain,” says the Council of Trent, in a decree
passed in its 4th session, “ in order to restrain petulant minds, the
Council further decrees, that in matters ol faith, and of morals
pertaining to the edification of Christian doctrine, no one, relying
on his own discernment, shall dare to interpret the sacred scrip-
tures, even though such interpretation shall never be published,
wresting them to his own sense of them, contrary to the sense of
them, which Holy Mother Church, whose right it is to judge of
their true meaning and interpretation, has held and still holds,
and contrary to the unanimous consent of the holy fathers.
Whosoever shall transgress, 1 t them be denounced by the ordi-
naries, and punished according to law.”* To obey this decree,
the papist, if he read the scriptures, must carefully abstain from
exercising his judgment on wliat he reads with the view of un-
derstanding it. Whatever meaning it conveys to liis own mind,
he is not to attach to it any meaning, except the meaning attached
to it by all the fathers, and now and always attached to it by
the Church of Home ; and, if he docs not know that meaning,—
and, to say the very least, in multitudes of instances, there is no
such meaning for him to know, —he is not, of course, to attach
to it any meaning at all, —he is not to understand it, no matter
how plain and intelligible it may be. In the face of such a pro-
hibition it, is useless to read the scriptures. It is even dangerous
to read when it is a sin to understand.
This legislation, it may be observed in passing, is singularly
inconsistent with itself. It treats those, whose conduct it is in-
tended to regulate, as being simultaneously both able and unable
to understand. It treats them as being able to understand, as is
evident from the fact, that it furnishes the rule under considera-
tion and similar rules for their instruction and guidance, which of
course would be useless, if they could not unde;stand them; and,
• Prreterea ; ad coercenda petulantia ingenia ; decernit, ut nemo,
ansß prudentiae innixus j in rebus fidei, et morum, ad sedificationem dootrinse
Christianas pertinentium, sacran) Scripturam ad suos sensus contorquens,
contra eum sensum, quem tenuit et tenet sanota Mater Ecclesia, cujus est
judieare de veto sensu et interpretatione Scripturarum sanctarum, aut etiam
(2) contra unanimem consensura Patrum, ipsam Scripturam sacram interpre-
tari audeat; etiamsi liujusmodi interprotationes nullo uunquam tempore in
lucem edendae forent. Qui contravenerint, per Ordinarios declarentur, et
pcenis i jure statutis puniantur. —Canons and Decrees, V- 22.


the same time, with glaring inconsistency, it treats them as
feeing unable to understand the far plainer and more reasonable
rules of scripture.
At present, however, we have to do with the enactment of
the Tridentine fathers, as an expedient for getting rid of the in-
terference of scripture with tradition ; and, viewed as a means to
that end, nothing could be more skilful in design or effective in
operation. The first expedient, vigorously applied, is quite
capable of almost wholly abolishing the possession and reading
of the scriptures; and what it may leave undone the second
expedient, which may be regarded as its complement, will fully
accomplish, abolishing wholly the intelligent reading of the scrip-
tures. And, as our minds are so conaituted that we shall not
read if we are not permitted to understand, I may say simply that
it will wholly abolish the reading of the scriptures.
The scriptures having been almost wholly shut oat of cir-
culation by the first expedient, and the few straggling copies,
that might have escaped this process, having been completely
silenced by the second ; and even reason itself having been over-
awed to suspend or rather abandon its functions within the sphere
of religion; tradition might, of coarse, be wrought in any direction
and to any extent that those who wrought it chose ; and clearly
the preparatory arrangement indicated that they intended to work
it unsparingly, It is to be observed, however that it was not
under cover of the doctrine by which the teaching of the scriptures
has thus been set aside, as a doctrine already developed and enun.
elated, that corruptions of the gospel were introduced, but under
the influence and as the result of successive defections in the
direction of that doctrine ; and that the doctrine itself was resorted
to, as necessary to render practicable any sort of defence of accu-
mulated corruptions already introduced. The design of the doc-
trine is thus chiefly retrospective and defensive; and the enunciation
and maintenance of it are virtually a confession that the system to
which it is attached will not bear the light of the scriptures,* and
• This is the Italian view of the matter. “ How curious”, says Dr.
Richard Chenevix Trench, Dean of Westminister, after remarking on the
Italian proverb, Revenge of a hundred years old hath still its sucking
teeth, “How curious again is the confession which speaks out in another
Italian proverb, that the maintenance of the Romish system and the study of
Holy Scripture cannot go together. It is this: Con TEvangelo si diventa
eretico, “ With the Gospel one becomes an heretic .” No doubt with the study
of the Word of God one does become an heretic, in the Italian sense of the
word i and therefore it is only prudently done to put all obstacles in the way
of that study, to assign three years’ and four years’ imprisonment with hard
labour to as many as shall dare to peruse it; yet certainly it is not a little re-
markable that such a confession should have embodied itself in the popular
utterances of the na' ion.”— Proverb < and their Lessons , 4th Edition, p. 56-
Th» fact and the conversation, related in the following extract, reveal the same


•annot be defended if the scriptures are not silenced ; or in other
words, that it contains unscriptural elements, elements derived
from other than scriptural sources, and that the presence of those
elements would be inevitably detected if the scriptures were read.
If.—PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE HEATHENISM OF
POPERY.
The elements of which the presence is thus virtually con-
fessed are the heathen elements, with which I maintain popery is
largely impregnated—so largely impregnated that it derives from
them its distinctive character. I now proceed to prove that it is
thus impregnated with such elements; and, first, I will adduce
some instances and illustrations of their presence, and, then,
furnish evidence of a more general character.
1. PARTICULAR INSTANCES OF THE HEATHENISM OF POPERY. —PURGATORY.
My first instance is purgatory. The doctrine of the Church
of Rome on this subject is based upon the following distinctions.
It teaches that the punishment due to sin is of two kinds,
eternal and temporary, and that, when Grod in justification remits
the eternal punishment of sin, a temporary punishment, which
must be endured either here or hereafter, may still be due to it.
It also distinguishes two kinds of sin, mortal and venial, the
former exposing not only to temporary but also to eternal
punishment, of which, however, the remission may be obtained
in this life, and the latter to temporary punishment only. Apply-
ing these distinctions, it holds that there are three different
states in which men die, —some being liable to the eternal punish-
ment of sin, some to its temporary punishment only, and others
to neither. With respect to those classes, it teaches that, while
those of the first class pass at once into the place of eternal misery
and those of the third into the place of eternal blessedness, those
©onviction of the danger of the bible to popery which the proverb expresses,
“I have conversed with a noble Christian man who was exiled from Rome
for introducing into that city some copies of the Latin Bible. After having
in vain sought for a Bible in many shops in Naples, I said to my valet, a
sensible man of fifty, “John, have you ever read aßible ?” “No, sir,” was the
reply. “ Have you ever seen a Bible V’ Again he replied, “ No, sir.’’ “Aa
God has given the Bible to man, why is it not found in Naples ?” “The bishop
and priests forbid its circulation, sir, and forbid us to read it.” “ And why,
John, do they forbid your reading it?” “ O,” said he, with a shrug of the
shouider so peculiar to the Italian, “they think that if we should read the Bible,
we would become Protestants, and they would not like that.” —Romanism at
Home, by Kirwan, p, 28.


of the second are detained in an intermediate state, -which it calls
purgatory, that they may there undergo the temporary punishment
due to them, and, being thus purified, may pass on and join those
of the third class.
In proof of the correctness of this representation of the views
of the Church of Rome with respect to purgatory, I submit the
following quotations.—The first I shall adduce is from a cate-
chism thus, described in the title page, “ The Most Rev. Dr.
James Butler’s Catechism ; revised, enlarged, approved, and re.
commended by the Four Archbishops of Ireland, as a general
Catechism for the Kingdom.” In this Catechism the following
questions and answers occur at page 35. “ What is purgatory ?
A place of punishment in the other life, where some souls suffer
for a time before they can go to Heaven, Do any others go to
purgatory besides those who die in venial sin? Yes ; all who die
indebted to God’s justice on account of mortal sin. When God
forgives mortal sin, as to the guilt of it and the eternal punish-
ment it deserves, does he require temporary punishment to be
suffered for it ? Yes, very often, and for our correction ; to deter
us from relapsing into sin, and that we should make some atone-
ment to his offended justice and goodness.” The Council of Trent
at the commencement of the 25th session adapted the following
enactment with respect to purgatory. —Since the Catholic Church,
instructed by the Holy Spirit, has, in accordance with the sacred
writings and the ancient tradition of the fathers, taught, in holy
councils, and last of all in this general council, that there is a pur-
gatory ; and that souls detained there are assisted by the suffrages
of the faithful, but especially by the acceptable sacrifice of the
mass ; —the holy Synod commands bishops to be at pains to secure
that the sound doctrine concerning purgatory, transmitted to us by
the holy fathers and sacred councils, shall be believed, held,
taught, and every where preached by the faithful ”* In canon
30, Sess. YL, the Council asserts the necessity of purgatory and
indicates the purpose it serves.—“lf any one shall say that, after
the grace of justification has been received, guilt is remitted and
the desert of eternal punishment cancelled to every penitent sinner,
so that there remains no desert of temporary punishment to be
endured either in this world or in the next in purgatory, before
• Cum Catholioa Ecclesia, Spiritu Saneto edocta, ex sacria literia, et
antiqua Patrum traditione, in aacris Couoiliis, et uovissimS in hac oecumenioa
Synodo docuerit, Purgatorium eaae ; aniraasque ibi detentas, fidelium auffragiia,
potiasiinilm verb aoceptabili altaria sacrificio juvari; praecipit aancia Syuodns
Episcopia, ut sanam de Purgatario dootrinam a sanctia Pacribus et aacris
Conoiliis traditam, a Ohristi fidelibus credi, teneri, dooeri, et übique prssdi-
«ari diligenter studeaut, —Canons and Decrees, p. 253.


the access to the kingdom of heaven can be opened for such sinner f
let him be accursed.”!
These authorities assert the existence and set forth the design
of purgatory ; the following legends, related by Matthew Paris, a
monk of St. Alban’s Abbey, present rather minute, I will not say
faithful, descriptions of it, supplied by parties who professed to
have seen what they described. One of those parties was called
Enus. He was a soldier, and served under Stephen, King of Eng-
land. Resolved to make reparation to St. Patrick’s purgatory for
the enormity of his life, he visited Ireland. “ The Son of God, if
old chronicles may be credited, appeared to the saint when he
preached the Gospel to the Irish, and instructed the Missionary to
construct a purgatory at Lough Derg; and promised the plenary
remission of sin to all who should remain a day and a night in this
laboratory of atonement. Fortified by the holy communion, and
sprinkled with holy water, the fearless soldier entered the gloomy
cave. Protected by invoking the Son of God, Enus beheld the
punishments of the wretched purgatorians. The groans of the
sufferers soon began to stun his ears. Numberless men and
women, lying naked on the earth, and transfixed with red hot
nails, bit the dust with pain. Devils lashed them with dreadful
whips. Fiery dragons gnawed some with ignited teeth ; while
flaming serpents pierced others with burning stings. Toads of
amazing sum and terror endeavoured with ugly beaks to extract
the hearts of many. Monstrous deformed worms, breathing fire
from their mouths, devoured some with insatiable voracity. Some
hung in sulphureous flames with chains through their feet, legs,
hands, arms, and heads, or with iron hooks, in a state of ignition,
through their eyes, nose, jaws and breasts. Some were roasted
on spits, fried in pans, or boiled in furnaces. Many were hurled
headlong into a fetid, tumbling, roaring river; and, if any raised
their heads above the surface, devils, running along the stream,
sunk them again into the cold element. A sulphureous well,
emitting flame and stench, threw up men, like sparkling scintil-
lations, into the air, and again received them falling into its
burning mouth ”
Thurcal, another traveller in purgatory, gives a fuller des-
cription, which, besides, differs from that of Enus in some im-
portant details, —so much, indeed, that it seems difficult to har-
monise them. How'ever, notwithstanding this or any discrepancy,
he that believes either can believe both. “Julian who officiated
fSi quis, post aooeptam justifioationis gratiam, cuilibet peocatori poeni-
tenti ita culpam re.nmitti, et reatum seternse pcenss deleri dixerit, ut nullua
remaueat reatus pa;me temporalis exsolvendse vel in hoe steculo, velgn
futuro in Purgatorio, Jntequam ad rngna Coolonnn aditus patera possit;
anathema sit. —Canons and Decrees , p. 54.


as guide on the occasion, left the body of Thurcal sleeping in bed,
and took only the soul as the companion of his journey to the
nether world. He wisely, however, breathed life into the soul-less
body, lest, in the spirit’s absence, it should appear dead. Having
settled these necessary preliminary arrangements, the two spiritual
travellers departed, at night, from England to purgatory. The two
disembodied companions soon winged their aerial way to the mid-
dle of the world towards the east, and entered a spacious fabric of
wonderful structure. This edifice was the general rendezvous of
departed souls, and was built by Jesus the Son of God, at the in-
tercessi' n of Lady Mary, his mother.
“ Many souls in this depot of spirits, and many beyond the
north wall, were marked with spots indicating their venial sins.
The Apostle Paul sat in the palace at the end of the north wall;
the devil and his guards sat without the wall opposite the Apostle.
A balance was affixed to the wall between the Apostle and the
devil, in which Paul and Satan, with precision and care, weighed
the souls. The former had two weights, which were bright and
golden; and the latter two, which, as might be expected, were
dark and smoky. When the beam inclined to Beelzebub, the
guards threw the soul, wailing and cursing, into a flamy gulf, which,
of course, was hell. When the beam inclined to Paul, the Apostle
introduced the soul through the eastern gate to purgatory, to make
compensation for its venial crimes.
“ Purgatory, according to our subterranean traveller, consists
of a vast valley between two walls, the northern and southern.
The entrance into this ancient domain is occupied with purgatorian
fire, caldrons filled with flaming pitch, blazing sulpher, and other
fiery materials, to boil or roast the souls for the expiation of their
sins. These furnaces also exhaled a stench which was not very
pleasing to the olfactory nerves; and which caused even the dis-
embodied souls that on earth had wallowed in filthy gratifications,
to cough, hiccup, and sneeze. Having enjoyed the warm bath,
the souls, for the sake of variety, were introduced into the cold
one. The unhappy spirits exemplified the variations of Popery,
and passed into a frosty pool, which skirted the eastern extremity
of the valley. The water of this pool was icy, salt, and shivering.
The spirits, according to their crimes, were immersed in this lake
to the knee, the middle, or the neck. Removed from this shiver-
ing situation, the sufferer had to undergo another trial : a bridge,
studded with sharp nails and thorns, with their points turned up-
wards, had to be crossed. The souls walked barefooted on this
rough road, and, endeavouring to ease their feet leaned on their
hands ; and afterwards rolled with the whole body on the per-
forating spikes, till, pierced and bloody, they worked their painful,
tedious way over the thorny path. Passing this defile was often


the labour of many years. But this last difficulty being sur-
mounted, the spirits, forgetful of their pain, escaped to heaven,
called the Mount of Joy.”
The teaching of the scriptures is directly opposed both to the
doctrine of purgatory, and to the view of the position of believers
as to liability to punishment on which it proceeds,—the view,
namely that, they may still, notwithstanding that they are in
Christ, be liable to a portion of the punishment of sin. According to
scripture, and in express contradiction to this view, “there is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus.” —(Rom. VIII, 1.)
And, of course, as there is no condemnation to them, they are liable
to no punishment. How could they be liable to punishment,
seeing they have been washed “in the blood of Jesus Christ,
which cleanseth them from all sin ”?—(Rev. I, 5. John, I. 7.)
And as the doctrine of purgatory is unscriptural, it was wholly
unknown, to the early church. It was only after the church had
greatly and in many respects declined from scriptural purity, that,
towards the end of the 6th century, it was fully inaugurated and
made an article of faith by Gregory the Great.
But though not a scriptural, still it is an old doctrine,
and the belief of it was widely diffused It was held by
the Greeks and Romans, and by other nations long before the
Christian era. The Greek philosopher Plato, recognised a three-
fold distribution of the dead quite similar to that with which
we have seen the doctrine of purgatory is connected, —namely,
the good, who immediately after death were received into the
region of the blessed ; the incurably wicked, to whom eternal
punishment was allotted ; and, persons of a middle class, charge-
able only with remediable sins, who, after this life, were subjected
to purgatorial sufferings, from which, when purified by them,
they too were admitted into the region of the blessed. Virgil repre-
sents the Romans, or rather their ancestors, as believing in pur-
gatory from the very earliest period, for he describes the sufferings
of such a middle state as witnessed by Aeneas in the infernal
regions and explained to him by his father, Anchises. The pas-
sage to which X refer, beginning with line iB6 of the sixth Book
of Aenaid, is thus translated by Dryden :
“ Nor death itself can wholly wash their stains ; _
But long contracted filth, even in the soul, remains.
The relics of inveterate vice they wear,
And spots of sin obscene in every face appear.
For this are various penances enjoined;
And some are hung to bleach upon the wind.
Some plunged in water, others purged in fires,
Till all the dregs are drained, and all the rust expires.
All have their Man&, and those Man6s bear.
The few so cleansed to these abodes repair,
And breathe in ample fields the soft Flysian air.


Then-are they happy, when by length of time
The scurf is worn away of each committed crime;
No speck is left of their habitual stains.
But the pure ether of the soul remains.’’
The description here given by Anchises does not go so much
into detail as those given by Enus and Thurcal \ it is evidently,
however, a description of precisely the same sort of place,—of a
purgatory, and a purgatory in which the same sort of sufferings
are endured, and endured with the same result.
In the Church of Rome, as is well known, prayers and offer-
ings are resorted to and relied on as a means of obtaining the re-
lease from purgatory of the souls detained there ; and the same
means were employed by the heathen for that purpose long before
the Christian Church was founded; and they are still employed,
for example, in Tartary. Prayers for the Dead, which prayers are
called G-urjumini, are offered there, and it is a notorious fact with
respect to them that they are very expensive to the living.
Among the Greeks a sacrifice, called a telete, was offered for the
dead, and it has been described as their “greatest and most expen-
sive sacrifice.” Among the ancient Egyptians the same practice
prevailed. “ The priests,” says Wilkinson, referring to the
Egyptian priests, “induced the people to expend large sums on the
celebration of funeral rites ; and many who had barely sufficient to
obtain the necessaries of life were anxious to save something for the
expenses of their death. For besides the embalming process,
which sometimes cost a talent of silver, or about L 250 English
money, the tomb itself was purchased at an immense expense ; and
numerous demands were made upon the estate of the deceased,
for the celebration of prayers and other services for the soul.”
“ The ceremonies,” on this occasion, he states elsewhere, “consisted
of a sacrifice similar to those offered in the temples, vowed for the
deceased to one or more gods (as Osiris, Anubis, and others con-
nected with Amenti); incense and oblations were also presented;
and a prayer was sometimes read, the relations and friends being
present as mourners. They even joined their prayers to those of
the priest in the leopard’s skin ; but various other rites were per-
formed by one of the minor priests to the mummies, previous to
their being lowered into the pit of the tomb after that ceremony.
Indeed they continued to be administered at intervals, as long as
the family paidfor their performance.
It is thus clear that the doctrine of purgatory was held by
the heathen long before the Christian era; that a correspond-
ing practice, particularly the offering of prayers and sacrifices
for the dead, was based upon that doctrine; that such prayers
and sacrifices, in the offering of which the services of the priests
were necessary, were attended with much expense. The Church


of Home, as we have seen, and aa is well known, has an exactly
similar system. I have also shown, although I have only
touched on this part of the evidence, that the entire system is
not only unknown to the scriptures, but diametrically opposed to
the view which they give of the condition of believers in Christ
as fully pardoned and accepted ; and it is equally opposed to the
scripture account of their corresponding prospects beyond the
grave. “ Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord” (Rev.
XIV. 13). ‘*We know,” says the Apostle Paul, speaking for
himself and his fellow believers, “ that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.”—(2 Cor. V. 1) Here
there is no purgatory, no room for purgatory. Instead of the
doctrine of purgatory, we have here an unspeakably more pre-
cious and glorious doctrine, —the doctrine that the believer, when
death dissolves the earthly house of this tabernacle of the body in
which he now dwells, will at once be received into a building
of God eternal in the heavens, —into the place prepared for him
by Christ in the many-mansioned house of Christ’s Father and bis
own. What a blessed doctrine for those who stand and weep
around the believer’s death-bed! What a blessed doctrine for the
believer himself who occupies that bed 1 Many a believer, in the
faith of it, has been enabled to say with his last breath and with
triumphant joy, “ Come Lord Jesus ; come quickly”, —“ Lord
Jesus receive my spirit—“ to die and to be with Christ is far
better.” Let us, my friends, thank God that life and immortality
have been brought to light as being thus near; and let us see to
it that our own relations to God and our character before him
may be such, that we shall personally participate in them
Before I pass on from this topic, let me place before you at one
view what has been now advanced. The doctrine of purgatory is
not found in the scriptures,—their teaching is opposed to it; the
heathen held it many centuries before it was embraced by the
Christian Church, and founded upon it or associated with it prac-
tices and exactions exactly similar to those which are based upon
it in the Romish system. Such being the state of the case, I leave
it to your own judgment and candour to determine from what
source the Christian Church derived it. There are only two views
that are admissible on this point. It either derived it from the
heathen, or reached it by a course of deviation identical with or
similar to that by which the heathen themselves reached it. In
either case the result was an assimilation so far to heathenism.
On the former supposition, which presents the actual historical
fact, this assimilation was the result of imitation and borrowing ;
and, on the latter supposition, it was incidental: but, on either,
it was equally an assimilation.


PARTICULAR INSTANCES OF THE HEATHENISM OF
POPERY.—USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP.
I now proceed to another topic, the use of images in wor-
ship. It is well known, and not only admitted but testified and
proclaimed by the Church of Rome itself, that images are largely
used in the worship of that Church. What it wishes to be re-
garded as its doctrine on this subject, may be learned from the
following extracts from the decrees and catechism of the Council of
Trent. “ Thq Holy Council gives it in charge to all bishops, and
others whoso office and duty it is to teach, that they diligently
instruct the faithful, according to the practice of the Catholic
and Apostolic Church, received from the eirliest times of Chris-
tianity, and according to the consent of the Holy Fathers, and the
decrees of the Sacred Councils, with respect especially to the inter-
cession of saints, the invocation of them, the honour due to relics,
and the ligitimate use of images,—teaching them that images
of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other saints, are to
be kept and retained in churches, and that due honour and venera-
tion are to be rendered to them ; not because it is believed that
there is any divinity or virtue in them, on account of which they are
to be worshipped; or because anything is to be asked from them • or
because confidence is to be placed in images, as was formerly done
by the heathen, who trusted in idols; but because the honour
which is given to them, is referred to those whom they represent,
so that through the images which we kiss, and before which we
uncover our heads, and prostrate ourselves, we adore Christ, and
render veneration to the saints of whom they are images.” *
“ The pastor will not only shew that it is lawful to have
images in the Church, and to render honour and worship to them;
but will also declare that even to the present day this practice has
been attended with the greatest advantage to the faithful.”)-
• Mandat sanctaSynodus omnibus Episcopis, etc®teris docendimunus
curamque snstinentibus, ut juxta Catholic® et Apostolic® Ecclesi® usum, i
primsevis Christian® Religionis temporibua receptum, sauctorumque Patrum
consensionem, et aacrorum Conciliorum decreta, in primis de sanctorum in-
tercessions, invocatione, Reliquiarum honore, et legitimo imaginum usu
fideles diligenter instruant, docentea eos... Imagines pon-6 Christi, Deipar®
Virginia, et aliorum Sanctorum in tempiis pr®sertim habeudas, et retiueudas,
eisquedebitumhonorem et veuerationom impertioudam; non qubd credatur
inesse aliqua in iis divinitas, vel virtus, propter quam sint colend®; vel quod
ah eis sit aliquid petendum; vel qubd fiducia in imaginibus sit Agenda, veiuti
olim fiebat 4 Gentibus, qu® in idolis spent suam collocabant; sed quouiilm
houos, qui eis exhibetur, refertur ad prototype qu® ill® repr®sentaut: ita
ut per imagines, quas osculamur,et coram quibus caput aperimus et
prooumbimus, Christum adoremus ; et Sanctos, quorum ill® similitudiuem
gerunt, veneremur. —Canons and Decrees, pp. 251, 255.
t Non solum autem licere in Ecclesia imagines habere et illis honorenx
et cultum adhibere, ostendet parochus, cum honos qui eis exhibetur referatur
ad prototypa; verum etiam maximo fidelium bono ad hanc usque diem
factum declarable— Catechism p. 311, „


This last extract teaches plainly, in express terms, that
images are to be worshipped. But, even allowing the use of them
in worship to be reduced within the narrowest limits, that can be
assigned to it if it is at all retained, it is still contrary to the
scriptures. The second commandment,* which the Church of Rome,
when it does not wholly erase it, mates part of the first, refers
to the worship of God ; and it forbids, in the most absolute man-
ner, the making of any graven image or any likeness for the pur-
poses of that worship. “ Thou shalt not make unto thee any
graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth.” The obvious meaning of ibis prohibition is that no images
of any kind are to be made or provided, for the purpose of being
in any way used in religious worship. It is not the use of
images as ultimate objects of worship, that is, as gods., that is for-
bidden ; for in the first commandment the divine lawgiver forbids
our having “other gods before” him, and it is not to be imagined
that he repeats that prohibition in the second commandment.
What he forbids in the second commandment is, the uses of images
as images or representations of the object of worship. But the
commandment proceeds further, and forbids the very prostration
before them, which we have seen the Council of Trent authorises
and enjoins ; “ Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them. ’’ If it
he objected that it is not to them that the worshipper bows him-
self down, but to those whom they represent, it may be replied
that, in the extract adduced from the Cathechism of the Council of
Trent, the rendering of honour and even worship to images is
expressly enjoined. But this evasion is not satisfactory to the
Church of Rome itself ; and it is probably to put the prohibition
under consideration as much as possible out of sight, and thus to
obtain some relief from it, that instead of rendeiing it literally
from the original, “ thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,” it
has substituted for this translation, “thou shalt not adore them
for, while it is too evident that “ bowing down to them,” forms
a part of its worship, it might argue, with some plausibility,
that it does not “adore them.” Still, however, notwithstand-
ing this modification, it remains too palpable that the use of
images in worship is forbidden in the second commandment.;
* For the sake of members of the Church of Rome who may read
these pages, the second Commandment is given here in full: — ‘ Thou shalt
not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any iking that is in
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth : Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them : for I
the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me ; and
shewing raerey unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my command-
ments.” — Exodus , xx. 4-6.


This the Church of Rome feels ; and, therefore, when, from the
circumstances in which it is placed, it is at all safe for it to
take this step, it erases it wholly from the decalogue. This
daring course, —for what course can be daring, than to erase
from the statute-book of God’s kingdom a law, which he has
given to us for the regulation of his own worship, —is adopted
in Dr. Butler’s Catechism, from which I formerly quoted. In,
that Catechism, at p. 36, the ten commandments are given as
follows :
1. “I am the Lord thy God ; thou shaft not have strange
Gods before me, &c.
2, “ Thou shalt not taka the name of the Lord thy God in
3. “Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath-day.
4. “ Honor thy father and thy mother.
5. “ Thou shalt not kill.
6, “ Thou shalt not commit adultery.
7. “ Thou shalt not steal.
8. “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour,
9. “ Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife.
10. “ Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s goods,”— Ex. xx.
Here the second commandment is wholly ommitted. It is
probably to cover somewhat without at all correcting or modify-
ing, this omission, that “ &o.” is appended to the first command-
ment; and, that the proper number might be retained, the tenth
commandment is divided into two. When, however, on the next
page, the question “ Which is the first commandment,” is put,
the answer returned is ‘ I. am the Lord thy God, thou shalt not
have strange gods before me,” the “ &c.” having wholly disap-
peared. Thus from the decalogue of the Church of Rome, as it
is exhibited in' this catechism, the second commandment is
entirely expunged. The same treatment is given to it in a cate-
chism, called “ Snort Christian Doctrine,” prepared by Cardinal
Bellarmine, by order of Pope Clement VIII, and published by
authority. In this catechism, said to have been translated
into almost all the languages of Europe, and to be the cate-
chism most extensively circulated among the members of the
Church of Home, we find the following version, or rather perver-
sion, of the ten commandments :
1. “I am the Lord thy God; thou shalt have none other
God before me.
2. “ Thou shalt not take the name of God in vain.
3. “ Remember to keep holy the festivals.
4. “ Honour thy father and thy mother.
5. “ Do not kill.
6. “Do not commit adultery.


7. “ Do not steal.
8. “ Do not bear false witness.
9. “ Do not covet the wife of others.
10. “ Do not covet the goods of others.”*
Here in addition to the omission of the second commandment;
and the division of the tenth into two, we find the fourth entirely
■changed to serve an obvious purpose. But we have to do at pre-
sent with the second commandment; whence this dread of it, —
this hostility to it ? It arises clearly from the conviction that
it condemns the use of images in religious worship. The Church
of Home has adopted and means to retain this use of images ; and
it knows that the second commandment prohibits it; and, therefore,
so far as it can, it withholds this commandment from the people.
Besides, the scriptures do not at all recognise the distinction
between images and those whom they represent or are intended
to represent. It is well known that the heathen regarded the
images they used in their worship, not as being themselves
their gods, but as representations of their gods; but the scriptures
wholly ignore this distinction, and regard the heathen as worship-
ing the images used in their worship. And there is the best pos-
sible reason for ignoring it, for, while those, who refer their
worship wholly to the true object of worship, worship Him
without the intervention of images, it ever holds that those,
who use images in their worship, worship images. To the view
that images used in worship, represented the gods to whom
it was rendered, the belief, that the gods, represented by them,
were more immediately present in them or with them, than
they were elsewhere, naturally and even necessarily attached
itself. Thus the images came to be regarded, not as mere images,
but ns images possessed with or inhabited by the gods repre-
sented by them ; so that, in any given case, the image and the
god whom it represented formed, in the apprehension of the
worshipper, but one whole, —one complex object; and to this
object his worship was rendered. Hence, as the belief, that the
image was possessed with or inhabited by the god of whom it was
an image, was a mere fancy, without* the slightest foundation in
fact, his worship, was in reality, rendered to the image alone. It
was rendered to the object before him, and the object before him
was simply the image, in no way specially inhabited or occupied
by the god it represented or by any god. %
In illustration of the idolatrous character which religious
worship, when images are used in it, will thus inevitably assume,
I beg to submit the following extract from Dr. Wylie’s “Pilgrim-
age from the Alps to the Tiber, or the Influence of Eomanism on;
• MomUfeism in England Displayed , p. Id I.


Trade, Justice, and Knowledge.”—(pp. 308—311.)—“ From
the Scala Santa in the Lateran I went to see the Santissimo Bam-
bino in the church of Ara Cseli, on the Capitol. This church is
squatted on the spot where stood the temple’of Jupiter Ferretrius of
old. It is one of the largest churches in Rome, and is unquestion-
ably the ugliest. A magnificent staircase of an hundred and twenty
four steps of Parian marble leads up to it ; but the church itself
is as untasteful as can well be imagined Entering by the main
doorway in the west, I passed along the side aisle, on my way to
the little chapel near the altar where the Bambino is kept. The
wall here was covered with little pictures in thousands, all in the
homeliest style of the art, and representing persons falling into
the sea, or tumbling over precipices, or ridden over by carts.
Those were votive offerings from persons who had been in the
situations represented, and who had been saved by the special in-
terposition of Mary. Arms, legs, and heads of brass, and in some
instances of silver, bore testimony to the greater wealth or the
greater devotion of others of the devotees. Passing through a
door on the left, at the eastern extremity of the church, I entered
the little chapel or side closet, in which the Bambino is kept.
Here two bare-footed monks, with not more than the average dirt
on their persons, were in attendance to show me the “ god.”
They began by lighting a few candles, though the sun-light was
streaming in at the casement. I was near asking the monks the
same question which the Protestant inhabitants of an Hungarian
village one day put to their Catholic neighbours, as they were
marching in procession through the streets, —“ Is your god blind,
that you burn candles to him at mid-day ?” The tapers lighted,
one of the friars dropped on his knees, and fell to praying with
great vigour. I fear ray deportment was not so edifying as the
place and circumstances required ; for I could see that ever and
anon the monk cast side-long glances at me, as at a man who was
scarce worthy of so great a sight as was about to be shown him.
The other monk, drawing a key from under his cloak, threw open
the door of a sort of cupboard that stood against the wall. The
interior was fitted up not unlike the stage of a theatre. A tall
figure, covered with a brown cloak, stood leaning on a staff in
the foreground. By his side stood a female, considerably younger,
and attired in an elegant robe of green. These two regarded with
fixed looks a little cradle or casket at their feet. The background
stretched away into a hilly country, amid whose knolls and dells
were shepherds with their flocks. The figures were Joseph and
Mary, and the vista beyond was meant to represent the vicinity
of Bethlehem. Taking up the casket, the monk, with infinite
bowings and crossings, undid its swathings and solemnly drew
forth ihe Bambino. Poor little thing! it\a»all one to it whether
one or a hundred candles were burning beside it; it had eyes, but


Baw not. It was bandaged, as all Italian children are, from head
to foot, the swathings enveloping both arms and legs, displaying
only its little feet at one extremity, and its round chubby face at the
other. On its little head was a golden crown, burning with bril-
liants ; and from top to toe it was stuck so full of jewels, that it
sparkled and glittered as if it had been but one lustrous gem
throughout.
“ Two women, who had taken the opportunity of an Inglise
visiting the idol, now entered, leading betwixt them a little child,
and all three dropped on their knees before the Bambino. I
begged the monk to inform me why these women were here on their
knees, and praying. “They are worshipping the Bambino,” he
replied. “Oh i worshipping, are they?” I exclaimed, in af-
fected surprise, “ how stupid 1 am ; I took it for a piece of wood.”
“ And so it is,” rejoined the monk ; “ but it is miraculous ; it is
full of divine virtue, and works cures.’’ “ Has it wrought any of
late ?” I inquired, “It has,” replied the religiose ;“ it cured a
woman of dropsy two weeks ago.” “In what quarter of Rome
did she live ?” I asked. “ She lived in the Vafican,” replied
the Franciscan. “We have some great doctors in the city I come
from,” I said, “we have some who can take off an arm, or a leg,
or a nose, without your feeling the slightest pain ; but we have no
doctor like this little doctor. But pray tell me, why do you per-
mit the cardinals or the Pope ever to die, when the Bambino can
cure them?” The monk turned sharply round, and gave me a
searching stare, which I stood with imperturable gravity ; and
then, taking me for either a very dull or a very earnest questioner,
he proceeded to explain that the cure did not depend altogether
on the power of the Bambino, but also somewhat on the faith of
the patient. “Oh, I see how it is,” I replied. “But pardon me yet
farther ; you say the Bambino is of wood, and that these honest
women are praying to it. Now I have been taught to believe
that we ought not to pray to wood.” To make sure both of ray
interrogatories and of the monk’s answers, I had been speaking to
him through my friend Mr. Stewart, whose long residence in
Rome had made him perfectly master of the Italian tongue,
« Oh,’’ replied the Franciscan," all Christians here worship its-
But now the signs had become very manifest that my inquiries had
reached a point beyond which it would not be prudent to push
them. The monk was getting very red in the face ; his motions
were growing quick and violent: and, with more haste than
reverence, be put back his god into its crib, and prepared to lock
it up in its press. His fellow monk had started to his feet, and
was rapidly extinguishing the candles, as if he smelt the un-
wholesome air of heresy. The women were told to be off; and
the exhibition closed with somewhat less show of devotion than it
had opened.”


The use of images in worship, as might be inferred from e
idolatrous character which, if it does not bear it from the outse ,
it will, as has just been shewn, necessarily and speedily assume,
was unknown in the early church. The New Testament contains
numerous notices of religious worship during the Saviour s per-
sonal ministry, and, after his ascension, during the ministry o ie
Apostles, and in no instance were images used m the wors ip o
either period. One feels, indeed, as if there were something ire
irreverence in connecting with that worship, even in thoug , a
corruption of which the slightest admission would have been de-
structive of its entire tone and spirit. I dare not propose e
contemplation of the Blessed Saviour in such a light, but thin
of one of the Apostles-of John, or of Peter, or of Paul pros-
trate before an image, and do you not feel as if a shock wer g
to the entire conception of his piety and his worship you have
derived from the scriptures? And as the use of images had no
place in the early worship of the church, attempts to introduce
them were opposed, first with entire, and subsequently with partial
success, until at last the second Council of Nice, convoked in the
year 787, established the use of them, protecting it with an an-
thema pronounced upon opponents. And even this decision i
not remain undisputed or undisturbed.
The following comprehensive sketch of the conflict, exhibits
in detail what has now been summarily stated ; and, while it affords
clear historical evidence, that the use of images is a foreign ele-
ment imported into the worshsp of the church, it furnishes equally
convincing proof of the utter baselessness of the pretended apos-
tolicitv and unchangeableness of popery.
“The ancient Council of Elvira, which sat during the reign
of Constantine, and therefore in the early part of the fourth cen-
tury, strictly enjoined, that neither paintings nor images repre-
senting the person whom we adore, should be introduced mo
churches. For this striking and undoubted fact the Komisti
Bishop of Aire would account on the principle, that the Klviran
Fathers dreaded lest the new converts from Paganism should un-
fortunately mistake Christian image worship for Pagan idolatry.
Let his solution avail; the fact he fully acknowledges.
“In the early ages then of Christianity, not only was the wor-
ship of images and pictures unknown, but their very introduction
into churches was expressly disallowed. Matters, however, did not
long remain in this state. Images and pictures, in direct opposi-
tion to the Council of Elvira, having at length been unadvisedly
admitted on the plea that they were a sort of books f °r the un-
learned, the idolatrous worship of them soon followed. About tne
end of the sixth century, a transaction of this nature took place at
Marseilles, and in consequence of it, Serenus the Bishop wise y
removed and destroyed the images. ..Gregory...speaks fully and


expressly against any adoration either of pictures or of images
* Omne manufaetum adorari non licet. Adorari imagines omni
bus modis veto.’
t( Thus stood the question at the close of the sixth century /
but, as might easily have been anticipated from the idolatry of the
Massilians, the introduction of images soon led to their adoration.
This gross abuse was strenuously opposed by the Emperor Leo the
Isaurian ; but, as it still continued to increase, his son Constantine
assembled a Council at Constantinople in the year 754, which
formally condemned and forbade it. ’
“The Council of Constantinople, though it agreed in its con-
demnation of image-worship both with the decision of Pope
Gregory the Great, and with the yet more ancient decision of the
Council of Elvira, was, on that very account, disowned as a legiti-
mate Council by the innovating successors of Gregory; and the
cause of idolatry rapidly acquired such a degree of strength, that
the second Council of Nice, which sat in the year 787, reversed
the decree of the Council of Constantinople, pronounced it to be
an illigitimate Council, and ordained the adoration of images in
language which strikingly contrasts with the express prohibition
of Pope Gregory. ' I confess, and agree, and receive, and salute,
and adore the unpoluted image of our Lord Jesus Christ, our true
God, and the holy image of the holy mother of God.
“Having thus wholly departed from her former self, the
Church, speaking through the mouth of a General Council’ had
now decreed the orthodoxy and legality of image-worship ; but
this decree was not long suffered to remain undisputed either in
the west or in the east. In the year 794 Charlemagne assembled
at Frankfort a Council of three hundred Bishops, who reversed the
decision of the second Nicene Council, and who with one voice
condemned the worship of images. Such was the solemn judgment
of the west, and that of the east speedily followed it. For in the
year 814, the Emperor Leo, imitating the conduct of Charlemagne,
assembled another Council at Constantinople, which, like that of
Frankfort, rescinded and abolished the decrees of the second
Nicene Council relative to the worship of images.
“Thus as both the east and the west had concurred in estab-
lishing image-worship, through the medium of the second Council
of Nice, so did the west and the east concur in condemning image-
worship, through the medium of the Councils of Frankfort and Con-
stantinople. But we have not yet reached the end of this strange
eventful history of multiplied variations; we must prepare our-
selves for yet additional changes of opinion on the part of a pro-
fessedly unchangeable and infallible Church. In the year 842, the
Empress Theodora, during the minority of her son, convened yet
another Council at Constantinople; and, this assembly, differing


entirely from its immediate predecessor, re-instated the decrees
of the second Nicene Synod, and thus re-established image-
worship.
“ Meanwhile the Church of the western patriarchate continued
to maintain, that the second Nicene Council had erred in its de-
cision ; for in the year 824, Louis the Meek assembled a Synod
at Paris, which confirmed the decrees of that of Frankfort, and
which strictly prohibited the payment of any, even the smallest,
religious worship to images.
“ The Church, however, of the eastern patriarchate, subsequent
to the year 842, persevered in declaring, that the decision of the
second Nicene Council was an orthodox decision, and that images
ought to be devoutly worshipped by all good Christians. To es-
tablish this point, therefore, an additional Synod was held at
Constantinople in the year 879; and the Fathers of that assembly
decreed the undoubted obligation of image worship, and confirmed
and renewed the decrees of the second Council of Nice. Their
decision gave such entire satisfaction to the Greeks, that they as-
cribed it to the peculiar interposition of heaven, and commemo-
rated it by a yearly festival, which they appropriately called ‘ the
feast of orthodoxy.’
“Nor did the Latins long withold their assent. The deci-
sions of the Councils of Frankfort and Paris have been consigned
to the owls and the bats; and the second Council of Nice, which
enjoins the adoration of images, is now universally acknowledged
to have set forth the true faith and practice of the Gospel.”
The facts are now before us. While images are used in the
worship of the Church of Rome, this use of them is not only con-
trary to the word of God, but known by that church to be so. Xu
exactly similar use has been made of images in heathen worship.
It is well known that this use was made of them in the latter,
thousands of years before it was introduced into the former.
Whence, then was the use of images derived when it was at last
admitted into the worship of the Christian Church?- It must
clearly h ave either been derived from heathenism, or been again
reached by the church, by steps of defection indentical with or
similar to those by which it had been reached in the older system.
The derivation of them from heathenism was the actual historical
fact; and the result, the same in either case, was assimilation so
far to heathenism.
111. PARTICULAR INSTANCES OF THE HEATHENISM OF
POPERY.—RELICS.
I proceed now to the subject of relics, as affording the only
further illustration I shall adduce of the Heathenism of Popery.
The doctrine of the Church of Rome on this subject, in its most


guarded form may be learned from the following extracts. “It
is to be carefully taught, in explaining this commandment, that
the veneration and invocation of the holy angels and of the blessed
souls who enjoy the glory of heaven, and the worship of the very
bodies and ashes of the saints, a worship which the Church
of Rome has always rendered, —are not repugnant to this law,”*
“From all this it may be gathered that, when we honour and in-
voke the saints, who have fallen asleep in the Lord, and venerate
their holy relics and ashes, the glory of God, instead of being
diminished, is very greatly advanced.”f In a decree from which
I have already quoted, the Council of Trent enjoins all bishops
and others to teach the faithful, “that inasmuch as the bodies of
the holy martyrs and of others who now live with Christ, were the
living members of Christ, and the temple of the Holy Ghost, and
are to be raised by him to eternal life and glorified, they are to
be venerated by the faithful; and that through them many benefits
are bestowed on men by God ; so that those who affirm that honour
and veneration are not due to the relics of the saints; or that it is
of no advantage to the faithful to honour these and other sacred me-
morials ; and that it is in vain to resort to the shrines of the saints
for the purpose of obtaining their aid, —are to be wholly con.
demned.”i These authorities connect relics with the veneration
and invocation of saints; and, as relics are material things,
it is only of beings that have sojourned on the earth in material
bodies, and that have thus sustained close relations to material
objects, that relics ean be pretended to exist. At the same time,
in a matter of this kind probability and even possibility will, of
course, be disregraded ; and hence relics of angels have been ex-
hibited.
From the nature of the case relics must occupy the same
place in every system of religion or, rather, of superstition, in which
• Verutu illud etiara in liujus prascepti explicatione accurate docen-
dum est, venerationem et invocationem 'sanctorum angelorum ac beatarum
animarum, quae coelesti gloria perfrnuntur, aut etiam corporum ipsoium,
sanctorumque cinerum cultum, qnem semper catholica Ecolesia adhibuit,
huic legi non repugnare. —Catechism of Council of Trent, p. 305.
f Ex quibui etiam colligi poterit tantum abesse ut sanctis, qui in Do-
mino dormierunt, honore affioiendis atque invooandis, et saeria eorum reliquiis
cineribusque venerandis, Dei gloria minuatur, ut eo maxime augeatur.—
Catechism, p. 306.
J Sanctorum quoque martyrum, et aliorum cum Christo viventium
sanota corpora, quae viva membra fuerunt Christi, et templum Spiritiia
sancti, ab ipso ad aetemam vitam suscitanda et glorificanda, & fidelibus vene-
randa esse : per quae multa beueficia a Deo hominibus prasstantur : ita ut
affirmautes, sanctorum Reliquiis venerationem atque honorem non deberi;
vel eats, aliaque sacra monumeuta, a fidelibus inutiliter honorari; atque eorum
opis impetrandae cans 4 Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari ; omnin6
damnandos esse. —Canons and Decrees, pp. 254, 255.


they are used. It is not necessary, therefore, to compare the place
which they occupy in the popish system with that which they
occupy in any heathen system, in order to prove, so far as regards
this particular, the identity of popery with heathenism. For this
purpose it is quite enough to shew that, while popery has its relics*
so also has heathenism. It will serve, however, to illustrate the
thoroughly heathenish character borne by popery in this matter,
if, in an instance or two, I compare the “invention” of popish
relics with that of heathen ones. As an instance on the popish side
I select the invention of the relics of Stephen the proto-martyr.
“ In the year 415, on Friday, third of December, about nine
o’clock in the evening, Lucian, a priest of the church at a place
called Carphagamala, was in his bed, in the baptistry, where
he guarded the vessels of the church. Between sleeping and waking,
he saw on his right hand an aged man, of sacredotal aspect, with
a long white beard, in a white stole, embroidered with golden
crosses, and carrying a golden rod in his hand. This venerable
apparition, challenging Lucian thrice by his name, commanded
him to admonish John, then bishop of Jerusalem, to make search
for, and to bring to light, certain sacred remains, which had long
lain in obscurity, and the discovery of which was peculiarly needed
by the perils and disorders of the times ; so that through them,
‘ the door of mercy might be opened to many.’ ‘lt is not,’ said
the apparition, ‘so much on my own account, as on that of those
interred with me, and who are worthy of many honours, that I am
thus anxious for the discovery of the relics.’
“ ‘ Who art thou, Sir ?’ said Lucian. ‘I am Gamaliel,’ re-
plied the vision ; ‘the same who taught Paul the Apostle. He
who is buried with me is my master Stephen, who was stoned by the
Jews and chief priests, at Jerusalem for the faith of Christ. The
body, after it had lain exposed a day and a night, untouched by
beast or bird, I directed to be removed by religious men, and car-
ried to this place, where I caused a mourning to be made fur him,
forty days, and where, at my own charges, he was interred.
Moreover Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night, is buried in the
same sepulchre ; he having been deprived of his rank by the Jews,
was nourished by me to the end of his days, and buried honourably
by me next to my master Stephen; where also I interred my dear
son Abibas.’
“Lucian entreated, that if this were a true vision, it»might
be repeated once and again ; which in fact happened :—Gamaliel,
appearing after an interval, reproached the priest for his tardi-
ness in declaring the matter to his bishop :—Lucian pleaded in
excuse his fear of being regarded as an impostor, or visionary-
In condeaension to this fear, the venerable ghost produced four
baskets; three golden and one of silver :—.the three filled with


rosea, white and red; the fourth with odoriferous saffron t—
signifying the relics, severally, of those who shared the same
sepulchre; —to wit Stephen, Nicodemus, Abibas, and Gamaliel's
self! At the third time of his appearance, the slighted- Rabbi
thus upbraided the incredulous priest—What excuse will you have
before God, and how will you hope for pardon on the day of judg-
ment for thy contempt? Go—go—tell the bishop to open to
us, and to construct a place of prayer—that by our intercession
the Lord may have mercy upon his people.’
“After a further vision, the scrupulous Lucian posted to Jeru-
salem, where he narrated all to the bishop, who wept for joy in
recieving such tidings, and commanded Lucian to return, and
make search for the sacred treasure; and if he found it to report
accordingly. —The search was made, the inhabitants of the village
having been summoned by the town crier to attend at break of day,
and assist in the exhumation. The search, at first fruitless, was
at length made under the direction of a ‘simple minded man,’ who
during the night, had also been favoured with a visit from Gama-
liel • —and success crowned the renewed diligence of priests and
people—Three coffins were found, duly inscribed in mystic style !
The news is carried to the bishop, who was then presiding at a
Synodal Lydda : he hastens to the spot with two of his col-
leagues, and proceeded to open the coffin of Stephen ; and at that
instant there was an earthquake! and moreover a sweet odour
■was suffused all around such as none had ever before heard of
orpeiceived! ‘Verily,’says the narrator, ‘we believed ourselves
surrounded with the delights of Paradise! Among the crowd
then present, were many labouring under various disorders (some
of which are enumerated) and in that same hour, and by the
sweetness of that odour, seventy and three souls were cured.
¥rom some demons were expelled ! After leaving, on the spot,,
small joints from the limbs of the saint—the relics, with earth,
were conveyed to the holy Church of Sion.
“ The invention happened at the time of a great drought; but
at the very moment o£ their discovery a heavy rain fell, and the
earth was satisfied; and all gave glory to the Lord for his holy
Stephen, and for the heavenly treasure of his mercy and piety
which, at the time of public danger, had been granted to the
Church.”- —Ancient Christianity, by Isaac Taylor, Vol. 2, pp
819-321,
Tkfc miracles which thus attended the invention of the relics
were the first of a long series. Of the subsequent miracles I ad-
duce the following illustrations:—
“On a certain day, says the writer, during the market hours,,
in our town, the heavens were suddenly overcast, and there ap-
peared immediately above us, a fiery serpent of immense magnir-


tude; an occurrence which the writer thinks consonant with cer-
tain scriptures, which he cites It was no wonder that, while this
monster continued to contort his sparkling length, as if in pre-
paration for a descent upon the devoted town, terror should reign
beneath, or that a general same qui pent should drive the people
to make their escape in all directions! The stalls are deserted-
business comes to an end, and many of the people rush to the
bosom of mother church —ad gremium eoclesise matris, for
safety.
“ In the first instance, we are told, they betake themselves to
the mercy of God the Father :—and then to the sacred oratory of
the Friend of God they also go, and there the old and the young
—men and women lie prostrate! Prayer was however offered
to Christ—the Christ of the Lord Stephen, ad Christum Domini
Stephani. Forthwith the said monster curled up his horrid length
among the retiring clouds, and the people were once more glad
and returned abundant thanks, as in duty bound to God and his
Friend !
“ But this is not the end of the story. —To a subdeacon of
the church was delivered, by a mysterious stranger, a vail on
which was an emblamatic painting in many colours, indicating to
the grateful people of Uzali the celestial rationale of their late
deliverance from the aerial dragon; and in doing so their devo-
tion to their illustrious patron was confirmed. This pictured
vail was hung up before the shrine of their great Patron. It re-
presented St Stephen triumphing over the monster, whom be
crushed with his foot! It was, says the writer, as if God, by this
picture, were holding converse with the people, and showing them
to whose intercession they were indebted for their deliverance from,
so terrible a danger." —Ancient Christianity, Vol 2, p. 330,
In our next instance we have not only the invention, but
also a sort of miraculous advent of relics. The following ac-
count is given of both in “ Kirwan’s Romanism at Home,” on the
authority of a book entitled “ The Holy House of Loretto” by
the Very Rev. P. R. Kenrick, V.G. “This veracious book,” says
Kirv'an, “ proves to the satisfaction of all the credulous that the
house in which the Saviour was born became early an object of
deep veneration ; that Helena found it at Nazareth about three’
hundred years after the incarnation; that it was carried by angels
through the air in May 1291, and laid down by them upon a little
eminence in Dalmatia, where it attracted wonderful attention,
and performed wonderful miracles of healing; that when doubts
arose as to its character, “ the Blessed Yirgin, surrounded by
angelic spirits,” appeared to Alexander, then priest of a
church near by, and sick of a violent fever, and informed him
that in that house she was born, lived, received the message of.


Gabriel, and conceived the Son of God. This vision appeared to
Alexander “ between sleeping and waking,” and when he had
a violent These, you know are circumstances under which
many besides this “ respectable ecclesiastic” have strange visions.
She moreover told him that the apostles had converted this'house
into a church ; that Peter had consecrated its altar; that, because
insulted in Nazareth by infidels, and neglected by Christians, it
was carried over by angels to Dalmatia ; and that, as a miraculous
proof of all this, his health should be immediately restored. “On
awaking Alexander found himself immediately restored to health
and his story was told and believed, and was proved true by the
miracle of his restoration ?
“ But the story is not ended. The Dalmatians were not long
to enjoy this heavenly gift of an old house. For some cause not
discovered by the profound researches of the “ Very Rev, P. R,
Kenrick, V.G.,” the house resolved to take another journey ! So,
on the night of the 10th of December, 1294, some shepherds, who
were watching their flocks, beheld a house, surrounded by uncom-
mon splendour, flying across the Adriatic, which separates Dal-
matia from Italy. The shepherds waked up their companions to
see the “ mysterious object,” and they all testified that “ it was of
a supernatural character.” It pleased “ the holy house” to rest
in a district called Lauretum, either from its laurels, or from the
name of the rich lady, Laureta, to whom it belonged; and hence
the name, “ the House of Loretto,” which it retains even to this
day ! Soon it became very famons in its new location, and tens of
thousands flocked to it for devotion and healing :
_ “ But the restless little house was not yet satisfied. The
faithful, who sought te present, under its holy roof, their offerings
to the Virgin, were often robbed by bandits. This greatly dimin-
ished the number of pilgrims, and, of course, the revenue of the
priests. To remedy this evil, it walked off to a small hill near
where the faithful might approach it without fear of
robbery. This new miracle greatly increased the public reverence
for it and the reventie. This hill was the joint property of two
brothers, who quarrelled about the rent they were to receive,
when, in the language of “ the Very Rev. P. R. Kenrick, V.G.,”
most extraordinary to relate, this miraculous house was once
more transferred, and placed in its present site, a very short dis-
tance beyond the property of the unworthy brothers.” And there
it remains to this present. ’’—Romanism at Home, pp. 82-83,
“This holy house,” Kirwan adds, “is about thirty-two
feet long, thirteen feet wide, and eighteen feet high, with a
chimney and a small belfry. The walls are of stone. There
is in it a small altar, the one dedicated by Peterand on it is
an antique wooden cross. On the right of the altar is an imago


of the Virgin Mary, with the infant on her arm, with the hair of
each divided after the manner of the people of Nazareth. This
image is surrounded wiih golden lamps, by whose constant glare
and dazzle it is somewhat concealed. The Virgin and Son are
most gorgeously decorated, and are brilliant with precious stones.
This holy image was carried to Trance in 1796, but it was brought
back with pious pomp ; and, welcomed by the discharge of cannon
and the ringing of bells, it was borne to the holy house on a rich
frame, carried by eight bishops, on the 6th day of January, 1803.
‘ And the miracles wrought by this holy house are numerous
and wonderful. It is hung round by “ the votive offerings in
gold, silver, wax, and other materials,” presented by those on
whom miracles were performed. Pietro Barbo was there miracu-
lously healed, and was informed by the Virgin that he would be
elected Pope. He was so elected, and assumed the name of Paul
11. He issued a bull, dated November 1, 1464, in which he
speaks of “ the gt&xt wondevs and infinite miTacles” wrought
by means of the Holy Virgin in this house. This house has been
the pet of many a Pope, who have expended treasures upon it!
And there it stands at the present hour, “ the most celebrated
sanctuary in Italy”—hung round by votive offerings of great
value, visited by pilgrims from all parts of the world, and with
a regular establishment of priests, sustained at an enormous an-
nual expense, mainly collected from beggar pilgrims. There
also is the “ holy porringer,” in which pap was made for the
infant Saviour, and which imparts wonderful sanctity to every
thing that is put into it! A small stone from this house has
been sold for many dollars ; and it is said that a poor little mouse
caught there was preserved with great artistieal skill, and was an
effectual preservative against diseases 1 !”— ld., pp. 84, 85,
The following extract, given by the same writer from “ The
Litany of our Lady of Loretto,” illustrates the idolatrous use
made of relics, and the idolatrous character of the invocation of
the saints with which they are associated.
“We fly to thy patronage 0 holy Mother of God; despise not
our petitions in our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, 0
i i -\t* • i ® *
ever-glorious and blessed
“ Holy Mary, '
Holy Mother of God,
Holy Virgin of Virgins,
Mother of Christ,
Mother of divine grace,
Mother most pure,
Mother most chaste,
Mother undefiled,
Mother untouched,
Mother most amiable, ,
Virgin!
hj
f
'-i
£
ce
Mother most admirable,
Mother of our Creator,
Mother of our Redeemer,
Virgin most prudent.
Virgin most venerable,
Virgin most renowned, f
Virgin most powerful,
Virgin most merciful,
Virgin most faithful,
Mirror of Justice,
►a
S»
•1
g


Seat of Wisdom, >
Cause of our joy,
Spiritual Vessel,
Vessel of Honour,
Vessel of singular devotion
Mystical Rose,
Tower of David, (
Tower of Ivory,
House of Gold,
Ark of the Covenant,
Gate of Heaven,
Morning Star, J
Health of the Weak,
Refuge of Sinners,
Comforter of the Afflicted,
Help of Christians,
Queen of Angels,
Queen of Patriarchs,
Queen of Prophets,
Queen of Apostles,
Queen of Martyrs,
Queen of Confessors,
Queen of Virgins,
Queen of all Saints,
P
V.
I S'
I-S
0
CO
>-s
ps
>s*
g
“We fly to thy patronage, O holy Mother of God ; despise
not our petitions in our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers,
0 ever glorious and blessed Virgin !
“ Pray for us, O holy Mother of God !
“ That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.”
Id., pp. 85, 86
I have already adduced in illustration of the idolatrous use
made of images in the worship of the Church of Rome an account
of a scene presented, and a conversation held in the shrine of the
bambino in the Church of Ara Coeli in Rome ; and I will now,
in illustration of the idolatrous use made of relics in its worship,
request attention to the following scene enacted on Good Fridays
in the Sistine Chapel, in the same city, as described in “ The
land of the Forum and the Vatican” by the Rev. Newam Hall.
“ The celebrant Cardinal laid aside part of his vestments, and from
behind the altar brought forth a wooden cross covered with a
black veil, which he then partially removed so that the top of the
cross was seen. At the same time he chaunted the words —Ecce
lignum, crucis, —‘ behold the wood of the cross,’ —the tenor voices
continuing ‘on which hung the salvation of the world,’ and the
whole choir bursting forth with Venite, Ador emus'- Come, let us
adore !’ when all knelt. The priest then came to the front corner
and uncovered one arm of the cross which he lifted up, saying
in a louder voice than before —Ecee lignum crucis I The same
responses were repeated, and again Pope, Cardinals, and congre-
gation knelt in adoration The celebrant than came to the middle
ot the altar and exposed the entire cross, raising it on high
with a still louder summons to adore it. And a third time all
bowed themselves, on their knees. He then laid it on a ohusioa
prepared for it in front of the altar. The Pope now rose
from his knees, and, while seated on his throne, was divested of
his shoes, his mitre, and his cope. Destitute of all marks of
dignity, a striking contrast to the splendour of his ordinary ap-
pearance, in the plain habit of a monk, and barefooted, he was
led by two bishops into the centre of the chapel at some distance


from the cross, towards which he then knelt. Rising, he walked
forward a few steps supported by the bishops, and knelt again.
He again rose and advanced to the foot of the cross which was
lying longitudinally on the floor, and knelt avain. And now he
perfectly prostrated himself before it, supporting himself on his
hands as he kissed ‘ the wood of the cross.’ Having left beside it
an offering, he resumed his seat. The Cardinals, Bishops, and
others followed in succession, barefooted, all kneeling three times
during their approach to the cross, and then prostrated them-
selves to kiss it.” After those prostrations, “ the whole choir
joined in the anthem— ‘ Cmeem tuam adoramus, Djmine’ —‘ We
adore Thy cross, 0 Lord !’ followed by a hymn, after every verse
of which, the chorus repeated the first verse commencing ‘ Crux
fidelis !’ This worship of the cross, for it was nothing short of it,
was most painful to my feelings. I could not but regard it as an
act of idolatry, the more distressing from its very impressiveness.
I know that ‘ enlightened Catholics would say ‘ though the
tokens of affectionate respect are given to the symbol, the homage
of adoration is paid only to Christ.’ But I cannot see how this
apology meets the case. We were invited to behold the wood of
the cross —and then to adore it, and this was done with all those
marks of profound worship which were used in the adoration of
Christ himself. Romanists defend prostrations to the altar by
saying that Christ himself is there in the transubstantiated wafer.
But greater homage than ever I saw paid to the assumed body of
Christ, was here paid to a piece of wood alone, there being no
host present in the chapel. If we are to judge of worship by
words and actions, I cannot conceive how to describe what I wit-
nessed, otherwise than by saying that the crosswas worshipped. I
cannot imagine any idolators paying greater homage to any of
their images. A person entering that Sistine Chapel, ignorant of
the religion professed, would unavoidably say, that he had been in
a heathen temple, and that the god worshipped was in the shape of
a wooden cross.”
Let it be particularly observed that there is here acknowledged
and unquestionable adoration of the cross, and thus a plain and
a direct violation of the second commandment, which according to
the Douay version expressly forbids such adoration : “ thou shalt
not adore them.”
Let us now turn to heathen relics. The following narrative
relates to Buddhist relics; and it exhibits, it will be perceived,
precisely the same kind of alleged facts and the same copious use
of the miraculous as we have just met with in the history of Romish
relics, “ I present the reader”, says Mr. Pococke in reference to
it, in his valuable work entitled “ India in Greece,” (p. 306)
“ with an extract of one of those abundant miracles with which


the Bud’hist Church is absolutely hung from end to end. It is
taken from the Mahawanso, a work of authentic standing in the
Eud'histic sacred books of Ceylon. It is the history of the inaugu-
ration of a relic, and the building of a shrine for its reception ;
acts of imaginary piety, for which the Bud’hists, in the highest
antiquity, as well as in more modern time, have been celebrated,
“ The vanquisher of foes, (Dutthagamini,) having perfected
the works to be executed|within the relic receptacle, convening an
assembly of the priesthood, thus addressed them : ‘ The works
that were to be executed by me in the relic receptacle, are com-
pleted ; to-morrow I shall enshrine the relics. Lords, bear in
mind the relics.’ The monarch, having thus delivered himself, re-
turned to the city. Thereupon the priesthood consulted together,
as to the priest to be selected to bring relics ; apd they assigned
the office of escorting the relics to the disciple named Sunuttaro
who resided in the Piyk Parawcno, and was master of the six de-
partments of doctrinal knowledge.
For the office thus assigned to him this disciple had been pre-
pared, in a former existence, —so the legend has it, —by witnessing
a stupenduous miracle. In his presence and in the presence of
many others, Bhaddaji, springing up into the air to the height of
seven palmira trees, and stretching out his right arm, brought up
a “golden palace, twenty-five yqjanas in extent,” from the bottom
of a great whirlpool in the Ganges to the spot where he was poissed.
Having restored it to its former position, and returned to his own
former position on board a vessel on the river, he again “ raised
from the bottom of the whirlpool the submerged palace, by laying
hold of it by the pinnacle with his toes, and, having exhibited it to
the people, threw it back there.” On witnessing this miracle, the
disciple of our narrative arrived at the conviction, “It will be per-
mitted to me to bring away a relic appropriated by another.”
“The priest S6nuttaro, while yet at his parieweno, hearing for
the first time the burst of the musical sounds which announced
the procession to be in motion, instantly diving into the earth,
and proceeding subterraneously to the land of Nagas, there pre-
sented himself to the Naga Efija. The Naga King, rising from
his throne, and reverently bowing down to him, seated him
thereon; and having shown every mark of respect, inquired from
what land he had come. On his having explained himself, he
then asked the thero for what purpose he had come ; who, after
detailing all the principal objects, then delivered the message of
the priesthood; —‘For the purpose of enshrining at the Maha
Thupo, pursuant to the predictive injunction of Buddho ; do thou
surrender to me the relics which have fallen into thy hands.’
On hearing this demand, the Nhga Efija, plunged into the deepest
consternation, thus thought, ‘ surely this sanctified character is


endowed with power to obtain them by forcible means'; therefore
it is expedient that the relics should be transferred to some other
place; and secretly signified to his nephew, who was standing by,
’‘By some means or other let this be done.” That indvidual,
whose name was Wasuladatto, understanding his uncle’s intention,
hastening to the relic appartment, swallowed the relic casket; and,
reparing to the foot of Mount Mfiru, and by his supernatural
powers extending his own dimensions, to three hundred yojanas
broad, coiling himself up, remained there. This preternaturally
gifted Nfiga, spreading out thousands of hoods, and retaining his
coiled-up postion, emitted smoke and lightening ; and calling forth
thousands of snakes similar to himself, and encircling himself with
them, remained coiled there. On this occasion numerous dfiwos
and ndgas assembled at this place, saying, ‘Let us witness the con-
test between these two parties, the snakes and the thero.’
“ The uncle, satisfying himself that the relics had been re-
moved by his nephew, thus replied to the thero, ‘ the relics are
not in my possession.’ The said thero revealing to the Naga Rfija
the travels of these relics from the commencement of their arrival
in the land of Nfigas,, said, ‘ Give up those relics to me.’ The
ophite king, in order that he might indicate to the thdro that ha
must search elsewhere, escorting and conducting him to the relic
apartment, proved that point to him. The priest beholding the
chetiyo and the chetiyo appartments, both exquisitely constructed,
and superbly ornamented in various ways with every description of
treasure, ‘exclaimed, ‘ All the accumulated treasures in LankS.
would fall short of the value of the last step of the stair in this apart-
ment ; who shall describe the rest ? The Nfiga king forgetting his
previous declaration, that the relics were not there, retorted, ‘Priest
the removal of a relic from a place where it is preserved in so per-
fect a manner, to a place inferior in the means of doing honour to
it surely cannot be right?’ Scmattero replied: * N&ga, it is not
vouchsafed unto you n&gas to attain the four superior grades of
sanctification ; it is quite right, therefore, to remove the relics to
a place where the four superior grades of sanctification are attain-
able. Tatthigatas (Buddhos) are born to redeem beings endowed
with existence from the miseries inseparable from aangskra
(interminable transmigration). In the present case, also, there is
an object of Buddho’s to be accomplished. In fulfilment thereof,
I remove these relics. On this very day the monarch of Lankk is
to effect the enshrinement of the relics. Therefore, without causing
unavailing delays, instantly surrender the relics.’
“ The Nkga insidiously rejoined, ‘ Lord, as thou of course
seest the relics, taking them, begone.’ The thero made him re-
peat that declaration three times. Thereupon, the thero, without
moving from that spot, miraculously creating an invisibly atten-


uated arm, and thrusting its hand down the mouth of the nephew
at Mount Mora, instantly possessed himself of the relic casket.
Then saying to Kalo, ‘Nhga, rest thou here,’ rending the earth,
he reascended at his pariewSno at Anurhdhpura.
“ The Naga Eaja then sent a messenger to his nephew to-
uring back the relics, informing him at the same time, ‘the priest
is gone completely deceived by us.’ In the mean time the nephew,
being conscious that the casket was no longer in his stomach, re-
turning, imparted the same to his uncle with loud lamentations.
Then it was that the Naga Raja, exclaiming, ‘it is we who are
deceived,’ wept, The afflicted nagas ail mourned the loss of the
relics.
The dcwos, assembled at to witness the conflict, ex-
ulting at the priest’s victory over the naga, and making offerings to
to the relies, accompanied him thither.
“ The nagas, who were in the deepest affliction at the removal
of the relics, also, presenting themselves, full of lamentation, to
the thero (at Anurhdhapura), wept. The priesthood out of com-
passion to them bestowed on them a trifling relic. They, delighted
thereat, departing to the Land of Nagas, brought back treasures
■worthy of being presented as offerings.”
It is evident from what has now been submitted, that, while
popery and buddhism, the form of heathenism with which I com-
pare popery in this instance, are alike in assigning a place to
relics among their objects of worship or religious veneration, they
make precisely the same ample and unscrupulous use of “ lying
wonders ” to gain credit for their relics. Now whence this re-
semblance ? Buddhism is, by many centuries, the older system of
the two. Did popery then reach its resemblance to the older
system by an independent divergency of its own ? Or did it reach
it by adopting what it found already existing in the older system V
It was, unquestionably, In this latter way that it readied it ?
“ From that country,” says Mr. Henry J. Prinsep,, referring to
India and its buddhism, in a passage to be afterwards quoted,
“ Christianity derived its worship of relics and working of
miracles through them.’’ This is the plain historical fact. It
need not be said that it con'd not have derived from the scrip-
tures either its faith or its practice with respect to relics. Nothino-
idolatrous can be derived from that source ; and relic-worship
and relic miracle-working have not been derived from it. If the
scriptures were let loose upon them, they would soon dispose of them
as Hezekiah, whose conduct in the matter is recorded with the
most marked approval, disposed of similar practices. “He re-
moved the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the
groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had
made j for unto those days the children of Israel did burn insence


to it; and he called it Nehustan He trusted in the Lord God
of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the kings
of Judah, nor any that were before him. Lor he clave to the
Lord, and departed not from following him but kept his com-
mandments.”—2 Kings, xviii. 4.-6. By the Bye, notwithstanding
this early destruction of the brazen serpent, it is still she*n, it
seems, by the inhabitants of Milan ! Nothing is too hard for the
power of working miracles and telling falsehoods that is exerted
on behalf of relics and in some kindred cases.
2. EVIDENCE OF THE HEATHENISM OP POPERY IN ITS ‘WHOLE EXTENT.
I proceed now, as I proposed, to adduce evidence of a more
general character, —evidence supporting in its whole extent the
charge which I maintain against popery. It is impossible here
within the limits of a lecture to go into detail. I shall in the
first place, therefore, present a few brief comprehensive statements ;
and I will present them in the words, that they may be supported by
the authority of others. And I shall then indicate the identity of
the characteristics of popery with those of heathenism. The first
statement I shall present is from Mosheim’s Institutes oi Ecclesi-
astical History,” and occurs in the chapter on the state of theology
in the fourth century.* “Genuine piety was supplanted by a long
train of superstitious observances, which were derived partly from
opinions inconsiderately embraced, partly from a preposterous
disposition to adopt profane rites and combine them with Christian
worship, and partly from the natural predilection of mankind in
general for a splendid ostentations religion. At first, frequent
pilgrimages were undertaken to Palestine and to the tombs of the
martyrs, as if thence men could bear away the radical principles
of holiness and certain hopes of salvation. Next, from Palestine
and from places venerated for their sanctity portions of dust or
earth were brought, as if they were the most powerful protection
against the assaults of evil spirits; and these were bought and
sold everywhere at great prices. Further, the public supplica-
tions by which the pagans were accustomed to appease their gods
were borrowed from them, and were celebrated in many places
with great pomp. To the temples, to water consecrated in due
form, and to the images of holy men, the same efficacy was as-
cribed and the same privileges assigned which had been attributed to
the pagan temples, statues, and lustrations, before the advent of
Christ. Images indeed were as yet but rare, and statues did not
exist; and, shameful as it may appear, it is beyond all doubt that
the worship of the martyrs, with no bad intentions indeed, yet to the
* Murdock’s Translation, p. 143, London, 1848.


great injury of the Christian cause, was modelled by degrees into l
conformity with the worship which the pagans had in former times
paid to their gods.”
Our next witness is Isaac Taylor, whose testimony has all the
claims to be received with confidence that extensive research, a
thorough knowledge of the subject of which he treats, and high-
toned integrity of character could confer upon it. The language
which he employs in the following passages is explicit and decided
in support of the position maintained in the lecture.
“ This varied ascription to the martyrs, of powers to help,
powers to heal, powers to punish, was enough. Whatever oblique
references might be made to the power of God, as the ultimate
source of these energies, the people—the ignorant and the in-
structed alike, crowded around the visible and palpable shrine,
where, as they were taught, the supernatural energy resided.
And before this shrine they knelt:—to the deity there present
they offered their supplications, and to him, when their suit was
granted, they offered their grateful acknowledgements—presenting
to the god some appropriate votive offering. In nothing but names
and titles did this worship differ from the abolished paganism;—
in nothing did it differ from the idolatry of modern popery,—
Ancient Christianity, p. 269, 270.
“The long series of alleged miracles now to be reported
were not merely in their abstract tendency such as to promote
among the people the habit of relying upon the aid of subordinate
divinities, and of rushing to their shrines-for aid in time of trouble ;
but in J act this was the direct consequence which thence resulted ;
an d their effect has been to fix upon the Christianity'of un-
reformed Europe a polytheistic practice, admitted by all who
now witness it, to involve what is essentially idolatrous. Against
this polytheism and idolatry the Reformed Churches, and, not last,
the Church of England, vehemently protest,...lt is of their very
essence to protest against these blasphemous superstitions.’’ — Id.
316, 317.
“ The points of resemblance between the waning paganism,
and the christianised polytheism which had taken its place, were
too many and too broadly marked to allow the analogy, or rather
the identity to be overlooked. The comparison which thence
forced itself upon all observant minds, annoyed and perplexed the
Christian champions; and they laboured to establish distinctions
which the common people barely understood at the moment, and
which they utterly forgot when they rushed to the fanes of their
new divinities to supplicate favours.”— ld. p. 336,
“ Well aware, as he was, of the fact that the gods of the
heathen were almost all of them Dead Men deified (Civ. Dei, viii.
26), he could yet see the people flocking again to the shrines of


e l)ead Men/ believed to possess miraculous powers of healing,
and to whom passionate supplications were constantly addressed; —
he could see all this, and not see that the slain paganism was
reviving with freshened energy ! How should not the people
abandon themselves to this new polytheism, when a far more ready
help was to be obtained at the shrines of the martyrs than had
ever been promised at the fanes of the gods ! — ld. p. 337.
“ So closely had the christianized heathenism of the shrines
and oratories followed upon the heathen heathenism of the paren-
talia, that Augustine, in this and other passages, found all his
ingenuity demanded to make out a clear case of exculpation for
the Church, when he had to do with its opponents. In the above
passage he denies that the custom of offering viands at the shrines
of the martyrs was general in Christendom; it had however so
firmly established itself in North Africa that (in a letter which
has been already cited) he expresses his belief that nothing less
than the authority of a general council could avail to repress the
evils thence accruing.— ld. p. 338.
“ Our martyrs might well be called heroes,’ says Augustine,
(Civ. Dei, x. 21.) ‘if ecclesiastical usage permitted the adoption
of the phrase.’ But although it did not, they—the martyrs,
not merely inherited the prerogatives of the hero gods, but were
the objects of a far more animated worship, and exercised powers
which touched the hopes and fears of mankind far more intimately
and extensively. This is an important point in the comparison
between the gay, sensual, picturesque, and poetic idolatry of ancient
Greece and Home ; and the profound, heart-stirring polytheism
which under the guise of Christian names superseded it. — Id. t pp.
338, 339.
“The Nicene demonolatory—the system of shrine going
was a far more animated and soul-entrancing polotheism than was
that of the dislodged gods and goddesses of the by-gone paganism.
“ In every system of polytheistic worship there has been a
localizing of divinities; and this same tendency was peculiarly
characteristic of the demon-christianism of the fourth century.
The martyr-god, as to his miraclous agency, was always fixed to
a spot; and, even if he might hopefully be addressed by remote
worshippers, they could barely expect his best favours unless they
honoured him by making a journey to his shrine. Slender in-
deed, in many instances, was the film of connexion through which
an oratory drew down, as to a focus, for the use of a province, and
fixed there the saint’s presence and favour,” — Id. p. 311.
“ To the mass of the people—the educated and the unedu-
cated, the shrine-worship—the invocation of saints—the venera-
tion of relics—the pilgrimages from shrine to shrine, in quest of
miraculous cures and other benefits, was nothing but a more pro-


found and deep working paganism, which, while it effectually
alineated the hearts of the people from the worship of God, and
put out the light of the Gospel, opened to the clergy a door of
gain and power, by means the most nefarious, and which could
not be resorted to without thoroughly debauching their minds and
manners.”— ld pp., 355-356.
These testimonies, —those of Mosheim and Taylor,—refer
chiefly to the corrupting influence exerted on Christianity by the
heathenism of Home and the West, and to the consequent as«
similation of Christianity to that heathenism. The testimonies
which I shall now adduce present this change as an assimilation
to the heathenism of the East, —of India and other Asiatic
countries. This heathenism, in the form of buddhism, was con-
veyed into the west, and, as adopted there, came into contact with
Christianity and corrupted it. Its peculiarities were largely im-
ported into the Christian system and incorporated with it; and
the result was, as Isaac Taylor expresses it, that a “ Christianised
heathenism” took the place of “ heathen heathenism,” On this point
the following testimony is borne by Mr. Henry T, Prinsep, in his
work on “Tibet, Tartary, and Mongolia ; their Social and Political
Condition, and the Religion of Boodh as there existing.”
“ The Boodhists of the West, accepting Christianity on its
first announcement, at once introduced the rites and observances
which for centuries had already existed in India. From that
country Christianity derived its monastic institutions, its wor-
ship of relics, and working of miracles through them, and much of
the discipline, and of the dress of the clergy, even to the shaven
heads of the monks and friars. It would require an entire volume
to compare in detail the several points of similarity, and to trace the
divergence, from the more ancient doctrine and practice, in the
creed and forms of ritual ultimately adopted by the churches of
the west
“ But independently of the similarity of doctrine, of ritual,
and of institutions, we find that Boodhism has run in the east a
very analogous course with Romanism in the west. Having its
classes of specially initiated and ordained teachers, it spread
widely amongst the populations, before it was adopted and made a
state religion by the reigning sovereigns The subserviency of
the temporal to the spiritual power was universally preached by
this separate initiated class; and, in presumptuous reliance on
their influence over the populace, priests in the east, as in the
west, have humbled and destroyed the kingly power, and occa-
sionally, when circumstances favoured the pretension, have es-
tablished a priestly government, such as we see in Tibet, in entire
supercession of the ordinary temporal authority, and have sought
to reserve the administration of all affairs for the special class of in-


Itiated or ordained. But the consequence in the east has been the
same as in the west. The priestly governments have been unable
to maintain themselves without foreign support; priestly domina-
tion has been found quite incompatible with energetic military ac-
tion, which always has been, and always must be, the source of real
political power. The great Lamas of Tibet are the protected
minions of China, just as the Pope of Rome is dependent to day on
France, and was recently on Austria, notwithstanding the rever-
ence in which the Papal name and spiritual authority is still held
by vast populations.—p. 163
Our next witness is M. Hue, a popish missionary, who,
during his travel and residence in Tartary and Thibet in 1811-
5-6, witnessed in person the heathenism of those countries, and re-
cognised with surprise its exact resemblance in so many particulars
to the system of his own church. Hia testimony, which is now to
be adduced, is borne in his account, —contained in this volume, —
of his travels in the countries just mentioned, and in China. A
summary of it is given in No. C X C of the Edinburgh Review
(April, 1851,) and that summary with the Reviewer’s comments I
now submit.
“ These volumes contain the most detailed and complete ac-
count of Lamanisra that we remember ever to have met with;
and they confirm, on the authority of these Romish priests them-
selves, the astonishing resemblance that exists between the external
rites and institutions of Buddhism and those of the Church of
Rome. Besides celibacy, fasting, and prayers for the dead, there
are enshrined relics, holy water, incense, candles in broad day,
rosaries of beads counted in praying, worship of saints, proces-
sions, and a monastic habit resembling that of the mendicant
orders. Although our worthy missionaries call ; the images of
Lamanism idols, and the Romish idols images, we do
the distinction is worth much, and therefore may throw in this
item with the rest; the more especially as, on the summary prin-
ciple of ‘inveniam viam aut faciam,’ the commandment against
idol worship has been thrust bodily out of their Decalogue by the
Romanists, as may be seen from any copy of the Missal. It is
remarkable that these very missionaries had an image made for
their own adoration, from a European model, at a place on their
journey where a huge image of Buddhah had just been cast, and
sent off to Lhassa. Thus the object of their worship was a
molten image, the work not only of men's but Pagan hands, em-
ployed indifferently for either Buddhism or Romanism.
“ The monasteries of the Lamas, resembling as they do in
so many respects those of the Romanists, differ from them on some
few points. The members are all subject to the same rule and
the same discipline ; but they do not seem to live to the same ex-


tent in community j and exclusive rights of property prevail
among them. Our missionaries passed some months in these es-
tablishments. Besides His Holiness the Supreme Lama at Lhassa,
there are Grand Lamas who derive their investiture from him,
and descend from past ages in uninterrupted succession. With
reference to one of these, it is observed:— ‘ If the person of the
grand Lama did not strike us much, this was not the case with
his costume which was exactly the same as that of the bishops.
He wore on his head a yellow mitre ; a long staff shaped like a
crosier was in his right hand, and his shoulders were covered with
a cloak of violet taffeta, fastened on the breast with a clasp and
exactly like a cope. Hereafter we shall have to describe the nu-
merous agreements of the Catholic worship and Lamaic ceremonies.’
“ M. Hue afterwards recapitulates as follows :
‘ The crosier, the mitre, the dalmatioa, the cope or pluvial
which the grand Lamas wear when travelling or celebrating some
ceremony out of the temple; the service with two choirs, the singing
of psalms, exorcism, the censer suspended with five chains and
opened and closed at pleasure ; the blessings given by the Lamas
extending the hand over the heads of the faithful; the chaplet, ec-
clesiastical celebacy, spiritual retreats, worship of saints, fast-
ing, processions, litanies, holy water, —these are so many agree-
ments between the Buddhists and us,’
“ He might have added, that they likewise have a goddess,
whom the call Tien-how, literally, regina cwU, ‘Queen of Heaven
but with a different legend,
“ Our author very naturally endeavours to persuade himself
and his readers that by some process these things have been bor-
rowed from his own church ; but why should we do such violence
to the subject, when there is the much easier, more intelligible,
and more straightforward course of deriving both from something
older than either ; and remaining persuaded, as most of us must
have been long ago, that the Pagan rites and Pontifex Maximus
of the modern Rome represents, in outward fashion, the Paganism
and Pontifex Maximus of the ancient ? Strange to say, instead of
blinking the matter, a sort of parallel has often been studiously
preserved and paraded, as when the Pantheon, the temple of ‘all
the gods,’ was consecrated by Pope Boniface to ‘ all the Saints.’ Is
it necessary for us to compare the annual sprinkling of horses
with holy water to the like process at the Circensian games—the
costly gifts at Loretto to the like gifts at Delphi—the nuns to
the virgims sanctw of old Rome—the shrines of ‘ Maria in triviis’
to the like rural shrines of more ancient idols—the flagellants
(whose self-discipline Sancho so dexterously mitigated in his own
case) to the practices of the priests Isis ? In running the parallel,
the only difficulty is where to stop


«In its modern traits, as well as in its ancient, Lamanism
maintains its resemblance to Romanism Prodigies and miracles
of constant occurrence come to the aid of the priesthood, and
maintain their influence over the stupid multitude. Some of the
instances adduced are palpable cases of ingenious jugglery; but
M. Hue, with characteristic facility, believes in the miracle, while
he attributes it to the agency of the devil:—
‘An entirely human philosophy will, no doubt, reject facts of
this kind, and will ascribe them without hesitation to Lamaic deceit.
As for us, Catholic missionaries, we believe that the great liar who
formerly deceived our first parents in the terrestrial paradise, still
pursues his lying systega in the world ; he who had the power of
supporting Simon the magician in the air, is still in the present
day able to speak to men through an infant’s mouth to maintain
the faith of his worshippers.’
“ Whatever Protestants may think and say of the means by
which the Romish Church has maintained and extended its influ-
ence over the masses of mankind, it is impossible to deny the
thorough knowledge of human nature on which all its measures
have been calculated The priestly array, the lighted taper, and
the histrionic pantomime, are aided by smoking censers, graven
images, and all the pharaphernalia by which so many temples of
so many different religions have been before distinguished. We
entirely agree with M. Hue, that the Romish Church has a fair
field for proselytism in the vast regions where Buddhism at pre-
sent prevails. In external forms, the transition is the easiest
possible ; and during his short residence at Lhassa, he remarked:—
‘The beauty of our ceremonies always appeared to us to have a
great influence on this people so desirous of everything relating to
exterior worship.’ ” —Edinburgh Review, No.oxc., pp. 411-414.
IDENTITY OF THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF
HEATHENISM WITH THOSE OF POPERY.
(supplementary.)
None of the false religions, that have obtained among men,
have been arbitrary inventions of the human mind. In every case
the fundamental elements have been derived, in part, from pri-
meval revelation through the medium of tradition, and, in part,
from the constitution and requirements of human nature. Having
thus had, so far, the same origin, they have, from this cause and to
a corresponding extent, exhibited uniformity of character. Re-
velation presented and delineated religion as required, intended,


and fitted to serve certain purposes; and man, from the intima-
tions of his consciousness and his conscience,—from his impressions
of his own character, bis relations, and his resources, —and how-
ever dim and, in some or many respects, erroneous the views by
which he was guided, felt the necessity of it to serve the same
purposes. Thus all systems of false religion, for it is with these
alone I am at present concerned, are placed, by the determining
influence of the sources from which they first issued on their posi-
tion and character, in relation to the same ends as means of accom-
plishing them, and are accordingly, distinguished by some sort
of adaptation to those ends, —by what is intended to be and is ac-
cepted as such. Hence the uniformity that pervades them ; and at
this point, evidently, we are to look for their fundamental prin-
ciples, and for their identity in respect of them.
We shall ascertain their fundamental principles, and shall
perceive that these are the same in all of them, if we determine
the ends which it is their primary design to accomplish, and trace
there adaptation to those ends, such as it may be.
The ends to be thus determined may be reduced, it will be
found, to those three, —that due worship be rendered to the
Supreme Being, that his favour be conciliated and secured, and
that the requisite qualification for happiness, especially in a future
state, be acquired.
As regards the first of those ends, —worship, in its essential
character and under its highest form, is the acknowledgment of
the glorious perfections of its object, and of his relations to those
who render it; it is the due expression of admiration and grati-
tude ; it is thanksgiving and praise. This is its character in
heaven. It was the language of such worship that John heard,
and acts of such worship that he witnessed, when, “in the
spirit,” he was taken up into heaven. Speaking of heavenly wor-
shippers, he says “ they rest not day and night, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come/’
and again, “ they fall down before him that sat on the throne, and
■worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, 0 Lord, to receive
glory, and honour, and power ; for thou hast created all things,
and for thy pleasure they are and were created.”—Rev. IV ,8,
10, 11, Such also must have been the character of the worship
of unfallen man. But, when man became a sinner, and a revela-
tion of mercy was granted to him, it was now necessary, in order
that the worship which he rendered should be the legitimate wor-
ship in his altered circumstances, that it should add petition to
thanksgiving and praise. This extension of worship as offered by
fallen man is due to God on the same grounds, on which worship
under its essential and original form is due to him from the holy


angels, and was due to him from man before be lost bis pristine
integrity. God bas called upon sinners to come to him for pardon
and all the blessings associated with it, and, from the very fact
that he has done so, compliance with this call has become a part
of the homage which they owe to him. They owe to him, as all
creatures who are capable of worshipping do, the homage of what,
as rendered by them and in their circumstances, is the legitimate
worship; and, inasmuch as they are sinners and such a call has
been addressed to them, the worship they render, must, to be the
legitimate worship in the circumstances, comprehend the prescribed
application for the blessings to which the call refers, —it must
comprehend petition. Besides, the blessings tendered are of such a
nature that by the due appreciation of them we honour God, and that
by disregarding them we dishonour him. And, while earnest ap-
plication for those blessings is a part of the homage which we owe
to him, the procuring of them is necessary, that we may be able
and otherwise in a position to render to him any portion of that
homage. Thus an enlightened regard to the glory of God, —the
disposition and desire, in adequate power and activity, to render
to him the homage to which he is entitled, —would lead us to make
petition a part of the worship we offered to him.
And, in view of our condition as sinners and of the fact, that,
with respect to the blessings which as sinners we need, God says
to us “Ask and it shall be given to you,” legitimate self-love will
also prompt us to include asking in our worship. Such self-love,
however, is not to be confounded with selfishness. The latter re-
gards the benefits to be obtained in the light exclusively of their
bearing upon our welfare, of which, at the same time, it takes a
low and contracted view ; but the ‘former proceeds upon the ap-
preciation of the excellency, by which, independently altogether
of any relation to our interests, the benefits to be obtained are dis-
tinguished, and prompts us to desire and, in the worship we offer,
to ask them, because they are distinguished by such excellency.
The one takes no notice of what they are in themselves, and regards
only the effect that, because it has been so appointed, the posses-
sion of them will have ; the other is first of all impressed with what
they are in themselves, and then, because they are such in them-
selves, prompts us to desire them, —expecting, it is true, high ad-
vantage from the possession of them, but expecting it, not unin-
telligently, or as the result of a mere arbitrary appointment, hut
from a perception of their excellency and of their adaptation to our
nature in virtue of that excellency. It has already been remarked
that selfishness takes a low and contracted view, and, indeed, it
often forms no definite view, of our welfare; with legitimate self-
love it is far otherwise ;it places our welfare, —I speak of welfare
as it will be realised in heaven, —in perfect holiness and the


highest holy occupations and enjoyments of which our nature,
qualified for them by perfect holiness, will be capable, namely, the
service of God as it is performed and communion with him as it
is held in heaven. It is evident that, such being its operation, it
implies the most exalted homage to God; and thus the asking to
which it prompts coalesces harmoniously, as a part of worship,
with thanksgiving and praise.
It became necessary in consequence of the fall that the worship
presented by man should be distinguished also by this further pecu-
liarity, that it should be presented through a mediator, and, as
there is but one who has been appointed and is qualified to sustain
and execute the office of mediator, through that “ one mediator.”
—(1 Tim. 11, 5.) That this necessity arose is proved by the fact
that an arrangement,—the meditorial arrangement, —in which it
is pre-supposed and by which it is met was devised and instituted
by God; and it oonld be shewn, that, on the commission of sin, it
must, from the principles of the divine government, have inevitably
arisen. ,
Worship, it will be perceived from the view which has now
been presented of its constituent parts and of the mode of access
with it to God, is liable to the following forms of corruption. It
may be corrupted by being offered to any other than the true God,
by such curtailment as would result from the exclusion of any of
its constituent parts, by the vitiation of any of them, and by the
substitution in presenting it of any other for the divinely appointed
and only available mediator; and it has been corrupted in all
those ways. As regards the second of them heathen worship may
be represented, in general terms, as universally corrupted by the
rejection of what I have called the primary and essential elements of
worship, and by the consequent reduction of it to an application for
benefits, and then by such a vitiation of that application as rendered
it the application of selfishness, and not that of legitimate self-love.
1 shall not at present trace the resemblance of popery to heathen-
ism which has arisen from this form of corruption in both.
The point to which, in the first instance, I wish to direct
attention is the corruption of worship which arises from its being
offered to any other than the true God. In dealing with this
point I will not insist upon the corrupting influence of erroneous
views of the character of God; I will only remark with respect to
it, that, under its operation, the object of worship may, and, in
heathen systems, did become a mere creature of the imagination.
But, whatever views the heathen entertained of the Supreme
Being, the great bulk of their worship was rendered to inferior
divinities. In the Roman Pantheon two classes of gods were pre-
sented as objects of worship. These classes were distinguished
by designations derived from those applied to the two classes of


senators, dii majorum gentium — gods of the greater families, —
and dii minorum gentium,— gods of the lesser families. The former
of these orders comprehended some twenty gods, twelve of them,
—six male and six female divinities —being called dii consentes or
complices, probably as forming the grand council of Olympus, and
the remaining eight dii selecti. While these gods were all of
them superior to the gods of the lesser families, only one of them,
of course, could be supreme ; and, viewed in relation to that one,
all the others were inferior divinities. The gods of the lesser
families again, while all of them were inferior to those of the
greater families, were themselves distributed into several ranks
and classes. Those called dii indigites,— native gods, that is, men
who by their heroic deeds and distinguished services and merits
were, after their death, enrolled among the gods and worshipped
—formed one of these.
Here, then, we see heathenism, recognise inferior divinities,
male and female, and among these distinguished members of the
human family deified after their death; and in popery we meet with
the same corruption, canonised saints occupying in the latter a posi-
tion corresponding to that of the inferiordivinities and, particularly,
of the deified heroes in the former, with this difference, however,
that the worship of the canonised saints is far more ardent than
that of the corresponding heathen gods. The Council of Trent
states the doctrine of the Church of Rome on the subject of the
invocation and worship of saints with the caution demanded by
the circumstances under which it was held, and, evidently, with
an apologetic rather than a didactic aim. In a decree from which
I have already quoted repeatedly, it “ gives it in charge to bishops”
and others to teach the faithful, “that the saints, reigning together
with Christ, present their prayers to God for men; that it is
good and profitable to invoke them suppliantly ; and, with respect
to the obtaining of blessings from God through his son Jesus
Christ our Lord, who alone is our Redeemer and Saviour, to flee
to their prayers, help and assistance,” adding that “ those, who
deny that the saints enjoying eternal felicity in heaven are
to be invoked, or who assert either that they do not pray for
men, or that it is idolatry to call up them to pray for us even
individually, or that it is contrary to the word of God and
militates against the honour of Jesus Christ, the one mediator be-
tween God and men, or that it is foolish to supplicate them, either
orally or mentally, as they reign in heaven, entertain impious
sentiments.”* The teaching of the Catechism of Council of Trent
* Sanctos una cum Christo regnantes, orationes suas pro bominibus Deo
offerre, bonum atque utile esse suppliciter eos iuvocare ; et ob beneficia im-
petranda a Deo per Ixlium ejus Jesum Christum, Dominum nostrum, qui
solus uoster Redemptor et Salvator est, ad eorum orationes, opem, auxilii


on this subject is to the same effect. Passages in which it is ex-
hibited have been already quoted. P. 23. Notwithstanding the
caution that, as I have already remarked, characterises the passage
now adduced and those referred to, they teach that the “ faithful ”
should “ invoke ” the saints, should “ pray to them ” and “ sup-
plicate them,” and should “ flee to them for assistance.’’ And,
surely, these are acts of worship. Is not prayer such an act ?
Especially, is not prayer to the saints, when the petitions ad-
dressed to them are intermixed with petitions addressed to God,
an act of worship ? Here is an instance of this kind.—“ Lord
have mercy upon us... Holy Mary, pray for us... St. Peter, pray for
us, St. Paul, pray for us.* Be merciful to us, spare us, 0 Lord,” &c.
It is true that the petition addressed to the saints, in this case, is
“ pray for usbut the addressing of this petition to them is
prayer; and it is intermingled with petitions addressed to God,
and forms with these one continued act of worship. Besides, as we
have already seen and as I will shew still further, petitions of a dif-
ferent character are addressed to them. In “ the Litany of Our
Lady of Loretto,” already quoted, pp. 29, 30, the following petition
occurs twice, —“deliver us from all dangers and we shall find
similar petitions addressed to the Virgin in passges to be now ad-
duced. The following occurs in “the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin
Mary.”—“Hail holy Queen, Mother of mercy, our life, our sweet-
ness, and our hope ; to thee do we cry, poor banished sons of Eve;
to thee do we send up our sighs, mourning and weeping in this
valley of tears. Turn, then, most gracious Advocate, thy eyes of
mercy towards us, and, after this our exile, show unto us the blessed
fruit of thy womb, Jesus.”+ The following extract is taken from
what is called “the thirty days’ prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mary
...by the devout recital of which, for the above space of time, we
may,” it is said, “hope mercifully to obtain our lawful request.’’—
“ Ever glorious and blessed Mary, Queen of virgins, Mother of
mercy, hope and comfort of dejected desolate souls,...take pity I
beseech thee, on mypoverty and necessities; have compassion on my
umque confugere: illos ver6 qui negant, Sanctos retema felicitate in Ccelo
fruentes, invocandos esse; aut qui asserunt, vel illos pro hommibus non orare ;
vel eorum, ut pro nobis etiam singulis orent, invocatioem esse idolatriam ;
vel puguare cum verbo Dei, adversarique honor! unius mediatoris Dei et
hominum Jesu Christ!; vel stultum esse, in Ccelo regnantibus voce vel menie
supplicare ; impie sentire.— Canons and Decrees, p. 251.
* In the* chain of petitions from which these are taken there are forty-six
similar petitions addressed to angels and saints individually by name, eight
addressed to sixteen saints in pairs, and eleven addressed to collective bodies
of angels and saints. — The Manual of Catholic Piety, by the Kev. William
Gahan, 0. S, A., 137 —142.
f The Manual of Catholic Piety, p. 222


anxieties and cares; assist and comfort me in all my infirmities and
miseries. Thou art the mother of mercies, the sweet eonsolatrix and
refuge of the needy and the orphan, of the desolate and the afflicted.
Look, therefore, with pity on a miserable, forlorn child of Eve,
and hear my prayer; for since, in just punishment of my sins,
I am encompassed with evils, and oppressed with anguish of spirit,
whither can I fly for more secure shelter, 0 amiable Mother of
my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ! thau to thy maternal protec-
tion? Attend, therefore, I beseech thee, with pity and compas-
sion to my humble and earnest request. I ask it through the
infinite merits of thy dear Son.”* If prayer is at all an act of wor-
ship, the Virgin Mary is worshipped when such prayers are ad-
dressed to her, and addressed to her, too, as "the hope and comfort of
dejected and desolate souls,...the mother of mercies, the sweet con-
solatrix and refuge of the needy and the orphan, of thedesolate and
the afflicted,” and even as " our life.” And not only are those
divine titles bestowed upon her in the prayers addressed to her,
but one of the prayers quoted is addressed to her "through the
merits” of Christ. She is thus exalted above the Saviour, who is
made to occupy the position of mediator between her and those
who pray to her.
Thus in popery, as in heathenism, inferior objects of worship
are recognised, and worship rendered to them. Both, so far, ex-
hibit the same corruption,—the corruption which arises from the
fact that worship is offered to another or others than the true God.
And this form of corruption is, from its nature, pervasive in its
influence ; it affects the whole of the system in which it obtains.
Religion ’throughout its whole extent has reference to God or to
gods; and, hence, as there is but one true god, polytheistic systems
of religion, —systems in which a plurality of divinities or objects
of worship is recognised, —are, from the fact that they are poly-
theistic, corrupt throughout their whole extent, and not merely
in some details. But the resemblance, in respect of the object
of worship, which popery bears to heathenism, is not confined to
the fact, that, while the one has its inferior divinities, the other
has, corresponding to these, its canonised saints. It is very ob-
servable also in the intercessory functions which both assign to
their inferior objects of worship. The petition most frequently
addressed to the canonised saints of popery is “ pray for me—pray
for usand it is especially, though not at all exclusively, by in-
tercssion, that the Virgin Mary is believed to accomplish so much
for those who invoke her. But the inferior gods of heathenism
also interceded with its supreme god on behalf of their favour-
ites. Virgil represents .Venus, one of those inferior divinities, as
praying to Jupiter for Aeneas and the Trojans in the following
* The Manual of Catholic Piety, pp. 150, 151.
K


terms :*—“O thou, who in the exercise of eternal dominion rulest
the affairs of both men and gods, and terrifiest with thy thunder-
bolt, what great offence could Aeneas and the Trojans have com-
mitted against thee, that, after they have already suffered so many
deaths, the whole world is closed against them in order that they
may be excluded from Italy ? Thou hast, surely, promised that
from these, —from the restored blood of Tencer, —the Homans
would spring in some future age, in the course of revolving
years,—that from them would spring leaders, who should exercise
absolute rule over sea and land. What new counsel, sire, has
changed thy mind ? With this promise I consoled myself in
my sorrow' for the fall and sad desolation of Troy, weighing
favourable against adverse fates. But still, already the sport
of so many calamities, the same misfortune pursues them.
Great king, what end of their toils dost thou grant ?” After
referring to the better fortune of Antenor, she proceeds, “ we,
thine own offspring, having, unutterable calamity! lost our
ships, are sacrificed to the resentment of one individual and
severed far from the Italian coasts. Is this the regard due to
piety ? Is it thus thou restorest us to our lost dominion ? ” The
following is an instance of the same kind, but presents a more ex-
tended and complete resemblance to the popish invocation of
saints and their subsequent alleged intercession. Achilles applies
to the goddess Thetis to pray to Jupiter for him; f and she inter-
cedes for him accordingly. J “0 Father Jupiter, if, on any occa-
sion, I have assisted thee among the immortals, either by word or
deed, perform for me this request. In answer to my prayer con-
fer honour on my son, short lived beyond others; for Agamemnon,
king of men, has certainly now treated him with indignity, for
he has taken and possesses the prize, having carried it off with his
own hand. But do thou, Olympian Jupiter, first in counsel, very
decidedly honour him ; bestow victorious might upon the Trojans,
ever until the Greeks duly acknowledge the merits of my son.”
It was a necessary consequence of the heathen multiplication
of divinities that the sphere of influence allotted to each of them
should be limited. Thus Jupiter himself, in the Roman form of
heathenism, ruled specially over the air and the upper regions, while
the sea was subject to Neptune and the infernal regions to Pluto ;
and, of course, in the case of divinities of less note and inferior
power, the local limitation of authority and influence was still
greater. The control and interference of individual gods and
goddesses were also restricted to certain operations and interests.
Thus Minerva presided over learning, science, and art, and par-
ticuarly over spinning and weaving ; Ceres was the goddess of
corn and husbandry ; Vulcan of fire and particularly of the forge,
* Aeneid 229. f Iliad I. 365. + Iliad I. 503.


and Bacchus of wine. There was also, on behalf of certain loca-
lities and communities, in accordance with the local limitation to
which I have referred, special confidence reposed in particular di-
vinities and special worship rendered to them as guardians. Even
each family had its special gods, its lares and its penates, and each
individual his genius. Places also were under the guardianship
of genii. This localising, distribution, and selection of objects
of worship, inseparable from the multiplication of them, obtains
also in the popish system. The Virgin Mary, from the exalted
position assigned to her, —for she is, practically, very much the
first and highest among the objects of popish worship,—is but
little subjected to the limitations which result from these processes.
She is not, however, wholly exempt from them. The heathen
title, which she has inherited, —that of Queen of Heaven, —borne
before her by Juno, the wife of Jupiter, and also, as stated in the
extract 1 have given from the Edinburgh Review, by a Buddhist
female divinity, while a title of honour and a designation ot the
most exalted rank, seems at the same time to indicate a limitation
of sphere. The distinctive territory of her husband consisted of
the heavens and the upper regions, and he was so closely' associated
with these in the popular mind, that in certain phrases bis name
is employed to denote the sky, the visible heavens, the air; and,
accordingly, when his wife was called the Queen of heaven, as
Proserpine was regarded as the Queen of the infernal regions, the
title, while it proclaimed her pre-eminent rank, may have also im-
plied the limitation of her dominion. But, be this as it may, the
title under consideration, as regards both its origin and its im-
port, is uumistakeably heathen. It could have originated only
in a polytheistic system, of which the gods and goddesses, formed
throughout on the model of humanity, were subject to some at
least of its earthly conditions, and thus “married and were given
in marriage,” so that, as there was among them a king of heaven,
and this king of heaven was married, his wife, as a matter of
course, was the “ queen of heaven,” for their marriage was not a
morganatic one, little as the husband regarded its obligations.
Thus, “queen of heaven” is a title furnished by one of the grossest
elements of the conception which the heathen formed of their
gods; and, yet, popery finds use for it and retains it, —a con-
vincing proof not only of the fact but also of the intensity of the
heathenism of that system. It is, further, worthy of notice in
this connection, that the Greeks called Juno Hera, a name equi-
valent to Lady, and that the Church of Rome, as if determined to
constitute the Virgin Mary the successor of the chief female di-
vinity of heathenism, gives her the title of “ Lady.” There is,
however, in the bestowal of this title, something still worse, if
possible, than an imitation and reproduction of heathenism.


Juno, naturally enough, bore titles expressive of her rank and
dignity as the wife of Jupiter. The very name Juno, a contraction
of Jovino, indicates her relation to Jupiter or Jove, And tho
Church of Rome, adopting the same mode of designation, regard-
less of the blasphemy involved in doing so, bestows upon the Vir-
gin Mary the title of “ Lady,’’ corresponding to that of “ Lord”
which is borne by G-od. It calls her “ our Lady” as it calls God
“ our Lord.” Could anything be more revolting than to bring
thus into contact with Jehovah a title which originated in the
conjugal relation of Jupiter and Juno ?
Relics are the great means of localising the popish objects of
worship. Whersoever relics of a saint are enshrined, there his
power is specialty exerted and his favours more successfully sought.
The Virgin Mary, notwithstanding the übiquitous influence as-
cribed to her, has been thus brought into special connection with
certain localities. Among these Loretto occupies a conspicuous
place. Saints of less extended power are more fully subjected to
this local limitation. To such saints, accordingly, exactly defined
territorial spheres are sometimes allotted j and the exertion of
their power emanates mainly, if not wholly, from particular
shrines. Some saints, too, are invested with the special office of
promoting certain interests and conferring certain benefits. Thus
St Blaise is the patron of wool-combers and heals sore throats.
Particular saints have also been chosen by communities and indi-
viduals as patrons. Thus popery in its objects of worship and in
its mode of dealing with them maintains a close resemblance to
heathenism,
V hen objects of worship are multiplied, inferior objects of
worship are, of course, admitted; and such divinities, from the
fact that they are such, and are, at the same time, numerous, can-
not well be worshipped always and everywhere. It becomes ne-
cessary to resort, to a great extent if not throughout, to the plan
of distributing time and territory among them, giving a portion to
each , and this arrangement will sufficiently satisfy any claim
that can be preferred for them. We have already seen that, so
far as regards the distribution of territory or the assigning of
local spheres to particular gods or canonised saints, such a plan
has been pursued by heathenism and popery aiike; and both
systems have pursued it also with respect to time, assigning cer-
tain days and seasons, the one to certain gods and the other to
certain saints. That popery' has set apart and distributed
among its canonised saints a great number of days to be ob-
served in honour of them is notorious; and under the older
system days were similarly set apart. Thus the festival of
Janus was celebrated on the Ist January; and the Quirinalia,
or festival of Quirinus, on the 17th February. The first of


each month was sacred to Juno, who was specially worshipped
on the Matronalia celebrated on the first of March. On the
18th of this month the festival of Bacchus, or the Liberalia,
was held, and the festival of Minerva began on the 19th, and was
held for five days. The festival called Hilaria was celebrated on
the 25th, in honour of the mother of the gods. Among the festi-
vals of April were the Robigalia, celebrated on the 25th, to pro-
pitiate Robigus the god of mildew, and the festival of Flora, cele-
brated on the 28th. On the 15th May, the festival of Mercury
was held, and on the 9th June that of Vesta. The festival of
Neptnne was celebrated on the 23rd July, the festival of Vulcan
on the 23rd August, and, to omit many others, that of Saturn,
characterised by feasting and unrestrained mirth, on the 17th
December.
Thus the canonised saints of popery occupy throughout a
position corresponding to that of the gods, particularly the inferior
gods, of heathenism. They bear a closer resemblance, however, to
the dii indigites or deified heroes, and to the lares or the spirits
of deceased persons acting the part of tutelary deities. Such
gods the Greeks called demons. Thus, when Paul “ preached
Jesus and the resurrection’’ to the Athenians, and some of them,
regarding the resurrection as a female divinity, said “ he seemeth
to be a setter forth of strange gods,” the word which they used for
“ gods” was daimonia, demons. This, accordingly, is the proper
Greek designation of canonised saints viewed as objects of wor-
ship and inferior divinities. Bearing this in mind, let us listen to
the following prediction. 1 Tim. iv, 1-5. I give, as more in ac-
cordance with the original, the translation adopted by Macknight,
Bishop Newton, Townsend, Boothroyd, and others. “ Now the
Spirit saith expressly that, in the latter times some will apostatise
from the faith, giving heed to deceiving spirits, and to doctrines
concerning demons, through the hypocresy of liars, of those whose
conscience is seared with a hot iron, who will forbid to marry,
and command to abstain from meats, which God hath created to
be partaken of with thanksgiving, by those who believe and know
the truth ; for every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be
refused if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by
the woid of God and prayer.” Here we find an apostacy from
the faith predicted and described; and can any one fail to recog-
nise popery in the description of it? The prediction states how
those who should apostatise would do so, —they would apostatise,
“ giving heed to seducing spirits and to doctrines concerning de-
mons and then it intimates further how they would come to
give heed to these, —“ through the hypocrisy of liars,” and of
liars qualified for their hateful work by having their “ conscience
Beared with a hot iron,” and who would “ forbid to marry and com-


mand to abstain from meats.” Here wo Lave two parties distin-
guished,—the “ liars,” and those who “ would apostatise through
their hypocrisy.” Now, in the first place, it is notorious that
those, who occupy in the popish system, at least in respect of au-
thority and influence and as being the leaders, the same place as
the “ liars” were to occupy in connection with the predicted apos-
tacy, “ forbid to marry and command to abstain from meats,” as
it was predicted the liars would do. And, then, further, though
not equally patent to all, it is well known to those, who are ac-
quainted with the history of this subject, that those same leaders
have, in a variety of ways, to an almost incredible extent, and
with consummate ‘‘hypocrisy,” acted the part of “liars” in main-
taining and promoting popery, —forging documents when none
were extant that would serve their purpose, corrupting extant
documents by interpolations, substitutions, and omissions, ex-
hibiting and relating pretended miracles, such as the winking of
Madonnas and the liquefying of the blood of St. Januarius, alleg-
ing that they had been favoured with visions which they never
saw, and, in all sorts of ways, misstating, misrepresenting, and
distorting facts. Of the unscrupulous and unsparing use that is
made of this species of testimony, the Rev. Mr. Kenny’s alleged
quotation, in one of his recent letters, from Jeremy Taylor’s Liberty
of Prophesying affords an instance. Jeremy Taylor’s words are,
“ but we find (says the Romanist) in the history of the Maccabees,
that the Jews did pray and make offerings for the dead,”&c., and
by omitting “ says the Romanist” Mr. Kenny, as several others
did before him, makes it appear that the writer, instead of ex-
pressing, as he does, the sentiments of papists, expresses his own.
This is very gross ■ but, still, it presents only an average specimen of
the use made of falsehood in the service of the Romish apostacy.
While the leaders in the apostacy predicted in our passage would
act the part of “ liars,” they would do so under the closest con-
cealment and with the highest pretensions of “ hypocrisy,” This
feature again is exhibited in full developement by the popish sys-
tem. Those who bear rule under this system and enjoin its er.
rors are, every one of them, “ lies” and all notwithstanding, at
least if you accept their own representations as sufficient evidence
in the case, very holy. Cardinal Bellarmine, for instance, in his
“ Short Christian Doctrine” omits the second commandment
wholly, substitutes for the fourth “ Keep holy the Jestwah,” and
to keep up an appearance of having ten commandments divides
the tenth into two ;* and then coolly gives the result of this mu-
tilating and adulterating- process as the ten commandments which
Grod had written twice with his own finger on tables of stone. In
this, there was, of course, audacious falsehood, but all the while
* See p. 17, of this Lecture.


sind notwithstanding, Bellarmine pretended to great holiness. The
“ Short Christian Doctrine” was prepared by order of Pope
Clement YIII, and published by authority, but still, Pope Cle-
ment VIII and all concerned, parties as they were to the false-
hood perpetrated, pretended to great holiness. This hypocritical
pretence,—for hypocritical it must have been under the circum-
stances, —was necessary to impart efficacy to the falsehood ; and
thus, those, who were deceived by the forgery, as thousands were,
were deceived, in exact fulfilment of the prediction, “ through
the hypocrisy of liars.” *
This combination of falsehood and high pretension to holiness
implies and must increase “searedness of conscience” ; and other
evidences of this state of conscience, on the part of the chiefs
and agents of popery, are furnished by the history of that system
in appalling abundance.
So far popery corresponds exactly, feature for feature, to the
predicted apostaoy. We now come to the peculiarity of that apos-
tacy with which we are at present more immediately concerned.
Those who should be involved in the apostacy would “give heed
to doctrines’ concerning demons” ; and we have already seen that
the adherents of popery do so. They are taught to worship saints,
who, as has been shown, occupy the same place in the popish
system as the gods, called demons by the Greeks, occupied in the
form of heathenism which we examined with regard to this point,
and who, therefore, if a Greek designation is to be applied to
them, as it is in the prophecy, are themselves properly called
“ demons and “ they give heed ”to this teaching, and, accord-
ingly, worship those “demons.” Thus, as regards the corruption
which I have been illustrating, namely, saint or “ demon” wor-
ship, and in every other particular, popery answers to the descrip-
tion given of the apostacy predicted in 1 Tim. iv. 1-5.
In this passage, as has now been shown, the origin of the de-
monolatry of popery is predicted. The following passage, Rev.
ix. 20, 21, predicts the obstinate retention of it. “ And the rest
of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils,
[demons] and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of
The reader’s ideas of this popish holiness may be rendered more
defmile by the following additional illustration of it. “ The little cardinal,’’
—then sixteen years of age,—“felt somewhat awkward at first, when he
found himself in the consistory in questionable company,”—namely, that
of the other cardinals ; “ the debauchee, the man of war, the hypocrite,
were well represented in that body. Riceno, who helped to kill his uncle,
and wished to kill his father, sat near him, and always turned pale when the
young Medici looked on him.” Italy in the Nineteenth Centurv. By
James Whiteside, M. P. L.L. D. p. 99. London, 1860. On the same page
this writer states, “ Lorenzo .... married his daughter to a son, with shame
be it spoken, of the Pope himself,” His Holiness Innocent VIII.


wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk : neither re*
peiited they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornication, nor of their thefts,” Mr. Scott in his commentary re-
marks on this passage, “ the Latin or Romish Church, which es-
caped this destruction,” —that predicted in the proceeding context,
—“still persisted in the idolatrous worship of demons, or angels
and departed saints, real or fictitious, by which devils are virtually
worshipped, in their stupid adoration of senseless images, for which
they have no better plea to use than the Pagans had, in their mur-
ders, massacres, and bloody wars with heretics, so called, and their
execrable persecutions, in their ‘ sorceries,’ or pretended revelations
and miracles, and in their ‘ fornications,’ forbidding marriage, yet
conniving at concubinage in the clergy, binding numbers by vows
to a single life, and yet licensing brothels by public authority
of the Pope, in Rome itself, and in ‘ their thefts,’ or those exac-
tions and impositions, by which they fraudulently, oppressively,
and iniquitously drew immense treasures from the nations.’’
* have already, in these supplementary remarks, exceeded the
limits I bad prescribed to myself, and must therefore, which I re-
gret, bring them to a close, without treating, as I had intended,
of the popish corruption of the gospel by the adoption of unscrip-
tural views with respect both to justification and sanctification. I
may, however, have an early opportunity of bestowing on those
fundamentally important subjects the discussion which I must
now defer.
CONCLUSION.
I have now, I conceive, presented ample proof that popery is,
as I have alleged, largely impregnated with heathen elements.
The facts thus evinced and established cannot be overlooked with
safety or without sin either by Protestants or by members of the
Church of Rome. The system in which they are presented is
necessarily, from the character which they impress upon it, highly
dishonouring to God, in direct and powerful antagonism to the
Redeemer’s cause, and, to an extent that cannot be adequately de-
plored, pernicious to the souls of men. What attitude ought Pro-
testants to maintain towards such a system ? Ought they to smile
upon it and virtually bid it God speed ? Ought they to conceal
its deformity and its destructive operation by throwing over it
the veil of complimentary designations ? Ought they not, on the
contrary, to regard it with horror and abhorrence ? Ought not
zeal for the glory of God, devotion to the cause of Christ, and
love to the souls of men to prompt and impel them to use with all
their might all legitimate means in their power, to arrest its deadly
activity and to banish it from the earth ? And of course upon
those who adhere to it a corresponding duty devolves. That they


may discharge that duty, let them follow the example of the
Bereans, whom the sacred writer pronounces “ more noble than
those in Theesalonia, in that they received the word with all readi-
ness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those
things ” which were spoken by Paul and Silas “ were so.” (Acta
XVII. 11.) Let the ns act the same part; let them, in the same
spirit and with the same view,“search the scriptures,’’undeterred by
the monstrous requirement that they do not not understand them.
The scriptures are a revelation, —a revelation given to us by God ;
and how could they be a revelation, if they did not reveal, —if, in-
stead of making known to the humble earnest inquirer the way
of salvation, they were unintelligible to him ? But they are a
revelation ; and let the members of the Church of Rome, let all,
treat them as such, coming to them for instruction, or, rather,
coming for instruction to God, as in great love and condescension
he speaks in them to the children of men. If they pursue this
course, they too shall hear what John heard, “a voice from heaven
saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniqui-
ties.” (Rev. XVIII, 4,5.)
0
I regret that my intention in dividing the lecture into sections has
been to some extent frustrated by typographical errors in the
titles and numbers of them, which escaped my notice when the
proofs passed through my hands. Those errors are corrected in
the following table of contents.
PREFACE HI.
I. PRELIMINARY REMARKS 1.
1. OCCASION OF THE DELIVERY OF THE LECTURE 1.
2. DESIGNATIONS APPLIED TO THE CHURCH OF ROME,
ITS CREED, AND ITS PEOPLE 1.
3. RELATIONS OF POPERY TO THE SCRIPTURES. 3.
11. PARTICULAR PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
OF THE HEATHENISM OF POPERY 8.
1. PURGATORY jj
2. USE OF IMAGES IN WORSHIP J 5.
3. RELICS,,.. ........9.,,,,,,,,,,,..,,,,..... 23
111. EVIDENCE OF THE HEATHENISM OF
POPERY IN ITS WHOLE EXTENT 35.
1. TESTIMONY OF SEVERAL WRITERS 35,
2. IDENTITY OF THE CHARACTERISTIC PRINCIPLES OF
HEATHENISM WITH THOSE OP POPERY 41
IV. CONCLUSION 54.
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.
