

The DAYS THAT
ARE NO MORE
by
D.Mundy


Here is a companion volume to
“There’s Gold in Them Hills,” whose
author, Donald Mundy, now draws
on his store of memories to relate
more of the episodes and adventures
which were crowded into his life of
wandering in Australia and New
Zealand.
Told simply and without forced
dramatisation, they blend into a life
story of the kind which is all too
rarely recorded in book form, be-
cause such a task is one which few
men of Mr Mundy’s rugged back-
ground could set themselves to and
successfully accomplish.
A boyhood on a pioneer farm settle-
ment in Australia, harried by four
unsympathetic elder brothers;
rovings in search of better fortune
away from home; passage to New
Zealand, bringing experience in the
hard school of gold mining and
timber working on the West Coast,
in Nelson and Marlborough; odd
jobs of many kinds in many places
—these are the background of Mr
Mundy’s life.
Among the most intriguing parts
of his story are the chapters deal-
ing with those men of persuasive
tongue, always to be found where
simple, honest toilers were gath-
ered, who sought to live by exploit-
ing the credulity and weakness of
their fellows. His encounters with
such men, and with many other
odd characters good men and
rogues, bullies and fools —are de-
scribed with candour and quiet
humour.
[Continued on back jiap
PRICE 6/-


THE DAYS THAT ARE NO MORE
THE AUTHOR


PRINTED BY
THE MARLBOROUGH EXPRESS NEWSPAPER CO. LTD.
BLENHEIM, NEW ZEALAND.
Written 1950. First Published 1953.
Published by Donald Mundy,
Renwick, Marlborough, New Zealand.


The DAYS THAT are
NO MORE
by
DONALD MUNDY


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
“SEAGULL AND THE BODY SNATCHER”
“WHO DISCOVERED PENICILLIN”
“THERE’S GOLD IN THEM HILLS”


CHAPTER I
BOYHOOD ON THE SNOWY RIVER
WHEN we shifted down to the Snowy River from
Buchan there was no road of any consequence
leading in or out from our Selection, but the
Snowy was navigable all the way to its mouth,
sixteen miles from our home, where a small wharf
existed and a public house stood on top of the hill.
This place was called Mario, and travelling along
the coast towards New South Wales, a place called
Genoa is reached, and then Twofold Bay.
Now the nearest town to our place was Orbost,
six miles down the river, and my father, being a
business man, had brought a pit-saw with him and
immediately set to work at what was known as pit-
sawing timber. In cutting timber in this manner
a pit is dug and a stand or frame is erected above
it, and the log is barked, sometimes squared, and
then placed upon the stand. A cord is then dipped
into a coloured solution of some kind; powdered
charcoal mixed in water was generally used. The
cord is then stretched and fastened at each end of
the log,, then lifted at the centre and let go to strike
the log smartly, leaving a mark which the saw has
to follow. The log is lined on both sides like this
and then two men start to saw it into boards. One
man in the pit pulls the saw down, which only cuts
one way, that is, on the downstroke, then the man
on top lifts the saw up for the next stroke, and the
man in the pit although getting a shower of sawdust
each time the saw comes down, must, at the same
time, keep his eye on the line to see that the saw is
travelling in the right direction.
Our father was generally referred to as “old Fred
Mundy” by the public for the purpose of avoiding
confusion, as he also had a son Fred who was very


much like him. It was either Old Fred, or Young
Fred, and any of the family referring to Old Fred
would either call him the old fellow or the old man.
Now the old man wanted an easy means of getting
supplies from the homestead to Orbost, and from
Orbost to the homestead, so he set to work pit-sawing
timber to build a boat, which, when finished, was
named the Black Swan. My brothers used to tell
me some sad stories about their partnership with
the old man when sawing the timber for the Black
Swan. As a matter of fact the oldest boy would
not be old enough or strong enough for that class
of work; but that wouldn’t and didn’t trouble the
old man, as he used the whip on his wife and family
just as ruthlessly as he would upon a wild animal.
To make a long story short, the whole family was
afraid of him and actually hated him, and when he
died some years later nobody was made unhappy
and no tears were shed. However, the old man was
a handy man as most pioneers were in those days.
He cut the timber and built the boat, which was a
four-oared outfit. I suppose he planned that with
the lay of the family, the four eldest being boys, and
they would be expected to man the boat, which they
later on did.
I can just remember our first trip to Orbost. I
was given an empty match-box and I lost it over
the side. After our father went to Western
Australia in 1888, the Black Swan was hauled up
on to the bank and was parked there in dry dock
and never used except in flood time. An old man
flood arrived and the boys didn’t get a chance to
launch the Swan which was swept away into the
night. When the river was in flood my brothers,
who had grown up to be big strong men, used to
launch the boat and go down the river with the
object of rescuing anyone who might be surrounded
by water. The last trip the Swan made, my
brothers pulled downstream about three miles and
called at a Chinaman’s house, but could get no reply,
the place being deserted. This Chinaman was a
maize farmer, and he had a bam about a half mile


further downstream, so my brothers pulled on down
to the barn. The Chinaman was there, but he
wouldn’t get into the boat, lamenting his losses and
saying: “Clop all gone—me go too.” They left this
man there to take his chance, which happened to
be none, as when the flood went down there was no
barn, the bank of the river having given away, and
I suppose the barn and the Chinaman went out to
sea.
On this last trip my brothers rowed far beyond
Orbost, and on their return they changed course
and travelled through what was known as
Laughton’s Flat. There was a big strip of flood
water separated by some high ground and standing
timber between the river and the hills. There
was a man, his wife and child, who lived in a small
house, and this was the house that my brothers
made for; but when they got there it was partly
under water, and nobody at home. This was
Lawson Gibson’s place, and unbeknown to my
brothers, Lawson had been away from home for
some time, and Mrs Gibson was alone with the baby.
They discussed the possibilities of their safety, and
were about to continue in a straight line for home,
when one of the boys suggested that they should
cut across through the timber area, and get as near
as possible to the house of Lawson’s brother to
inquire there. It was late in the evening, and as
they neared the timber area, they could see a
woman, as they thought, sitting down in the water;
but on drawing nearer they could see Mrs Gibson
sitting on a log in deep water with her baby tied to
her body with a shawl and strips that she had tom
from her dress. It appears that this poor woman
tried to reach the road and go along to her sister-
in-law’s, but being cut off, she then tried to reach
the place by way of the timber belt and was also
cut off there. She would have been swept away
during the night, or perished with the cold. My
brothers brought Mrs Gibson home to our place
where she was given dry clothes, and the baby was


soon fixed up with improvised clothing in time to
prevent a chill.
No doubt this was a piece of good work, and my
brothers looked upon it as a reward for their
labour, and received a good deal of praise for the
noble work that they had undertaken; but nothing
was said about old Fred Mundy, who built the boat.
Now we must know something about our family.
Those four boys in the boat were actually a little
team apart from the rest of the family, and were
known by the others as “the boys.” Walter was
the oldest, then Fred, Harry or Henry generally
known as Hen., and then Jack. I have heard the
boys relate some of their experiences about their
early life at Buchan. The old man used to send
them out to strip wattle bark, which was a good
source of revenue foj> the outback settler, as also
were kangaroo and wallaby skins. On one occasion
they were sent out to strip bark. It had been
raining hard, and where they were working there
was a big hole of water and the boys were all stripped
off having a swim when the old man arrived. He
started to give them all a thrashing until he called
Walter, the eldest, who took a header and dived to
the other side, and when the old man went around
to head him off, Walter would dive back again. He
kept that up until the old man gave him best until
bed-time.
The boys had been running around the selection
at Buchan in a happy but primitive state. There
were a fair number of black fellows there and my
brothers would sometimes imitate their habits for
the amusement of any strangers who might ride
past. One of the customs practised by the natives
was a way of conveying the information to others
that he was what we call a man of means. The
abo. would demonstrate this by cooking a fair
sized lump cut from a monkey, and sometimes a
piece of well roasted snake. This would be placed
under his hat, and when a stranger would approach
he would pull this out and commence gnawing at


it, and do other pranks out of which they seemed
to get a lot of fun.
None of the boys ever saw a school at Buchan,
and we were resident for some time on the Snowy
River before a school was built near enough to our
place for the boys to attend—three miles distant.
That school was known as the Newmerellah school,
and when opened no age limit was instituted, and
young men with beards turned up for their first
lesson in one of the most essential things in life.
I had the first part of my education at that school,
and having little problems straightened out for me
I got many a good dusting. Many teachers passed
through that school, some good and some not so
good. We had one who was hated by all and sundry,
all hands being terrified of him, which actually
nearly imperilled his own life. We were all seated
at lessons one day, when a tig% snake put its head
through a break in a board of the wall near his
chair. I was the first to see it, and drew the other
children’s attention as well as possible without
making a noise; but when the snake made straight
for him and began to climb the high chair, someone
gave the alarm. I could have killed the snake with
a broom, but the teacher grabbed it and let fly at
the snake but missed it after breaking the handle
of the broom. The snake then crawled out the
open door. I finished the first part of my education
at that school after receiving a few thrashings,
bashings, and bare knuckle blows from the masters.
There was only one master who could thrash me
and make me work, and the only reason that I can
think of was that I realised he was my master.
Later on he would come along and convince me that
he was also my companion; then he would set me
to work and I would forget the past.
I left school at an early age, thirteen, which was
the age limit for free education in Victoria at that
time. I had a little secondary education, but
nothing worth mentioning. We were all living at
home, six boys and three girls. The eldest boy,
Walter, had a team of bullocks, and we grew maize


and other produce. Walter, apart from doing
contract work away from home, carted our produce
to market, collected the proceeds, and brought back
whatever stores we required to run the household.
We would get one ton of flour, half a ton of sugan
a chest of tea, and other things in similar quantities.
No books were kept and Walter issued no statement
of accounts but just carried on like that for a few
years, and by that time the earnings of the family
had increased its holdings. We had several small
farms joined to the homestead on each side and
seven hundred and fifty acres at the back. We had
also bred and reared a lot of cattle, and we used
to turn some of them out into the bush, which
arrangement, as the years went by, became a bit
awkward. The big bush runs were changing hands,
which started a feud, and they were impounding
each others’ cattle. Our third eldest brother could
see trouble ahead, so he applied for a run adjoining
our boundary which he was successful in getting;
an area not exactly marked out but roughly about
ten or fifteen square miles, and that little advent
settled our problems about surplus cattle. By the
time we reached this position, Walter had decided to
be married and there were two blocks of land on the
other side of the river that my father left behind
when he went to Western Australia about ten years
before. Walter took charge of this property where
he built a house, and was then married. He made
a stipulation with our mother, who was not in favour
of the move he was making, that he would house
and provide for the three youngest in the family,
myself being one of the three. Walter was then
married and set up on his farm, and I had been
assisting him with the milking for the factory. He
invited me over and I was pleased with the change.
Although only about thirteen years of age, I had
been employed by the Victorian Water Supply
Department for a few years as a gauge reader at a
salary of five pounds per annum, taking the levels
of the rise and fall of the Snowy River, and from
that I always had a little cash in hand. One day


Walter was looking through my exercise book and
found that I had a pound note between the leaves.
He seemed to think that I would lose this money,
and he took it on loan, as he said, I was only there
for a few weeks. Then along came a brother-in-law,
then another, until he had four of his wife’s
brothers there, and he then told me I had better go
back home for a while. When I asked him when I
should come back, he said he would go up to the
crossing and whistle. A year passed, but he never
whistled, and he never offered to pay me my pound,
and I could never seem to muster enough courage
to ask him for it until one day when we were out
mustering on the run. He still kept his cattle, or
most of them, on our side of the river, and I made
up my mind, when we came across a miserable
looking calf belonging to him, that I would ask him
if he would give me this calf for the pound that he
owed me. When I got the last word out I felt
relieved that I had broken the ice. He started to
grizzle, and said that I would only sell it. However,
I was able to get him to agree, and I kept the calf
for eighteen months, and then sold it for two pounds
two and six pence. When Wal, as we used to call
him, heard about it he said that would be the last
calf he would give me, and I made sure that as far
as I was concerned it would be, especially on his
terms.
When Walter left our home, brother Fred took
over, and automatically became the boss. He was
a big well built man, a good buck-jump rider, a
runner, and could put up a good fight as a country
fighter. Along the years we were growing, as also
were our assets. We were not selling any cattle,
but breeding all the time, and there was only one
man who seemed to derive any benefit from all the
wealth in the family pool. When our maize crop
required weeding, all hands would be in the fields,
girls and all, and also at harvest time all hands
would turn to and turn the family’s wheel of fortune..
Later on, big Fred would arrive home with his team,
after being contracting somewhere, and would take


the produce to market. Then our part of the job
would be finished, because Fred would collect the
cash and that was all we would ever know about it.
While this was going on, I used to discuss our side
of the business with my brothers and sisters, and it
appears that Fred heard about this, and I used to
get a raw deal from him. After he felt that he was
firmly seated in the saddle as Lord of the Manor, he
was not satisfied with pocketing his own earnings
and selling the produce from the farm, but he
launched out a little bigger and leased a fattening
paddock. He anticipated fattening bullocks for the
market, and got out mustering on the run,
instructing me to bring in any good lumps of steers
belonging to Harry. Harry did not say anything,
until a fair number were in the paddock and nearly
ready for the market; but he then asked Fred what
he intended doing with his bullocks, and Fred had
no hesitation in saying he was going to sell them.
Harry there and then told him to leave his cattle
alone and the big boy, seeing that he was about to
have his wings clipped, said nothing, but later on
all the bullocks found their way back to the big run.
Harry had bought a small farm near our place,
and had been growing maize and rearing pigs. He
could collect the money for the pigs because he drove
them to market and put the sale through by him-
self; but with the maize it was more difficult, as
Fred would cart it away, collect the cash, and put
it to his own credit. No books were kept, and no
returns were shown. Now, Harry was launching
out for himself and wanted to get married, but his
assets were just blowing with the wind. The actual
position was that Harry and the rest of the family
were paying the rent and doing the work, and big
Fred was collecting the cash. The year’s crop was
in the crates, dry and ready for threshing, and Fred
was home ready to take delivery, and gave the order
that we would be threshing tomorrow; but Harry
had made up his mind that the maize would not be
threshed tomorrow. Morning came, and Fred was
up bright and early letting the rest of the family


know that he was about. After breakfast he was
strutting around outside just to see that everything
on the estate was in proper order, when Harry came
along leading a hack, and on reaching the harness
room, started to saddle up. Fred, seeing this, strode
across and asked him would he not be helping with
the threshing that day, and Harry walked towards
him with his sleeves rolled up, and said, “No, that
maize belongs to me, and I will thresh it myself when
lam ready.” Now the big boy could see that a little
more of his wings were to be cut, so he took up a
very mild attitude and was prepared to talk business
which would be fair and equitable to both parties.
It was herein and therein agreed upon that they
would thresh the maize and each one would receive
half the proceeds. This little matter settled, the
threshing was done and Fred carted the maize away
as usual, but nothing was said about the money.
However, you bet the big fellow had been scheming
things out whereby he could employ his half share
of the cash in something that would recover for him
his imaginary loss of the other half. Later on he
approached Harry, who had the big run, and
arranged that they would go down to Bairnsdale
and buy a mob of cattle with the money that they
received for the maize. In Fred’s opinion this little
move of transferring the ready cash into a dead
channel would offset and postpone the anticipated
wedding day, and allow him to get in on the next
crop.
They both went to Bairnsdale to the big cattle
sale and arrived home unannounced and unexpected
with one hundred head of cattle, comprised of cows
and heifers, which would nearly all be coming in in
the spring. In this mob there was a variety of
breeds represented, there being Devons, Shorthorns,
Jerseys, Alderneys and just anything. We had a big
stockyard about half a mile back from the house
composed of a high ring yard, a cutting out yard,
and a holding yard; but Fred wouldn’t use this yard
as I suppose he wanted to give a display to the
neighbours of a hundred head of bellowing cattle


coming over the top of the hill to be placed in the
yard used for holding our milking herd, not far
from the house. We were able to get all the cattle
in this yard, but being jammed for room, they
started to horn and rip each other, and we were
obliged to take them back to the big stockyards.
Jack had already been instructed to get a brand
made, which was on the job. This meant that the
three brothers would be using their brands on this
mob. Fred and Harry would take pick and pick and
their brands would be used according to their
choice.
Now and then a rough looking Jersey heifer
would be thrown, and Jack’s brand would appear on
that one until fourteen heifers were carrying the
initials “J.M.” on the near side rump, and the family
swallow tail ear-mark. Fourteen head is not a
great deal, but considering that Jimmy Tyson, the
Australian millionaire, started off with one lame
cow, fourteen head should be a fair start for a young
fellow and no grazing to pay. But Jack had worked
a good many years for this small reward. The
cattle were all branded and turned into a big pad-
dock at the back, and later on out into the bush run
with no fences where they could travel hundreds of
miles if they wanted to.
Things were now looking something like a small
cattle station growing up around the Mundy
Brothers’ estates, and that was how things should
have been, and each member of the family given a
start for services rendered when his turn came; but
that was not to be, as at a later branding one of my
calves, of which I had three, was brought in and
thrown. “What brand?” was called, and Fred said
“Put my brand on this one,” and I said, “No we will
put Harry’s brand on this one, and I will have a
brand made by the time the others come in.” Now
was the time for Fred to show his teeth, and he said,
“You needn’t get a brand made, as there are too
many brands on the place already.” That little
incident cut me off from my first venture in making
a start in life. Fred’s words remained within my


memory, and didn’t require to be told twice, so I
got rid of my little herd and that almost divorced
me from the family estate. Although my stake was
nil, I was still used as a rouseabout and if one
brother didn’t have me, another one would.
We now had about three hundred head of cattle,
and I was appointed stockman at nothing per week,
of course, and in addition to riding through the bush
looking at cattle and sometimes looking for them,
I had a lot of work to do at home. One of the tiring
jobs I had was carrying water for pigs during the
dry spells, and I would be hard-pressed all day carry-
ing two buckets on a yoke. I could never get ahead
of the pigs; they would drink and drink and drink,
and when I would think that I was getting ahead
of them, they would start again, and if they couldn’t
dry the trough out, they would lie longwise in it and
carry the water away on their bodies. One of my
brothers would come home, go down to the pig pad-
dock and finding no water in the troughs, would
come back and start growling at me; but my mother
would always take my part because she used to see
me carrying water all day until I got tired. But
it didn’t matter what I did, or how much I did,
according to my brothers I was not doing enough.
I not only got some thrashings, but I got some severe
bashings.
I can well remember when I was nearly fourteen
years of age, which seemed to be my critical year, I
had been out all one day chasing birds from the
maize crop, and as I was tired and hungry I walked
up to the safe where the food was kept and wanted
to get something to eat; but my eldest sister Martha
stood by the door and defied me to open it. It may
be conceded that the most dangerous animal in the
world is a man with an empty stomach, and al-
though only a boy, I was the only thing on the place
representing a man and working at high pressure
trying to keep things in order. Martha was actually
a good sized woman, but I grabbed her and spun her
around and gave her a tremendous shove. She
landed sprawling at the other end of the room. I


might say that I didn’t handle her lightly as my
existence was at stake, and I was prepared to fight
if there was a chance of winning through, which
didn’t always happen with my sisters as sometimes
they would attack me in mass formation. On this
occasion the younger girls, Ella, two years older
than me, and Maude, two years younger, didn’t seem
to think a general attack was warranted, so I was
allowed to help myself to as much food as I required.
This was the first time I had anything in the form
of a victory over the girls, but this victory was only
on loan as the boys, as they were referred to, al-
though actually burly men, would be home that night
and a report went in against me and I knew that I
would get it.
Harry was the official thug on this occasion. I
was in bed and heard him coming so I rushed out
the front door and down the paddock. The Snowy
River was in flood and the waters were backed up
within a short distance of our house. I raced into
the water, and behind a big tree and kept dodging
him there. He threatened to drown me if I didn’t
come out and I couldn’t think of anything else to
do but surrender, and when I did, he picked me up
and heaved me headfirst into the water, which was
too shallow to take my weight. I skidded along on
my face and the skin was all peeled away from my
chin to the top of my forehead. The brute then
commanded me to get to bed, which I did in quick
time thinking that that was my allotment, and that
his wrath had been satisfied; but no, he came in with
a small three strand whip which I had plaited with
my own hands, and he laid that on to me until I
was bleeding like a pig. Next morning I looked at
the sheet I had slept on and there was the imprint
of the whip which I had made to be later used upon
me as described.
With that evidence, I could have given the man
a term of imprisonment, but I was afraid to do any-
thing as I had an idea that if I squealed I would
be removed from the rest of the family, and at that
stage I hadn’t made up my mind that I would like


to be. I could never understand why so much was
expected of me, and why I was always treated with
so much contempt, so that when I did launch out
into the world to shift for myself, I was actually
suffering with what is generally known as inferiority
complex, and when we are in that state outsiders
are apt to take advantage of our shortcomings.
After receiving this thrashing, which was
extremely severe and no likelihood of receiving any
more, I seemed to break out into a frenzy and was
actually screaming and shrieking, and a great battle
was taking place within me. I was contemplating
that which I had often thought about before, and
that was to end this trouble once and for all time.
I intended to drown myself in the river, but to do so
it would be necessary for me to jump into the water
when the river was in flood, otherwise, as I was a
good swimmer, if I jumped in the ordinary stream I
would only swim out again.
All this was running through my child mind, and
I was about to spring from my bed and swim away
to the high bank which divided our house from the
river, and then climb a tree which I had previously
marked out, and take a header into the swift running
Snowy River, and then I would be washed out to sea.
When in this state of mind, my sister Ella came into
the room and seemed to withdraw my attention from
this little delirium, and, after a good night’s rest I
joined the rest of the family at breakfast just as if
nothing had happened. I have often thought that
I must have had the characteristics of a dumb
animal, as, after my thrashings, bashings, punchings
and kickings, I would soon forget about it and carry
on with my work as if nothing had happened.
Very early in life I made up my mind that I would
be a professional pugilist, and I also used to think
that these bashings would make me tough when I
grew up.
Harry got married and cut adrift from the old
home, and lived about a mile away. Our mother
had shifted into Orbost owing to big Fred’s snarling
and sneering manner, and had bound him down in


black and white to give her an annuity and a free
house for life. When he was signing the agreement,
under pressure, the tears were running down his
cheeks and hitting the floor with a loud crash, as
things had begun to tighten up on him. He had
given Ella and Martha notice to either get married
or get out, and they got out, and later on were
married. Martha settled down at Yarraville, and
Ella married Mr W. Cummings, the president of the
shire. Maude and Louis were allowed to remain for
a while. Fred had already got a girl friend staying
in the house while his orders had been adhered to.
This is just a parting shot at my big brother Fred;
but I don’t know whether he is dead or alive. In
my youth I received some dirty snarls and jibes
from the big bounce, as that is about the most
fitting word to use in describing a man of his type.
Our mother used to run a dairy, and I used to take
butter to Orbost every Saturday morning before the
heat of the day, and one Friday evening Fred gave
me orders to get his horse ready for him the next
morning. He had only just come home, and was
unfamiliar with the working of the farm, in fact if
he was it didn’t matter as he always considered him-
self first on the list with anything that was going.
This morning I was unable to locate his horse, and
proceeded to town with the butter, and when I
arrived home he got busy on me with a big riding
crop and gave me such a thrashing that I will not
forget in this life. I have had a good deal to do in
breaking dogs in, and sometimes it is necessary to
give a dog a thrashing; but there is a limit to all
things, and even a dog seems to know where that
limit lies. If you go beyond that, a dog may be
ruined for all time, and the same thing applies to a
human being, and he has a longer memory than any
other animal.
I was working for Fred one day when he was
pulling out some stumps with a team of bullocks.
I would be about fourteen years of age and I was
hooking on, and unhooking for him, with a big
heavy drag chain. He was giving me a severe


gruelling all the morning, and in the afternoon I
think his idea was to get rid of me, and I was think-
ing of him as the big bad uncle in the story about
the “Babes In The Wood.” As a matter of fact I
hated the brute because whether it was in company
or otherwise, he would always be throwing slurs,
and belittling me. However, the storm had been
brewing and in the afternoon I hooked on to a
stump, and was standing near by when the bullocks
pulled the stump, and a small root flew back and
struck me on the elbow. This caused me some
considerable pain, but the big fellow laughed, and
didn’t stop to see whether my arm was broken or
not.
Some time prior to this we were rolling logs into
a big pile with the bullocks, and while doing this
we used to use a couple of fairly big saplings to lean
up against the heap, and the logs were rolled up by
a chain pulled by the bullocks on the other side.
One day a log struck the end of one of the skids and
threw it towards me and it came down on the top of
my head and knocked me out on the ground. When
I rose and staggered around Fred just laughed and
went on with his work. I still carry that scar.


CHAPTER II
MY WANDERINGS BEGIN
NOW that my arm had been badly injured, I was
incapable of serving My Lord of the Manor, so
he commanded me to go home and roll my
swag and get along the road.
I never answered him, but I had often given this
proposition a fair amount of consideration, and now
that I had been given the order it seemed to assist
me to decide. They say that the devil you know is
better than the devil you don’t know, but to be
treated like a dog by my own brother—why, hell
would be preferable. I now walked away from my
big brother after a lifetime’s association. We were
bred and reared in the same coop, but it appeared
that there was not room for both of us. I must go,
so I walked home, went into my bedroom, gathered
up some of my belongings, took two blankets off the
bed, and rolled a swag for the first time. I then
went and caught my pony Blue-Bell, saddled up,
hung a pair of hobbles on the dee of the saddle, tied
the swag on the saddle and also my dog chain. I
then got on my pony and rode away, not saying
goodbye to anyone, and as I had made other
attempts to leave home previously, this little event
was looked upon as just another phase of my dis-
content. But it was no bluff this time. I was
going somewhere to see if the world held anything
different for me.
I rode away just out of sight of the house, and
pulled up. Raising myself in the stirrups, I looked
back at the landscape where my big brother was
still at work. I waved my hand and said, “Goodbye,
big boy. You have been my master, and a hard
one at that. You are far too big and strong for me,
but I hope to meet you in the years to come. I may


not be a bigger man, or as big as you, but I may be
a better man, and my only hope is that, wherever I
go and while I live, I will not bring discredit upon
myself.” And once again I waved goodbye.
I rode into Orbost and put up at the Club Hotel,
hobbled my pony in the long paddock, which was the
road, and Rowdy my dog stayed with her night and
day, sometimes coming back to tell me if she hap-
pened to stray too far away. I stayed put at the
hotel for a few days until Saturday came. Fred
was, to a certain extent, courting a sister of the
proprietress, and of course he was in to tea that
night. They parked him at the end of the table, and
I was sitting next to him on his right. I wouldn’t
look at him, and I had no wish to see him again. I
wouldn’t even pass anything that he might have
wanted, but a man on his left saved the situation.
After tea and a stroll down town, I went into the
Bar Parlour, and was playing Dave Saunders cards
for drinks. Fred came in and sat down, looking on
because the young lady in question was also looking
on, and of course Fred wanted to be near her. I beat
Saunders the first game, and he shouted for me and
also Fred. He beat me the next game, and I asked
the girl to bring the drinks. She asked me if I was
shouting for Fred, and I said, “No!”
There was a great human monster who had had
the power to make me leave my mother, brothers
and sisters, sitting right in front of me. Why, if he
had had a spark of manhood he wouldn’t have
stayed one second as he wasn’t wanted. I didn’t
want to see his face again. He was no longer my
brother (if he ever had been). I had served that
house with goods for a considerable time, and the
young lady who served the drinks had, for a year
or so, had a good deal of admiration for me, and I
had an idea that anyone who wronged me, wronged
her. Whether that was so or not, nothing came
of her acquaintance with Fred.
I moved out to work for a farmer, and later on I
got a job forty miles away, carting stone from a
mine up on Mount Ellery, to the battery. I used to


take a load down in a bullock dray to the top of a
steep hill, and a man there would take it to the
battery in a sledge drawn by bullocks. I ran into
a log one day, and the impact pulled the clamp out
of the end of the pole that the bullocks were hooked
up to, and the boss gave me a big blast, and while
about it he dragged up other matters which only a
full grown man could have been responsible for, so
I told the boss that he could do the job himself as I
was going back to Orbost.
I started at six in the morning to walk forty
miles. I had to travel down Mount Ellery and over
Mount Buck, and when I was about four miles from
the camp I heard a bullock dray in front of me,
which I overtook. After getting into conversation
with the driver, he said that he was going to Orbost
and if I liked I could get in the dray and ride. I
said “Thanks all the same, but I will push on,” and
I walked and walked, and that forty miles seemed
to be a terrible distance. The night was closing in
on me, and although I had a very staunch com-
panion with me, my dog Rowdy, I was afraid of
dingoes. I plodded on in the dark, and was just
about knocked up, when I heard the sound of the
old bullock dray that I had refused a ride in, coming
behind me. I slackened my pace, such as it was,
and the vehicle soon overtook me. I bundled my
tired body into the dray, and rode the other three
miles to Orbost, disembarked, thanked the driver,
and congratulated him upon the endurance of his
team. Just think of it. Forty miles in one
day with a team of bullocks in low condition.
I can remember when I was about thirteen and
a half years of age, we had a crate of maize to
thresh, and the day the job was to be done I had
a very bad attack of influenza, which in those days
we used to know as “A La Grip.” I was really bad
and paraded sick, but got the usual sympathy,
especially from big Fred. “Yes, he is always sick
when there is any work to be done! ”


I was ordered to get on to the job, which was
about half a mile from our house. The team con-
sisted of my three big brothers, a man Joe, and my-
self. The machine for threshing was meant to be
turned either by engine or by man-power, which
was our method of working. I had to gather the
cobs in a basket and fill the chute, which would
then be fed to the machine by one of the men. I
not only put in a miserable and wretched time
trying to keep the chute full, but I had also to put
up with the jibes and sneers of my brothers and
also the man who was working for them. Each
one in turn would refer to me as “swing-the-lead”
or say that I had “larry up” which used to be an-
other way of describing the practice of a lazy man.
When the machine stopped for the day I went
straight home to bed, only to be roused in a few
minutes to get up and bring the cows in to be milked.
My brother Harry gave the order. The only com-
ment I can make by way of retaliation is that later
in life Joe became paralysed and died. And later
on my brother was gored by a bullock and carried
around the paddock on the bullock’s horn. He was
rescued by some neighbours who heard his cries, and
was taken to hospital in a critical condition. I
don’t know whether he survived or not.
Although I could never please anyone at home,
when I went out to work, I was expected to, and
used to, do more work than men receiving twice as
much pay. I also had the record on the Snowy
River for the average of bags of maize picked per
day. I picked alongside of two champions, Joe Bell
and a man by the name of Allan. Allan taught me
to pick in such a way that I beat Allan’s average by
two bags per day, which for me was twenty-two
four-and-a-half bushel bags of cobs at fourpence per
bag. Allan’s best average was twenty bags per day.
Allan’s system was just the same as that practised
by Henry Ford, and that was—conserving energy
and saving time. He used to take a strip of eight
rows, which are one yard apart, place two bags at
the proper distance in the centre row, and throw his


bag of empties forward for the next two. Now the
next and most important part was to have a box that
went four to the bag when full. The box was stood
by the bag and the picker picked along the third
and fourth row on either side. It didn’t matter
which. If he picked the third row out he brought
the fourth row back, and by that time the box was
full and the picker, without losing any time carrying
the box to the bag, Just stooped down, picked the
box up and emptied it into the bag. All the other
rows were done in the same manner, which yielded
four boxes and the bag was full. The next empty
was placed alongside the full bag and the same
system was worked to fill this one by picking ahead
and coming back to the box each time it was full.
The following year I picked against another
champion, Joe Bell. Joe was a big strong man and
a great toiler; but he had an entirely different
method. He used to pick on the ground for about
three or four hours before he started bagging. In
the first place he had to clear a wide space to allow
for long throws into the heap, and as he branched
out with a wide area of about twenty rows, he still
had to pull down and tramp down underfoot for the
whole area, which meant a strenuous battle from
start to finish. Bell told me, when I started along-
side him, that if ever a man picking maize in the
same paddock as himself was picking more than he
was, he would roll his swag.
Picking with Allan’s system, I could beat Bell by
about four bags every day, and knock off early to go
over and count his bags. He knew I was beating
him, but he wouldn’t admit it. However, one night
I said to him, “Joe, I thought you said that if any-
one picking in the same paddock as yourself beat
your tally, you would roll your swag.” He said
“So I did.” I said “Well, you’d better roll it. I
have beaten you every day since I started.” Joe said
no more, but rolled his swag the following morning,
and I didn’t see him again until the big slump. I
saw his photograph in the paper. He was camped
somewhere outback in Victoria. He had a rabbit


trap and used to catch a rabbit every day, and that
was his sole subsistence except, as he said, some days
he would miss. Nevertheless, Bell was a great man.
His only drawback was that he wouldn’t be con-
vinced about any ideas other than his own.
I had a good ramble around after leaving home.
I used to go back on occasions if Fred was away
from home, and do some work, and tell stories about
my experiences. I was quite welcome and much ap-
preciated until the big boy returned unannounced,
and when he came in the front door, I would go out
the back. Not that I was afraid of him by then, but
I did it as a way of trying to get under his skin and
wound him; but I never knew whether my shots flew
wide or hit the mark. Fred was never any social
asset to the family, because when he came home,
sometimes after being away for months at a time,
he would go to bed after the evening meal. Or
change himself and go visiting, and walk back
around the kitchen where the rest of the family
might be congregated. If we were all in session he
might just come in, sit down, suck his teeth for a
while, and then to bed. But he usually walked past
and to bed without waiting to see any of us. This
man made a social outcast of himself. He was rude
and overbearing, to our mother as well as to other
members of the family, and at a very early stage
after our father went away I saw that he wanted
the place to himself. This eventually happened,
but he didn’t find everything as easy as he thought
it would be. He had lost all his servants and had
to be his own rouseabout, and he was obliged to milk
cows and do other work that previously he would
not have thought of doing.
My brother Jack, Angus McCole and I now
travelled to New Zealand. While over there Harry
and his wife became separated and then divorced,
while Fred struggled along not doing so well, com-
plaining that he had no help, and that the rest of
the family had turned dog on him. But he didn’t
stop to think when he was playing the dog on them.


Jack Mundy was now working in the Talisman
mine, and I was working at the Globe on the West
Coast. There was in residence on the Globe Hill
at that time Harry Dunn, the one-time world’s
champion wrestler, and his small brother Jimmy,
who was old but had been of some consequence.
Wherever the Dunns were they always managed to
get a school going for wrestling, and something of
the kind was started in the Globe hall. I formed a
Boxing and Athletic Club, and got permission from
the Mining Company to use the hall for that purpose.
Amongst the boxers and wrestlers who trained there
were Bill Arthurs of Sydney, Ted Creigh, George
Martin, Bill, George, and Wattle Connors, also Dan
Nelson and Harold McNeil and a few more of a lesser
degree. Billy Smith of the Progress Junction, who
afterwards became lightweight champion of New
Zealand, also trained there, and I learnt a fair
amount about boxing and wrestling in that school.
There was one thing in this world that I loved,
and that was boxing gloves. We usually had a set
at home, and when they were brought out I would
almost leap in the air with excitement.
Although in my ’teens, I used to conjure up in
my mind what I would do when I got back home
amongst the big boys again, and to big Fred in par-
ticular, because he once gave me a terrific thrashing
for no particular reason.
While in Reefton I took part in a wrestling com-
petition at Brunner. I met Mick Jemison, who was
about two stone heavier than I was. We both
agreed at the beginning that no strangling holds
were to be used. The conditions of the contest were
that four points on the ground constituted a fall,
and a fall takes some getting under those conditions,
that is to pin your opponent’s two hips and two
shoulders flat on the ground. The first two falls,
one each, were got in about thirty minutes’ wrestling,
but about two hours had passed, and no third fall.
The people were leaving the ground, and darkness
was setting in, when Jemison suddenly put a figure
four on me, and I gave in, which meant a victory


for him; but not a very creditable one, as I could
have strangled him several times.
Shortly after that Jemison went to the North
Island and got killed by a falling tree. I don’t mean
to say that happened because he cheated me, but
I don’t know why so many things like that happen.
At this particular time I was working in the
Wealth of Nations gold mine and living at Crush-
ington.
Shortly after I wrestled Jemison, I went back to
the Snowy River. I was very fit and nearly twenty-
one years of age. I wired forward that I was coming,
and didn’t know what kind of a reception I would
get; but my young brother Louis brought a horse for
me to ride out home, six miles from Orbost.
I was now at my mother’s place in Orbost, and
after what she told me about our family structure,
I was somewhat broken-hearted, but I soon made up
my mind that I would try and alter things for the
best, if possible.
According to my information, big Fred had got
the old homestead to himself, the only other member
of the family remaining being our youngest sister
Maude. Louis and I rode the six miles, and arrived
home after being away more than two years. Fred
had married his girl friend who he had in the house
when we left for New Zealand. Louis took me to
the front room which used to be our mother’s room.
Here, I found my big brother in bed and a cackling
wife beside him. The bed was standing where our
mother’s bed used to be. I shook hands with the
big fellow, and then with his wife, and he congratu-
lated me upon how I had grown up to be a fine big
man.
Perhaps it is as well that some people don’t know
what other people are thinking about them. I felt
as if I could have got my brother by the ears and
dragged him out of the house. Diplomacy is the
art of letting someone else have his way. If the
big fellow had known what I thought about him, he
wouldn’t have been conceited about himself.


I stayed with Fred for a couple of weeks, and I
used to look at him and just try to think how long
he would last with me if I cut loose on him. Big
Fred was thirty-two years of age at this stage. One
day we had just had a wash and were standing on the
back verandah of the kitchen, where a blacksmith’s
anvil was resting on the floor. I picked the anvil
up and raised it above my head several times, and
when I replaced it on the floor Fred remarked that
I was pretty strong.
Remembering that Fred was recognised as a very
strong man, I said “How many times can you put
the anvil over your head?” and to my surprise, when
he tried he was unable to put it above his head once.
I then asked Fred if he could wrestle, but he was
not interested. I then asked him if he happened
to have a set of gloves in the house and he said no,
very abruptly.
I could see a great chance of evening things with
brother Fred, but I had a slight idea that he knew
that I was after his pelt, and if I wanted to give him
a dressing-down, I would have to play cautiously.
Louis and I were out on the grass one evening
sky-larking and making a considerable noise and
enjoying ourselves, when big Fred came outside and
called out to us to make less noise or he would
straighten us up. I jumped up and told him to
come out, but he went in.
Another day Louis and Fred and I were loading
his wagon with maize. Four-and-a-half bushel
bags were supposed to weigh two hundred and forty
pounds. Fred and I on each end would heave the
bag into the wagon. Just for a moment I was doing
something else, and Fred called Lou into commission,
but Lou was unable to throw his end up to the re-
quired height. The big fellow was growling at him,
and when I saw what was going on I rushed over,
took the end from my young brother and com-
manded big Fred to heave, and I threw my end with
such force that his end was almost back in his arms.
I now started to talk to Fred and tell him that
he was a big loafer imposing on a young lad only


half-grown, and I continued to dog big Fred until
the wagon was fully loaded. But it never once
looked as if I could make a punching bag of him.
For some considerable time I tried different ways
to try and get big Fred to stand up so that I might
balance some of his rotten debts for him. No, Fred
was very capable of bashing a child or an animal,
but not a man’s equal, and I am satisfied to leave
him at that, and go back to the Globe Hill in New
Zealand to tell a little story about the Dunn brothers.
This school was kept going in a quiet way for
some months, and we were then approaching
Christmas. It was customary for Harry and Jimmy
Dunn to turn up in good order at the Caledonian
Sports at Dunedin, and at this time of the year a
tailor from Reefton and sometimes one from Grey-
mouth would call at the Globe to take orders and
measurements for suits. On this occasion it was
Mr Webber from Greymouth, and Harry and Jimmy
were measured for suits. Time dragged on; because
I was living in the opposite end of their ranch with
a partition between, I could hear their conversation
at times, which was then entirely centred upon the
sports at Dunedin on New Year’s Day. Both Harry
and Jimmy had not tasted anything stronger than
tea for about seven months, and they were both
actually keyed up for a change of climate or some-
thing of the kind.
Jimmy suddenly broke the silence and said, “It’s
about time them suits were here, Harry.” Harry,
anxious to renew his acquaintance, said “Oh, yes,
Boy.” And now that Jimmy had broken the ice
with the big fellow who was hard to approach,
especially as he hadn’t had a reviver for a few
months, he started a nice friendly conversation, and
did very well for a while, until Jimmy actually took
him right into the Sports Ground at Dunedin, well
dressed, sober as a judge and with money rattling
in his pocket. This news seemed too good for
Harry, who in an angry tone told Jimmy to shut up,
and jimmy apologised and made a quiet retreat be-
cause past experience had taught him to be careful


with the big fellow. Jimmy on one occasion, on their
return journey of course, found himself swimming
for his life in the river at Brunner, and found it
more advisable to land on the opposite side to that
where Harry was standing.
However, those two boys stuck together until
they left the hill at least. The suits arrived, and for
the umteenth time a vow was made that those two
suits would be worn by two prohibitionists, and all
this was rehearsed several times by Jimmy, until
Harry would, as usual, tell the little squib, as he
called him, to shut up. The holidays were declared
and Harry and Jimmy left the hill both well-dressed,
sober, about half a hundred each in their pockets.
Nothing more was heard of them until the holidays
were over, when Harry arrived back in Reefton for
the last time. He returned to the Globe Hill and
was found dead in his bed with a pannikin of water
beside him, which was frozen. A hole had been
picked in the top of it where the poor man had tried
to break the crust to get a drink. That took place
some time after the two brothers went to Dunedin
together. By the time Harry died Jimmy was in
South Africa and was going to send Harry’s fare to
get him over there with him later on. Jimmy died
there and that was the end of two great men who
saw a great deal of the world and took part in many
contests.
I was working in the Buller Gorge many years
afterwards for a Mr Jim Ryan, who at one time used
to be a punt man crossing the Buller for traffic be-
tween Westport and Reefton. Mr Ryan told me
many interesting stories about the different adven-
tures which he had during the years when he was
employed at that work. On one occasion when a
man wandered along from Westport and was walking
to Reefton, Ryan brought him over in the boat.
This man looked weary and worn and had about
one week’s growth on his face. Ryan could see
that the man had been drinking, so took him over
to his hut and from a bottle of whiskey poured him
out a good nobbier, which found its way down his


throat in quick time. He asked for more and Jim
gave him another, and by this time he could see that
he was kindling an old fire, so he carefully pushed
the bottle safely under his bunk. The man kept
staring at the bottle and Ryan anticipated trouble,
but was not alarmed as he was nearly twelve stone,
of stocky build and fairly fit. However, he watched
the man to see what would happen. The man sud-
denly exclaimed, “I want that bottle,” and Ryan
said, “You are not going to get the bottle,” and
without another word the man made a dive for it.
Ryan said that the fellow gave him the biggest
struggle that he had ever had with another man.
Although Ryan had a rope to tie him with he was
unable to throw him until sheer exhaustion and
weakness compelled the man to give in. Ryan tied
him up until he had calmed down and after getting
into conversation with him found that he had been
wrestling with Jimmy Dunn, one of the world’s best
in the days that had gone.
Now, to proceed, I arrived at Greymouth from
the North Island in 1916 and went on to Runanga,
where I started cutting sleepers and posts. For
some time I worked above Dunnollie cutting on both
sides of the Rewanui line, and later cut some mining
timber for the State coal mine. It was agreed upon
between Mr Hall and myself that all timber cut by
me would be bought by the management until
stocks were in full supply. While on this work I
was interviewed by Aussie Allcock, who used to do
the boot-repairing for the Co-operative Store. I
was looking for a timber bush where I could cut
props for the mine, and this man told me about a
property that he owned about one mile on the Grey-
mouth side of Runanga. The locality was known as
The Camp. He asked me to have a look at this
place and see whether I could work it, as the ground
was low and boggy and would present difficulties by
way of haulage tracks, etc. However I went down
on more than one occasion and inspected the place,
and also had a look through an empty house which
was on the property that would have served me as


a dwelling if I had decided on working the bush. I
was undecided what I would do about this proposi-
tion but continued with other work that I had in
hand. At that particular time I was squaring some
logs for George Hunter; they were twelve by twelve,
and twelve feet long, and were to be used as stringers
by the Runanga Borough Council for bridges.
George was the Council Clerk and is now the Hon.
George Hunter.
Sometimes while doing this work, which was near
Allcock’s property, if the sun was out at mid-day I
would stroll out to the edge of the bush and stand
on a fairly high embankment and take a view of the
landscape, to which any man is entitled. But it
appeared that there was a woman down the road
who was watching me; and leave it to a woman to
see things and find things out. I finished up on
the timber work as my heart had become enlarged
to a degree of alarm, through too much heavy lifting
handling big logs single-handed. Dr Mead advised
me to have a rest so I shifted into Greymouth and
lived in a bach owned by Paddy Deer in Ainey Street.
This was in 1916 and the war was in full blast, and
I was just taking things quietly, living from the
returns of a patent medicine. Incidentally I used
to stroll down to Hassell’s billiard saloon and perhaps
have a game, and maybe I would stroll down the
beach and in the afternoon I would go surf-bathing
near the Tip-head.


CHAPTER HI
THE PAYROLL MURDERS
MY mail if addressed properly would be
delivered at my bach. Sometimes it would be
put under the door, or else be placed on a box
outside and perhaps a stone placed on top of it. My
correspondence was not very great, but I seemed to
be short of a few replies, and continued in this
position for some time. I discussed the matter with
a friend of mine and he advised me to write a letter
to myself, which I did, and if one thing is wrong
everything will be wrong, and this letter did go
astray. Thinking that everything was not as it
should be I had this little matter in mind. A
couple of days passed but this letter never turned up
and I had decided that I wouldn’t say anything for
perhaps a few more days. While this was in
abeyance I was sitting down in Hassell’s billiard
saloon one morning when a man came along and
sat down beside me and started talking. Presently
he asked me what I was doing now and with what
might be classed as an idle and boastful remark
without much meaning, I replied that I was doing-
nothing just now but expected to bring off some-
thing big in a few days’ time.
The following day I was sitting down by the
wharf at the end of Tainui Street where I often
sat in the morning, and then walked down to
the Post Office. Whilst sitting there that morning
I saw Mr Hall, paymaster at the State Mine, who I
knew well. As far as I knew when he went into the
Bank on the corner I thought that he had gone in
to get the money to pay the miners on the following
day, which would be Saturday. I did not see Mr
Hall come out of the Bank again. He seemed to
remain inside a good while. I started for the Post
Office and as I commenced to walk another man met


me and started to talk. Just to make a pun I said,
“Do you want to know how to make a Hall? There
is a man who has gone into that Bank and will be
out shortly with a bag of money which he will be
putting into that car,” pointing to Mr Hall’s car
which was standing by the Bank. I then said, “I
will see you about it later,” and started for the Post
Office. On the next corner I met Constable
Shannan, whom I knew well as he and Constable
Roberts were frequent visitors to the surf, and I
must be funny and repeat the same words to him.
When I walked away I said, “I will see you about it
later on.”
I went along to the Post Office but I did not get
the letter I expected, and the following morning
instead of doing my usual round I walked straight
along to the Post Office and got the aforesaid letter,
which had been delivered to another address and
returned to the Post Office. That was the end of
that and I then knew that everything was in order.
I then proceeded along to Hassell’s billiard saloon.
I walked in and the morning paper was spread out
on the table. I was leaning on the table reading
the paper when Jim Hassell said, “That was a terrible
thing, that hold-up of the State Mine pay yes-
terday, wasn’t it?” Having in mind about several
stoppages which had taken place just recently I
thought that it was the Government that had with-
held the miners’ pay, and I said to Mr Hassell, “Oh!
it seems to me that the Government is looking for
trouble,” and he said, “But two men have been shot
and the pay has been stolen by a highwayman.”
As a matter of fact, I was ill and any news did
not alarm me, and I immediately said, “Well he must
have wanted the money or he wouldn’t have shot
them.” I think old Jim thought the manner in
which I dismissed the matter deserved some
suspicion, and being a layman he started to question
me in an open and suspicious manner. To make
matters look bad for myself I didn’t mind giving
him a hand without being afraid of being implicated,
because I hadn’t been near the State Mine for about


two months. Furthermore I couldn’t think of my-
self killing anyone, as at that particular time I was
expecting that I might drop dead any day. Worldly
riches did not have any charm for me and I had
sufficient money of my own to supply all my needs.
As a matter of fact I was a wealthy man because
my requirements were so small.
After things settled down in my mind, and when
I got a full account of things and where it happened,
etc., I began to think. The hold-up took place just
where I had been working and the man had occupied
the house which I had inspected more than once.
Of course, Mother Grundy, who lived within easy
distance of it, knew the man who had done the
robbery and the killing, and that man was me. The
news flew around swiftly and soon reached Grey-
mouth, and the little incidents that were actually
manufactured by myself were added to the fact that
I had been seen in the locality. I was beginning to
feel fairly uncomfortable and used to walk down
town and be scowled at by my best friends, or ap-
parently my best friends. This condition prevailed
all day Saturday and Sunday and until the man
Eggers was arrested in Christchurch with all the
money.
I was standing on the footpath this Saturday
night all alone, not feeling too happy, as all my
friends seemed to have deserted me and more than
one had told me that I was under suspicion. While
standing there a young lad who was a telegraph
messenger walked up and stood by me and said, “I
have some bad news for you, Don; you are going to
be arrested at eight o’clock tonight. It’s pretty
crook, isn’t it,” and I said “Yes,” and I looked at my
watch and it was ten minutes to eight. I then told
him the time and said that if there was any truth
in his statement he might see the arrest as I intended
to stay where I was until eight o’clock—which I did,
and nobody came near me. So I moved down the
street. Considering the amount of talk that was
going on around me, and that none of the police
had said anything to me, I decided to contact one


of them myself, and the first one I met was Constable
O’Grady whom I knew fairly well. I got into con-
versation with him and lost no time in telling him
that things were becoming very unpleasant for me,
and my friends were all looking black at me and that
with all the wild rumours going around I was afraid
that the police might make a false move. He said
“Oh! you have no need to worry, as we know the
man we are after,” and he actually described the
man to me, which description was verified when I
saw Eggers in the box at his provisional trial at
Greymouth.
On the Sunday evening following the murder I
was standing outside the Theatre Royal, where
several other people were standing, just a little early
for the pictures that would be showing presently,
when a policeman approached me and said he
wanted to see me, at the same time assuring me that
there was no need for alarm as this was only a matter
of form. After he enquired about my movements on
the previous morning, etc., we both walked back to
the Theatre, which I entered and took my seat. Of
course this was more good business for the police as
it had already been advertised in the local papers
that a well known and prominent man in the district
would be arrested at any time. A bogus photograph
also appeared in one of the local papers which was
supposedly that of the wanted man. This was all
in favour of the police, as Eggers, the actual killer,
would see all this and it would make him feel secure.
Maybe he might become a little careless and walk
right into the trap which was being set for him.
Eggers was tried and ended his life on the end
of a rope where all those like him should. But one
murderer admires another, and it doesn’t always
happen that way. This man Eggers, it appears, was
suspected as being the person who committed a
similar act in Western Australia, which was never
solved, but the police had Eggers’ particulars and
the particulars about the hold-ups in Australia and
Runanga. Both bore a resemblance of being done
by the same man, and that is why an old criminal is


easier located than a novice. If a new hand
launches out in crime, and the method employed by
him should resemble that of any of his associates,
then it sometimes becomes difficult to know whether
it is the old hand or perhaps an apprentice who has
served a sentence for a minor offence, and at the
same time undergone a refresher course under the
old-timer. Many an old-timer has gone out of busi-
ness and has turned to earning an honest living
because the police become so familiar with his style
and technique that as soon as a crime is committed
and the police have a look around, in many cases
they can tell who the expert was, by the class of
work applied to the job.
Now Eggers was found guilty, and was hanged,
dead and buried, but Mother Grundy, who lived at
The Camp, said that the wrong man had paid the
price, as she knew who the right man was, because
she saw him wandering around at different times
at the spot where the murder took place. Eggers
was found guilty and there was no doubt about him
being the man. He never denied shooting Hall, but
denied shooting Coultard. Mr Hall was in the Grey-
mouth hospital, mortally wounded, and he lived for
some days, and if he had recovered Eggers thought
that he had a chance of dodging the rope; but when
he learned that Hall had died, his spirits slumped
and his heart sank. After the shooting Eggers
crossed the railway line, looked back and could see
that Mr I. James, the mine manager, who had been
a passenger in the pay-car, was watching him. He
called out and told Mr James to go, and fired a .32
at him, and struck him in the buttock. Mr James,
rather than be in the way of other people, did a
fairly fast four-mile run to Greymouth. I met him
about a year later at Otira, and after discussing this
incident with him, I asked him if he had any idea
what time it took him to run from the camp to
Greymouth, as I understood that he had broken a
New Zealand record. He said that he had no idea
how long it took him, except that he wasted no time


in getting away and hearing his boots cluttering
across the Grey River bridge.
When Eggers was tried and sentenced to death
he told the police where he unloaded all copper coins
from the bag, and where he had planted himself
after the shooting. The police searched the place
and recovered most of the copper coins, and the
hiding-place became known to the residents. My
brother Jack had a look at it, and described it to
me as a huge tussock between two logs drooping
down all around it, and he said that it was a re-
markable place for a man to be so well concealed,
while numbers of men were walking past him, and
their voices could be easily heard by him. It
appears that Eggers stayed there for some time, and
then walked through the bush to Brunner, crossed
the bridge, and caught the Otira train travelling to
Greymouth, arriving there that evening.
At Greymouth he got out in the railway yards
away from the station, and walked down to the
Park Hotel, then run by Andrew Russell. When he
got accommodation for the night, he walked into
the sitting room, and eagerly grabbed the evening
newspaper, scanning the reports associated with the
murder. Tom Murray, who was working at the
Seven Mile at the time, was in the sitting room
when Eggers entered it. Tom was actually behind
the door, and it appears that Eggers was unaware
of his presence, but Murray could see that the
murder case was all that interested him, but did
not bother about it till he went back to work on
Monday morning, when he sent a report to the
police. It was also noticed that his brief bag was
very heavy and it was also rumoured that he had
it placed in the hotel safe until he left for Hokitika.
A reward was already offered for any information
that would lead to the arrest of the murderer, and
Murray put in a claim and later on got a cheque
for twenty-five pounds,, which he returned to the
department as he seemed to think that his informa-
tion led to the arrest.


In cases of this kind and every other where
peoples’ rights are involved, all details must be in-
vestigated, and all evidence weighed on the scales
of justice, whether it be in a court of law or else-
where. Now, by the time Murray’s information
reached the police in Greymouth, Eggers was well
away from the Park Hotel and speeding in a round-
about way towards Christchurch, as he travelled to
Hokitika by rail and there engaged a taxi to drive
him back to Kumara, paying all his fares in silver,
and on to Otira to catch the coach travelling over
the hill connecting with the express to Christchurch.
The police knew all the time who he was, but they
didn’t know where he was until he arrived back to
his girl-friend, whom the police were watching, as
they expected he would return to her, which he did.
When Detective Abbot arrested Eggers, he asked him
to show him what he had in the bag, and his hand
began to shake and he started to fumble around
with a .32 revolver. Abbott then grabbed his wrist
and saved him the trouble of committing another
murder, or trying to.
If Murray had walked out of the Park Hotel
that night in question, and reported to the police,
his reward could have been bigger, but his evidence
had gone cold and was of no more value than the
details they already had.
After Eggers had been arrested and was awaiting
trial in Christchurch, Mother Grundy and her
friends were much quieter. There seemed to be no
doubt about the guilt of Eggers, and to confirm
that, when he was arrested he sent at once for a
Church of England minister, and also said that the
police had enough evidence to hang him twenty
times. Yet in spite of that it was remarkable the
class of people who barged their way into court to
give evidence, sometimes entirely concocted and
without any foundation in fact; but which if be-
lieved by the court, would be sufficient to bring
about a conviction and also hang the accused. It
appears that when Eggers was camped in Allcock’s


house by the side of the road adjacent to his hide-
out, prior to the hold-up, he was obliged to make
some improvised meals consisting of tinned fish
and boiled eggs, and when the police searched the
place they found some labels that had been removed
from fish-tins concealed between the boards in the
wall.
When I was in the courthouse in Greymouth at
the preliminary trial, a young man as a witness for
the Crown swore that he could identify those labels
as being on the tins of fish that he had sold to the
accused. I thought this evidence most remarkable,
and would weigh very heavily against the accused,
but that was not all. This witness also said, to
back up the truth of his evidence, that the shop
where he worked was the only shop in Greymouth
where tinned fish with that label was sold. I
thought this last statement most extraordinary and
also seemed like a fish story. I mentioned it to
another grocer who told me that this evidence was
purely a concoction, and that nearly every grocer
in Greymouth stocked that brand of fish.
I left Greymouth before Eggers was tried in
Christchurch and something like about thirty people
got a free trip over and back as witnesses, when as
Eggers said himself they had enough evidence to
hang him twenty times. In America if a man can
be proved guilty no time is lost in executing. Killers
have been captured, tried, found guilty and executed
inside of four hours; but in some countries it is
necessary to fill up the courts with implements of
slaughter, articles of clothing, furniture, and some-
times nearly a house, with the farm and scenery
to set it off. I have read De Balzac, Arnold Bennett,
Shakespeare and other authorities on legal technique,
and I know from my own general understanding
that shallow greatness and legal technique are full
brothers, cruising around the world arm in arm,
and have the self-given power to defy anyone who
elects to challenge their integrity.
I left the coast and arrived in Wellington, where
Frank Griffin had been training for his second fight


with Dinny Murphy, and I was looking for diggings.
The usual custom in those days was to get a room
and eat at the restaurants, of which Wellington had
a good number. Frank was leaving for the coast in
a couple of days, and I was able to get the room that
he was vacating, and I seemed to be well set with a
single room in a quiet position in Dixon Street, not
too far to walk for meals. There was only a married
couple and myself staying there, and after a couple
of days my bed was not being made so I contacted
the lady lodger and asked her where the landlady
was, and she said that both she and her husband
had gone to the West Coast; also that they were
continually running backwards and forwards, and
that some people thought they were interested in
the murder trial. I said “Hell! Is this a parasite or
a plague that is following me around the country?”
I stayed at this place for about two weeks with
nobody in charge, and it seemed to me like a ghost
ship, so I shifted up to Napier and was staying at
a private hotel where there were a good number
of people. I was just resting and taking the air.
There was a young woman staying in the house who
could talk, and it appeared to me that she was a bit
of a kite flyer, but that didn’t matter as I like people
to talk even if they are not telling the truth because
when people talk we get to know them, and the
devil you know is better than the devil you don’t
know. Let us call this lady Stella. She could
break the monotony of my life, although right from
the start I had and never intended to have any more
interest in her than listening, and now and again
get a question along to her between records, for the
purpose of trying to find out who and what she was..
Stella was a big girl in her own way and had
some very important connections. By accident or
design, if I appeared to be about she would get
hooked up on the telephone with some big shot and
when she would put the receiver down she would
tell me with a sigh that this gentleman was so
wealthy and was pestering the life out of her to
marry him, but he would keep as she was in no hurry


and there was plenty of time for her to think of
getting married. From what I could understand
she was Just having a holiday. I was talking to her
one day in the sitting room and she remarked on
the beautiful day and what a pity it was to be inside;
and she suggested a stroll along, I think she said,
the Marine Parade. Being a bit shy and putting on
my favourite blush when trying to make an im-
pression, I said I would, and just like a boy and a
girl we strolled down to the end of the Parade. As
soon as we left the house everybody seemed to be
looking at us, which didn’t trouble me as I thought
that they would recognise us as two strangers. I
had already learned from her that she knew a good
deal about Reef ton and Greymouth, but nothing
further than that.
We sat down on one of the seats, talking and
enjoying the sun until nearly lunch-time, and then
strolled home, and on our way back people were
still looking curiously at us. However we arrived
home and I started to think about things. Up
until then I had never been in any domestic
entanglements, but had had some narrow escapes,
blackmail being one of them. I started to think
that I may be walking out with a married woman,
and also walking out into some deep water, and
must now be careful, so to a certain extent I
avoided her company. Being a novice at this class
of work I was not sure what I should do, but I re-
membered Michael Angelo saying that an artist
must have his measuring tools not in his hands but
in the eye.
A couple of days later I was sitting on a seat on
the Marine Parade in company with another man,
when presently along came Stella looking her best,
and when she got within speaking distance she ad-
dressed me by my Christian name. I’m afraid I
blushed a little as she appeared as if she was coming
up to sit on my knee, and I was actually afraid and
looked straight at her as she advanced. I think my
eyes indicated the antipathy of my soul, and she
shied off and continued along the path. My newly


acquired companion on my right looked at me and
said, “Do you know that lady?” and I said “Yes, in
a way; she is staying at the Put-and-Take private
hotel, where I am staying.”
As he was so much interested, I said “Do you
know who she is?” and he said “Isn’t that supposed
to be the girl friend of that cove who did the shoot-
ing on the West Coast?” I said “I have no idea
about that, but do you mean it?” and he said “Oh,
yes, quite a few have told me that.”
I bit my lip for a second, and then I thought to
myself “Is this plague still following me?” And
the following morning I took the early train back to
Wellington, this time staying at the Waverley private
hotel in Marion Street.


CHAPTER IV
THE DOUBLE DECEPTION
EIGHT years ago I used to stay next door at the
Fountain Hall private hotel, where about twenty
or thirty people usually boarded, including two
West Coasters. One’s name was Jack and he was
from the Progress Junction, Reefton. A fine looking
young man with a round full face, a big mop of
light curly hair, and what the girls used to call
“lovely big blue eyes.” The other man was Tom,
and he belonged to Westport. He was a bit of a lad
but a very good companion. The proprietress of
this place had a family of five, three girls and two
boys. They were Tom’s cousins, and most of the
people boarding there were either acquainted with
Tom or his cousins and it was much like family life
staying there. Tom was working at the gas-works
and I understood him to say that he was stoking
boilers. Jack was doing pick and shovel work at a
big clay bank in Kaiwarra. To see Jack and Tom
walking down the street dressed up you would not
take them to be common labourers, especially Jack,
as he was an exceptionally good-looking fellow and
would readily be taken for a stage artist or a
musician. It was their first time in Wellington and
they were making the best of things, having all the
fun they could, when they could.
One of their chief diversions, which is quite
common among both male and female alike when
living away from the place in which they are known,
was to pretend to be somebody else. Neither of
them changed their names but they would not
divulge the true nature of their occupations to any
of their newly acquainted girl friends, of which
they had plenty. Jack, although a little on the shy
side, was a great asset to Tom, being such a fine


looking fellow that all the girls were after him, and
as Tom was nearly always with him at week-ends, he
would cash in on many new acquaintances. These
two boys were having a really good time, so much
so that they both had an idea, like many vain young
men, that sooner or later they would run across
some wealthy girl, get married and live happily ever
afterwards. Tom was still running under his own
name but was an engineer employed by the railways
department, and likewise Jack, but he was posing
as the manager of one of the biggest warehouses
in Wellington, and everything was going according
to plan.
They both came home one night and told me
that they had struck oil at last, having met two
heiresses from Napier on holiday, who might take
a situation in Wellington for a change, but that
both of them could be classed as horribly rich.
After they had met these two girls a few times and
taken them to plays, picture theatres and other
places of entertainment, they were greatly impressed
with their culture and learning; quite different from
the ordinary average girl of the working-class type.
Tom’s girl’s name was Lorna and Jack’s was Lucy.
As time went on they all seemed to be so much in-
terested, one way and another, that they all became
greatly attached to each other. All their hearts
seemed to beat together until they met one evening
and Loma, being the spokesman, told Tom and Jack
that each of them were the only child of the family
and that both their mothers had written and asked
them if they would come home for a week and then
return to Wellington. Loma’s Dadda would be
collecting ten thousand pounds on a portion of his
property that he had just sold, and Lucy’s Dadda
had also just sold two house properties in Auckland,
and he and Loma’s father had decided that as the
two girls liked Wellington they had agreed to give
the girls a hundred pounds each and let them return
to Wellington. As Lorna put the position before
the company this news had come so suddenly that
it was like being blown off their feet with a gust of


wind, and as the boys should know that for their
mutual company and pleasure the girls had over-
stayed their leave, and incidentally overspent their
allowance, and for the purpose of not disturbing the
good relationships that had existed at home with
their respective Mummas and Daddas, they would
like to know where they could raise ten pounds each
on some diamond necklaces which they said they
had.
When Lorna finished her little speech Jack was
unable to get his hand into his pocket quickly
enough, as he was not one who would see a girl
short of a little ready cash, and would ten pounds
be enough for Lucy. She said it would, and how
much she appreciated such a ready response from a
man with a big heart and a noble disposition. Jack
was about to hand over the cash when Tom said,
“Hold on, can we have the jewellery as security?”,
and Loma with an indignant air thrust her hand
into her handbag and pulled out a well polished and
sparkling necklace. Simultaneously, Lucy did the
same and everything was moving so quickly that be-
fore Tom and Jack knew what they were doing, the
girls each had ten pounds tucked away in their
handbags, and the boys were standing fumbling
with a couple of diamond necklaces. After this
little confusion both Tom and Jack tried over
and over again to explain that they were not
doubting their bonafides but would keep the
jewellery just as a bond that they would both be
back in a week’s time. Then Lorna cut in and said
“You have no fear now that we won’t come back,
considering that you are holding between you a
couple of hundred pounds’ worth of jewellery.”
Tom and Jack took the girls home, or near their
home, as they used to tell the boys that they didn’t
want their people in Napier to know that they were
going out with young men, which made a big im-
pression upon the boys. They concluded that they
were associating with a couple of very exclusive
young ladies, and furthermore they had both been
warned several times not to ever breathe a word


about being out with them. After saying goodnight
and getting very strict instructions not to be careless
and leave the jewellery where anyone might steal
it, Tom said that he would get one of his cousins to
lock it up, and as for Jack they had no need to worry
about him. As a manager of a warehouse he would
place his in the big iron safe which was cast burglar-
proof. After those assurances, they said au revoir,
but not goodbye.
When Tom and Jack were walking home through
the Basin Reserve, Jack remarked that it was rather
mean on their part to demand the jewellery,
especially from people of such high standing; but
Tom was more of a businessman, and said that it
was always as well to be sure in dealing with other
people, besides those two girls might just find out
by accident that Jack was a common navvy, and that
he was just a common fireman at the Wellington
gasworks. Another rotten phase of the question
was that the girls might in the interval meet a
couple of big boys of their own class, and forget all
about them. After all this summing up, they were
both of the same opinion and thought that they had
handled a very awkward problem in a practical
manner. They were both very proud to think that,
either by accident or otherwise, they actually had
those two girls under their thumbs, which was not
bad for a couple of raw country-bred boys who had
only been in the capital city a few months.
Now about the safe custody of those jewels, Tom
said that he wouldn’t let his cousins know anything
about their business, and would not think of hand-
ing the jewels over to them, and as Jack’s safe was
only a bogey he wanted to know what could be done
with them. Tom had a fair-sized wooden box made
of kauri timber with a good lock on it, and sug-
gested that they put the jewels in there, and that
was agreed upon. When they got home the jewels
were carefully wrapped in tissue paper, placed in
the toe of an old boot, and duly locked in the big
kauri box. Tom was careful to place the key under


his pillow each night and also to carry it with him
to work each day.
This work was very trying, as Tom had never
before undertaken such a responsibility, and often
used to tell Jack that he was sorry such a thing
had ever come their way, but they fully realised—
especially Tom, as he was the elder of the two and
it was always he who made stipulations and
arrangements in connection with their many little
love-affairs—that after many skirmishes with girls
of their own manner and mode of life, they seemed
to think, and rightly so, that they had moved up
the social ladder, and were about to marry into
money. The first part of their idea was very true,
but the second part was very much amiss.
When the two girls departed for Napier it was
necessary for them to have the boys’ address, and
Jack had already given Lucy the number of his
boss’s private box, which arrangement had previ-
ously been made. Just to centralise things, Tom
arranged that Loma could address all correspond-
ence in care of Jack as he was in a responsible
position, and all letters would be safer through that
channel.
Tom and Jack confided a good deal in me re-
garding their little love-affairs, and on one occasion
I had the pleasure of being introduced to both the
girls through meeting them one evening with the
boys. Later on I met Lorna in a land agent’s office
where she worked. I had a block of land for sale
at the time and just happened to have put it into
her employer’s hands for sale, and strange to say
Lorna, knowing that I was a friend of Tom’s, asked
me as a favour not to give Tom any information.
I assured her that I would not and strictly kept my
word.
Now time was passing, a couple of weeks had
gone by, and neither Tom nor Jack had received a
line from Loma or Lucy. I don’t know whether it
was their affection for the girls, or what it was, but
I could see that a change had come over the two
of them. After tea in the evening they would both


dress themselves up, walk out and stand on the
footpath looking rather serious, also looking about
as if they were in search of somebody. Sometimes
I would stroll down the street with them and they
would be very quiet, keeping a watchful eye upon
everyone who passed. It was now more than two
weeks since the girls had left Wellington, and no
word from them yet, so one evening both Jack and
Tom were discussing something in earnest out front,
and when I joined their company under instructions
not to divulge a secret they immediately told me
about the jewels, which news was very interesting
to me. They wanted to know if I had gone through
an experience of this kind and what did I think
about girls generally. I told them for the first part
that I had never had anything in bond as a guaran-
tee that a girl would come back to me, and for the
second part I was of the opinion that girls were
very delicate and sometimes elusive things to
handle, especially if you let them down or dropped
them suddenly. Tom was prepared to take my in-
formation in a sporty kind of way, but Jack was
more serious and thought that some action should
be taken.
Jack then asked me if I had ever had any real
love-affairs that gave me grief or pain, and I told
him that only a few years before a young man had
taken my best girl away and married her, only
leaving me the memory of being in love with her,
and that some day I would dip my nib in some bitter
juice and stir up the bitterness of the days of long
ago.
When I assured them that holding such a bond
would almost guarantee their return, Tom said,
“Yes, that seems sound enough but I don’t care
about having a couple of hundred pounds planted
in the toe of one of my boots, and being responsible
for it.” Jack agreed with Tom, and they decided to
give the girls another week, and if they got no word
from them, or they failed to return, the matter would
be placed in the hands of the police. This was Jack’s
suggestion, but Tom finally laughed as he was far


too big a man to think of such action, and ex-
plained that they would decide in a week’s time
what would or could be done.
They put in another quiet week and both seemed
to think that life was not worth much without the
company of the two girls from whom they were
separated, and nothing they could think of could be
done about it. At first everything looked just an
ordinary thing that might happen to anyone. It
was Friday evening and tomorrow would decide a
certain part of the difficulty.
Unbeknown to Tom and Jack, Lorna and Lucy
knew more about their business than they were
aware of, both having had a good education at the
girls’ college near their home, and although their
fathers were only working men, they were intellectu-
ally above the average girl owing to their studious
natures.
Loma’s father, “Old Ben” as he was generally
known to his workmates at the gasworks, knew Tom
quite well and often used to hear him cracking some
new joke at lunch-time about some new love ad-
venture; but during the past few weeks Ben could
see a change in Tom but didn’t bother to ask him
what it was all about. Lucy actually worked in the
manager’s office at the warehouse of which Jack said
he was the manager, and at times she would see Jack
passing by on his way from work dressed in
dungarees and his hobnailed boots, clothes usually
worn by a navvy in those days. Tom used to say
that Jack would blush so hard at times that his ears
would move backwards and I often wondered, when
I heard the full story afterwards, what Jack would
have looked like if he had happened to look up at
the window and had seen Lucy gaping at him.
Lucy’s father, Ned, also worked in the gasworks
but was somewhat separated from the rest of them
owing to the nature of his work. Lorna and Lucy
had been lifelong pals and neighbours. Saturday
morning of the third week since taking delivery of
the jewels found Tom at work in the gasworks as
usual, and old Ben could see that he was not as


bright and cheerful as he used to be, so invited him
up to have tea the following evening, and would he
bring his friend Jack along. Tom was glad of this
invitation, and when he mentioned it to Jack he
was also pleased as he thought that in all probability
there would be some girls present who would distract
their attention from their previous sad loss. Lorna
and Lucy knew that the boys were coming along,
and to a great extent had the best of the deal as far
as playing their part was concerned.
On Saturday night after tea, Tom and Jack were
all dressed up ready to go out and when I came
downstairs they were having a very confidential
talk, and confided in me that they were taking the
jewels along to a jeweller in Manners Street to have
them valued. They asked me if I would come along
with them and we duly arrived there; but on the
way down all sorts of things were spoken about, Tom
suggesting that it might be stolen property. Jack
thought that they might be the property of their
parents, but the jeweller soon decided. Tom had
both strings in his pocket and we all walked in to-
gether. The jeweller looked somewhat surprised,
but Tom steadied his nerves by placing two strings
upon the glass case in front of us, and asked the
jeweller what the value of those gems would be.
The jeweller said in a surprised kind of way
“Where did you get them?” Tom thought about
something big, and said “I have a lot of them growing
on gum-trees at my place,” and the jeweller, eyeing
them more closely, said “That’s just as well, as they
are not a bad class of glass, but you wouldn’t have
enough there to make a sugar basin.” With that,
Tom started to wrap the so-called jewels up in a
parcel again, at the same time wanting to know
what their true value was, and when told four and
sixpence each, they started to walk out, both blush-
ing like schoolboys.
The three of us strolled up and down the town
that evening, but neither Tom nor Jack was pleased
when I ventured to speak about the diamond neck-
laces; but Tom, who usually wore a happy expression,


which is a gentleman’s badge, was inclined to be in
a quandary as to whether he was miserable or happy.
He had enough sense to know that both he and Jack
had met their match, and that now the time had
arrived for action. When we got home that night,
I anticipated that a conference would be taking
place, so I walked along with the two boys to their
room, sat on a chair, and just waited to hear what
was going to happen. Tom asked Jack what he
thought about the situation, and as Jack was al-
ready informed about the invitation to tea the fol-
lowing evening, he thought that they might leave
the matter to stand over for a day or so which would
give them a little more time to finally decide what
action would be taken. If either, or both of them,
decided to lay an information against the girls,
they would both have to give a clear and concise
description of their names and occupations, and
when they came to consider this phase of the
question, they were both inclined to be halted.
At the breakfast table next morning, both boys
seemed to be in better spirits, especially Tom who
had gathered in the remnants of the good old
smile that he used to wear. Jack also seemed to
be more satisfied with himself, and was able to
pass a humorous remark to Tom about the experi-
ence of coming to life again.
When Lorna and Lucy collected the twenty
pounds, Loma lost no time in depositing the whole
amount in the bank, credited to “Us Four” to guard
against any disturbance, which she did not intend
to allow to develop to any unusual dimensions if
she could help it.
Tom and Jack were in great spirits all day
Sunday, and advised the proprietress that they
would be going out to tea in the evening. They
arrived at Ben’s place at five-fifty p.m., and after
their knocking the door was opened by Ben, who
hospitably invited them inside. Tom introduced
Jack, and Ben introduced his wife to both of them.
Then “Old Ned” walked in, shook hands with Tom,
and Ben introduced Jack.


Then Loma and Lucy walked in, also Ned’s wife
who was introduced to Tom and Jack; and the only
thing that took the jar out of such an awkward
situation was the amount of hand-shaking and re-
marks about what a lovely day it had been. Ben
then asked his wife if tea was ready, and she
answered by directing each one to a seat, which she
managed in appropriate style, having everyone
seated in order of relationship to each other. That
move being completed, she actually had four couples
seated, and to prevent any embarrassment which
might be present—especially with Jack, as at times
it seemed that he was not quite sure whether he was
swallowing food or the Adam’s apple—Loma kept
up a continual stream of talk, and would frequently
invite Tom to make some comment. This Tom was
only too pleased to do, to free his mind from the
great surprise and somewhat of a shock which he
was passing through. As far as Jack was concerned
a great battle was taking place within him, from
which he would have given a considerable sum to
be free.
This was Lorna’s little drama, and she was re-
sponsible for everything connected with it, and
seemed to rise to the occasion by keeping up a good
flow of conversation and as near as possible dis-
tributing it evenly amongst the company. In fact,
she was doing so well that she was quite elated about
how well things were going. Lorna could be readily
classed as a very strong personality, and in reality
was well informed, solidly instructed, and her ex-
perience was sufficient to guard her against roguery,
hypocrisy and seduction. Now she had a couple of
wild boys from the West Coast, and she felt as if
she had just caged a couple of lions which at her
hands would soon be tamed. Lucy was one
hundred per cent, behind Lorna in everything she
suggested and did. The tea being over, Loma sug-
gested that the old folks need not wait for them as
they would clear up everything, and laughingly re-
marked that the boys would help to dry the dishes.


When the respective parents retired to the sit-
ting room Lorna, only having Lucy and the two boys
to attend to, became more composed and dignified.
She had no desire to prate over anything, as every-
thing was running according to her plan. On the
other hand she was dealing with people who were
more entitled to pity than punishment, and Just to
relieve the situation a little, she suggested that they
all enter the sitting room to see how the old folks
were. Finding them comfortably seated and dozing
by a good fire, Lorna knew that they wouldn’t like
to be disturbed, so she arranged a little company of
four which she had already invented, and asked
Lucy to play some popular airs while they had a
sing-song, and to everyone’s surprise Tom and Jack
rose to the occasion and demonstrated that they
both had had some training in sacred songs as well
as in the popular rag-time chorus songs. The old
people commenced to sit up and smile and both
girls were beginning to think that they had found
something. After several good choruses were sung,
the old people went to bed, and Lucy’s parents who
lived next door told Lucy not to be late home.
“Just Us Four” were now able to look at each
other and look upon themselves as the principal
actors in this world of love and adventure. The
company had now settled down to a quiet talk, and
Lorna, who was awaiting a favourable opportunity,
produced the bank book, which showed a credit
balance of twenty pounds deposited in the name of
“Just Us Four” about three weeks ago. She pro-
ceeded to explain that that was her way of thinking
about how two young men might be brought to
discipline, and that if the two boys were prepared
to return the beads, which were only the bonds of
friendship, she would go down to the bank and
draw the money and
Tom interrupted and said that he would rather
keep the bond and Jack would also do likewise, as
both of them were of the opinion that they had
made a good investment. Lorna agreed, and said
that now an understanding had been reached the


money could stay where it was and they would see
what luck it would bring to “Just Us Four.”
Tom looked at Jack and said “All’s well that ends
well. Monday morning is coming nearer and we
had better be leaving, as the time is nine o’clock.”
After saying a fond goodnight to the girls they pro-
ceeded on their way home, and while walking
through the Basin Reserve Tom laughed and said
“What do you think about our two heiresses?” and
Jack said that he actually didn’t have time to think,
but had no hesitation in saying that he thought
they had struck their match.
All members of the party remained in their
occupations, while frequent meetings were held and
some good discussions took place. It appeared that
the little party were joined together under such
queer circumstances that they might never be sep-
arated. Twelve months passed and Tom and Loma
and Lucy and Jack were happily married, and were
living with their in-laws.
I called on “Just Us Four” forty years afterwards.
Lucy’s and Lorna’s parents were dead and buried.
Tom and Lorna’s five children, three boys and two
girls, were all married and settled in different parts
of New Zealand. Jack and Lucy’s family of two
boys and a girl were also married and settled in
other parts of New Zealand. Tom, who early in his
married life launched out in the real estate business,
had made enough money to comfortably retire, and
Jack was also very successful as a builder and con-
tractor, retiring after thirty-eight years of married
life.
I was sitting down in Tom and Lorna’s house,
Jack and Lucy being present, and on rising to say
goodnight remarked that “Just Us Four” seemed
to be very happy, and Tom said “It’s a wonder you
didn’t buy a bond in your young days, Don,” and I
said with just a little feeling of regret “Yes, I wish
that I had done so.”


CHAPTER V.
THE COPPER MINE CAMP
WHILE in Nelson after leaving the Coast in 1904
I was gathering up a party of men for Mr
Jackson, to work at the copper mine which
was starting for the second time. I picked up a
fellow who was generally known as “Long Jack,” a
native of Australia. He was tall and thin and a
blacksmith by trade.
I also got another fellow whose name was Giffey
but I found out later that he was known to his
workmates at the waterworks in Brook Street as
“Lousy Jack.” I used to meet him fairly often
after I arranged for him to be one of the party and
I “shouted” for him a few times without getting a
drink in return. However, drinks were only three-
pence a glass, and besides, if I asked a man to have
a drink, I didn’t do it expecting him to “shout” for
me, but it transpired that the boys at the dam had
all had him as a guest and he would always claim
that he was “broke” and was never known to
“shout.” The story goes that a man wandered into
his camp one day and found his bank-book which
had a credit balance of two hundred and fifty
pounds—a good deal of money for a man to have
while sponging on his mates.
“Long Jack” was a foot-runner and also a track
rider with the bike. I had another acquaintance
who was working at the waterworks and he said to
me one day “Come along with me up to Mr Vining’s,
and I will get you a bike and we will go for a spin.”
I said “What does bike hire cost in these parts?”
and he said “It costs nothing, as I am agent for Mr
Vining and if I have a likely or a potential buyer of
a bike he lends one until a sale is made,” but I told
him that I had no intention of buying a bike and he
said that it didn’t matter but to go along with him.


We went along to Mr Vining’s, opposite the old
Post Office. I was introduced and before I knew
where I was I found myself leading a first-class
Massey-Harris free-wheel cycle (which was not com-
mon in those days) out into the street, and away
we went, just travelling around Nelson looking at
the layout and beauty of this quiet little township.
Riding this bike was how I first made a companion
of “Long Jack.” We did a number of long trips to-
gether and we also visited the copper mine before I
started work there.
After “Long Jack” and I visited the copper mine
or the base where the manager lived, I handed in
the bike on which I had been racing around the
country-side and asked Mr Vining how much that
would be. I was surprised to learn that the charge
would be nothing, and could not understand at this
stage of my acquaintance with Mr Vining why it
should be that way.
After having ridden around the Nelson district
with “Long Jack,” who was a good companion, I
met “Lousy Jack,” as it was time for us to be getting
ready for a start looking for copper on the Dun
Mountain; and as a surprise to me I found that
“Lousy Jack” had a bitter antipathy towards “Long
Jack,” creating an awkward situation. I thought
it just as well to convey the information to “Long
Jack” as it appeared that we would all be camped
together. When I told him about this little matter
he at once decided that he would not go to work
at the copper mine. This decision in my opinion
was a big loss to me, as “Long Jack” was really good
company and at all times wore a big smile, which is
actually a gentleman’s badge. Owing to some delay
at headquarters as to the time of starting, some
members of the party dropped out, leaving only
“Lousy Jack” and myself. It must not be under-
stood that he derived his name through harbouring
vermin on his body; it appears that it was brought
about by the way he had in dealing with other
people.


In those days I didn’t bother very much about
work-mates or camp-mates as I was care-free and
little points that were sometimes put across me
passed as nearly as possible unnoticed.
Giffey, as this man was known, and I decided
after the rest of the party backed out that we would
attack the mountain ourselves, so we proceeded by
train to Richmond, where we arranged about stores
and walked the remainder of the journey to the
base. Mr Turnbull was the manager and aMr
Ingram was a kind of foreman, who knew how to
find his way around the mountain by following the
goat tracks. Mr Ingram was a very big man, some-
where about six feet four inches and as straight as
an arrow. He thought he knew a lot about copper
and how to find it, and if, when travelling along
showing us the way to a camping site, he saw a
stain on any of the strata, there was copper down
there according to his idea.
We reached the camp site, where there was al-
ready a man in residence. This man was from
England and I can just remember his nick-name
“Taffy.” Taffy was a very religious man and could
do some remarkable things. He could call the dead
up from the grave if he wanted to know anything,
and he could also tell within a few pounds how
much copper was hidden in the Dun Mountain; but
he was not prepared to tell anyone because if he did
he would immediately lose this psychic power which
he claimed to possess. Taffy was good company but
soon became monotonous. However he was a good
worker and gave no trouble by trying to force his
ideas on other people.
Giffey was a hilarious, arrogant ya-hoo who used
to get a good deal of pleasure in laughing at his own
nonsensical remarks. In our first camp we were
nearly at the top of the spur which we were pros-
pecting and it was difficult to get any suitable poles
for bunk-building and other requirements. Giffey
suggested that we lay down fern at the back end of
the tent and make one bed wide enough to do the
two of us. That was agreed upon and we both


slept together. I would be about twenty-two years
of age and Giffey was twenty-eight but seemed to
have the brain of a small boy. I soon came to the
conclusion that he was not a very satisfactory bed-
mate but I didn’t say very much to him as we were
only in camp a few days and quarrels are easier
made than avoided.
We did about a week’s scratching on the surface
about the camp and then we got orders to shift
down the hill about half a mile where Ingram found
some copper-stained rock. When we pulled down
and got our gear to the next camping place I said
to Giffey that now we had plenty of timber handy I
intended to build myself a bunk and that I expected
him to do the same for himself. He asked me if
the two-man bunk didn’t suit me and I told him no.
He said that he had been used to flying-camps on the
survey and was used to sleeping on the ground so
would just put himself down at the back of the tent
and that would do him as we may be shifting again
in a week’s time. I told him there wouldn’t be much
room that way and I didn’t want to be obliged to go
outside to turn around, and besides I wouldn’t agree
to his having gear lying around on the floor, so the
best thing he could do was set to work and build
himself a bunk and save further trouble. He said
“Why trouble, are you the boss?” and I said “Yes, it
is coming to that.” He looked at me in an un-
decided manner and went and sat down for a while.
I suspected that he was trying to think of some way
out of the little task that I had set for him but after
a rest and a smoke he set to work and built himself
a bunk, I should say under protest.
After the camp was set up and we each had a
bunk to ourselves I felt more comfortable but this
comfort to most people since the beginning of time
has not been a curiosity and happiness belongs to
those who are contented. Although we had shifted
down the hill we were again employed in close prox-
imity to our old camp and the only advantage in
shifting was having a shorter distance to pack our
food, which was now just three miles from the base.


Another man had arrived, Billy Bates from Reefton,
with whom I worked in the Inglewood in that
locality. Our party now numbered four, although
several men were engaged at the base where the old
smelters used to be and where preparations were
being made re-conditioning the old plant to smelt
the ore which we hadn’t got. Men were also in the
bush laying miles of tramway and others were
cutting thousands of cords of firewood for the
furnaces, which were not required as there was
nothing in the way of ore to put in them. There
was a heap of pure copper at the mouth of one of the
drives, but this was not meant for the smelters as it
didn’t come out of that mine and nobody could tell
me where it came from.
We used to work on what the boss called a copper
lode which was no more than copper-stained rock,
and the mountain generally seemed to me to be as
free from copper as a frog is free from feathers. We
worked away at the old camp site up the hill and
after walking up and down to work each day some
arguments used to arise as to whether we should
have shifted our camp. Giffey was care-free
whether we were camped at either place or even the
South Pole, as he used to hilariously exclaim that
where could we get better than nine shillings a day
and living like fighting-cocks? Taffy thought that
we were far better off in our present camp as in-
stead of one man having to carry all the food up
an extra half-mile each man was carrying an equal
share up the hill under his own steam without losing
that amount of time which could be better applied
opening up the rich copper lode that would later
cause the furnaces to roar and supply the British
Empire with pennies. My remarks were not readily
accepted as I thought that we were only wasting-
other people’s money that could be better applied in
other directions.
A house is a good house when good folks are
within, and to be angry about trifles is mean and
childish, but to prevent rising resentment is wise


and glorious. I could see, as I thought, a rising re-
sentment in the mind of my camp-mate which was
growing bigger and bigger, and was thinking that I
might have been a little abrupt with him when giving
orders about his bunk, etc. I allowed him to retali-
ate considerably, thinking that it might relieve the
little hurt which he thought he was enduring.
Calamities that seem insurmountable when looked at
from a distance lose half their power if met and re-
sisted with fortitude.
One Sunday a party of shooters from the base
camp had been out, and on their return left
a small goat with us to be eaten as meat. I had
never as yet tasted wild meat of any kind, and I
asked Giffey if he would eat some of the meat if
I cooked it, and he said definitely no, he was not
used to that kind of living and he would never resort
to eating half-starved wild animals while he could
get butcher’s meat fattened on good sweet green
pastures. I said “Alright, boy, you needn’t preach
a sermon about it, I will try it myself.” He then
said “Don’t call me ‘boy’,” and I said “Alright, sir.”
Of course he was twenty-eight years of age and I was
just past twenty-two. Gracian once said, “Be master
of yourself first of all and afterwards you will be
master of others.” Some people develop a habit of
barking at other people, and habits at first are cob-
webs but later on grow into a tangle of cobwebs. I
set to work and skinned the goat, cleaned the
carcase and put it into the oven while “Lousy Jack”
went for a stroll down to the base.
The goat was nicely cooked by about three-thirty
p.m., this being Sunday afternoon. When I removed
the lid of the oven and placed the meat in a dish I
liked the aroma. I had put seasoning into it,
making it smell good, and I decided to taste it to see
whether I would like it or not, and while doing so
I discovered that there is very little meat on a kid
goat, so I just continued sampling until there was
nothing left but a dish half filled with bones.
Giffey arrived back at the camp at about four-
thirty, announcing that he was as hungry as a


hunter and what did I have for tea. I said that
I hadn’t bothered about putting on any tea yet as
I had a snack about an hour ago. I was lying down
on my bunk and I could see Giffey looking at the
dish. Then he called out “What did you do with
the goat?” and I said “I ate it just about an hour
ago. It was nice and tender, and I enjoyed it very
much.” Giffey didn’t say very much, and if it was
not for the fact that I might have made myself feel
uncomfortable the championship of the Dun Moun-
tain would have been decided on the spot.
That night while sitting by the fire outside,
Giffey told the other two men that his mate had
cooked a goat and eaten it before he had time to
get home and sample it. The other men said that
it was incredible that a man could consume a goat
in one meal and Giffey got up, produced the dish of
bones which caused a good deal of laughter, and to
add a little impetus to Giffey’s fury Billy Bates said,
winking at me, “Fancy camping with a man like
that.” Giffey then glared at me and emptied the
dish of bones by throwing them with terrific force
as far as he could. This little incident amused the
other men as they had heard him say that he
wouldn’t eat it. We worked on as usual, but the
other two men had something new to play with, and
they would often raise Jack’s ire by chiding him
about being done out of his share of the goat. I
used to do most of the cooking and just to be agree-
able I used to ask my mates’ advice about certain
aspects of our little mountain cafeteria and some-
times I wouldn’t. I was very fond of raw onions, so
much so that I would eat them with tears running
down my cheeks, and being the one who used to do
the catering I always had a supply on hand. One
evening when I was having tea by the fireside outside
the tent I asked Jack if he knew where the onions
were, as I was unable to find them. He said that
they had all been eaten and there were none left.
I was not quite sure about that statement as there
was a good supply on hand a couple of days before.


However the next evening Jack was having tea in
the tent and on going in to get something for my-
self what should I see right in front of me but my
noble companion sitting on the end of his bunk
eating onions. I didn’t say anything, but made an-
other search and found about a dozen in a paper
bag under Jack’s bunk in the far corner.
“He who has a thousand friends has not a
friend to spare, and he who has one enemy
shall meet him everywhere.”
One evening I was about to bake a loaf of bread
and I had the loaf ready for the oven. It was a
baking powder loaf which should be put into a hot
oven without delay. I had the oven hanging in a
high position above the fire and when I lifted it
down and removed the lid I found that meat had
been cooked in it and a fair amount of fat was in
the bottom. I smartly poured the fat into a tin
and then got a billy of water and emptied a small
amount into the oven. Giffey roared at me and
said “You will break the oven doing that,” and he
jumped up and grabbed the billy by the handle. I
held on to the billy until he got too aggressive and
then let it go, and to my surprise “Lousy Jack”
emptied its contents right in my face, or near
enough, as I ducked and it went over me. At the
same time I dropped the oven and landed Giffey
square on the jaw and he rolled away down into the
gully. None of us could see where he went, as after
he left the fire he was in darkness. After a little
silence he came walking back up the hill, grabbed
the frying pan and broke the handle off and said
“I’ll hit you with this.” I moved forward to give
him some more but Billy Bates asked me to stop,
and I did.
All this happened just before Christmas when
everyone’s nerves were frayed and we were anxious
for a change. That was my last association with
“Lousy Jack” and I was pleased to know that I had
taught him a lesson.


CHAPTER VI
BUYING A BIKE
AFTER the holidays I was staying in Nelson. I
was standing on the footpath near the Masonic
Hotel when Mr Vining rode up on a rather at-
tractive-looking bike, all nickel-plated; a Roxley, an
American job. I had noticed him riding past me several
times on this bike, which little manoeuvre would
have told an experienced person that he also had
the American technique of salesmanship. Mr
Vining was a big dark man and I should say that his
ancestors roamed around the Mediterranean in the
days gone by. He said “This is a machine that
should suit you, Mr Mundy.” I said “Oh yes! but
I have no idea about buying a bike as I have no use
for one.” However we stood talking for a while and
he told me that he was going along to the shop, and
that I had better go for a ride around town and see
how I liked it, and he handed me his bike clips and
walked away, leaving me with that which looked like
the flashest bike on the road.
I got on and rode down to the Port and along the
Rocks Road, then back to Nelson to Mr Vining’s
shop, where he met me and asked how I liked it. I
said I liked it very much but didn’t know whether
I would buy it or not, and that I would see him later
on. I was about to walk away when he said “Take
the bike, old boy, and have a look at Nelson.” I
took the bike and while riding that afternoon I re-
newed my acquaintance with “Long Jack.” Jack
was greatly taken up with my new mount and
wanted to know how much I had paid for it. I told
him that I only had it on loan but the cash price
was eleven pounds. He told me it was a cheap bike
as the one he was riding cost twenty-two pounds,
and he advised me to buy it as he considered that


his bike was half of the pleasure that he derived
from life.
I took his advice and when I went back to Mr
Vining I bought the bike at that price. I had a
general tour around Nelson and one day I met “Long
Jack” and he wanted me to go to Tadmor with him
at the week-end. Tadmor would be about fifty miles
from Nelson and he painted a great picture about
what a fine time we would have so I went along.
Jack liked a long beer and if there was anything that
he liked better than a beer, it was several beers—
and we emptied several pint pots on the road.
When a pint of beer was put in front of Jack, if
there was any froth running over the side, he would
lick all around the outside before he attacked the
actual fluid; and when he did attack it, I’ll say
he used to enjoy it. He had big dreamy eyes and
loving lips and he would look up at me and smile
while he was doing it. Jack was going up to see his
girl friend of course, but when we got there Jack
was so much steamed that his girl wouldn’t speak to
him, so we stayed the night at a boarding-house and
left the following day after lunch, and I think Jack
was glad as he appeared to be spitting chips.
As for my part the trip was a wash-out, as it only
counted to me as a pacer for “Long Jack” with the
bike and also emptying glasses of beer at every “pub”
on the road. Jack was a very thin man but it was
wonderful how much endurance he had. We
plugged along up hill and down dale, and Jack was
very happy all the way, but as we were approaching
Stoke, a few miles from Nelson, I could see from my
position as a pacer that Jack’s machine was starting
to wobble. It was crystal clear that the rider was
tiring and so far he had never allowed me to get
even with him.
Up till now I had paced Jack all the way from
Tadmor and the position was now looking interest-
ing to me, so I increased my pace until I got along-
side him but in spite of the fact that the man was
nearly used up he set to work and drew away from
me, at the same time looking back to see where I


was. I could have caught him but I could plainly
see that he was going to race me right to Nelson, so
I waited until we reached the straight on the Rocks
Road, then I challenged Jack to a race to Trafalgar
Street—the last man in to shout three times at the
Coach and Horses Inn run by old Tom Newman.
Jack said “0.K., let me see what you have got,”
and with that I drew alongside, but he would let me
go no further, so I just gave him a fair trial and
found that I could sneak past him if I wanted to.
We were riding along just about even for the first
half-mile but Jack would crowd over and as he was
not riding too steadily was rather dangerous. I
kept telling him to keep out but that made no differ-
ence and he had me nearly off the road at times.
We continued like that until we were nearly at the
Port when suddenly the front wheel of his bike
struck mine but I managed to make a good recovery.
Jack crashed badly but fortunately was not hurt.
I went back and assisted him to his feet and he was
willing to continue the race, but he was through, and
had difficulty in reaching the Coach and Horses
under his own steam.
The old horse, as he used to call himself, lined
up to the bar and was prepared to pay out, but I
only allowed him to shout once, explaining that I
wanted to buy him a full pint of the best in recog-
nition of the noble fight that he had put up against
a better man. He said “I am not so sure about
that,” and I wasn’t either. I got him home to the
boarding house and he was soon in bed smiling and
laughing, remarking, “She’s a great country,” and
I said “Yes Jack, but it’s men like you and me who
make it great,” and still smiling, he agreed. I said
that it was a poor reception that his girl had given
him and that the trip was only a waste of time, and
he replied that girls were like that and that he was
used to their ways, and would I come with him again
next Saturday. I thanked him but said “No, you
can have the field to yourself.”
I met “Long Jack” in Marlborough just ten years
later, and he was just as full of beer as a man could


be without being uncomfortable. He informed me
that he had renewed his courtship with the girl at
Tadmor and was now married to her and had a
small family. I met one of his sons at the same
place in Marlborough twenty years later. He told
me that his father had died when he was quite
young and had left no estate. This son was on the
dole, and could slide a pint down his neck in a pro-
fessional manner equally as good as his father did
before him.


CHAPTER VII
PRISON WARDERS AT PLAY
START some habit on its travels and there is no
telling where it will stop. After leaving Nelson
I worked in the quarries and tunnels in Welling-
ton and from there I went to Auckland and worked
at Mt. Eden Prison. I was very much interested
not only in the character of the prisoners but also
that of the warders. From what I could see in
regard to the habits of some of the habitues of jails,
quite a number look upon prison as a home. I have
seen men liberated on one day and they would be
back again at the same job within a week. The old-
time burglars, confidence men, and all swindlers are
a poor type of the human race, as they will put in
the greater part of their lives in jail through trying
to annex something that doesn’t belong to them.
The greatest problem today is the murderer, of
which the majority are sex perverts who because
they commit murder at a very young age will most
of them be liberated in their early thirties. There
is a great number of this class of murderer. They
should not be placed in the ordinary prison but in
jails where criminal lunatics are kept. A great deal
of discretion should be used in classifying criminals,
lunatics, and criminal lunatics. The criminal
lunatic is a crafty fellow and can plan a murder
sometimes more cleverly than a man who couldn’t
be classed as a criminal lunatic.
While working at Mt. Eden I only attended one
or two dances, and social life was just limited to
walking from one pub to the other in the evenings
to get a drink, and sometimes several drinks, and
perbans a smile and a little attention from the bar-
maids. I used to spend freely, and sometimes too


freely, because one of my tutors in early life told me
not to be wasteful but never allow anyone to have
cne privuege oi saying tnat f was mean. Livmg by
mat rule some oi my brother orncers used to maxe
it their business to meet me m the street and spend
tne evening with me. There were two oi this class
who could easily be classed as professional “bums”
as they would not only sponge on me for beer but
would smoke ah the tobacco and cigarettes tnat 1
would give them. One of these biros had a very
imposmg manner, so much so that after we had
done tne rounds together one evening he just
mentioned when leaving me to go home, alter havmg
his neck well oiled at my expense, that he had en-
joyed the evening very much and when would I be
coming down town again. I don’t just remember
what I said to him, but it was the last evening that
he had with me—at my expense or otherwise.
There was another chap who worked at Mt. Eden
whose name was Ted. He was a really good fellow
but the “booze” had him and he knew it. He was
educated at the Dublin University, came to New
Zealand as a young man and joined the permanent
Artillery at Wellington, but in a very short time he
developed a great liking for the New Zealand beer
and incidentally became a champion drinker. He
had a drinking match with one of the biggest men
in the Artillery, whose name was Tom. I know he
was a very big man, as he was pointed out to me
one day by Clarence Stevens, who was also a member
of the Artillery. This drinking bout took place in
Wellington, and Ted told me that he beat Tom so
easily that Tom was in the horrors for four days.
According to Ted’s own story he drank himself out
of the Artillery and joined the Police Force. He
steadied up for a while and was married, but when
his wife died he drank himself out of the Force and
became a private citizen for some time. Eventually
tiring of private employment he decided to try the
Government again, and this time it was the Prisons


Department, but in the meantime the Commissioner
of Police had shifted to the Prisons Department and
was now Director-General. Of course Ted knew
that he had to face his old boss who had sacked
him for insobriety, so he went straight for a couple
of weeks so that the alcoholic bubbles would not be
showing through the skin. He lined up and after
his old chief had had a good look at him and given
him a severe probing about his behaviour, he gave
Ted another chance.
Ted was sent to Mt. Eden and he walked a chalk
line until he completed his probation, which was six
months. When he was appointed to the permanent
staff he was able to resume his old profession. Ted
and I used to be out a good deal together and after
what he had told me about his ability to consume
more beer than anyone else, I used to notice that
we would stand up to the bar during the evening and
just drink —because Ted always said that if a man
was at the bar and not drinking, he was only wasting
time.
There was one good point about him, he would
always shout when his turn came round. In those
days in Auckland we used to order a bottle each and
pour the beer into the glasses ourselves. After being
out with Ted a few times I could see that when he
was drunk I would just be feeling comfortable. So
one Sunday morning when we were talking together
in our home at the prison I challenged Ted to a
drinking bout some evening to be arranged, the bout
to be from six p.m. to ten p.m., the loser to pay for
the amount of beer consumed. Ted was very pleased
with this suggestion, as for him it made the future
look brighter because at that time he was very dry.
No final arrangements were made as to where this
match would take place, and shortly afterwards I
was sent over the bay to Fort Courtley relieving for
one month, as the jailer was laid up with
rheumatism.
One Saturday morning I had a ring from Ted
asking me to meet him at the Ferry Wharf, North


Shore, at six p.m. that evening, which I did, and my
noble companion jumped off the first ferry about
ten minutes late looking fit and well. After greet-
ing each other and making other incidental remarks
we automatically headed for the nearest hotel and
started emptying bottles of ale at a fairly fast rate.
He made arrangements with the publican to decide
who was the best drinker and also who would be the
most sober man to leave the bar at closing time.
Ted was out for the love of drinking and I was out
to get all the fun that could be had. After we got
well under way we started to sing that old and ap-
propriate air “We parted on the Shore,” and I think
that Ted must have had a few before leaving Auck-
land because by eight p.m. his eyes were starting to
roll and his pronunciation was obviously defective.
From then on the going was easy for me. I would
encourage the singing with my glass in my hand and
lean up against the counter and pour the beer out.
We both had late leave and left the hotel at closing
time, Ted having had as much as he could carry
under his own power. He was sixteen stone and
had a fairly big waistline, and as far as I could see
had some difficulty in balancing himself on the
journey to the wharf. In fact he was so bad that
I decided to accompany him to Auckland, and after
leaving the ferry we walked up Queen Street to the
foot of Symonds Street, where I put Ted on the tram
which would carry him to within a few yards of the
jail. I got back to my quarters at Fort Courtley just
a few minutes before midnight and rolled into bed
fairly tired, but before going to sleep I hummed a
song that I once heard:
Twist thee, twine thee! Even so,
Mingle shades of joy and woe,
Hope and Fear and Peace and Strife,
In the thread of human life.
While the mystic twist is spinning,
And the infant’s life beginning,
Dimly sees through twilight bending,
To what varied shapes attending.


Passions wild and Follies vain,
Pleasures soon exchanged for pain;
Doubt and Jealousy and Fear
In the magic dance appear.
Now they wax and now they dwindle,
Whirling with the whirling spindle.
Twist ye, twine ye! even so,
Mingle human bliss and woe.
I was then transferred back to Mount Eden, and
when meeting my convivial companion I was sur-
prised to learn that when I put him on the tram the
previous Saturday, instead of alighting opposite the
jail he continued with the tram to its destination
and found himself walking along the railway line
at Onehunga at eleven-fifty p.m. When someone
told him where he was, he lost no time in getting
into a cab and instructing the cabby to get him to
Mount Eden jail as fast as he could. The cabby
arrived at the prison gate at twelve-ten a.m. and Ted
was placed on the carpet next morning and fined
ten shillings in addition to cab fare, ten shillings.
He wanted to know how much he owed me, and
when I told him that if he would admit having lost
the drinking championship I would say we were
square. He was quite satisfied with that suggestion,
but he could never figure out how I put him down
and he often used to say that he thought I had
hollow legs.
I met one of the old warders in Wellington about
eight years later, and he told me that my old friend
Ted took to the drink and died under somewhat sad
circumstances away in the King Country.
On two days, it stands not to run from thy
grave,
The appointed, and the unappointed day,
On the first, neither balm nor physician can
save,
Nor thee on the second, the unwise slay.


CHAPTER VIII
THE BLOWER
WHEN I was contracting in a lumber camp at
Turramurrah, about thirty miles along the
Newcastle line from Sydney, I took in as a
partner a fellow by the name of Bill, better known
as “the Blower,” and so far as I was concerned the
Blower was indispensable because he could keep a
saw, which means that he could sharpen a saw and
keep it in good working order. The Blower could
work if he liked, but being in the position that he
was in (the most important man on the job), he
didn’t relax his muscles fully until sitting down by
the fire late in the evening. I had a couple of men
working for me besides the Blower and the three of
them were camped right by me. The Blower would
start chopping and sawing as soon as the evening
meal was over, and the two men, Martin O’Rooke
and Mick Hennessy would be his audience. Some-
times Dick Bourke, a farmer near by, would come
over to have a yarn but very often the subject of
religion would crop up and Dick would perhaps leave
early, and then the Blower would commence chop-
ping and sawing again. One night I was actually
asleep and the Blower was chopping a match with
a Jack Stewart on the West Coast of New Zealand,
and it appeared that for the purpose of demon-
strating how to sever the log with the last blow and
jump clear, the Blower got so excited at winning by
only one blow that he jumped right into the fire.
Such a roar of laughter was raised that I was
awakened with a start, and I jumped out of bed
and looked out the door to see the Blower settling
down on a box to rest after winning this big match
somewhere in New Zealand.


Another night I was awakened by a considerable
noise of hurrahing by Mick and Martin, who were
cheering the Blower after he had just defeated Bill
Featherston on a two-foot block for a wager of fifty
pounds aside at Kumara, New Zealand. With the
Blower it was not spinning dreams about the
beautiful days ahead, but imaginary dreams of the
days that were gone—leaving a lasting memory of
that which might or might not have been.
I used to try and get the Blower to go to bed and
leave the chopping until the morning, but it was no
use; he would continue to fell trees and saw up logs
until sometimes nearly midnight, and turn up to
work in the morning in a tired condition.
I knew the Blower on the West Coast of New
Zealand, and also saw him competing there. My
brother Jack told me that the Blower was a great
general and knew all the fine points about chopping.
The Blower in spite of all his blowings and skite was
what is generally known as a slip-up, or a dark horse.
Nobody seemed to be able to measure him up
properly as he was a very erratic performer.
The Blower was only a small man about five feet
six inches in height, and about ten stone, and al-
though he was only thirty-three years of age he was
quite grey. On the top of all this he was frequently
drunk, and would usually walk around with his
mouth half open with a cigarette butt adhering to
the top lip.
The Sydney show was near at hand and some
chopping events were on the programme. The
Blower was in town half stunned, with a week’s
growth on his chin accompanying his grey locks.
He barged his way in amongst the organisers and
handicappers and registered his name as a com-
petitor in the big event. Then he started to blow
and blow until the officials took pity on him and
escorted him outside and returned to their work,
taking no notice of what he had told them. The
handicaps came out and the Blower was on the limit.
He was in a pub having some liquid refreshments
when someone handed him the handicaps, and when


he read it he laughed heartily and exclaimed: “They
don’t seem to know who I am,” and “There’s a mug
born every minute!”
The Sydney show is open for seven days, and on
the day of the chops the Blower arrived on the
ground carrying three axes in a leather case. The
competition which the Blower was to take part in
was now about to take place, and the Blower lined
up carrying his axes and smoking the butt end of
a fag. When the competitors removed their clothes
in preparation for the event the Blower looked a
scraggy old man, as his hair was much greyer then
than it was when he was with me.
The starter said “Go!” The Blower started, and
the rest followed in turn according to their handi-
caps, and to the surprise of everyone who saw it, the
Blower’s log parted first. As soon as he got his wind
he started to blow and a good audience surrounded
him. He told them where to hit a log and how to
hit it, etc., and he kept on talking until he nearly
became exhausted. There was a man standing by
listening to this expert and he walked up to the
Blower and got into conversation with him, and later
asked him if he wanted a job, which he did, and
there and then he was engaged at a good salary in
the Malay States teaching the natives how to use
an axe, etc. After all is said and done it is an ill
wind that doesn’t blow good to someone.
It was a gust of wind that helped Drake to defeat
the Spanish Armada. History sayeth “The Lord
blew with his wind and they were scattered.” It
was also a turning of the wind that saved the British
Army from the Kaiser’s gas in France during the
1914-18 war.
“For us, the winds do blow,
The earth doth rest, Heaven move and
fountains flow,
Nothing we see, but means our good,
As our delight, or as our treasure,
The whole is either our cupboard of food,
Or cabinet of pleasure.”


CHAPTER IX
BOARDING HOUSES
WE do meet some interesting people in this
world.
On one occasion looking for diggings while
working as a conductor on the trams in Sydney, I
was having a very lean time staying at different
restaurants in and around the city area. I was
working at the Waverley Depot, and decided to shift
out that way to be nearer my work, and for the
possibility of getting better accommodation. I got
into a tram going out to Waverley and immediately
got into conversation wth a young fellow who was
also going to Waverley. Something seemed to tell
me that he might also be working on the trams, so
I asked him where he worked and he said “The
trams, and lam at the Waverley Depot.” I said “I
am working there also, and am going out to try
and get board nearer my work. Could you advise
me where I could be well accommodated?” He told
me that they had a room for me where he was stay-
ing, and while he was telling me all this I was taking
observations of his general appearances; to all in-
tents and purposes he seemed to be well nourished,
so I decided to go along with him. When we arrived
I was made very welcome, and undoubtedly they
were very nice people, and I was very happy to think
that I had got fixed up so easily in such a nice place.
We arrived about four p.m. and we sat down to tea,
which was the evening meal, at about five-thirty,
and not long after being shown where to sit I could
plainly feel that a big variation was taking place
within my mind about how happy I would be in my
newly-acquired home.
In the first place there was nothing edible within
my reach, which would ensure that I wouldn’t get
a flying start, and everything edible was all at the


end of the table where the landlady had full charge.
I should say in all households everyone approaches
the table for the evening meal with a good appetite
and a feeling of expectation of something good that
might be served. The whole company comprised
the landlady, her sister, two children, the big babe
who took me there, and myself who was sitting very
quiet like Amy Johnson the aviatrix when her car-
buretter started to splutter—she waited to see what
would happen. I was thinking about an old poem;
The children all rise,
And put their bibs before their eyes,
While father carves the duck.
The lady at the head of the table started to look
around the table, either to see how much each one
could do with or how much each one could do with-
out. At the same time she was wrestling with a
cold joint which in all probability had been cut from
a bullock that had been raced into the slaughter-
house to save him from the ravages of the drought.
This angel looked at me with her eyes raised and
asked me in a tender voice whether I would have a
little cold meat, and I said “Yes, please” quite
meekly, because this was to all intents and purposes
a very solemn event, and all else was as silent as
the tomb. She placed a couple of small slices of
this meat on a plate and she also had some thin
slices of cucumber and tomatoes, and she asked me
if I would have some of the aforesaid slices, and I
again said “Yes, please.” She then put the fork
through a slice of cucumber and explained “Say
when,” and I immediately said that would be plenty,
thank you, as I had already come to the conclusion
that the place was not a boarding-house but just
a joke, and the big babe sitting opposite me and
myself were the biggest part. She then put the fork
through a slice of tomato and again said “Say
when” and I immediately said “Enough, thank
you,” and the good lady then put a thin slice of
bread on the plate and passed it down to me.
Just by way of being polite I was waiting for the
others to be served before I made a start, when the


good lady said that I needn’t wait on the others but
could just make a start and make myself at home.
Just for fun I manoeuvred the meat together and
put my fork through the lot and put it into my
mouth, which was waiting for it. I then put my
fork through the cucumber and tomato slices and
placed them in alongside of the meat and cucumber
and commenced to chew. By this time I could see
the landlady was looking serious. She sent me
down a cup of tea water, and later on asked me if
I would like another slice of bread, and I said “Yes
please,” and the good lady started to cut a full slice
right around the top, but after completing this
operation she drew the knife across the centre and
then raised her eyebrows and asked me if I would
have a full slice or a half, and I said that half a
slice would be ample for me, and thanked her, and
with a smile returning she passed the half slice along
to me.
I noticed that if any of the others at the table,
including the big babe, wanted anything, they would
say, “Could I have another slice of bread” or “Could
I have another cup of tea,” etc. She didn’t ask me
if I would have any more bread, but tea didn’t cost
much so she asked me if I would have another cup
of tea. I declined with thanks and assured her that
I had done splendidly.
After the meal we all sat looking at each other,
looking as cheerful as the circumstances would per-
mit. We all then rose from the table and were about
to settle down around the room, as this dining-room
was also the sitting-room. I was standing just be-
hind my chair as I had just left the table when the
landlady moved up to me in a pleasant kind of a
way and said “Now, Mr Mundy, I was just thinking
about the paying, and if you will, let us say, pay a
shilling for your tea, and then a week in advance;
and that will be one pound.” I said “All right, I
will pay you one shilling for my tea, but no more, as
I don’t think I will be staying very long.” “Oh!”
she said, “And when do you think you will be going?”
and I said, “I am going now,” at the same time


handing over one shilling for one of the biggest
apologies for a meal that I ever encountered. Even
though my action was thoroughly justified I felt
sorry for the little lady, who in all probability didn’t
know any better. I left this place and got a room
about two streets nearer the tram shed, and I got
my meals just anywhere that we might be at meal
time.
I met the big babe a few days later and I asked
him what was his idea in recommending such a place
to me, and he said, “Oh, I know the place is bad for
meals, but I thought that you might say something.”
I told him no; that I gave measure for measure, and
when people were nice to me I always liked to be nice
to them. I sometimes did make a noise if things
were not going right. I am a stingaree, and the
sting is in my tail, but when it comes to giving
orders to the fair sex I would rather leave that to
someone else. Any man who thinks that he can
rule a woman can rule a nation, and I don’t think
that I am capable of doing either.
My brother Jack, who could be classed as a very
big man, was six feet two-and-a-half inches with his
boots off and weighed fifteen stone. Jack was a
very strong man. He lifted half a ton in Melbourne
when he was only twenty years of age. He was also
a fast worker, and incidentally a good feeder. When
Jack was in his early thirties he was doing pick and
shovel work on the Greymouth-Dunnolhe railway
construction work, and had some difficulty in getting
sufficient food where he was boarding. He was
boarding with a man by the name of Jim. Jim was
also working on the line, and one day Jack heard
him tell another man that there was money in
boarders. Jack told me the story himself and he
said when he heard that his stomach started to
growl. “Yes,” said Jim, “we can feed our boarders
on eight bob a week.”
One of the men said “Do you mean to say that
you can feed a man like Mundy there for eight bob
a week?” It appeared that Jim had let his tongue
slip for he just blushed and let the subject drop.


When Jack put a slice of bread to his mouth he
would not take one bite, but several, going nearly
all round the slice, and when doing heavy work he
could be classed as a big eater. This remark about
making money out of boarders and feeding men on
eight bob a week seemed to stick in Jack’s gizzard,
and he had a look around for another place. He
was fortunate in getting what he called a very good
place to board, the place being run by an Irish lady
whose husband also worked on the line, by name
Cowan. I should say that Mrs Cowan was already
conversant with the facts about how big Jack had
been faring for food since starting on the line and
had made up her mind that he would have a different
story to tell after he had been staying with her a
while.
In addition to being a big eater he also suffered
a good deal with indigestion. He sat down to tea,
which was the hot meal for the day, and this dinner
was composed of corned beef, cabbage and potatoes,
boiled pudding, bread and butter and other things
to follow. Jack received a big helping of meat and
vegetables and managed to get on the outside of it
and when he emptied his plate Mrs Cowan cried out,
“Have some more meat and taties, Mr Mundy,” and
repeated the request until Jack was confronted with
another plate piled up, and of course Jack got on
the outside of that also. This was followed by a
plate of boiled pudding but he refused a second
helping, having some bread and butter and a couple
of cups of tea. Jack said he was satisfied that he
was being well catered for, but was not sure whether
he was feeling quite comfortable.
About half an hour after tea Mr Cowan and Jack
had a smoke, then Mr Cowan suggested that they
go down to the Dunollie “pub” and have a shandy.
When they got there they had two long beers each
and then went home to bed. Jack said that was the
best meal he had had for many a day but it cost
him a considerable amount of pain and he spent
most of the night kicking at the ceiling.


When I was in Wellington engaged as a town
traveller I used to rent a room and have my meals
at any place near to my work. Very often I would
have my mid-day meal at the “Bubble and Squeak”
in Willis Street and after I had dined there a few
times I noticed that an old dame who also had her
meals there just through accident would be seated
at my table nearly every day. The tables held four
persons and if I arrived a little late there would be
only one seat vacant in the room, and nearly always
at the table where she was sitting. If I happened
to be in before her the same thing would occur, and
she would walk in and sit down in the vacant seat
which was sometimes beside me or opposite me. One
day I walked in and as usual a seat was vacant right
opposite this old duck and as this thing had hap-
pened so often I was not exactly pleased about it.
However I took my seat and she said, “And here we
are again,” looking at me with one of her best
smiles. I said, “Yes, we usually turn up at meal
times.” Taking into consideration the number of
times that I was obliged to sit at table with the same
lady I was at a loss to understand what I had done
to be punished so severely.
I have often looked around in those cheap
restaurants trying to figure out how many people
of a kind should through force of circumstances be
actually jammed up against each other and living
under a system of improvisation. I am unable to
speak for others but I have already tried to move
the pillars of the earth to improve my lot but my
constitution would not stand up to my expectations.
I have made my bed and I must lie on it. Most
people when in bad circumstances usually say that
they never have an opportunity. I claim that the
opportunity is there; but what preparation have we
made to avail ourselves of that opportunity when it
does come, as it does to everyone at the proper time?
I could have made enough money in my early
twenties to have retired over and over again, but I
did not take advantage of the opportunity, so I had
to take what I was getting. The belief has some


prevalence that children reared in the lap of luxury
are not so fit to fight the battle of life as those raised
in poverty. A man once said, “Do not deny your
boy the privilege of poverty as a stimulus to success,”
but this is poor psychology. Poverty leads to feel-
ings of inferiority, depression, nervous moods and
poor health.
I had just been dreaming about what had been
and what might have been when my lady friend
sitting opposite me remarked what a lovely day we
were having, and that ran me along another line of
thought. Why should she tell me that it was a
lovely day when I already knew it was a lovely day?
If she could have told me how I could pick up a
thousand pound honestly, with an easy effort, I
would have been interested. It was crystal clear to
me for quite a while that this dame was one of those
man-hunting gold-diggers of whom I had heard so
much and from whom I had had a few narrow
escapes, from being trapped by their plausible and
ingenious methods. Every picture tells a story, and
judging by the careful but steady progress which
this lady had made since first meeting me I had
decided to be careful and was expecting at any time
she would make a more vigorous effort to try and pin
me down to something more than a casual meeting.
Some people’s brains do not develop in proportion
to their bodies or the length of their tongues, and it
is sometimes more interesting to meet these people
than a hard-boiled intellectual. This woman was
just driving ahead irrespective of what the road was
like or where she was going. By this time I could
see that I was confronted by a human gramophone,
and not being in a hurry decided to listen to her
for a while. If a man hasn’t his own home he is
obliged to go somewhere else to get well and truly
nagged and possibly clawed.
She said, “I suppose you are a bachelor.” I re-
plied “Yes, I am,” and she said, “Now we are get-
ting somewhere,” looking quite cheerful while trying
to adjust what I would call an improvised fringe.
Then she said in a confident kind of way, “I am a


widow, you know.” I commenced to think about
getting my hat, without replying to her, when she
leaned over fairly close to me and repeated the re-
mark. She then said, “You wouldn’t think that I
was well connected, would you?” and I replied “Well
I don’t just know, but if you are well connected I
would have no doubt about your connections being
badly connected.” She smiled at me and said “Oh!
you do flatter me.”
Now that she had drawn her map closer to me I
could see that she had a well-worn and weather-
beaten face, and was wearing two faulty fangs in
front, and her eyes had fallen out with each other,
one looking here and the other looking there. The
situation was beginning to look interesting and per-
haps serious, as I could see that she was forcing me
against the ropes. I could have got up and walked
out the door, but by this time some people at the
other tables had evidently awakened to the fact that
a battle was in progress, and some of them were
resting their elbows on the table, taking a keen in-
terest in the proceedings.
Having no desire to be classed as a coward I de-
cided to stay where I was, and give measure for
measure or put up as good a fight as possible against
a well-trained, experienced veteran. After coming
at me from different angles without gaining much
ground she said, “Now taking into consideration
how many times we have met and had the pleasure
of each other’s company, don’t you think that there
should be something deep and lasting between us?”
I said, “Yes, I do. lam going by boat to Picton
this afternoon. Cook Strait I hope will be deep
enough, and to be lasting I will be away from Wel-
lington for at least two years.”
When people are moving around in this world
they should not ape greatness or try and force
themselves into company where they are not re-
quired. It’s far better to be just their little selves,
as a good farthing is better than a bad sovereign.


CHAPTER X
GHOSTS
WERE you ever afraid of the night? When I
was a boy I was not only afraid to go places
in the night, but I was also afraid to move
far away from home in the daytime. When we (the
family) were seated round the fireside in the even-
ings our elder brothers would tell yarns about bush
rangers, wild hairy men who were supposed to have
been seen at certain localities, some of them not
very far from our homestead. There was also Bill
Hitchins who was drowned in the Snowy not far
from our place. He was found straddled across a
snag with three pounds in his pocket, and we would
be told that Bill’s ghost had been seen wandering
around looking for that three pounds.
I was somewhere between thirteen and fourteen
years of age, and at that time my job was keeping
birds from eating the maize which was growing
about one mile from our house, and I was supplied
with that which was known as a muzzle-loading
Enfield gun. For some considerable time I was not
supplied with shot, as it was thought a waste of
money.
The gun barrel was very long and could either
be loaded with shot or a bullet. After I had been
blazing away with powder for some time I came to
the conclusion that I was only wasting time, so one
day I filled the ladle with lead and placed it on the
fire and of course all hands were anxious to know
what I intended to do; but I had no desire to say,
as I was not quite sure myself. While the lead was
melting I got a board and cut a V line from end
to end and poured the lead into that. I then cut
the long strip into small pieces. I then got another
ladle full of melted lead, and standing on a box,


poured it into a bucket of water and I got some re-
sults from that. After all this experimentation and
a good few jibes from different ones, I gathered up
what I had and proceeded to the battlefield.
When out of view of the house I set to work
loading the gun with that which to my mind, in
those days, would be similar to the idea which the
ballistic boys of today have of the atomic bomb. I
carefully loaded the gun, placed a cap on the nipple
and proceeded to the top end of the field. I
stationed myself there for quite a while and it
seemed that there was nothing game enough to even
approach me. The maize on the Snowy River flats
grew as high as from twelve to fourteen feet, and
my travelling way was just a narrow strip between
the maize and the uncleaned frontage on the river-
side. I felt very proud standing where I was, in
full charge of a crop of maize extending nearly a mile
long, and because I was armed with a new invention
there was nothing game enough to approach me.
Everything was as silent as the tomb, but
presently without any warning I could hear a
thundering noise coming towards me through the
maize. I was facing the river when I heard it first,
and I immediately turned around with the gun at
the ready and pulled the hammer back smartly.
While doing that the cap fell to the ground, and
failing to see where it fell, I reached into my
ammunition bag, but before I could get the cap box
in my hand this thing referred to seemed to be
making straight for me, fairly close at hand. My
effort to replace the cap had failed so badly that I
suddenly decided that a live coward would be better
than a dead hero, and set off at top speed for home.
Instead of dropping the rifle I carried it with me, as
I suspected a hairy man would be following me, and
if he happened to catch me I would knock him down
with the butt end (perhaps). When I got within
shouting distance of the house I started to call for
assistance, which wasn’t required as nobody was
after me, and I had the field to myself. I continued
to run and call out until within ten yards of the


house. I fell and lay there prostrate on the
ground, and after frequent questioning from my
mother and sisters as to what had happened I was
unable to get enough breath to be able to tell them.
When I did tell them they only laughed at me, and
this supplied them with some good ammunition to
fire at me in the future.
When I look back upon those years of my life, I
have no wonder that I could be easily alarmed, as
I had been well thrashed and well bashed by four
elder brothers, and in addition to that the hair-
raising stories which were instilled into my young
mind in the evenings were never forgotten.
For a considerable time I would not venture to
the top end of the crop without being very cautious.
My first try-out with the new ammunition was a
screaming success. I brought down two parrots
with the one shot, and later on by getting the birds
in line at odd times I could bring down four with the
one shot. After I started to take the dead birds
home in my bag, I was allowed to go to the store
and buy shot, which made the work much easier
for me. One day I left home and strolled along to
the far end of the crop without thinking of danger,
when suddenly I heard a bumping noise. I quickly
got my gun in position, pulled the hammer back
and waited for a few seconds, which seemed much
longer. Then the bump, bump, bump again, and I
could easily see how I had been mistaken before, as
it was only a wallaby hopping around and striking
the ground with its tail.
After all this had happened and it was generally
known how I had been nearly frightened to death
by a wallaby, one of my sisters erected a wooden
cross suitably inscribed to mark the place where the
hero fell and when visitors came to our place they
were shown the cross and sometimes they would be
asked to remove their hats as a mark of respect to
the fallen but not dead. Life in Australia in the
early days and even today was, and is, much differ-
ent from that in New Zealand.


When I first left home I had a good deal of camp
life and I always tried to get set up where other
people were, or as near as possible to them. When
I arrived in New Zealand all fear of being camped
in the bush had ceased to exist for me, as there were
no bushrangers and very few murders or cases where
people had been attacked, which doesn’t apply today.
When I was in Australia in 1922 and decided to work
in the bush I bought a dog. A dog is one of the best
companions that a man can have, especially in the
bush because he will always put up a good bluff
when strangers are approaching. I have never been
afraid that I might be murdered, but on more than
one occasion I have been a little suspicious of the
fact that I might be, as I have for nearly forty years
paid cash for all stores when camped in the bush
both in Australia and New Zealand. When one does
that sort of thing, which is unusual for the average
man, the rumour goes round that this man is
wealthy, and there are quite a few in all lands who
would think nothing of bowling a man over if they
thought that they could get anything over twenty
pounds in ready cash. There was a man by the
name of Strange who murdered his mate not far
from our place in Victoria for seven pounds. Of
course he had a serious accident shortly afterwards,
for a platform that he was standing on was pulled
from under his feet, and having a rope tied to his
neck he dropped six feet and his neck was dislocated.
As I have already mentioned, a dog is a good
companion and also a bodyguard. Before I reached
this page of the subject an old man seventy years of
age had been murdered in a brutal manner at
Wairoa, and so far the murderer had not been traced.
Now we can go back to Victoria.
I bought a dog to take into the bush with me for
company. My brother Louis and I were cutting
sleepers at W.R. Creek between Orbost and Cunning-
ham. My brother often used to go to Orbost, stay
there the night and be back at camp for work the
following day. I used to feel lonely during his
absence but I was not actually afraid; however all


roads lead to somewhere, and I left that work and
shifted down near the coast and was camped on a
dry spot in Ewing’s Marsh, which joins the Snowy
River at Mario at one end and Lake Tyres at the
other.
I had a covered-in waggon and I landed at my
new camp site late in the evening, but before I had
time to get my appointments properly laid out it was
quite dark. It was common knowledge that a ghost
had frequently been seen at this spot and also about
two miles further on towards Mario. While I was
busying myself walking around with a lighted
candle, attending to my requirements, my dog
Nigger seemed to be very alert and unusually fidgety,
but was doing his part very well by circling around
the camp and barking a good deal. After I had
cooked my tea and sat by the fire wondering
whether I would be convinced about the existence
of a ghost or not, I made my bed in the waggon and
barricaded myself in as far as possible, and after
falling asleep I didn’t wake until six in the morning.
I had the makings of my hut with me, which I
brought from W.R. Creek, and I put in the day
building it and made a good job of it. Once inside
and the door well secured I was not afraid of any-
thing. My dog would circle around the camp and
bark every night just before bed-time. I was at a
loss to know what his idea was until an experienced
bushman told me that dogs will do that to frighten
foxes away before they retire for the night. This
place agreed with me, but I used to go into Orbost
about once every two weeks, and quite a few people
were surprised to know that I was actually camped
on the ground where a ghost had been seen several
times. After being probed with this bogey so often
I eventually became ghost-conscious, and when I
would arrive back at the camp late, sometimes just
on midnight, when ghosts are supposed to be most
active, I had to take my horse about two hundred
yards to the paddock. While travelling to the gate
I could ride but I had to walk back.


There were two roads running parallel, and while
I rode down one side Nigger would travel down the
other, and after leaving the camp I didn’t see any
more of him until we reached a small bridge where
the two roads came together again. While crossing
the bridge my horse’s hooves seemed to make a
terrible noise, which could be heard by the ghost
within a distance of a mile either way along the
marsh, thus letting him know where I was. When
travelling back to the camp after putting my horse
in the paddock it was often near midnight, just
about the time when ghosts are moving around.
Now I don’t want to be branded as a coward, but I
must say that my walk back to the camp was always
a hair-raising experience, and I would always be glad
when I got inside my hut with the door well fastened.
When I used to meet my brother Louis he always
asked me if I had been chased by the ghost yet. I
worked in this locality for several months but if
there was a ghost there I never saw him.
I then shifted one mile down the marsh towards
the mouth of the Snowy River. I went into a big
bark hut belonging to Mr George Ross, my employer.
This was the hut which had been previously occupied
by one Stewart, and also the principal place where
the ghost had been seen. In fact one night the
ghost chased Stewart from the marsh right to the
door of the hut, and he was just able to get inside
and bolt the door before he collapsed on the floor.
Christmas was near at hand, in fact the holidays for
some workers had started. Mr Ross wanted some
grass-seeding done during the holidays and was
offering good money, and he asked me if I could get
a man from Orbost to work along with me until the
job was done. I had a good deal of difficulty in get-
ting that man, as they all seemed to know that a
ghost lived there.
After working for Mr Ross for about six months
and travelling around the locality both night and
day without seeing any signs of the ghost I was just
interested to know what all this scare was about.
One day my brother Louis told me that the scare


was started one night when some unauthorised duck
shooters were followed down to the swamp by
Stewart. The shooters were suspicious about his
bonafides and someone started running through the
water towards Stewart, with a white handkerchief
tied around his head, and his mate cried out,
“Ghost! ” That was the night Stewart collapsed in-
side the door, and he never troubled the duck
shooters afterwards.


CHAPTER XI
WHAT’S IN A DREAM?
WHEN I worked at the copper mine in Nelson
for the second and last time, I had for a
mate a man who was known as Jack the
Liar. Whether Jack was a liar or not, he was a good
mate to work with, as he seemed to have a fund of
experience all just for the price of listening. Some-
times rearrangements would be made and I would
have Slim Jim for a mate. Slim, as we used to call
him, was a musician and had just recently won the
cornet solo at the Dunedin competitions. He would
whistle all night, and strange to say, although a
good musician, he couldn’t whistle, so finally I got
tired of him and told him so; then he gave a retort
that I had no ear for music.
When working with Jack the Liar it was like
turning on the radio today, when all one has to do
is listen. Jack seemed to know a lot about most
things, and he was once official photographer to the
Royal Family. He was also interested in spiritual-
ism, and one night while expounding upon this sub-
ject I informed him that I was a little psychic-minded
and could sometimes predict things that would take
place in the future. He was interested in this and
asked me to predict something for the purpose of
proving my statement. I was unable to comply with
his request so told him that I was only able to foresee
something which would either come by premonition
or in a dream, and that if anything like that should
arise during my stay at the mine I would let him
know.
The Liar hadn’t long to wait, as shortly after
this conversation I was awakened one night about
midnight, trembling from head to foot. My bunk


and also the tent frame was shaking severely. I
dreamt that I had been murdered by a Chinaman,
and that my name was Scott Harden. I remembered
the name, and the next day when I went to work I
told Jack about my dream. The following day, when
he came to work, he said that an account appeared
in the paper about a man by the name of Scott
Harden being killed in Marlborough, and that it had
not been ascertained how he had met his death. I
asked him to bring the paper to work with him,
because I couldn’t believe it unless I saw it; but he
arrived at work the following shift and said that the
paper had been destroyed, so I never saw the report
and didn’t know whether he was telling me a lie or
not. He advised me to write down to Constable
Cameron at Richmond and tell him what happened,
but not seeing the report and not knowing whether
old Jack was telling the truth I just let the matter
go down as a dream.
I was working in Marlborough about eight years
later, and on making inquiries found that a man by
name Scott Harden had been killed and that a
Chinaman lived near the spot where it happened.
Although I never heard the man’s name in my life
and I have never been in that locality, I could still
recognise the spot where the man was killed.
While travelling around New Zealand in recent
months I have been asked the question, was I ever
heavyweight champion boxer of New Zealand, and
I don’t just know how to answer; but if I was asked
the same question by the New Zealand Boxing
Council I would say “Yes, and I am still prepared to
defend my title.”
This is what happened. A fight was pending
with Jim Mitchell, who was champion, and myself,
but Mitchell in the meantime fought Williams, a
coloured man, at Gisborne and Williams knocked
him out and won the championship. Later on I got
a fight with Mitchell and the winner of that fight
was to meet Williams for the championship. I won,
but the other fight with Williams never took place.


Later on Williams left New Zealand and I became
resident champion.
When travelling to America on diplomatic service
two years later I met Williams, who joined the boat
at Rarotonga, and we were ship-mates as far as
Tahiti; that was the first and the last time I ever
saw him. As far as I know Williams never returned
to New Zealand and he is supposed to have been
killed in the 1914-18 war, but I am unable to vouch
for the authenticity of that information. He was a
fine type of a man and I guess he would have been
hard to beat.
Boxing fell away in New Zealand during the war,
especially in the heavy-weight class, so much so
that the New Zealand Boxing Council approved a
match which was put on at King Edward barracks
in Christchurch between two amateurs, Cyril Whit-
taker and Brian McLeary. I saw that fight and I
think that I could have beaten the two of them.
McLeary, when leading a left, had a very bad and
dangerous habit of jumping in the air with both feet
off the ground, and anyone knowing how to hit could
have lifted him on to the broad of his back every
time. Now, for the benefit of my readers, that is
just what happened, and as far as I know I am still
champion, so I will leave the subject as it is and just
mention that I am not actually fond of using the
personal pronoun “I,” but just happen to get mixed
up with other people and I must be excused.


CHAPTER XII
CHARLIE JACOBSEN
WHEN I started in business as a herbalist in
Vivian Street, Wellington, in 1915, I was
doing well; but was like a lot more people
and had no idea how long the war would last.
Before going to Wellington on that trip I met in
Picton the notable Charlie Jacobsen, a past cham-
pion bike-rider who had previously had both his legs
well and truly smashed in a motor accident. How-
ever he was in uniform and told me just quietly that
the Russians would be in Berlin within three weeks,
and the war would be over before he got there.
Charlie was a long way out, as he reached the front
and was engaged as a driver, having many narrow
escapes from death through motor smashes, but he
arrived back in New Zealand and was later on en-
gaged in trawling for fish at Greymouth. Charlie
had some more hair-raising experiences, and on one
occasion he had to run his boat thirty miles to Grey-
mouth without a rudder, using one engine and then
the other, and in that way he reached port.
Now we go back to the beginning of the 1914-18
war, and that is what Charlie thought; and no
ordinary people had any idea how long it would last
until it ended in 1918.


CHAPTER XIII
FEATHERSTON CAMP
WHILE in business in Vivian Street I could see
Wellington getting smaller and smaller. All
the boys were going into camp and a lot of
married women were selling their furniture and
going to live in rooms. Although in my middle
thirties, I was just making a start in life. At that
time conscription had not been introduced but there
were already a good number of unofficial recruiting
agents, both male and female, and those people
would think nothing of accosting a total stranger
and telling him that he would look well in uniform.
I met a good few of those people on the trams or
in railway carriages, which were a good hunting
ground for them, especially at race-time. A race-
train was proceeding to Trentham where races were
to be held that day, and at that time, if I remember
right, prominent horses were Gloaming, Desert Gold,
Eligible, etc. There was a young fellow in the
carriage who was a very sporty chap and had a good
deal to say about what he fancied, and in general
was a very happy man. On the opposite side there
was a well-dressed middle-aged lady who had been
listening very attentively; not that she was inter-
ested in his racing talk, but she was waiting until
he eased up a bit. When he did, her chance had
arrived, and she partly leaned over and said “Are
you eligible, young man?” The young man burst
out laughing and giving her a hearty slap on the
shoulder, said “No, strike you pink, I am Desert
Gold.”
A good deal of that went on, and I never before
had any idea that I was such a likely-looking fellow
to make a soldier until I had been accosted a few
times. I am pleased to say that I was never ap-
proached in an abrupt manner, as they usually soften


the ground and I could always tell what was coming.
After a good deal of consideration I decided to either
go into the army or go up and work for the Public
Works Department, which was building the camp at
Peatherston.
I closed my shop and sold up for a song the
furniture and other things which I had just recently
bought. I knew that the muscles of my heart were
considerably enlarged and that I may not pass.
However, I didn’t have long to wait, for when I
walked up to Buckle Street and was sent along for
examination I think the medico was in a bad skin,
for he said to me while listening in, “You don’t
want to go to the war,” and I said “No? Well pass
me as fit and we will then see whether I want to go
or not.”
But he passed me out, and I proceeded to
Peatherston Camp where I got a job as a blacksmith.
I stayed at that work for some considerable time
and finally I was the only smith left with the Public
Works Department. Mr Tyndall (later His Honour,
Mr Justice Tyndall) who was a qualified engineer,
was in charge and I worked under him.
Some great men passed through that camp and
I could only name a few of them. There were Ted
Lanauze, Dave Pretty, Mick Hogan, Jim Jeffries,
Clarence Stevens, Billy Senior and Ned Lakey. All
those good men were there at that time. Jimmy
Heggerty, the lightweight champion boxer, was
killed a few months before I left Wellington. Len
Porter, another of New Zealand’s good boxers, was
also in camp, but didn’t take very kindly to the class
of training that a soldier had to go through, so he
cut up fairly rough and was discharged. I saw him
leaving the camp; when he got to the main gateway
leading to the main highway he turned round, stood
for a while, and by the way he expectorated and from
what he said I should say that he had no love for
the camp or anything that it contained.
In writing about Len Porter it is interesting to
know that he had a twin brother, also a boxer; for
weight he was in the same class as Len, and they


often had to fight in the final bout of the tourna-
ment. On one occasion these two boys were en-
gaged in this manner, the referee being the late Dr
Napier McLean, and they were having a real fight
as they always did even when training. One was
trying to win on a k. 0., the other on points, and
they were both putting up such a clever display
without doing much damage that the referee
thought they were only playing, so he stopped one
of the best fights seen for many a day.


CHAPTER XIV
THE CARD PLAYERS
WHILE I was travelling by express train from
Melbourne to Sydney when about twenty-one
years of age the carriage, being different from
our New Zealand carriages, had a compartment
similar to a small sitting-room, and I suppose there
would be about eight or ten people in it including
my young brother Louis, myself, and about five or
six young men who had been working in a glass-
blowing factory at Melbourne and who were going
home to Sydney for Christmas. There were two
others, more important occupants, in the carriage,
one being a tall, well-groomed gentleman about
fourteen or fifteen stone, and his companion was of
a more rugged and rough appearance although he
was neatly dressed and wearing a big gold chain on
his chest. The chain was similar in pattern to the
chains worn by many New Zealand miners. We
weren’t in motion long before the big gentleman
produced a pack of cards and asked me if I would
join in a game, but I refused, although the glass-
blowers were very keen. A game of poker was
started and I could soon see that the big boy was
not travelling for the good of his health, but to
find mugs and induce them to part with their money.
The card-playing went on and the boys dropped out
one after the other, and the man with the hard dial
got out at a small station along the line. I was
glad when one of those gentlemen left the train, as
I now had only one to be interested in. I had
summed up the situation right from the start. There
were two big hefty men in the compartment against
one man and a few boys. The tall gentleman said
goodbye to his companion and seemed to know and
greet a good many people along the line, which had
a tendency to take the down off his occupation.


The train moved off again and the big fellow
wanted to resume playing with the boys, but I think
he had just about skinned them out. Having played
himself out with the boys he turned his attention to
me, and was becoming a bit of a pest until I told
him that there was another game that I knew more
about, and that if he didn’t put the pack in his
pocket I would show him what it was. He at once
obeyed and pretended to fall asleep, and remained
like that until we reached Albury, where he got out.
I was on my way to New Zealand on that
occasion, during the year 1902. Nine years after-
wards I was in Westport and my brother Louis intro-
duced me to a man with whom he had become
acquainted, and whose Christian name was Jack.
He was a very interesting man to look at, having a
big full face with the skin drawn tight up against
the face. His forehead was not very high but was
very bulgy above the eyes, and generally speaking he
had what would be termed a hard dial. In appear-
ance he might be taken to be a cruel man but this
was somewhat deceptive, as he was kind to his own
children and also others, and had a great antipathy
towards any man who neglected his children. I
worked with him after I met him and was able to
make a full study of his characteristics.
He had one outstanding feature, that being not
to allow anyone to teach him anything. We were
snigging sleepers out of the bush—a job that will
give a new chum a good deal of trouble, as the load
must be fastened in such a way that it will stay on
the “sleigh,” which is altogether different from an
ordinary sledge. The nose of the sleeper sleigh
comes together and is bolted about nine or ten inches
back from the nose. Jack was unable to get the load
to stay on, and every time I offered to tie the load
on he refused, until he had many upsets with the
loads scattered. We had to gather up each time
and Jack finally got tired and asked me to tie the
load, which was done quite simply by dividing the
sleepers into two separate bundles and bringing the
chain up under the front bolt in such a way that


when the horse pulls the chain tightens, and while
he pulls it is just about impossible for the load to
fall away. After we had taken a few loads without
having a mishap, I mentioned to Jack that there
was something I was able to teach him, but he re-
pudiated my remarks and said that if I hadn’t been
there he would have fixed the load properly in the
first place.
Jack left the district shortly after that, and I
didn’t see him again until I left Featherston
Camp in 1915, when I went down the line and was
cutting timber for him. Later on I worked for Jack
O’Brien, who later joined the army and through a
fall from a horse broke his neck and was killed.
I was living in a house belonging to a Mr Benge.
It had been raining heavily one day and I was inside
by the fire, when Jack, who lived a short distance
away, strolled across and after being seated for a few
minutes produced a pack of cards and suggested that
we have a game of nap, which I agreed upon. We
had not long been started when I could see that he
was a bare-faced cheat, but I was not alarmed, being
more inclined to be amused because he was so
ridiculously clumsy. After he tried several times to
get me T just laughed and suggested that we termin-
ate the game, and in a joking manner told him that
if he was really short I might be able to give him a
few shillings. After I had made these remarks he
got very indignant and said that he used to make a
good living travelling with card-sharpers on the
express trains in Australia. I then looked at him
and wondered why it had taken all those years for
me to remember that he was the man who stood by
on the Melbourne-Sydney express in 1902.
It is a dreary process wandering through life
picking up the broken threads and weaving a yarn
to tie up the ligaments of a broken life. I never
saw or heard of anything that Jack did in New Zea-
land except hard work; but nevertheless there was
something in the blood, as his daughter cut loose
a few years later. Dressed as a man and in com-
pany with another man she invaded the capital city


and staged a somewhat deliberate and daring hold-
up just before nightfall in one of the suburbs. She
called upon her desperado companion to sock a
fellow who was trying to get away, and he fired at
the man, who was a service station attendant. Their
reward was only a few shillings. They then slipped
back to Wellington where Nellie changed into female
attire, but they were quickly caught, and in those
days, not being like these days, people were expected
to behave themselves, and Nellie got seven years’ hard
labour. I heard no more of her for several years
until at the age of thirty-seven she was playing a big
part with the underworld in Sydney.


CHAPTER XV
THE “MODERN” HOTEL
FOLLOWING and relating the doings of other
people has taken me away from the West Coast,
but I must wander back there again. When I
started work on the wharf at Greymouth I was
staying at an hotel, and if I happened to be working
at night I would get a couple of sandwiches to take
with me, but no tea, and after exchanging notes
with other men on the shift they explained to me
that each one had a mate and at eating time the
gang would go along to a “pub” and have two drinks
each. This arrangement served as the liquid portion
of that which should have been something different.
“Booze” is supposed to be a food for some and poison
to others; and I happened to be one of the others.
The stuff was doing me an injury, and when I looked
about me and saw the beer-sodden faces it was
nearly enough to take my appetite away, so I soon
made up my mind what to do.
I shifted away to a private boarding house but
the proprietress was more suitable to be catering
for sparrows than for wharf labourers, so I then
shifted back to Greymouth and put up at a big
private hotel which wasn’t much better, yet I hung
on for a few weeks as I had a fair-sized problem
right in front of me. I was earning good money and
was well satisfied with my work, but I was losing
weight fast and the time arrived, in my dead reckon-
ing, when I would have to get suitable board or
leave my work and shift on. I had been making
enquiries all the time and had a “pub” recommended
to me, so one day I made a quick shift and had lunch
at this boosted establishment. Then I walked into
the office, paid what I owed and went in search of
another good place.


I wandered into the Union Hotel, which at the
time was under new management. I was accommo-
dated and allotted my room by the proprietor’s wife,
who seemed to be a business woman, and she ex-
plained to me that the place would be run on
strictly modern lines. I settled reasonably well in
this place as I could walk home from the wharf to
lunch, which to me was a great improvement. One
Sunday evening when I was due to work a shift at
midnight I battled with the “wife” (as the boss, Alex,
used to refer everything to the wife), for a cut lunch
as we would be working until seven o’clock in the
morning. The lunch might have been suitable for
a person just walking about, but was entirely inade-
quate for a man engaged in throwing bags of grain
and produce from midnight until seven a.m.
A few of the boarders were in the sitting room
that night after tea. A game of bridge had been
mooted for some time, and a visitor who was gener-
ally known as “War-step” suggested a game. He
asked me if I could play bridge, which of course I
could, and I couldn’t resist the invitation. We
played on until about ten p.m. and all the time I
was suggesting that I should be in bed as I was on
the “midnight”; only to be met with a chorus of
“Why worry, when you will have all day tomorrow
to sleep?” I went up to my room shortly afterwards,
having to start work in two hours’ time, which
meant that I would get no sleep, so I just turned
into bed and waited until about eleven-fifteen when
I rose and got into my working clothes. I was very
hungry, as we had been playing for drinks and it
was just five hours since the last meal. I looked at
the miserable snack that had been handed to me
and decided that I must eat at least half of it before
starting work. The parcel was so small that I
chewed more than half-way, and left the balance to
be eaten at four in the morning.
I reached the wharf on time and we were on
cargo. I was with a very good gang of men who
could shift at a fast pace and by four a.m. I was
really hungry. We went up to the shed to eat. All


my work-mates had their own homes and could
open lunch tins containing food to satisfy a worker’s
requirements, and when I produced my lunch from
my pocket they wanted to know where I was staying
and advised me to get married, etc. All this banter
was mixed with a little practical sympathy as one or
two of them forced a sandwich on to me, which
considerably saved the situation. When I got home
to this modern hotel in the morning and related
my experience to the “wife,” and told her that I had
no tea and didn’t even have a bottle of water (the
water on the wharf not being the best) I thought I
might create a little sympathy and have a bottle of
tea added to my small ration to take to work with
me. When I told her all this she said, “Oh! You
could have taken a bottle of water from here with
you.”
It had cost me more than ten shillings for drinks
while playing cards before I went to work. I made
something like thirty shillings at work and if I didn’t
get another day that week it would not pay for my
board; but of course I would be permitted to take a
bottle of water to work with me, as this hotel was
run on modern lines by the “wife.”
Alex used to put in a good deal of time strutting
up and down in front of the “pub” with a big cigar
in his mouth, leaving the inside work to the “wife,”
who up to a point could manage it very well. Even
when pushed she would challenge a man to fight
and Alex was very proud of her manner in that re-
spect, as he told me one day that he told a man who
was giving trouble in the bar that he would back the
wife to fight him. However, the chickens come
home to roost and we will hear something about
this later on.
There was a big red-faced middle-aged man who
recently came into some money. He was employed
on the wharf when he worked—which wasn’t very
often. This man was very rude to me one day and
I was obliged to put him in his place, after which
he went and told the “wife.” Most of the time this
man complained of being ill, and having money to


spend was a great friend of hers. I didn’t know
that the big fellow had told her what had happened
until one day I was having a drink at the bar when,
as often happens, she held my change. Some time
elapsed before I asked her for it, and the opportune
moment had arrived, but she slammed the change
on the counter and at the same time produced a
knotty brier walking stick which looked as if it would
be capable of smashing a man’s skull. She accused
me of attacking her friend and threatened to mow
me down. I remained very quiet, as a woman is
much harder than a man to subdue. From that
moment on I became very restless and completely
made up my mind that if I couldn’t get suitable ac-
commodation or a place of my own to live in I would
pack up and go through to Canterbury.
By this time, and many times before, I was un-
able to say whether I was unsuitable to the social
conditions or whether the social conditions were not
suitable to me; but whatever the cause might be I
must shift somewhere. I dreamed one night that I
walked down to the wharf and entered the shed
where we used to congregate, and a man by the
name of Jack Rasmussen said, “You were asking me
about a place to bach in, Donald,” and I answered
“Yes, I was.”
“Well,” he replied, “there is a place empty next
door to me in Ainey Street and that should suit
you.”
I got up in the morning and walked down to the
wharf and into the shed; and sure enough old Jack
was sitting right in the position where I saw him in
the dream, and he repeated every word that he spoke
to me in the dream. I said, “Thank you, Jack, and
who do I see about getting the place?” When he
told me I went straight down to the agents and
secured the bach of two rooms and a coal shed, all
for four shillings per week.
I missed the eight a.m. call that day, which gave
me time to shift in and get some food and to eat as
much as I required to give me strength to carry on
with my work. I got set up in a rough-and-ready


fashion for a start, and it just about remained that
way as there was no stove and all cooking had to be
done on the open fire. The building must have been
a great age as all copper nails had been used by the
builders and the windows showed signs that the
place must have been a stronghold at one time. I
was not able to get the full history of the place but
was told that it used to be a house of ill-fame in the
early days, and that in the room where I slept one
girl had killed another with a tomahawk, and there
was supposed to be a ghost appearing there occasion-
ally—but she never troubled me.
“This old world is just what we make it,
And he who is wise understands,
We can make it a hell or a heaven,
Our destiny lies in our hands.
The soul is the man—not the body;
Obey the soul’s dictates and then
You shall climb to those heights that are
golden,
And your name shall count among men.”
I was quite happy now that I had a place to my-
self with nobody watching my every move to see if
I would be putting my hand in my pocket to pull
out some money. My old workmate, the man who
told me about the bach, was adjoining me with a
wall dividing us. His wife was dead and he had
three young boys, two of them living in the bach
with him, and I could hear all their conversation
without listening. Old Jack’s place was like mine,
without a stove, and all cooking had to be done on
an open fire. Jack had been a cook at one of the
local hotels and had also been used to improvised
camps in the bush. He had more patience than I
had as he would spend a good deal of time in pre-
paring what they called “mulligan”—a pot of boiled
meat and vegetables of all kinds. Sometimes this
would not come off the fire until late in the evening,
then there would be a hurry and scurry until the
pot was empty and at intervals the boys would sing,
“Whop it down your neck while your legs hang low.”
On Sunday evenings Jack would get the Bible out.


This was much different from ours, as it was of the
old original type with quite a lot of pictures of sheep
and goats and other pictures of ancient times, and
Jack would explain everything to the boys after he
had read a few passages and end up by teaching
them more and more about less and less.
I was now firmly established in my bach, and
things had been moving at the “modern” hotel which
I had just left behind. It appeared that one day
Alex displeased his wife and she hit him with a poker
from the fire, opening an account at the side of his
head which required a few stitches.
The wife then packed up for Canterbury, and
later on a court case took place at which a lot of
dirty linen was washed; that was the last I heard
of the people who were running a pub on modern
lines.


CHAPTER XVI
THE PEOPLE NEXT DOOR
THE Otira Tunnel was now open for rail traffic
between Greymouth and Canterbury and a few
strangers were arriving. One evening I was
standing at the door and a woman and a girl of about
fourteen passed down the street; the lady spoke to
me and when they came back and I was sitting on
the verandah she spoke to me again. I could see at
once that she wanted to talk to me, so I got up and
went out and had a little conversation, and accord-
ing to what she said I could see that they were
having a bad run, as she kept saying, “I do wish
Dadda could get work.” Finally she asked me to
come up that evening, a few doors up the street, and
have a talk with Dadda. I accepted her invitation
and went along, and after I had been talking to
them for a while I could see that they were hard
pressed and the woman again asked me if I knew
where Dadda could get a job. I said that at the
moment I didn’t know where he could get one, but
when I went home that evening I thought about a
fairly big job that was being done laying telephone
wires underground by the Post and Telegraph De-
partment.
The following morning I made it my business to
go along and see the foreman and when I met him
the first thing that he said to me was, “Do you want
a job?” (I had worked for him before). I said,
“No, I don’t want a job but I know a man who does,”
but he said, “Oh! I don’t really want any more men
but I could give you a job if you wanted one.” I
replied that if he was prepared to give a man work
who didn’t want work he could surely give a man
work who with a wife and child was really hard
pressed. He asked what sort of a fellow he was and


I said that I thought he would be a good worker, so
he told me to send him along to start at one o’clock
that afternoon.
When I went back and told them they were very
pleased; but could I now tell them where they could
get a house to live in? At this request I was begin-
ning to think that I was a kind of maintenance
officer; however, I told them that I didn’t know
where they could get a house but as she had also
mentioned that any kind of shelter would do until
they got straightened out I told them that Jack
Rasmussen and the boys had shifted up country and
their bach was empty. They were delighted with
the information and lost no time in moving in.
I saw a good deal of these people when they
started shifting in, and it appears to be a brain-
wrecking process trying to arrange furniture and
other requirements, especially if there isn’t any. Of
course the lady told me that they left all their furni-
ture, piano and all, in the North Island and wouldn’t
be sending for them until they were sure of being
able to get permanent work for Dadda.
I could easily see that these people were hope-
lessly in need of a lot of things, and I had an old
couch that needed upholstering which I gave them.
When covered and turned the reverse way to the wall
it served as a bed for the girl, and being turned
around in the morning automatically became a
couch again. I also gave them an old chair and
other odds and ends and it was surprising how this
lady adapted herself to a difficult task.
Now that we have a couple from the North Island
settled down in Ainey Street, Greymouth, let us call
them Mr and Mrs Jonah. Things were moving along
very nicely and I was told that Dadda was a first-
class workman and just about sure of permanent
work with the Post and Telegraph Department.
The underground cable-laying was finished and
he was put out on line work. Several months had
passed, and although the place was far too small to
accommodate three people, they didn’t seem to want
anything better. Everything was doing well until


word was sent down to arrest Dadda for desertion
and failure to maintain his wife in the North Island,
which meant that Mr and Mrs Jonah were only living
together. As soon as he was taken away Mrs Jonah
packed up, and while doing so busied herself in
throwing out all the old improvised furniture, and
each time a piece was heaved across the yard she
would say “Just fancy using that rubbish after what
I have been used to.” She lost no time in getting
her belongings along to the railway station, and they
were off to a better land and a better home. I was
not sorry to see the last of them because many
quarrels had taken place between them.
The indignity of living in a poor man’s locality
is not as bad as suffering the indignity of putting
up with your next-door neighbours. Mrs Jonah was
not a bad woman, but having half a mouthful of
gold teeth and her arms well tattooed, she did not
add to the dignity of the neighbourhood. In the
first place she was married to a policeman, and to
break the monotony of a miserable life he joined up
in the 1914-18 war and was killed. Widows and
orphans of deceased soldiers in those days were not
provided for as well as they are today, and in fact I
don’t think the woman received anything in that
direction.
Now that the little bach next door was empty,
the place was very peaceful, and to keep it that way
I intended to pay the rent so that the place would
remain empty, but postponed the idea until one day
a boy who lived a few doors up the street came along
and said that his mother had had a wire from the
Jonahs and that they would arrive by the evening
express from Christchurch. I made up my mind
there and then to go down to the agent and secure
a tenancy of the bach before they arrived. I went
along but didn’t go in as I couldn’t decide what to
do, so finally I decided to watch at the station and
if they were on the train hurry along and secure
the place before they could get there.


When the express pulled in at the station sure
enough the Jonahs had arrived. Then, still not de-
ciding what to do, I just kept out of their way and
watched their movements, but they seemed to have
separated on the station. I was able to keep Dadda
in view and followed along behind him as he walked
straight down to the Post Office, then proceeding
around into the back yard, which he would naturally
do to secure his job first. When he came out and
walked across to the agent to secure the key of the
bach I was glad I hadn’t done anything to hinder
their progress, but I knew that I was in for some
more misery listening to an unmarried couple railing
and trying to see who could say the nastiest thing
about the other.
After doing some shopping I wended my way
home and on arriving found that the Jonahs were
already in residence. When Mrs Jonah heard my
movements next door she started to talk in a loud
voice, saying “Now they will see whether we are
married or not,” and quite a lot of talk went on about
the gossiping neighbours. While all this was going
on I was just wondering what new furnishings these
big people had brought back with them, and when
Mrs Jonah started to move around the yard using
her tongue all the time I was able to see her through
a window in my back room; sure enough, she started
to quieten down and gather up the old remnants of
furniture, at the same time looking about her to
see if anyone was observing her.
I was very interested and at the same time began
humming a few words of the old song that I used
to sing, “You may think yourself above us now, You
are worth a lot of gold, But you never know what
time will bring you to.” Dadda started work the
following day, and the family life went along very
well, Mumma being very glad to be able to let the
neighbours know that they were married; but it
was I who knew that it was not a very happy union,
and many fights took place, not all in a verbal
manner.


Sadness to most people in the world is not a
curiosity, and I could see that this couple were
having their share of it. The quarrels and fights
used to arrive like squalls of wind, and I would hear
Dadda when he arrived home on some occasions
being greeted in a friendly manner, but not always.
The rooms that we were occupying belonged to
what was known as the Gourd Estate, containing
several houses which were all let. One day when
X was up town I saw Mrs Gourd and Mrs Jonah
coming out of the agents’ office, and I could see at
once that there was something cooking, so I made
up my mind to try and find out what it was. Mrs
Gourd was a very elderly lady, with whom I was
quite friendly, so I called upon her the following day
and after a friendly chat, which we often had, I said
“I hear that you are going to let my place to Mrs
Jonah,” and without any hesitation she replied “Yes,
she is expecting to be confined and she hasn’t got
room where she is.”
I said “Oh! I’m sorry to hear about that, but I
have no intention of vacating the rooms that I am
in.” No more was said and the following day I
called upon the agents, and a young fellow in the
office told me that there had been some inquiries
about my rooms, but they had no intention of letting
the place while I was paying the rent.
Of course women are wiser than men because
they know less and understand more. As time went
on a baby was born to Mrs Jonah and that seemed
to cement the lives of this couple for a while. Dadda
bought an accordion, and the noise of the instrument
with other small uprisings in their little den made
matters anything but pleasant for me. Sometimes
a battle would start in a small way but grow bigger
and bigger, and when I would hear one of these
storms approaching I would get my hat and go for a
walk down town. Foolish people have no range in
their scale, but I suppose as every man is as every
other man they call what is not good the worst and
what is not hateful they call the best.


As time went on the relationship between Mr and
Mrs Jonah was deteriorating very rapidly. It was
pay day and he arrived home slightly steamed, and
a little argument started and gradually grew till a
straight-out fight began. Mrs Jonah called out to
me for assistance, and although I had often been
told that it was a bad policy to interfere in a quarrel
between a man and his wife I went out to see how
the fight was going. She was hammering him on
the head with a big white milk jug and actually
had him staggering. Not being interested in the
show that they were putting on, I stopped the fight
and Mrs Jonah immediately collapsed, fell to the
ground and lay there in a prostrate condition.
The daughter asked me what was the best thing
to do, and I commanded her to bring me a jug of
water quickly, which she did. She then said “Will
you give Mum a drink?”, and I said “No, stand back
or you may get splashed when I throw it over her.”
Automatically Mum opened her eyes and said “It’s
all right, I only just fainted.”
By this time Dadda had gone inside, and locking
the door, refused to let Mumma in to get the baby.
After appealing to him several times to let her in
without even getting an answer, Mrs Jonah sent for
the police, and when a constable arrived he was able
to get Dadda to open the door. A conference took
place and it was agreed upon that Dadda would
shift, so he went up one block on the opposite side
of the street where another husband was living apart
from his wife, who lived only three doors up from
where Mr Jonah had just left. He was given a room,
the possibility of its acquisition having been previ-
ously discussed, and settled down and continued with
his work.
Mrs Jonah then went out to work and after a few
weeks I was told that he had gone away and left no
address. That was the end of their sad association,
for I afterwards saw him in Christchurch, where he
asked me what had become of his Greymouth wife.
Later on I met her in Wellington and she asked me
if I knew anything about him. It has always


seemed strange to me how divorced, deserted and
abandoned men and women seem to find one an-
other, form illegal alliances, and create more
trouble for themselves.
I have been of the opinion for a great number
of years that a woman is the most interesting animal
in the world, and have often been sorry that I never
seemed to find time to build a suitable cage to house
one in. In Hollywood people say that after one has
been married about four times the event is not so
painful.
“This old world is just what we make it,
And he who is wise understands
We can make it a hell or a heaven,
Our destiny lies in our hands.
So though you have faltered, and fallen,
And sunk to the depths of despair,
Just take a fresh grip of your manhood,
And rise up and struggle and dare.”


CHAPTER XVII
FROM WHITEBAIT TO CHICKENS
WHEN I left the wharf at Greymouth I tried my
hand at whitebait fishing, and of course all
new occupations create a new and fascinating
interest for those taking part therein. The white-
bait come in from the ocean in the early spring and
are running at their best usually about the middle
of October at full tide. This work sometimes be-
comes very tiring, as there is no guarantee whether
the fish will run or not. I am told that the early
pioneers along the Grey River as far as Brunner,
eight miles from its mouth, used to catch the white-
bait in such quantities that they became valueless,
and they had to dig them in the garden for manure;
but as time went on and people acquired a taste for
the little things they gradually went up in price, and
were much sought after as a delicacy to be taken to
people in hospitals, or people outside in a delicate
condition.
When the Otira Tunnel was opened for traffic,
that opened up a market from Canterbury. Visitors
to Greymouth returning by the morning’s train
would travel along the river and buy the bait right
out of the net, and very often good money would be
turned away because the fish weren’t there. The
people of Greymouth, especially those in business,
used to give me some straight talk about not being
able to get any fish, in fact some of them would give
a display of bitterness, and say that there was a fish
ring operating, as they told me that they once were
able to buy fish at sixpence per pint and now it was
two-and-sixpence and three shillings, when available.
To make matters worse I used to quote what Carnegie
once said in America when a commission was sitting
enquiring into the bonafides of certain commodities.


Carnegie said that it was not the value of a
commodity that counted but the ability or power to
control the price. I used to buy and sell as well as
wield the net, which is not as easy as it looks as I
have been on the river from daylight to dark some-
times without catching any fish. I landed on the
river one morning about ten o’clock and the tide
was nearly full, and as it was a very rough morning
there were no fishermen to be seen anywhere, which
at all times was almost a sure sign that the fish
were not running.
As I have mentioned, I used to buy the fish. If
there happened to be only a few fishermen out—and
I could see from a good stand up and down the river
who was catching a few—l would pack up early and
buy all the fish on the river, sell out that evening
and be out with the net again in the morning. This
happened on a few occasions and people wanted to
know why I was the only one who had fish, and why
the price was so high, and just for fun I used to tell
them that I was controlling the market.
On this morning, as I have just mentioned, the
weather was very rough, and the water in the river
was very restless. However, I remembered seeing a
fisherman by the name of Brisland dipping deep on
a rough day and making some good hauls, while
everyone around on both sides was getting nothing,
so I put the net in and tried at various depths, and
got some results at a certain spot at a depth of about
six feet. I continued to wrestle a few into the tin
at intervals but the results were becoming less and
less, and the wind being very fierce I put the net on
the bank.
I was scanning the river up and down to see
whether there were any more fools out for the day,
when I saw a figure coming in the distance carrying
a net at the shoulder. I once read where Mark
Twain said “Be good and you will be lonely,” and
here was someone coming to spoil my goodness.
When this figure drew closer I could see that it was
a lady carrying a kerosene tin and a whitebait net
with a pole attached, about fourteen feet long.


I had been told before that the local residents
would combine and go down to the river to catch
their own fish as their fathers did in the days gone
by. As this lady drew near enough to be within
speaking distance, and remembering the old adage
that one fool admires another, I braced myself up
as well as possible and bid her good morning in as
pleasant a manner as possible under the circum-
stances, and tried to engage her in conversation.
She didn’t appear to be interested in me, but she
walked close enough to my tin and seemed to be
interested when she saw that I had several pints
swimming around in the tin. This lady was well-
dressed and was wearing a pair of expensive-looking
gloves. I was pleased with this lot as it would give
the status of a fisherman a bit of a lift. She walked
past me hurriedly after seeing my tin, and going
down the river a few chains she lost no time in
getting into action by continually dragging the net,
hoping to get it full but only getting stragglers which
it appeared were not worth emptying into the tin.
There was nothing about this lady to indicate
whether she was married, a widow, spinster, divorced
or anything else; which is sometimes a handicap to
a man, sometimes for the best and sometimes for
the worst. I just pretended to be moping around
looking into the water; but I was watching this
mystery lady very carefully, and could see that she
was tiring. I was of the opinion that a meeting of
the Ladies’ Guild had been held and this one had
been sent down to see what chances there were of
the ladies of Greymouth securing their own fish.
I waited until she put the net down and was
gaping towards me, and I suddenly grabbed my hat,
placed it in the bottom of the net, and commenced
to drag deep, then when raising the net I would lean
back on the pole and pretend to empty the contents
into the tin and then hurriedly get into position for
the next operation. I would then stop and pretend
to be scanning the water, but was watching my
adversary down the river where she was working like
a Trojan.


I carried on with this hoax at intervals, and then
I went down to see how the lady was getting on. I
could see about six whitebait in her tin, but she was
still unprepared to have much to say. She asked
me how much I thought the bait would be today, and
I said by the look of things they would be so much
per dozen. With that she had nothing to say but
placed the net in the river for another pull, which
brought back nothing.
She then laid the net down and asked about how
many pounds of fish did I catch in a day, and I said
that sometimes it was about one hundred pounds and
sometimes not so much; then, fearing that she might
detect a hidden smile, I wandered back to my stand,
and although I was tired and had had enough for
the day I made up my mind that I would see my
rival out. This happened about half an hour later,
when she came strolling along not looking too
pleased. I had a look in her tin, which is customary
for fishermen to do without permission, and she had
about seven little fellows in the bottom of the tin.
I asked her if she would be along tomorrow, and she
said she didn’t know. She never came back and the
price of fish remained the same.
Most of my fishing was done by the wharf, just
opposite the township, and most days I could sell
all my fish as fast as I could catch them, right on
the job. Different people have different ways of
dealing, and I had a regular buyer, a Jew, who was in
business in town. I noticed when fish were running
plentifully he would either pay cash or not get any
fish from me, but if there happened to be a poor
run and the fish were dearer he always wanted a
few pounds but didn’t happen to have the money on
him. He wouldn’t come back to me until there was
a big run on and the fish considerably cheaper, and
of course he paid me on the price ruling that day.
It was some time before I awoke to the fact that the
little fellow was getting the better of me, and when
I made him pay the price ruling on the day he made
the purchase, I got the money but lost a customer.


Fishing for whitebait was not a payable proposi-
tion, so after two bad seasons I decided to move on,
and after rushing around the country with unprofit-
able lines, I made straight for the Wakamarina
Valley in Marlborough. I did two years and eight
months without finding payable gold, and then went
on to railway construction work on the Nelson-West-
Coast section. After doing only nine months’ work,
I found myself moving, lock, stock and barrel, back
to the Wakamarina Valley. People have often asked
me why I haven’t settled down somewhere during
my lifetime, and that opens up a very big question
which requires a good deal of explaining.
I can and always have got along with other
people until they put a fast one across, and then I
have added another to my long list of enemies. When
I arrived in the valley on this occasion I was quite
content to settle down anywhere as long as I could
make a quiet living. I decided to go in for fowls
and run them as a sideline to my gold-digging. I
got a hundred fowls and had quite an experience in
a new line of business.
I don’t know how the news spread, but I never
saw so many hawks before or since, and I lost a good
number of chickens. As I gave the hens plenty of
food I used to get plenty of eggs, and would take my
eggs up to the store cart on the road about once per
fortnight, and sometimes I had a kerosene tin nearly
full, which would be sold to the grocer, and very
often after I had made a few purchases he would pay
me the balance in cash. At this period the slump
was on and a big crowd of subsidised miners were in
the valley, and the grocer usually had one or two
travelling with him. They would see me collecting
stores and the balance in cash, and I used to see
them look at each other as much as to say “What
do you think of that?” with the result that nearly
all hands up the valley went in for fowls, eggs went
down to sixpence per dozen, and I was paying eight
shillings for very inferior wheat; finally I was losing
money on my fowls and also losing valuable time
looking after them. I decided to get rid of the fowls


as soon as possible, and was unable to convince any-
one that they were not paying. I sold them here,
there and everywhere, and also ate some of them.
The last one was a pedigree leghorn one-year-old, a
real beauty, and I sold him to a man for the pot. He
was in splendid condition, making six pounds live
weight at two shillings the lot, and that was the end
of my poultry farming.
A man was talking to me one day about my little
ventures, and asked me what I would be farming
next; when I said “Snakes” he said “Why?” and I
told him that I wanted to get into something that
would not be attractive to other people. After I
sold my fowls everyone else did likewise, and then
eggs went up in price.


CHAPTER XVIII
SAM GREEN’S RICHES
I am now well and truly anchored in the Waka-
marina Valley, and I look about me and think
what it has been, what it is, and what it might be.
“This is the place, Stand still my steed,
Let me review the scene,
And summon from the shadowy past
The forms that once have been.”
—Longfellow.
And this is also the place where Levy, who was
advance agent for the notorious Maungatapu
Murderers, had walked up from Canvastown and
stayed the night at Deep Creek for the purpose of
finding out who had money or gold, and who would
be worth murdering. Levy stayed the night at a
shanty, where miners were playing a card game
known as “playing around the Horn.” Levy was
asked to join in, and when he stated that he had no
money some of the miners gave him sufficient money
to join in and play with his future victims, who were
murdered by the gang at a place known as the
Murderer’s Rock, situated about half-way between
the Pelorus Bridge and Nelson.
This is also the place where the scars still remain
to bear witness to the performance of some great
men who lived and worked here in the sixties of
last century. As I approached the Pelorus Hotel
one evening shortly after I came here, I noticed a
little old man sitting on the seat, and after saying
good evening I sat down on the seat beside him, as
in places like this, and knowing that after all the
world is not so big, there is always a chance of meet-
ing someone whom I might know.
This little fellow said “You are Don Mundy,” and
I said “Yes, and who the heck are you?” “I am Sam


Green,” he replied, and I said “Put it there, Sam, if
it weighs a ton. lam very pleased to meet you, and
how did you find this place, and what do you intend
to do here?” Sam had no hesitation in telling me
that he worked on the gold here in the eighties of
last century. Sam was a very interesting man for
me to meet, and had I known better during our long
acquaintance I would have taken note of a little
more of what Sam was always anxious to tell me.
Sam was born at Nowra on the south coast of New
South Wales. I don’t know how he strayed to New
Zealand, but he was educated at the Stoke Orphan-
age, Nelson, and was a fairly brilliant scholar, and
a good man with the pen. When I first made Sam’s
acquaintance, he was manager of Stancel’s Flax Mill
at West Wanganui in the Nelson Province. That
was away back in 1903, and at that time Sam was of
a short but stocky build, and used to live a wild life;
he was a hard drinker and took part in a number
of bare-knuckle fights of the rough and tumble
variety, and in that style he was not easy. Sam’s
principal characteristics were honesty and straight-
forwardness in all his dealings, and he had no time
for a rogue or loafer; this was the little fellow that
I was talking to now.
I could hardly imagine that this was Sam Green
of thirty years ago, but Sam had worn out a good
many pairs of boots and emptied many pints of beer
since then, and to celebrate the occasion I asked Sam
if he could keep one down, but to my surprise Sam
hadn’t had a drink for some time and had decided
to become a teetotaller, and as far as I know he kept
his pledge until he died.
As Sam wouldn’t have a drink I found out some-
thing about his ramblings, which only amounted to
shifting from Nelson to the North Island to work
here, there, and anywhere, and as the years over-
took him he was drawing the pension and cutting
wood to supplement the small amount of one pound
per week. Sam looked only about half of what he
used to be, but when he was telling me what he had
been doing and what he was going to do I had to be


on my guard, as he used to spit through his teeth,
and if one was not careful one might get a shower
bath at any time.
Sam was a great general and organiser although
he had been out of touch with this district for about
fifty years, and he had prearranged to take
possession of a hut that was on the Golden Bar Lease
(privately owned). This whare was in poor condi-
tion, but just about capable of giving a man shelter
for a time.
Sam had all his plans arranged. He could see
now where lots of gold had been overlooked by
people who didn’t understand. Sam was going to
build a cradle and rock the auriferous gravel up one
side of Deep Creek and down the other, and without
any exaggeration (I should take my hat off to him)
the little old man knocking at the door of three score
years and ten, was tackling a job that younger and
stronger men would shun. Sam was a very inde-
pendent man, and he had a considerable amount of
gear which had to be shifted more than six miles
up the valley, and rather than ask any of the store
carts to take it up for him he made several trips and
carried it all up on his back.
Now Sam was settled in the only home he ever
had, and was busy thinking out his future opera-
tions. He didn’t go into Deep Creek as anticipated,
but Nuggety Creek was his goal. He started in the
dead of winter without gum boots; all he had was an
ordinary pair of boots and no socks. A farmer told
him one day that if he (the farmer) worked under
those conditions he would be dead in a week.
Sam produced some fair-sized nuggets, but some-
one started above him and he reckoned that they
were only dirtying the water to drive him out, so he
packed up and took his gear home and later on
started to open another piece of ground about half
a mile upstream from his camp, and it was wonder-
ful the interest that the old man took in what he
thought was going to put him on his feet. Old Sam
would be up and ready before daybreak, especially
if there had been a shower during the night. Sam


would always be expecting water which never seemed
to come. He had cut a race some distance but it was
only storm water that Sam relied upon; if it rained
through the night the water would be gone before
Sam appeared on the job.
I often used to meet Sam coming back, and when
I asked him how the water was he would spit through
his teeth and say he hadn’t got enough to wash a
shirt. Sam spent a lot of time on that claim, and
it took him a long time to discover that his water
supply would never be any good to him.
He had been sluicing a little through for a couple
of years, and one Sunday a couple of men who were
not diggers came along looking for gold, and they
came across Sam’s little claim and just cleaned up
the box as if it was theirs. Sam showed me where
they comfortably placed their feet while they were
panning off the gravel from the box. That little
incident seemed to put a damper on Sam’s
enthusiasm for chasing the precious metal. He
pulled the box up and shifted all his gear along to
his hut and called it a day as far as his mining days
were concerned; but he lived on to think about the
days that had gone and the things that might have
been.
“The silent army of claim and mine
Were the men who led the way,
I tell you the might of the digger’s arm,
Is the strength of the land today.
Though the gold is not what it used to be,
And the ounces gather slow,
The hands are with us who fought and won
In the days of long ago.”
—David McKee Wright.
After Sam retired from the digger’s dish, he
stayed on in the old hut, which he claimed to be
very comfortable, especially as it was his own pro-
perty; in spite of what Sam thought about the old
structure it was settling down rapidly, but Sam.
being a handy man, was always adding a sheet of
iron or a stay here and there to keep the place from
falling down. Sam’s health started to deteriorate,


and I made arrangements for him to go down to the
O’Connor Home at Westport, which is one of the best
institutions for aged people to be found anywhere
in New Zealand, or perhaps the world; but Sam re-
fused to go as he always had something very im-
portant planned out for the future.
The big slump had been coming along at a fast
pace at that time and was no respecter of persons,
as old Sam was hit by having his pension reduced
from one pound to seventeen and sixpence per week.
Sam took his cut in good grace, saying that he could
afford it. Although Sam had definitely retired as
an active miner he was usually fully employed giving
technical advice to new-comers who were starting to
arrive in numbers. Sam would tell them where
they could find a rich patch, and if they were unable
to locate the gold in a certain time they were to go
straight back and see him for further advice. They
rarely got any gold, and often went back for advice.
Although Sam was not too well off for clothes
except for a little blue suit that Clair the tailor at
Nelson made for him thirty-five years ago, he un-
expectedly came to light with the information that
he was what might be classed as a fairly wealthv
man; but up to the moment all his wealth had not
been within his reach or available to be applied to
his own use. A farmer who was talking to Sam one
day, realising that the old hut might blow down and
pin Sam underneath it, offered Sam a house to live
in, which Sam accepted and stayed in, trying to
make suitable bequests to the most worthy people.
There was a miner, Alf Davies, who was bom at
Clive, Central Otago, and lived at Dead Horse Creek.
Sam confided all his private business to Alf, and
also got Alf to draw up a will for him. Sam told Alf
that he had slightly over ten thousand pounds held
in trust by Mr Justice Ostler of Wellington, and that
he also had one thousand pounds’ worth of jewellery
held in trust by the same person.
The Judge was doing the Marlborough and
Nelson circuit of the Supreme Court and Sam had
been down to Canvastown (that is a village halfway


between Blenheim and Nelson) to see the Judge, and
had made arrangements to have the jewellery for-
warded to him, for he intended to make suitable and
adequate presentation to all those whom he thought
worthy of a gift. Now that Sam had let the cat out
of the bag people began to talk, and as Sam one
day remarked, it used to be “that old Sam,”
but now they knew that he was a man of means and
substance they used to come up rubbing their hands
and say “Good morning, Mr Green.” But they
could play whatever game they liked an elephant
has a big memory and never forgets.
Now that Sam had broken the news and let the
people know just who he was, life had more pleasure
for him through the pleasant and courteous manner
in which people would greet him. Sam was a fre-
quent visitor to Alf and finally got Alf to draw up a
will with various devices and bequests. Alf was
almost the sole beneficiary, as Sam was giving Alf
ten thousand pounds and two diamond rings, two
diamond necklaces for Alf’s wife and four gold
brooches. By the time this amount was written,
Alf’s hand started to shake and he was doubtful
about the legality of writing out a will for such huge
amounts in his own favour, but Sam had some legal
knowledge and was on good terms with the legal pro-
fession; he knew that there was no need to worry
as there was a proviso in the Act allowing a bene-
ficiary to write out a will in his own favour with the
permission of the testator.
Having fixed up all business with Alf, he now
turned his attention to the Deep Creek post-mistress,
to whom he intended to present with his own hands
a beautiful diamond necklet and other valuable
trinkets of gold and precious stones. Mr Green had
arranged with Mr Justice Ostler to forward the jewels
by registered post and he would distribute them to
those who were worthy.
When Sam vacated his own hut he actually
shifted into a house which was already partly occu-
pied by a man known as the Giant. This man


derived his name through being so small. It ap-
pears that Sam was not over-fond of the Giant, be-
cause when Alf was drawing up the will he asked
Sam what about leaving a little to the Giant and
Sam said “All right, put him down for a fiver.” Alf
said “Why cut him so low?” and Sam said “I have
no wish to leave him anything, but rather than leave
a stain on my soul and have anyone say that I left
the world bearing a grudge, I have decided to leave
him that amount.”
Sam frequently used to call at the Post Office,
but through some hitch or another the jewellery
never arrived, so Sam just carried on as usual as un-
official technical adviser to any new-comers, of which
there were plenty, as the subsidy for miners was
available to any man who was prepared to say that
he was a miner and knew where the stuff could be
picked up.
Owing to Sam’s age he became quite unfitted for
the task of cutting his own wood from a solid log,
so he used to select all timber that was dozey and
partly decayed, which was far easier to cut and also
easier to carry. That class of wood is always a
danger to burn in the open fire-place because if a
piece of other wood should happen to be put on the
fire with it and a spark is thrown there is a good
chance of setting fire to the house, which is what did
happen to Sam. After that he shifted to Canvas-
town and used to do a little gardening; there I often
met Sam but could never get any satisfaction as to
whether he was Mr Green or just plain Sam.
One evening I was sitting down in the sitting-
room with Sam at the Pelorus Hotel. I had noticed
that Sam had done several trips to Blenheim and
was not sure whether he had left the hotel or
whether he was just having a run. A few minutes
after Sam got settled down to talk he told me that
he had just bought a most magnificent place in
Blenheim, also telling me about the dimensions of
the hall and the appointments of the building gen-
erally. Sam had me guessing for a while, trying to
think out where he could get so much money in such


a short time, but Sam plugged on and seemed to be
happy to let me know everything.
It appeared that quite a few of the wealthy men
in the North Island had heard about Sam’s hig loss
through losing everything in the recent fire at the
Golden Bar. The late Mr William Barton gave five
thousand pounds and Mr W. D. Ormond ten
thousand pounds, and a few others donated smaller
amounts, and that was nothing compared to the
huge sum of money that he had in the bank sub-
scribed by other people in New Zealand.
After Sam had got all this off his chest, he
started to tell me about all the money that he had
won as a jockey, and it seemed that it was no trouble
for him to make a few thousands at every meeting
riding both in the flat and over the hurdles. In a
matter of minutes he must have scooped in about
twenty thousand pounds. I started to feel miserable
and poor. At this stage there was a little lull and
Sam filled his pipe, and after applying to it a good
flame from a wax vesta, carelessly and deliberately
threw the lighted match down on the carpet, and
had I not taken prompt action a fire would soon
have started. Sam was very frank and open in his
conversation with me and appeared to be holding
nothing back, as when he got the old pipe properly
under way he would cast a thin liquid through his
teeth, sometimes nearly to the opposite side of the
room.
I said “According to your statement you must
have an enormous income” and after ejecting an-
other shower through his teeth he said, “What do
you think I paid the Government last year in income
tax?” I replied “I haven’t the slightest idea,”
whereupon he said that the amount was four
thousand pounds. By the time that he got the last
of that statement out I had shifted my gaze and
was watching a big fly crawling upon the ceiling,
and was just wondering whether he was listening
or not. Sam’s discourse was very interesting, but
also fairly tough. I then said “Sam, how do you get


on about your pension?” and he said “Oh! if I wasn’t
drawing that I could never carry on.”
Now I really admired old Sam because from a
quick-tempered, bustling and not-too-easy to get on
with chap in his youth, he had now settled down to
be a peaceful, quiet old man, dreaming about things
which did not exist. As much as I disliked the job,
the publican with a wife and children were running
a big risk of being roasted like grubs in a log of wood,
and I was obliged and compelled to inform on my old
friend and tell the publican about the danger of
having Sam in the house—not forgetting to break
the news in the proper manner, advising the publican
to try and get Sam into the Old People’s Home in
Blenheim, which he did.
Sam was decidedly a very happy old man as he
actually thought that he was wealthy. He died in
the Home a few years later, but his wealth was only
a dream.


CHAPTER XIX
THE SHINER
MOST people have heard and read about men
who were known by the appellation of “The
Shiner,” but this Shiner is a brand new
Shiner who was well enough known, but whose
characteristics have never been properly written
about. This Shiner was born at Charleston on the
West Coast of New Zealand; later on he moved with
his parents and the rest of his family to the Lyell,
and from there to Reefton, where he was batman to
one of the mine-managers. The Shiner, although
giggly and gay, was studious and had a wonderful
memory. I have known him to read a fair-sized
journal relating to the history, character and uses
of some rare mineral, and then hand it over to me,
giving a discourse in every detail relating to the
contents thereof.
The Shiner, like all other known shiners, when
dressed could be identified by any person familiar
with the appearance of a Shiner or race-course
guesser, as these two types fall into the same cate-
gory, which means having the ability and taste to
be able to dress in such a manner as to appear to
be just a little superior to his fellows. I knew him
when he was about twenty-five years of age, and at
that time he seemed to me to be a wild, hilarious,
but happy young fellow just following an occupation
that would lead to nowhere; but he appeared to be
well satisfied as he could dress better and mingle
with the heads, thereby appearing to be a little
higher socially than the ordinary miner.
In travelling around from place to place and
from mine to mine I lost sight of The Shiner for a
good many years, but it appears that he had been
working for the Geological Survey Department and


had also been batman to Dr Bell, who was the Gov-
ernment Geologist for a number of years, and who
later on went to America.
A new mine was opened on the Limbo, and that
is where I came across The Shiner and renewed his
acquaintance after a break of more than ten years.
He had not altered a great deal except that with his
knowledge in this locality he was a tower of strength
and knew how to use it. It seems that he had made
preparations and had his plans well laid when I
arrived, as he was parked with the managing
director, both living in a one-roomed hut and having
their meals at a boarding-house. The managing
director’s name was Larry Gettick, and he was a
good free-and-easy fellow who had been a contractor
but had no knowledge of mining. The Shiner had
taken along a good stock of books, nearly all of a
geological nature, and they were stacked in a con-
spicuous position, indicating that this place was
occupied by two people who knew their onions.
Both Larry and The Shiner were clever, and also
a very happy pair of men. The Shiner would not
use the same terms as a miner. A miner would
speak about “the reef,” but The Shiner would refer
to “these scheelite measures,” and could calculate
to within a few pounds what returns could be got
from the aforesaid measures within a given time.
The Shiner was very much the same as he used to
be in features, but had developed a more refined and
cultured manner, and it was just a matter of en-
vironment having to a certain degree moulded his
character in a superficial kind of way. The Shiner
was a brother-in-law to the manager, whose name
was Jim Rocker, and there was no affection between
these two men. The Shiner as a cultured and diplo-
matic man would show no animosity towards Jim,
but Jim just loathed The Shiner. Whether it was
jealousy or the remnants of an old feud, I don’t
know. Nobody seemed to have any idea what posi-
tion The Shiner held. I used to tell the men that
he was just employed in a technical and advisory
capacity.


A fair amount of development work both inside
and outside of the mine was being executed, and he
was usually put in charge of some of the outside
work. When I landed at the Limbo I had been
felling bush on the north coast of New South Wales,
and I brought one of my good axes with me, a Colley
King. Larry wanted some timber felled to make
room for some work that The Shiner had in hand,
so he asked me if I would go up and do the felling,
saying he would send Wally with me to assist.
Wally knew nothing about felling bush but was a
good mate, and although just twenty-one years of
age he had more confidence in himself than a man
twice his age and experience.
The Shiner was in charge but usually used to
ask me how I would do such-and-such a job, as there
were cables to be got across deep chasms to carry
fluming, and later to be used to carry water to drive
the battery about two miles down the valley. Wallv
was a humorous and hilarious fellow and The Shiner
seemed to excel in all things unique to the habits of
people working in the back country. The managing
director had a special cook-house designed for him-
self, and the battery manager and anyone else who
would be a clip above the ordinary miner and The
Shiner had their meals there. The first day on the
job when Wally was making up tea for The Shiner
he opened up The Shiner’s outfit and came to a neat
little straining-bag for the tea, which amused Wally
very much. He said, “I don’t think The Shiner is
entitled to this kind of swank,” so he filled the little
bag with four-inch nails and placed it on top of a
stump nearby where The Shiner must see it when he
arrived for lunch; but Wally’s joke missed, as The
Shiner was too diplomatic and pretended not to
notice it.
Now the managing director was no man’s fool,
and he wanted this job done and as quickly as pos-
sible. Water was very important, and this job was
bringing an extra flow which was expected to supple-
ment the existing supply to such an extent that it
would fill all requirements during the summer


months. That being the position Larry took charge
himself and allowed The Shiner to act as caretaker
of the existing race and build castles in the air at
night when Larry and he would be together.
The Shiner had already swotted up sufficiently
to know how to chloroform Larry when he came
home tired at night, as the director was a tiger to
go, and he had more than three miles to walk to and
from work. The Shiner’s main object now was to
convince Larry that a geologist on the job was most
essential, and he would have a plan drawn up tracing
out these scheelite measures just at the back of the
camp. The Shiner could show the director in the
sixth dimension in Euclid that these measures con-
tained in addition to gold just a little under one
million pounds’ worth of scheelite, and many a good
night’s sleep was gained by the director through the
scientific calculations of the geologist right at his
elbow.
After this big addition of water had been laid on
to the battery, boring machines were installed in
the mine and a compressor was hauled up the
mountain-side and cemented down into position.
The Shiner had nothing to do with the fitting up of
the machinery but had been swotting up all about
mechanical working of the rock-drilling machines
that were to be used in the mine, and would “bore a
round of holes” every night after tea when Larry and
he would be together in their hut. The managing
director was so much taken up with the way that
The Shiner could bring the whole face away with a
minimum of holes in the hardest of ground that he
appointed him in charge of all machines, and his
duties were setting up and keeping all machines in
repair, which at all times is a very tricky job as the
slightest defect will cause the machine to lose power
and then boring becomes a “bore.” The Shiner was
not a success at this job but managed because the
miners in most cases were able to keep their own
machines in order; but for many reasons the
machines were scrapped and boring by hand-steel
was reverted to.


The director was not pleased with several little
schemes that The Shiner failed in, but was unable to
get very far, as he was a great magician and could
soon bring Larry around by telling him that there
was a ton of money in that mine at the back of the
camp. For a considerable time The Shiner had been
working out a scheme not for the benefit of the
managing director, but for yours truly, The Shiner.
By this time The Shiner, through being an expert,
and having had a roving commission from one end of
the lease to the other, was afforded a useful oppor-
tunity of figuring out how much he could make for
himself.
In the extraction and production of any mineral
from any crude ore the greatest amount of technical
knowledge is required by those in charge to save that
which is required and discard that which is not.
Scheelite is a very heavy metal but not quite as
heavy as gold, and running these two minerals over
the same tables a greater amount of scheelite than
of gold is lost. Up till then in all probability one
hundred tons had already gone over the end of the
tables and the bulk of it would be flooded down the
river, but a large quantity was lying handy as tail-
ings from the tables.
The Shiner had spotted this from the beginning,
and now the time had come to act. Often just in a
casual way The Shiner would touch the big boy on
the possibility of knocking out a crust by trying out
a new technique in saving scheelite. Larry was in-
terested, and was neither anxious nor hostile about
The Shiner’s new idea, so finally after the ground
had been properly softened the director gave him
permission and laughingly asked him how much
would the shares be worth.
The Shiner then started to rub his hands and
went along with the preliminary work; and being an
expert and a business man he pegged off an area
sufficient for his working requirements. When he
got this far both he and the managing director were
looking at each other, and The Shiner without giving
any indication of unfriendliness made himself a


camp near his work and also a shed to store scheelite
in. The work went ahead, and he didn’t make it
too hot for a start, but in a short while he was
collecting more scheelite than the company’s battery,
which did not improve the shareholders’ opinion
about the managing director’s ability.
By this time The Shiner was well and truly in
business, and the friction that existed was causing
heat between the two portions of the brains-trust.
Several incidents had already taken place, Larry on
more than one occasion even going so far as brand-
ishing a revolver. The Shiner was now firmly in the
saddle, being sufficiently versed in mining law, and
was satisfied about his provisional title, which only
amounted to a miner’s right, to be followed by an
application to the Warden’s Court for the granting
of a license for a machine site and other require-
ments. Now the battle was on. The Shiner’s
application was strenuously opposed by the Limbo
Mining Company but The Shiner won the case, as
the 1914-1918 war was in progress and Britain
wanted all the scheelite that could be produced.
The Shiner had been threatened by the managing
director several times, as he could see that through
his efforts and the shareholders’ money they had
only blazed a way for The Shiner, and that they
were sucking the cow with the blind teat. But The
Shiner was not worrying about them, as he had
pitted his brains against theirs and won. In spite
of threats and suspicious-looking circumstances he
just chuckled to himself, and used to say to a certain
person in whom he confided that a mug was born
every minute.
After Larry had tried all manner of means to rid
himself of the parasite, as he used to describe him,
he laid information against The Shiner that he was
stealing scheelite from the battery, but The Shiner
won again and carried on as usual, producing, all
told, seventy-five tons that otherwise would have
gone down the river.
When the war was ended and The Shiner had
a well-filled wallet, he decided upon having a run


around New Zealand for the good of his health and
he arrived back at the Limbo much benefited after
a well-earned holiday. There were no more lemons
at the Limbo but he could send out a radio beam and
search in other parts. By the rule of the circle all
lines drawn from the centre to the edge of the cir-
cumference become equal, but all lines drawn from
the centre of The Shiner’s brain to the verge of his
destiny would not become equal and The Shiner
knew that, and would lay his plans accordingly.
The war ending while stocks were fairly high in
England, The Shiner had already received a record
price for all that he had sent there, but he discovered
another method whereby he might get a further
dividend still without expending very much energy.
He had his scheme all worked out, and he wrote to
the War Department in England to say that through
shortage of labour and being pushed for time, he
had been unable to extract the twenty-five per cent,
of gold remaining in all shipments that he had sent
to England. He also mentioned that the method of
extraction was his own, and was a rather difficult
process, but if they were unable to extract the gold
he would be prepared to come over and do the job
and show them how it was done; but as a reward for
divulging the secret about extraction he would want
all the gold extracted as payment.
After receiving this information from The Shiner
the authorities in England went into the matter, and
after calling up all metallurgists and experts to try
and extract the twenty-five per cent, of gold, only
traces were found, and after a considerable amount
of work and expense the experts found that they
were only grasping the shadow and missing the
substance. Consequently the task was abandoned
and a letter was drafted and forwarded to “The
Shiner, Limbo, New Zealand,” stating that they were
unable to extract the twenty-five per cent, of gold
referred to by him, so they would be quite agreeable
for him to come to England and show them how the
job was done on his terms, as mentioned in the
letter which he had previously forwarded. The


Shiner, after reading the letter, started to rub his
hands and looked forward to some more easy money.
Having shipped, during the war years, seventy-
five tons of scheelite through his agents at Blank-
side, it was now an easy matter to be introduced to
people who had a little ready cash to splash,
especially after seeing The Shiner’s credentials from
people in England of high repute. Of course The
Shiner had exhibited to them the letter of invitation
which he had to go to England to clean up about
eighteen thousand pounds’ worth of gold by a new
process which he had in his head.
Having done considerable business with a bank
in Blankside, he let the banker in on the box seat
to organise a team of his friends to the number of
eighteen, as The Shiner had worked out a scheme
that would cost exactly eighteen hundred pounds for
expenses travelling to England and other incidentals;
this would be only a small amount to spend for the
production of eighteen thousand pounds, which
would give each member of the party nearly one
thousand clear for an investment of one hundred
pounds. When the scheme was launched these
eighteen boys stripped off, clapped their hands to-
gether and took a header, and The Shiner was very
happy except when he saw how easily money could
be collected in Blankside. He was sorry that he
hadn’t made the stakes a little bigger, but up till
that moment The Shiner had never brought off any-
thing so big. When he gave the banker the order
to go ahead with the organising, the banker worked
assiduously and untiringly, convincing eighteen of
his best clients that money was easily made.
The eighteen hundred pounds was collected and
handed over to The Shiner’s banker, who simultane-
ously had a passage booked to London via America.
It was a beautiful morning in Blankside when The
Shiner arrived at the railway station exceptionally
well-dressed with eighteen hundred pounds in the
bank to his credit, the bulk of which he had arranged
to have remitted to London. At this stage The
Shiner was not worrying as much about the


scheelite as he was about the money, for he was a
little uneasy to think how he could get all this money
entirely out of the bank’s control at Blankside, and
so far only a portion of the money had been sent to
London while The Shiner was about to sail for
America. Canada was already in his mind, as he
knew one or two gentlemen there whom he could
use.
On the way across, The Shiner’s body was resting
while the brain was working overtime. He arrived
in the States in good condition, and after he had
stretched his limbs and had a look around, he was
more convinced than ever that Canada would just
suit him better than the United States, so he packed
off for Canada and looked up his two friends and
started to advise them about waste products lying
around the mines. The Shiner was well equipped
with credentials, and in particular the one from a
high-ranking officer of the War Department inviting
him to England to show the experts a new process
for separating scheelite from gold.
The Shiner’s actual line of business was extract-
ing scheelite and gold from waste products. Of
course he was a self-appointed Messiah and at all
mining districts that he visited he immediately
became an object of curiosity. But The Shiner
didn’t mind, he was like the Jew when he was trying
to sell a client a second-hand coat. The customer
said “I don’t like the smell of that, in fact it stinks!”
and the Jew said “No, it’s not the coat, it’s me that
stinks.”
After The Shiner had a good look around he
came across a tailings dump containing about ten
thousand tons of waste products. Of course he had
been in communication with a friend of his in New
Zealand, Tom Handy. Tom knew more about
extracting minerals, and when The Shiner was under
cross-examination by any of the Canadian experts
and the subject became too hot, he would always say
that that part of the work was done by another
expert who would be arriving in Canada by the next
boat. The Shiner, in addition to getting Tom to


join him, wrote to his company at Blankside and
advised that he had discovered a dump which he
claimed was worth many times more money than the
project in Britain, and arranged that he should stay
in Canada and clean up this little patch before
proceeding to England. After a meeting was called
at Blankside and all hands said “aye,” it was herein
and therein agreed upon that their expert in Canada
be given a free hand to work and exploit any ground
that he may consider to be a financial gain to the
aforesaid company, and it was further agreed upon
that all matters relating to future operations on
behalf of the company, and now being represented
by The Shiner in Canada, shall be drawn up in legal
form either by one or the other of two able-bodied
solicitors who held a share in the aforesaid company.
It was further agreed upon that the banker be given
instructions to forward the balance of the subscribed
capital, eight hundred pounds, to his address in
Canada instead of London.
In the last communication by The Shiner to his
company at Blankside he advised that he would
require the full amount subscribed for the purchase
of machinery. The Shiner had already sent to
London for the one thousand pounds remitted to
that address and was now awaiting the arrival of
the balance from Blankside.
Through an inadvertency there was some delay
in sending the balance of the money to Canada, and
to prevent any ill-feeling between the company and
the expert, an accompanying letter was sent with the
money expressing regret about the delay. When
The Shiner received the mail one day, he was sitting
by a good fire at his hotel in Dumpville, and after
reading several letters he thrust them into his
pocket. It was a cold day and The Shiner was lean-
ing back in his chair with his feet against the
mantlepiece smoking a cigar when he opened the
next letter, which contained the draft for eight
hundred pounds. He said “Dammit, there was no
need to apologise as I never expected to get it.”


Since sending the balance of the company’s
money to The Shiner the company had a few
informal meetings, but nothing very big was done,
except to talk about the possibilities of their foreign
investments and to read correspondence from The
Shiner about his negotiations with the mining com-
pany at Dumpville trying to get a proper agreement
and a hold over the property.
By this time Tom Handy had arrived and some
samples were taken from the dump, and after being
tested by The Shiner and his partner Tom, the
values were considerably higher than previously
anticipated by The Shiner. Contained in the next
letter by The Shiner to the company at Blankside
was a report from Mr Handy, and this startling
report conveyed the information that the average
values of the dump would be considerably higher
than previously anticipated. Also nothing was more
vigorously prosecuted than the matter of receiving
a proper hold and a title over the dump.
The shareholders at Blankside, New Zealand, had
received a considerable amount of correspondence
in relation to the personal negotiations with the
directors of the Dumpville mining company. After
The Shiner and Mr Handy had a good look around,
they both decided that a title over this particular
dump could not be obtained, and in addition to that
the two experts fell out over some financial arrange-
ments between themselves.
Mr Handy packed up for New Zealand, and The
Shiner wrote to the company at Blankside to say
that the Dumpville company had let him down, but
not to be down-hearted as he would catch the first
boat for England and would immediately commence
operations upon the scheelite previously referred to.
Some of the ore was in England and some was stored
awaiting treatment in Scotland.
The Shiner arrived in England, where he lost no
time in making personal contact with the authorities
about giving a demonstration of how his new process
would separate gold from scheelite. The secret
process was all in The Shiner’s favour, as men of


genius are very difficult, and consultations which
The Shiner had with men who knew something were
carefully made.
While these preliminaries were being staged, Mr
Handy had arrived back in New Zealand and im-
mediately dug a hole under The Shiner, and the
Blankside mining company made some enquiries in
England. When The Shiner saw that the joke had
gone far enough, he slipped across to Ireland and
stayed there for a few months until things blew over,
and then he sailed for New York, where he took a
course of training as a chiropractor, returned to
New Zealand, and set up in business as a nerve
specialist. He charged twenty-five guineas a nob
and was actually getting a few clients at that price,
until a patient squealled and he was taken before the
Court and received a term of imprisonment.
After The Shiner served his time and was released
from prison, he decided to try his hand at mining
again and linked up with his old friend Mr Handy
who was working a mine at the Limbo. Mr Handy
was not popular with the men, and while paying a
visit to the men in the mine after pay-day, was
mysteriously killed.
The Shiner attended to all the burial arrange-
ments, etc. Another big mix-up was looming ahead
but the sudden death of Mr Handy closed a chapter
in the partnership between The Shiner and Mr
Handy. The mine was being worked on tribute from
the owner in the North Island, but after Mr Handy
was buried the men cleaned up the battery and left
the district. When a mine stops the copper plates
are left in the battery and are left in a cured state
with gold adhering to the plates, worth about four
pounds per square foot. A medium-sized battery
would have between thirty and forty square feet.
The owner of the Limbo seemed to neglect the pro-
perty at this stage, but The Shiner didn’t, as he knew
the plates were still in the battery and he intended
to look after them by giving them a good cleaning.
For the amateur or layman removing gold from a
copper plate is a very difficult undertaking, but The


Shiner didn’t mind and nobody knows how much he
got out of that little job, which must have been
fairly satisfactory, as he stayed on and was going to
open the mine again with modem machinery. Al-
though a caretaker had been appointed and was
living by the lease, The Shiner still claimed that he
had an option over the show and would be opening
up the works at any time.
Time went on and The Shiner used to cut away
some fern and clean up around the buildings to pre-
vent the danger of fire, and he also put in a good
deal of time taking measurements for space to house
new machinery that was supposedly coming from
America.
While he was getting ready to start, a speculator
in Wellington was organising a party of men to go
and reopen the Limbo, and unannounced and un-
expected a party of men arrived, and after looking
around they found that a house that The Shiner had
taken over would be required for the men’s use.
When The Shiner was told about this he remon-
strated with the man who was sent along to explain
to him that the house would have to be vacated by
a certain time. Finally The Shiner was told to get
out or be chucked out, so he got out.
The Shiner drifted away and did another turn
with the Geological Survey Department, and during
the slump in the thirties was actually reduced to the
pick and shovel on railway construction work. With
The Shiner, all roads lead to wealth as he made the
acquaintance of a very amiable gentleman who was
prepared to part with a few hundred pounds in a
likely-looking “spec.” The Shiner had this lemon
all primed up about the Limbo which had been
abandoned, but he knew just where to locate the
scheelite measure that was lost necessitating the
closing of the mine. The name of this new find of
The Shiner’s was Douglas Old, and after he had
been got ready he gave The Shiner a few pounds to
go over to the Limbo and make a start.
World War II was in progress and scheelite was
six shillings per pound. After The Shiner had been


looking around for some time he was just about at a
dead end. There was an old miner living near the
Limbo who had worked with me in the Limbo when
World War I was in progress, and in one particular
place I left a pillar for the purpose of supporting
the roof. I intended to remove it later and put some
timber in, but one of the bosses saw it and was
rather amused and said to leave it in. Adjacent to
that, near the surface, there was a very rich layer
of scheelite which, for safety purposes, I left un-
touched also. I often used to say to my old mate
how easy it would be to dig it out from the surface.
As I have mentioned, The Shiner was at sea as
regards knowing what to do to make an impression
with his new client, until one day he went down to
have a yarn with my old mate Alex, who told him
where this find could be located, and The Shiner
lost no time in rooting it out and dragging it down
the hill in bags.
Mr Old lived in Canterbury and used to visit The
Shiner periodically, and although he knew nothing
about mining, he was easily convinced that a fortune
was right at hand, as The Shiner was able to clean
up and pack his spoil as personal luggage right to
Wellington, through boosting his baggage as war
material and closely associated with the war effort.
The Shiner received fifty pounds cash from the Gov-
ernment and was congratulated upon his enterprise,
but just laughed and said “Just wait until I start
producing!” and he didn’t forget to touch a few of
the heads for financial assistance to open up in a
big way.
The officials in Wellington were interested in
scheelite, but had no confidence in The Shiner, as he
had previously taken them for a ride into no-man’s
land. The Shiner returned to the Limbo and
awaited the arrival of his partner, Mr Old, who was
to supply the money. The Shiner, who claimed to be
a mining engineer, also claimed that through a
movement of the earth thousands of year ago, the
top portion of the ground immediately above these
measures had been pushed over bodily to the west.


and this was one of the important discoveries that
he made during the time that he was employed by
the now defunct Limbo Gold Mining Company.
He suggested that they should clean out one of
the top levels, which required re-timbering and rails
laid. This would be a major operation, but when
finished, according to The Shiner, at a certain spot
that he had marked on his map there would be ap-
proximately one thousand tons of scheelite, without
counting gold and silver. The Shiner did not pro-
pose to run the show in a big way, but just run out
from the milling plant one ton of treated ore per
week, which at the ruling price of six shillings per
pound would be a return of about six hundred and
sixty-six pounds for the week’s work.
The man with the money was greatly taken up
with The Shiner’s ability, as he could draw a plan
describing everything which was not visible to the
lay-man. Mr Old gave The Shiner a cheque book
and told him to make a start and get things going
as soon as possible as the war may end and the
bottom fall out of the market. So The Shiner en-
gaged a couple of men and he was not long started
when he discovered that the job was much bigger
than he had expected. The man with the money
was worried but The Shiner used to put over a good
tale; however certain things had happened which did
not substantiate The Shiner’s statements and
drawings.
Numerous arguments had taken place, but Mr
Old decided to see the thing through right up to the
point where the measure had slipped or was pushed
over a few feet from its counterpart. Instead of
only having to pick up about one hundred feet of
broken timber, etc., nearly the whole of the four
hundred and fifty feet had to be reconditioned, and
the speculator was a sorry but a wiser man, as there
was nothing to show to verify the markings on The
Shiner’s plan, and finally when The Shiner was asked
to produce the plan, he said that one day he was out-
side looking at it when suddenly a gust of wind blew
the plan out of his hands and he saw it float high


into the air in a westerly direction. He offered a
reward of ten shillings if anyone could find it, but
nobody was inclined to look for it and that was the
end of the scheme.
Mr Old pulled out and would supply no more
money, and The Shiner, just to make out that he was
serious, put two men on and paid them out of his
own packet and then tried to get Mr Old to cough
up again, but he just shook his head and later on
arrived with a truck and took away the rails and
other gear that he had supplied. The Shiner hung
on and did many trips to different places trying to
get capital to run the mine, but always arrived back
a weary man with blood-shot eyes through not
having had sufficient sleep. Eventually, The Shiner
admitted that the mine was a wash-out and the
house that he was living in belonged to another man
who required it for removal. The Shiner was not
worried as he had another dwelling in view at the
southern end of the Limbo, but before occupying this
he must have a trip which took up about three weeks;
and he arrived back full of business.
After getting set up in his new quarters, he had
time to have a look around and he came across a
dump of ore which, according to his estimation,
would be one thousand tons, and some of it worth
up to five ounces to the ton. The Shiner couldn’t
understand why all this wealth should be lying
there so long. All this mess had been put there
during the war and now the war was over and what
did the Government care anyhow—they had a bank
to draw from, but this would do him.
The Shiner applied for nearly one hundred acres
and a special claim as a machine site, as he not only
wanted the contents of the dump, but a big area of
the place where it came from. The licenses were
duly granted and everyone waited for The Shiner to
crack the whip. He was always a man who kept
his own counsel, and people never knew what he
would do until he had done it. For some time after
securing the ground he had been very busy looking
around trying to find anyone who had money to


invest in a good sound mining venture, but his pro-
gress was rather slow until he met Dave Rudd.
Dave had previously worked for The Shiner, and prior
to that had picked up a good deal of money actually
connected with the production of the dump which
The Shiner was about to operate on.
The Shiner and Dave put their heads together
and decided to put a battery in right away. Dave
knew where he could get one fairly cheap, and being
a handy man, could erect it himself with the Shiner’s
assistance. They bought the battery right out, and
landed it on the job ready for erection and several
people were promised work as soon as the wheels
started turning. Both men worked hard bringing
on water, laying pipes and erecting the battery,
which was duly finished, and the workmanship
would stand up to any rigid test, and taking all in
all a fine job was done. The rest should be easy,
feeding the machine with ore that had jumped by
this time up to ten ounces per ton, and people were
wondering why all this wealth should have been left
there by the Government.
However, the proof of the pudding is in the eat-
ing of it, and Dave and The Shiner were now engaged
in putting this rich ore through. A fair-sized spoon,
if it was kept moving, would have just about fed the
battery, but Dave and The Shiner put in about two
months putting ore through this miniature machine
and nobody knew how the show was panning out.
Several big flash cars found their way in, and one
visitor, according to Dave, was prepared to spend
forty thousand pounds. After this announcement
was made several applications went in for work at
the battery or in the mine. As time went on, Dave
pulled out and left The Shiner in full charge, still
trying to get people with money interested, but no-
body came along and The Shiner carried on alone.
An enquirer one day asked a resident who lived near-
by, how much money The Shiner and Dave made
out of the new venture, and he said that they
averaged two pounds ten per day, and he also ex-
plained how it came about. The first day they


started, Dave took a five-pound note to work with him
in his vest pocket, and before the day was out The
Shiner had it in his pocket, and Dave got it the next
day and they carried on like that and made good
money taking each other down. The Shiner re-
mained at the job for years and boosted it until
sometimes he would nearly blow his front teeth out,
and finally he drifted away and seemed to have gone
right out of business.


CHAPTER XX
POSTSCRIPTS
WHILE I was writing this book in my lonely
whare in the Limbo Valley, a man ran amok
and was hanging threatening notices upon
my gate, and finally one containing a bomb. That
night my beautiful dog Mack got poisoned, and al-
together I had a terrifying experience, as the notices
had the appearance of being put there by a maniac
who was not responsible for his actions. The police
took my dog’s body away to the Research Station for
analysis and the maniac has not yet been appre-
hended.
I buried Mack deep down in my heart, and fenced
in a little grave on the top of the hill where he had
kept watching the man for about two weeks and
finally paid the penalty of death. Apart from every-
thing I have never seen or known of a better dog,
and he cannot be replaced. As long as I live, and
every time that I think of him, which will be fairly
often, those will be the sad moments of my life. I
have had many dogs, but Mack was the greatest ever,
and I could never expect to get one like him. I
have lost my sole companion—destroyed by a fiend.
Who poisoned my dog? I don’t say it was you,
But God’s wheels are slow in the grinding,
And they grind so dreadfully true.
My writing has been interrupted for a time, but
the fiend was located, taken before the Court, and
fined £3/10/-.
The Shiner drifted away and spent the last days
of his life in a lonely hut on the south side of the
Limbo. He left no records and no estate; the old
gold mining story went the round that he had a lot
of gold planted somewhere, but it was never found.


Man hath a weary pilgrimage, as through
this world he wends,
On every stage from youth to age with
discontent attends.
With heaviness he casts his eye upon the
road before,
And still remembers with a sigh the days
that are no more.
Nowadays I may be found strutting around with
a coltish walk, but am not actually dangerous.
The average young man, when launching out
upon the highway of life, has high hopes about how
far he will go and what he will achieve. Speaking
for myself, I was over-confident, and when my
mother asked me what I had been doing after I had
been away from home for two years I said that I had
been places and got nowhere.
With ambition simmering within me I set off
again, only to be met by failure after failure until
my ambition was almost consumed. When this was
followed by one nervous breakdown after another I
started to moan, but an old woman I met told me to
keep going, and a man told me there were many
people far worse off than myself.
I then measured things up, including myself, and
decided that I wouldn’t allow today’s misery to
interfere with tomorrow’s feast. The question now
arises, can a man who has failed in the past be a man
of the future?—and the answer is, of course he can.
The main object in life should be to keep plodding
along, avoiding the mistakes that Hitler and
Napoleon made by marching too far ahead of their
supply lines. It’s far better to be a success in a
small way than to be a failure in a big way. Men
have committed suicide when their fortunes have
dwindled down to a few thousand pounds.
The world is just as attractive, or perhaps more
than it ever has been, the opportunities are there,


and my advice is: “Cheer up, boys, and go to it, and
let us see what you can do. Hope is our greatest
friend, and fear our greatest enemy; don’t allow the
tide to recede and later wash you up on the beach
with the refuse.”
THE END
PRtNTKt> BY THE MARLBOROUGH EXPRESS. BLENHEIM




Self-pity would be the keynote of
the chronicles of most men who
had suffered the disappointments
and dislllusionments that befell
Donald Mundy; but not so in his
case. His writings reveal a philo-
sophic outlook and an ability to
find quiet amusement at the idio-
syncrasies of others qualities
which must have sustained him in
adversity in the same way in which
they now brighten his book.
With a humble nature, yet a proud
spirit which would not allow him
to demean himself or to work
under what he felt to be unfair
conditions, he drifted restlessly
from place to place, from job to
job, in a way which gave him no
chance to accumulate worldly
riches. Instead, he has acquired a
wealth of knowledge of human
nature, and a philosophy that en-
ables him to reflect on the past
without bitterness, and to appreci-
ate what small comforts life has
given him rather than fret for
what might have been.


N 9 86771
UNDER THE MINING ACT. 1926.
[Form 1 (Esg. %.
ss,
MINER’S RIGHT, NEW ZEALAND.
NOT EXTENDING TO NATIVE CEDED LAND.
District;
To whom issued:
of.
(Full name.)
Date of issue
Date of expiry : /f
(Hesideuce,)
day of 1
.day of_
Receipt of the fee of five shillings is hereby acknowledged.
Dated and issued »■»» //ifo S ***
I9#f
Warden [or other JolmDm of officer!.
(Receipts issued by Government Officers for the receipt of public moneys must be given on
numbered official forms.)
■r~ -<r*
mm
m
mm
, 19
~l9dS#
The Author’s home at Renwick
