





A ||h||
[HE VALLEY
Ldf the




THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL


By the same author
JUNGLE VAGABONDS


THE VALLEY OF THE
LOST TRAIL
T. STUART GURR
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON


Set up, printed and hound
in Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
19iS
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a book.


Cl 7264
15 NOV: 1344
DEDICATED
MY DEAR
ANNE ELIZABETH




CHAPTER I
Barrington J. Cantwell junior, who had behaved
like a whirlwind since his arrival home from school
for his Christmas holidays, stopped unpacking his
trunk and rushed to the window as he heard a boyish
voice lustily singing a Salvation Army hymn. He
looked to the right of the servants’ quarters at the
sloping millet field then in crop, just in time to see
coming into view the head, horns and massive
shoulders of a blue-grey water buffalo leading a small
herd. A moment later Lakhsman the cowherd, sitting
cross-legged on the great bull’s back, with the soles
of his feet and the palms of his hands turned upward
in the contemplative attitude of a Buddha, finished
a rousing chorus with a triumphant “There’ll be no
sorrow over there.” The voice had the uncertainty
and raucousness of adolescence, but no one could
doubt its deep religious sentiment. Barry grinned with
pleasure and delight and, placing his fingers into
his mouth, gave a piercing whistle. At this the Mah-
ratta boy looked up with a jerk of his head toward
the picturesque and rambling bungalow Dalziel where
lived the great and influential sahib who was Barry’s
father.
“Barr-ee! Barr-e-e-e!” he yelled, standing up and


waving his arms, but still maintaining his balance as
Kabria, the old bull, plunged on. Then in an abandon
of delight Lakhsman went through a series of breath-
taking acrobatic tricks, difficult enough on the ground,
but more so on the swaying buffalo’s back. Barry
jumped through the window and scaled the garden
wall as Lakhsman dismounted and rushed to meet
him.
“My friend, my dear, dear friend!” he shouted
with eyes alight as he caught Barry and hugged him
close. Lakhsman stepped back with an appraising
eye. Barry undoubtedly had grown. Well, so had he.
They were still the same height, both tall and stockily
built for their fifteen years. Barry looked his brown
comrade over and wondered if he would still be
able to throw him in a wrestling bout. Lakhsman
had always been wiry, muscular and energetic. He
climbed trees like a monkey, swinging from one
branch to another, and dropped unhurt from heights
from which broken bones seemed inescapable.
Kabria the bull, with half a dozen cows standing
modestly behind him, chewed the cud, and watched
his master with a resentful eye. The temple bells in
the village near the river had clanged just before
they started homeward, and Kabria counted on
reaching their enclosure, with no interruptions, in
time to see the sun set behind the mountain range.
As a reward for his protection of the herd from
savage dogs and prowling beasts, he was always given
a share of the mash and cotton cake served to the
cows, who fed contentedly while they were being


milked. There was good pasture on the common
just now. Feed was always most abundant when nagli
and jawari crops were in ear. But as the summer
advanced the heat would scorch and pulverize the
grass, and the wind blow the dust far and wide. Then
a gnawing stomach could brook no delay in returning
to be fed.
“Stop, bamta!” Lakhsman shouted, whereupon the
bull, who had begun to saunter away, came to a
halt and, with an innocent look, started to graze.
“You know, Barry, the bull’s getting impatient. Come
on up to the old look-out and let him wait.”
They squatted on the rubble wall and shaded
their eyes against the glare of the setting sun. In
front of them, the village snuggled in a tope of
mango- and jackfruit-trees. The hillock on which it
stood sloped to the plain below that extended to the
foothills. It was very still. Now and again a human
voice called. The crows and mynahs leisurely flew
to their roosts in the village trees, and the noisy
sparrows were already settling down and quarrelling
violently in the bamboo clumps.
“I’ve waited since noon for this moment, Lakhs-
man,” Barry said. “Just to sit here on the wall and
watch the sun go down with you, as we’ve done
so often.”
“And I,” said the Mahratta, “did not expect you till
to-morrow. The Surthee cook told me so not later
than this morning, fool that he is. I suppose if he
had real wisdom he would not be a cook.”
“Shunker’s a good cook, Lux,” Barry protested.


“Of course, he can’t stand on his head, or make a
back somersault on top of a buffalo, but remember
how you nearly broke your neck trying to learn that
trick. Tell me, what have you been doing since I
left you six months ago?”
Lakhsman laughed and lowered his voice. “I ran
away with a circus, and joined the troupe of jugglers
and acrobats. I leamt a lot, although most of the
time they made me attend to the animals. The owner
was a Mussulman swine who cared not that I was a
Brahmin of the Brahmins.”
“Why worry about that? I’ve told you caste
observance is just snobbery,” Barry said seriously.
“Didn’t the village elders search for you?”
An impish smile stole over Lakhsman’s face. “Else
would I have been here? They caught up with me
at Ahmadabad. I thought I had dived into an ocean
of millions of people, and could no more be found
than a jingha in the deep sea. Who think you found
me quite by accident?”
“How should I know?”
“Think again. Who unravels many mysteries? Who
sees beyond the sight of ordinary man? Who goes
and comes without warning and without purpose?
Who has no employment and therefore no master?
Whoa, Kabria budmash!”
Barry looked puzzled. Sometimes Lakhsman was
enigmatic, although usually simple and direct in
speech.
“Oh Barry, Barry. Don’t you know I speak of
your father? But how did he come to follow me like


a wolf on the trail? And why did he, a great sahib—for
he is a great sahib—waste his time on a peasant brat
like me?”
“He knew I was your friend,” Barry suggested, hid-
ing with difficulty his mounting excitement. No boy
was prouder of his father than Barry, although he
saw so little of him. Even on his holidays from St
Peter’s school in Bombay, he was never sure of spend-
ing much time with him. Last Christmas he saw him
only just as he was leaving for school again, Barring-
ton J. Cantwell senior was always so absorbed, busy,
restless and uncertain in his movements that his son
sometimes wondered if he remembered he had a
motherless boy.
“He knew that?” Lakhsman said breathlessly and
incredulously. “No, your father would not see me if
I passed him on this narrow cattle track.”
“I have often spoken of you, and then surely he
must have heard you singing the Salvation Army
songs,” Barry replied. “Never once has he tried to
discourage our friendship. Of course he knew you,
and often he has been amused by your acrobatics as
you passed the house to the village.”
Lakhsman gave a low whistle. Undoubtedly Cant-
well Sahib was a wonderful man, and yet, as with
all really clever men, his line of reasoning was direct.
If Barry’s father had noted his skill as an acrobat, the
presence of a circus in town would have suggested
that Lakhsman had probably gone away with it. It
was not a difficult matter to follow the tracks of a
circus.


“Finding me was quite easy,” Lakhsman said, slip-
ping off the wall to the ground. “Kabria is getting
impatient. Will you walk to the village with me?”
The sloping millet field and the grassy plain below,
dotted here and there with trees, were bathed in
golden sunlight. The bhisti, or water carrier, drove his
panting bullock with its well-filled puckal up the
winding and stony path, leaving a little trail where a
tiny leak in the leather bags spurted water on the red
dust.
“See, it was thuswise,” Lakhsman said, emphasizing
his points on the open palms of his left hand with a
long and shapely forefinger. Yes, Lakhsman’s
recovery was a simple matter, thus explained, but
nevertheless it made Barry prouder than ever of his
father.
“I can imitate many more birds and animals than
when I saw you last,” the Mahratta boy said hastily,
as though anxious to monopolize the conversation
until he had related all his newly acquired accomplish-
ments. “And oh, Barry, I can cast my voice like a
tiger in the depth of the jungle so that his prey is
bewildered, not knowing from which direction he
will spring. Listen!”
The boys stopped, and Lakhsman looked about him
as if he expected that something sensational was about
to happen. Then Barry heard the chatter of a couple
of mynahs who had just discovered a snake and were
anxious to warn the world. He heard their excited
cries as they dived to the ground, becoming louder
as the snake moved in the direction where the bovs
✓


stood, Barry looked around, but no birds were in
sight. From close by came the rik-tik-tik of a mon-
goose, then the hiss of a cobra reared for combat.
The birds, apparently satisfied that they had played
their part in bringing destruction to a reptile who
robbed their nests of eggs or young, could be heard
chortling in a distant tree. Lakhsman laughed, and the
spell was broken. Barry, tricked by his friend’s clever-
ness, joined in his mirth.
“We call that ventriloquism, Lakhsman. Who
taught you?”
“A lad in a distant village. Now I must go and
attend to the cattle. To-morrow morning I shall drive
the beasts to the river. There is good fishing now,
especially at a bend that I will show you. Perhaps
we shall catch a big mahseer. Bring your sporting
rifle too. A fat duck or two will please your Surthee
cook.”
Barry strolled homeward, a little envious of Lakhs-
man, and very much impressed. He had known him
soon after his arrival in the small but important hill
State of Nanda ten years ago. He remembered coming
to Dalziel late one day, and the excitement of settling
down in the commodious and pretty bungalow
perched on a hilltop in the outskirts of the capital.
His mother had been with him then—a dainty, slim-
looking girl with blue eyes, as deep and serenely blue
as the sky after rain. She used to sit under the great
tamarind-tree on the terrace in front of the house and
sew while he chased the lizards or a cheeky mongoose


up the garden path. Now, he never heard a bulbul
call to its mate or chirrup anxiously and excitedly
as it trained its fledgelings for flight, or listened to
the crickets chirp in the leafy recesses of the garden
in the short evening twilight without thinking of
her.
He remembered the last time he had seen his
parents together, perhaps so keenly for the very fact
of its having been the last. Even in those days his
father had spent little time at home, and they were
so intensely happy when united that it made separa-
tion more cruel and memorable. His father, on that
occasion had said to him, “Look after mummy while
I’m away, son.” To have been committed with that
trust had made Barry feel very proud. That was the
last clear picture he had of his mother. What had
happened to her he did not know. Possibly he was
too young to understand. His father had never spoken
of her again, and had not encouraged him to talk
about her either.
It was then that Lakhsman, a chubby little boy
with a rather protuberant stomach and roguish eyes,
and as full of tricks as a monkey, had come into his
life. He, too, appeared to have no mother, and he
never spoke of his father. A Brahmin priest in the
village close by looked after his spiritual welfare, and
a peasant couple with a small family had adopted him
and seen that he was adequately fed. As a matter of
fact, Lakhsman belonged to the village, or, to be more
correct, the village belonged to him. He slept where


he pleased, and fed where the evening meal smelt most
enticing. There was one spot where he could retire
with some privacy, a hollow space on the top of the
trunk of a large mango-tree from which great lateral
branches spread. Here he had built quite a comfort-
able little hut with reeds and a palm thatch. The vil-
lagers, seeing him walk along those great branches to
his hide-out, would hold their breath. They called
him Humayun, the monkey god. His agility, at least,
merited that compliment.
Ambaji, the village holy man and saint, spent a
good deal of time educating Lakhsman, whenever
he could induce him to pay attention. But the boy
loved roaming round the countryside and scaling the
mountains with which Nanda was hemmed in. No
punishment deterred him from wandering into the
forests for a week at a time when he felt the urge,
and he seemed quite indifferent to the anxiety his
sudden disappearances caused. The simple villagers
regarded him with something akin to awe, or at least
as being quite incorrigible. Utterly fearless of beast
or reptile, he was as much at home in a forest thicket
as he was on the village green.
After his mother’s death or disappearance, Barry
had been practically brought up by Shunker the cook,
aided by his wife, Paroo. They insisted on obedience,
kept Barry clean, tidy and well fed. He was a lonely
youngster, but had the capacity to keep himself in-
terested and amused. The study of flowers, plants,
insects, reptiles, birds and animals absorbed his mind.


Whenever it was possible Lakhsman spent the day
with him, and then every moment was one of excite-
ment and activity. They wandered farther than
Shunker thought wise, climbed trees and took part
in many warlike exercises. Lakhsman’s great ambition
was to be a dacoit leader, a sort of Robin Hood who
looted the countryside, enriching the poor with the
spoils taken from the rich. Lakhsman certainly was
no ordinary child.


CHAPTER II
The road to Nanda, like a broad red riband, wriggled
through a mountain pass to the west and then cut
straight across to the main gate of the city. From
early morning to nightfall, straggling processions of
cattle, ponies, camels and bullock carts, with an
occasional lumbering elephant, ambled along the high-
way in clouds of dust. An avenue of banyan-, tama-
rind- and mulberry-trees cast a grateful shade on its
scorched surface. As summer progressed and the heat
increased, the dust became thicker, and was caught
up in whirlwinds which chased one another in
columns across the plain.
The highway looked its best immediately after the
rains, when the grass was green and lush and the rice
crops ripened in the sunshine. Its surface was smooth
and its colour stood out in sharp and agreeable con-
trast. At eventide the smoke of camp fires curled
through the branches of the protecting banyans, and
travellers too tired to go further, slept in the cool
air under the stars. The city, built on a hill, rose
precipitously from the plain and was enclosed by a
wall of stone. On the peak of it, the palace of the
Maharajah was outlined. It was built of sandstone and
marble and followed the best Hindu architectural


traditions, modified by Moslem influence. Further
along the summit stood a richly carved temple show-
ing the once-strong Buddhist hold upon the religious
life of this little principality. Near by was the great
tank which constituted the city’s water supply. The
streets spiralled upwards in easy grades, and the
bazaar, situated half-way up, was particularly gay
and picturesque. On a clear day swarms of people
dressed in varied costumes of every hue, leisurely
shopping, presented a gay and animated scene. There
was little poverty in Nanda, and there were very
few beggars.
Almost near the top, but in an opposite direction
to the palace stood the residency, a long plain bunga-
low with a wide veranda running round the front
and sides, and protected from the sun by green
bamboo jalousies. A broad flight of steps led from the
gate up a succession of terraces to the house. The
garden of the residency with its parterres of English
annuals was one of the sights of Nanda. The house, to
the average citizen, had a dignity and remoteness that
even the Rajah’s palace did not possess. There lived a
man personally known only to the most important
citizens, seldom seen by the populace, yet credited
with possessing extraordinary power and influence.
Lustrelle Sahib had lived among them for exactly ten
years. He had been associated with certain crises in
the affairs of the State and had been successful in
maintaining peace and order when it seemed difficult
to control the populace. The Brahmin priesthood
was never favourable to improvements or reforms.


From the veranda of Dalziel Barry could get a
clear view of the residency. Nanda looked nearer
than it actually was. The palace and the women’s
quarters sprawled along the skyline, and the massive
architecture of the temple close by reminded him of
pictures of the fortified eyrie of some feudal baron
in Europe. At one time the palace had been protected
by formidable ramparts, but only the ruins of them
now remained. At a distance the town resembled a
great hanging garden with houses, washed white or
tinted in cream and light blue, peeping out from
bowers of verdure. Many years ago it had become the
stronghold of a notorious bandit chief who overthrew
the ruling house and established a new dynasty. Such
fortified strongholds exist to-day in many parts of
the Mahratta country.
The capital never ceased to interest Cantwell junior.
Now and again, when his father was at home, they
called on the resident. Mr Lustrelle, despite his pleas-
ant smile and charming manner, Barry regarded with
awe. Lakhsman had told him confidentially that he
was the most important man in Nanda and the only
one in India who could clap the viceroy on the back
and call him “old bean”, Barry’s father was on
familiar terms with this great man, and the boy never
forgot an occasion, which had left him trembling and
breathless, when his father had said, “Lustrelle, I’ve
come to the conclusion you are a stupid old ass.”
For many days afterwards Barry had expected his
father to be led away for execution. To his surprise,


however, Lustrelle had ridden over a few days later
and had dinner with them.
Barry liked best to prowl round the city with
Lakhsman, inspecting all the shops, and stuffing them-
selves with a selection of savouries and sweets,
tempting to any boy. They poked round the shop
of the bannias, the silversmith and the beaters of brass-
and copper-ware. In a rather mysterious side street
of the main bazaar, Lakhsman located a shop that
made exquisitely engraved swords and daggers, and
also martial drums whose rousing beats would incite
any martial heart to victory. On these occasions
Lakhsman forgot he was a Brahmin of the Brahmins,
and ate and drank what he pleased. He cut an odd
appearance dressed only in a little loin-cloth or a
dhoti with a huge pagri wound round his head.
Barry remembered once climbing up a steep stair-
way in the temple, passing along a sculptured corridor
and emerging on a portico that overlooked the palace
grounds. The royal bodyguard in blue and white
was drawn up in front of the gate expecting an im-
portant visitor.
Lakhsman watched the guard in silence, and then
said very gravely, “I suppose it sounds silly and like
swank, but somehow I feel certain that one day that
guard will be drawn up to receive me.”
“And if I’m around,” said Barry, “just as they pre-
sent arms, I’ll knock your pagri off your silly head.”
At which both boys laughed for five minutes
without stopping.
Barry did not pay much attention to the remark.


Sometimes Lakhsman was mysterious and inclined to
be a little boastful. Just then the Mahratta boy did
not look very important.
Barry was up soon after daylight waiting for his
friend to drive the cattle down to the river. An
excited call from the gardener took him to the front
of the house where he saw a man in white galloping
up the main road in the direction of Dalziel, Barry
recognized the blaze on his father’s bay mare and
rushed to the back of the house as Lakhsman, singing
the Salvation Army hymn “There’ll be no sorrow
over there”, ambled along on the back of a water
buffalo.
“My father is riding home and will soon be here,
Lux. So long. See you to-morrow,” Barry announced
shortly.
Lakhsman stood up and back-somersaulted to show
how delighted he was.
“You must be very pleased and happy, Barry. I’ll
pass here at sundown. See you then if you’re not
busy.”
Barry watched his friend disappear down the slope,
careless and happy, singing at the top of his voice.
Lakhsman on that morning had proved deaf to
Ambaji’s entreaties to continue his studies.
“Must I,” he had said definitely, “work while other
boys have school holidays? No, when Barry goes
back to school I’ll start work again.”
Lakhsman did not like to offend the elderly old
Brahmin who, five years ago, had settled under a shady
mango-tree overlooking a view of the river and within


a stone’s throw of the village. Ambaji lived in a little
reed hut built by the villagers for their “saint”, whom
they provided with the choicest food they could
serve. Ambaji undoubtedly was a holy man of vast
learning and experience. On very rare occasions,
especially when his wrath was roused by the stupidity
of the villagers, it was evident he had occupied a
position of authority and was accustomed to being
obeyed. He spoke English with the fluency of a
native district judge. At times his imperious gestures
hardly suited the role he had assumed of a sadhu
who had abandoned life and its hallucinations for a
future in which he would be able to shed his body as
a snake sheds its skin, and in which nothing would
be hidden from the eye of the spirit.
Ambaji took a deep interest in Lakhsman. He was
the only one with whom he conversed regularly. Even
the women who brought his food and reverently
placed the platter by him did not dare to rouse him
from his deep meditations. They and their children
slunk silently away, fearing the least sound might
wake him from a blissful dream. The old Brahmin
sage taught Lakhsman many things, but schooled him
particularly in the study and correct pronunciation
of the English language. The boy learnt its idiom
and its slang from Barry.
While the Mahratta boy drove his herd leisurely
through the sweet-smelling grass, singing lustily or
practising ventriloquism on straying cattle, Barry
waved frantically to his father who, recognizing his
son, spurred his horse.


At the gate Cantwell leapt from the saddle and,
with his arm round his son’s shoulders, led him up
the garden path. Barry’s father, tall, lithe and muscu-
lar, possessed tremendous vitality. His dark eyes
sparkled as he spoke, and his gestures were sharp
and incisive. A soldierly type of man with regular
features, a broad low forehead and thick brown hair.
In looks and bearing, his son was very like him.
They breakfasted together on the front veranda.
Through a break in the garden trees and shrubs,
Nanda could be clearly seen. Dalziel commanded a
particularly good view of the residency.
“I arrived at Nanda yesterday evening, Barry, and
spent the night at the residency with Mr Lustrelle. It’s
possible I may have to leave home again in a day or
two.”
“That’s pretty hard, dad,” Barry grumbled. “I
haven’t seen you since Easter, and you’re talking of
going away again an hour after you’ve come home.”
“Look here, old chap,” his father replied, “you’re
growing up, and it’s time I let you into a few secrets,”
He glanced around him and lowered his voice. “Have
you any idea how I earn a living?”
“No, dad. But it’s something mysterious or else
you’d talk about it a bit.”
“Well, I do all sorts of odd political jobs, disen-
tangling things and clearing up messes. For example,
your friend Lakhsman bolted from the village some
months ago.”
“He told me about that. I’ve seen him twice.
Cantwell laughed. “Great pals, you two chaps.”


“Yes,” Barry went on, “he suspected you were
on his trail and knows just how you discovered where
he was.”
“As simple as that?”
“Well, dad, it’s this way —” And Barry recounted
Lakhsman’s line of reasoning.
“He has a shrewd brain, that boy,” the father
commented.
They left the table, and Cantwell lit a cigarette
and strolled into the garden.
“Why,” Barry asked, “did you have to search for
a poor village boy like Lakhsman? Didn’t someone
report to the native police that he was missing?”
“They probably did. Of course I like the boy. I
know he’s a close friend of yours.”
“I don’t think you’d spend so much of your valu-
able time on Lakhsman only because he’s a chum of
mine.”
“As a matter of fact that was not the real reason,”
Cantwell said. “I acted under instructions from high
places. Let me see, how old are you now, Barry?
Fifteen, I think.”
“Yes, I was fifteen a month ago. Lakhsman is about
the same age.”
“You’ll soon be a young man, Barry. I think it’s
time I placed some confidence in you. I’ve been
thinking about it since I chatted to Mr Lustrelle.
You’ve reached the stage when you notice things
and want to ask questions. You can keep a secret,
I suppose?”


“Yes, I know how to be loyal. I’d never let you
down, dad.”
The father’s eyes glistened. He placed an arm
affectionately round his son’s shoulders. “The Cant-
wells have always been loyal, dependable and honour-
able, Barry. I haven’t seen as much of you as I would
have liked. Your early childhood was spent under
the care of native servants, and since then boarding
schools have seen more of you than I have. Some day
I hope w r e shall see more of each other, perhaps be
identified in our activities.”
“That would be great,” said Barry, his face lit with
a smile.
“Listen. I can’t discuss my work, but it’s thrilling,
adventurous and often dangerous. I have to be a good
detective as well as a clever diplomat, and above all,
I must keep my own counsel. Most people think I’m a
man of means who idles away his time travelling,
shooting or on race courses—a pleasure seeker with no
ambition or purpose in life. And indeed, when I
wish to convey that impression, I can do so very
successfully. I undertake many missions. Now let
me speak of Lakhsman. He gave me a job that I
handled very well. I followed him precisely as he
thought I did.”
“Lakhsman,” said Barry, “has puzzled me for some
time. He’s different from the other native boys.
There’s little he can’t do. I think he’s lazy—that is,
likes to wander about the jungles and mountains, and
he gives the villagers a lot of worry and trouble. He’s
a great anxiety to poor Ambaji. And by the way,


why does that old chap, who is seeking peace and
detachment from the world, spend so much time
teaching English to a near-naked Hindu village boy,
as well as science, mathematics and most of the sub-
jects I learn at school?”
“Lakhsman is not just a common village boy, Barry.
Let’s go into the fernery where we won’t be dis-
turbed, and where we can get a clear view of Nanda.
I’ll tell you then, who the boy is.”


CHAPTER 111
“Nanda,” explained Mr Cantwell, “is a native State.
There are many independent or semi-independent
native States in India, of varying size and importance,
and Nanda ranks among the small ones. It is, however,
very prosperous. There is good arable land in this
broad valley, and it extends farther north. Once it
was part of a larger province, but it was conquered
by a Mahratta bandit chief who had revolted against
his ruler. You can see that the town looks like a for-
tress. It’s been defended successfully against several
attacks in the last hundred and fifty years. All the
country around it used to be very unsettled. You’ve
noticed forts and ramparts on hills and mountain-tops
right through the land of the Mahratta. Brigand chiefs
used to loot the hard-working peasantry after their
crops had been garnered, and then retire to their
eyries and wait patiently for the next harvest.
“You’ve seen a good deal of Nanda although I
haven’t encouraged you to visit it. Look at it from
here. For prosperity, cleanliness and orderliness it’s
quite an outstanding city. You’ll notice modem im-
provements have been made, and you’ll also see traces
of western influence here and there, but Nanda still
remains the charming old-fashioned city that Hindu


bards once extolled in story and song. The climate is
bracing, the natural surroundings are attractive and
the people kindly, courteous and contented. I’ve lived
here partly from choice. There is another more im-
portant reason, but I’ll not discuss that just now.
“The reigning potentate lived in quite unnecessary
magnificence in the palace on the crest of the hill.
He was a wealthy man, and taxed his people heavily
to satisfy his greed until the British Government
decided to keep a restraining hand on him. There are
stories that he obtained a great part of his wealth
from sources other than taxation, but I have not been
able to substantiate them. At the northern tip of
Nanda the land undergoes a strange transformation.
Behind a formidable mountain range the country is
hot and desolate, and resembles nothing so much as
our conception of a valley in the moon. It’s said that
diamonds as well as other precious stones are found in
a particular valley or ravine, but no one has been able
to verify these stories. Probably they become exag-
gerated as they pass from mouth to mouth. I think the
people who first circulated them had read about the
adventures of Sinbad the Sailor in the Arabian Nights.
A famous red diamond, of which you will hear a
great deal, was supposed to have been found in that
barren valley of heat, wretchedness, privation and
thirst. This gem has a most important bearing on the
position of the State to-day.”
At the mention of diamonds Barry’s eyes danced
with excitement. “Didn’t you ever explore that valley,
dad? I wish I had the chance.”


His father smiled. “As a matter of fact I did set out
to find it. I got within a day’s march of it. It was a
terrible journey. The heat was unbearable, and my
servant and I nearly died of thirst. A mysterious
illness I contracted at that stage nearly cost me my
life. I have my own views about my bad luck, but it
did clear my mind of a certain doubt, and convinced
me that no one could possibly live in such a barren,
waterless wilderness, and that the stories about the
diamonds were imaginative.
“Perhaps you don’t know that at present Nanda is
really without a ruler. The State is administered by
the resident, our friend Lustrelle. The last ruler,
Bulwant Rao, died two years ago at the age of
seventy. He was a fine old fellow who had travelled
very little, but was liberal-minded, and adopted a
number of ideas suggested to him by the resident. I
knew him well. I never visited him in his palace, but
met him on various occasions at the residency. He was
very attached to Lustrelle and took quite a paternal
interest in him, Lustrelle being, of course, a very
genial, able and kindly man who loves Nanda and its
people. It’s curious to meet an Englishman so en-
grossed in his work and devoted to the welfare of
this State. I’ve told him that, except for his colour
and European clothes, no one would suspect him of
being other than a Hindu. Now and again we do
meet Europeans who have become completely orien-
tal, and Lustrelle is of that type.
“He’s quite popular in Nanda, you know. But few
men can have no enemies, and just now there are


several dissatisfied men in high places conspiring
against him. When I tell you the facts, you won’t be
surprised.
“Bulwant Rao had one son, bom to him late in
life. He was a stripling of sixteen when I met him
first. In many respects he resembled his father-
courteous, kindly, intelligent, and interested in his
people and in the well-being of the State. The boy
finished his education in a Bombay university and
returned home. There was talk of sending him to
Oxford, but his father, who showed signs of debility,
thought he should remain in the capital. Lustrelle
took a great interest in the training of the young
prince. Like him, he was a keen naturalist, and often
both went out together on short excursions, looking
for specimens of butterflies, insects or reptiles for
Lustrelle’s collection.
“A few months before the old Maharajah passed
away, his son, Ramanaji died suddenly. Some say he
died from snakebite, others from a sudden illness, but
I have my own opinion. This tragic end was a fearful
blow to his father, and one from which he didn’t
recover. A stroke sent him to bed, and after several
weeks of wild and futile upbraiding, alternating with
uncontrolled spasms of grief, the end came.
“Ramanaji’s death left the State without a direct
heir to the throne. He had been the last of his race in
direct descent. There have been several claimants to
the throne, some merely impostors supported by
powerful coteries in the State. One contestant, a
young Brahmin named Balkrishna, a crafty plausible


intriguer, is not advancing his claims openly, but is
working secretly to get all the aid he can. He was
supported by the high priest, to whom he was closely
related. You’ll hear more about him.
“Both Lustrelle and I have made close investigations
into the rival claims. Of course, the quickest and
surest way of filling the vacant gadhi or throne is to
find a blood relation of the old Rao, as long as he is
not too distant. We have already found him. In fact,
anticipating trouble, we’ve been keeping a close eye
on him since he was a very little boy.”
“Lakhsman!” Barry ejaculated breathlessly.
“Yes, Lakhsman. He came to the village just behind
us, about the time you first met him.”
“And he’s a royal prince!” Barry exclaimed. “And
I’ve punched his nose lots of times. I thought he was
just an ordinary native boy.”
“And that’s exactly what he is, except to us who
are in the know. But never breathe a word of this
to him,” he added wamingly.
“Do the villagers know?”
“The villagers think him an orphan of some im-
portance, because of his being supported in a secret
sort of way, and because old Ambaji takes such a lot
of trouble with him. Of course, no one could doubt
that he comes from a family possessing brains, energy
and enterprise. The lad has pride, self-respect, and
is very independent—just as you are, Barry my son.”
“Go on, dad,” said Barry impatiently. “I’ve never
read a thriller that’s moved me as much as this story.”
“You see, Barry, it’s a real story, in which you


6 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
and I are implicated and in which we’ll both be in-
volved more deeply before the successor to the gadhi
is established on it.”
“Where did Lakhsman come from?” Barry asked.
“He’s really a grand nephew of the old Rao, whose
only remaining relatives were three nephews. The
youngest, a very daring and adventurous man, led a
revolt which was quickly and bloodily crushed. The
young Prince Ranoji fled for his life, and nothing
more was seen or heard of him. A few years later a
bandit chief, operating in the rugged mountains of the
Western Ghats, gave the British Government a good
deal of trouble. Perhaps the most daring thing he did
was to make a sudden and unsuspected assault on the
city of Nanda. He stormed through the main gate
and overcame the little resistance that was offered.
His followers invested the palace and looted the city.
Bulwant Rao defended the heights of the capital suc-
cessfully, until the British troops arrived and restored
the position. But meanwhile, Nanda had been
thoroughly sacked.
“It isn’t easy to escape the British raj when it’s on
the trail of a criminal or a political offender. Ranoji’s
adventures would make a very good story. He ranged
the mountains and jungles of the Mahratta country
as an outlaw and a fugitive until an accident drove
him to take shelter in an obscure little village over
a hundred miles away from here, where Lakhsman
his son was born. Bulwant Rao, when he learned
who had sacked Nanda, said it was some comfort to
him to leam that the descendants of his house ran


true to form. After Ranoji’s accident, it’s believed the
Maharajah assisted him with money and even
arranged that he should no longer be hunted or
harassed by the British police. No one knew about
this except Lustrelle and myself. When, finally, Lakhs-
man’s father died, we brought the boy here. We
didn’t tell the Maharajah, who may not even have
known of his existence. We didn’t want Lakhsman
to be the victim of palace intrigues.”
“Did old Ambaji accompany him?” Barry asked.
“No, but he later settled near by. Ambaji once
held a very important post in a neighbouring State,
and was not only a friend of Bulwant Rao and staunch
to the reigning dynasty, but also had no friendship
for Madhu, the high priest of Nanda. Like many
Hindus, he wanted to spend the evening of his life
as a recluse, meditating on spiritual things. At first
he agreed to keep an eye on Lakhsman, but later,
especially after the death of the Maharajah, he spent
a great deal of time on the boy’s education and train-
ing. We know Lakhsman has given him a lot of
trouble, but Ambaji realizes he is a high-spirited boy.
You can understand that, with a father like his,
Lakhsman would be of an adventurous type. I can
well understand why he is so happy exploring the
mountains and jungles where his father roamed for
so long. My hope is that we’ll so be able to occupy
him that he won’t seek an outlet for his energy
and his love of danger and excitement by becoming
a bandit chief or a dacoit leader, like his forbears.”


“Lakhsman would do nothing against the law,”
Barry said defensively.
“Well, we hope not. I’ve hoped your friendship
might influence him to some extent.”
“I think Lakhsman is inclined to be religious. He
went to the Salvation Army meetings when they held
a mission in Nanda last year. He can sing several
hymns.”
Mr Cantwell laughed heartily. “Lakhsman is a mis-
chievous young scamp, but he loves music. The
Salvation Army hymns are set to good tunes.” He
looked at his watch and rose. “I’m afraid I’ll have
to tell you the rest some other time. I’ve promised to
meet Mr Lustrelle before lunch. I may not be back
until to-morrow, but you’ll understand.”
“Yes, I’ll understand,” said Barry. He now knew
a little more about his father’s occupations, and felt
prouder of him than ever when he saw how many
things he seemed mixed up in. Some dav. if he had
the luck, he, also, would be engrossed in affairs of
State.


CHAPTER IV
Lustrelle, in his office in the residency, impatiently
awaited Cantwell’s arrival. It was almost noon, and
every moment he expected his sepoy to announce
him. Dressed in tusser-silk, he looked cool and un-
perturbed, only repeated glances at the clock betray-
ing his anxiety. He was stout, of middle height, about
fifty, his hair grey at the temples and thinning on the
crown. Large blue eyes, a frank open expression and
a particularly pleasant and shapely mouth made most
people accept Lustrelle after his first engaging smile.
A couple of babu clerks in the adjoining office took
turn about glancing anxiously out of the window to
see who the resident’s visitor would be. For some days
there had been a tenseness in the atmosphere. They
knew that Lustrelle was anxious and preoccupied,
although he maintained his usual confident and affable
demeanour. In fact, the resident had been unusually
pleasant and unconcerned in manner to-day: the one
flaw in his political mask, which always aroused sus-
picion. At such times his staff knew that something
important and exciting was brewing.
Above the city in the grounds of the secretariate, a
cannon shot announced that it was midday, and simul-
taneously Cantwell stepped on to the residency


veranda. It was always cool there, and if he had to
wait a few minutes he could find something to
interest him. Trophies of the jungle, the heads of
tigers, panthers, wolves, bears, hyenas, boars and
noble specimens of antelopes and deer, ornamented
the walls. Their skins were spread along the length
of the highly polished floor of the waiting vestibule.
At the end of the veranda an armoury of ancient
Mahratta weapons, beautifully engraved and some-
times studded with precious stones, was mounted and
documented.
Cantwell, in khaki jodhpurs and a cool white tunic,
very alert and business-like, handed his Curzon hat
and riding crop to the waiting servant and was
ushered into Lustrelle’s office.
The resident, pointing to a chair, closed the door
after instructing the sepoy that he was not to be
disturbed. There was little chance of being heard
through stone walls quite a foot and a half thick. The
writing-table, beautifully carved and inlaid, was a
present from the late Maharajah. Lustrelle kept the
polished surface clear of all unnecessary impedimenta.
He drew some memo slips on to his white blotting pad
and picked up a pencil, prepared to indulge in his
incurable habit of sketching while he maintained a
serious conversation.
“I’m expecting Riverstone in a few minutes, but I
wanted to see you first,” Lustrelle said in his light
baritone voice, speaking with his eyes lowered, but
raising their lids suddenly at the end of the sentence.
“Late yesterday evening I got some disconcerting


THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL 3
news which I must treat seriously. The bairagi or
holy man I spoke to you about is moving slowly
towards the capital, telling his story and inflaming
the peasants as he moves along.”
“Repeating the same stupid tarradiddle? ” asked
Cantwell with a smile. When Lustrelle was nervous he
rather overdid it.
“Yes, he doesn’t vary it. That makes it all the more
impressive. I saw the prime minister early this morn-
ing and told him. He merely laughed, but that’s only
what I expected Sir Ramchandra to do. I have little
doubt that his sympathies lie with that pretender to
the throne, Balkrishna. His behaviour made me more
determined to treat this bairagi seriously. Riverstone
is certainly the brightest member of the mofussil
police and specially lent to us by the Government
for the occasion. He’ll trail the bairagi through the
State and at least keep us posted with further develop-
ments,”
“I’ve no objection to Riverstone being put on the
job,” said Cantwell. “In fact, I welcome it. I agree
things are working up to a crisis of some kind.”
“Good. I haven’t mentioned it for some time, but—
have you heard any news?”
“About my missing wife? No. You’re a thoughtful
chap, Lustrelle. You never fail to ask after her. I never
leave Nanda on any kind of mission but you make
the same solicitous inquiry when I return. You think
I’m still searching for her—that I still live in hope?”
“Why shouldn’t you be hopeful? You’re not sure
that she’s dead.”


“Sometimes I think it would be a relief to know
for certain that she was dead. It would be easier to
bear than that suspicion ”
“I’ve always maintained the suspicion was un-
worthy of you. To begin with, Captain Routledge
couldn’t disappear with another man’s wife without
someone knowing. All the inquiries I made failed to
prove that any one was with him when he left
Nanda.”
“You can’t substantiate that he left Nanda. No one
seems to know what happened to Routledge. His
disappearance is as mysterious as my wife’s.”
“Your wife only knew him for a fortnight in
Simla.”
“But he seemed to have an interesting personality.
Suspicions of that kind though, only make me more
wretched, and don’t help in any way.”
“I referred to your lost wife,” said Lustrelle, “with
a purpose. Let me see, you and the prime minister
have never been good friends since you came here.”
“No, I don’t like Sir Ramchandra, and he doesn’t
like me,” Cantwell agreed, “We’ve crossed each other
too often. By the same token, he doesn’t like you.
The man’s an unscrupulous scoundrel, and wouldn’t
hesitate to do away with either of us.”
“My whole political career,” the resident admitted,
“has been a tug of war with the dear Ramchandra
and his clique. I think he recognized I’d scored a force-
ful ally in you when you settled here. Can you see
what I’m driving at?”
“Yes. That he abducted Ann,” said Cantwell. “I’ve


thought of that often. In fact, at the back of my mind
there’s a growing certainty that the prime minister,
knowing how I adored my wife, hoped I'd leave
Nanda in despair upon losing her. But he miscalcu-
lated.”
“I don’t want to raise false hopes, Cantwell, but I
think we’re getting nearer the solution of some of
our problems, including that of your charming wife.”
“She’s been gone a long time now,” said Cantwell
sadly, “and I’ve searched for her everywhere. But
no, I’ve not abandoned hope.”
A sepoy tapped at the door and announced that
Riverstone Sahib was waiting. Lustrelle introduced
him to Cantwell, who gave him a quick appraising
glance. The police officer was above the regulation
height, slim but powerfully built, and still under
thirty. At the moment he looked somewhat travel-
stained, tired and grim.
Riverstone was country born and bred. His know-
ledge of languages and his close association with the
natives gave him an immense advantage in a service
in which it was often necessary to adopt disguise.
Riverstone was more than a good policeman. As a
detective, he had already earned a great official repu-
tation. He could disappear in the broad current of
life, in city or country, without trace, and a sleuth
rarely baffled when once on the trail. Two years at
an English public school, followed by three more in
Scotland Yard, had prepared him for the career on
which he had early set his heart. This sudden mission
to Nanda, without explanation of any kind, left him


perplexed, but he never took his hurdles till he
reached them.
He knew little or nothing about this native State.
His commissioner had merely mentioned in a casual
way that the old Rajah had died without an heir and
“things were getting somewhat mixed”. His only
definite instruction was to report to the resident as
early as possible. Nanda was eighty miles from the
rail head by road, and about thirty as the crow flies.
Part of the journey, especially up the steep mountain
tracks, he had journeyed by dak, his horse, led by
his mounted syce, trotting easily behind. After
entering the principality, the roads improved as well
as the rest houses. The river Buma threaded its way
through rich alluvial soil, and the country looked
lush and fertile. Farther to the north, the Buma
turned towards the coast, and the land became gradu-
ally less productive until it had all the aspects of a
parched and arid desert.
A hot ride since eight o’clock had left him both
hungry and thirsty. Lustrelle ordered drinks and
sandwiches, and they lunched as they talked. The
babu clerks closed the office until two o’clock, and
left to enjoy a quiet siesta under the trees. Quickly
and concisely Lustrelle sketched the position of the
State since Bulwant Rao had died.
Riverstone summed up the position. “I understand
there is a legitimate heir to the throne, a grand-
nephew of the late Maharajah, whose claims can be
established, and a pretender, a young Brahmin named
Balkrishna, who is a relative of the high priest, a scion


of the old dynasty. It seems that Balkrishna has the
support of the prime minister, and could be made
quite acceptable to the people. You, Mr Lustrelie,
have the support of the British Government in your
opposition to the pretender. Well, the position will
hardly improve by dallying with it. Why not have
a show-down and place young Lakhsman on the
gadhi?”
“Because,” said Lustrelie, “the coronation could
not be performed.”
“Why?”
“A famous red diamond known as the All-seeing
Eye, is missing.”
“I’m still puzzled,” said Riverstone.
“This famous diamond, in a particularly beautiful
setting, attached to a simple gold chain and hung
round the neck of the new ruler, is the principal part
of the investiture ceremony,” Lustrelie explained.
“It’s as important as the crown in the enthronement
of our king. This diamond, despite the State’s many
vicissitudes, has been the principal ornament in the
royal regalia for several centuries. There’s a queer
belief that when that diamond is lost, Nanda’s inde-
pendence will also be lost.”
“How long has it been missing?” Riverstone
inquired.
“Since the day of the old Maharajah’s funeral over
two years ago,” Cantwell replied.
“Do you suspect it was stolen?”
“It’s disappearance is regarded as a first-rate
mystery. The old Rajah’s obsequies took place, with


6 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
great ceremony, the day after his death. In front of
the palace, as you’ll see later on, is a great square.
Close to the palace gate stands a marble platform
with a domed roof supported by double arches on
each of its four sides. It served as a sort of hall of
audience, Bulwant Rao used it to make public
announcements or, when necessary, to accept the
homage and fealty of his people or to take part in
a public demonstration. On this platform the Maha-
rajah lay in state, wearing the full regalia. The red
diamond blazed on his inanimate breast. The square
was packed with people, and women mourners wailed
unrestrainedly. I was present, of course, and stood
about ten yards from the dead king. A simple cere-
mony was performed before the body was taken to
the funeral pyre outside the city’s bounds. Madhu, the
high priest, raised his hands at the conclusion of it, and
a great silence fell on the multitude. In a loud voice
he exclaimed ‘Behold your Maharajah!’
“ ‘He is dead! He is dead!’ the people answered as
they wailed and sobbed. ‘Who will now reign over
us? Who will be our father-mother, as our beloved
Bulwant Rao was to us?’
“The high priest, old but erect and dignified,
approached his dead master and removed the regalia,
which he handed to one of his attendants. He
detached the red diamond from the dead man’s throat
and raised it above his head so that all could see its
size, beauty and lustre.
“ ‘lt is known to you,’ he announced, ‘that there
is no direct heir to the gadhi, and therefore time is


needed before a rightful successor can be found.
When that happens I shall hang this royal gem round
his neck and he shall be the Maharajah, your master
and mine. Till then, obey the law and listen to the
behests of Ramchandra, our trusted prime minister.’
“Madhu placed the All-seeing Eye on a gold platen
and descended the three steps of the platform. His
departure was the signal for the royal bier to be lifted
and the mourners to line up behind it in order of
precedence. There was a certain amount of confusion
at that moment. The crowd broke bounds and milled
about, but, for some peculiar reason, I kept the high
priest steadily in view. He walked up a little columned
avenue bordered with a short, neatly clipped hedge
which led to the treasury entrance. He alone had
access to the strong room in which the regalia was
placed. I had no particular feeling of anxiety about
the red diamond, but for some reason I watched
Madhu holding the platen reverently before him as he
moved, slowly and with tremendous dignity, towards
the treasury'. I realized it was a very valuable stone
from a monetary point of view, but inconceivably
important in the affairs of the State. He was wholly
unaccompanied; the priests with the rest of the regalia
had already entered the treasury. At another time his
passage would have created much interest, but just
then all eyes were focused on the Rajah’s bier.
“For a brief space, as he reached a bend in the
avenue and was hidden from view, I diverted my
attention from him to the procession, which had
started off on its long and solemn march. Someone


plucked my sleeve. Turning, I saw a councillor who,
with a look of horror, beckoned me to follow him.
‘Something has happened to the high priest,’ he ex-
claimed hoarsely. ‘I lost sight of him as he reached
the bend just where that tree stands, and he hasn’t
reappeared.’
“We stepped into the avenue, from which we now
had a clear view right up to the treasury entrance.
Before it, a sentry marched briskly to and fro. No
one else was in sight, or I should say, no one moved in
that avenue but ourselves. Three-quarters of the way
up, someone lay prone in the dust. My heart stood
still. I recognized the high priest.
“We hurried towards him. He lay face downward,
and I stooped to pull him over on his back. The coun-
cillor, a high-caste Brahmin, immediately restrained
me. ‘Would you,’ he said in a tone of intense reproach,
‘defile the high priest with a touch?’
“ ‘Get aid quickly,’ I said, looking round for some-
one I could send for assistance.
“The councillor had turned the high priest face
uppermost, and now passed his hand over his eyes.
There was not the faintest flicker. He then drew
the eyelids back, but the stony stare did not alter.
Horror-stricken, he stood erect and said solemnly,
‘The high priest is dead.’
“The gold platen lay close by, bottom up. I lifted
it, expecting to find the diamond beneath it, but it
was not there. I hastily looked around, but the gem


was nowhere to be seen. If the councillor had picked
it up, he had done so without my noticing it. As
calmly as I could I remarked ‘The All-seeing Eye is
missing. Did you pick it up?’ He looked at me resent-
fully. ‘I did not see it.’ Then rather impudently he
added, ‘Perhaps you did.’
“Some young priests now emerged from the
treasury where they had deposited the regalia, and
with cries of dismay rushed towards us. The coun-
cillor spoke sharply and commandingly. ‘Do not make
a scene and excite the public. The high priest is dead.’
“One young priest, a nephew of Madhu, started
to weep audibly. ‘Command yourself,’ the councillor
exclaimed. ‘Pick up the body and remove it to the
treasury.’
“ ‘You’ll not touch it till the police subahdar
arrives,’ I said emphatically. ‘That is the custom and
the law. Then, there is the matter of the All-seeing
Eye which the high priest was carrying. That has
disappeared.’
“ ‘Search about for it,’ the councillor suggested.
‘lf it cannot be found, it must be in my possession or
in Mr Lustrelle’s.’
“The sentry apparently had informed the guard
that something untoward had happened, because it
came up under the havildar, at the double. By this time
a little crowd had begun to congregate. Despite my
instructions, the body of the high priest was lifted
into the shade. There was no visible wound or mark
suggestive of murderous assault.


“Doctor Gopal Secundra, the newly appointed
State doctor, hurried to the scene, followed by one
of the priests who had summoned him. He made a
cursory examination and pronounced life extinct.
‘Madhu was an elderly man and subject to heart
trouble. He died from natural causes. Did any one
suggest otherwise?’
“ ‘Doctor Secundra,’ I said, ‘there is some mystery
about the high priest’s death. He was carrying the
red diamond, the All-seeing Eye, to the treasury on a
gold platen when this happened. I watched him care-
fully except for the few moments when I turned to
see the funeral cortege move off. Councillor Hari-
chand saw that something was wrong and we hurried
to the high priest’s assistance. He was dead, and the
gold platen lay near him, but the All-seeing Eye had
vanished.’
“ ‘lt rather looks like foul play,’ the subahdar said.
‘Someone attacked the high priest and stole the dia-
mond. Did you, Mr Lustrelle or Councillor Hari-
chand, have him in view all the time?’
“ ‘Yes,’ Harichand replied, ‘except for the short
time he was lost to view going round the bend. That
tree helped to hide him. An assassin may have struck
him down, or possibly have attempted to secure the
diamond, when, in the short sharp struggle, poor old
Madhu collapsed.’
“I insisted that Harichand and myself should be
searched by the police. This was done very
thoroughlv, with negative results. After it was over


Harichand, looking relieved, discussed the mystery
with me, but offered no solution.”
“Was there an inquest?” Riverstone inquired.
“Not a public one. Being an important functionary,
no fuss was made. There was almost a conspiracy
to get the body cremated as quickly and as quietly as
possible,”
“What about the diamond?”
“It’s still lost,” said Lustrelle.


CHAPTER V
At about three o’clock that afternoon Cantwell,
accompanied by Guy Riverstone, left the residency
for Dalziel. News of the arrival of the famous police
officer had already spread through the city and roused
speculation. At Cantwell’s suggestion, Riverstone
decided to accept his hospitality and make Dalziel his
headquarters.
Barry arrived home after sundown. He and his
friend had spent the day fishing and swimming in
the river. They strolled home in the fading light
pleasantly tired, happy, and eagerly planning for the
next day. Riverstone’s horse neighed, and Barry
pricked his ears.
“That’s not Asoka, my dad’s horse, but a stranger.
We’ve got a visitor, Lakhsman. Would you like to
come in?”
“No, Barry. I’ll look in to-morrow morning. I must
have a talk to Ambaji to-night. He left word early
this morning that he wanted to see me.”
Barry found his father and the visitor talking
earnestly in the office off the front veranda.
“Your dad’s been telling me what a great chap
vou are, Barry,” Riverstone said as he shook hands.


“I believe you know a few official secrets about
Nanda.. We’re going to let you into a few more.”
After dinner they sat on the terrace talking while
the men smoked their cigars. At Barry’s feet sprawled
Laddie the Airedale, with eyes closed, but listening
for any strange or approaching footsteps. Barry
watched Riverstone with undisguised admiration. He
had a quality which reminded him of his father.
Behind his genial smile was a quick-thinking and
tireless brain, and tremendous enthusiasm. He and the
boy had many contacts. India was their birthplace,
and they were bound to it by close ties. Both had
a sympathy and affection for the people and a par-
ticularly human approach to their problems. If he
should ever find himself in a tight place, Barry
thought, it would be very comforting to have a man
like Riverstone standing by.
The boy listened avidly to every scrap of conver-
sation, especially in relation to the death of the high
priest and the theft or loss of the red diamond.
“I think,” Cantwell senior remarked, “one has to
go back a few years to get the case in its right per-
spective. Lustrelle is a kindly, genial soul, popular
with those who know him. The old Maharajah took
to him instantly, and their friendship deepened with
the years. This close friendship did not please the
aristocracy and priesthood of Nanda or the wealthy
commercial class. They were afraid the Maharajah,
under the resident’s influence, would introduce more
liberal ideas and limit their privileges. Lustrelle was a
very tactful resident. The reforms he sponsored were


gradual, but they alarmed the old die-hards. Although
Lustre lie was shown no open hostility, the reaction-
aries did their best to have him removed. They were
less cautious in their attitude towards me. The high
priest never lost the opportunity, on the rare occasions
when we met, of openly insulting me. I knew he
had the sympathy of the prime minister, Sir Ram-
chandra Bhose, so my position for some time in this
State was not very enviable. I won’t give you
particulars just now. Just accept my assurance that I,
like Lustrelle, have no evidence of their goodwill.
“Then you think,” said Riverstone, “that they are
supporting the pretender just to get nd of both of
you?”
“Precisely. If our man goes in, Lustrelle m particu-
lar will have the support and friendship of the ruler
once more. Barry understands who Lakhsman is,
although the boy apparently has no suspicion of his
importance.”
“What would be the next move if the All-seeing
Eye were recovered?” asked the police officer.
“We would lose no time in placing Lakhsman on
the gadhi. More than likely he would be sent to
England to be educated, and Lustrelle would carry
on during his absence,” Cantwell replied.
“It’s a strange case indeed, the death of the high
priest,” Riverstone commented. “In broad daylight,
in close proximity to a vast concourse of people,
walking up an avenue which could be overlooked
except at one spot, within earshot of the guard, the
high priest is murdered mysteriously, or drops down


dead, and the gorgeous diamond disappears. The
loss of the gem in these circumstances indicates
that the high priest was killed to obtain possession of
it. Do you suspect any one of the murder?”
“One of the priests could be suspect, or Harichand,
or Lustrelle for that matter,” Cantwell replied. “They
were quickly on the scene.”
“Have you a theory?”
“Yes, but I’ve kept it to myself. However, I want
to give you all the facts so that you can come to an
independent conclusion.”
“Did you see the high priest cremated?”
“No. Neither did Lustrelle. As a matter of fact, I
was out of the State when the tragedy happened.
There seemed to be a great deal of undue haste about
everything. The medical officer, a relative of the
high priest, issued a certificate of death from heart
disease due to shock. The police were strangely
apathetic about the whole business, and the prime
minister equally so. Now the loss of the All-seeing
Eye is just regarded as an insoluble mystery, and
there the matter stands.”
“How many people witnessed the cremation?”
“Very few. Only near relatives usually are present,
you know.”
“I’ve already made up my mind about the case,”
said Riverstone, sitting back in his chair. “I don’t
know if my theory coincides with yours, but there’s
only one solution. Madhu, the high priest, is not dead.
The whole business was a daring and cunning ruse
to steal the red diamond which, once in the treasury


vaults, would be inaccessible to him. The high priest
had most likely decided to retire and commune with
the Infinite before this tragedy happened, and he s
probably in ashes and filth now, like countless num-
bers of sadhus, unrecognizable as he travels the open
road. Perhaps he’s made himself a shnne m some
obscure spot where he’ll never be disturbed.”
“That ” said Cantwell, “is a daring hypothesis, but
to my mind a logical one. To be quite frank, I’ve
always held that opinion. I differ from you, however,
in regard to the life the ex-high pnest is hying at
the present time, if he is alive. I agree that he s gone
into smoke somewhere. It may be assumed that at
his age, like many thousands of Brahmins, he s carry-
ing a begging-bowl with a brass-handled crutch under
his arm. But Madhu is too utterly avaricious-too
ambitious for his family to renounce the world
altogether. He is playing for big stakes He is a
direct descendant of the royal house of the old
dynasty, and has always worked for its restoration.
In my opinion Prince Ramanaji was poisoned by
Madhu or his emissaries. No, Madhu is behind the
scenes somewhere, planning and scheming for support
to place Balkrishna on the gadhi. When that happens
his family will be secure, Lustrelle will have to go,
and my life won’t be worth a snap of the fingers. Sir
Ramchandra, the prime minister, is working hand m
glove with him.”
“That’s fine reasoning,” Riverstone agreed.
“I’ve brought my son into this discussion because
it is essential, for the present, that Lakhsman should


believe himself just an intelligent cowherd, orphaned
and of no particular consequence.”
“So the three of us work together, Barry,” said
Riverstone. “When do you return to school?”
“In about four weeks,” Barry replied.
“Much depends on developments,” said his father.
“Barry may have to stay here. I think I mentioned
to you on the way up that a mysterious bairagi or
holy man has just entered the State and is creating
some excitement among the peasantry. I want to get
a line on him without delay. Somehow, I feel that he
will give us the cue to what’s going to happen, and
probably also reveal the whereabouts of Madhu. I
know Nanda extremely well, as I do India generally.
The Government has asked me to take charge of
this case. I wanted an assistant and begged to have
you sent.”
“I appreciate the compliment, Mr Cantwell. I
understand I take my instructions from you. To-night
I shall disappear. Then that bairagi and I will pit our
wits against each other.”
“I shall disappear at the same time, Riverstone,
which means Barry will be here alone,” said Cantwell.
“I don’t think he’ll be nervous. He’s lived a fairly
lonely life for a boy, and old Shunker has been a great
guardian.”
“What do I do, dad?” Barry asked, not a little
excited and feeling rather important.
“You take charge here, which will be our head-
quarters. We may want to communicate with the
resident, personally or by letter, through you. But


your main job is to keep very closely in touch with
Lakhsman. Go where he goes and if possible don’t
let him out of your sight. At night Ambaji will keep
an eye on him. Generally speaking, he’s well watched,
but the young rascal—like you, Barry—has an adven-
turous streak and a love of exploration. To lose him-
self in the mountains or jungle for a week isn’t an
unusual escapade. If you can’t dissuade him from
going away, you must accompany him. I don’t think
Lakhsman would hold a secret from you. Above all,
keep him out of the city of Nanda, and don’t let
him go there after nightfall.”
Barry returned to his room shortly after ten
o’clock. It was a calm cool night, and the sky was
bright with stars.
“Don’t go to sleep for half an hour,” his father
said. “We’ll look in to say good-bye.”
Barry undressed, and waited in his sleeping suit for
his father to look in. He heard Shunker speaking to
his master in a low voice, in the next room, and soon
afterwards the syce led out the horses. A rap at the
door, and Barry sat up. Two men entered, looking
like flourishing Mohammedan merchants, dressed in
flowing pyjamas, a loose muslin shirt, a coloured
cummerbund and an elaborately embroidered, close-
fitting waistcoat. Heavily bearded and each wearing
a small, close-fitting turban, Barry did not penetrate
their disguise until his father spoke.
“Good-bye, old chap. If the syce returns with the
horses, don’t be alarmed. Mr Riverstone and I can’t


say when we’ll be back, but I’ll endeavour to keep
in touch with you. Don’t return to school until I
come home. In the meantime, keep a close watch on
Lakhsman.”
The house seemed very lonely and empty when
the sound of their horses’ hoofs died away. Barry ran
to the veranda window and looked toward Nanda.
Except for a dimly burning cresset here and there,
the city was almost in darkness, but the bazaar blazed
with light against the velvety background. There the
refreshment shops carried on a brisk business, and
people wandered about examining foodstuffs or
clothes and trinkets, the women handling and admiring
silks and satins with envy. Modest eyes flashed as
some gallant in embroidered jacket or skull-cap
smiled and twirled his light moustache. Barry won-
dered if his young Mahratta friend had slipped away
from the village and was prowling down the high-
ways and alleys, spurred by his insatiable curiosity
or his love of adventure. He never knew all that
Lakhsman did or intended to do. The native boy only
mentioned those incidents in his life of which he was
sure Barry would approve.
A cool wind blew from the mountains across the
valley. He heard the flying foxes chattering in the
fig-trees and a dignified white owl hooting from an
adjacent tall mango-tree. Barry did not feel nervous
or afraid, or even unpleasantly lonely. It pleased him
to be thrown so much on his own resources. Besides,
if danger arose he knew exactly where he could


place his hand quickly on a loaded revolver. His
father possessed a little armoury of sporting rifles
and double-barrelled breech-loaders for duck and
snipe, and had taught Barry how to handle firearms
and shoot expertly. “If you have to shoot,” he always
advised, “shoot to kill, but don’t shoot wantonly to
take life.”
Barry fell asleep almost as soon as he turned in,
and slept soundly till daybreak.


CHAPTER VI
Lakhsman, riding his favourite buffalo, woke Barry
with a very vigorous rendering of “Over There”,
shortly after sunrise. Barry ran out to greet him, and
promised to join him at the river after breakfast.
Lakhsman was in cheery but defiant mood. He had
been engaged in a rather sultry argument with
Ambaji since dawn. The old Brahmin was not satis-
fied with the educational progress Lakhsman was
making. He had reproached his pupil for being care-
less, lazy, and altogether a bamta or good-for-nothing.
Lakhsman, accepting that reproof without imper-
tinent comment, had merely retorted that Ambaji
took too much trouble over an orphan village boy,
and that there were numerous others much more
worthy on whom he could devote his tireless energy
and devotion. He had again asserted that he wanted
to be a cowherd, or perhaps a hunter, and that he
was more interested in rambling through the jungle
and studying the habits of animals, birds and insects,
than in learning the nonsense written by that ancient
and very stupid sage Manu, whom Ambaji seemed to
revere so much.
Lakhsman was a difficult pupil, and unfortunatelv
Ambaji could not explain his interest in him without


arousing suspicions that might upset Lustrelle s
schemes and plans. Ambaji had once been a guardian
and preceptor to Lakhsman s father Ranoji, and had
remained staunch to him through the greater part of
his adventurous and fugitive life. It was not a case
of mere personal attachment, to an attractive man,
but also of loyalty to a dynasty, or to a branch of
it, with which the destiny of his own family had
been closely interwoven. Ambaji intended to retire
from the worldly life to commune with the spirit
Brahm, but he realized that severance could not be
complete until the problem of succession to the gadhi
of Nanda had been settled.
Lakhsman, in many respects, resembled his father.
He was energetic and self-willed. He disliked being
thwarted, and possessed an abundance of self-confi-
dence. Like his father, he had courage and a gift for
leadership, and was prepared to take risks that he
could induce others to share. But father and son in
common also possessed loyalty, affection, reliance,
courtesy and unfailing good-humour.
Ambaji had given Lakhsman all the spiritual
instruction he could assimilate for his years. He had
drilled him in caste matters, and in the correct attitude
to his equals and inferiors. Lakhsman had rejected
with ridicule the theory that he was twice-bom, and
said he was satisfied to have the same outlook as his
friend Barry Cantwell, who treated all men as human
beings and with respect. Ambaji did not attempt to
discourage that friendship, although he did not
approve of it. Too much depended, just then, upon


a close relationship between Lakhsman and the Cant-
wells.
Who, however, thought Lakhsman, could hon-
estly want to pore over leather-backed tomes or
work out problems in arithmetic on such a glorious
day? The air was sweet and stimulating: cold at
daybreak but more genial as the sun climbed the
heavens.
Lakhsman dismounted, and allowed his herd to
graze as he urged them slowly towards the point of
the river where he and Barry had arranged to meet.
Though thinking a little regretfully of his ingratitude
to his old tutor, he was tingling with excitement this
morning. “Bother him!” he exclaimed, not wishing
to think further about Ambaji. “Why doesn’t he
leave me alone?”
More important matters than education occupied
his mind for the moment; one in particular which had
stirred him so much that he had not slept that night
as soundly as usual. Yesterday he, for the second time
in three days, had met Nehru the blind man, who
had persuaded him to set out on a very hazardous
journey. If he could talk Barry into accompanying
him, he meant to go within a week; otherwise the
project would have to be indefinitely abandoned.
Nehru was known throughout the principality of
Nanda. In fact, it was a popular belief that he was
known from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin and
from Assam to the troublous north-west frontier. It
was said that he had been born blind, but it was
difficult to look into his soft brown eyes and believe


them sightless, except for their fixed stony stare. His
features were regular, although badly pock marked.
Tall and slight, Nehru possessed a bland, agreeable
and disarming personality. Like most blind men, his
senses, other than that of sight, were ultra-alert. With
the aid of a staff he picked his way unfalteringly
over mountain tracks and through crowded bazaars.
His low appealing cry, “You who through the bless-
ings of God can see the sunshine, pity one who lives
for ever in darkness”, invariably brought response
from the charitable. Even the poor placed a pie (one-
third of a farthing) in his polished black coco de mer
begging-bowl.
It was usual for Nehru to visit Nanda at the begin-
ning of the cold season, but sometimes he came more
frequently, or again he would absent himself for a
year or two. The children in particular hailed him
with delight. He always gave them a winsome smile
and placed a hand of blessing on their heads. Nehru
was famed among them as a story-teller. Tales he
could tell of kings, princes and lovely languishing
princesses, until even the little nude and sometimes
hungry youngsters walked among palaces with heads
proud and erect. But his animal stories were in great-
est demand and, among the children who gathered
around him, were many grown-ups too. Nehru’s
memory was prodigious, and the readiness with which
he linked himself with the lives of the people he met
in his travels intrigued and rather bewildered them.
Even when a year or even two years had passed, it


seemed that Nehru had bidden them farewell with a
pious blessing only a short time before.
Nehru was no ordinary beggar. He spoke in a
quiet, dignified and cultured voice, smiled happily
and always had something interesting to say. One
felt that his background and history were not unim-
portant. Singing was one of Nehru’s accomplishments.
In his pack he carried a small guitar, on which he
strummed while he sang, in a sweet tenor voice,
martial airs of the days of the Mahratta hero Sivaji,
or little love and folk songs which gave to the peas-
antry and the bazaar shoppers the thrill of romance.
He had quite a repertoire of English airs, among his
best being “Sally in our Alley”. White children
always demanded “Three Blind Alice , and waited
to burst into screams of merriment when Nehru
reached the word “such”, which he could never pro-
nounce, only stutter:
They all ran after the farmer’s wife,
She cut off their tails with a carving knife,
Did you ever see su-su-su-ch a thing in your life,
As three blind mice?
To Lakhsman, Nehru was a memory that appeared
to have no distinct beginning, a person with whom
he had grown up. Now what had induced Nehru to
make a confidante of him, Lakhsman could not
imagine. The scheme Nehru had outlined was
tremendous. The magnitude of the secret had almost
overwhelmed him, and yet it seemed only fitting and
right that he should know about it. He and Barry
had always longed for some adventure they could


share, and now Nehru had presented one that was
simply breath-taking to anticipate.
He watched Barry brushing through the reeds and
tussocks as he approached, whistling a lively air. In
the monsoon the Buma overflowed its banks and
inundated the fields to the depth of half a mile on
either side of it. As the water receded, pink and white
everlasting flowers gleamed like a gorgeous satin
riband. Barry kept a keen look out for snakes, his
catapult ready if a snipe should rise to test his skill.
He could toss up a two-anna piece and invariably
hit it as it fell to the ground. Barry saw his friend
waiting for him under the shadow of a clump of trees,
and waved. Lakhsman ran to meet him. He could
restrain himself no longer.
“How slowly you are walking, Barry!” he exclaimed
as he placed an arm across his chum’s shoulder. “I’ve
got great news. Fm going away soon, and you’re
coming with me.”
Barry stopped. “Going away, Lux? Where to?”
“A long way from here. It’s a big adventure. There
will be danger, but precious stones and other things
as a reward.”
“You’re talking nonsense, Lux,” Barry replied.
“No, there’s no nonsense. I only slept a little last
night, thinking about it. If you talk like that or make
fun of me, I shall get angry, I am very serious.”
“Well,” said Barry, as he threw himself down in
the shade and wiped his perspiring brow, “tell me
more about it. If someone had told you that a tiger
was lurking near by I’d be as excited as you about


stalking and killing it. But precious stones and
treasure sound to me like something you’ve read in
a book.”
As Lakhsman prepared to reply, both boys heard
the regular tap, tap of a staff coming towards them
up the narrow cattle track through the trees. They
recognized Nehru, the blind man, walking up to
them with regular and fearless stride.
“Here’s Nehru,” Lakhsman exclaimed. “He told
me about the secret I’ve been talking about. Just
listen to what he has to say. I told him you d be
here.”
He ran forward, salaamed and, holding the blind
man’s arm, led him towards Barry. Nehru halted. His
face shone as he raised his sightless eyes and salaamed
with a low obeisance.
“How is your father, Barry Sahib?” he inquired.
“I shall see him before I leave. He is a good and
charitable man.”
“He isn’t at home just now, Nehru, but if he were
he’d be pleased to see you as I am now.”
“A great sahib,” said Nehru, rubbing his hands,
“is pleased to see a beggar. That shows how great
he is. When will he return to thee?”
“I don’t know.”
“Cantwell Sahib is like the wind that blows. No
one knows from which quarter he comes and where
he goes. Listen. Yesterday I had speech with ) our
friend Lakhsman. Has he spoken to thee of the
matter I proposed?”


‘‘No,” Lakhsman broke in. “I gave him no par-
ticulars.”
Then I shall give them. But both of you must
swear you’ll not divulge what I say to another person
in this world.”
e swear, said both boys together.
If you break that solemn promise, there is nothing
that will save you from punishment,” Nehru went on,
as he settled himself near the great trunk of the
mango-tree and snuggled between two great tap-
roots. Barry sat facing him, his arms hugging his
knees, his back to the coolness of the river. Lakhs-
man squatted beside him, looking fixedly at Nehru
as though in his impatience he would pierce through
to his mind and leam what he was thinking about
before he spoke.
“I told Lakhsman of a valley where inestimable
riches await the bold hands that will collect them,”
Nehru said. Diamonds of all hues are there, fit to
find a proud place in the crown of the world’s great-
est monarch. It is said that some of the finest gems
in the gorgeous Peacock Throne of Shah Jehan came
from this locality.”
“I’ve heard my father speak of that valley,” Barry
said. “I’ve always thought of it as the Valley of the
Lost Trail.”
The blind man gave an impatient cough. “Yes, he
and a servant attempted to reach it some years ago
in the middle of the hot season. That was madness.
They took the journey before the rains, and almost
perished from thirst.”


“Yes, and sickness too,” Barry added.
“Your father, Barry, is a brave and very deter-
mined man, but luck was against him. I doubt whether
he would have learnt very much even had he per-
severed and actually reached the valley. He was
fortunate to escape with his life. It may seem strange
to you that I, who am blind, should tell you I have
been a little farther than the point Cantwell Sahib
reached. A well of water, a day’s journey from the
Pass which is the name given to the entrance of the
valley or ravine, just saved my life. But I learnt all
it was necessary to know from the guard, posted
there to fire on all who approached to quench their
thirst. It’s sometimes an advantage to be blind, I man-
aged to circumvent every effort made to prevent me
from reaching my objective; but where I failed,
Lakhsman will succeed, and you too, sahib, who will
accompany him.”
“Is it dangerous?” Barry asked.
“The way to the valley is hard and full of priva-
tions. If you start off soon you will make the journey
while the dreadful sultriness is dissipated by winds
or storms. Most of the year the valley, which lies
below sea level, is hot and stagnant. After you pass
the mountain of Ankai the country grows more for-
bidding and the trees become more stunted and
scarce until finally no signs of vegetation can be seen.
Day after day one sees no living thing except a vul-
ture or a soaring eagle, or snakes and lizards among
the boulders which are strewn everywhere. Great


iguanas slide out of the traveller’s path or sit on some
great rock and blink at him as he passes.”
“What about human beings?” asked Barry. “Don’t
you see any?”
“Near Ankai,” Nehru replied, “Bhil villages are
found. One stands not far from the route to the
valley. Sometimes these aboriginal tribesmen wander
into the wilderness, but the Bhil prefers the forest
and the jungle.”
“Somebody must live in the valley, or have lived
there in the past, to have obtained the diamonds,”
said Barry, “unless all these stories are fabrications.”
“There are no doubts about the existence of dia-
monds. I’ve had positive proof that they can be won
by the stout-hearted.”
“Has this place got a name?”
“Yes,” the blind man replied, “but it is neither safe
nor wise to repeat it.” He looked carefully about
him, and then said in a low voice, “It’s name is
Mumtaz.”
“But who owns this wealthy valley?”
“It is under the nominal ownership of the Maha-
rajah of this State, but don’t ask me more. Men do
live in Mumtaz or close by, or else no gems would
come from it. Let me describe them as the ghostmen.”
“The ghostmen?” Lakhsman shuddered. “Who are
they?”
“No one knows except the very privileged. lam
not speaking of spirits,” Nehru went on. “They are
called ghostmen because they are never seen, yet
their hold on that valley and its riches is firmly estab-


lished. Their employees win the gems and prevent
any one else from approaching the valley. They dis-
pose of the gems and wax fat on the proceeds.”
“The master ghostmen live in Nanda, I suppose,”
Lakhsman hazarded.
“It is not wise to speak of ghostmen or whisper
the word Mumtaz in the city of Nanda. Even trees
have ears. Assassination has always been the hand-
maiden of avarice.”
Lakhsman, in his direct way, lowered his voice and
asked, “How do you know these things?”


CHAPTER VII
It seemed right to Barry that they should know some-
thing of the credentials of the man who was urging
them to undertake a mission difficult and dangerous,
and moreover having repercussions in Nanda itself.
A little below them the buffaloes grazed peacefully.
They heard the snort of the beasts, the click of their
teeth and the wrench that carried with it another
mouthful of green grass. Some of the buffaloes had
taken to the river, to float leisurely in the stream with
their noses just above water. On the other side of the
bank two Mahratta girls in bright saris daintily des-
cended to a little jetty with their copper water-pots
balanced on their heads. Lakhsman’s eyes sparkled
with admiration as they stooped to fill their vessels,
their glass and metal bangles clanking musically on
their wrists. Mischievously they smiled at the little
group talking under the trees. They could hear on
the soft breeze the laughter and shouting of the
children in the village, which was almost hidden from
sight in a bower of trees. Danger and privation,
famine and thirst seemed far away at that moment.
Nehru leant back for a few moments, his hands
clasped loosely, his misty eyes staring fixedly before
him, thinking deeply. It was obvious Lakhsman’s


question had disconcerted him; yet, if he was to suc-
ceed in persuading these boys to carry out his scheme,
he would have to be more frank and explicit.
“That is a fair question,” he replied. “\ou see,”
he went on, “1 am both a blind man and a beggar.
I live on the charity of the benevolent, to whom I
am eternally grateful. How could a beggar be other-
wise? There are a few people here and elsewhere
whose businesses exist in distant places and must be
secretly negotiated. They are discerning enough to
learn that I am no ordinary blind man who needs
to be led from place to place, and moreover, that I
can be trusted. Other senses compensate me for the
lack of sight. If in five years’ time we meet again,
ask me to relate our conversation this morning and
I will do so almost word for word. It is well to keep
a curb on the tongue when in the presence of one
who has sightless eyes. The chatter of the idle makes
much mischief, and often much work and woe. But
I never miss anything an important man says in my
hearing, although most people believe that a blind
man, as he sees nothing, understands very little.
“I’ve told you I have been within a day’s journey
of Mumtaz. One day you, Lakhsman, will understand
why I made that journey, and when you do you will
also understand why I am urging you to go there
now.”
“And knowing what you do, you suggest that
Lakhsman takes the risk?” Barry asked.
“Yes, it is very important he should take the risk,
as I have just explained. There is more in Mumtaz


than diamonds—something vital to Lakhsman and to
others you know, and also something perhaps of
great consequence to you, Barry Sahib. If I told you
what it was, either you would not believe me or you
would want to set out alone. I would not beg of
you to go if I thought you would not succeed.”
Lakhsman stood up. Suddenly he had become very
cool and calm. He had regained control over his
limbs, which had trembled in his excitement. His
breath came evenly. The blood, the fighting royal
blood of his ancestors, surged to his brain in a spirit
of resolve and of quickening enthusiasm. Something,
he knew not what, told him more clearly than any
human voice could have done that it was destiny
calling, and that he must act with courage and
promptitude. For the moment Nehru was not a blind
beggar, but a prophet with a special message for him.
“I have made up my mind. I shall go beyond the
Pass, whoever impedes me. If Barry comes, all the
better; otherwise I go alone.”
“And you, sahib?” Nehru inquired.
“Where Lakhsman goes I go too. How long shall
we be away?” Barry said.
“Less than a month, with good luck. Now, lay your
hand in my left while Lakhsman holds my right.
Ah, that is correct. Now you trust me as I trust both
of you. Sit down again.”
They squatted, Nehru supported by the great
roots. His face suddenly became grave. Placing his
hands in the bosom of his long white coat, he drew
out a wooden case and, listening carefully, opened it.


It contained a folded map, the outlines embossed so
that they could readily be traced by the finger of a
blind man. The boys crowded nearer.
“This map gives all directions. You will see that
the distances are in strides. Aly step on the march is
exactly two feet. I adjust it to the swing of my staff.
There are about six thousand steps in a kos, which
again is roughly about two and a third English miles.
You can make no mistake.”
They studied the map with Nehru. The direction
from Nanda was due north. Ten kos from the capital
the main road was abandoned, and the route led to
the foot of a distant mountain named Ankai or the
Eye. This was distinguishable by a curious cleft in
the rocky escarpment near the ridge, which from
this point gave the impression that a huge cavern
pierced it. An approach towards this eye or opening
in a direct line brought the traveller to a valley
traversed by a rough track which led to a forest.
Here the route lay along an old river bed. In some
past age this river had flowed with the force of a
cataract, as the country now began to dip gradually.
Vegetation became scarce except for thorny scrub
and clumps of tough grass. The distances from point
to point were clearly indicated as the c< iuntry became
sheer desert, not of sand but of boulders and pebbles,
as though some vast and continuous whirlwind
moving with cyclonic force had swept over it,
denuding it of every vestige of soil. Now came into
view the peculiar barren mountain range which
sprawled over an even more forbidding wilderness.


As Nehru explained, this region was practically water-
less, but he indicated certain points, all carefully
measured, where water holes existed. The location of
these was a closely guarded secret.
Quickly Nehru handed the map to Barry. “Make
a copy and return the original to me, but keep it
secret. My life depends upon that.”
Barry took charge of it with some trepidation. It
was a very important and fateful document such as
he would never have suspected a blind man of
possessing. Lakhsman looked at him with envy as well
as pride. Barry must be very clever to be entrusted
with such a delicate task. That he could make a good
job of it he did not doubt.
Nehru stood gazing at the boys with his sightless
eyes as if he were studying their reactions by their
expressions. He looked very dignified, benevolent
and patient, as though all his cares and disabilities
and the tremendous secret he shared with them could
not ruffle his outward calm. He knew that he had
attained his purpose, that the boys would set out as
he desired. Of Barry he was just a little dubious, but
of Lakhsman he was sure, knowing he would always
run true to form.
“I shall be here to-morrow,” he said, “to receive
back my plan of the route. I shall also tell you what
I propose doing. A bullock cart with two good beasts
will convey you on the first stages of your journey.
After that Deccanee ponies may be provided. Your
comfort will be studied in every way, and the cart
will be stocked with food and drink.”


“And who will provide these things—the bullock
cart for instance?” Barry asked.
“That will be my responsibility,” Nehru replied.
“I cannot tell you more just now. If I could say more,
you would be satisfied to go without further ques-
tioning. You will require clothing, arms, ammunition
and a camping outfit. Remember, you travel light.”
Nehru broke off the conversation at this point and
retraced his steps across the warm, sweet-scented
meadows. The boys watched him descend the bridle
track through the play of sunlight and shadow till
he was out of the coolness of the mango tope. Then
unhesitatingly he took the bullock track to the river
ford and disappeared behind the shoulder of a little
hill.
“What do you think of him?” asked Lakhsman.
“He is more than Nehru the blind man. I always
thought him just a poor travelling beggar who stayed
long enough to be welcome and then passed on,”
Barry replied. “But I feel he is in touch with impor-
tant people and great things.”
“Like your father, Barry?” Lakhsman said.
“Yes, a mysterious person like father is. I wonder
if my dad knows more about him than most people?”
“I bet he does.”
“You’ve made up your mind to go?” Barry asked.
“Of course. Haven’t you?”
“Yes. Tell me, why are you going?” was the next
question.
“It’s excitement and adventure. I’ve waited for
something like this to happen,” said Lakhsman. “Oh


Barry, you don’t know how I love the mountains
and the forests, and hoped for the opportunity to try
myself out. There’s something in my blood that
danger alone will satisfy. I’m tired of being a cow-
herd, tired of being bullied by Ambaji in that peace-
ful little village. All this quiet is not meant for me.
Since the British have settled India the fighting spirit
has gone out of the Mahrattas. No Hyder Ali or
Tippoo Sultan to defy them, no Pindari leaders to
ride through the land taking what they need!”
“You don’t want to be a freebooter or a dacoit,
surely?” Barry asked.
“No, but I want to pit my wits and strength
against somebody. What do you think made Nehru
pick on me? There are other young men wiser and
stronger than I am. What does it mean? I ask myself
that. And if I told you the answer, you’d only say
I was conceited and foolish. Why do you want to
go?”
“Because you’re my friend. Where you go I’ll go,”
Barry answered. “It’s a great adventure. There’s
treasure and danger, mystery, and everything that a
boy dreams about when there’s hot blood in his veins.
I don’t know what Nehru meant when he said the
expedition had a purpose for me. I’ll just have to wait
and find out.”
Lakhsman hugged his friend, his eyes dancing with
delight. “So you’ll come, Barry? That is fine. We’ll
get ready to move off as soon as we can.”


CHAPTER VIII
Soon after an early dinner, Barry dismissed the
servants and Lakhsman arrived. His bedroom and
study were just off the veranda, the study having
access to a little cubicle, adjoining his father’s room,
styled the armoury. Here Cantwell senior kept an
assortment of sporting rifles and double-barrelled shot
guns, and a number of daggers and revolvers.
Ammunition was stored in the drawer of a cabinet.
A high narrow window afforded the only ventilation
when the door was closed. That door had two keys.
One Barry kept, the other never left his father’s
possession.
Shunker, the cook, was glad to get away earlier
than usual, as he and his wife had been promised a
lift into the city. Lakhsman passed through the
dining-room looking straight before him, as an in-
curious guest should properly do. In Barry’s bedroom,
he caught his friend in an unexpected clinch, and
they struggled and panted until the wrestling bout
was declared a draw.
Then they settled down to an examination of the
copy of Nehru s route map made on specially strong
parchment paper, a duplicate of which Barry handed
to Lakhsman, to his great delight. Preparations for


the expedition were then discussed. Weapons had the
first attention. A Winchester .303, light, dependable,
and his father’s first selection on a shooting expedition
except for very big game, and a beautifully-finished
Greener breech-loader were picked and laid aside.
Two Colt revolvers were next approved, and then a
couple of daggers or flenching knives, selected by
Barry for in-fighting. After considerable argument,
Barry chose the rifle as he was the better shot. The
breech-loader, needed for game, Lakhsman appro-
priated as it was a mighty dangerous weapon at close
range. A couple of tomahawks or light axes completed
the lethal side of the outfit. As an afterthought, Barry
remembered a pocket compass.
They spoke of the expedition and of naught else.
After their talk with Nehru, nothing seemed left to
the imagination except the region beyond the Pass.
There, Lakhsman declared, they would find diamonds
that would make those from Golconda of fourth-rate
importance. They discussed the Koh-i-noor and the
strange history of the Hope diamond, Kimberley and
the wonderful discoveries in Namaqualand. The dia-
monds of that Valley of the Lost Trail, as Barry had
named it, were, according to Nehru, of various
colours and of superb lustre. They pictured themselves
scrambling for them and pooling their riches. The
gems would have to be smuggled into Nanda with
great cunning and secrecy, but once they were
deposited in Dalziel, Barry was sure his father would
do the rest. After that, both decided to travel round
the world in great luxury. Next they intended to fit


out an expedition into central Africa or into outer
Mongolia—anywhere so long as the going was tough
and the objective had defied the efforts of previous
explorers. Lakhsman naively suggested a climb to the
top of Mount Everest, the highest point of the Hima-
layas, but Barry insisted on outer Mongolia first.
Just before Lakhsman left for home, he asked a
question that confused Barry for a few moments. He
asked if he had heard of a wonderful red diamond
called the All-seeing Eye.
“Yes,” said Barry, rather taken aback. “I’ve heard
my father speak of it. It’s part of the royal regalia of
Nanda. Without it the enthronement of a ruler isn’t
complete.”
“That,” said Lakhsman, “sounds pretty stupid to
me, but still, it is the law or custom of this State.
Did you know the All-seeing Eye is lost, stolen or
hidden?”
“It is not generally known, but I have heard that,”
Barry admitted.
“I want to tell you something, Barry,” said the
Mahratta boy. “I’m very interested in that red dia-
mond. I think about it day and night. I often dream
I’m looking for it. Why is that? I’m just a humble
village boy. No one seems to be very clear who
my parents were. Ambaji, who told me about the
All-seeing Eye, says I was bom in a far-away place,
and that my father and mother are both dead. One
day I shall go to my birth-place, and I shall learn
all about my parents. Perhaps they were just peasant
folk, but I don’t think so. Why are my thoughts of


struggle and fighting for power, the commanding and
ruling of men, instead of the peaceful meditations of
a peasant whose life is simple, honest and uneventful?”
“Ideas often spring from the books we read and
the stories we hear,” Barry explained. “I think all
boys of courage and spirit think as were thinking
now.”
“Do you know,” said Lakhsman, “when Nehru
first spoke of this valley, there sprang to my mind
the image of the red diamond. I saw it clearly—not
among the scrub, gravel and great stones where the
other diamonds will have to be sought, but round
the neck of an evil man lying in a deep pit. I shall
not be happy or contented until that diamond hangs
around my neck,”
“Now you’re talking nonsense,” Barry said, and he
let his visitor out by a side door. “I’ll see you by the
river to-morrow morning. Nehru is coming about the
same time as he met us this morning.”
Lakhsman back-somersaulted into the darkness,
disappearing into the night so silently that his chum
went out after a couple of minutes to make sure he
had really gone. The weapons were returned to the
armoury, and Barry prepared for bed. It was then
about half-past ten. The servants’ quarters were silent
and in darkness, and the lights of Nanda shone fit-
fully. Barry, from the veranda looked across the
plain, almost hidden in a ground mist. A great peace
had settled upon the countryside. Perhaps the Valley
of the Lost Trail slept just as peacefully under the


stars. More than likely, Nehru had exaggerated the
danger to which they would be exposed.
He sat on a bamboo chair and thought constantly
of the blind man. He could not discuss his motives
with Lakhsman, but already he had concluded that
Nehru was another pawn in the great game that
would settle who the next ruler of Nanda would be.
It appeared on the surface that he was a supporter
of Lakhsman, but of course it was just as likely he
was working for the pretender. In that case, the
whole object of his proposals would be to put Lakhs-
man out of the picture altogether. But the blind man
had been frank and hidden nothing, and moreover
he regularly called on Barry’s father.
He yawned with weariness and rose to retire. He
closed the veranda door and then listened at the open
window. It may have been fancy, but he thought he
heard the soft and regular tap, tap of a staff going
down the drive. Then the night swallowed up every-
thing, even that diminishing tap, tap, until the only
sound that broke the silence was a cricket’s chirp at
the foot of the garden.
The morning broke fine with a tang in the air. The
mist rose from the distant mountains and from the
valley heavy with dew. Barry waited in till about
nine o’clock, half expecting a letter or message from
his father. He missed Lakhsman’s tuneful rendering of
“Over There” as he led his herd to pasturage. After
breakfast he cleared out to escape a very thorough
house-cleaning that Shunker insisted on carrying out
every week. There would be the swish of brooms,
J


the flailing of carpets and mgs, and a general upheaval
of furniture which Barry did not enjoy.
Nehru and Lakhsman were talking earnestly as he
joined them on the river bank.
“We start off to-morrow morning at three,” Lakhs-
man said gleefully. “Everything will be ready then.
The cart will be waiting just across there.”
Nehru salaamed. “You see, no time has been lost.
Just bring your personal belongings and your
weapons. Everything else will be found in the cart.”
“Who is providing the cart?” Barry again asked.
‘lt is being provided, so why ask questions, sahib?
I asked you to trust me. Please do so. There is one
thing I neglected to mention. Barry Sahib must be
disguised as a Mahratta boy. It would not do to set
out as a European.”
“I’m quite agreeable. That means sandals instead
of boots and a pagri instead of a helmet. But what
about my skin?”
“I’ve given Lakhsman a preparation to apply,” said
Nehru. “It will take at least four or five weeks to
wear off. If you’re not back by then, use the prepara-
tion again.”
Nehru described in detail the provisions and equip-
ment, and asked if they needed anything else. The
boys could think of nothing.
On his return to the village that evening, Lakhsman
found a message awaiting him from Ambaji. The
old Brahmin, with his rosary of basil seeds hung
round his neck, and seated in statuesque solemnity,


waited for the boy to come. He seemed troubled, as
though he almost sensed Lakhsman’s plans.
“I have spoken to thee of many things, my son,”
Ambaji said very gravely to his attentive ward. “But
it is necessary to discuss with you without delay
a quality of mind most important to character and
success—control. The wisdom of our ancient writings
directs our minds to this quality. Splendid is thy
body in its shapeliness and growing strength, but
mind, man’s immortal self is its master. At all times
remember that. Do not let thy body, with its strength
and its weaknesses overcome thy mind at any time.
Also remember that greater Mind, which controls
all things big and little in the universe. Do you under-
stand?”
“I think I understand,” said Lakhsman solemnly.
“Sit down, Lakhsman, I wish to say a little more,
because I love thee. Some day you will understand
how great has been that love.”
Lakhsman, sitting meekly before his master, felt
the tears welling in his eyes. Ambaji had brought him
up to obey moral principles and not to depart from
the paths of right conduct. To-morrow at dawn the
old man would wait as usual to place his hand on
his head and give him a blessing, and the boy would
not be there. Two strong bullocks would have placed
several kos between them. He and Barry would be
setting out on a great adventure. Lakhsman felt mean
and deceitful, but he could not break faith with
Nehru and divulge what he was about to do.
“I shall not be with you always, Lakhsman, Even


6 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
now, closely though I keep my eyes upon you, there
are times when I am very anxious. But of course, I
cannot expect to keep a tight rein on you now you
grow apace into manhood. But even if I am not near
you in the body, I shall be with you in the spirit. Go,
my son, strong of mind and wilful as thou art, to
where destiny leads you.”
An hour after midnight Lakhsman crept out of the
village, petting the dogs awakened by his stealthy
steps. He found Barry waiting for him at a side door
of Dalziel. At two o’clock, laden with arms, blankets
and other comforts, they left by the front veranda,
Barry quite unrecognizable: in appearance a Mah-
ratta peasant boy and a twin brother of Lakhsman.
It was cold enough to wrap a grey blanket around
him, but Lakhsman’s naked torso glinted in the star-
light. They heard the bullock bells tinkling long
before the covered cart hove into sight. Nehru,
standing near the cart wheel, salaamed and, picking
up the little oil lantern hung in the rear, lighted the
interior. The bamboo matting hood gave shade, and
also protection from dust. A couple of boxes of food
were stowed neatly on the floor, packed a foot deep
with clean rice straw. A big earthenware flagon in
a rope net contained drinking water. Ordinary water
bottles were also provided. Rope, matches, copper
cooking utensils and miscellany of that kind com-
pleted the outfit.
They made a swift inventory of their belongings,
then Lakhsman without further ado, leapt on the


yoke traverse, in the customary way of bullock-cart
drivers, and gathered up the reins.
Nehru gave Barry a few last-minute instructions
and then salaamed deeply.
“Have courage, both of you. Yours is a great
mission, and much good both of you will derive from
it. You may perhaps hear about me most unexpectedly.
Do not be surprised.”
With a crack of the whip the bullocks started off.


CHAPTER IX
They jogged along in the darkness, silent and a little
drowsy with the slow motion of the cart. The
bullocks, without handling, kept in the centre of the
road, not exerting themselves overmuch and resent-
ful at having been yoked when they should have been
peacefully chewing the cud. The bells tinkled as the
beasts swayed, and this was the only sound except
the crunch of the wheels. Here and there they passed
a small encampment, and the tethered bullocks tinkled
their bells in response as they came up like ghosts out
of the south. A yawn perhaps as the travellers passed,
and the campers once more snuggled down.
At the first streak of dawn the earth seemed to
awake. The black partridge gave his harsh cry, and
then the whole feathered tribe awoke and greeted
a new day in a medley of dissonant notes. A fire in a
camp threw up sparks as a billet of wood was heaved
upon it, and a girl’s voice, sweet and clear, burst into
song as she set about her domestic tasks. A man’s voice
hailed them in greeting, and they rumbled on. From
the tip of a ridge could be seen country billowing
with wheat, and prosperous villages snuggling
amongst dotted-about trees. A covey of partridges
crossed the road, and a little farther on a great tusker


dashed through a cactus hedge and ran past squealing.
A small herd of black buck, grazing peacefully close
to the road, pricked their ears and broke away. Barry
and Lakhsman saw the bucks leaping high above the
crop, looking to see if they were being pursued. As
the sun rose, a couple of shy fawn-like Chinkara deer
stared at them with their great appealing eyes and
dodged out of sight. Lakhsman tried his hand with
the fowling piece and brought down a brace of
partridges as they rocketed out of a cactus clump.
They would do for the evening meal.
At eight o’clock they crossed a bridge over a
narrow river and took shelter from the sun under a
big banyan-tree. The bullocks were unyoked, watered
and left to graze. While Barry boiled a dekshi of
water for the tea, Lakhsman visited an adjoining
village. He came back with some fresh eggs, a
generous lump of wild honey in the comb, several
freshly made bannocks of bajri and a lotah of milk.
After breakfast Lakhsman, without further ado,
curled himself up under a tree and went to sleep.
Barry followed suit. It was past two before they
awoke, and soon began to chaff each other for
having slept like irresponsible children. Refreshed,
they started off once more, and rumbled along
through fertile country until sundown. Both lads
were thoroughly enjoying themselves. Once they
passed quite a caravan of ponies and bullock carts,
with great dogs like Afghan hounds running at the
heels of the ponies. The men, fierce and ragged,
scowled at them, while the women, some of them


perched on the baggage were rather saucy or sought
a quarrel. Lakhsman exclaimed “Brinjarri!” and spat
contemptuously as the gipsy tribe gave them a fare-
well malediction. Carts conveying castor seeds to the
mill, or transporting oil and oil cake to the city of
Nanda, passed by. Others, laden with produce, vege-
tables, hides, jagri, and crates of dried fish which
left no doubt of their contents, jogged along, the
drivers giving them a cheery greeting or stopping
to ask for a light or a cigarette. No haste, no urging
of tired beasts, no schedule to follow, and the cattle
moved with rhythmic precision. They jangled their
bells, and lashed out with their tails at the flies, neither
idling nor hurrying, till sunset, which meant journey s
end.
Late in the afternoon they saw a company of the
State lancers ride easily past, rather dusty, but still
very smart and picturesque in white riding breeches,
blue tunics and smart white pagris. They did not
deign to notice wayfarers but looked straight ahead,
proud of bearing and martially grim. Looking back,
the boys could still see the range that encompassed
Nanda, but the valley had now broadened out into
a great plain. In the distance, as though strung across
the horizon, a line of camels, tied nose to tail, lurched
towards them along the road with slow and stately
stride. Before the lads came up with them the camel
drivers had selected a site and were forming a camp.
The men were Kabulis from the north, peddling
numdahs, carpets, silks, perfumes and dried fruit,
obviously out of their beaten tracks. A couple of


them, big bearded ruffians wearing loose blue trousers,
a low-necked smock and a pyramid shaped turban,
crossed the road and stopped the bullocks.
“How far go ye?” one asked in fair Hindustani.
“As far as it pleases us,” Lakhsman rejoined. “So it
is hail and farewell.”
“What is your hurry,” the bearded giant said sooth-
ingly. “See, it is nearly sunset. We camp here. Join
us for the night.”
“We have yet a little distance to go before night-
fall, brother,” said Barry, “so we shall continue our
way.”
“W T here goest thou, and what is thy business on
the high road, striplings?” the Pathan observed. He
had moved to the rear and begun to shift and examine
the contents of the cart. His eyes lit up as he spotted
the rifle, and he immediately stretched to get posses-
sion of it.
Lakhsman rounded on him with blazing eyes.
“Surely ye be not common thieves,” he said
menacingly.
“I know a good rifle when I see one, boy. Tell me,
how came it in your possession? It is not the law
to carry arms.”
“This,” said Lakhsman, “is an independent State,
where it is lawful. But it is unlawful to touch that
which does not belong to thee.”
“More chastisement in thy very early days would
have made thee a better boy. Talk not insolently to
thy elders. I desire to handle that rifle, just to note


its make, weight and finish. Thinkest thou I am a
common thief?”
As the Pathan’s fingers closed on the rifle, Lakhs-
man brought the handle of his whip smartly across
his knuckles. With a vile imprecation the man raised
his head, to look into the barrel of a revolver. His
companion near by found himself covered by Barry.
“Now march towards your camels and don’t look
back, or we shoot,” Barry exclaimed.
Sullenly the men walked off, but one shouted, “No
one insults Afzur Khan and lives. Remember that,
fools.”
A young man, dressed in white and riding a spirited
half-Arab, rode up. “What is afoot here?” he shouted
to the two men. “Have I not forbidden ye to accost
travellers? This is not our country, but a land where
we be guests. Hurry and help unpack the camels.”
Once more the boys jogged along. The malevol-
ence in the eyes of Afzur Khan had roused them to
a sense of danger. So far this expedition had presented
all the pleasant thrills of a picnic. They urged the
bullocks on and placed a few miles between them
and the Kabulis before they sighted a little stream,
where they camped. It was a snug spot hidden from
view by a spinney and some scrub. Barry attended
to the watering and feeding of the bullocks while
Lakhsman lit a fire and prepared the evening meal.
They were ravenously hungry, and the appetizing
smell of roasted partridge and dhal curry made wait-
ing a torment.
The first day of the great adventure ended happily.


There had been the disagreeable incident with the
camel drivers, but that had only afforded some excite-
ment. Lakhsman slept with his weapons by his side.
“If Afzur Khan calls for my gun,” he declared, “he’ll
get two cartridges first.” He slept on the ground
near a little fire, while Barry stretched himself in
the hay on the floor of the cart.
They were up at dawn. A glance at the map showed
them they could not be far from the point where they
had to diverge from the main road. As they jogged
along in the early light they saw smoke spiralling from
little cow-dung fires warming blanketed peasants who
guarded their fields and cattle. Lakhsman shouted a
greeting, and they waved back. At about ten o’clock
they came to a track which junctioned with the main
road and led due north. Lakhsman, with a whoop,
swung round the bullocks, taking the slight grade
with a run.
“Now the fun starts,” he said. “The journey will
get less pleasant every day.”
There was little doubt about the turning being the
O O
right one. Away in the distance they saw the blue
of a mountain which they felt certain was Ankai,
although they were too far away to see the peculiar
opening responsible for its descriptive name. The new
road was rutty after the main highway, and progress
was slower. The country became poorer, and on the
third day good arable land existed only in patches.
Travellers, too, were less frequent.
They camped at night near a little village. The
patel, accompanied by some children, paid them a


visit and invited them to stay. They declined, but the
old man, determined that the village should uphold
its reputation for hospitality, begged that at least he
be permitted to send them food and fresh milk. Grate-
fully they accepted this, on condition he joined in
the repast.
He was a thin man with a white moustache, slightly
bent shoulders, naked except for a loin cloth, but
surmounted by an enormous white pagn. Narryan
Charwal, unlike his villagers, had seen something of
the world, and could remember vividly his one and
only visit to Nanda on the occasion of the coronation
of Bulwant Rao.
“Every patel in his dominions was present except
those of no account,” he said as he lit a bheri, inhaled
the aromatic smoke in great gulps, then coughed
furiously. “Those were great days. Herds of elephants
swung along the streets of Nanda, every one draped
with silks and velvets richly embroidered and
covered in gems. Princes from the length and breadth
of Hindustan came with their bodyguards and
retinues of servants, until hospitality was so strained
that visitors had to camp outside the city wall. What
warriors, what horse flesh, what trumpets and music,
and aye,” he added with a roguish twinkle, “what
women! I shall never forget those days. In the pro-
cession through the streets the Maharajah looked
straight it me, salaamed and smiled. I still thrill at
the memory of his graciousness.”
“That is a long time ago,” Lakhsman said. “Of
course you know the old Maharajah is dead?”


“Yes,” said the old man. “Bad news travels swiftly.
You see, we are far away from the capital, but still
close to a road. They say, too, that no successor
has yet been selected for the gadhi, and that there
is doubt which of the claimants should be chosen.
But we are told that very soon all that will be settled.”
“That is good to hear,” said the Mahratta boy.
“Who gave thee such good tidings?”
“Someone you may know,” the patel replied.
“Periodically, though at long intervals, we see him,
and he brings this little village closer to the great
world—the blind man Nehru.”
“We have met him,” said Barry.
“That also is good to hear,” said the patel. “He
was here a few weeks ago—his third visit in twelve
months. It seems to me great things are afoot. Are you
from Nanda?”
“From a village close by,” said Lakhsman.
The old man dropped his voice. “Then mayhap
you have heard that the gadhi may divide the people,
and that brother will spill the blood of brother. It is
a long time since the villagers here rode to war.
Sivaji, our great leader of the Maharashtra and the
conqueror of the great Mogul, recruited his best men
from this district. Those were the days when the
wealth of loot comforted the women for husbands
and sons slain on the battlefield. But I talk too much,
and you are nodding with sleep.”
He strolled away from the fire, his blanket hugged
close, his shoulders thrown back, his eyes flashing.
“Remember this when you think of me. If there is a


time of reckoning, I shall be found with the royal
house. Thus do I reward a ruler with a smile.”
The old man was there to farewell them long
before the sun rose, and walked by the cart the dis-
tance of a mile. He was now very curious to learn
where they were going, and Barry found it difficult
to fence his direct questions. Lakhsman, more diplo-
matic, explained they were out for a jaunt, extending
their knowledge and experience by travel.
“Will you go as far as the foot of Ankai?” the
old man asked gravely.
Lakhsman nodded.
“Then I warn you to go no farther than the point
where you first see the eye. If it is a clear day you
should be able to discern it to-morrow afternoon.
Some say it is a round cavern where an angry god
cast a thunderbolt through a great cliff. As soon as
you can see it clearly, know it is foolish to proceed a
step farther.”
“What is the danger?” Barry inquired.
“From the foot of Ankai the wild country begins.
It is the abode of nats and churals, for certainly no
one but evil spirits could exist among such stark
frightfulness. It is said that few travellers have
returned from that wilderness.”
“Why did the madman go there?” Lakhsman
asked.
“Why indeed? Why do all men sacrifice safety,
comfort, honour, and that calm and easy conscience
which makes death a benediction and not a thing to
be feared? What is responsible for wickedness and


injustice, and all the evil the great cities know? Why
are we engaged in a fierce struggle just to keep alive
and pay our taxes while great rajahs and chieftains
can drape an elephant with wealth enough to pension
my villagers and many others and keep them in
comfort for the rest of their days?”
Lakhsman pulled up his bullocks.
“Wealth is the curse and the ruin of mankind,”
continued the old patel. “It has always been and
always will be so. Along the road you are taking
men have journeyed in a mad attempt to win great
wealth. Yes, they tell me they sought precious stones.
It may be true. Perhaps they set out for adventure
just as you two are doing. But I do know that few
of them come back.”
“What do you advise us to do?” Lakhsman said.
“I do not know your mission, so how can I advise?
I have never been farther north than three kos from
here. Why should I go into strange regions where
wild beasts roam and evil spirits have full sway? Have
you heard,” he asked, leaning heavily on his staff, his
head thrust forward impressively, “of the Grey
Shadow?”
“What is that?” Barry asked.
“A tiger that roams the country at the foot of
Ankai. He has slain men, women and children with-
out number. His depredations have extended even as
far as my village. Beware of him. If he bar your way,
return. As you proceed towards Ankai you will note
that villages become more scarce. There are no single


travellers. People move only in a caravan, for safety.
This scourge has made the land desolate,”
He salaamed deeply as Lakhsman touched the bul-
locks with his toes. “Unto you be peace,” he called
as the cart wheels churned up the dust.
“Not a very cheerful bird,” Barry commented,
moving up beside Lakhsman. “However, it would be
wise to keep an eye skinned in case Grey Shadow
pays us a visit.”


CHAPTER X
The departure of Barry and Lakhsman had caused a
good deal of anxiety. The first day their absence was
thought due to an excursion into the mountains, and
Shunker, the cook, was certain that Barry would
report back next day. Learning that Lakhsman was
also missing eased his mind tremendously.
After two days had passed the villagers began to
fear something had happened. They were consoled
by Ambaji, who told them not to worry as Lakhsman
would return in due course unharmed.
Shunker, however, was stirred out of complacency
by the arrival of a letter for Barry in his father’s
handwriting. He knew Cantwell Sahib never wrote
except on matters of great importance. He discussed
the letter with his wife and, after two hours’ delibera-
tion, resolved to take the letter to Lustrelle Sahib and
report that Barry was missing from home.
He arrived at the great man’s bungalow, at about
four in the afternoon, very hot and tired, having
tramped the whole distance. Lustrelle sent for him
immediately he was announced.
The resident waited until the old man stood in
front of his desk before looking up.


“What is it, Shunker?” he inquired with a genial
smile.
Shunker gave him the news.
Lustrelle was obviously disconcerted. He took the
letter and turned it over, undecided what to do with
it.
“You have no idea where Barry is?” he asked.
“None, sahib, except that he will be with Lakhs-
man, who, as I already said, is missing too.”
“I’ll have some inquiries made about the two boys.
Now about the letter. Cantwell Sahib would not
write except on a matter of importance. I shall open
it.”
He tore the envelope open and extracted a short
note. It read:
My dear son:
Our quarry has run to cover as we expected. Keep a close
eye on Lakhsman. Peasantry being prepared for some important
event. Crisis expected in four or five weeks. Impart this news
right quarter. Will write again.
Dad.
Lustrelle placed the letter in his pocket. “The
message was for me,” he explained. “If Barry is not
there to receive others that come, bring them to me.
And don’t worry unduly about the boy. Don’t discuss
his absence, or talk about him, his father, me or any
one you have seen in your master’s home.”
The old cook pulled thoughtfully at his scraggy
beard. In the absence of his master, Lustrelle seemed
the right man to consult in a difficulty. His loyalty
to Cantwell was profound, but he admitted to his wife
that he had never worked for any Englishman quite


so mysterious. The sahib came home unexpectedly
and departed without warning or explanation. But
also, he was thoughtful, and kind to his servants.
Sometimes he brought them presents, and always
rewarded them when he made a surprise visit and
found the house and garden as smart and well kept as
he insisted it should be when he was in residence.
Shunker was regarded as the head of the household.
Barry was his responsibility and he made a very frank
report on his behaviour. The boy provided a close
link between master and servant.
Shunker would have appreciated being taken more
freely into Cantwell’s confidence. There was the
notable occasion, for instance, when Cantwell Mem-
sahib had suddenly disappeared. He had spoken to
her at about ten o’clock, before retiring to his
quarters for the night, and that was the last time he
had seen her. Who spirited her away he never knew.
He and the other servants discussed her disappearance
from every angle, but to-day it was as great and as
baffling a mystery as it had been then. He remem-
bered how he had waited in fear and trembling for
his master’s return. He expected to see a man broken
with grief or furious with the servants, but Cantwell,
calm and judicious, asked a few questions and never
referred to the subject again.
“I am anxious about Barry Sahib,” Shunker said.
“His father left him in my charge. I shall be com-
forted to know he is well. You will let me know as
soon as you hear anything about him?”
Lustrelle assured him he would, and Shunker with-


drew. A little later he called for his horse and rode
briskly to the secretariate to see Sir Ramchandra
Bhose, the prime minister, who had sent an urgent
message saying that he would be honoured by an
immediate visit. Lustrelle did not like Ramchandra.
After each of his three trips to England he returned
a little more bumptious and intolerable. He was a
shrewd politician rather than a statesman. He spoke
enthusiastically of Western ideas and reforms, but
always remained a proud, implacable and conservative
Brahmin who taxed subjects to the last degree of
endurance and spent the revenue in keeping a host
of satellites contented while he built up a surplus
for a further visit to Europe. The old Rao with all
his extravagance, mainly on the palace and its occu-
pants, had supported a liberal public-works policy,
and had violently opposed increased taxation. Nanda
had been a happier and more prosperous State under
him. The administration certainly had drifted since
his death.
But Sir Ramchandra had a good deal of personal
charm. To begin with he was a rather good-looking
man, who had preserved his figure with sport and
hard riding. In vice-regal circles he was warmly
welcomed as a scholarly man who preferred European
society. For a native he possessed the unusual gift
of humour, and had won a reputation as a raconteur
and wit. Lustrelle found him sauntering on the lawn
in front of his palace, feeding the peacocks, dressed
smartly in a light grey lounge suit and close-fitting
white pagri.


He came forward with a smile of greeting. “Hullo,
Lustrelle,” he said heartily. “Hope you find this visit
convenient? It’s a lovely afternoon, and I thought
we could drink a cup of tea together under that
shady tree there.”
“Delighted, I’m sure,” the other replied as he shook
hands. When the Prime Minister was in friendly and
amiable mood Lustrelle kept on guard.
They drank tea as they discussed the darkening
European situation. As they spoke the shadow of
war seemed to have extended even to isolated and
peaceful Nanda. Below, in the bazaar, they heard the
tapping coppersmiths and brass- and silver-beaters
above the distant boom of the temple gongs. The sun,
warm and genial, steeped the picturesque city in
happy somnolence. The peace and security of Europe
were threatened, but Sir Ramchandra concerned
himself only with its probable effect on his next visit
to London and the continent.
They lit cigarettes, and the servants retired.
“I want to have a quiet talk with you about the
empty gadhi,” said the prime minister. “You’ve had
some correspondence about it with New Delhi?”
“Yes,” said Lustrelle casually. “The Government
considers the position unsatisfactory. The present
condition of world politics makes it imperative to
leave no strands loose.”
“I quite agree with that viewpoint. But what are
we to do about it? What do you suggest? We talk
this matter over often enough, but we never get
nearer a decision.”


“I think we could do so, nevertheless, if you and
I set about it earnestly.”
“You have indicated on several occasions, or shall
I say you have implied that it could be settled if I
were not obstructive. I resent that point of view.
What possible advantage can it be to me or the State
to function without a ruler? It means more work and
responsibility for me, besides my being subjected to
constant suspicion.”
“Perhaps,” said Lustrelle, “you might review the
position and offer a solution?”
“Well,” said Sir Ramchandra, “you have never
approved of the only claimant to the throne who, in
my opinion, merits consideration. I think,” he con-
tinued, some warmth creeping into his voice, “that
you have objected to him mainly on the score that
he has my support and that of many other responsible
men in the State.”
“That,” said Lustrelle firmly, “is not correct, and
you know it.”
“Well then, what is the reason?”
“You don’t need any prompting from me. You
know what the position is as clearly as I do. As soon
as Nanda can agree on a successor to the gadhi, the
enthronement will take place.”
“Even if we made a choice, there still remains an
insuperable obstacle,” the prime minister objected.
“The ceremony cannot be performed without the
All-seeing Eye. Despite a diligent and continuous
search, no trace of the gem can be found.”
“That will present no real obstacle, the moment


the successor is chosen,” LustreUe commented. “I
don’t think the Government would permit a lost
diamond to stand in the way.”
Sir Ramchandra’s face darkened. Despite his poise
and sauvity he could not disguise his annoyance. This
impudent and contemptuous allusion to the most
important item of the royal regalia struck deeper
than an insult to his caste, his faith or his gods, but
he kept his temper in check.
That is merely your view: the harsh, unsympa-
thetic view of one of the ruling class, who cannot
be expected to understand how deep-rooted in India
are customs and traditions, especially in independent
States. A ruler without the All-seeing Eye could not
command obedience or respect, still less reverence.
He would not be a monarch but a usurper, another
example of the interference of the raj with the con-
ventions and principles of the people. I tell you that
to disregard the All-seeing Eye would be fateful to
your best intentions as well as mine. To ignore it is
therefore impossible.”
“I am afraid my dear prime minister,” said LustreUe,
“that you are injecting a little unnecessary heat into
the discussion. If you seriously advance the view that
Nanda must remain without a ruler until that diamond
is found, then I am afraid it will not go unchallenged.
You know as well as I do that it will be found at & the
right moment.”
The prime minister’s face became distorted with
fury. “What is the implication?” he said in a voice
almost out of control.


96 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
“I shall leave it to you to supply the answer,” said
Lustrelle. “What I do make clear is that the present
unsatisfactory position will not be permitted to con-
tinue. The administration of a State like Nanda must
be purged of Gilbertian notions. You and I are not
the principals in oriental grand opera. We live in
extremely modem times and must take practical
approaches to the problem.”
Sir Ramchandra rose. “I think this interview must
close here. You are indulging in plain speaking which
I regard as being purely offensive. Good afternoon Mr
Resident.”
Lustrelle moved towards him, and in a quiet under-
tone said, “I resent your attitude throughout our
discussion. When I return to my office I shall place
on record the main features of our conversation and
send you a copy. It should make an interesting
reference some day.”
The prime minister continued to feed his peacocks
after calling a peon and sending him at a trot on some
errand. He turned as he heard the resident galloping
away. Then he sauntered back to the shady tree and
sank into a comfortable cane chair. Ten minutes later,
the chief of police walked towards him and smartly
saluted.
Shere Ali, although a Moslem, was an exceedingly
capable police officer inasmuch as he always carried
out the policy of the prime minister whether it was
constitutional or otherwise. He was a powerful man
with a clipped moustache and small black beard, and


his dark blue uniform fitted his figure closely enough
to be very uncomfortable on a warm day.
“Sit down,” the prime minister said affably. “Tell
me, how is your son? I heard it was feared he was
contracting an illness.”
“He is better, huzoor. It was a fever only.”
“I have just had a visit from the British Resident.
The Government is becoming impatient about the
succession. Have you heard any news?”
“None of the whereabouts of Cantwell and River-
stone Sahibs. They are probably out of the State.”
“Are you sure?”
“How can one be sure of either of them? They are
as elusive as eels.”
“Not to a good chief of police,” said the prime
minister with an ugly smile.
111 report when I hear of them. In the meantime
the holy man has gone into hiding. He may be sick,
or maturing other plans.”
“And what of the All-seeing Eye?”
“Remains where I for one certainly can’t see it,
said Shere Ali a little facetiously.
The prime minister leant forward. “Do you know
what would happen if someone other than myself
controlled the administration of this State?”
“Yes, most likely I should not be chief of police.”
“Quite so. You know how difficult the position is.
For several years I have resisted the pressure of the
raj to appoint a successor. The resident does not
approve of Balkrishna, and I’m afraid it really would


8 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
be difficult to uphold his claim while that village boy
lives.”
“That is for you to say,” Shere Ali said with polite
subservience.
“He is the nearest descendant, as you know; but
his father Ranoji was an outlaw and a criminal. Only
by the grace of the late Maharajah was he permitted
to go unpunished. It is dubious that Lakhsman is his
son. We could easily disprove, or at least cast doubt
upon such a claim. In any case, Nanda does not want
to be ruled by the son of such a scoundrel.
“Most certainly not,” Shere Ali agreed, expanding
his chest. “We still have some ideals of dignity and
morality, if Lustrelle Sahib has not.”
“It is unwise to criticize the resident, O Shere Ali,
however correct your views may be. Now attend
to what I say. Events are likely to move rapidly. It
is essential that Lakhsman, youth as he is, should be
placed out of the way.”
“For good?” Shere Ali asked eagerly.
“No. There must be no shedding of blood—at least
not yet, or until it is absolutely necessary. Just remove
him.”
“Where, huzoor?”
“To the bad lands beyond Ankai. Are there not
caves and valleys there, where only the vulture and
the eagle will seek him?”
“It shall be done,” Shere Ali said determinedly.
“To-morrow he will be well on his way to Ankai.”
Late that evening, just about midnight, the Mah-


ratta village behind Dalziel was roused with shouts
and musket shots, and the swift movements of near-
naked men dodging between the huts and calling
upon the occupants to remain indoors on pain of
death. The confusion died down after every hut had
been carefully searched. A few articles of women’s
jewellery were stolen but the dacoits did not plunder
the village as thoroughly as they might have done.
Old Ambaji, seated erect in the correct yogi
attitude of contemplation, heard muffled sounds and
whispers, and became suspicious. But before he could
make any attempt to warn the villagers, Shere All’s
hirelings were upon him.
“Where is the boy?” one asked, giving the old man
a buffet.
“There are many boys in the village,” said old
Ambaji in his gentle voice. “Which one do you seek?”
“One named Lakhsman,” the man said threaten-
ingly. Just then a twig glowed in the little fire beside
Ambaji’s humble shrine, and he looked his assailant
in the face. He recognized a city policeman.
“It is thou Krishnaji, the sepoy,” Ambaji said.
“There is evil in thy face. Thou hast smitten me, but
let that be the full extent of thy evil. Lakhsman is
not here.”
“Where is he?” Krishnaji demanded.
“I know not. We have grieved for him several days.
Some misfortune, perhaps.”
“Liar!” shouted a man from the shadows. He
levelled a pistol and fired.


Ambaji sank to the earth without a moan. A trickle
of blood ran from the centre of his forehead.
Krishna] i turned on the murderer. “There was no
need to kill the holy man,” he said.
“He knew too much,” was the retort. “Did he not
recognize thee? Holy men see beyond human sight.
This one is better dead.”


CHAPTER XI
As Ankai was approached, the population became
very sparse. It was obvious that men toiled harder
and had to be satisfied with less. Also noticeable was
a marked falling-off in the number of travellers on
the road. At midday four bullock carts in company
swung around a stony foothill, the leading cart halting
as Lakhsman also drew up.
Lakhsman, with a wad of pahn in his mouth,
squirted a red blob on the road and inquired how far
they had to go to reach water.
“About a kos,” the driver said, “and then you must
leave the road for a village a little distance away.”
“With loveliness to draw the water from the well?”
Lakhsman inquired roguishly.
“Yea, budmash. The maidens of the village are well-
favoured, and there is a surplus of them just now.
One has eyes of a heavenly blue—of her beware.”
“I shall see how blue they really are, O grand-
father of mine,” Lakhsman retorted, leaning from his
perch to offer a bundle of bheris. “As made in Nanda
from the choicest tobacco and leaves for the prime
minister himself! As you smoke them you will dream
as princes dream.”
“Ganja?” the man inquired.


“No, good tobacco only,” Lakhsman said airily,
lighting one.
“How far go ye?” was the next question. “It is
not wise to travel alone on the road to Ankai.”
“We seek to destroy a great dragon that haunts its
fearsome cavern,” Lakhsman said. “We hear that
lately his teeth have become loose and some have
fallen out.”
“I didn’t notice that when I last heaved him from
my path,” said the bullock driver. “He was asleep
with his mouth open. However, we wish you good
hunting.”
He kicked his bullocks gently under the ribs and
they plunged forward.
“There is a tiger in the neighbourhood that is very
wideawake,” he flung back as a parting shot. “Don’t
let him find thee asleep with thy mouth open.”
The bullock carts rumbled past in a haze of dust.
Away in the distance to the left the boys caught
sight of a little village that drowsed in the fold of a
hill. The sun beat fiercely on the ochre-coloured road.
The cart jolted over stones and into wheel ruts as
the going became steadily worse. The sky, innocent
of cloud, seemed to glow, and the horizon shimmered
with heat. A vulture wheeled high above a dreary
drab landscape, dappled here and there with outcrops
of rock or clumps of dust-covered cactus. The boys’
tongues were dry with thirst.
“We’ll have to watch our water supply,” Barry
observed. “The country becomes more like a desert
every hour.”


They left the road for a cart track which led to
the village. A well stood just within a plantation of
trees, and a comely Mahratta lass, fair and with eyes
of blue, watched them pull up.
She smiled as the boys came forward and, without
speech, waited till both squatted and placed cupped
hands to their lips. She poured water from a brass
lotah. It was cool and sweet.
“We were parched, sister,” Barry said, standing up
again. “Can you spare us some to take away?”
While she drew more water Nita chatted with all
the curiosity of a maid who sees and knows little
outside the village bounds. Before one question was
answered she was framing the next.
“It is dangerous to go further,” she warned, after
they told her they were bound for Ankai. “Two
days ago the Grey Shadow killed a woman between
the highway and where we stand. It was nearly mid-
day. The brute’s daring is unbelievable.”
“It will be most uncomfortable for this savage beast
if it pays us a visit,” said Lakhsman airily.
The girl shivered. “Don’t joke about it. They are
still wailing for his last victim in our village.”
“Why doesn’t someone shoot the shaitan?” Barry
asked.
“Several sahibs have been here. One lost his life
six months ago,” little Nita said, with her hand on
her heart. “The village shikaris have done their best.
This tiger is possessed of the devil. It is not a tiger,
it is a scourge.”
“Have you seen it?” Barry inquired.


“Yes, one evening at dusk,” the girl replied, return-
ing to the parapet of the well. “My father was driving
us home in his cart from a neighbouring village. With-
out warning, the Grey Shadow leapt among us. My
brother, younger than you are, was seated on the tail
of the cart, swinging his legs. That is the last we
saw of him.”
The tears rolled down her cheeks as they helped
her to lift her heavy water-pot on her head.
“You are very sweet,” said Lakhsman, and Nita
blushed as she turned to leave.
They sprawled under a great jackfruit-tree, and
slept till the heat was less oppressive. Then the boys
prepared for the road once more. Neither of them
was feeling very cheerful. Grey Shadow filled their
thoughts. The patel came up: a strong lithe man of
about forty with an axe in his belt, his muscles rip-
pling as he strode along.
“My daughter tells me you are travelling to Ankai,”
he said, squatting with his back to the cart wheel. “It
is not my place to ask questions, but I must warn you
of your danger.”
“From the tiger?” Lakhsman said.
“Yes, a brute possessed by a devil. Many have
travelled the road to Ankai. Yes, I have watched
them. But how few have returned!” the patel replied.
“There is nothing at the foot of that mountain, or
even on top of it, that is worth a poor man’s shoe
leather. Nothing but hardship, peril, and death.”
“Can you not speak more plainly of the dangers
we must face?” Barry asked.


“I can only speak of what I know. Some go beyond
Ankai who are too proud to have speech with a
village patch Holy men, too, who go and come. What
they seek I know not, but why do men brave peril
and privations?”
He wagged his head. A golden oriole flashed by
and settled on an adjoining tree. Lakhsman and Barry
did not reply.
“Both of you are still youths. Perhaps adventure
stirs your blood, as it once stirred mine,” the patel
went on, “Come you from Nanda?”
“Yes, both of us.”
“The gadhi is still unoccupied?”
Lakhsman nodded.
“A few years ago Budhoo, a most holy and wise
man, sojourned in this village for three months. He
foretold then that the gadhi would be vacant and
that there would be much intrigue to keep the right-
ful heir from taking his place upon it. He has told
me something else since.”
Both boys were now keenly interested. “Go on,”
they entreated.
“You know the red diamond has been stolen?” the
patel inquired, looking cautiously about him. He took
the bheri Lakhsman offered him and lit it with a
cheap sulphur match. Inhaling, he settled himself
down for an exchange of confidences.
“In Nanda,” Lakhsman said, “we speak of it as
being lost.”
“We speak more openly here,” said the patel. “But
even the disappearance of the All-seeing Eye was


foretold by Budhoo a year before it happened. He
also prophesied something else.”
“You are sure you are not repeating bazaar gossip?”
Barry remarked.
“I speak the truth. I speak of things that are known
to many simple country folk. The gadhi will be filled
by a lineal descendant of the late Maharajah. And
who think you he will be? Not one who has wealth
and power or who is accustomed to riches and high
places, but a poor villager—an obscure cowherd!”
“Is that common talk too?” Barry asked.
“No. Perhaps I should not have repeated it. How-
ever, I feel I can trust you.” He looked searchingly
into Lakhsman’s face. “I see destiny on thy brow,
young man. You two are close friends. It is well that
it is so. Listen. I am but a patel, but there are some
who know what Budhoo foretold and who believe it
will come true. We shall stand for the right on that
day, because there is Thakur blood in our veins—yes,
the same blood that coursed in the veins of our late
ruler Bulwant Rao.”
He lit another cigarette. His eyes glowed with an
inner fire, his lips suddenly became stem and resolute.
It was very calm and peaceful. Children, shouting as
they played together, broke the silence; and a
woman’s voice, singing as she ground com in her
chucki, came sweetly to their ears.
“We shall not forget our warrior blood when the
call comes. We shall not be deceived by priests who
foretell something different, and even now prepare
the way for an impostor. The red diamond will be


found, and will glitter on the breast of our young
prince at the proper time.”
The patel sprang to his feet. “You’ll remember
what I have said,” he exclaimed, gravely looking into
Lakhsman’s eyes.
He turned away, but after a few steps came back.
He was thinking furiously, but had now reached a
decision, and was ready to put his theory to the test.
“Wilt thou find the diamond?” he asked, too gravely
for one making a mere hazard.
Lakhsman drew himself up. He returned that look
with dignity, and a proper appreciation of its sig-
nificance. He knew Barry was watching him.
“Yes,” Lakhsman said simply. “I shall find it, or
rather,” here he caught Barry’s hand, “we two shall
find it together.”
“That, too, was foretold,” the patel said, almost
speechless with excitement. He was looking at Lakhs-
man with an expression akin to awe, and he felt
somewhat bewildered. So many stories went the
rounds, so many theories were discussed on the village
green throughout the length and breadth of Nanda.
Since the death of Bulwant Rao the people had been
divided. It was not safe to display partisanship or to
speak one’s mind. The ruling class reflected the views
of the administration, and apparently it was their
policy to keep the populace in a state of confusion.
He, as a common patel, was prepared to see the right-
ful heir placed on the gadhi whether the All-seeing
Eye was found or not. The priests in particular kept
stressing the importance of finding this extremely


sacred talisman, without which the regalia would have
little potency or purpose. The superstitious belief in
its beneficence extended even to the common people.
It was curious the faith the patel placed in old
Budhoo. As he scrutinized Lakhsman and noted his
light complexion, his aristocratic cast of features, the
little cleft in his determined chin, the steady regal
expression of his fine eyes, he knew that here was
someone bom to command: a boy of spirit, initiative
and determination. It was useless to battle further
against a conviction. He fell at Lakhsman’s feet and
touched them with the tips of his fingers.
“Prince!” he exclaimed, then drew himself up again.
“When thou art ready, call on me. Till then, I give
you the blessings of Mahadeo. Is there aught I can
do for thee now?”
“Nothing. We have all we need. Again thank thy
daughter for drawing water for us,” Lakhsman
replied. He leapt into his seat in the cart, and Barry
took his place beside him. “I shall see thee on my way
back.”
“Thou wilt not be a simple peasant then,” the patel
replied with a low salaam.
The bullocks had started off, their bells tinkling
merrily in the still afternoon.
“Beware of the Grey Shadow,” he shouted warn-
ingly, and retraced his steps.


CHAPTER XII
After a long and weary journey the forest at the
base of Ankai became more distinct. Nothing now
stirred the dust of the rough road, and no hawk or
kite specked the brazen sky. To-morrow, if all went
well, they would reach the mountain and skirt it, and
then the most difficult stage of the journey would
begin.
The solitude, the desolation of their surroundings,
began to affect the boys’ spirits. They had not fare-
welled humanity altogether, but they felt they were
gradually losing touch with it. No kindly patel
offered to supply their needs, no lass with blue eyes—
rather unusual among Mahratta people—drew water
for them and made pleasant the little space during
which they and their animals were refreshed. And a
disturbing thought occupied their minds. They were
in the domain or beat of a man-eating tiger, who
might attack at any moment.
Lakhsman encouraged the bullocks to greater
efforts, his features, however, not betraying his fears.
At the moment, he was not thinking about what the
patel said concerning his future, but about his per-
sonal safety. He did not care to admit to Barry, but
he was getting scared. After the girl’s simple story of


her brother’s death, which had greatly impressed him,
the tiger could no longer be ignored. Even now it
might be stalking them. The numerous stone outcrops
scattered over the countryside gave excellent cover.
Barry felt equally preoccupied and nervous. He
had seen many tiger skins, and an occasional dead
beast carried into Nanda, but never a live one in its
own haunts. Stories of shikar and of thrilling en-
counters with tigers and leopards had often been
related in Dalziel. Both his father and the resident
were hunters and fine shots, but neither of them had
been suddenly attacked by a man-eater, or had stalked
one on foot, and altogether Barry had an uneasy
feeling that they were in a spot of bother.
The bullocks jogged on. Barry leant back, picked
up his rifle and started to clean it.
“Getting ready for Grey Shadow?” Lakhsman said
with a smile.
“Yes. He’s a very cunning brute from all accounts.
I’ll load the Greener, one barrel with ball and the
other with big shot. Don’t forget to lift the triggers
before you fire.”
“We’ll see Grey Shadow before morning breaks,
Barry,” said Lakhsman very quietly.
“How do you know?”
“I just have a hunch, that’s all. We’ll keep a smart
look-out—l in front, you from the back of the cart.”
Once more they trundled along. The sun was now
beginning to set, and the glow in the sky was like
the reflection of flame on polished brass.
“Look, there’s a solitary tree. We’ll camp there,”


Lakhsman said. “The bullocks have had enough.
We’ll water and tether them. They won’t want to
stray far with a tiger around.”
Camp was soon made. Lakhsman cooked a curry
and made a pile of chupatties. The blue smoke curled
up from the fire as straight as a column. There was
no breeze, but the air had already become cool, and
promised to be chilly as the night advanced.
The appetizing smell of the curry made them
hungry. As they ate, they looked warily about them.
The short dusk deepened into night. A new moon
sailed across the sky. The bullocks chewed the cud
contentedly, and away in the distance a jackal pack
howled.
They washed the cooking pots and let the embers
of the fire die out. A good fire would have been the
best protection against a lurking tiger, but dry fuel
was scarce.
“One of us must keep watch,” said Barry. The
subject of Grey Shadow had excluded every other.
“It wouldn’t be safe for both of us to sleep at once.”
“I’ll keep the first watch, Barry,” said Lakhsman.
“I think I’ll take your rifle if I sit up.”
“No,” said Barry, “you’ve been driving all day.
I’ll keep the first watch.”
“We’ll settle that without argument,” Lakhsman
replied, advancing with his hands on his thighs, a
sure sign that a rough-and-tumble was about to
commence.
Barry dropped his rifle with a grin. “It’ll be a grand


moment for the tiger to hop into the struggle,” he
said as he prepared to close. “Come on, prince.”
Lakhsman laughed. “Don’t let a village patel pull
your leg, Barry,” he exclaimed, and with a quick
movement caught his companion off guard, pulled
him forward, and adroitly tripped him.
They struggled and rolled on the parched earth,
rose to their feet, and once more exerted all their
strength and craft for a final throw. Backwards and
forwards, the well-contested wTestling match surged,
until Barry suddenly broke away.
“Lakhsman,” he w’hispered, “what’s wrong with
the bullocks?”
They had moved back, wfith hindquarters to the
bole of the tree, their heads lowered, their bodies
trembling. The boys sprang for their weapons and
made for the side of the cart.
The minutes passed. The boys scarcely dared
breathe. They knew the direction from which the
tiger was stalking them by the position of the bul-
locks, facing a common enemy. Now and again the
cattle would relax, their bells tinkling cheerfully: a
sign that the tiger had retreated, to try a different
manoeuvre or attack from a new angle.
Barry wiped the perspiration from his eyes with
the back of his hand. Suddenly the bullocks swung
round and became tense again. The prowling man-
eater obviously was approaching the cart.
Barry sank to his knees, and pulled Lakhsman
down too. They held their guns at the ready. The
silence was now’ not only oppressive, but nerve-


racking. Lakhsman’s trained nostrils first caught the
rank feline odour of Grey Shadow as he crept for-
ward to spring. They could see and hear nothing.
The bullocks, taut and alert, awaited the coming
onslaught.
Barry fired first at an object that catapulted
towards them, and which seemed to have materialized
out of the darkness. Instantly, Lakhsman emptied both
barrels and slid behind the cart wheels, protection
that his chum also sought. The great beast, mortally
wounded, struggled to its feet and rolled over and
over, roaring at first with mounting rage and then
with the feebleness of ebbing life.
“We’ve fixed him,” Lakhsman shouted triumph-
antly as he emerged.
“Keep back, you fool, till you’ve emptied your
barrels into him again,” Barry enjoined, as he fired
twice at the struggling brute. Lakhsman, unheeding,
advanced to within a few yards and gave Grey
Shadow its quietus.
It was midnight before the skin was removed.
Tired and elated, the boys flung themselves on the
straw in the cart, and slept dreamlessly.
The sun had risen when they woke. The bullocks
stood as far as possible from the tiger’s carcass, which
already had attracted a few ravens and a pair of
vultures. Lakhsman opened his eyes slowly, and
prodded Barry with his toe.
“Did we kill a tiger last night?” he asked sleepily.
Barry yawned and sat up. “I believe we did, but


l4 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
if we sleep much longer only the bones will serve as
evidence.” He looked at the skin pegged on the tree.
“That big hole in his chest is where you let him
have it, Lakhsman,” Barry said. “Well, Grey Shadow
won’t kill any more people. What shall we do with
the skin?”
“We’re not taking it with us. It stinks too much.
We’ll place it somewhere by the wayside, so that
passers-by may know Grey Shadow is dead.”
The sun was hotter than on the preceding day.
Not a living thing was in sight. They draped the
skin over a cactus clump and Lakhsman scribbled
in Mahratti, “He won’t worry you any more”, and
pinned the note on the pelt.
Lakhsman was in high feather, and sang “Over
There” with great gusto.
“We’re not doing so bad,” said Barry. “We’ve
bagged the famous man-eater, and had no accidents.
I think we’ll have a good trip. I say, Lux, what was
all that talk about your recovering the red diamond?”
“You heard.”
“What am I to believe?”
“Just that,” said Lakhsman. “We’re bringing it
back with us.”
“Who told you where it was?”
“The blind man, Nehru,” said the Mahratta boy.
“He told me many things, or rather hinted at them.
So had old Ambaji. And where their statements
squared, I felt there was truth. Did you think we’d
come here only to find a few white diamonds?”
“That was all Nehru said in my presence.”


“Then,” said Lakhsman, “I’ll tell you more. Per-
haps we can exchange confidences.”
Barry said as much about the All-seeing Eye as
he thought circumstances warranted. He was sur-
prised to learn that Lakhsman knew so much.
“You must never repeat what I am about to tell
you, Barry, because that will be very serious for me.
There is no secret so important as this. The high
priest did not die on the day of Bulwant Rao’s
funeral. He feigned death, and got away with the
All-seeing Eye.”
Barry expressed no surprise. The cart trundled and
bumped along over a road that became stonier as
they approached the base of Ankai.
“I always intended telling you about it, because
we shall recover the red diamond together. The high
priest is believed to have taken refuge in Mumtaz.”
Lakhsman talked excitedly, withholding very
little, and Barry listened silent and grim.
“I say, Barry, you’re not offended, are you?”
Lakhsman said. “You didn’t think I knew so much?
Perhaps if you’d known we were setting out prin-
cipally to find the All-seeing Eye you may have
prefered to stay at home.”
“I could punch your stupid head for saying that,”
Barry replied hotly. “What do you take me for—a
squib?”
“Don’t be silly. If you want to punch me, do it
after the evening meal. But I don’t think you’ll do
that,” said the Mahratta boy, his left arm stealing
around Barry’s neck.


Immediately, Barr} 7 was all smiles. “I tell you what
I’m going to do, Lux—find that red diamond before
you do. Gosh! It’ll be a mighty big thing for me to
say that you and I found something that the shrewdest
and most important men in Nanda failed to do.”
After the noonday rest they started on the last
stage of the journey to Ankai. The road now ran
downhill, which made the going easier. Not a breath
of wind brought relief from the oppressive heat. The
cavern or eye was clearly visible as the mountain
towered above them, but they soon lost sight of it
again.
“Not a very cheerful spot,” Lakhsman said. “We’ll
so on till sunset, unless we find water. That will be
our big trouble from now on.”
The road steadily became worse. The scrub, the
trees, the rocks were coated thickly with a yellowish
dust. The sweltering leaves smelt strongly and
aromatically. At length, the jaded bullocks swung
through a pass. A musky odour set the boys sniffing.
“Monkeys,” they said together. In the khud below,
a troop of big grey monkeys with black faces grim-
aced at them defiantly.
“I didn’t expect to find them here, but where mon-
keys are we’ll find water,” said Lakhsman, as he
handed the reins to Barry and leapt to the ground.
In advance of the cart, Lakhsman leapt from one
vantage-point to another, scanning the rocky valley.
The shadows began to lengthen, and birds fluttered
in the tree-tops. It was time they found a suitable
position and camped for the night.


The bullocks quickened their pace as Lakhsman,
about a hundred yards ahead, shouted, “Water be-
low!” They, too, had caught the drip of a little
waterfall.
They camped close to a welling basin. The night
air became chill, so they lit a fire, near which the
bullocks bedded down.
“Leopards don’t like fire,” Barry said drowsily.
“No,” Lakhsman replied, yawning, “nor do most
fierce animals. Heap on plenty of wood, like a good
chap. I’ll sleep soundly to-night.”


CHAPTER XIII
At daybreak they heard the stealthy approach of
human beings. Four Bhils, one carrying a musket, the
remainder armed with bows and arrows, emerged
into the little clearing, and grunted a greeting. These
hardy junglemen drank at the pool, then squatted
to talk in a friendly way.
As is usual, each sought as much information about
the other as possible. The Bhils said their village was
about a half a kos farther down the track. It was a
permanent settlement, although the tribe moved
about a good deal, following game. Yes, it was pos-
sible to supply three Deccanee ponies, young and in
good heart, if they were needed.
It transpired that the village did a regular although
very infrequent business in mounts, which travellers
either hired or bought outright. They were ready to
look after the bullocks and cart if entrusted with
them.
“Well,” said Barry, “the country is getting more
rugged, and we can’t expect to go further by cart.
I think we should make a deal. Leave the bullocks and
cart and our belongings with them in exchange for
the ponies, and then make a bundobust with them for
the hire of the mounts.”


It seemed an equitable arrangement to the Bhils,
who led the way to the village where a council was
summoned.
“You have come a long way,” said their chief,
Golgi, in his hospitable manner, “and the worst part
of your journey is to come. Why not rest here for
a day or so?”
He led them to a clean reed hut on the outskirts
of the village, constructed especially for visitors, and
brought fruit, vegetables, eggs, and rock honey. The
boys outlined their plans.
“Will you go on to the end?” the chief asked.
“We go as far as possible,” Lakhsman replied.
“I doubt if you will go beyond the Pass. They say
only those entrenched in that stronghold go in and
out. They say, too, that for a stranger to enter the
Pass or descend into the valley is certain death. Per-
haps these are only stories to frighten simple people
from learning the truth. Once I travelled as far as
the Pass.”
“What think you is in the valley?”
“It is a wild and weird place—the abode, surely,
of all evil spirits. One can only reach it through the
Pass. Burning with curiosity, I scrambled a little
distance up the steep mountain that partially over-
looks it. That rugged range resembles a great wave
turned into stone, and the ridges are like giant fingers
clawing the sky. I don’t know how I scaled the cliff,
but I reached a point where I actually peeped into
the valley. What I saw reminded me of a bottomless
pit.”


“Anything else?” Lakhsman asked breathlessly.
The chief lit a bheri and coughed violently. “The
tobacco is strong,” he said, “but, huzoor, it is good.”
He looked a queer sprite of a man—short, spare, but
with muscles like whipcord. As he spoke his eyes
flashed, and gesticulations made his meaning clear
when speech did not adequately convey it. Squatted
under the gnarled limbs of a banyan, black almost as
coal and as shiny, Golgi did not look the type who
wantonly deceives, A big yellow parish dog had
thrown himself down a few yards away, and watched
Barry vigilantly. Some children hung round curiously,
but they had been trained not to intrude when the
chief entertained visitors.
“Yes, I saw something else. The morning sun
shone on rocks the colour of yellow, red, gold, and
violet. There were no trees. There was nothing but
stone. Great cliffs straight as the side of a house, and
at the foot of them such a jumble of rocks and
boulders as I hope never to see again. That terrible
ravine dipped suddenly from a wide ledge, which
ran almost level from the Pass or entrance. Then I
saw a strange thing. A man, from a sort of window
or opening in the cliff opposite me, cast something
into the depths below.”
“Go on,” said Lakhsman impatiently.
The Bhil’s face glowed with excitement. “Slowly,”
he continued, “he drew up what he cast into the pit.
He did so in a calm leisurely way, as though he lived
there and had time to spare, I did not see more. It
was hard clinging to that cliff face. Very cautiously


and with great exertion I descended, lucky to reach
the base alive.”
“Were you afraid?”
“Well, I saw enough to know that where one man
is others live also. Only desperate men could exist
in so terrible a spot. But I proved one thing,” said
Golgi with a prodigious wink.
“Which was?”
“There is something in the valley worth guarding.
Tell me,” Golgi said earnestly, “is it treasure you
seek? If so, I implore you to return. What are riches?
Can it, for instance, bring me a better wife or
children? I have enough to eat, and a shelter against
the weather. Such were the thoughts that raced
through my mind as I looked down into that awful
valley. You are both very young. Perhaps you have
never faced death?”
“We slew Grey Shadow,” said Lakhsman proudly.
The chief rose to his feet. “Is this true?”
“His skin is on a cactus bush by the wayside a few
kos back.”
The Bhil salaamed deeply. Then his arm made a
comprehensive gesture. “All that I have is thine.”
He proclaimed the great news, and instantly the
village was wild with excitement. Men, women and
children compassed them round and, to the beat of
tom-toms and weird monotonous chanting, the villa-
gers broke into a slow, rhythmic dance. Nearer and
nearer they converged, until, at a sign, they stopped.
The chief gravely approached the boys and affec-
tionately laid his hands on their shoulders.


“Hereafter,” he said, “thou art one of us. Come
and go in this village, or in that of any other of our
kin, and know thou wilt always be welcome.”
It was a sincere ceremony, and impressed the boys
immensely. All the resources of the village were at
their disposal. The ponies were brought up for
inspection, and their rough saddles and girths very
thoroughly looked over. A quiet animal was selected
for the baggage. No detail, from food and drink to
fodder for the animals, escaped Golgi’s supervision.
“I have a great favour to seek,” the old chief said
just before sundown.
“What is it?” Lakhsman asked.
“I have a son Chimar—a lad, though a few years
older than either of you. He is a son of whom I am
proud. As a hunter and tracker he even surpasses me,
but he also has the courage of a tiger and the fidelity
of a dog. It was two years ago that I made my
memorable trip to the Pass. There were three of us,
and one was my son. Look you, huzoor, he sees
everything and forgets nothing. On that journey he
learnt where water is to be found and where the
ponies can find sustenance. Grant me this favour,
and take him with thee.”
Chimar came forward, somewhat diffidently and
morosely in his rather dirty strip of loin-cloth. He
was as tall as Barry, broad and well-muscled, keen
of eye, and intelligent.
Barry liked him instantly, and said, “Yes, he’ll do.”
Lakhsman came forward and placed his arms on
Chimar’s shoulder. “Come, brother,” he said. “If it


is adventure you are seeking, we shall find it
together.”
In the check-over, Chimar refused an extra mount.
He said he preferred his own legs to a pony’s, and
besides, he had to look after the baggage. As if by
right of special knowledge, he took charge of the
expedition.
Before sunrise, the cavalcade stood before Golgi’s
hut for a final inspection. Chimar’s mother ran out
and touched her son’s head with her fingers, and
kissed the tips of them.
“Come back, my son. Say thou wilt come back.”
“Of course, he’ll come back,” Golgi said, irritably.
“Is he not my son? Danger only exists to test brave
men.” \
About a dozen Bhils, led by Golgi, ran a little
ahead, the younger ones giving an exhibition of their
prowess, hoping to the last to be included in the
party. At the mountain track they stopped.
“May the gods protect ye,” said Golgi with a wist-
ful smile. “Your bullocks and chattels will be safe in
our hands.”
At the turning the boys waved to the faithful band,
watching them to the last. Lakhsman’s eyes were
moist.
They rode on through sunlight and shadow, till
at last there was no shelter, and the heat beat down
so fiercely that their heads reeled. The ponies picked
their way through the rough track like goats. No
cart could have negotiated that terrible trail.
In the afternoon they were behind Ankai—as


formidable a bastion from the rear as from the front—
and, although they often turned to seek it, the cavern
or eye was again invisible.
The country became more desolate with every mile
they rode. Sparse trees dotted the dreary, boulder-
strewn landscape, as though they were the last
surviving outposts of a green and pleasant world.
By four o’clock both the boys had drained their
water bottles, when Chimar pointed to his and lec-
tured them on their stupidity and extravagance.
“A mouthful only, when the tongue is dry,” he
adjured. “A good drink when one can replenish.”
Now and again Barry and Lakhsman checked, from
Nehru’s map, the route Chimar was taking, and they
found him wholly trustworthy.
They camped under a rather stunted tree for the
night, and the Bhil skinned and roasted a goat kid
he had hunted down while Lakhsman cooked curry
and rice and made a great batch of wheat chupatties.
Chimar, with unerring instinct, had piloted them to
a pool of water.
Chimar could not have been styled a sociable
companion. He was shy and spoke very little. After
tethering the ponies and building up a small fire, he
prepared for sleep. All felt drowsy after their good
meal.
“It will be cold,” Chimar said, wrapping himself
up in his blanket or cumli, and stretching himself
before the fire.
The stars shone brightly in a sky that seemed only
ceiling-high. The silence was complete and awesome.


Ankai, though far away, frowned heavily. Huge
boulders, like prehistoric beasts, crouched around.
Chimar breathed heavily in a sound sleep. Barry,
sprawled uncomfortably on the hard dry earth,
reviewed the events of the last few days.
He hoped his father was still away, or, if he had
returned, that he was not worrying. He would under-
stand where he was upon learning that Lakhsman
also was missing, for both were engaged on the same
' case”. Providence had looked after them well so
far, and would continue to do so. Everything was
opening up in a really wonderful way, particularly
this meeting with the Bhils. Even their battle with
Grey Shadow had had a great bearing on their for-
tunes. It had presented them with Chimar.
Lakhsman, beside him, had also been thinking, but
his limbs ached, and he was tired mentally as well as
physically. Soon he drifted quietly into a deep sleep.
His last thoughts were of Chimar. Here was someone
after his own heart, one who had studied deeply the
lore of the jungle. Even the humblest human being
reflected the courage and intelligence which protected
him against enemies.


CHAPTER XIV
Chimar was a source of continuous interest and
delight. On the march he kept ahead, his eyes search-
ing the ground for those riddles every living thing
leaves for the observant and understanding to solve.
The claw marks of a leopard, the trail of a bear, the
passage of wild pigs rooting wherever vegetation
clung, and the abrasions on the bole of a sapling
where a buck had rubbed his itching antlers-all
these told a story. Sometimes, examining the dust on
the track, he would give a warning whistle, or wander
away to confirm his deductions. He gave the impres-
sion that he was too absorbed by the important things,
invisible though they were, to indulge in conversation.
He seemed less tense when they left the forest and
travelled along a great watershed strewn with the
debris of a thousand floods and fierce gales. The heat
was now terrific, and even Chimar, hardened as he
was, twined leaves round his head and seemed glad
for a spell in the shade. As the great Ankai range
slid slowly behind the horizon, a barren ridge of low
foothills showed up. The problem of water gave
Chimar a good deal of concern. One evening he
brought them to an almost dried-up water-hole, foul
with the carcass of a sambur killed where it had been


quenching its thirst. However, they got sufficient
water to last themselves and the ponies, with careful
rationing, for a couple of days.
The country continued rough, arid and forbidding.
The broad valley gradually contracted as the hills
closed in, until finally it split into three separate
valleys, each as desolate and uninviting as the others.
They camped that night at the head of one that
Chimar was certain would lead them to Mumtaz.
Now, for the first time, both Barry and Lakhsman
were conscious of being in a danger zone and of
facing forces as sinister as they were mysterious.
Chimar did not look very cheerful, at the con-
clusion of the next march, after a visit to a water-hole
where he was sure they would be able to replen-
ish their supply. Not his failure to locate water, but
his depressed manner gave the boys cause for alarm,
and they began to realize how much they depended
upon the sagacity of the Bhil lad.
Chimar wrapped himself in his cumli and went to
sleep. Perhaps he was a fatalist, or else had that enor-
mous faith and courage primitive people must possess
in order to survive. To him the joys and sorrows of
the day closed with the fall of night. To-morrow was
a new day of hope and promise. Life really started
again, free from the shackles imposed by yesterday.
Their surroundings were cheerless in the extreme.
Barry likened them to a valley in the moon, although
Lakhsman declared that the moon could not possibly
be as bad. It was a region where no life or activity
could exist without challenge. It suggested to both


8 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
lads simultaneously that it may be just as well to look
over the weapons and sort the ammunition. They
chatted in whispers so as not to disturb the phlegmatic
Chimar. Without any explanation, the Bhil had
dowsed the camp fire before going to sleep.
Before daybreak Chimar was astir, and roused the
camp. The sun rose in a brazen sky and set the
horizon aquiver. The ponies, suffering from thirst,
could not be urged faster than a walk. Just before the
midday rest, Chimar seemed a little perturbed by a
trail he had picked up. Without explanation, he
mounted the baggage pony and made a detour. The
broken country, with its great outcrops of rock, made
reconnaissance difficult. While they sprawled under
the lee of a rock which gave little shade, Chimar spoke.
The seriousness of the news he voiced brought Barry
to his feet. Quite simply, merely stating a fact, Chimar
said that three men had been shadowing them for a
couple of hours.
“All are mounted,” he said, “on well-shod Dec-
canee ponies. One keeps in the lead, and it is he who
commands. Their beasts are fresher and faster than
ours, so it would be useless trying to outstrip them.”
“What do you suggest?” asked Lakhsman.
“There is a circle of great stones two miles farther
along. We shall make for that spot and see what
happens. They may attack or close in on us. If they
don’t, we shall move away in the darkness. That is
our only chance. They mean to kill us.”
With this cheerful summing-up, they mounted
their ponies and ambled along to the position selected


for defence. They had barely gone a hundred yards
when a rifle shot, like the crack of a whip, broke the
echoes, and a bullet whined close by.
Barry unslung his rifle, but Chimar, urging the bag-
gage pony to its utmost, turned and shouted, “Don’t
shoot—ride!”
Six shots were fired at them before they reached
cover—without effect, though the markmanship was
good. Leaving Chimar to attend to the animals, Barry
and Lakhsman took up positions and searched for
signs of the enemy.
In the distance a pony neighed, and Lakhsman’s
mount responded. Otherwise, although they strained
eyes and ears, they could detect nothing that might
give them a clue to the foe’s whereabouts.
“They’re not far away,” said the sapient Bhil.
“Keep under cover. They will shoot, not from the
back of a moving pony, but from behind a rock.”
The great circle of boulders looked as if Titan
hands had built it as a fort. The boulders gave splen-
did cover and also a certain amount of shade. During
daytime it would be almost impossible to surprise
them, and, unless the enemy believed them unarmed,
it was unlikely they would be rushed. At about four
o’clock Lakhsman, who had foolishly exposed his
body for a moment, drew a shot which struck the
rock close by and ncochetted with an ear-piercing
whine over his head.
Their thirst was becoming unbearable. Chimar led
the ponies round to the shade as the sun moved across


the sky. They were showing signs of increased
distress.
As the sun set, Lakhsman handed round some stale
bajri bread and a handful of parched grain. The Bhil
abstained from eating, and Lakhsman too. He noted
the grim look on Barry’s face and threw himself
down beside him.
“Not worrying, are you, Barry?” he said.
“Don’t talk. Get back to your post on the other
side,” Barry snapped. “Let me know if there’s a
movement of any kind.”
“Okay,” Lakhsman said, and crawled away. A new
note had crept into his friend’s voice—one of com-
mand.
The moon, in a clear velvety sky, lit the surround-
ings with a soft, ghostly glow. At a council of war
it was decided that two should keep watch while one
slept, and Chimar, under that arrangement would
take over at midnight. At about ten o’clock, how-
ever, Barry’s keen ears picked up a new note in the
desert’s orchestra of silence, and a little later he
distinguished a shadowy object approaching. It
materialized into a pony ambling leisurely towards
them, Barry took a sight but did not fire. Perhaps it
was a pony that had broken tether and was seeking
companionship with his own. He did not wish to fire
unless it was absolutely necessary. Better to keep
their foes guessing about the kind of reception
awaiting them.
As the pony came closer, Barry could see it was of
a light colour and that a rider crouched in the saddle,


THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL I 3
making himself as inconspicuous as possible. He rode
cautiously to make a thorough inspection and satisfy
himself if his intended victims had given him the
slip. Then he urged his mount on boldly with a touch
of his heels. Barry pulled the trigger of his rifle, and
the pony reared up and crashed to the earth.
Chimar and Lakhsman were quickly at his side.
The pony did not move; neither did the rider, who
perhaps was dead or badly wounded. Lakhsman
wanted to go out and finish him off if he were still
alive, but Barry thought he might be foxing and that
Lakhsman should not take the risk.
They watched so intently for about half an hour
that they did not notice Chimar was no longer at their
side. A few minutes later he rejoined them.
“The rider has crawled away. I heard him. He
coughed once. You cannot see him, nor can I, but
I’m going to make sure where he is.”
“You must not go,” Lakhsman ordered, but Chimar
slipped out of sight, and the boys returned to their
respective posts.
“Chimar said there were three men on our trail,”
Barry warned. “They may be stalking us now.”
Shortly after midnight they heard a low whistle,
and a dark figure rose from the earth and approached
leisurely. Barry shouted, “Is it you, Chimar?” and
the Bhil gave an answering, “Ai.”
He carried a rifle and a bundle, which he flung to
the ground. Then, casually, he lit a bheri and inhaled
a couple of deep gulps.


“See what he’s got and report,” Barry said, and
maintained his vigil.
“Just his clothes,” Chimar announced, grinning,
“and his bandook. He wasn’t wounded, but waiting
to snipe at us. I crawled up from behind and drove
my knife between his shoulder-blades. Then I finished
him with my axe. That’s one out of the way.”
“By gad, he’s a cool customer,” Lakhsman said.
“The carbine is a Lee-.Mitford, and Chimar got hold
of a hundred rounds of ammunition. What do you
think he wants to do now?”
“Can’t say,” said Barry.
“He suggests that he and I stalk the other two in
the party. Would you hold the fort if we did?”
“It’s a risk, Lakhsman, but there’s nothing like an
offensive spirit. Look here, I think Chimar and I
should go and leave you to keep watch here.”
“I spoke first,” said Lakhsman, and a whispered
consultation took place with the Bhil. Then, without
further ado, they slipped away.
One of the ponies whinnied soon after they had
gone, and was answered by another in the direction
Chimar and Lakhsman had taken. Barry felt lonely
and somewhat nervous, but his courage returned as
he realized he was entrusted with the entire defence
of the camp.
The moon sailed through the sky, utterly disinter-
ested in the drama unfolding in that curdled-looking
wilderness where a lonely boy kept vigil, his heart
thumping every time a twig cracked or a lizard dis-
placed a pebble. After what seemed an eternity, Barry


looked at the illuminated dial of his wristlet watch
and saw that it was a quarter to three. Lying as he
was on the hard rock in the chilly night air, his limbs
were stiff.
“It’s time they were back,” he thought, beginning
to feel anxious.
Just then he heard a short scream, a gargle, and
then silence. He turned swiftly in the direction of
the blood-curdling sounds, his rifle at the shoulder.
Somebody had been done to death with a knife-
thrust, and he hoped and prayed his two companions
had not been ambushed.
Then something else sharply claimed his attention.
He heard the soft slither of approaching footsteps,
and saw someone coming towards him indecisively.
It was too dark to distinguish friend from foe.
“Who is it?” Barry shouted.
“Don’t shoot,” said a voice in Hindustani. “I sur-
render, and am unarmed.”
“Then come forward with your hands up,” said
Barry. “No tricks or I’ll blow your brains out.”
Another voice now hailed Barry. It was Lakhs-
man’s.
“We’re just behind him, Barry, so don’t shoot.
He’ll be more useful alive. Chimar got the other chap.
Stalked up and slew him with a stab through the
throat.”
They brought the prisoner in, tied him up securely
and flung him to the ground.
“That’s the lot,” said Chimar, as he wrapped his
cumli round him and unconcernedly went to sleep.


The Bhil was up at daybreak, and noticed Barry
still keeping guard. “Why did you not sleep?” he
said. “The danger has passed.”
“But the prisoner?”
“Oh, he’s safe. I saw to that.”
Chimar leapt on to the baggage pony. “I am going
over to the budmashes’ camp,” he said, “to collect
the ponies and whatever food and water there is.”
The prisoner was ordered to sit up, and his gag
was removed. He was a short, stocky Moslem with a
scrubby beard and jaundiced eyes, dressed in a pair
of loose white drawers and a light embroidered waist-
coat drawn over a thin cotton shirt. His cummerbund
had been used to truss him up.
“You will be shot at sun-up,” said Lakhsman, as he
calmly chewed a bit of stale bajri bread.
“It will be so if it is the will of Allah,” was the
prisoner’s resigned reply as he reclined against the
rock.
“We come from Nanda,” said Lakhsman, “to put
down such outlawry as this. What made you hunt
us down?”
“Ask Moti Lai, if he can crawl into those blood-
stained clothes near thee,” the man said fearlessly. “I
was but his servant, and an unwilling servant at that.
It is well that his spirit choked in blood as it left his
vile body. Who slew him?”
“It matters not,” Lakhsman replied.
“Whoever it was has earned my gratitude.”
“You are as bad as he was. We will shoot you at
sunrise,” Lakhsman persisted.


“Moti Lai and his brother Chota Lai are both
dead,” urged the prisoner. “Methinks that the Bhil
slew both of them. You two would have used your
rifles. Perhaps it will pay you not to shoot me at
sunrise, or at least until you hear what information
I can give.”
Lakhsman did not reply, and the conversation
lapsed. Barry, cleaning his rifle, had taken no part
in it. He studied their captive closely, convinced that
with right handling he would be of service. It was
impossible not to admire his indifference to danger,
and the way he quickly adapted himself to changing
circumstances.


CHAPTER XV
Mahmud Ali was not shot at sunrise. Lakhsman
doubted that he could be entirely trusted, but Barry
thought otherwise and decided to give him a chance.
Chimar wanted to cut his throat as the shortest way
to settle the argument, but finally agreed to spare his
life. He insisted that Mahmud should be placed in
his charge, and on no account be allowed to ride one
of the ponies. The Bhil had appropriated Mahmud’s
mount and transferred the mussuck, or leather water
carrier, from the smart little roan to Mod Lai’s
dapple grey.
The party was slow in getting away. The heat
became so intense that they left the meagre shade of
the rocks unwillingly. If Mahmud could be believed,
unless they exercised the greatest care and restraint
they and the animals would suffer severely from
thirst before they reached the next water supply. One
side of the mussuck had been lacerated against the
edge of a rock. Part of the contents had leaked away.
The other side was only a quarter full. The ponies
showed signs of exhaustion, and their pace slowed
accordingly.
They strung across the boulder-strewn wilderness:
Barry in front, Chimar behind leading the two bag-


gage ponies; then Mahmud, his wrists securely tied
behind his back, tramped painfully along, while
Lakhsman brought up the rear. The prisoner, with
fatalistic unconcern, had made certain admissions. He
confessed that his party had left Mumtaz with the
intention of slaying them all. Asked how Chota Lai
knew they were making towards the valley, Mahmud
excitedly pointed to a pigeon winging its way due
north.
“My master keeps a cote full of them,” he said.
“That one we call Shalima. She is very sure and fleet,
and flies between Mumtaz and Nanda.”
He did not invite further questions. When Barry
had suggested that the corpses of Moti Lai and Chota
Lai should be buried, Mahmud had observed cynically
that the vultures and ravens could do the job better.
He promised that when he passed that way again, he
would make certain the skeletons had been cleanly
picked.
There was little change in the journey until noon,
when the party drew up, too distressed to go further.
Even breathing was becoming painful. Again, they
had to depend on boulders for shade. Vegetation had
almost entirely disappeared, except for rashes of
camel-thorn that struggled for existence on the
parched, pebbly surface. Mahmud limped badly the
last few miles, and Barry dismounted and examined
his feet. One, badly lacerated, he cleaned with a little
of the precious water and then bound up with a clean
handkerchief.


“You will ride on one of the baggage ponies till
your foot is better,” Barry said.
Mahmud looked up at him gratefully. “Thou hast
a kind heart, young man. It shows in thy face. I feel
I owe thee my life. Yesterday, with my two masters,
I tried hard to kill thee. Now I swear by Allah and
Mohammed his prophet that I shall be thy servant
so long as it pleases thee to command.”
“We did Moti Lai, Chota Lai and thyself no
wrong,” said Barry. “Why did you seek to slay us?”
“Perhaps,” said Mahmud, “Gopal Singh will explain
that when you meet him.”
“And who may he be?”
“What he directs in Mumtaz must be obeyed. No
one can enter or leave without his permission. The
long, dreary way you have come is in his keeping.
On this side of Ankai he is lord of life and death.
Later I shall tell thee more.”
Barry untied his wrists. “See, I trust thee on the
oath of a true Moslem. Keep near me. There, thou
art safe.”
At the end of an hour, although it was blistering
hot, Barry decided to push on. Mahmud warned him
that their water supply was practically exhausted,
and that only with a determined effort would it
be possible to reach the next water-hole by sun-
down the following day. Chimar, however, full of
hope, rode off with Lakhsman in the later after-
noon, after a rather contemptuous glance at the
Mohammedan, taking the baggage pony with the
mussuck.


“We’ll pick you up, Barry, about three miles
farther along,” Lakhsman said. “My tongue is hang-
ing out for a drink.”
Mahmud shook his head. “It is little good trying to
teach that Bhil, clever as he is. There was a water-
hole along there to the right, but it is dry. We learnt
that three days ago.”
“Are you sure you can lead us to water?” Barry
asked.
“Yes, but we may have to fight for it.
“What do you mean?”
“It is the last water supply before Mumtaz. Gopal
Singh stations a guard there.”
“How many men?”
“Two usually, but I think we’ll find only one.
Leave him to me.”
They rode along slowly in the oppressive sun. An
iguana unhurriedly crossed their path and then stood
blinking at them. He seemed to be revelling in the
heat. Twenty minutes later Lakhsman rode up.
“The hole was dry, and the carcass of a wolf lay
in it,” he said. “There’s nothing to do but push on.
How much water is there?”
“A mouthful for man and beast,” Mahmud replied.
“We had better rest again, and keep going during the
night. It’s easier travelling then. In this heat we won’t
last till sunset to-morrow.”
The dryness of the atmosphere, which seemed to
blot up the moisture of the body, made thirst a posi-
tive torment. Worse than that, it thickened the
blood-content and made the action of the heart more


difficult and laboured. Fortunately, so far there had
been little or no wind to add to their discomfort.
Chimar agreed readily. He had not taken kindly to
Mahmud, but his attitude towards him was under-
going favourable change. His was the primitive mind
that could not understand how a man who wished to
kill you one day could be trusted as a friend the next.
Anyway, Mahmud apparently knew the country
better than he did.
A wineglass of water was apportioned to each man,
and the ponies were made as comfortable as possible.
Barry and Lakhsman sat down to talk, but Mahmud
stretched himself out and closed his eyes.
“Always rest as much as possible when you are
hungry or thirsty,” he advised.
After sundown, Mahmud roused the party and
they set off again. The ponies ambled along painfully,
and the look of suffering in their eyes was more than
Barry could bear. He dismounted and led his, an
example which was followed by the others.
The moon flooded the country with light. It played
strange tricks on the tired cavalcade. Great boulders,
like unknown monsters, seemed to move towards
them. This stage of the journey was a nightmare
of illusion and suffering. The ponies often stumbled
and, overcome with weakness and exhaustion, refused
to go forward until rested. The air was chilly, and
towards early morning every one in the party except
the near-naked Bhil shivered with cold. About an
hour before daybreak Mahmud advised Barry to call


a halt. No persuasion was necessary. Men and animals
were played out.
“The water spring is close by, Barry Sahib,” the
Moslem said, addressing Barry as sahib with emphasis.
“We shall rest a little, then you and I will get the
water. I’ll ride up boldly and tell Ganpat the guard
that Moti Lai and Chota Lai are resting near by. He
will ask no questions. If he gives trouble I shall raise
my right arm, and then you will shoot to kill.”
“I, too, will keep you in view,” Chimar said, “in
case a second shot is needed.”
Lakhman laughed. It was obvious Chimar did not
even yet entirely trust Mahmud.
A quiet stroll in the half-light brought them to a
little knoll.
“Ganpat is asleep,” said Mahmud. “We’ll sneak up
a little closer.” He led the baggage pony, with a mini-
mum of noise, until they could actually see a little
windlass loom out of the grey.
“Now, sahib, I shall ride up boldly. You and Chimar
cover me with your rifles. Don’t shoot unless I signal
you.”
Ganpat Rao, asleep a few yards from the spring
with a rifle beside him, rose to his feet as the clatter
of hoofs roused him.
“Salaam, Ganpat,” Mahmud hailed cheerily. “It is
I, Mahmud Ali.”
“Where are the other two?” Ganpat inquired, a
little suspiciously.
“They will be here shortly to water their beasts.
By Allah, I am parched with thirst.”


He started to turn the windlass, till the leather
bucket came up streaming with water. Ganpat drop-
ped his rifle and ran forward to save the bucket from
the polluting touch of the infidel.
Mahmud sat on his haunches while Ganpat poured
the water into his cupped hands.
“Nay, friend, that will do just now, Ganpat said
wamingly. “It is not good to drink to repletion with
a thirst like thine.”
Mahmud stood up with a grateful smile, and wiped
his beard. Ganpat turned to pick up his rifle. At that
precise moment Mahmud sprang on him and brought
him heavily to the ground.
“Spawn of the devil!” Ganpat exclaimed, as he
gripped his adversary. “What treachery is this?” He
struggled to his knees, and his hand went to the dag-
ger at his waist. Back and forth they wrestled,
Mahmud, after his long march, fighting at a disad-
vantage, but with tenacity. Then both heard steps
scurrying towards them.
“Save me, O Moti Lai,” Ganpat cried, “from this
murderous madman. What have I done to deserve
this?” he yelled.
At that moment the Bhil gripped him by the throat
with fingers of steel, and the terrified Hindu became
limp and still. Chimar soon bound Ganpat’s wrists
behind his back, and his prisoner, expecting to have
his throat cut at any moment, lay perfectly passive.
Half an hour later the party enjoyed their first good
meal for several days. Ganpat, at first resentful and


inclined to be truculent, improved in temper after
a confidential talk with Mahmud.
“You can trust him,” Mahmud said. “He is happy
to hear we have offered Mod Lai and Chota Lai as
a feast to the vultures and ravens. He liked them less
than I did. Poor Ganpat is wondering what is going
to happen next. If he joins us, we shall be an advanc-
ing army that only Gopal Singh, his wife and servant
will be able to resist. No one else will be in Mumtaz
for a week or two at least.”
“But who is Gopal Singh?” Barry and Lakhsman
inquired together.
“I think that would make quite a long story.
Ganpat lives in a cave close by. It is cooler than this
open spot and has room for all of us, including the
ponies. We’ll sleep there till sundown. Then, if we
march all night, we ought to be close to Mumtaz
by daybreak.”
“I would like to know more about Mumtaz and
who Gopal Singh is,” Barry persisted.
“I shall tell you as we march to-night. Then, you
also will tell me, sahib, why you have come to Mum-
taz. Don’t start. Your skin is becoming patchy, but
there is also a quality in your speech and actions
which tells me you are not of the blood of Hindustan.”


CHAPTER XVI
Ganpat soon ingratiated himself with everybody,
and was given liberty of movement. He was a cheer-
ful, garrulous little man with the caste mark of the
Brahmin on his forehead. It was obvious from his
coarse jests that he had no love for Gopal Singh, and
yearned mightily to return to his wife and children
in Nanda. After being formally inducted into the
party, he strutted round and rehearsed how he in-
tended to greet his late master. A mighty swipe across
Gopaks face with his sandal, then a propelling kick,
were the highlights of the performance. Getting level
with Gopal gave Ganpat an enormous amount of
satisfaction, and the method tickled him immensely.
The trek to Mumtaz began soon after sunset. Fed,
rested and watered, the ponies seemed eager for the
road.
The night air was pleasant and bracing. As they
neared their journey’s end, excitement mounted. So
far, the boys had triumphed over all their dangers
and difficulties. Their numbers had grown from two
to five. Barry was sure of Aiahmud’s loyalty, and
from the cheerful passages exchanged between Gan-
pat and the Bhil, even separated as they were by
caste and blood, it was apparent that they were


finding much in common to talk about and laugh
over.
Curiously, Barry had been thinking a great deal
about his mother since they had reached the well.
For some inexplicable reason, whenever he looked at
or spoke to Ganpat he thought of her. Since her
disappearance he had never ceased to mourn her loss.
Associations with her, seemingly forgotten, now
revived. He was reminded, too, of his father and the
lonely hours he spent on the veranda smoking and
thinking, with an inexpressibly sad look in his eyes.
He and Lakhsman were riding together, discussing
their future plans, when Mahmud sidled in between
them.
“I have something to say, Barry Sahib, that both
you and Lakhsman must know. To-morrow we shall
reach Mumtaz. You would not come all this way
without some purpose, but whatever it is, rely on my
help.”
“There is much we wish to learn about Mumtaz
and Gopal Singh,” Barry declared.
“I do not know how much you know already,”
Mahmud continued, “but I shall give you some facts
about Mumtaz. It is the name of a valley completely
shut in by mountains, stifling hot, and infested with
snakes. From this valley, for many years, diamonds
have been won. How, ingeniously, this is done, you
will learn when we get there. It will be our purpose
to overcome Gopal Singh, and then be free to carry
out whatever plans you have in mind.
“I have been in the employ of Gopal Singh for four


years. My duties have been of various kinds, from
personal attendance on him to dredging for precious
stones. I have been a pultan or soldier, engaged to
help protect Mumtaz against all comers. Now and
again I have mounted guard at the well, but only
whenever we heard that someone had taken the road
behind Ankai.
“Gopal is fat, impatient, arrogant, and explosive
when roused. He demands instant obedience, and
to disregard his orders or cross his purpose means
death. You will hear about the great rock python
Naga, who emerges at the right moment and, with
great cunning, manages to capture and swallow some
poor wretch who has incurred Gopal’s displeasure.
I tell you these things only because Gopal has a
pleasant manner and an oily tongue. When he strikes,
it is with the swiftness and sureness of a cobra.
“Large quantities of precious stones are not easily
obtained from Mumtaz, but those won are of the
first water and flawless, and command the highest
price. The valley belongs to Nanda and is really the
private property of the ruler. Bulwant Rao received
a large annual revenue from it. A few years ago, for
some peculiar reason, the administration of it was
given to Madhu the high priest, who appointed Gopal
Singh as the location manager. Centuries ago, Mumtaz
had a reputation for fabulous wealth. It is said that
the Peacock Throne, looted from Delhi by Nadir
Shah, contained many gems from Mumtaz. All this,
of course, may be idle talk. Only a few people know


of the existence of this wealthy and desolate region.
To the rest of the world it is but a legend.
“Gopal Singh is a very astute man, and, also, I
should surmise, a very wealthy one. Who can tell how
many diamonds are won each year, and what their
total value is? Who can tell, either, how many used
to reach Madhu? It is like taxation. A quarter or a
third of a farmer’s crop is appropriated by the col-
lector, but what proportion of that, think you,
reaches the treasury? The Maharajah was supposed
to receive all the revenue from Mumtaz, but we who
work here know that the high priest waxed fat, and so
also did Gopal Singh.
“When you reach Mumtaz and overthrow Gopal
you will be surprised at the organization which
enables him and his staff to live and function in this
desolate region, and also at that in Nanda which
keeps their activities secret.
“In the past three years I have been twice to
Nanda: once soon after I joined Gopal, with a small
parcel to test my trustworthiness, and later with one
that was checked over and handed to me. It con-
tained thirty diamonds. In between vists from us, the
high priest and Gopal communicated by carrier
pigeons. The prime minister and Madhu had always
been close friends and, after the old Maharajah’s
death, arranged to divide the spoils between them.
Now Sir Ramchandra bags the lot, and keeps a tight
hand on Mumtaz. A spy, may Allah bewilder him,
whose duty it is to watch the Ankai road, warned
us that strangers were heading towards Mumtaz.


Gopal ordered the Lai brothers and myself to inter-
cept and kill you. It didn’t come off.
“Just before the old Maharajah died, Gopal had
not heard from Nanda for some time. He knew
Bulwant Rao would not last long and that there was
no direct heir to the throne. This made him feel
anxious and insecure. His allegiance was to the gadhi,
even if he recognized Madhu as his immediate
superior. One day, a carrier pigeon brought news of
the Maharajah’s death, and also of an emissary from
the court who was on his way to Mumtaz. Chota
Lai and I were sent out to meet him. He came in the
guise of a priest, and seemed very exhausted when we
met him. I couldn’t understand why they had sent
such an old and frail man on this difficult journey,
but after he had drunk, eaten and rested he showed
himself mettlesome and dignified, accustomed to
command and expecting obedience. Chota Lai did
not like him or his bullying, and neither did I.
“I shall never forget,” Mahmud went on, “our
arrival in Mumtaz. Gopal Singh stood at the entrance
of the Pass to meet us. Our guest walked up with a
frozen look, and stared hard until Gopal’s insolent
expression changed to one of servility and he
salaamed. The priest turned and haughtily dismissed
us.
“We saw nothing of our visitor for some days, and
then I was ordered to mount guard at the well. I did
not mind this. It gave me an opportunity to rest,
enjoy my own company and read the Koran, and
also the works of Firdausi the poet. The loneliness I


did not mind. It was a relief to be away from Gopal
Singh and the nagging tongue of his wife Shamsa.
In the cave I read or slept in the heat of the day,
and at night I communed for a space with the stars.
No one can realize how great and infinite is Allah
till he lies on his back and watches the stars march
slowly across a clear sky. Great is Allah! I pray for
his protection three times daily, and I know he
hears my petitions. Even now, you and I move
together in the shadow of the love he extends to all
his children, whatever their caste or creed.
“One late afternoon I was wakened from a doze
by the tapping of a staff on the rocks near the well
and, seizing my rifle, I rose to challenge the intruder.
He walked towards me gropingly, and with a smile
on his face like that of a trusting child. He was a tall,
lithe man, in the prime of life, heavily pock marked,
and blind. He told me he had come from Nanda and
that his name was Nehru.”
The boys exchanged glances.
“He was very thirsty. His canvas water bottle was
dry, but he had a store of parched rice and grain,
and some chupatties. A strange story he told me, in
answer to my questioning. A companion had deserted
him on a journey north, and he had blundered into
the Ankai Pass, and so had continued his way. He
would not speak of his privations, but I could see
he had suffered. He wanted to know who I was and
from whence I came. I saw before me a poor blind
man who would probably die on his journey back to
Nanda, so I spoke freely. For months I had been


yearning for attentive ears into which I could pour
my grievances against Gopal Singh. Nehru had a low,
soft, and musical voice. He was not inquisitive, but
he listened and I talked. I invited him to accompany
me to Mumtaz, although I warned him that Naga,
the great python, would come from his lair to greet
him.
“He smiled. ‘I shall not make the acquaintance of
Naga,’ he said, ‘but retrace my steps to Nanda.’
“We both laughed, and then I told him of our
latest visitor, who had not long before arrived at
Mumtaz.
“ ‘What was he like?’ Nehru asked, and I, wishing
to hear no good about this bumptious old wretch,
described him at great length. Nehru gave me an
encouraging smile and, when I had finished speaking,
asked me if I had ever seen Madhu the high priest.
At that question, I knew who the old man was. It
was to him I had handed the parcel of thirty
diamonds.
“ ‘Yes, the visitor to Mumtaz is Madhu the high
priest,’ I said.
“ ‘Would you swear it was the high priest?’ Nehru
asked. And I declared I was ready to take an oath
upon the Koran that it was he and no other.
“The blind man rose to go, and I hastened to his
side. He turned towards the desolation of the wilder-
ness, and with that long and dreadful journey to
Ankai before him, he still had the heart to smile.
“ ‘You are right,’ he said. ‘lt must be Madhu, for
you could not so accurately have described him.


It was Madhu either in the flesh or in the spirit. Are
you sure it was not his ghost?’
“I laughed, remembering how often I had had to
support him in his weakness. I assured Nehru he was
no spirit.
“ ‘Strange things happen in this world,’ said Nehru.
‘Now lead me into the centre of the valley and set my
face in the right direction. While we walk I shall
tell you something.’
“So he told me of the death of Bulwant Rao and
how Madhu had died on the day of the Maharajah’s
cremation, and also of the mysterious disappearance
of the beautiful red diamond known throughout
Hindustan as the All-seeing Eye.
“I was puzzled, and asked Nehru if he was sure of
his facts.
“He halted, and turned his sightless eyes to mine.
‘Mahmud,’ he said, ‘you and I may not meet again.
I go a long way, with no one to guide me, through
the boulders and the pitiless heat. But I tell you that
Madhu is believed to be dead, and yet you have
spoken with him. Strange, is it not? Would you do
me a service,’ he asked, ‘for a great and substantial
reward, and if you need it, an honourable position
in the State of Nanda?’
“Bold words for a beggar, I thought, although I had
never met a beggar who had impressed me so much,
so I bade him tell me his desire.
“ ‘That priest is Madhu, and for proof, he has con-
cealed on his person the All-seeing Eye. Take it from
him and come direct to Nanda, and ask for me at the


home of Lustrelie Sahib the British resident. Is that
clear?’
“I promised, and went a little distance with him. He
salaamed at parting, and with great courage moved
steadily on his way. How good Allah is to children
and the blind! I knew that since Allah had brought
him to me without danger, I could petition him with
a trusting heart to lead him safely back to Nanda.
With my face turned towards Mecca, I prayed that
it should be so.
“I puzzled my poor head until Ganpat relieved
me, when I returned to Mumtaz and reported to
Gopal Singh. Agreeable to my own plans, I had to
tell Gopal of my meeting with Nehru and of the
great news he had given me.
“ ‘And so,’ said Gopal with an evil leer, “my visitor
is not a man but a spirit.’ And he laughed so loudly
that he woke the echoes.
“When I repeated the story of the All-seeing Eye
Gopal looked serious, and then across his cruel face
came a look of greed and hate, which he made no
attempt to disguise.
“ ‘A wonderful gem like that is of no value to a
spirit. What think you Mahmud?’
“I replied that everything existed in the spirit world,
and he laughed once more in great humour, slapped
me on the back and told me to tell that ghost story
to my grandchild when I had one.”
Mahmud paused. “Have you a bheri?” he inquired,
and Lakhsman passed him one. He lit it and inhaled
deeply. At the smell of tobacco in the sweet night


air Ganpat and Chimar, talking as animatedly as two
children, halted and begged for a smoke.
The valley was closing in, and to the east a bleak
and barren mountain range looked loftier and more
forbidding with every step. Mahmud, enjoying his
smoke, broke the silence by observing, “Mumtaz is
over there,” and pointed.
“Did you see the high priest again?” Lakhsman
asked.
“Yes, only for a few minutes,” Mahmud replied,
tossing the end of his smoke away. “When you get
to Mumtaz you will see no sign whatever of human
habitation. If you arrive undetected you might see
Gopal with his wife, possibly taking the air in the
cool of the evening on the great ledge of rock inside
the Pass. You may even see him riding a bicycle to
and fro on the ledge in an effort to reduce his great
paunch. A sentry always stands on duty to report
at once if an unheralded stranger approaches. I dis-
liked this duty, especially during the day, when there
was little protection from the sun. One evening just
after sunset, thinking Gopal had returned to his eyrie,
I took a little walk to stretch my legs, and to my sur-
prise heard Gopal Singh and iMadhu talking angrily.
They were speaking of the red diamond, for I heard
Gopal ask where it was.
“ ‘I shall not deny that I possess it,’ Madhu said.
‘lt was entrusted to me, and I shall keep it till the
rightful heir to the throne is found. How dare you
demand to see it, you insolent dog!’
“I shrank against the cliff, listening intently. Gopal


had moved out of my line of vision, but I could see
Madhu’s face contorted with exasperation and fury.
Gopal gave an annoying laugh and asked, ‘ls it a real
diamond or a spirit diamond?’ and Madhu replied,
‘Are you mad? What do you mean?’ Then Gopal
gave a great guffaw and said, ‘Because you, too, are a
ghost, Madhu. I heard only a few days ago of your
death, and how the people of Nanda bemoan the loss
of their high priest.’
“I don’t know what happened next, but I heard the
sound of struggling and much cursing under breath
and, thinking it time to interpose, I rushed out to
separate them. Gopal caught the slim and withered
body of Madhu in his arms and, walking slowly and
deliberately to the edge of the precipice, hurled him
into the deep pit. I heard the body crash on the
rocks a hundred and fifty feet below, and the dribble
of earth and loose rock which followed. Gopal stood
for a minute looking down, and then turned and
saw me.
“ ‘Why weren’t you here sooner?’ he said. ‘My
visitor who has been acting strangely all day, threw
himself over the cliff just now.’
“I do not know whether I was light-headed or
light-hearted, because I said, ‘lt’s a pity he will not
give the crocodile a full meal.’ And then we both
laughed. Gopal roared with merriment and whacked
me on the back, and then rubbed his fat paunch with
glee. Since that day neither he nor I have referred to
Madhu again. Like a ghost he simply vanished.”


“And what became of the All-seeing Eye?” Lakhs-
man asked eagerly.
Mahmud shrugged his shoulders. “In the crocodile’s
pool, perhaps. If Madhu took it with him, it will be
safe there. The crocodile is very hungry, and I
wouldn’t go down to search for it even if I were sure
of finding it.”
He turned to Lakhsman and saluted. “Do not be
faint-hearted. Ganpat has whispered something to
me that gives a clue to your mission here. He may
be right or he may be wrong, but I ask you to accept
us both as your loyal supporters. Perhaps, with our
help, you may find the red diamond. I don’t know
for certain, but I do think when Madhu fell to his
death he took the wonderful gem with him.”


CHAPTER XVII
The raid on the Mahratta village of Nangaum at the
back of Dalziel caused a tremendous sensation in
Nanda. Not for many years had there been an out-
break of dacoity or any organized lawlessness in the
State. Only greybeards remembered the exciting days
of Sanoji, who had once sacked Nanda and continued
his depredations despite every attempt to capture him.
The village fortifications had fallen into disrepair.
They had been needed when the Pindaris harried
the country, but banditry had been shorn of all its
glamour and romance by the practical British. People
slept soundly and peacefully under the raj.
The death of Ambaji shocked the populace, by
whom he was regarded as a holy man of high family,
with a distinguished career and, so far as they knew,
without enemies. Lustrelle heard the news at day-
break, and called for a full report. A tense situation
had arisen. The city streets were congested with
people who swarmed into the capital by every road
and path. The peasantry, sensitive to every new
development, became conscious that the outrage was
not so much the murder of a revered man, as a politi-
cal crisis to which they must respond immediately,
according to their political views. Since Cantwell’s


departure from Nanda the situation had deteriorated.
The prime minister was becoming more arrogant and
insolent. There were meetings and whisperings in the
palace, in Government circles, among nobles and com-
mercial magnates. The period of conspiracy and
intrigue had reached the stage at which a show-down
was needed.
Nanda without a ruler was fast disintegrating. The
rival factions had either to settle their differences
amicably or to fight them out.
Lustrelle had heard from Cantwell and also from
Riverstone, working in different parts of the State.
Each reported a determined effort, by lies and false
propaganda, to enlist sympathy for the pretender
Balkrishna. Cantwell predicted an early crisis, and
thought their enemies were gaining ground, where-
upon the resident sent an SOS for their immediate
return to the capital.
After breakfast, the resident shut himself in his
office and interviewed the stream of callers. He had
expected a ring or some kind of message from the
prime minister, who, however, kept ominously silent.
Reports from reliable sources established that the
raid on the village had been a half-hearted affair,
somewhat in the nature of a search for some person
who had apparently escaped. Several peasants had
been slightly wounded and a few minor thefts had
taken place, but otherwise, beyond the murder of
Ambaji, nothing serious had happened.
Now, to the resident’s surprise and relief, Cantwell
was announced. Lustrelle welcomed him with un-


usual warmth. Always, in moments of crisis, Cantwell
seemed to be on tap. Here he was, bronzed, but calm
and collected, cool and smart in his white uniform.
“Well,” Cantwell remarked, “it looks as though
the first shot has been fired. I’m glad I came to head-
quarters. I was beginning to feel rather anxious about
Barry, for no particular reason. You know he’s left
home?”
“Yes,” said Lustrelle.
“At first I thought he’d been abducted, but when I
looked into my arms-room and saw that my best
Winchester, my expensive Greener and two revolvers
were missing, I knew he’d taken the initiative.”
Lustrelle touched a bell. “Nehru is here. He’s been
waiting for some time to see me. Between us, we ought
to tell you what’s become of Barry and Lakhsman.
A peon came to the door.
“Send Nehru in, Rama,” he directed. “And see
that I’m not disturbed.”
Nehru came into the office through a private door,
and made a deep salaam. He tapped his way forward
with his staff, his eyes stony, his face wearing the
pathetically patient expression of the blind.
“Just Cantwell Sahib here, Nehru,” said Lustrelle,
and Nehru’s head turned and surveyed the room.
Like a man transformed, he placed his staff in a comer,
drew up a chair and instantly was a man of action.
“What’s the latest news?” Cantwell asked.
“There’s no doubt the raid was organized by the
prime minister and his rascally chief of police,” said
Nehru in cultured English. “The dacoits were sepoys


in disguise. Their object was to capture Lakhsman,
but”—he turned to Lustrelle—“we got him away in
time, didn’t we?”
“Barry went with him, of course?” Cantwell
inquired.
“Yes. A good bullock cart well equipped, and a
great adventure ahead. What more do spirited youths
need?” said Nehru. “They went away in great fettle
and in high glee. And what’s more,” Nehru continued,
rubbing his hands, “no one in Nanda knows where
they are.”
“Perhaps you’ll tell me,” said Cantwell.
“They went north to Ankai.”
“Where the notorious man-eater can dispose of
them?”
“It will be bad for the man-eater if he attempts to
make a meal of those bright blades,” Nehru replied,
and rubbed his hands again.
“You didn’t exactly send them to a health resort,”
Cantwell commented. “Are you sure they’re not
going beyond Ankai?”
“Who can say what they will do,” Nehru replied
a little limply.
“Nehru, you’re not as frank as usual. I have an
idea those boys have gone farther. Mumtaz has always
been somewhat of a magnet to Barry. Did they go
beyond Ankai?”
“They started off with the idea of reaching Mum-
taz,” said Nehru, a trifle disconcerted.
Cantwell sat bolt upright. He remembered his
journey in that terrible wilderness, and how he had


almost perished with heat and thirst. A bullock cart,
driven by two irresponsible youths not caring what
was beyond, would not penetrate far. Even if they
managed to reach Alumtaz, he doubted that they
would find their way back. It was easy to get lost in
that desolation of rocks and boulders and radiating
valleys. A vision of his son staggering along, weak
and exhausted, searching for a water-hole to cool his
swollen tongue, made him wince.
“Was there no other place they could have gone
for a short while?” he said. “A little village in the
mountains would have made a safe retreat.”
“I sent them to Mumtaz,” Nehru said deliberately,
“because it is Lakhsman’s destiny to go there.”
“Indeed,” said Cantwell, somewhat sarcastically.
“And who discovered that?”
“A sadhu who has made several accurate pro-
phecies about him,” Nehru replied more boldly.
“There are thousands of sadhus in Hindustan, all
making prophecies and looking into the future. Have
you believed every tale they’ve told you?”
“No, sahib. But throughout the countryside, one
and all have listened with awe and respect to
Budhoo.”
“Well, I grant you he’s got a great reputation,”
Cantwell acknowledged rather grudgingly.
“Yes, and remember, too, that he recognizes Lakhs-
man as the legitimate heir, and is preparing the people
for the advent of their young prince.”
“Did he say anything about Balkrishna who’s mak-
ing so much trouble?” Lustrellc interjected.


“Yes, he will splutter out like a squib. He had no
fear of that,” said Nehru.
“Wherever Riverstone and I have been,” said Cant-
well, “it seems certain the majority of the people
would flock to the banner of Balkrishna. Look here,
Lustrelle, we’ve got to tackle this problem in a prac-
tical way. No one denies the wonderful work Nehru
has done and is doing for the cause, but isn’t he some-
thing of a visionary?”
“We need visionaries sometimes, Cantwell,” said
Lustrelle, biting off the end of his cheroot and
lighting it.
During this passage between Cantwell and Nehru
he had listened with an amiable and expansive smile.
He regarded them as the most trustworthy friends
he had made in India, and he knew each had a strong
regard for the other.
“Well, I admit getting hunches myself,” Cantwell
rejoined. “But a hunch that sends the heir apparent
and my son to Mumtaz—what will they do when they
get there?”
“Budhoo prophesied that it is there Lakhsman will
recover the All-seeing Eye,” Nehru explained simply.
“The All-seeing Eye may originally have come
from Mumtaz, but to suggest that it will be found
there, when it might have been hidden in millions of
better and more accessible places in this State, is
merely bunkum.”
“Madhu the high priest took refuge in Mumtaz,”
Nehru observed.


“What?” Cantwell exclaimed, rising excitedly from
his chair.
“Sit down, sahib, and don’t raise your voice. The
high priest arrived at Mumtaz shortly after his death.”
“You mean in the flesh and not the spirit?” said
Cantwell.
“In the flesh,” Nehru declared emphatically. “He
made the journey safely, too.”
“Who told you this?” said Cantwell.
“I went to Alumtaz soon after he arrived, or to be
more correct, reached a point close by where I met
a retainer of Gopal Singh. He told me of the arrival
of the elderly and rather frail traveller whom they had
picked up in the wilderness. Gopal had heard that a
distinguished visitor was coming, and had sent some
men out to escort him. I have no doubts about that
visitor being the proud and arrogant high priest.”
“You never mentioned this before,” said Cantwell
in an aggrieved tone.
“No, sahib. I had my reasons. When several brains
are working on a problem it is best to let each investi-
gate independently. You see, until quite lately you
believed that the high priest was dead and well and
truly cremated.”
“But why do you think he took the All-seeing Eye
to Mumtaz?” asked Cantwell.
“Do you think he would entrust it to any one
else?”
“And so you think the gem is still there?” said
Cantwell.


“Yes. I even made certain plans to get possession
of it, but these appear to have been unsuccessful.”
“Isn’t a great deal we hear about Mumtaz just
nonsense?” Cantwell asked.
“No,” said Lustrelle, “It is a diamond-producing
centre and nominally belongs to the Maharajah,
though what revenue he got out of it after a few State
officials had their pickings I don’t know.”
Lustrelle, who seemed particularly well-informed
about the mysterious coterie which controlled the
wealth of Mumtaz, explained how the diamond field
was mixed up with the fight for supremacy in which
they were now vitally interested.
“You see, Cantwell, the prime minister is more
concerned about keeping his sticky fingers on
Mumtaz than in finding a rightful heir to the throne.
If he is successful in installing his puppet Balkrishna,
he will practically control Mumtaz. If we succeed
with Lakhsman, Sir Ramchandra will have to be
content with his present possessions. He certainly
won’t have the opportunity of adding to them.”
That is the position precisely,” Nehru endorsed.
“Let all that be as it may,” said Cantwell. “It does
not alter the fact that Lakhsman and my boy, if alive,
are in great peril. Something has to be done to bring
them back to safety, and at once.”
“Don’t get panicky, my friend,” said Lustrelle with
a quiet smile. I, also, think we ought to do something
at once. Riverstone will be here before noon. Why
not let him go with a strong rescue party of say five
or six well armed men? You can go too,'if you'wish,


but I’d like to have you near me for the next few
days.”
'__ _ . i
“Very well, let Riverstone go,” Cantwell agreed.
“Nehru, will you make the arrangements? The
party will be mounted, with pack-horses for pro-
visions and baggage. You know whom to select. The
expedition should start off before midnight.”
Nehru stood up and bowed. “All will be ready as
you desire. It is well, Lustrelle Sahib.”
“It is well,” came the reply. “The necessary funds
will be made available to you.”
Nehru walked smartly to the comer and picked
up his staff and, without another word, turned
towards the door. His eyes resumed their fixed stony
stare, and an expression of calm patience and resigna-
tion crept into his face.
Tap, tap. From the silence of that little office a
blind man groped his way out into the sunshine.
Lustrelle turned his attention to various reports
that had just come in. One dealt with the attack on
the village. He read, reread it, then tossed it over to
Cantwell.
“I don’t think there’s much doubt about the prime
minister’s being mixed up in this business. It was a
deliberate attempt either to capture or assassinate
Lakhsman. Had it not been for Nehru, who pestered
me until I agreed to the boys going away, it might
have succeeded.”
He picked up his receiver and rang the prime
minister. A voice replied that he was not in.


“The resident is calling. I must contact him im-
mediately.” Lustrelle said sharply, and hung up.
“Sir Ramchandra will avoid me for a day or two,”
he remarked. Several minutes later the telephone rang
and the prime minister spoke.
“You rang me?” he inquired in a cold, toneless
voice.
“Yes,” said Lustrelle. “I want you to come down
and see me.”
“That is quite impossible, my dear fellow,” Sir
Ramchandra replied. “I’ve many important things
to attend to this morning.”
“I want to see you at once,” Lustrelle insisted
doggedly.
“Well, why not come round here if you’re in such
a terrible hurry?”
“You’re trying to be obstructive,” the resident
replied. “I shall expect you here in ten minutes.” And
he hung up. “The prime minister is adopting a
decidedly insolent tone,” he said, leaning back in his
chair, his flushed face paling a little. “I don’t want to
be drastic, but the Government knows that a crisis
is approaching. A ring from me, and a regiment will
be on its way to this capital. I think the viceroy’s
patience is about exhausted.”
“Ramchandra’s been very difficult since Bulwant
Rao died,” said Cantwell. “He’s been allowed to get
away with too much.”
Lustrelle flushed, “I don’t think that’s quite fair.
I’ve been firm enough. It’s the Government that’s
temporized, hoping the position would clear up in


a normal sort of way. I think I’ve convinced them
that Lakhsman is not only the rightful heir, but that
he’s acceptable to the majority of the people.”
They argued as two friends do who speak straightly
and candidly and take no offence. To these sane and
experienced Englishmen it seemed absurd that the
position should have drifted out of control. That it
should have been affected by a missing gem was too
ridiculous for words, but both remembered that they
were living in India, among a credulous and super-
stitious people anchored to tradition who, moreover,
believed in soothsayers, charms and talismans, and
never entered upon any venture without first con-
sulting an astrologer.
Budhoo’s prophecy concerning Lakhsman’s per-
sonal recovery of the All-seeing Eye, intrigued them.
The holy man had been right about the boy in
several instances, and it was probable that he might
be correct again. Cantwell found himself deriving
considerable comfort from that prediction. If Lakhs-
man recovered the gem and reached safety, Barry
would have a good chance of coming through safely
too.
When the prime minister was announced Cantwell
slipped out by a side door, and Sir Ramchandra was
ushered in.
The prime minister rode up on his famous grey
stallion. He looked well groomed, in a light brown
lounge suit and a white pagri. In his hand he gripped
a formidable hunting crop, and as he marched into
the resident’s office his attitude was almost menacing.


“Morning, Lustrelle,” he blustered, ignoring a
request to be seated, and pacing the office. “What’s
all the excitement about this morning? You’re very
urgent, aren’t you?”
“Just cut out that bluff,” Lustrelle said coolly, “and
come down to earth. You know why I sent for you?”
“Not the faintest idea in the world, my dear chap.
Anxious for me to arrange another shooting trip?”
Lustrelle walked up to his visitor and looked him
narrowly between the eyes. “So you fired the first
shot, eh?”
“I don’t understand you.”
“You know why I sent for you.”
“Then why talk in enigmas?”
“Very well, on this occasion I shall forget we are
diplomats. You heard of the attack on the village and
the death of Ambaji?”
“Yes,” Sir Ramchandra replied. “I did hear a small
party of dacoits had committed a few outrages. I’ve
called for a report and taken steps to apprehend the
law-breakers.”
“Has the chief of police reported to you yet?”
“No, but inquiries are progressing. Surely, Lus-
trelle you haven’t disturbed a very busy morning for
me to discuss a minor affair like that?”
“Still bluffing, eh? The murderous assault on that
village and the death of Ambaji have such tremendous
significance that I have decided to take immediate
action.”
The prime minister laughed. “Adding to your


foolish correspondence for the past two years? How
you English love to dramatize every situation! Look
here, Lustrelle, don’t let us continue a very futile
discussion about a matter we’ve already touched upon.
I have reason to believe the viceroy is bored to death
with your suspicions and your extraordinary com-
ments about the administration of this State.”
“And why not add,” said Lustrelle, “with my
views on a successor to the throne, vacant overlong?”
“I intended adding that,” Sir Ramchandra said
rudely.
“You are candidly insolent,” said Lustrelle, “but
don’t think your ruthless tactics have any chance of
succeeding. I shall hold you personally responsible
for last night’s outrage. It is not a minor affair as you
describe it. Already it has shaken the State and re-
leased forces difficult to control. Remember, you are
prime minister and Nanda is an independent State
by the grace of His Majesty’s Brittanic Government.”
Sir Ramchandra, speechless with anger, turned
rudely away and, swinging the door open, tramped
boisterously out. Lustrelle returned to his table and
J
drummed idly on the top while he waited for
Cantwell.
Cantwell, at a glance, knew that Lustrelle had been
outspoken. The tense atmosphere indicated as much.
Quickly he seated himself opposite the resident and
waited for him to speak.
“I’ve told the prime minister that I hold him
responsible for the outrage. We’ve had a little straight


talk. After to-day, things will happen. Lakhsman must
be presented as the legitimate heir to the throne as
soon as possible, and then we must see that Balkrishna
is harried out of the State or rendered innocuous.
We’ll ask the Government for assistance if the situa-
tion gets out of control. In the meantime, we’ll
concentrate on getting Lakhsman back.”


CHAPTER XVIII
An hour before sunrise, Mahmud called a halt, and
the party immediately proceeded to take cover behind
a rocky knoll almost directly in line with the Pass.
The ponies were tethered and attended to, and Barry
called the party together for a council of war.
A strange group sat in a circle in the half-light,
weary and heavy-lidded, but keyed up with the
thought that their long and tiresome journey was
over and that they would soon be facing the final
stages of their perilous enterprise. Mahmud stated
that he was not certain whether Gopal Singh, his
wife and personal servant were the only occupants
of the Mumtaz stronghold, or if a small caravan
of camels, which regularly conveyed provisions and
equipment across the desert behind Mumtaz, had
arrived and the drivers were being held by Gopal
for protection until the Lai brothers and himself
returned. The first thing to do, he said, would
be to capture Gopal, which, if they followed his
plan, should be a simple matter. They would wait
until dusk, when he would lead the party to the Pass.
While they took cover in convenient positions he
would go inside, and announce his arrival in the
usual way by firing a rifle shot. Gopal would then


THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL 17
descend the cliff to the ledge with the aid of a rope
ladder, to receive him and hear the news. While Barry
and the Bhil gagged Gopal, he and Lakhsman would
climb the ladder and take control of the only means
of reaching Gopaks stronghold. It was not very clear
where Gopaks eyrie was, but Mahmud said he could
more easily explain matters on the spot.
Barry and Lakhsman, in the morning light, looked
towards Mumtaz, their hearts beating fast. They were
about a mile from the Pass and at the base of the
mountain range, which resembled a great petrified
breaker poised in challenge and defiance. The scarp
was smooth and devoid of vegetation. In the morning
sun the great precipices gleamed like brass about to
melt, shot through with the red, mauve and purple of
escaping fumes. Shadows, like the vapours of heat,
flickered across the face of the cliffs. One could
almost feel the burning radiations, suggested by the
variegated tints which became accentuated as the sun
mounted in the heavens.
A path threaded its way through rocky debris and
fell steadily downward to the ledge which gave access
to the Pass. It was a narrow opening, not more than
thirty yards across, and peculiar inasmuch as it was
the only visible break in the monotony of the moun-
tain rampart. At their present distance from it, it was
difficult to imagine that it gave access to an enclosed
valley. However, there was little use in speculating
when a few hours more would satisfy them
completely.
The boys, somewhat nervous and tense, said little,


but their minds were active, trying to forecast what
Mumtaz held in store for them. Danger, yes; but
danger had dogged them nearly every foot of the
way. Time after time, in some unaccountable manner,
they had been protected, and help had been provided
when they needed it most. Gopal Singh might give
them opposition, but he was merely incidental to
the purpose of their visit. Since Mahmud’s account
of how Madhu, the high priest, had been flung to
the crocodile, both boys had determined not to leave
Mumtaz until they had thoroughly searched the pit
for the All-seeing Eye.
They discussed Lakhsman’s future frankly and
fully. There was no further need for Barry to pretend
that he knew little or nothing. Instead, they planned
what they could do to bring Lakhsman to the gadhi
with as little delay as possible. A good deal of banter
enlivened these discussions, especially when Barry
envisioned Lakhsman a proud and intolerant despot
forgetful of how he had once run about almost naked,
a mere cowherd. He promised Lakhsman that, if he
did not live up to his expectations of him, he would
come up to the palace and clout him across his stupid
head. Then threats and challenges freely exchanged
would end in a wrestling match until both, too
exhausted for struggle, would find something better
to talk about than thrones and Maharajahs.
The camp slept until about four o’clock. Chimar
stirred first, and the slither of his knife being whetted
on a strip of leather soon roused the others. The Bhil,
calm and collected, eagerly looked forward to meet-


ing Gopal or some potential enemy who would need
to be dealt with swiftly and effectively. Every time
he thought of Mod Lai and his brother Chota Lai
his pulse raced. He had made a neat job of both.
Sometimes his thoughts reverted to his parents and
village, but Chimar looked forward not back. Since
boyhood he had had many experiences in mountain
and jungle, among wild beasts and occasionally among
men, but his present adventure surpassed them all for
high-pressure excitement. Of what they would do in
Mumtaz he was not sure, but if there were any killing
or looting to be done, he was determined to be in
the thick of it. Mahmud and Ganpat were decent
enough and quite likeable in their way, but he trusted
neither of them wholly. He was still convinced that
men who could be disloyal to one master could be
disloyal to another.
Preparations for an advance on Mumtaz were
leisurely made. Ganpat was ordered to take charge
of the ponies, and Chimar was detailed to help him.
This created such a scene that the Bhil was moved up
to the “front line”, as Barry described it. At sunset
the cavalcade moved off. Almost immediately, the air
began to feel chilly. By nightfall they were within a
stone’s throw of the Pass. Here Ganpat detached
himself, and the rest of the party as stealthily as
possible pushed on. Mahmud impressed upon them
that they were not to shoot Gopal unless it was neces-
sary, as he possessed much knowledge of value to
them.
They reached the ledge in single file. Barry and


Lakhsman took up their position on the right and
Chimar moved up on the left, obviously intent on
keeping Mahmud in view. He had his rifle at the
ready. The least indication of treachery and that
would be the end of Mahmud, and the Moslem knew
Mahmud swung round the comer and into the
open with a steady, matter-of-fact stride. The slither
of his sandals was sent hissing back by the echoes of
the beetling cliffs. Then the valley, ghostly and silent,
woke with a rifle crack and rumbled in protest. Barry
held his breath. He appeared to be standing in a well
of darkness. It seemed sacrilegious to disturb the
awesome quiet of these desolate regions where
creation had sought to typify chaos. Lakhsman
shivered a little. His superstitious mind waited for
the spirits who dwell in such fastnesses to shriek and
wail so terrifyingly that, stricken with terror, they
would have to bolt for safety. While the reverbera-
tions were still in progress, a great bellowing voice
shouted from the cliff above.
“Is that you, Chota Lai?” Gopal asked.
“No, huzoor. It is I, Mahmud. I come on ahead at
Chota Lai’s bidding. They will be here in half an
hour or so.”
“Is all well, Mahmud?” Gopal asked.
“Yes, but there is great news for you. But I shall
wait till Chota Lai tells thee.”
“No,” said Gopal impatiently, “I shall hear it at
once.” And thereupon, a rope ladder with timber
rungs rattled down, flung from an aperture above.


Presently they heard the heavy breathing of a stout
man making the descent.
Gopal straightened his shoulders and took a deep
breath as he faced Mahmud. He wore a billowy dhoti,
and the sacred cord over his left shoulder, and nothing
else.
“Well, Mahmud bamta,” he exclaimed, his mouth
full of pahn, “what is the news? Can’t you see I’m in
a hurry?”
“Walk down a little way and we’ll see how far
Chota Lai is,” Mahmud suggested. But Gopal, always
suspicious, eyed his retainer sharply.
“Soor!” he exclaimed. “Who art thou to order me
to come or go?”
Mahmud poked the barrel of his rifle into Gopal’s
pudgy back. “Go when I say go or I’ll shoot you
like a jackal.”
At that moment the others emerged and Gopal, too
terrified to resist, was effectively gagged while Mah-
mud and Chimar scaled up the ladder. In a few
minutes Muhmud hailed them.
“I’m leaving Chimar up here and coming down.
No one is here but Gopal’s wife and his servant, and
we’ve secured both of them.”
He almost slid down the ladder in his haste, and
proceeded to remove Gopal’s gag.
“Thou canst see, thou fat pig, that I no longer am
thy servant. Be it known that Chota Lai is dead and
so is Mod Lai, and only by the mercy of Allah am
I alive. And only by the mercy of one of thy many
gods wilt thou live unless thou doest as thou art


bidden. First, the truth. And remember, if thou liest
thou wilt assuredly die.”
“What is it you wish to know?” Gopal said.
“When does the next caravan arrive?”
“I do not know. It may be here at any time
“Is any one here but yourself, Shamsa your wife,
and Baloo your servant?”
“No.”
“Very well,” said Mahmud. “Now we’ll go up-
stairs.”
They climbed up the ladder and over a sort of
parapet about two feet high, and descended a flight
of twelve steps which brought them to a subterranean
gallery or cavern. A little oil lamp on a ledge gave a
faint glow, and within its circle of light a man and a
woman crouched in fear. Before them Chimar
squatted, holding his sharp knife loosely in his right
hand. Till they became accustomed to the gloom all
they could distinguish of Chimar was his eyes and
teeth, and his polished blade.
As the party advanced—Gopal leading, Mahmud,
Lakhsman and Barry following—Shamsa rose and,
with short mincing steps, hurried towards them.
“Gopal, Gopal,” she wailed, “where hast thou
been? See, these pigs and sons of pigs have thrust me
back and forth, bound my wrists, and threatened to
slit my throat if I do not hold my tongue. Didst thou
send up this scum, or what devilry is afoot? Don’t
stand blinking at me like an owl in daylight, but
order these budmashes out of my house.”
During this harangue they noticed the air was


sweet and cool. When the voices subsided, they heard
the prattle of a little stream. Gopal lit a hanging lamp
with a trembling hand, and made vain efforts to
quieten his angry and spluttering wife.
“If thou lackest courage to drive these shaitans
away, I don’t,” Shamsa yelled with rising wrath.
With her bare and shapely small foot she kicked
a copper cooking pot with the precision of a foot-
baller, and it struck Chimar full on the chest.
Chimar rose and, looking at Barry, asked casually,
“Shall I slit her throat, sahib?”
“No,” Barry laughed. “She’s just behaving like a
clown in a circus. Leave her to me.”
“Now, buddhee,” he said to Shamsa, kindly, “please
be quiet. No harm will come to you or your husband
provided he does as he is told, and tells the truth.
When you promise to behave yourself we shall
release your hands.”
Gopal’s underground apartment was simply furn-
ished. A table and two chairs and a few odds and
ends constituted a reception-room. The only enclosed
rooms, separated by rubble walls, were the kitchen
with a couple of stone and clay fireplaces and an
assortment of copper cooking pots and pans, and the
sleeping room which contained two rope charpoys
and a couple of teak chests. Another little room was
used as a larder and storehouse.
Gopal squatted on the floor puzzled, anxious, but
furious. Every time he looked at the traitorous Mah-
mud he wanted to commit murder. The invasion of
his home by this medley of humanity, among whom


was an untouchable—the Bhil—was an outrage, and
violated all the principles of a high-caste Brahmin.
Feebly he voiced a protest, addressing his remarks
to Lakhsman.
“Please remind these people who I am. Tell them
to stop defiling my wife, my home and myself, for
I am as you know from the caste mark on my fore-
head, a Brahmin of the Brahmins.”
“I am sorry,” said Lakhsman. “This is war.”
“War?” Gopel exclaimed with apprehension.
“Then it has started?”
Lakhsman nodded. “Did you expect it?”
“Yes, any day now. Come you under the banner
of Balkrishna?”
“No, under the banner of Lakhsman Sanoji, the
rightful heir to the gadhi.” Lakhsman stood under
the hanging light, so that his features were sharp and
distinct. “Hur! Hur; Mahadeo!” he cried, giving the
battle cry of the Mahrattas. “Up with the banner of
Lakhsman Sanoji! Look, Gopal Singh—look closely
into my face, for I am he!”
The Brahmin rose to his feet and, his eyes starting
with amazement, approached the young Mahratta.
And as he looked, terror crept into his eyes. Yes,
there could be no doubt about that lad’s parenthood.
On two occasions he had been face to face with San-
oji. The nose, the cleft chin, the calm fearless eyes
were replicated in his son.
Gopal threw himself at Lakhsman’s feet. “Maha-
rajah,” he exclaimed, “do your will!”
“Get up,” Lakhsman ordered; and the grovelling


man rose to his feet. “Tell me who told thee the war
had begun.”
“The prime minister,” was the quavering reply.
“How came the news, and when?”
“Yesterday by carrier pigeon.”
“Where is the letter?”
“I destroyed it, but I can remember the contents.
He said they had struck the first blow, but that you
had escaped. Your village was raided, and Ambaji
was slain. The country is in a ferment, and many
fighting men are trooping into the capital.”
“So they killed dear old Ambaji,” said Lakhsman
bitterly. “He was more than a father to me. Barry,
we must not waste time here. We must get back to
Nanda. Chimar, tell Ganpat to bring the ponies closer
so that we can start back at any moment.”
There was silence for a minute, during which
Chimar slipped away. Mahmud watched Lakhsman
steadily, admiration in his eyes. This lad had fighting
blood in his veins. As for himself, he had made his
resolution. He would follow Lakhsman to the death.
Tears started in the boy’s eyes, but he brushed
them away and was his father’s son again. “When
did you last send a package to Nanda?” he asked.
“A month ago,” Gopal replied. “The gems were
sent to the prime minister. That has been the proce-
dure since Madhu the high priest died.”
“Who killed him?” Lakhsman demanded.
“Did he not die in Nanda, and was he not cremated
there?”


“Don’t quibble and lie. You know different. He
was killed here.”
“No, huzoor. He was not killed. There was an
accident. He fell over the cliff near by.”
“I do not believe you,” said Lakhsman. “You mur-
dered him, just as you attempted to murder us. How
many men have you ordered to be done to death
since you have been in control of Adumtaz?”
“None that I know of. They died mostly of thirst.”
“We shall learn more about that when the time for
your trial comes. Have you any diamonds on hand
now?”
“Yes,” Gopal replied readily. He went to the store-
room and extracted a little soft leather bag, “They
are all there.”
“I think he tells the truth this time,” interjected
Mahmud.
Lakhsman opened the bag and poured at least a
dozen good stones and a number of smaller ones on
the table. “How much would these be worth?” he
asked.
“Thousands of rupees,” Gopal replied indefinitely.
“Last month we did better.”
“Is there any food here?”
“Yes. Mahmud should know. He will show you
where it is stored.”
“You may retire,” said Lakhsman. “And keep to
your room.”
Gopal salaamed. His pendulous cheeks and double
chin wobbled as he walked over to his wife. “Will


you order that her wrists be untied?” he begged
humbly.
Shamsa still had the light of battle in her eye. Her
cream sari had fallen from her head, exposing the line
of baldness where her blue-black hair had literally
been dragged from the roots to draw it closely and
neatly to the scalp. Her pahn-reddened teeth and lips
gave her a slightly ferocious appearance. Thin and
withered-looking, she still possessed amazing vitality
and courage.
She looked boldly up at Lakhsman. “So we have
a prince as a guest. Then there is no need for a woman
to be afraid,” she said, and shuffled towards her sleep-
ing apartment.


CHAPTER XIX
Barry was astir before daybreak, and wakened the
others. The news from Nanda made it imperative to
hasten their plans so that they would return without
delay. Taking Mahmud’s advice, they decided not to
bind Gopal and his wife, but merely to confine them
to their rooms. Chimar was placed on guard with
orders not to let them out of his sight. Baloo, Gopal’s
servant, a meek, subservient and miserable-looking
man, abjectly placed himself under the orders of
Barry.
Mahmud led the way to explore the cavern with
the aid of a couple of hurricane lamps. A little shallow
stream of ice-cool water musically purled away to the
right. The underground passage, about ten feet in
width and eight in height, like a catacomb, ran
parallel with the cliff face overlooking the ravine,
and then took a sharp turn and penetrated to the
other side of the mountain. From this bend, the pas-
sage became progressively lower and narrower, until
a man had to stoop to the waist to get through.
The sides of the cavern were rough and uneven.
It was extremely dark, and bats, disturbed by the
light, fluttered about, colliding with the men as they
advanced. A damp, slightly musty but not unpleasant


odour pervaded the air, which at all times was fresh
and cool. The stream apparently had changed its
course during the centuries. Perhaps in the cataclysm
which had thrown up that gigantic rampart of rock,
a vein or stratum of soft rock or limestone had been
enclosed, and the underground stream, following the
direction of least resistance, had gradually worn it
away. In some past age, the approach to Mumtaz had
been a whirling watershed.
On their way, Mahmud drew attention to several
short tunnels which had been excavated from the
gallery to the face of the cliff. The first one, at a
point where the gallery made the curve, was the
longest, but it gave a splendid view of the ravine
beneath.
The sun had risen as the party leant against the
masonry parapet and surveyed the grandeur of the
scene. After the coolness of the interior, the air
smote them like the breath of a furnace. The sky
was changing rapidly from a pallid blue to the hue
of brass. They looked towards the Pass. The ledge,
almost as smooth as a road, fell away abruptly to the
abyss below. It looked not so much like a ravine as
like a great tip into which fragments of rock were
being thrown. Except below the ledge where a thin
waterfall trickled, there was no sign of vegetation.
No life, however low in form, could apparently exist
in that inferno of heat. As the day progressed, the
rocks became too hot to touch.
Above all, there was a silence so deep and unbroken
that the sound of their voices did not disturb but


were merely super-imposed upon it. There was no
negotiable entrance or exit to that fearful valley.
Mahmud said that djinns and all manner of evil spirits
dwelt there with writhing masses of cobras and other
varieties of poisonous snakes. Gopal once proposed
that Mahmud should be lowered to the bottom to
prove or disprove the stories about the snakes, but
he received such little encouragement that he never
repeated the suggestion.
To the left of the ledge, a short length of cliff fell
sheer into a small pool whose placid surface shone
in the morning light like molten lead. It acted as a
basin to a little stream which bubbled into it from
a height of two or three feet. This pit was only a
fraction of the depth of the ravine.
“There’s an old crocodile down there that’s many
years old,’’ said Mahmud. “Gopal feeds it regularly,
but it’s usually ravenous with hunger.” He laughed.
“The best meal it had had for a long time was the
day Gopal pushed Madhu over the cliff.”
The pool’s overflow fell in a thin and almost
invisible waterfall into the great ravine below. The
mountain opposite was very similar in character to
the one upon which they clung. Its precipitous cliffs
with varying tints had the dull gleam of cooling
metal.
“Down below—yes, straight down—is where we
get the diamonds,” said Mahmud.
“But how do you get them?” Barry asked.
“I’ll show you,” he said. “You remember the story,
in the Arabian Nights, of the merchants who threw


meat into a valley where diamonds were found, and
how the eagles picked up the meat and took it to
their eyries? Sometimes diamonds adhered to the
meat, and the men who climbed to the nests reco\ -
ered them. There is such a valley in southern India
and precious stones are obtained from it in exactly
the same way. It’s very difficult to clamber down,
and the bottom is infested with venomous snakes.
Now, you couldn’t throw meat here with any advan-
tage,” Mahmud continued, “because there are no
eagles. What other than man and evil creatures would
live in this awful place?”
He picked up a glutinous mass almost like rubber
to the touch, but of the consistency of toffee begin-
ning to get soft. To this viscous lump he attached a
tough cotton line coiled on a light windlass. A strong
steel catapult near by was drawn back and “the bait”,
as Mahmud described it, was fixed in place, Mahmud
pressed the trigger and the bait, with the line unravel-
ling behind it, shot out and then fell into the valley.
“It is like deep sea fishing,” Mahmud remarked
with a grin as he began to wind up the line.
It was a long job, but at last the sticky mass was
pulled clear of the parapet and closely examined.
Some pebbles adhered to it, but nothing else. Mah-
mud, having demonstrated how the job was done,
left the gear neat and trim for the next cast.
“There are three apertures in the rock, and from
one, and sometimes from two, casts are being made
from early mom till noon. The heat,” said Mahmud,
“is so terrific and the exertion so exhausting that no


man can work longer than two hours at a stretch.
The Lai brothers, Gopal and I attended to this work
because we were trusted. Chota Lai was the luckiest
of us all, but each of us got a rich prize now and
again.”
On their way back, Mahmud pointed out a recess
in the gallery where stores and equipment were kept,
and suggested that this was really the healthiest
position in which to camp, and one in which they
could, at the same time, be able to keep an eye on
valuable gear and food. It was a short distance from
Gopaks quarters. Barry explained that it was their
intention not to stay an hour longer than neces-
sary. However, they decided to sleep near the store
that night if they were not already on their way
home.
An appetizing smell of food greeted their return
to Gopaks apartment. Shamsa, realizing that the visi-
tors must be very hungry, as they had not eaten the
night before, had prepared a big bowl of rice flav-
oured with a curry of dried prawns. A great pile of
steaming chupatties was stacked beside it, and every
one immediately accepted her advice not to let the
repast get cold. She was particularly attentive to
Lakhsmam but shuffled round the whole party in
great good-humour and with a mothering solicitude.
Gopal, who did not partake of the meal, sat back
with a rather dour and distant expression. He was
seriously considering then, as he had done during a
sleepless night, whether he should switch his loyalty
over to Lakhsman or continue to co-operate with


the prime minister. After all, Balkrishna, with Sir
Ramchandra’s support and that of other powerful
leaders of the community, had more than a fifty-fifty
chance of winning out in the struggle for the gadhi
of Nanda. Sir Ramchandra had been a liberal master
to him, and he in turn had been faithful and reason-
ably honest. No one could dispute the returns of the
winnings from Mumtaz. He had needed to be mod-
erately careful, particularly with the Lai brothers who
had been personally engaged by the prime minister.
At the present time, he missed them both sorely.
He concluded after much thought that he would
be helping the cause in the most effective way, and
ending his own troubles and anxieties for the future,
if Lakhsman disappeared without trace, as quite a
number of people had done since he had taken over
the management. The crocodile had disposed of most
of them, but the bones of others strewed the bottom
of the great ravine, not to speak of those bleached
white which littered the wilderness between Ankai
and Mumtaz.
It was probable that his detested visitors would
leave shortly, and he would then be left undisturbed.
But for how long? If Lakhsman ascended the gadhi
it would mean the termination of his office and, more
than likely, his arrest. It would be difficult to escape
the death penalty if he were fairly and openly tried.
The position would not be entirely hopeless if the
caravan arrived, which he had been expecting for
days. Then he would be able to enlist the help of the
four or five men accompanying it to throw his


enemies out of Mumtaz or to murder them. Some-
how, he had a hunch that even then the caravan was
approaching the base of the mountain, expecting the
inmates to man the windlass which hauled up the
goods they had transported across the hot and dreary
desert. He hoped the entire party would be well
occupied during the day, so that he might bring up
men and arms and give Lakhsman and his merry crew
an unexpected surprise. Shamsa, with whom he had
discussed his plans, was prepared to assist him, and,
if Baloo could be persuaded to lend a hand, he might
yet triumph over Mahmud and the two striplings to
whom the traitor had given allegiance.
Immediately the meal was over Mahmud, without
seeking Gopaks permission, took the key of the store
and helped himself to two coils of very strong cotton
rope. Much to Shamsa’s disgust, Chimar arrived and
clamoured for something to eat; and that vile un-
touchable, to her consternation, gorged what was left
of the repast, after putting aside sufficient for Ganpat.
A hasty council meeting decided that the Bhil should
be left behind to keep an eye on Gopal, but Chimar
to be allowed to take part in whatever job
they proposed doing, and finally it was decided to
take Gopal with them as a hostage. If once the ladder
was hauled up, they would be left, without shelter
or water, to stew in the awful heat.
Gopal protested against leaving the coolness of his
home for the frightful heat and glare, but Chimar’s
hand went to his knife, and Gopal became extremely
amiable in a moment. In fact, he displayed much


interest in their plans to make a descent to the croco-
dile’s pool. At first he did all he could to discourage
the dangerous enterprise, but afterwards begged that
at least the poor brute’s life should be spared. It had
been his pet, so he declared, for some years, and it
had cost him a considerable sum to keep alive. As
a matter of fact Gopal, like many Hindus, believed
in reincarnation, and he held a superstitious reverence
for the hideous monster. Barry promised that, if it
did not attack them, it would be allowed to continue
its existence as the guardian spirit of Mumtaz.
The ledge soon became the scene of great activity.
The face of the cliff was examined for footholds, but
it dropped almost sheer, and it seemed utterly impos-
sible to clamber down it. Finally, they decided upon
the exact spot where the descent was to be made and
.Mahmud, hitching the rope securely to the ledge,
dropped the free end into the abyss. With a rifle
slung over his shoulder and ammunition at his waist,
Barry removed his sandals, bound up his feet, and
prepared to go down. It was arranged that, if he
could gain a ledge out of the crocodile’s reach, he
was to wait there until Lakhsman joined him, but
that if the danger was too great he was to shout,
when he would immediately be hauled up again.
For the greater part of the descent Barry contacted
the cliff face, except when it became concave and
he slid down the rope cautiously, glad to be able to
touch the rock again with his bandaged feet.
Fortunately, he had previously done a good bit of
mountaineering with Lakhsman and, among other


precautions, he refrained from looking up or down,
realizing that this was the best way to keep his nerve.
The descent imposed a great strain on his muscles,
and he was glad now and then to take advantage of
a narrow and insecure ledge to rest for a few minutes.
At last he became aware that he was not far from
the bottom, and just then a protrusion in the cliff
face provided him with a respite from a most exhaust-
ing experience. He looked about him before signalling
that he was safe. The base of the cliff was merely a
catchment for splintered rocks and time- and water-
worn pebbles. A few reeds and queer aquatic plants
CTrew on the marge of the pool, but what interested
Barry most was the hideous and scaly old saurian’s
obvious awareness that its long fast was about to end.
It scrambled out of the water and made a series of
unavailing attempts to reach him, snapping at him
with its great jaws. Then Barry signalled that all was
well, and made his rope fast. Lakhsman was to use
another rope in case of accident. In the meantime,
while he waited for his chum, he realized how
essential it would be to get rid of the crocodile.
The great brute, tired with its efforts to reach him,
now sprawled beneath, watching with unwinking
eye. The eye was the most vulnerable point and,
considering the position of the head, a shot placed
there would penetrate the brain. But just as Barry
was about to fire, a shout from Mahmud, warning
him that the rope was being hurled over, frightened
the brute and it scuttled away.
The rope dropped a few feet to his left, and before


he could rectify its position Lakhsman started to climb
down. He was a little more agile and inured to the
perils and fatigues of mountaineering than Barry,
and made the descent in slightly better time; but as
he reached a point about thirty feet above him,
something happened. He lost grip, and slid a great
deal faster than he intended to the bottom of the cliff.
He picked himself up rather ruefully, the blood
oozing from his right heel. Just then the crocodile,
with startling agility, emerged from the water and
made straight for the young Mahratta.
“Lakhsman! Look out for the mugger!” Barry
yelled. “Run for the rope!”
But the crocodile, as though it understood, imme-
diately cut off that line of retreat. Lakhsman stood
irresolute for a moment, and then the cliffs re-echoed
with a quick succession of shots. One may have pene-
trated the brute’s exposed stomach while making a
turn, but the others simply ricochetted off the
armour-plated hide.
There was nothing to do but run for it, and Lakhs-
man, disregarding his injured heel, scrambled over
the rocky debris, the fierce crocodile pacing him
around the edge of the pool. The chase continued
right round the basin, Barry firing whenever an
opportunity offered, with Lakhsman unable to use
his rifle since he needed hands as well as feet in the
struggle to escape. Mahmud, fearing something had
gone wrong, yelled at the top of his voice, and was
barely able to restrain Chimar from going down to the
rescue. At length they caught sight of the crocodile


making a desperate effort to corner Lakhsman. Gopaks
eyes dilated with expectancy. There was a sort of
legend that Mumtaz would continue to be prosperous
so long as the crocodile lived, but that when it died
all in Mumtaz would share misfortune. It was for
this reason that he had fed the brute as often as pos-
sible, and even at great expense. If the mugger
was a costly pet in one sense, it was a most profitable
one in another. Gopal prayed that his old mascot
would finally settle who was to be Maharajah of
Nanda. Then he would be fed much oftener than
he was being fed now.
Round the pool Lakhsman ran and panted. The
fearful heat, the exhausting climb down, and his fall,
all helped to impede him, and the crocodile never
once let up. Now Lakhsman was almost back at his
starting place while Barry, disheartened by the poor
results of his shooting, looked down from his eyrie
with an expression of hopelessness and terror. It
seemed he was rendering his chum little assistance,
perched where he was. Gripping his loaded rifle
firmly, he leapt down into the arena.
It had the effect he anticipated. The brute advanced
to challenge the new intruder, giving the Mahratta
boy a breathing space to unsling his rifle. Barry had
no time to move out of its way. Presenting his rifle,
he stood his ground. The ugly brute, jaws opened in
anticipation, made its final dash to kill. Two shots
rang out. Barry fired point-blank down the croco-
dile’s throat, while Lakhsman’s bullet found a lodg-
ment somewhere as the brute exposed its underside


to clamber over a rock. The fight suddenly went out
of it. Slowly it dragged its lumbering body into the
water, staining it with its blood. For a while it dis-
appeared, and some time later the tip of its snout
could be seen sticking out of the water.
Barry bound Lakhsman’s foot, and then both boys
stood up and, with a queer little emotional laugh,
embraced each other. Nothing was said. After resting
in silence for a while, they amused themselves potting
the mugger every time it showed up, until at last
it completely disappeared from sight.
When the firing ceased, Gopal gave a groan and
sank to the ground. “They’ve killed my pet, my god!”
he cried. “Oh Mahmud, see what terrible trouble
you’ve brought on me and my house!”
Mahmud did not seem the least disconcerted. Barry
had jerked the rope three times to signal “all’s well”,
and nothing else mattered just then.
With the crocodile out of the way, the search for
the All-seeing Eye began. Up on the ledge high
above them, it had seemed a simple matter to find it,
but here, in this litter of rocks and splinters, looking
for a diamond was like searching for the proverbial
needle in a haystack. The body of the high priest,
they computed, would have been cast close to where
the ropes hung, and the gem, provided the crocodile
had not swallowed it, should be lying near to where
they now stood.
They scrabbled among the pebbles, and shifted
boulders to search beneath them. Where it was impos-
sible to displace rocks, they poked into the crevices


hopefully and determinedly. They even dredged the
pool, risking the crocodile which had not stirred for
a long time. Without rest they toiled all day, until
their backs ached and their fingers were barked and
almost numb with pain. Their heads swam with the
terrific heat and their continuous exertions.
At length Lakhsman, weary and disheartened,
threw himself down. “We’ve done our best, Barry.
I’m through. Better leave the search till to-morrow.
Looks pretty hopeless, doesn’t it?”
“Nothing’s hopeless. We came here to find the
All-seeing Eye and we’re not going back till we do
find it. To-morrow, after a good night’s rest, we’ll
come down again and have better luck.”
Utterly weary, they staggered to the ropes, and
were fastening the loop under their arms preparatory
to giving their signal to be hauled up when Lakhs-
man gave a cry.
“Look, Barry—there, almost at your feet! Some-
thing’s shining there. Perhaps . . .” Lakhsman said no
more. He leapt down, walked a few paces, stooped,
and then stood erect with a look of ecstasy in his eyes.
He was holding in his hands something which
glittered like fire. Barry did not look at the lovely
gold setting: his eyes were riveted on the great flash-
ing diamond in the centre of it.
“Do you remember what that holy man was said
to have predicted-eh, Barry—that I, Lakhsman San-
oji, should find the All-seeing Eye? See how it has
come true!”


“Oh, Lux,” exclaimed Barry, “you don’t know
how happy I am. Now we can go back home.”
Lakhsman clasped Barry’s hands in both his own.
“I don't know what I should have done without you.
Tiger, crocodile, murderers—whenever and however
danger threatened, you were always there. How
precious a thing is a good friend!”


CHAPTER XX
A look of inquiry greeted the lads as they were hauled
up to the ledge. Gopal in particular, who had wilted
in the heat and sagged with the exertion of helping
to pull the boys up, watched them narrowly for a
cue; but Barry, beyond saying that they were
ravenous, made no reference to their adventures in
the crocodile pit. The heat, radiating from the burn-
ing cliffs, was stifling and oppressive, and Gopal
gasped like a fowl on a hot day. Barry called Mahmud
aside.
“We shall be leaving to-morrow morning early.
Tell Chimar to take charge of the ponies and bring
them up to be packed before daybreak. Ganpat can
help you with the necessary stores. He knows where
they are.”
“Is all well?” Mahmud inquired, with an under-
standing smile.
“There is no further need to stay in Mumtaz,”
Barry replied. “There are several other matters to be
settled, but we shall talk them over to-night, after
the evening meal.”
Shamsa had prepared another repast, and the sav-
oury smell greeted them as they entered the cavern.
She seemed in very good spirits, and asked each of


them if their appetites would match the fare she had
provided. Mahmud recommended that they should
camp next to the store, and led them to it with a
hurricane light. A little later Shamsa hailed them, and
they trooped back to her quarters, impatient to begin
the meal.
Gopal, bathed and attired in clean clothes, presided
at the feast without partaking of it. He was now in
excellent humour, and even beamed on Ganpat, whose
siding with his enemies had utterly amazed him.
Lakhsman announced that they would be leaving
Mumtaz in the morning and, with a sly look at
Shamsa, suggested that she would be glad to see the
last of her visitors. After the heat outside, the air was
cool and invigorating. Living like a troglodyte had its
disadvantages, although Gopal and Shamsa both
seemed in fairly good health. The artificial light was
the principal drawback to a comfortable existence,
though one could get all the sunshine needed by
sitting behind the parapet of the aperture which
formed a diminutive veranda.
Gopal had been feeling very depressed all day. He
was not sure what would become of him even if his
unwelcome guests did not take him, as a prisoner, to
Nanda. He trusted neither Barry nor Lakhsman, They
knew too many secrets about Mumtaz for him to feel
secure about his future. However, a message by car-
rier pigeon to the prime minister after they had gone
would relieve him of any responsibility. If Sir Ram-
chandra decided they were too dangerous to live,
something mysterious would happen, similar to the


disappearance of Mrs Cantwell. Conspiracy and
intrigue were like breath to his nostrils.
Gopal watched piles of chupatties, curry and rice
with savoury gamishings, and Shamsa’s delicious
purum-poories disappear. When all were completely
satisfied Lakhsman, in a neat little speech, thanked
Shamsa for her hospitality and said they would retire
so that she and her husband could spend the rest of
the evening together, undisturbed. The retreating fig-
ures were soon lost in the gloom, and husband and
wife settled down to their meal and a confidential
chat. Their ears caught the sound of men stacking
their rifles, and of Mahmud opening the recess where
the stores were kept and shutting it with a bang that
set the bats fluttering in all directions.
“That Moslem dog,” Gopal grunted, “could always
be counted upon to do the most annoying thing
imaginable.” Gopaks nerves were a little frayed, and
the news his wife had imparted to him before dinner
had increased his tension considerably.
Gopal, certain that his enemies were out of ear-shot,
dropped his voice to a whisper. “Where are the men
now?” he inquired.
“At the back of us in the darkness,” said Shamsa.
“I’ll take their food along presently. All we want is
courage. We have them at our mercy.”
Shamsa had good reason to be pleased with herself.
While Gopal and his pestiferous visitors had been
broiling in the sun, she and Baloo had not been idle.
She had sent Baloo to reconnoitre and report if he
could see any signs of the expected supply caravan.


Baloo, accustomed to negotiating the narrow passage
to the opposite side of the mountain, had returned in
less than half an hour with the exciting news that six
camels were heading towards Mumtaz. Shamsa there-
upon wrote a letter to the leader, Rassul Ali, and
explained the position they were in. She suggested
that one of the men should be left in charge of the
camels while Rassul and the remaining camel drivers
should come to their assistance and eject the intruders.
Rassul, hauled up sixty or seventy feet by wind-
lass, fully expected to meet Gopal, and was surprised
to be greeted by Baloo. Reading Shamsa’s note, he
concluded that Gopal was in danger. Rassul was a
man of initiative and action. He picked two of his
most reliable men, and left the third in charge of the
camels after all had assisted in unloading them.
From the windlass platform one looked upon
another world. About half a mile farther on, the
range of mountains, continuing in a northerly direc-
tion, ended almost abruptly. Beyond was the sand of
the desert, like the billows of a lazy sea lightly rippled
by the wind. The desert extended beyond the hori-
zon’s limit. Rassul Ali, inured to heat, privations and
thirst, was always glad to see that curious angle in
the mountain rampart in which snuggled the ravine
of Mumtaz. The sight of that aperture where he now
stood meant shade, coolness, good food and rest, and
it had never been more welcome than it was to-day.
Mumtaz was a fortnight’s journey. For years, he had
undertaken the transport of all its requirements, and
received liberal reward for this service, but was not


encouraged to ask questions. Gopal Singh was a
good man with whom to deal. A crank perhaps, since
only a crank would live in a damp hole like a frog;
but that was not Rassul’s business.
He, like all his men, came from the north-west
frontier. He himself was a Zakka Khel from near the
Khyber, and proud of it. Powerfully built too, with
a long black beard, shaggy brows, a hooked nose, and
a very dignified bearing. Rassul did not relish crawling
through the narrower parts of the corridor, and get-
ting wet his red calfskin shoes with their turned-up
toes. He surmised something serious was afoot when
Shamsa met him near the little storeroom.
Rassul, definite and direct, proposed they should
wait until the visitors were enjoying the evening meal
and then rush out and overpower them, slitting the
throats of any who resisted; but Shamsa wanted to
discuss the scheme with her husband first, as she
desired to avoid shedding blood. She suggested that
it would be wdser to wait until her enemies were
asleep, and then steal their arms, after which they
could dictate their own terms. These, she mentally
stipulated, should include the return of the diamonds,
and the handing over of the All-seeing Eye if it had
been recovered. Rassul Ali, she learnt, was concerned
only with murdering all of them, or with appro-
priating their ponies and sending them back to Nanda
without food or water. If any of the party died on
the journey, that would be their own misfortune.
After further consideration, however, Rassul decided
it would be wiser to capture the intruders alive, and


if necessary to torture them until they confessed why
they had invaded Mumtaz. After all, Gopal could
settle what to do with them. In this matter it would
be better to be guided entirely by Shamsa. Women,
he had leamt from experience, were often intuitive
and far-seeing. Brutal murder had an ugly way of
being found out, but to send men to certain death
was a kind of refined cruelty that appealed to his
vicious nature.
He summoned his two henchmen Abdul Gafur and
Sulieman Khan, and advised them of his plan of cam-
paign. Neither of them seemed particularly keen on
the venture, and demanded to know the amount of
remuneration they would receive for endangering
their lives. Rassul Ali satisfied them by saying he
would demand a very substantial reward, which he
was willing to share with them. With this assur-
ance the rascals took up a position at the back of
Gopaks quarters, where they were completely hidden
in the darkness, and awaited the moment when they
could sally out and disarm their foes.
The tired lads did not take long to prepare them-
selves for sleep. Mahmud inspected the stores and
made a note of those he wanted to pack next day.
Ganpat slumped to rest in a fever of excitement.
Nanda was his hometown, and the prospect of seeing
his wife and children in a few days made him rather
light-headed. It had been a most fortunate day for
him when, through Mahmud, he had contacted Lakhs-
man. He looked forward to a future of comfort and
happiness in the service of the young prince who was


soon to become the Maharajah. Perhaps he would be
given a position in the palace or in the Royal Guard.
He hoped Mahmud would be given an influential
post too, for he liked and trusted him despite his
being a Moslem.
Mahmud dropped off to sleep very tired and with
only one trouble on his mind: What did Lakhsman
propose to do with Gopal? It would never do to
leave him in Mumtaz. If Alahmud could have his way,
he would push the pudgy babu over the cliff where
no one would ever find his bones. However, Barry
had ordered the ponies before daybreak, and that
meant early rising. On the whole, he was satisfied to
leave the larger issue to the two lads, who seemed to
know what they wanted.
Before nine o’clock, all were asleep except Gopal
and his wife, Rassul Ali and his two confederates.
Gopal, not easily frightened, admitted to Shamsa that
he was extremely nervous. There was always the
chance that their plans would go awry, and if his
visitors were alarmed a bloody struggle would even-
tually take place. The death of the old crocodile had
depressed Gopal a great deal. So long as it had
remained alive, he had been certain Mumtaz would
undergo no great change; but now, he superstitiously
believed that the brute’s death would drastically affect
his fortunes. He felt sure it had been killed. Sufficient
shots had been fired at it to kill a dozen crocodiles.
Shamsa, also, was too nervous to lose conscious-
ness. At about twelve or a little after, Gopal heard
Rassul and his men go by as silently as the flight of


an owl. The tension was now unbearable, and Gopal
sat up and listened as he had never listened before.
Rassul and his men used a small electric torch: the
only one in working order that Gopal possessed. A
small stock of battery refills was packed in the camel
loads, and so the torch was precious. Gopal possessed
also a couple of acetylene bicycle lamps, but their
glare would waken even a heavy sleeper.
In less than ten minutes Rassul returned, his servants
carrying three rifles they had collected without dis-
turbing the sleepers.
“What now?” he asked in a whisper. “Shall I go
back and kill them?”
“No, wait,” Gopal advised.
“Why wait? They sleep very soundly. Let it be the
merciful sleep of death.”
Just then they heard someone speaking in a low,
excited voice. It was Mahmud. Rassul Ali caught his
breath and retreated, and Gopal trembled a little with
fear. Mahmud had wakened Barry, and soon all four
were groping for their weapons. Mahmud believed
he had heard someone rummaging about, but he was
not sure. He felt somewhat guilty and negligent as he
lit the hurricane lamp with a shaking hand. When he
held this up, it was revealed beyond all doubt that
the weapons were gone. If this was Gopal’s doing,
he was a bolder man than Mahmud had believed him.
“Let us grab the foul pig before he gets rid of
them,” Mahmud exclaimed.
At that moment, a rifle cracked and a bullet pinged


past. It smashed the hurricane lamp and narrowly
missed Barry, who was behind Mahmud.
They scattered and dropped to the ground, expect-
ing a fusillade which, however, did not come.
“I think I know what’s happened,” Mahmud said
in a barely audible voice. “The camel train came while
we were on the ledge outside, and Shamsa ordered
Rassul Ali and his camel drivers to help her get rid
of us. Robbing our rifles is just the sort of thing
Rassul would do. Pathans are expert at it.”
Another rifle shot rang out and rumbled along the
corridor, followed by a distant scream behind them.
“Good Lord!” Barry exclaimed. “Whoever was
that? It sounded like a woman. Is Shamsa at the back
of us?”
No one spoke.
“I’m sure someone is back there,” said Lakhsman,
“or else I’m hearing things.”
They decided to send Ganpat to reconnoitre, with
instructions to go right along the narrowing tunnel
until he was able to satisfy himself of the arrival of
the camel train. Ganpat set out very half-heartedly.
That scream had unnerved him.
After Ganpat had gone, they discussed the position.
Barry had his revolver: the only firearm they now
possessed. Lakhsman and Ganpat carried knives, and
Mahmud had his bare hands only. However, he sug-
gested that one of them should creep forward with
the revolver and open battle at close quarters. If their
only opponents were Gopal and his wife, and perhaps
poor Baloo, it would be worth the risk. However,


this scheme was frustrated by a long beam of narrow
bluish light which came from the heart of the dark-
ness in front, and stabbed into the gloom in which
they sought protection. It was an acetylene bicycle
lamp. That steady shaft of light rendered quite
unthinkable any attack such as Mahmud had pro-
posed. Instead, they had to crawl farther back and
hide in any shadowy recesses the beam could not
reach.
Gopal was disclosing ingenious generalship. He
had them like rats in a pit. Only one way of escape
remained: that along the narrowing tunnel to the
safety of the desert behind. Mahmud believed that if
they could reach the camels and load sufficient food
and water, they would escape with their lives; but
such an attempt would not be likely to go unchal-
lenged. Barry wanted to creep up and smash the lamp
with a revolver bullet, but Mahmud said it would
be better to keep their attackers guessing about their
means of defence. All was quiet until Ganpat returned.
Unfortunately he stumbled over a small stone and
crashed down. Mahmud rose to assist him, and this
time a volley of three shots was fired, without taking
effect. As soon as the echoes died away a distant
scream, a little louder and more terrifying than the
last, reached their ears.
“There it is again,” Bam- said to Lakhsman. “I’m
sure that it’s a woman and that she isn’t far away.
That scream curdles my blood.”
But Ganpat’s report was more important at the
mgment, and they listened to what he had to say


with quickening pulse, and with eyes and ears alert
for any movement on the part of the enemy. He
confirmed Mahmud’s suspicions. The camels were
at the foot of the mountain, and bales and packages
were neatly stacked, waiting to be hauled up the
mountain side.
“How many camel drivers remain behind?”
Mahmud asked. “Only one,” said Ganpat. “Rassul
Ali, Abdul Gafur and Sulieman Khan are here. They
came up before noon.”
“How did you learn that?”
“I hailed Bekr Khan from the outlet. It took some
time to wake him,” said Ganpat, “but once roused,
he recognized my voice and gave me the information.
Of course, he doesn’t know that I’m no longer serving
Gopal. Baloo brought a letter from Shamsa. Bekr
wanted to know if all was well, and I told him it was
and that Rassul Ali would give him further instruc-
tions at daybreak.”
“That makes the position pretty bad,” said
Lakhsman. “Of course we could escape by the back
way. If attacked, one man could hold the mob at bay
till the rest got clear, and then he could slide down
the windlass rope.”
At that moment another scream broke the silence.
Barry looked at the illuminated face of his wristlet
watch. It was a quarter past four,
“I can’t stand any more of that,” he exclaimed.
“Mahmud, Ganpat, do either of you know where
that scream comes from?”
“No, sahib,” Mahmud immediately replied. “I have


heard it before, but I’ve been told it s a spirit con-
fined in the mountain by a djinn and that no one can
help it. At least, that is what Gopal says. Perhaps it
is not a spirit, but an echo of running water or
whistling wind. I’ve heard many strange sounds in
this place. In the darkness all sorts of things seem to
happen.”
“And what does Ganpat say?’
“That is no spirit, sahib. It is a woman!


CHAPTER XXI
With four trusty sowars behind him from Lustrelle’s
personal bodyguard, Riverstone set out for Mumtaz.
He left Nanda late at night, but even then the clatter
of the horses’ hoofs brought inquisitive eyes to the
street windows. Riverstone did not like being pulled
off a job that was becoming daily more exciting to
set out on what might be a wild-goose chase to the
hottest spot in India. Since leaving Nanda in disguise,
he had learnt a great deal. In the little town from
which he had operated he had been hailed as a staunch
supporter of Balkrishna, and had even wormed him-
self as a member into the district committee set up
to enrol support for the pretender.
The simple peasantry saw the problem of the
accession very clearly. Bulwant Rao had left no heir,
and not even a distant relative could be found to
occupy the gadhi. At least, that was the story told
by numerous priests throughout the State, most of
them loyal to the ancient clique. Balkrishna claimed to
be the direct descendant of the former dynasty,
deposed by Bulwant Rao’s bandit forbears, and after
all, the priests argued, had royal blood in his veins
and most important, was a Brahmin of the Brahmins.
It was curious, also, to learn how opinion was


swayed by the loss of the All-seeing Eye, which had
now become a village legend. Some people interpreted
the loss as a sign of divine displeasure and wrath which
fittingly closed the reign of a Maharajah who had
never been favoured by the gods. It was surprising
to discover, too, how many people were still lo\ al to
the old dynasty. Just as to-day the Jacobites profess
allegiance to James 11, so there was a strong associa-
tion in Nanda sworn to support the old House.
The priests had not had things all their own way.
Strong rumours had spread that an heir to the gadhi
had been found who was a direct descendant of
Bulwant Rao, but it was not policy to discuss this
openly. Riverstone learnt that Sir Ramchandra had
a strong hold on the populace, and that the influence
of the resident was steadily declining. He thus felt
assured of his wisdom in having already advocated
that the situation should not be allowed to drift
further, but that Lustrelle should openly proclaim
Lakhsman as the rightful heir. If the prime minister
accepted the challenge, matters would swiftly come
to a head. After all, Lustrelle was the British resident,
and the Government always had the last word.
The resident had evidently decided to test the
issue. Lakhsman was to return as swiftly as possible.
Riverstone had had a long talk with Nehru, who had
been tremendously excited and had never let up until
the expedition was on its way. Pack-horses with food
and water enabled Riverstone to press forward
rapidly to Ankai. Beyond the mountain they met a
party of Bhils belonging to Chimar’s tribe. Chimar’s


father, on learning the purpose of the expedition,
requested to go with it as a guide. He looked at
Riverstone’s massive figure and clear blue eyes with
intense admiration.
“I have been feeling a little uneasy about my son,”
he said, “and if you will permit it, I shall accompany
you.”
Then commenced the most difficult and hazardous
part of the journey. Terrific heat, the monotony
and the rough nature of the country sorely tried
the temper of the men and the endurance of the
horses, but Riverstone pressed on. During the last
stages of the journey they too, like Lakhsman and
Barry, decided to travel by night and rest by day.
Riverstone had heard several stories about this arid
and desolate region, but his mind had not conjured
up anything quite so bad.
After an extremely strenuous ride, Riverstone
arrived at Mumtaz early one Thursday morning. The
Pass was clearly visible, and towards it the cavalcade
pressed without waiting to break its fast. The sun
soon dispelled the chill of night, and beat with ter-
rific intensity on the bare mountain cliffs which
radiated something akin to a glow from their incan-
descent-looking layers of rock.
The Bhil chief, Golgi, riding a little ahead, drew
Riverstone’s attention to a small encampment near
the Pass. Riverstone halted and, surveying it with his
glasses, could distinguish several ponies tethered, but
no sign of human beings. A dark figure, however,


presently detached itself and immediately rushed for
cover among the rocks.
Golgi, who was standing by, gave a grunt. “That
is Chimar, or I don’t know my own son.”
“Where are the others, I wonder?” said Riverstone.
“We’ll soon learn,” said Golgi, and broke into a
canter. The Mahratta sowars, swearing under-breath
at the dreadful heat, became galvanized at the pros-
pect of contacting somebody. In less than half an
hour they were within a few hundred yards of the
camp. Golgi thereupon stood on the saddle of his
horse and gave a loud piercing cry, something like,
“Ah-ee! Ah-ee! Ah-ee-ee-ee-ee-ee!”
Immediately Chimar emerged from hiding, waving
His arms in a friendly manner, and rushed towards
his father, who jumped off his pony and warmly
embraced him.
“I thought,” he said, “some harm had befallen thee,
Chimar. I should have known that a son of mine
would have both the strength and the cunning to
survive when pitted against an enemy. Where are
the others?”
Riverstone rode up and dismounted, and listened
intently while Chimar recounted their adventures
since they had left the village. Then, more important,
he described all that had happened since they had
arrived at Mumtaz.
A great deal had gone amiss in the past two days,
Chimar said. He had been instructed, on the day
Barry and Lakhsman had descended into the croco-
dile pit, to take over the care of the ponies from


l2 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
Ganpat and to lead them through the Pass before
daybreak next morning, to be loaded with provisions
and equipment for the return journey to Nanda. He
mentioned regretfully that he had not been given the
opportunity of slitting Gopal s throat, but added that
he hoped, before taking his final leave, to kick the
old rascal over the cliff. The party, particularly
Lakhsman and Barry Sahib, seemed in wonderful
spirits and were well armed. Gopal, he said, trembled
with fear like a child with ague. Shamsa, his wife,
was just a woman, and Baloo had as much courage
and strength as a chinkara doe, so that four such
warriors as Lakhsman, Barry Sahib, Mahmud and
Ganpat had little to oppose them. Yet a strange
thing had happened, filling him with anxiety and
dismay. As arranged, he had announced his arrival
with the ponies by firing his rifle. After a short wait
for the rope ladder to be lowered or for the appear-
ance of one of his party to give him instructions, his
patience had been rewarded by a bullet that grazed
his ear, followed by two more, all of which fortun-
ately missed. Immediately he had known that some
treachery was afoot, and had quickly driven his ponies
out of the line of fire. One, however, had been shot
clean through the forehead and had fallen on the
ledge, where he had left it. Since then he had returned
during both the day and the night, but had seen
nobody, and consequently felt very troubled.
“What do you think has happened?” Riverstone
asked.
“It may be that Mahmud and Ganpat have betrayed


THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL 2
the two young men and have returned to the service
of their old master. In that case there is little hope
for their safety.”
Riverstone decided to reconnoitre, taking Chimar
with him. However, before doing so, he learnt all he
could about Mumtaz and the underground corridor
in which Gopal and his staff lived. It seemed a pretty
hopeless task to climb to the aperture over the ledge
without the rope ladder, and any attempt in broad
daylight would be disastrous. However, he halted and
dismounted his little troop about three hundred yards
from the Pass, and they crept forward in skirmishing
order in case they encountered opposition. They
reached the Pass without incident, and Riverstone
and Chimar crept out on the ledge. Everything was
calm and peaceful. Not even a kite or vulture could
be seen in the sky, although the bones of the poor
pony had been picked clean.
It was a queer place, thought Riverstone as he
wiped his steaming forehead and opened the neck
button of his shirt: just the spot where diamonds
might be found and where men would pay most
easily the usual price for their cupidity. Personally,
he would not venture down that awful ravine for all
the wealth of India. No one could possibly suspect
that the interior of the mountain to the right was
inhabited as Chimar had told him it was. He was
certainly up against a very stiff problem and, for
once in his life, he was baffled wfflat to do next.
It occurred to him that it might be possible to
throw a grapnel, in the hope it would find a grip


l4 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
or lodgment on the parapet and so enable a light
man to climb up; but he did not possess a grapnel,
and it was questionable if he could improvise one.
There was no other way of storming Gopal’s strong-
hold with their small party, unless he were to expose
them to almost certain death. Apparently a close
watch was being kept.
Of this he had evidence when a head suddenly
popped up over the parapet and took a pot shot at
him. The bullet went wide and, although he returned
the fire and waited, revolver in hand, for some time,
he did not see his enemy again. But to stand in this
exposed position was inviting disaster, so he sought
cover.
The terrific heat and his sheer weariness after a
punishing ride all night were now beginning to
affect Riverstone. Nothing could be done at the
moment, so he resolved to rest until the afternoon,
when he would tackle the problem again. His men
and Golgi swarmed around to hear the news, then
all returned to a site that Golgi had selected which
afforded a little shade. There a council of war was
held, and the grapnel idea was fully discussed; but it
seemed rather hopeless to construct one without metal
or materials of any kind. Then Riverstone noticed
Chimar and his father exchanging glances, and soon
the old man spoke.
“Leave this to Chimar and me. We shall make it
possible to get to our enemies at nightfall.”
They said no more. Bhils were not talkative people,
expressing themselves in action. Golgi and his son


rode away towards the base of the mountain,
apparently with the intention of skirting it. River-
stone watched until they were out of sight, specu-
lating what they had in mind. Meanwhile, after a
sentry had been posted, the rest of the party went
to sleep.
Riverstone woke at about three in the afternoon,
gasping for breath. The heat had become more intense,
and the sky glowed as if charged with electricity. All
conditions pointed to a storm. The surrounding
country looked as if no rain had fallen upon it for
several years. Riverstone’s mind began to dwell on
the task confronting him. Of course, it was possible
that the worst had happened and that both boys had
been done to death. Gopal was not likely to surrender
Mumtaz without a struggle.
He noticed two sowars in earnest conversation over
a pile of reins and bits and saddlery, apparently seek-
ing some solution to their problem. He joined them,
and together they fabricated a contrivance of leather
straps and stirrups, weighted with stones, which might
possibly find a lodgment if thrown clear over the
parapet; but Riverstone did not feel very hopeful
about it.
At about five o’clock, a hot wind blew from the
south, and a small cloud suddenly appeared out of
the yellow murk. A little later a mass of cumulus
rose as if from a witch’s cauldron, and was soon in
violent commotion. The wind blew in sudden gusts,
and great whirlwinds gathered and travelled at an
amazing speed across the barren surface of the


parched earth. The sky flickered with lightning and
became more overcast. Rain now began to fall in great
sizzling drops, and distant thunder rolled and
reverberated.
The storm was rapidly approaching, and Riverstone
looked around for shelter. The horses were left
tethered, but he and his men moved to a little cavern
in the mountain which promised some sort of refuge
from the coming deluge. At that moment, Chimar
and Golgi galloped up, their faces wreathed in smiles.
Across Chimar’s saddle was a huge iguana, trussed
so securely with rope that the poor brute could not
move a hair’s breadth.
“Shabash,” said the sowars, patting the Bhils
approvingly, “We’d forgotten how Sivaji sometimes
stormed the bastions of great forts.”
The lizard’s jaw had been securely tied, as a bite
sometimes causes blood-poisoning. A strong loop to
fit snugly round the base of the neck and the shoulders
was adjusted, and a long rope was then attached to
these improvised traces. Chimar and his father needed
no instructions. They attacked the job in a masterly
fashion.
When everything was finished to their satisfaction,
they asked for water and something to eat.
“We rode eight miles before we saw and caught
this one,” Golgi said. He did not explain how the
capture had been made.
The storm, unleashed in all its fury, was upon
them. The lightning lit the sky in jagged pencillings
of incandescence. The thunder crashed like artillery,


and the mountains rumbled with echoes. The rain
literally poured from a great, fast-moving curtain.
In the brief pauses between the thunder claps they
heard the hiss and crash of runnels coursing down
the mountain sides.
Riverstone and his men prepared for the assault on
Gopal’s stronghold. All of them stripped except for
a loin-cloth, and smeared their bodies with oil. Each
sowar hung his carbine over his shoulder and strapped
his tulwar to his side. Riverstone carried his revolver
and a wicked-looking curved knife which resembled
a Ghurka kukri. Chimar and Golgi insisted on joining
the storming party, and carried knives about ten
inches long and as sharp as razors. One sowar, much
to his chagrin, was left behind to look after the
horses and ponies. Riverstone had brought two
bitumen torches with him, one of which he handed
to a sowar, and the other to Chimar. The party,
headed by the Bhils who pulled and prodded the un-
fortunate giant lizard, moved towards the Pass in a
perfect deluge.
The clouds clinging to the mountain ridges entirely
blotted out the stars, but as the storm slowly moved
north the lighting became less vivid. Riverstone in-
sisted on the sowars taking cover while he and the
two Bhils tried to manipulate the lizard. It made
several attempts to scurry towards the edge of the
cliff, but a knife prick soon persuaded it that there
was no way of escape from its persecutors except up
the face of the cliff.
Riverstone has not yet decided if it was owing to


lB THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
luck or to the careful manipulations of the Bhils that
the lizard climbed straight towards the aperture. It
seemed to sense that there existed a sure means of
escape and refuge. Its claws gripped the parapet like
hooks of steel, and at that moment, .Chimar and Golgi
took the strain.
“Up, son,” said Golgi. “Riverstone Sahib, you help
to take the strain now.”
Chimar shinned up the rope with the ability of a
trapeze artist, and a minute later the rope ladder
slid softly down to the expectant men below.
Golgi made fast the rope tied to the lizard while
Riverstone, followed by his men, swarmed up the
ladder. Then he climbed up, cursing Gopal with such
a variety of choice phrases that he chuckled at his
own blasphemy.


CHAPTER XXII
Ganpat’s admission that the scream emanated from
a woman, confined immediately behind them, brought
him under a cross-fire of questions. Unconsciously
there was a disposition to crowd closer to him and
hear particulars, but another rifle shot warned them
that they were under observation, and in imminent
peril if they made the least movement.
The shaft of light from the acetylene lamp never
wavered except when their observers suspected that
a rush was about to be made. It illuminated a zone
difficult and dangerous to cross. The disposition of
the enemy could only be identified or located by
sound.
Ganpat told his story in simple language. He did
not know when the woman had come to Mumtaz.
It was before he had taken service with Gopal, and
it did not pay to be inquisitive about anything that
did not concern him. Who she was and where she
came from he had not been able to learn. She had
been imprisoned in a little cave just off the main
corridor, and Shamsa kept the key of the door.
Usually Shamsa brought meals to the captive, but
on a few occasions this sendee had been entrusted
to him. The prisoner was fair and over thirty years of
p


age, and spoke Hindustani like a foreigner. He had
had little conversation with her, as Shamsa had for-
bidden it.
Except that she got scarcely any exercise, she had
little to complain of. The cell opened out on the
cliff through a narrow sloping corridor, and the sun
shone through it during certain periods of the day,
and gave sufficient light to read. Ganpat thought
Shamsa had been kind to the prisoner, who was
always cleanly and decently clothed, and well sup-
plied with books. He had often heard Gopal and
Shamsa quarrel about her, Gopal declaring that she
was being dealt with too leniently and suggesting
harsher treatment, Shamsa flaring up angrily and tell-
ing him to mind his own business.
“But why the scream?” Lakhsman asked
“She’s probably not been fed since we came to
Mumtaz, and the rifle shots have alarmed her. She
must realize that something’s wrong,” Ganpat
explained.
“Is the lock a strong one?”
“No, a blow or twist would remove it.’
“Then,” said Lakhsman, “I’ll go along and
investigate.”
“Very well,” Barry agreed. “You and Ganpat
sneak away as soon as day breaks. Mahmud and I
will hold the enemy till you return.”
Exploration began shortly after six. Barely fifty
yards from the store, Ganpat turned to the left and
halted before a door, the framework set in a rough
stone wall. It could have been passed a dozen times


unnoticed. Ganpat, using his knife, twisted the cheap
lock and pushed the door ajar.
A slight musty smell assailed them. After the dark-
ness of the main passage, the cell was light enough
for objects in it to be discerned.
At first they did not see the prisoner. A little cot, a
table, a chair and a rough box gradually came into
view, A small cotton rug occupied the centre of the
floor and, crouched in a corner, her great eyes almost
starting out of her head with fear, was the woman.
“Don’t be afraid, mother,” Lakhsman said kindly.
“We are not here to harm but to help you, if we can.”
She neither spoke nor moved.
“You speak to her, Ganpat. She may recognize
you.”
Ganpat went forward and gave her a deep salaam.
“I am Ganpat whom you know. There is no need
to be afraid. We shall not harm you, and if God so
wills, we shall deliver you from this prison.”
“Where is Shamsa?” the woman asked in a low,
fearful voice.
“She is still here.”
“Why has she deserted me and left me here with-
out food or drink? She was always kind until now.
There are strangers here. I have heard their voices,
and also rifle shots. Terrible things seem to be hap-
pening out there. Do you wonder I am afraid. What
does it all mean?”
“It would take too long to explain,” Lakhsman
intervened. “But we ask you to trust us. We shall
bring you food and water. It may not be savoury


food such as Shamsa supplied, but it will appease
hunger. Ganpat, there are nuts, dates and dried fruits
in the store. Bring some, and water.”
The Hindu left promptly, and the woman, more
assured, emerged from the comer and stood near
the table, blinking at Lakhsman. He noticed that her
hair was brown and her skin fair and pallid, and
that her eyes were intensely blue. She was slim and
young-looking, and he knew that men had once
accounted her lovely and that perhaps, when health
and happiness brought back the colour to her cheeks
and the lustre to her hair and eyes, they would again
think her beautiful.
Lakhsman approached her. “You are not of Hindu-
stan,” he said. “At first I thought you were a woman
from Scinde. Comely and fair women grace that
country. You speak, also, like a foreigner. Who are
you?”
“It does not matter,” she said sadly.
Lakhsman addressed her in English. “I think your
birth-place was England. If so, confide in me. I can
help you more than you imagine.”
“Yes,” she replied. “I am English. I do not know
how long I have been imprisoned here. One day is
so much like another that I’ve lost count.”
“Where did you come from?”
“I once lived in Nanda. I was abducted from my
home and brought to Mumtaz.”
“Who was in charge here then?”
“A man named Gokhale Dass. Later Gopal came
here. I don’t know what became of Gokhale. Men


seem to come and go, but where they come from and
where they go to no one seems to know.”
“Listen,” said Lakhsman, suddenly becoming
abrupt and business-like. “I, too, come from Nanda.
Just now, through the treachery of Gopal, we are in
great danger. Gopal is trying to kill us, or to drive us
into the desert where we shall perish. You, as well
as we, are in Mahadeo’s hands. Just be patient and do
not fear. Your deliverance is at hand.”
“I will trust you,” she said.
“There are four of us just fifty yards away, under
fire from Gopal and his men. Ganpat, as you see, has
turned against his late master. If you are afraid, call
and we shall come; but it would be better if you did
not leave your cell. You may get hit with a bullet.”
Ganpat returned with the provisions, which she
accepted gratefully, then both, after giving her a
cheery assurance, returned to the “firing line”, as
Lakhsman called it.
Throughout the day of ceaseless vigil the position
remained unchanged. When night came they divided
themselves into shifts, and Barry and Mahmud
remained on guard until two in the morning. Lakhs-
man briefly reported about the woman prisoner but
did not mention she was an Englishwoman. He
thought it better to keep this knowledge from Barry,
who had quite enough on his mind just then.
Barry could hardly keep his eyes open when
Lakhsman relieved him. There had been no incidents
during his watch, except that the light had gone out
for a few seconds, probably when the lamp was being


changed for one newly charged. Now and again he
heard voices and movements, and once Shamsa’s shrill
advice to her husband to go to bed, was so loud and
unexpected that it brought him to his full senses with
a jerk.
They could not tell what Gopaks intentions were.
Probably he was testing their nerves in the hope that
they would attempt to escape into the desert wastes,
or meekly surrender and place themselves at his
mercy. Barry was feeling the strain. He had a
premonition, too, that something rather disastrous
would happen very soon. The captive woman had
remained silent since Lakhsman’s visit. She did not
interest him much. She may be Gopaks other wife,
or the wife of a relation he was attempting to dis-
cipline. At the moment he could think of little besides
circumventing the enemy.
Lakhsman and Ganpat took over, and shortly
afterwards, before Barry had actually fallen asleep, a
volley was fired and, with a yell, Rassul Ali led a
charge. Lakhsman blazed with the revolver at the
lamp, and with a lucky shot extinguished it. This dis-
concerted their foes, who had thought them entirely
unarmed. Ganpat, eager to get to grips, sprang on
Rassul Ali in the darkness, and used his dagger to
such good effect that the giant Pathan did not speak
again. Gopal, however, had quickly rigged up another
lamp, which caught Ganpat in its gleam, and Sulie-
man, firing a few paces away, drilled the genial Hindu
through the heart.
Ganpat died instantly. Rassul Ah lingered a little,


but it would have been impossible to render him any
aid. Both sides made new dispositions. Mahmud took
his place beside Lakhsman, insisting that Barry should
have, at least, a couple of hours’ rest. Lying or crouch-
ing on the hard rocks for hours at a stretch became a
torment. Fortunately, their opponents were equally
uncomfortable, although by the appetizing odours
that wafted in their direction, it was evident that
Shamsa was still maintaining her reputation as a good
cook.
And so another night passed. At daybreak Lakhs-
man paid the prisoner a visit and took her fresh
supplies of food. He did not tell her that Ganpat
had been killed. She had heard the firing during the
night and had been terrified. Lakhsman told her the
position was improving, and that they might have
some good news for her towards the end of the day.
Optimistic as he always was, Lakhsman now began
to lose heart. There was little to stop Gopal’s men
from overcoming and killing them if they made a
determined and concerted effort. No thought of res-
cue entered his mind. However, they had so far put up
a very good bluff, and it was possible Gopaks nerve
might break first. Even then it depended on what
terms he would offer and, most important, on whether
he could be trusted to keep his word.
It was distressing staring at the two dead men in
no man's land. Lakhsman had hoped some day to
reward Ganpat for his fidelity. Now, he resolved, it
would be his sacred duty to care for his wife and


2 6 THE VALLEY OF THE LOST TRAIL
family, if he were spared to do so. Both he and Barry
were becoming exhausted with weariness. Only the
fear of death kept them alert. About midday, the
silence was broken by Gopal calling to Lakhsman.
“Don’t answer,” Barry whispered. “He’ll locate
you if you do.”
“Do not fear, Lakhsman,” Gopal exclaimed. “I want
to make a bundobust. We cannot go on like this for
ever. Enough blood has already been spilt. We are
men of peace. Let us, therefore, discuss how to settle
our differences.”
“Put out that light,” Barry shouted back, “and
don’t move, or else we’ll shoot.”
Out went the light instantly. Both sides listened in
a spirit of deep distrust, and then Gopal spoke again.
“We are willing to let you escape with your lives,
provided you leave everything—do you understand?
everything behind: your arms, your belongings, your
ponies—in fact, all you possess.”
“And die in the wilderness of heat and thirst,”
Lakhsman replied sneeringly.
“You will not die. Men like you are too tough,”
Gopal said facetiously.
“And what about Mahmud?” Lakhsman asked.
“There are no conditions for a traitor like him,
unless he escapes to the desert. Perhaps he is on his
way there now.”
“I am still here,” Mahmud called, “and will remain
here to cut your throat, you son of a pig. Till then,
wait hopefully.”


After this heated exchange came a few minutes’
silence. Then Gopal spoke again.
“This is my final offer. You must hand me the
diamonds, and the red diamond too, and any arms
you possess. We shall then permit you to keep two
ponies, and give you enough food and provisions
for a three days’ journey. We faithfully promise to
carry out these terms as soon as you surrender.”
“And what about Mahmud?” Barry inquired.
“You will leave him here to be heaved into the
ravine for Naga to caress with her coils. We shall not
treat with him.”
“There’s nothing more to be said, so carry on,”
Barry yelled back. And the acetylene beam stabbed
the gloom once more.
They were considerably heartened by Gopal’s
attempt to come to terms. If they had possessed their
rifles they would not have hesitated to storm his
quarters, but the odds were heavily against them.
The fat old babu was not only losing heart but was
having difficulty in keeping awake. Another twelve
hours would make a change in the whole situation, if
they had the grit to hang on.
The weary vigil continued. Towards evening
Mahmud said a storm was gathering, as the air, even
in the bowels of the mountain, had become very
oppressive. He predicted that, when it broke, the
thunder and lighting would be terrifying. That, then,
would be an opportune time to make a sudden raid
and bring Gopal in as a hostage.


After that, he explained in an enthusiastic burst of
confidence, the others could be bribed to throw down
their arms. His suggestions did not meet with much
encouragement. There had been a distinct lull in
hostilities. Since the death of Ganpat not a single
shot had been exchanged. Lakhsman, who made a
quick visit to the prisoner, came back and reported
that a violent storm was raging and that the lightning
and thunder were terrific. The woman was showing
a considerable amount of courage.
“Fd like to meet her,” said Barry, “but native
women are so shy with strangers. She’ll have to learn
to trust us and be friendly as soon as we get old
Gopal off our hands.”
“Yes, later on. It’s better to take our time. A poor
lonely woman would most likely get alarmed if we
all crowded about her together,” said Lakhsman in
the sapient manner he sometimes assumed.
Again the smell of a savoury meal made their
mouths water. Mahmud, longing for a good plate of
curry and rice, with a little chutney to give it a
“bite”, declared that Shamsa was tormenting them on
purpose.
“Fm sick of hanging back here,” he said, a note
of revolt in his voice. “Let’s put our fortunes to the
test without delay. What better time to attack than
when they’re having a meal? If they’re all as hungry
as I am, they won’t be worrying much about us.”
Now and again a particularly loud thunder crack
could be heard. Gopal, they speculated, would hear


it more distinctly and, as some people do, may become
unnerved with it. There was a good deal of common
sense in Mahmud’s suggestion to attack \v hile the
meal was in progress and the storm was fraying the
diners’ nerves.
“Don’t let us discuss the pros and cons,” said Barry.
“Nothing worth while is done without taking a risk.
I’ll bet Gopal’s courage is just about evaporated. I
agree with Mahmud that we should give them a go.
I’m pretty slick with the revolver, so I’ll take the
lead. You, Lakhsman, and Mahmud will do good
work at close quarters if I haven t killed the lot before
you get to grips.”
Lakhsman looked at his watch and sniffed. “Shamsa
is serving the meal now. Shall we fix zero hour in
ten minutes’ time?”
“Okay,” said Barry, and saw to the loading of his
revolver.
They relapsed into silence. Now and again they
heard the shuffle of feet or the clatter of a cooking
pot. Gopal was in no genial and expansive mood, for
his guests ate in silence. The acetylene light burnt
steadily, and the beam it cast was at its best. To
Lakhsman this was the crowning hour, and his beat-
ing heart was steeled to meet whatever fate was in
store for him. Barry settled down to grim thinking.
If his father had been with him, he was certain the
attack they were about to make would have his
approval. He had little fear of the consequences. As


the moments ticked away, a strange feeling of
elation nerved him for the coming struggle.
He counted the minutes mentally as they slipped
by: five—six—seven—eight—nine. A warning glance
prepared Mahmud and Lakhsman for instant action.
Suddenly, in a dark corner, a torch burst into flame,
and Barry saw Chimar hold it aloft, whereupon he
knew that, in some extraordinary way, help had come.


CHAPTER XXIII
Led by Chimar, the storming party flung themselves
down and, as stealthily as snakes, crept into the area
of combat. Riverstone was just behind the young
Bhil, his sowars following and Golgi bringing up the
rear. The clank of a tulwar disturbed the hungry
men, ravenously eating the appetizing meal that
Shamsa had provided.
Gopal, manipulating the acetylene light, sprang to
his feet and switched the beam towards the sound.
For a moment Riverstone saw the babu clearly out-
lined and, with a quick apprehension of the position,
immediately fired. Gopaks hand went to his chest
as he swayed and crashed, bringing the lamp and its
stand clattering to the ground. Almost simultaneously
a torch was lighted, and shadows danced in the cavern.
The death of their leader, Rassul Ali, had greatly
dispirited the camel drivers, who had been urging
Gopal to call off the fight as they did not see why
they should imperil their lives for a cause which did
not concern them. Shamsa, too, had sensed a mutinous
spirit, and had begged her husband to patch up some
sort of peace that would ensure their personal safety
at least. Gopal was a wealthy man and had more than
sufficient for their needs or extravagances, and she


knew it was greed alone that made him persist in his
attempts to force his opponents into surrender.
Her temper was becoming more and more frayed
with sleeplessness and the constant tension. The loss
of Rassul Ali had marked a turn in their fortunes. It
was apparent that Lakhsman and his men still
possessed weapons and could use them. They had
shown pluck and good strategy, and had never once
stampeded. Their silence and quiet assurance had
worried both herself and Gopak
Like most Hindu women she was loyal and devoted
to her husband. He had many bad qualities but a few
good ones. In his personal relations with her he had
been kind and considerate, almost gentle in fact. Had
they lived where she could have flaunted jewels and
fine clothes, he would have lavished them upon her;
but in his business dealings she knew him to be crafty
and unscrupulous. He exacted the last degree of
service from those who worked under him, and
rewarded them as little as possible. Except for the
personal testimony of his men, no one could know
how many precious stones were won each week or
month. The prime minister accepted what was sent
to him as the total output and paid Gopal a percent-
age upon the sale price. The number of men em-
ployed, the provisions and equipment purchased, and
the means Gopal took to prevent travellers or curious
people from arriving at Mumtaz and attempting to
spy or nose round, did not concern Sir Ramchandra.
Nor did Gopal worry about what became of the
diamonds, or the wealth they represented once they


reached the prime minister of Nanda. He knew that
the gems had once been sent to Aladhu the high priest,
who had delivered them to Bulwant Rao. After the
Maharajah’s death and the death or disappearance of
the priest, he had received instructions from Sir
Ramchandra to send the stones direct to him. It had
been an entirely satisfactory arrangement. His com-
mission was paid into his bank in Baroda with great
regularity, and the prime minister was not so harsh
or distrustful as the high priest had been. When it
came to a choice between dealing with Sir Ram-
chandra in office, and Madhu prowling around the
country in disguise or posing as a ghost, well no one
could blame him for pushing Madhu into the crocodile
pit.
Shamsa realized that her husband’s tenure of office
depended upon political conditions in Nanda. It suited
Gopal to have Sir Ramchandra at the helm, even if a
new Maharajah were enthroned. This controversy
about the rival claims of Balkrishna, a descendant of
the old dynasty, and a village boy who was opposed
by the wealthy elements in Nanda, did not interest
him so long as Sir Ramchandra remained prime
minister.
Shamsa was growing very tired of living in a moun-
tain cave as the alternative to being scorched if she
ventured out into the sunlight. Unlike Gopal, she
could not stimulate associations of happier days spent
in the city of Baroda, by riding a bicycle precariously
up and down the ledge. Life, of course, might have
been much drearier had it not been for the woman


captive. Gopal’s predecessor had placed her under
Shamsa’s personal care, stressing the importance of
keeping her as comfortable, healthy and happy as
strict confinement would permit. Their prisoner was
not communicative. She was an Englishwoman who
was married and had a son to whom she was extremely
devoted. Where she came from, and who she was,
she refused to say. Only once had Kamala, as Shamsa
named her, taken someone in Mumtaz into her con-
fidence, and she had never ceased to regret it.
Gopal, under instructions from Sir Ramchandra,
kept Kamala supplied with books and with the
materials for crochet and needlework. She was never
permitted to leave her cell, but Shamsa visited her
regularly. A very close friendship and attachment
had sprung up between the women. Kamala spoke
freely of her homeland, its customs, the college where
she had been educated and her journey to India. As
though memory extended no further, the story of
her life abruptly ended at that point.
At one time Shamsa had felt somewhat jealous and
distrustful of Gopal’s periodic visits to Kamala’s cell,
but she soon realized that her suspicions were un-
founded. Only when Shamsa was ill or too busy, did
she permit any one else to take Kamala her food. The
key, otherwise, never left her possession.
Since Mahmud’s treachery had enabled their foes
to gain access to their stronghold, Shamsa had been
so busy and distraught, and so anxious not to disclose
Kamala’s presence, that she had entirely neglected
her. \\ hen finally she had resolved to make contact,


it had been impossible to reach her. The poor woman’s
screams had distracted her. Shamsa knew she was
suffering both hunger and thirst. In the days that
followed, Kamala’s plight had troubled her without
cessation, and she had used it strongly in her argu-
ments to bring Gopal to a better frame of mind.
Shamsa was in the act of offering her guests more
food when a party of naked and glistening men,
in some miraculous way, burst in. Gopal jumped up
instantly to swing the light round, and crashed as a
shot rang out. Before she could rush to his assistance,
a torch flared, and then the scene became almost as
light as day. Riverstone, a great pale giant, felled
Sulieman with the butt end of his revolver, and
Chimar the Bhil promptly knifed Abdul Gafur before
he could stagger to his feet.
Then Riverstone called, “Barry, are you there?”
And, with a cheer, the beleaguered party joined their
rescuers.
A few hasty words of greeting and explanation,
and Riverstone, lighting every lamp and torch avail-
able, attended to the wounded and the dying, Gopal
was beyond all human aid, and expired shortly with
his wife’s screams ringing in his ears. Abdul the camel
driver, after Chimar’s ardent attentions, had also
expired, but Sulieman seemed likely to recover. The
dead were reverently lowered to the ledge for burial
later on, but Golgi and Chimar promptly and uncere-
moniously hurled the bodies of their late enemies into
the ravine.
The storm by then had died down, and the sky had
Q


cleared. The ravine frothed with crashing waterfalls,
which were like music in that arid and desolate region;
tumbling headlong to the depths, calling gleefully
one to another like children sliding down a mossy
bank. Riverstone, anxious to return to Nanda with-
out delay, discussed the position with Barry and
Lakhsman.
“We’ve got a great deal to say to each other,”
Riverstone declared, “but we’ll let it stand over till
we’ve got more time. Lakhsman must get back to the
capital at once, and your father, Barry, is impatient to
see you. That weeping one is Gopal’s wife, I suppose?
We can’t leave her here.”
“There’s a woman who has been imprisoned here
for some years,” said Lakhsman, “and she too will
accompany us. But first let us find out what Shamsa
wants to do.”
Shamsa dried her eyes, and raised them tragically to
Riverstone’s when he asked her kindly what she
wished to do, as they were leaving very soon. For
the first time since Mahmud’s return to Mumtaz she
deigned to speak to him, and sought his advice. She
did not want to go to Nanda. If Riverstone Sahib
would approve, she preferred to go with the remain-
ing camel drivers back to civilization again. She had
no fears for the journey. The drivers had known her
for many years and could be trusted. She hoped Baloo
would be permitted to accompany her. He had been
with her family since childhood.
“I think Shamsa would be well-advised to do as she
proposes,” Mahmud agreed, still shamefacedly avoid-


ing her direct look. “There is nothing to keep her
here. In fact, it would now be dangerous.”
Shamsa regarded him with gratitude, and addressed
Riverstone again. “I have only one more favour to
ask. There is a woman who had been confined here
for some years. I do not know who she is or anything
of her history, as she refuses to talk about her past.
Sir Ramchandra the prime minister knows she is here,
and has instructed that she be well cared for. I have
done my best for her—not as a duty, but because I
became attached to this poor, lonely, patient and
lovable woman.”
“Lakhsman,” said Riverstone, “will you and Mah-
mud bring that woman here? Let us hear what she
has to say about her future. In the meantime,” he said
to his sowars, “you can return to camp and prepare
for an early start back to Nanda.”
The sowars retired immediately. The last of them
had just descended the ladder when Lakhsman and
Mahmud returned, with the woman prisoner between
them.
She walked up to Riverstone, her eyes blinking
until they became used to the glare of the torches.
Riverstone only needed a glance to know she was
an Englishwoman, or at least a European. He had
seen fair women in Persia and in Afghanistan, but
this one did not seem to him Asiatic. As she stood
before him he became conscious that she was good-
looking, comparatively young and a woman of innate
refinement, and that he, by comparison, must have
presented a curious sight, naked except for a loin-


cloth and smeared with oil. He noted that the dark
red sari she wore was clean and the woman looked
well-nourished.
He spoke kindly, almost apologetically. “Pardon
me,” he said in English, “am I right in assuming you
are English?”
“Yes,” she replied in a soft deep voice. “I am
English.”
“I, too, am English. I may not look it at the present
moment, but you must believe me when I say I am
a British officer—Riverstone of the mofussil police.
I’m afraid this conversation must be brief, as I have
much to attend to. I’m told you’ve been a prisoner
here for some time. There has been some fighting,
and Gopal your warder has been killed. His wife
Shamsa will speak to you presently. We are leaving
for Nanda as soon as possible. Whom will you accom-
pany—us, or Shamsa, who is going north by camel
over the desert?”
“I am somewhat bewildered, Mr Riverstone, at the
turn of events,” the woman said in a nervous voice,
“but I am naturally very pleased to be rescued at
last. Much as I regret parting with Shamsa, I shall
be glad to have my liberty and be able to return to
my husband and child, if they are still alive, and to
my friends.”
All this time, Barry had been watching the woman
intently. Something about her features, and particu-
larly about her voice, stirred the chords of memory.
Surely, in some dim happy past, they had been


associated. As she spoke, the thought—a daring one
indeed—made his heart beat tumultuously. Was she
his mother? His father had never spoken of her,
believing, perhaps, that she had deserted him and her
little son. As she came in she had glanced at him
without recognition, but then he had grown, and
moreover his skin was dyed as brown as Lakhsman’s,
and his disguise as a Mahratta was almost perfect.
“May I speak to the lady, sir?” Barry begged of
Riverstone. “I have something very important to
ask her.”
Riverstone nodded, and Barry faced her shyly.
“Like Mr Riverstone, ma’am, I too am English. My
skin is normally white, but just now it is dyed, and
I’m afraid I’ll just have to let it wear off. I’ve been
watching you and listening to your voice. Somehow
I think we belong to each other, and that once you
held me in your arms. My name is Barry Cantwell.”
While he spoke, the woman’s eyes gradually lit
with a curious ecstasy. When he finished, she placed
her hands on his fine young shoulders, looked search-
ingly into his face, and then drew him to her breast.
“My son, my son,” she kept repeating, as she
sobbed in his arms.
They let her finish her joyous weeping, while the
onlookers wiped the tears that had sprung to their
eyes also.
“Where is your father, Barry?” she asked. “Is he
still alive?”
“Very much alive,” Riverstone interjected. “Only


grave affairs of State kept him from coming to
Mumtaz.”
Barry then led her away to a quiet spot where they
could exchange news. Meanwhile, Shamsa had already
begun to pack her treasured belongings. A couple of
bundles and a box were filled with all she desired to
take away.
At daybreak Sulieman and Baloo hoisted these on
their shoulders and prepared to make their way
through the tortuous passage to the other side of the
mountain. Lakhsman and Mahmud courteously
decided to accompany the old woman, and followed.
She did not say adieu to Riverstone, because she
was certain his revolver had slain Gopal and left her
a widow; but she held out her hands to Mrs Cantwell,
who clung to them while she said farewell.
“Art thou happy, Kamala?” asked Shamsa.
“I should be,” Mrs Cantwell replied, smiling. “I
have found this, my son, and in a few days I shall be
restored to my beloved husband. What greater joy
can a woman ask than that?”
“I hope,” said Shamsa, “that you will be so happy
that the years you have spent in Mumtaz will soon
be forgotten. You have been a good and comforting
friend to know, and I shall remember you all my
days.”
Shamsa embraced Mrs Cantwell, placing first her
right and then her left cheek against the white
woman’s face. Without another word, she turned and
walked slowly away.


Slowly and gallantly the Hindu woman left the
home in which she had known some happiness and,
with Mahmud and Lakhsman on either side of her,
stumbled along that water-worn passage through
the mountain. After a rough and painful journey, she
stood beside a little parapet and looked over the
sleeping desert.
Baloo and the camel driver had already awakened
the sole occupant of the camp below. A few minutes
later Shamsa’s belongings were lowered. Baloo, not
waiting for a more dignified mode of reaching the
base of the cliff, slid down the greasy wire rope, and
occupied himself packing the camels. He could not
leave Mumtaz quickly enough.
Mahmud wound up the windlass, opened the little
cage, and stood aside respectfully while Shamsa
stepped into it.
“I am sorry,” he said with a little break in his
voice, “that you have been left a widow. May Allah
be with you in the days before you. I wish you well.”
She smiled up at him, not gaily, but with pathos.
“Thou art a budmash, Mahmud, even though thou
pretendest to be a good Moslem. Wilt thou do one
thing for me after I have gone?”
“Command me,” Mahmud said.
“Loose the carrier pigeons, otherwise they will
perish. If a message can be sent by one that came
from Sir Ramchandra’s cotes, write thus: ‘All human
tyranny and greed must be paid for in blood.’ ”
“I shall give him that message personally,” said


Lakhsman, “before I send him to live the remainder
of his days in darkness and disgrace.”
“Well spoken,” said Shamsa. Lightly touching her
forehead in salute, she turned to Lakhsman. “Prince-
ling, when thou comest to the gadhi, be firm and
strong. If Mumtaz enters your thoughts, think of an
old woman who wished thee well.”


CHAPTER XXIV
The sun rose in a blue sky washed with the copious
rain of the recent storm. The air had a refreshing
tang in it. Little specks of light cirrus cloud radiated
from the south. Indeed, it was so pleasant a morning
that Riverstone said he almost expected to hear a
skylark burst into song.
The cavalcade filed out of the Pass in imposing
array. Riverstone led with his sowars, then came
Lakhsman with his henchman Mahmud beside him,
and Barry and his mother followed, with Golgi and
Chimar well in the rear. The Bhils released the iguana,
and gave it a friendly pat before it slid to cover.
The waterfalls had ceased to run on the mountain
side, but there were runnels frothing towards the
ravine. If the rain had been general, there would be
little fear of water shortage on the journey before
them.
When they had travelled a fair distance from
Mumtaz, Barry turned in his saddle. The Pass, from
that angle, was becoming invisible.
“Take a last look at your prison, mother,” he said.
She pulled up her pony and reined it round. For
years—and she hated to count their number—Mumtaz
had separated her from all she held most dear. As the


months had passed, in the gloom of confinement and
solitude, her home, husband and child had come to
seem like mere figments of her own imagination, or
hazy dreams.
Life at Nanda had been as near perfection as any
human being could expect. What induced her oppres-
sors to abduct her from her home she had never
understood. She knew that Madhu and Sir Ram-
chandra were hostile to her husband, but this alone
could hardly explain the daring and effrontery of
the outrage.
“When I think of all the happiness it deprived
me of, I feel that I never want to hear it spoken of
again,” she said.
Barry moved up and placed his arm around her.
“You must forget the past and think only of the
future. I’ve got some great news to give you. Mr
Riverstone has thoughtfully sent his best-mounted
sowar ahead with a message for dad. If it reaches him,
he’ll meet us long before our journey ends.”
They talked about the servants, the garden, and
countless other familiar things. Ann Cantwell would
eventually see many changes.
The journey to Ankai, though tiresome and hot
during the day, was uneventful. Their arrival at the
Bhil village proved both agreeable and exciting.
Chimar and Golgi begged to be allowed to lead the
troop, and their relatives and fellow tribesmen agreed
they had never witnessed a more imposing spectacle.
A feast—humble perhaps, but convivial and cheery-
celebrated the Bhil chief’s return. The highlight of it


was an address given by Lakhsman, who extolled in
glowing terms Chimar’s deeds of prowess as well as
those of his father. Finally, he promised the villagers
that when he returned to Nanda he would see that
the two heroes were suitably rewarded.
Chimar could not contain himself longer. “What
he says, my brothers and sisters, that he will do. For
look you, Lakhsman is no common man, but a prince
who goes back to ascend the gadhi of Nanda. To
prove my words, O Maharajah and brother, wear for
my sake the gem you set out to recover to establish
your right.”
Riverstone nodded approval, and Lakhsman hung
the gold necklet, to which the All-seeing Eye was
attached, around his neck.
“You have heard,” continued Chimar, “how this
gem was lost, and how without it the gadhi had to
remain vacant. Well, there it is, and we—yes, all of
us—fought every inch of the way to reach the spot
where it was found.”
Humbly he knelt before Lakhsman, with his father
beside him, and went on, “Till a moment ago we
were warriors in arms and good comrades. Now we
salute you as a ruler. Maharajah, when you sit on
the gadhi, remember those who dwell in the jungle
and contend for existence with the brutes.”
“I shall remember that, brothers,” Lakhsman
declared with trembling lips.
The travellers called at all the villages that had
given them hospitality on their way to Mumtaz.
Particularly memorable was the visit to the one where


Nita, the Mahratta girl with blue eyes, had drawn
water for them. The village was prepared for their
coming, for the news, in some incomprehensible way,
had spread throughout the countryside that the All-
seeing Eye had been found and was adorning the
breast of the rightful successor to the gadhi. The
pretty village lass looked at Lakhsman with adoration
as he rode up. She, and no other, had helped to
quench his thirst and warn him of Grey Shadow.
Lakhsman dismounted, and hurried towards her
with his engaging smile. “Grey Shadow,” he said
gently, “will frighten you no more, Nita.”
“No,” she replied, smiling back. “He met his
master in thee.”
The excited little throng fell away slightly, so that
they could converse in private.
“I have thought of thee often in moments of
danger,” he said in a low voice. “Do not quite forget
me. Some day I shall come this way again.”
“But a Maharajah will have no eyes or thoughts
for a village maid. How could she be worthy of him?”
“She who has gentleness and goodness has every-
thing, and is priceless,” Lakhsman said gallantly, and
then turned to talk to her father, the patel.
Long before the sowar messenger passed their way,
the peasantry were on the move, some waiting to
greet their new ruler by the wayside, the more
adventurous forming an army and already marching
on the capital. Cantwell, after hearing a multitude of
rumours, was advised by Nehru that the party had
left Mumtaz and was beyond Ankai, and that the


All-seeing Eye had been found. So he had already
hurried to Dalziel, preparing to meet his son by car,
when the sowar arrived.
Cantwell opened the letter, and read it with tears
of joy streaming down his face. The news was simply
incredible. Ann-his beloved Ann-had been rescued
and was on her way home, and the All-seeing Eye
had been found. Hastily he packed a bag, fuelled his
Crossley and, telling Shunker that the memsahib
would be home in a day or so, thundered down the
road.
Shunker looked at his wife, bewildered.
“He speaks of the memsahib. Surely he has not
married again—unless,” and his wrinkled old face
broke into a smile of hope that he could not check,
“unless our memsahib, by God’s grace, is coming
back.”
Lustrelle had also received a message from River-
stone. The news was too good to be true. Only two
days ago Sir Ramchandra had announced that Bal-
krishna had arrived and was his guest, and that he
would not be responsible for Lustrelle’s safety if he
did not leave the capital immediately. Now both the
prime minister and his guest, like Lustrelle, could
look over the plain and see the procession of people
moving towards the capital. Reports said that the
banner of Lakhsman was floating high above the
columns of dust.
Just before noon Lustrelle rang up the prime min-
ister. “The resident here,” he said curtly. “Ask Sir
Ramchandra to come to the phone.”


“Sorry, Mr Lustrelle. This is the prime minister’s
secretary speaking,” came the response. “Sir Ram-
chandra is not here, and neither is his protege
Balkrishna. I fancy both of them have bolted. As a
matter of fact, I think you can guess,” said Ram
Sarrup facetiously, “that they did not leave so hur-
riedly to greet the new Maharajah.”
Lustrelle hung up the receiver with a satisfied grin,
and lit a cigar. “Cunning fellow, Ram Sarrup,” he
remarked to himself. “He’s getting on side already.”




Halstead Press Pty Limited
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney




In this thrilling story we find
ourselves in the midst of the
colourful life of Nanda, an Indian
native state, and the adventures
of a host of fascinating charac-
ters. The heroes are two boys —
Barry, the son of an English
official, and Lakhsman, a native
cowherd. The friends are soon
involved in a series of exciting
happenings, for the throne of
Nanda has been left vacant, and
Lakhsman is known to a few
friends —and enemies—as the
rightful heir. The boys set out
on a perilous journey in search
of the All-seeing Eye, a red dia-
mond without which no corona-
tion can be held. Needless to say,
their enemies do their best to
frustrate them, and there are
many thrilling encounters with
tigers, crocodiles, and murderers
before the goal is reached.
This is a real adventure story
—a feast for youthful imagina-
tions, Jungle Vagabonds estab-
lished the author as a firm
favourite with our boys, and The
Valley of the Lost Trad will
bring him even greater popularity.




