

■PIXIE 0'WAR.RI§ V
WITH A FEW DRAWINGS
BY THE AUTHOR


ST ' l' v ' m l\\;Av V \v;* . > : ' ;i V vi •'•' * *«r•" v r x >> vi*'-' :V\ » 4 -V\\7 . 4 -> V'""•G* 4 •:,.,v 4 * r i> > S.\'"' % 7 *
ftfrfV fURr '%-il 7*1 »\v v^ A 7'*•*••> ft. *s 'w CV-V'*. •i ■:»? « : >V '•••. "^S-rjL&s. -
, tBt nHVJT'■ w -Vv'/ 'Sv* •USisr-*' ■-■*•-* 'X* * *v "• £*;v:. ' ■ ' Vv *.•'?• •*•'. '' s> V W ; >•'' f f >. •: r . r -V".'*• y. m * *;♦ * '•
H >'-n '.%•••; A .' •<47.'"•" r V'
' Vl-'V;';/ I V,i'->;..- .V; 4V ; . - • f •-;* ••''•' ; r-'Q&i KS'V-V*'
"7 /l%w \ 4 ."V- '•• - v: ; .7:- ; v •..
• w- / • \ A7<; J 1 #v„f '.Vi- ; .'-'V.fv».> , -VIV' *VW*. ■"•2-?* •' '4. ■ 'C, 1 ■ &> y '\. < *2
i : r iF Al\ / ' X. / \ "f ,,,:•.. :^i ;■ •..-;u'
K *• 4D y \(K \ / Al V yV.' V •'' ■ \ r Vi,;: ,y:. -v*i n *- v. •• '0.-- Vj'. v 'v-
T Imlliiiir
T / | *MI BS 90 iii Rvi«ir\\ x I IMH "nvHi-" •' • • . ,
-^S^'irvvlC— ■'
v


Will W In I H1 f«i
Am |j|\
f WjW X
, a ' .JaSR jyjpBW *
8»,, Tf Sf^fSk<€52^.
lw [ /1 j/ \\ • rm Hk \ *.
W \ fj&alk aMA*
" V suv
S
W W I ,
jfjjf Ht ffiiffijjl^''
\S 'fei % ■
ScS* V^V*
V «ftw> -Ar\ i-
«
* 51K?
Vx -




THE HOUSE THAT BECKONS




•Pixie 0'WARRI§ V
WITH A FEW DRAWINGS
BY THE AUTHOR
THE AUTHOR
1940
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 NORTH YORK STREET, SYDNEY


Set up, printed and bound in Australia by
New Century Press Pty. Limited,
3 North York St., Sydney.
Registered in Australia for transmission
through the post as a book.


CI 3076
808




PAGE
13
18
23
28
32
39
43
47
30
54
39
67
71
78
83
87
94
97
101
106
109
114
CONTENTS
PART ONE
CHAPTER
1. THE BROOK
2. THE NEW BOX 18
3. LITTLE STRANGERS 23
4. CONTENTS OF THE BOX 28
5. THE FLUTE 32
6. PIETTRA 39
7. KANGAROOS AND PEACOCKS 43
8. PLATYPUS 47
9. PUG-PITS AND MUDBALLS 30
10. DRAGONFLIES 54
11. PLAT AND KIT 59
12. THE WINDING ROAD 67
13. THE CIRCUS 71
14. THE BEGGAR GIRL 78
15. WINGS 83
16. GUESSING 87
17. THE RAINBOW AND THE STILE 94
18. FATHER CHRISTMAS 97
19. THE WAY BACK 101
20. THE RIGHT WAY TO THE CIRCUS 106
21. THE REINDEER 109
22. TWINKLE THE DANCER 114




CHAPTER 1
THE BROOK
HE Mistress of Brookside was Dear Val to everyone except Merle
and Blueboy. She was Dearest to them. She was also their
favourite Auntie because she told them secret things that no one
else knew.
There was the Brook for instance; she knew where it entered her
garden and secretly trickled under creepers and down a great rocky cliff.
How it made its way to terraced gardens and ran slyly through thickly
grown shrubs to a long flight of steps.
Here it could be seen running in and ofut of mossy nooks and down
beside the steps, gathering speed as it went and ending in a small stream,
which ran to level ground beneath the wide spreading branches of a
magnolia tree.
Dear Val told of the great age of the tree, that it had been there
longer than anyone could remember. The house on the hillside, high
above it, was older still, and had been named after the Brook before the
tree was tall enough or wide enough to steal its reflection from the clear
waters.
Now the Brook lay in shadowy places, except when it ran beside a
green lawn, even here tall lilies overhung its banks and there was little
room for the sun's reflection.
Merle and Blueboy loved the Brook, and followed every twist and
turn. They saw it slip away between the tall bamboos, where the wind
played entrancing tunes upon the orgamlike stems, and wondered where
it went to.
There were other interests in the garden. A pair of kangaroos
hopped along the banks of the Brook and drank the clear water; and a
pair of peacocks strutted, using it as a mirror to reflect their beauty.
PAGE THIRTEEN


It was quite clear to Merle and Blueboy that the Brook talked of
adventures. It chattered incessantly and slurely told of happenings before
it entered the garden as well as happenings afterwards.
But what happened when it left the garden, they were unable to tell.
They guessed that it ran to secret places underground, and wondered if it
ever came out again. They did not know of a place in a field not far
away where the Brook came out of its hiding place and hid among tall
reeds and lagged into quiet pools before hastening on to other adventures,
running swiftly through fields and on and on until it came to the sub-
merged roots of a tree growing upon its banks. Here in a deep still pool
beside the tree it greeted two friends.
"Here I am, after a long journey and many adventures."
"We would like to hear about your adventures," the two friends
replied.
The friends were Splash and Flash, two platypuses. Since babyhood
they had played on the brookside and swum in its waters; when they
were very young their mothers introduced them to the Brook.
"What are their names?" the Brook sang.
"We have not chosen their names," the platypus mothers replied.
"But the way you splash over rocks and flash in the sun gives lus an idea.
"What is it? —what is it? What is your idea?"
"We wish to call our babies after you."
"After me! In the name of goodness, how?"
"Splash and Flash."
The Brook gurgled and laughed and splashed over rocks and flashed
in the sunlight.
"Fll be their foster-mother," it sang.
"That will be a splendid idea," the platypus mothers agreed. "And
you can help rear our babies."
So the Brook became a foster-mother to the baby platypuses,
gathered tadpoles for meals and washed worms out of its muddy banks,
and the platypuses were well fed and well cared for.
There were games, too, when the platypus babies floated idly on
the Brook's surface, and lullaby songs and tales of great adventure. Most
of all the platypuses liked to hear of the garden, and the Brook sang and
made a song about it.
Could there be a place so wonderful!
PAGE FOURTEEN




"Are you sure that all you say is true? Splash and Flash of
inquired, when the Brook came running hurriedly from the garden to
te li of Dear Val and the wonderful flowers she grew, and other strange
PP "Ofbourse, of course," the Brook sang. "Everything is true. And
there is a great deal more that I could tell.
"Do you think that we could go there?"
"Some day, some day!"
"Tell us about the magnolia tree and the wonderful roots. Is there
a good place among the roots for a nest?
"Certainly, certainly!"
"And is there room to burrow and to make a nursery?
"Ample room, ample room!"
"Is it a quiet place to rear a family? And can I burrow without
finding my way blocked?" Flash made special inquiries.
"That I cannot tell. You must find out for yourself. Surely you are
not afraid to burrow your way around an obstacle?
"I try to avoid obstacles, for it means I have further to go for food
when I am caring for my young. So it is natural I should wish to avoid
anything that I must tunnel around. However, if the garden is as beautiful
as you say, it is worth the risk."
"It certainly is worth it," sang the Brook; "for there are a great
many tadpoles in the still pool at the side of the magnolia tree.
"We will go then, if only for the tadpole season." Splash decided
for himself and Flash.
"Once you get there you will never wish to leave," the Brook gurgled.
"How do we get there?"
"Swim back as far as the rushes and tall reeds, hold your breath
and dive deep. You will find a tunnel deep down. Swim through it. You
will be swimming in dark waters and upstream. The way is difficult, but
it will take less than ten minutes."
"Are you sure that it is not longer than ten minutes, and that we will
find the light again?" Splash and Flash were a little nervous. "We may
lose our way and drown should we have to stay in the tunnel longer than
that."
PAGE SIXTEEN


THE BROOK
"You will find the light again," the Brook murmured. "By the time
you feel the need of coming to the surface for air, you will be in the
garden."
The Brook hurried on through fields, ran swiftly between red clay
banks, chatting incessantly, running inquisitively here and there. Some'
times it ran in and out of the burrows of animals who were not as clever
as the platypus, but made their burrows in the banks within reach of the
Brook's curious and inquisitive ways.
PAGE SEVENTEEN


CHAPTER 2
THE NEW BOX
AIN fell for days. The Brook had a wonderful time, swelled
up and up, and at last, unable to resist the chance of setting out
on new adventures, it overflowed its banks and ran away. It
ran through strange places, over rocks, across roads, in and out of gar-
dens. Presently, it came to a garden with a lily-pond, little knowing
that it was Merle and Blueboy's garden. It was such a lovely garden
that the Brook decided to stay awhile.
What fun to overflow a lily pond!
There were goldfish in the pond. The fish thought it fun, too, and
swam around flitting their tails and blowing bubbles.
And there were frogs in the lily pond, all croaking at once. I hey
croaked dismal news. Someone was lost—someone who had gone from
the garden and not returned.
Here was something to gossip about!
Who could it be? Who was lost?
It was surely someone important. Not only the frogs were dismal,
but all the little creatures in the garden and others, too.
"Oh, dear! I wish Gardener would come back!" came a dismal voice.
"What a croak!" the Brook gurgled. Then it swirled and rippled
excitedly •
That was not a frog croaking, that was a well-known voice. How
came the little boy, who played so often upon the brookside, to be so far
away from the garden? Why was he croaking as dismally as the frogs.
And here was another voice that sounded like a croak, too. Surely
the little girl's voice! And what did she say?
"Perhaps he is lost in all this wind and storm."
PAGE EIGHTEEN


THE NEW BOX
Croak, croak —what was the matter with them? The Brook ruffled
the waters of the lily pond.
"Stop croaking." Gurgle gurgle. "Stop croaking." Gurgle gurgle.
"Why don't you laugh as you always do?"
Merle and Blueboy did not recognise the Brook in the lily pond of
the Little Round Garden, and thought only that the rain had filled it to
overflowing. The rain came down heavier still and they ran indoors.
The Brook stayed all day and listened to the croaking frogs and all
the little creatures in the garden. Even the birds were unhappy about
the person who was lost.
When evening came the frogs' croaking changed to a more cheerful
note, the birds sang and the little creatures made a fuss. Something had
happened—they were all happy again. Then the children's voices called:
"Gardener is back!"
Now the Brook knew why everything had changed; and it remained
in the lily pond in order to hear further news. Then came a familiar sound
—Merle and Blueboy asking questions. It was a way they had; the Brook
had learned this when it gathered news at Brookside. And here in
another garden they were at it again.
"Did you find what you were looking for when you were away?"
Blueboy asked. (The Brook knew that he was speaking to the person
who had been lost.) "The birds and bees said you had gone away to
look for something. They thought it was your name; but I thought it
might be something else."
"I was looking for my name and I was looking for something else
at the same time. I found my name and something else, too. And here
it is!"
Another box! Can we see inside it?"
Not yet. I will tell you how I came by it first."
"How exciting!"
"I found it in Fairy Twinkle's garden. My foot kicked against it
as I waded knecdeep in a bed of lovcin'thcmist. I picked it up, found
that it was locked. Twinkle gave me the key and bade me not to open it
until I was far away."
"Didn't you?"
"No, no! Not at once. When I did open it, I found something
inside that made me decide to return to the Little Round Garden."
PAGE NINETEEN


"Oh! Can't we see what it is?"
"First of all, I would like you to read what is on the outside of it."
"There are long words," Merle said. "I can't read them. I can see
three circles around a map?"
"It is not a map; it is a plan. Don't you recognise it?"
"Why, yes," both the children shouted. "It is the Little Round
Garden! Why has it all those circles around it?"
"I will tell you about those circles. I made an important discovery
while I was away."
"What was it?" the two children whispered.
"I discovered that the Little Round Garden has three circles around
it, one circle enclosing the other."
"I haven't seen any," Merle said.
"You can't see these circles, but they are there just the same. You
live in one of them."
"Which one?"
"You and Blueboy and Little Mother and everyone, the birds and
insects and little animals all live in the first circle."
"Where do you live?"
"I live there too when I am Gardener; but when I am Mr. Fairy I
live in the second circle. And of course, Twinkle the fairy lives in the
third with her ring of laughter."
"How did you find out?"
"I found it out when I climbed over the fence on my way home.
I dropped the box and, as it lay upside down, I read what was written
on it. Then, putting two and two together, I found out many things
that had puzzled me."
"Let me see the writing!" Blueboy said eagerly.
"I will read it to you. It has in large letters across the top:
'A Prescription for Wisdom. 1
"then a plan of the Little Round Garden, and in small letters:
'Reality—Dreams—Humour.'
"And in tiny letters:
'Equal parts of Reality and Dreams mix well, and sprinkle plentifully
with Humour.'
"Of course that made me know everything!"
"Know what?" both children whispered.
PAGE TWENTY


THE NEW BOX
About the circles, of course. And I was glad too, for now I know
we have everything in the Little Round Garden to make us happy and
very wise. 11
What does Reality mean? 11 Merle stumbled over the difficult
word.
It means everyday happenings: to eat, sleep, work, play, and lots
of other things. 11
The Brook murmured gently: "There is a great deal to learn but I
must be on my way. It is growing darker every moment. 11
Darkie, the owl, called; then quite suddenly the Crickets sang loudly
—deafeningly. Their song died away.
Everything was quiet; a frog croaked in the lily pond; the trees
rustled softly. It was peaceful in the garden.
"I must be on my way, 11 the Brook murmured again.
Soft lights were lighting the windows of the Little Round House.
The silence was broken by a song. Someone sang inside the house;
someone called. The children answered the call and ran off their
voices became distant and died away. Silence again.
He who had been lost tiptoed away from the lily pond and walked
along the garden paths, stooping under the trees; reaching the pergola,
he pushed the door open and slipped quietly inside.
Gardener looked around him. It was wonderful to be back. There
was enough light from the evening sky and from a bright star shining
through the open shutters to enable him to see without lighting his
lantern.
He put the box on the table, sat on his bed, pulled off his shoes, urn
dressed quickly and tumbled into bed. He pulled the patchwork quilt
up around his chin and right over his ears. He was very, very tired after
a long journey and did not wish to be disturbed. But before he fell
asleep, he thought of many things that had happened while he was away;
of Twinkle and of the wonderful garden she had shown him.
"Merle and Blueboy will love to hear about that garden, 11 he
chuckled. "Those animal flowers would make anyone laugh. That little
sprite Twinkle will be able to weave a ring of children's laughter that
will surely echo round the world and make many children happy. 11
He chuckled again.
PAGE TWENTYONf


"And she knew how to make me happy too. How well she knew
how to please me when she gave me a box filled with rare seeds and
bulbs. A plan of the Little Round Garden too! —with places marked
where to grow the seeds and bulbs. As if I don't know my own Garden
and where things should be grown.
He yawned.
"Early to bed and early to rise. How early Til rise! I'll be up
before the sun, so as to get all the bulbs planted out and sow the seeds
in good time."
Suddenly all the lights went up in the Little Round House. Gar'
dener peeped through the open shutters of the pergola; there were a
great many windows on all sides of the Little Round House. He saw
Merle and Blueboy at the tea table. Both were talking; and he knew
that they talked about him.
PAGE TWENTY-TWO


CHAPTER 3
LITTLE STRANGERS
HE platypuses Splash and Flash had only one wish, and that
was to go to the garden the Brook sang about. What a song it
made about it!
They must go there.
One day they left the quiet pool beside the tree and swam back a
long way until they came to tall reeds. Here they looked for a still deep
pool. Finding it, they sank quietly beneath the surface—down—down
—down.
They did not hurry at first, for there was much to interest them
u - Tti at the bottom of tbe P° ol t0 tem P t their appetites. They filled
their bills and rose to the surface again and again to enjoy a hearty meal.
Each time they sank, although they kept their eyes closed, they felt
the way growing darker and guessed that they were near the tunnel. At
one time they tried to find the surface, but could not; so they knew that
they had entered it.
TU §^ MMERE D through the water. The way was upstream.
Ihey swam quickly, a little nervous of the deep dark waters. It became
darker and darker; the way seemed long—minutes seemed like hours
1 hey swam and swam. Although they felt the need of air, they knew
that they must keep on until they got through the tunnel and reached
the garden.
Would they ever see the light again? Had the Brook deceived them?
Was it further than they had calculated? Would they have to stay
beneath the water too long and perhaps drown?
"How long have we been swimmingr Splash said to Flash.
PAGE TWENTY-THREE


"It cannot be as long as it seems, 11 Flash replied, "for I still have a
little breath left."
"Mine is fast leaving me. . . I hear something! . . . What can it
be? 11
"Perhaps it is the song of the bamboos. The Brook told us that the
bamboos are the last things he sees when he slips from the garden, and
the song the wind sings in the organdike stems is the last thing he hears?"
"Of course, of course," Splash cried. "And I can feel a ray of light."
"At last! At last!" Flash gasped. "I thought that we would never
get to the garden."
The light came through the tall bamboos. Splash and Flash swam
towards it and in a moment rose gratefully to the surface.
They were in the garden too exhausted at first to take notice.
Breathing in the fresh air, they floated idly on the water, glad to rest
and recover their breath. They had had a trying experience.
They watched with suspicion two ducks that darted here and there,
squelching and slithering on the brookside, sinking among shiny lily leaves
as they pecked at dainty morsels.
These morsels were thrown by Dear Val, and Splash and Flash
were suspicious of her, too. Each time an arm was raised and before a
morsel could be thrown, they sank quietly beneath the water and dis'
appeared from view.
They came up again a few yards away, small eyes twinkling with
curiosity.
Up went the arm —down went the platypuses. Up went the arm —
—down went the platypuses. And so it went on for some time until
Dear Val caught sight of the little strangers. Before she had time, how
ever, to make their acquaintance, they had gone again.
"Platypuses," she murmured. "How exciting!"
She waited quietly on the brookside, stood quite still and did not
raise her arm.
Splash and Flash came to the surface again. They remembered that
the Brook sang a song about the Mistress of Brookside. It was a beautiful
song; there was nothing to fear.
The wind in the bamboos whispered: "Splash and Flash," and Dear
Val heard it.
PAGE TWENTY-FOUR




Are those their names? Splash and Flash!" she called softly. The
platypuses sank quietly beneath the surface.
Curiosity brought them to the surface again.
"Splash and Flash!"
Soon they became used to the voice and stayed above water longer
each time. The Brook was right! The Mistress of Brookside was gentle
and kind; and the garden the most wonderful place ever seen.
I have many friends in my garden!" Dear Val called to Splash and
Flash. Kangaroos and peacocks, and you are welcome too. There is
plenty of room for all."
Suddenly a shrill cry startled Splash and Flash. They disappeared
again, and Dear Val turned to Shimma the peacock.
"Hush, hush!" she said.
Shimma strutted about the lawn. There was a jealous note in his
cry. Dear Val walked towards him.
"You must be taught better manners," she said. "You should not
scare the sensitive creatures."
Then she caught sight of a child at the foot of the steep steps.
Beggars often called at Brookside, so it was not surprising to see a stranger.
Expecting to be accosted she waited, but was surprised to see the child
turn away and run up the steps. Before she disappeared, Dear Val caught
a glimpse of loveliness.
"The child seems as light as air the way she runs on the tips of her
toes, 1 she said aloud. Then to herself: "The ragged dress flutters like a
wind-blown flower. I must tell Merle and Blueboy." She stopped to
think. What can I tell them? There is nothing about the wind-blown
flower to tell. But there is a great deal to tell about the platypuses. I
wonder what next will happen in my garden?"
What happened next was what the Brook heard. The kangaroo and
the peacock talked together.
My dear friend, Shimma, who are these newcomers? They appear
to be able to live in the water as well as on land."
Strange creatures! I suppose they claim relationship to birds,
because they have bills and webbed feet!"
And to animals because they wear fur. But they seem more like
fish to me," Kango said.
PAGE TWENTY-SIX


LITTLE STRANGERS
"Neither fish nor fowl."
"A strange mixture."
"Exactly what I think!" Shimma said. "We have been birds always.
ancestors were favourites in the courts of the ancient Pharaohs. We
are survivors of an ancient type."
k And we are old and have remained native to our own soil for untold
centuries. In fact, we count ourselves as one of the first and oldest families.
Ihe platypus is hardly fit to associate with us," Kango said.
The Brook roared. It wished to drown this sound of discord It
would never do for Splash and Flash to hear.
PAGE TWENTY-SEVEN


CHAPTER 4
CONTENTS OF THE BOX
ARDENER slept all through the night. With the first streak
of dawn he awakened. He loved the quiet hour before the sun'
rise when birds stirred in their nests, chirping and chatting
noisily before leaving their cosy beds, and when every flower
and every tree caught the glow from the rising sun.
The first thing he did was to put his hand out and feel for the
precious box Twinkle had given him. Finding it safe and sound upon his
table, he jumped out of bed and started to dress.
While he dressed, he peeped into the box and turned little packets
over and over. Then he closed the box, turned it upside down and studied
the plan of the Little Round Garden. It was a neat plan and was marked
carefully. The writing was very small but very distinct.
Gardener laughed and chuckled to himself. He had no intention of
following Twinkle's instructions. However, the more he studied the plan,
the more interested he became; for he made a discovery. Twinkle s plan
for the garden was in rings of colour and would make a rainbow in the
garden.
I think I will follow it after all," Gardener said.
He took the box to the garden, emptied the packets into one of his
large pockets and put the box upside down beside him, then he started
to work.
He had been working quietly for some time before the birds left their
nests to seek a morning meal. As he dug in the garden Honey and Chirp,
the little birds with their nest in the tree near the lily pond, darted for
the worms, his spade uncovered. But old Kooka, the kookaburra, snatched
them first, then flew to the fence and sat there chuckling.
PAGE TWENTY-EIGHT


CONTENTS OF THE BOX
A llttle ® lue Wren hopped about the lawn then flew away. The
theS TP ° n Merks window ' clin g in § w "h his claws to
the lead-l ghts and tap—tap— tap with his beak.
blue a ™ akened and looked w hh admiration at the little bird with
b nLT nf h VlV 'n Col ° Urm f made a P icture am °ng the rose-coloured
Sow bogainvillea that hung in sprays around the heart-shaped
said "Tan ttnIPVP for „ fear of Orbing her little visitor. She
said, lap, tap, tap. You re telling me it is time to get up."
f . iJ T somet^ in § s P ra ng upon the window sill and gave her a dreadful
\/r i pair ° green eyes trough the pane.
ere sprang from her bed, ran to the window and banged upon it
Go away, you naughty cat!" she cried.
This awakened Blueboy.
it time to get up?" he called.
"Quickly, quickly! Gardener is back!"
Gard t f r ew ™nu entS kter , th i ey were °V t in the garden ' and runnin g t0
Gardener. Oh we are glad you are back!" they cried as they threw
heir arms about him. Please can we see what is inside the box?"
inere it is. Gardener pointed.
A-tr. Y hat d °f Re—re—reality mean?" Merle stumbled over the
difficult word But before Gardener had time to answer, she said, "Oh,
there s my little Blue Wren! Why are cats cruel to birds?"
to the Gardener j aid ' " and more Reality." He pointed
to the little Blue Wren as it darted after insects on the lawn.
Would you call birds cruel? They eat insects."
They eat seeds, too," Blueboy said, and pointed to a bed of
cinerarias.
The y a f e full °f conceit, those little blue fellows," Gardener replied
hi P f.u , re , the fl ,° Wers are brightest. They seem to know how
beautiful they look, and cinerarias bloom brightly even when some of
the flowers have gone to seed.
Gardener and the children stood quietly to watch little Blue Wren
is antics and tricks were amusing. He alighted upon a large leaf picking
"Where has he gone?" they asked.
PAGE TWENTY-NINE


The little bird came out from under the flowers, just as suddenly as
he had gone in, and with quick motion slid off a wide green leaf.
He thinks he is on a slippery-slide," Blueboy laughed.
They all laughed at this, and at the little bird as it darted swiftly
A dosen or so other little grey birds hopped about the lawn.
Are those his wives? 11 Blueboy inquired.
Two or three of them are, 11 Gardener said.
foHow'the'leader. See how one leads and all the others
follow? Merle said.
The blue ones don t follow. They seem to go their own way, 11
Blueboy remarked.
Perhaps it is to escape being hen-pecked." Gardener chuckled. He
pointed to a gay little fellow perched on a large leaf within reach of the
spray from a sprinkler. "He is having his morning shower, 11 he said.
Look at him now! 11 Merle cried.
The little bird had taken shelter under a large leaf,
is using it like an umbrella, 11 Blueboy cried.
"He tapped on my window this morning, 11 Merle said. "He is peep-
ing out from under that leaf in the same way as he peeped into my
room. r 7
Tell us about the box now, 11 Blueboy said.
"The box was full of packets of seeds and bulbs. 11
"Is that alir Blueboy's voice was full of disappointment. "I thought
it might be magic. 11 8
"Well, indeed, indeed, it is magic! Sit down and I will tell you all
about it. In the first place I must tell you that the seeds are very rare
and very wonderful, because they came from Twinkles garden where
she grows flowers with animal names for her ring of children's laughter 11
Tell us about it. 11
"Well there are Dragons and Snap-dragons; Tigers and Tiger-lilies;
andies and Dandelions; Stags and Stag-horns; Cows and Cowslips and
even Butterflies and Butterfly Delphiniums. 11
"And did they grow like animals instead of flowers? 11
Not exactly. But they are grown in a way that makes them as
exciting as Dragons, Lions and Tigers. Some day I will tell you all about
the flowers in Twinkle's garden. But look at these seeds!" He took some
seeds from the box and held them in his hand.
PAGE THIRTY


CONTENTS OF THE BOX
colouTform a m n °, re , wonderful magic could there be than to know that
lour form and s ha pe come from these and also delicious scent."
How does it happen, I wonder?" Blueboy said.
J. here is a magic wand, you know."
Is there? Where is it?"
"\m. aWay ?. nd yet i close; you see it: is tbe ma gic wand of the sun
Who is talking about magic?" sun . . .
grass ™ ey looked U P- Cookie stood on the
g s embankment. She had come to the garden to greet Gardener
get all the mat yOU it - if y ° U are talkin S about magic, you'll
fuotmeS
famoustnagickm dtere. ' ** P ° St£rS Say there 15 t0 be a worid '
"A circus!"
dener^id C "fwo n nd a e nd f% arde w r i!°° ked f her in sur P rise ' 111611 Gar '
said - 1 wonder if Twinkle has anything to do with it."
PAGE THIRTY-ONE


CHAPTER 5
THE FLUTE
fHE Mistress of Brookside looked for the platypuses every day.
She was disappointed not to find them; still she was sure that
they would come again some day.
But days lengthened into weeks and still there was no sign of Splash
and Flash. Then one morning, quite suddenly, they were there.
I must go to see Merle and Blueboy and tell them the exciting
news, she said to herself. But she did not find time to do so until evening
came; then when she arrived at the Little Round House Merle and Blue'
boy were in bed.
Long ago Little Mother had made a plan of heart-shaped corners for
the Little Round House and Merle s and Blueboys bedroom windows
were heart'shaped. Their beds were set in the window space, which
enabled them to talk to one another before they went to sleep at night
and when they awakened the first thing in the morning.
Dear Val went first to Blueboy's room and gave him a big hug and
a kiss and whispered that she had some news for him. Then she went to
Merle's room, kissed her and whispered the same to her. Then she sat
on a chair by the open windows and both children were able to talk to
her. Blueboy sat up in bed and shouted:
"Tell us the news quickly!"
'The platypuses have come back," she said.
"Have they? How exciting! What are their names?"
"Splash and Flash."
"Can we see them?"
You will have to get up very early one morning because platypuses
like the mornings best for playing in the Brook."
PAGE THIRTY TWO


with me^ 1Slled S ° m0 7 * blue ' e y ed £ irl would come to live
"Why?"
"Because . . . because . . Dear Val started.
the fluti
»d S:™;xz; b "z™r P "' ked and mwerd ,bo " Sp "
t Tell us about your butterflies, 11 he murmured.
Oh, please do, 11 Merle said.
p^ 11 ', 0 !? 6 y °, U j eyes ; lie down read y t0 slee P and I will tell you."
tfoth children did as they were told.
"One morning when I awakened early," Dear Val began, "I found a
ong sunbeam across my bed. Something was happening. A shimmering
dust like powdered opals.fell gently, gently down up oS me. ButS
' r Un k eam '/ atChing th£ iridescent flours upon their
. The Fairies have been dancing on the Rainbow,' I said to mvself
This is the dust that is raised by their dancing feet and sent to their
honeTtlf f°T e^th. I held out my hand. I wanted some for myself I
hoped that I might be a favourite too. I wished to sprinkle the dust on
my shoulders, perhaps I could grow wings."
"Did you get some?" the children whispered.
m, F Ye 5 1 dld 'j ? 6ar Y al w hispered back. "And I threw the dust over
to Jp F ? u r j moments I fch I had wings, and off I went
to see where else the dust was falling."
"Did you find out? 11
Dear Val nodded.
"Where? 11
nee. 1 - nto the sandmans hag- The sandman who sprinkles it into little
people s eyes at bedtime and makes them sleep and have lovely dreams "
Anything else?
"yy l Jt mto children's eyes, and I made a wish 11
What did you wish? 11
"Shall we guess? 11
111 give you two guesses. 11
Because someone you love best in the world is far away? 11 Merle
guessed, and you are sometimes lonely. 11
Dear Val nodded.
rHIRTY-THRI


And because you would like someone like Twinkle the Fairy to
stay forever."
You have both guessed right! Sleep now, my darlings. Good
night."
Dear Val threw kisses as she went out of the door. Merle and Blue'
boy closed their eyes, then opened them a tiny slit. Through their half-
closed lids they saw iridescent colours shimmering. They closed them
tight again, as they wished to catch the dust. Cautiously, they opened
their eyes. But the dust was gone and so was Dear Val.
Dear Val slipped away quietly through the front door of the Little
Round House. When half way down the garden path she heard a
sound. Stopping for a moment to listen, she thought that Blueboy played
his flute. The sound ceased and she continued on her way. As she
neared the gate, the sound came again.
Blueboy has found his lost flute," she smiled to herself.
No. The sound came from outside the gate. Whoever played,
played delightfully and appealingly. Dear Val was curious. She walked
out on to the winding road, looked both ways, but there was no one to
be seen.
Pulled and a little bewildered she looked one way, then the other;
walked this way, then that. But whichever way she went, the sound
seemed to come from the opposite direction, and she could see no one.
Surely someone was playing a joke upon her. She would not be
caught. She decided not to notice or seek to find the player. The moon
looked down from a clear sky and seemed to smile at her predicament.
She set out again and kept steadily on. The sound followed. It
floated on the night air, seeming at one moment to come from a garden
she was passing, then from the other side of the road. Sometimes near;
sometimes far off. Dear Val walked with a light tread, singing as she
went, looking neither to right nor left for fear of losing this enchantment.
At every turn, however, she paused a moment to listen before con-
tinuing on her way, happy to hear the tune which seemed to follow
on the air.
Arriving at the gates of her own home, she looked quickly over
her shoulder, expecting to catch a glimpse of the player. But no shadow
stirred. She walked quickly beneath tall trees, where moonlight flickered,
making small patches of light among deep shadows on the driveway.
PAGE THIRTY-FOUR


• ••V'. f - ; *1? ••••- ;■ v. : ;v • - •


The drive sloped gently upwards, curving beneath wide spreading
branches of great oaks that grew on either side. At the top of the slope
it turned in a wide sweep, and ran around bordered gardens where white
azaleas challenged the brightness of the moon till Brookside came into
view, tall and lovely in the moonlight.
Dear Val did not attempt to enter her front door, but walked under
the portico through which the drive ran on to a terrace. It seemed as
if a second moon looked through the branches of a tree that loomed at
the end of this terrace. In reality it was a lamp shaped like a moon and
suspended from a branch. It was Dear Vahs guiding light to her home.
As she walked towards it, it appeared luminously green, and the
sound of the flute came clearly and joyously. She picked up the ends
of a long scarf she wore, waved it until it billowed about her and danced
and pirouetted about the terrace, holding her arms high, the scarf flow-
ing about her.
A little out of breath, she wondered at herself, laughed happily,
leant against the balustrade and stared over terraced gardens to the
lawn far beneath. Upon this lawn she saw moving shadows.
Dear me, dear me! They are all awake, 11 she murmured. "The
magic of the flute disturbs them, too. 11
Steep steps led to the lawn. She walked to these and felt her way
carefully, step by step. The branches of trees cast deep shadows, no
glimmer of light came through the dense foliage. She knew the way and
the darkness did not hinder her.
When she reached the bottom step she stood a moment. Thump
thump—thump! A shadow bobbed up and down on the smooth
lawn. She stretched out her hand, and the next moment a soft warm
nose nulled into her palm.
"What is it, Kango dear? 11 she asked.
Thump thump—thump! Another shadow came bobbing. She
felt a small head, quivering lips and sensitive nose pressed against her arm.
You too, Tangi! Why are you all so excited? V?hat is the matter
with you? 11
A sudden raucous cry filled the night.
Hush, hush! Dear Val said. "You naughty peacock. You will
disturb the neighbours. 11
PAGE THIRTY-SIX


THE FLUTE
Shimma with tail outspread stood in the moonlight. He bowed
his small head with a peculiar quick motion, bowed and bowed again.
"Is it the music that has excited you or the moonlight? Perhaps
it is your new friends the platypuses."
Dear Val little knew how near the truth she was.
"If I could only understand your language," she continued. "I need
Blueboy's flute. It has the right kind of magic."
She listened. That other sound had enchantment too, it came again
in a different way. It seemed to be in the rustle of leaves, in the scent
of the magnolias heavy on the night air, in trickling waters. And now
she did not care who played the flute —only that the music was still
there—how long it lasted she did not know. When the moon went
under a cloud she bid her pets good night and went up the long flight
of steps.
As she neared the top she saw a slender figure. The wind-blown
flower again she thought, and hastened. But upon reaching the top
steps there was no one there. The moon shone with a luminous green
light encircled by an iridescent ring of colour. Dear Val walked to a
side door, put her hand upon a switch, and the next moment the light
from the green moon went out and she disappeared inside the door and
darkness enveloped her.
When Dear Val left Merle and Blueboy, they talked about the
platypuses in the garden of Brookside.
"We'll get up very early and go and see Splash and Flash," Merle
said.
They continued to talk about the strange creatures until they grew
sleepy. They fell asleep, but were awakened almost immediately.
"What's that?" Blueboy said, sitting up in bed. "I hear my flute
being played by someone."
"It sounds like a flute. It is out on the winding road," Merle called.
'The moon is very bright. We could just peep out of the gate.
It might be my lost flute."
No sooner thought than done. They crept from their beds, put on
their gowns and slippers, and went out into the garden.
At first they peeped out of the gate; then they took a few steps
on to the winding road, then a few more. The music of the flute became
PAGE THIRTY-SEVEN


distant. They followed step by step and soon found themselves a long
way from home. The flute became more distant still. They ran and kept
on running, but could not catch up to that elusive sound. It was entic
ing. They followed and followed until suddenly they found themselves
in a dark place among trees.
"Where are we?" Merle asked.
I think we re in somebody's garden," Blueboy whispered.
PAGE THIRTY-EIGHT


CHAPTER 6
PIETTRA
HE moon came out from behind the dark cloud. Music from the
flute filled the night with mystery.
"I wonder who plays the flute? Blueboy said.
"I wonder how we got in here?" Merle said.
Quietly and stealthily they walked about feeling their way around
rockeries, upon uneven paths that twisted and turned m every jetton.
They stumbled over crooked steps, some up some down, until they
came to a straight path. They walked along this and found a gate, ran
through it and were on the winding road once again.
"We are back on the road," Merle said. "The flute led us in there.
I wonder why?" ,
"I wish it would play again," Blueboy said. Sometimes it sounds
like my flute, and it may be the one I lost. 1
"What's that?" Merle said. ... "I can hear something.
Quite a different sound came to their ears.
"It is someone crying," Blueboy whispered.
Then the moon shone brightly. And they saw a little: girl sitting
by the side of the road with her head on her arms. She sobbed.
Merle and Blueboy ran and sat down beside her.
"Why are you crying?"
"Please don't cry," Blueboy said. "We'll help you
The little girl raised her head, and by the light of the moon ere
and Blueboy were able to see a pair of very blue eyes.
"Blue eyes!" they both said, staring at the little girl.
PAGE THIRTY-NINf


The little girl in turn stared at them, and saw sympathy in two
pairs of earnest eyes. It seemed to comfort her. Tears that shone like
stars on long lashes were brushed away.
"Oh, thank you! It is so kind of you to want to help. I was sure
that I would find it again. 11
"Find what? 11
"The house. 11
"What house? 11
"The house that beckons.
"Do you want a house? We know of one you can have. You
needn't look for one. 11
"But I want the house that beckons. 11
"How can a house beckon? 11
"I don't know—but it does."
"Would you like us to help you to look for it?"
"That would be wonderful."
Strange things happened on moonlit nights, and it seemed a simple
matter to look for a house that beckoned.
"What will you do when you find it?" Merle asked.
"Never leave it again."
"Haven't you got a house of your own?"
"Yes, of course."
"Don't you like it?"
"Well, there are so many children
" 'She had so many children and she didn't know what to do',"
Blueboy interrupted.
Piettra laughed. "How did you know?"
"Oh, I just guessed."
"Oh! I wish I could find the house," Piettra said, jumping to her
feet and running quickly away.
"Wait! Wait! We are going to help you find the house that
beckons," Blueboy called.
"I can't wait. I can't. I will be late, but I will come again," Piettra
called and turned before she came to a bend of the winding road, raised
her arm and waved. Her ragged frock blew away from a slender figure.
Something like silver threads shone beneath her rags.
PAGE FORTY


"" '


"I saw some wings, 11 Blueboy whispered. Perhaps she is Twinkle
and she doesn't know it."
"But she's got blue eyes and we should have got her for Dear Val.
A sound floated on the night air—the flute again!
"Come on! I'm going to find out where it comes from," Blueboy
said, getting slowly to his feet.
Merle got up slowly too. Suddenly she felt very tired.
"My legs are aching," Blueboy said. "I can't go any further.
"Well here " Merle offered her hand. "I'll help you."
They trudged homewards. It was not really as far as they imagined.
When they came to the gates of the Little Round Garden, they were
surprised to see Piettra peeping over the low hedge.
"Oh! There she is again, and she's peeping into the Little Round
Garden," Blueboy said excitedly.
They ran to her, calling: "Piettra, Piettra!"
"Why are you looking into the Little Round Garden? Do you
think that the Little Round House is the house that beckons?"
"It looks so sweet and inviting, I wish it were," she said.
"It belongs to us," Blueboy said proudly.
"Oh!"
Piettra ran. Merle and Blueboy ran after her, calling: "We'll help
you to look for the house that beckons!"
"I must hurry, I must, I must," she called over her shoulder, then
disappeared around a bend in the road, and Merle and Blueboy turned
back and went home to bed.
PAGE FORTY-TWO


CHAPTER 7
KANGAROOS AND PEACOCKS
TOLD you so; I told you so," the Brook sang all day long when
Splash and Flash decided never to leave the garden again and
busily burrowed here and there looking for a home site. The
Brook thought they needed help and ran after them.
"Keep out," Splash said, "you are not wanted here, we like a dry
nest."
But the Brook felt they needed help and kept following until Splash
and Flash became cunning and burrowed upwards. They came to a
secluded place under the protruding roots of the magnolia tree and
decided to settle there. They burrowed with their claws and their beaks,
pulling the loose earth away. When the hole was large enough they
lined it with dry leaves and willow swishes. It was a very cosy nest,
the entrance surrounded by ferns. They took care not to disturb these
as they wished to keep their home a secret, and not even Shimma's sharp
eyes could have discovered it.
When this home was complete, Flash had her own particular work
that she must do unaided —the nesting chamber was her responsibility.
She burrowed and tunnelled away from the home nest. There were
difficulties, the magnolia tree's roots spread out in all directions. She
had to tunnel back towards the Brook.
"Surely the Brook won't come here. At any rate, I will make
plenty of pugs in the burrow so that the nest will be safe in case he
does."
She burrowed with claws, pulled the earth away with her beak,
and tunnelled until she found a suitable place for the nesting'chamber.
PAGE FORTY THREI


Then she shaped it to the shape she wished, ran back along the burrow,
collected gum leaves and willow swishes and carried them back to line it.
After this, although tired, there was still no time to rest. She ran
almost to the entrance of the burrow and started pugging. First she
gathered the earth into mud balls and then sealed up the burrow at
intervals, still shaping with her beak and building with her claws. After
each pug, she was more sure that the nesting-chamber was safe from
intrusion and that the Brook could not follow.
Flash worked without ceasing for sixteen hours. She was very tired
and glad to curl herself cosily into her nest, where she expected to have
a long rest. To make extra sure that she would not be disturbed, she dug a
pug-pit and built a pug which closed her into the nest.
By and by there were two little eggs and, later on, two baby
platypuses.
One day the Brook's busy ways led it too far, although Flash was
sure that the nesting chamber was above where the Brook could over-
flow, she had not calculated upon the great height from which the Brook
ran, and when it ran down the steps, instead of continuing on its usual
course, it swirled round and round a big stone and tore the earth away.
It uncovered the nesting-chamber.
There was nearly a tragedy. The Brook run away only just in time.
"What have I done! What have I done!"
It would never do to disturb the platypus babies!
Kango found the uncovered nest and called to his doe:
"Come and look at this, Tangi."
Tangi hopped to Kango's side.
"Here is our chance," he said. "If we disturb these creatures they
will leave the garden and we can live in peace."
Tangi was a gentle soul. Peeping into the nest she made a discovery.
She gave a little grunt and a little hiss.
"What are you doing?" Kango said sharply.
"Look at the babies. Look at them!" Tangi grunted.
"You are talking to those babies as if they were your own."
"Well, they are like our own, Kango dear, you must admit. See
how much alike! And they need comfort, too. Ours look exactly the
same when they are too young to leave the pouch."
PAGE FORTY-FOUR


More grunts and hisses. It was Tangfs way of comforting her own
young.
"Hold your noise! I never heard such nonsense!" Kango said.
"I'll see that these intruders leave the garden and never return. Com-
paring them with our offspring, indeed! What next? Out of my way!
I'll deal with them."
Before he had time to do as he threatened, there was a cry from
Flash, who had been in the nest under the roots of the magnolia tree.
Splash hastened to protect his family. He made a furious onslaught
upon Kango, and seized one of his hind legs with his back claw.
The kangaroo gave a cry of surprise.
"Let go, let go!" he shouted. "You interfering creature!"
"You call me that," Splash said, holding Kango's paw tightly. "In-
terfering indeed! When you are in the act of disturbing a mother caring
for her young. Don't you see that my poor little Flash is frightened and
that my two children are in danger of taking cold? I won't let you go
until I am sure you can do no harm."
Tangi looked on in great surprise. This was something she had
not expected.
"Oh, Kango! Perhaps you had better not do anything to disturb the
platypus family."
"I don't expect to be able to with this fellow hanging on. He's got
a grip like steel —and what a temper!"
This commotion attracted Shimma the peacock. He came strut-
ting across the lawn with outspread tail, his feathers shaking with excite-
ment.
"My good friend," he said to Kango. "Do you need any assistance?"
Kango endeavoured to hide his embarrassment. "I do not!" he said.
"Do you think that a little bout with a creature of this size would mean
my calling for help?"
"I could peck his eyes," Shimma suggested.
"Certainly not! Splash and I have decided to be friends. This is
a friendly bout; although he should be taught the exact rules of boxing."
"I should think so!" Shimma's raucous cry had a sound of contempt
which showed that he was not exactly taken in by Kango s explanation.
He peeped into the nest where Flash crouched in terror.
)RTY'FIVI


"What is this?" he said, looking at the baby platypuses. "A nice
pair of juicy worms?"
The next moment he was sorry for this remark. Splash released
Kango's leg and quickly seized one of Shimma s.
Before Splash had time, however, to get a good grip, Shimma pulled
his leg away and ran back to the lawn with his beautiful tail trailing
behind him. ,11. WT
"Spiteful creature! I knew I should have pecked his eyes out. We
were quite right when we thought he was not fit to associate with us.
"What do you mean by coming to our garden?" Shimma called when
safely on the lawn. ' You are interlopers.
"Your garden?" Splash called back. "I suppose you'll say next that
the Brook belongs to you, too? Why, he is our best friend and he
invited us to come here. He belongs to the fields and the hills. He even
runs far away and out to the sea. We are here and here we mean to
stay." 1 1 _
Kango hopped back to the lawn, followed by Tangi.
"Don't answer the fellow,' he said to Shimma. He and his family
may be here only for the tadpole season, and in that case we will not be
bothered by them for too long."
Kango's right paw smarted badly and he wished to forget his encoun-
ter with Splash.
PAGE FORTY-SIX


CHAPTER 8
PLATYPUS
HHEN Merle and Blueboy awakened the morning after Dear
Val brought the news about the platypuses, they did not know
which was the most exciting thing that had happened: the news
about the platypuses, the music of the flute; or finding the little girl with
blue eyes.
"We will have to tell Dear Val that we have found a little girl with
blue eyes," Merle said.
"And about the flute that might be mine," Blueboy added. "And
we've got to go and see the platypuses. So we had better go at once."
They dressed hastily and set out again on the winding road with
the sun shining instead of the moon.
The sun was just appearing above the rise of the hill and came with
a crimson glow. The morning air was fresh. The children ran fast;
their feet seemed to hardly touch the ground, whether the road ran
straight and level or crooked and uphill.
When they arrived at Brookside the great iron gates were wide
open. They walked between stone pillars on to the drive, under an
archway of trees where the early morning sun danced in patterns on the
leaves, and birds chirped loudly and shrilly over their morning toilet.
The trees made long shadows on the wide drive and there were
bars of sunlight between; this enabled the children to play a game. They
jumped over the long shadows into the sunlight. Merle had long legs
and she jumped over all the shadows, but Blueboy jumped right into
the middle of many.
When they arrived upon the terrace they were out of breath.
Looking up at the windows of Brookside they noticed that the blinds
PAGE FORTY-SEVEN


were drawn and that all the doors were closed, so they walked quietly,
talking in whispers.
"Everyone is asleep," Merle said.
"Pan is awake. He never sleeps," Blueboy said, looking at the
statue of the little god Pan who played his pipes by the side of the lily
pond. Lily buds were still tightly closed.
"The lilies are asleep," Merle said. "How early it must be!
They tiptoed to the balustrade and looked over terraced gardens
to the beautiful lawns below.
"The kangaroos and peacocks are awake!"
The sun shone on the top of the magnolia tree. The cup-shaped
flowers were tinged pink by the glow of the morning sun.
"I wonder if any Fairies slept in the magnolia flowers last night?
Merle said.
"If they did, they have been out of bed long ago," Blueboy ans-
wered.
The two ran to the steep steps and, walking slowly down, stopped
to peep into the mossy fern-grown corners beside the steps, and saw the
Brook running hurriedly down on its busy way. When they reached
the last step, their first thought was for the kangaroos and peacocks.
These creatures, however, were nibbling grass and tender young growth
so they did not disturb them, but hurried after the Brook, which raced
them to a shadowy place beneath the magnolia tree, where the banks
were starred with moon daisies, and ferns grew at the water s edge.
There were stepping stones wet and shiny. The children stepped
cautiously upon these and looked into the still clear water hoping to see
the platypuses. They waited patiently, keeping very still, but there was
no sign of these strange creatures.
Then they jumped from the stepping stones to the bank and walked
among the ferns to look for the platypuses 1 nest. A grey water rat
with beady black eyes peered at them and then scurried away; frogs
flopped and plopped into the water; dragonflies darted here and there.
But there was no sign of Splash and Flash. They walked to the further-
most comer of the garden, then returned along the Brookside, holding
back the ferns that overshadowed it, peeping, peering here and there,
until they were back again under the magnolia tree.


PLATYPUS
"Someone has been digging!" Merle said, pointing to loose earth
under the tree.
"There's a hole and a nest!" Blueboy exclaimed.
They stooped to look between the protruding roots of the magnolia
tree.
"Someone has been hunting for the platypuses," Blueboy said.
"And there one is!" Merle cried.
Flash crouched away in her nest and looked with feapfilled eyes
at the two children. She gave a little growl.
"Poor little platypus!" Blueboy said.
A sound above the ground drew their attention. And there was
another platypus coming towards them.
"I wonder which is Splash and which is Flash?" Merle said. "How
unhappy they seem. Poor little things!
"I am sure the little mother platypus is Flash," Blueboy said.
The two children knelt down to look closer at the little creature
in the nest. They noticed how cleverly and cunningly the nest had
been made.
"There are two baby platypuses," Merle whispered.
"They are like real babies," Blueboy murmured. "They haven't
got any fur on them and they are quite naked."
"Look how the mother cuddles them to keep them warm," Merle
said. "I wonder who tore up the ground."
"Perhaps it was Kango," Blueboy said. Just then the peacock gave
his raucous cry. It had a mocking and scornful note in it. "I believe
he knows; but he won't tell."
PAGE FORTY-NINE


CHAPTER 9
PUG-PITS AND MUDBALLS
ERLE had a strange feeling as she looked at the little
platypus mother so anxiously guarding her babies. She
felt that she should do something to help the little creatures, but
did not know how to set about it. She sat beside the nest and then
felt that she was protecting the platypus family.
Blueboy noticed Splash walk away and disappear. He followed and
discovered the entrance to the nest, cunningly hidden and daintily built
among ferns. It was about fifteen feet away from the uncovered nesting'
chamber.
"I suppose there's an underground passageway between the two
nests," he said.
"I wonder if it was blocked by the ground that has been torn
up? 11 Merle said.
They did not know, of course, how little mother Flash pugged her-
self and her family into the nest when she tunnelled the loose earth
away; and when she went in search of food how she made pugs along
the tunnels to protect her babies from intrusion; and how she had worn
a bald spot on her tail patting the earth flat when she returned.
Splash could not help saying: "You have a bald patch on your
tail, my dear. 11
"What else can you expect. The worry of a family you know, 11
Flash reminded him.
She had been caught unawares when the Brook uncovered her nest
and had no time to make pug-pits and mudballs. She was dazed by
such a happening. Splash was not even allowed near the nest she had
made. So no wonder he was angry when Kango took a liberty denied
PAGE FIFTY


PUG -PITS AND MUDBALLS
to himself and spoke of disturbing Flash in the sacred task of rearing
her young.
The children stood looking down at Splash, who growled at them
as he guarded his family. Merle s quick eyes noticed that one of his
back claws was bleeding.
"Oh, Blueboy! He has been hurt."
Blueboy's tender heart gave a fast beat.
"I know what we ll do. Let us cover up the nest with branches,
and fix it so that nobody can disturb them while they are mending it
again, then he can rest and get better."
The two children set to work. Collecting small branches, they
laid them gently across the top of the nest, while Flash watched them
with frightened eyes, hugging her babies closer. Splash showed great
mistrust. He was in a violent temper and several times made towards
the children. Blueboy held him away with a branch.
"You'll understand soon," he said. "I'm sorry for you and I like to
see you angry because it means you know how to look after your family.
"Aren't the babies sweet?" Merle whispered.
"I think I would like them better with fur on," Blueboy said.
"They'll get that later," Merle assured him in a motherly way.
"Aren't they greedy little creatures? Look, they are taking their tucker,
not caring for anything else. Isn t Flash a patient little mother?
Merle was sorry when the last stick covered the nest and the little
mother and her two naked babies were out of sight.
"I think we should put leaves next and then earth."
"Blueboy, you're clever! How do you know what to do?
"Uncle Timothy told me all about platypuses and how they build
with leaves closely packed and leaves pressed over the top of the hole.
Very soon the platypus nest was as safe and complete as it had
ever been. A few branches which Blueboy broke from a tree protected
the surface and finished the job. , . .
Splash was quieter now. Despair had taken the place of anger.
He did not understand what the strange giants were about He mis-
trusted them and was beginning to feel sorry he had come to the garden.
"I believe he thinks he has lost his home for ever—his wile—his
children and everything."
PAGE FIFTY ONI


"Let us try to make friends with him, then he'll be friendly next
time we come. He'll remember," Blueboy said.
They coaxed and called to Splash. He seemed to like their atten'
tion, but kept away from them. They admired his silky coat and were
amused at the way he walked. Then they made a discovery.
When they tried to get close to him, he walked backwards just as
well as he could walk forwards. This made Blueboy laugh.
"Clockwork that's gone wrong," he said.
"Comic clockwork," Merle suggested, and both laughed.
As they talked, Splash was getting nearer to the entrance of his
nest; when quite close to it he suddenly disappeared.
Merle and Blueboy sat on the bank hoping that Splash would re'
turn. They passed the time by throwing leaves into the water and
watching them twirl round in little circles. They listened to the click'
click of insects.
Suddenly Splash appeared in the Brook. He came silently and
quietly. They did not know where or how.
"He is taking his morning bath. He is happy now that his family
is safe and sound," Merle said. "Perhaps he will let us play with him."
Merle, looking about her, noticed a bottle'brush bush growing close
by, with red spindly blooms upon it. She picked one, waved it, ran to
the Brook with it, and holding it over the water called to Splash.
But Splash disappeared beneath the water. She then jumped on to the
stepping stones and trailed the bottle'brush in the water. Splash appeared
again, watched curiously, then without any warning came up beside the
brush and grabbed it with his hind legs.
Merle did not know the power of the claw or the damage it could
cause. It was just as well he seised the brush, and not her hand.
"I knew he wanted to play," Merle called to Blueboy.
Blueboy stood on the bank, giving little gasps of surprise as Merle,
holding the brush firmly, played a game of tug'o''war with Splash. Splash
pulled her from one stepping stone to another, sinking under the water
and pulling the brush with him, coming to the surface for a moment,
then under again. Merle held the brush firmly.
"Splash will win! Splash will win!" Blueboy shouted
PAGE FIFTY-TWO


PUG-PITS AND MUDBALLS
Splash did win. With a mighty tug he got possession of the bottle-
brush, and as he did so Merle over-balanced and nearly fell into the
water, but managed to spring to the bank beside Blueboy.
Splash appeared above the surface a few yards away. There was
no sign of the brush. He floated quietly, and looked at Merle with
small twinkling eyes that plainly said:
"I beat you!"
Merle and Blueboy, laughing merrily, waved their hands to him.
"Goodbye! We'll come to see you again.
Turning from the Brook, they caught sight of Dear Val.
PAGE FIFTY THREI


CHAPTER 10
DRAGONFLIES
EAR VAL came down the steps to feed her pets and smiled
when she heard Merle and Blueboy's voices.
The children ran to meet her and begged to be allowed help feed
the pets. They had often watched her do so. There was warm milk
and stale bread for the kangaroos and corn for the peacocks.
i^ ear aVe er^e a CU P to then poured the milk into it.
Merle, with her eyes down intent upon holding the cup steadily, heard
thump-thump'thump, as the kangaroos hopped across the lawn to get
their breakfast. 6
Kango came with a quick thump-thump-thump; Tangi more sedately.
Kango arrived first. y
Merle offered him the milk. He clasped the cup between his small
forepaws, thrust his pointed nose into it, and drank greedily. When
he had drunk it all he still held the cup, snuffling around it in the hope
or finding one last drop. ,
It was Tangfs turn now. Merle gave Blueboy the cup. He held
it while it was filled, and then offered it to Tangi, who held it
gently between her two paws, drinking quietly. Each animal was given
half a loaf of stale bread to finish the meal. Satisfied, they hopped away
In the meantime Shimma cried aloud until Dear Val bid him to be
patient. He strutted about the lawn, his tail outspread, shivering with
excitement. The patient Gleam followed with long tail trailing behind
Why does his tail shiver like that?" Blueboy asked, looking curi-
ously at Shimma s outspread tail as he threw corn to the birds "It
quivers down to the tiniest feather."
•PAGE FIFTY FOUR




"It is curious, I '' Dear Val said, "for his body is perfectly still. His
tail is like an electric fan, with vibrations so swift, it is impossible to see
it moving. 11
The children, intent upon this new interest, forgot for a moment
to tell Dear Val the news. Then they remembered about the platypuses.
"We found Splash and Flash, 11 Blueboy said. "There are some
baby platypuses. But something dreadful happened. 11
"What happened? 11 Dear Val said anxiously.
Someone had torn open the ground over the nest. But we
mended it and they are happy again. 11
"What kind little children you are. 11
"And we've got a blue'eyed girl for you! 11
"You have what? 11
"But we lost her again. 11
That is very disappointing. However did you manage to do
that? Come, let us sit beside the Brook, you must tell me all about it.
I also think that you will have to stay for breakfast. When we go up
to the house we will send a message to the Little Round House that you
are staying with me. 11
Lovely—lovely! 11 the children said, jumping about.
They all sat on the brookside.
If you are very quiet, Splash and Flash may come again, 11 Dear
Val said.
While they waited they talked in whispers and Dear Val heard
all about Piettra. She was very surprised and asked many questions.
"What is she like beside having blue eyes? 11
Her dress looks old and poor; but she has another one underneath
it that is shiny and shimmery. 11
"Oh, indeed! 11
"And she has wings! I saw them. 11
"Really! 11
"Hush! 11 Merle said, and pointed.
Splash had arrived quietly on the surface of the Brook again. His
jaws were moving.
"He is having his breakfast, too, 11 Dear Val whispered.
Splash sank quietly out of sight, but in a few moments he was
back again. His jaws worked —chew—chew—chew.
PAGE FIFTY-SIX


DRAGON FLIES
"He gets his breakfast from the bottom of the pool and comes up
to the top to eat it, 11 Blueboy said. Then he whispered: "Flash is there,
too."
And sure enough, Splash and Flash side by side rose to the surface,
chewed quietly, then sank again, only to return a few moments later
and chew again.
"I wonder if the platykittens have been fed?" Blueboy said.
"Platykittens?" Dear Val inquired. "Who thought of that name?"
"Isn't that what they are called? Their mother is a platy —puss."
Dear Val laughed and laughed. "So she is!" she said. "But I've
never heard of platy— kittens before."
"We could call them Plat and Kit for short," Merle said.
"So we could!" Blueboy agreed.
Splash and Flash now climbed to the bank and in a sunny spot
made an elaborate toilet. They brushed and combed their coats with their
claws and polished them with their beaks till they were so well groomed
that it seemed as if they had been to a barber.
The sun climbed higher and higher and other creatures came about
the Brook. There were dragonflies darting swiftly here and there.
"Why do they fly so fast?" Blueboy asked.
"They are getting breakfast, too."
"What do they eat?"
"They catch tiny gnats as they fly, and as they skim across the
water they get baby mosquitoes and gobble them all up."
"They seem a bit greedy," Blueboy said.
"If they were not so greedy we would be bothered a great deal
more with mosquitoes. And mosquitoes are greedier still."
"Yes, of course."
Blueboy loved to hear about insects.
"Why are dragonflies called Horse Stingers?"
The Brook gurgled: "There he goes again asking questions."
"I don't know why," Dear Val said thoughtfully. "But Ido know
they haven't any sting."
"Perhaps it is because they go faster than the fastest horse," Merle
suggested.
"Do they go faster than fleas?" Blueboy asked.
Merle said: "Oh, Blueboy! You do ask questions!"
PAGE FIFTY-SEVEN


And the Brook gurgled: "At it again."
Dear Val laughed. "It is rather a sensible question all the same.
Do you know that if you could jump as far as the flea can hop —in
relation to its size, of course —there would be no need for aeroplanes. You
would be able to hop around the world quicker than the plane could fly."
"Oooh!" Blueboy said. "I know what Til do when I grow up.
I ll get stilts and hop all round the world on them."
"I would rather fly like the dragonfly," Merle said. "He darts in
the sunshine and looks so happy. Besides it's prettier than hopping."
"I think Blueboy has an inventive mind," Dear Val remarked. "If
he could invent a way to hop around the world, it would be something
never done before."
"Splash and Flash have disappeared!" Blueboy shouted.
"And it's time for breakfast. (Come along!" Dear Val jumped up
and led the way towards the steps.
"Can we come often to see the platykittens?" Blueboy asked as
they walked up the steps.
"Of course you can. But you will find it will be a long time before
they are able to swim in the Brook."
"How long?"
"About eight weeks, I should say."
Then Dear Val noticed something.
"Why, Merle has had her plaits cut off
Both children laughed.
They loved to give Dear Val surprises.
PAGE FIFTY-EIGHT


CHAPTER 11
PLAT AND KIT
HE Brook wanted to see the platypus babies. Splash and Flash talked
about their children all the time, and this made the Brook restless.
Remembering Splash and Flash's babyhood it longed to play with
the new babies. It was difficult to keep from looking for them. It dared
not overflow its banks again for fear of causing trouble.
It crooned and gurgled and lap—lapped; ran in and out of mossy
nooks under the banks, hoping to catch sight of the babies. But there
was no sign of the platykittens.
Plat and Kit stayed in the nesting chamber and Flash kept them
well protected. Even when she was with them she scraped the earth
and built a pug around the nest. When she went for food she made
more pugs, ran a short distance, scraped earth, made a pug-pit, then
patted the earth with her beak and shaped it into a pug, then a little
further another one, and so on until she reached the entrance near the
Brook.
She loved the Brook, but it was not the Brook's place to visit a
platypus home.
After each visit Flash returned to her babies. As she ran back
through the burrow, she scraped away the pugs she had carefully built
and patted the loose earth flat again with her tail. She had to do this
so often that the bald spot on her tail was getting larger.
No wonder when she reached her nest again she was tired, and
when she was tired, ready to sleep, she curled herself up into a ball
while cuddling her babies, and went fast asleep.
While little mother Flash was kept busy searching for food for
herself, and making pugs to keep her babies safe from intrusion from the
PAGE FIFTY-NINE


Brook or anything else that might disturb them, the babies were growing
fast and losing their nakedness.
First they were covered with soft down, with a beautiful silken
sheen, then with soft fluffy fur. This made them really like a pair of
kittens. They were playful like kittens, too.
They played in the burrow as far as the first pug and could go no
further. Flash was a thoughtful little mother and made the first pug
farther from the nest each time so that Plat and Kit's playground was
getting larger and larger each day. In this way their legs grew stronger
for future use.
There came a day when Flash left the burrow open all the way
and the playkittens were able to run from one end of the burrow to
the other. In this way they found the Brook. And the Brook found
the platypus babies.
Wasn't the Brook pleased!
""Come in—come in!" it crooned.
Plat and Kit were shy at first and a little nervous of the Brook and
ran back to the nest, but later returned to look again. They had
never seen anything so wonderful. The Brook rippled and smiled and
called to them, till they gradually came down to the shallow water. When
the Brook heard that their names were Plat and Kit, it grumbled:
"I expected them to be called after me."
Plat and Kit had a strange little habit of sitting in the shallow water
on their curled up tails with their beaks on their chests. At these times
the Brook took the opportunity to roll them over. And when they
played at being tortoises and turned on their backs and often could not
turn over again, the Brook kindly helped them. Splash and Flash played,
too. Splash growled softly to his children and made kissdike popping
sounds. Flash took them riding on her back.
These antics amused Tangi; and also Kango, who had long since
got over his antagonism to the platypus family.
Tangi sat for long stretches at the side of the Brook watching the
babies. Sometimes tears gathered in her soft brown eyes, and Kango
knew why.
A long time ago a pair of bright eyes had peeped from Tangi's
pouch. Then there had been a tragedy.




A dog had come to the garden and chased poor Tangi around and
around, up and down terraced gardens until in terror of losing her baby,
she had taken it from her pouch and thrown it behind a tree, luring the
dog to follow her so that her baby might be safe.
She hopped away, but was too tired to get far, so she crouched
beside a tree. She would have been injured by the dog had not Kango
come to the rescue. He jeered at the dog until it left Tangi and turned
upon him. Kango had his back against the tree ready for his enemy.
When the dog rushed at him he hit out with one of his hind legs and
punished the dog, who slunk away to lick his wounds.
Tangi crouched away in terror for the rest of the night with one
happy thought—her baby was safe.
With the first streak of morning fight she went to look for her
baby. She gave the signal between baby kangaroo and mother; little
grunts and hisses. But there was no answer. Her baby was lost!
She never saw it again! And did not know that it had hopped
away and been found by a kind person who gave it another home in
another garden.
Now Tangi had another tiny baby inside her pouch, very like the
platykittens before they had their fur. Of course the platykittens
had fur coats now and played about, while her baby still snuggled
nakedly in her pouch. No wonder Tangi was interested in Plat and Kit.
How the Brook loved the platykittens. It rolled them over and
over in the water and Splash and Flash, remembering how the Brook
loved to play with them, played too.
One day Plat and Kit disappeared. Splash and Flash blamed the
Brook.
"You have taken them to the fields, 11 they said.
"No, no! I have done no such thing. I have even packed leaves
and twigs around the bamboos so the babies may not follow me and
get lost. 11
Everyone looked for Kit and Plat; even Kango and Tangi, who
remembered about their own baby.
Splash and Flash were sad.
Dear Val wondered.
Merle and Blueboy were sure they had run away and would come
back soon.
PAGE SIXTY-TWO


PLAT AND KIT
Even Shimma and Gleam were worried. Shimma spread his tail
and stared at his reflection in the Brook.
"If they get a glimpse of me they will return, if for nothing else, 11
he said.
But Plat and Kit did not come.
The wind played lullabies on the stems of the bamboos. The Brook
crooned and coaxed. Surely those naughty babies would return.
Merle and Blueboy would have been more upset if they had not
had something else to interest them. Something very exciting.
PAGE SIXTY THREf




Part
THE WINDING ROAD


\ ' 1 f N IXHNCli (
o N^lr wi 1 v q §Jwl) ) _r\
&LOft I* - /* 0'* 0-OCy HMCJ /^_^_7
[fS® P <$| /^
Z_/ 1 S«TTW<S N J | Z "
<£ n C<? # , y
/ pr. JM \
f° y 11 |P|oa Mil El
v^ r rt SP- Is c «~ *te? = ■''
VqJMIe t3
V_
5sJ —


CHAPTER 12
THE WINDING ROAD
NE morning Merle and Blueboy went out into the garden. There
they had a great surprise, for Gardener was cutting the hedges
and shaping them into animal shapes.
"How did you learn to do that?"
"I learnt from Twinkle's Garden.
All day long they watched Gardener, guessing all the time. They
were not quite sure what animals would be there when he had finished.
Towards evening Gardener gave some last finishing touches to his
work. Merle then said:
"They are lions. I knew it all the time!
"Lions!" Blueboy shouted at the top of his voice.
Cookie ran out into the garden.
"What's happened?" she called.
"Look at the lions!"
"As fine a pair of lions as I've ever seen!" Cookie exclaimed. "They
should be in the circus."
"Oh! The circus?" Merle and Blueboy looked at one another.
They had forgotten about the circus.
When bedtime came, they were nowhere to be seen. Nanny looked
everywhere for the two children. Little h/lother looked, too. Big Daddy
found them quite by accident. He found them in their own bedrooms
—both in bed. He called to Little Mother.
"Hush!" she said. "They are fast asleep."
Blueboy had his head under the bedclothes. Merle had her face
towards the pillow. When Big Daddy and Little Mother tiptoed think-
ing that they slept, they did not know that the children had gone to
PAGE SIXTY-SEVEN


bed early hoping that Twinkle would pay a visit. The circus was in
her ring of children s laughter, so that it was quite a reasonable thing
to expect the Fairy's assistance.
There came a faint faraway sound. Blueboy sprang up and threw
off his bedclothes.
"It's the flute again!" he cried. Tm glad I'm all dressed. It
sounds like a magic flute. 11
"I've got my nightie on over my clothes, 11 Merle called. "It won't
take a moment to get it off though."
She pulled her nightgown over her head as she got out of bed—
but in that moment Blueboy had gone.
"Wait for me!" she called in a loud whisper.
Blueboy was away down the hall and out into the garden. Merle
ran after him and found him just outside the door.
Look! he said in a nervous voice. "I'm sure they moved 11
"What?"
He pointed to the lions in the hedge, the shadows did strange things
at night-time and the crouching forms of the lions seemed really alive.
I wonder if they come to life," Merle whispered.
Holding hands, they tiptoed away. The faraway sound of the
flute called to them. Two shadows moved ahead of them.
"The lions," Blueboy whispered.
"Perhaps they belong to Twinkle's Fairy Circus. They aren't real
lions; they are only made from the hedges."
The flute sound came again, very close now.
"Who has my Talking Flute?"
"It makes me feel all funny inside. It's exciting!" Merle said.
I want to know what it is and who is playing it. I want to play
it myself. I've lost both my flutes; perhaps this is a new one for me."
Don tbe silly, Blueboy! You can t own all the flutes in the world,
and you couldn't play like that. I'd rather listen to it being played by
. . . I wonder who is playing it? It is getting farther away now. Hurry!
Hurry! or we will miss it."
The sound died away.
As Merle and Blueboy ran around the first bend of the winding
road, two swift dark shadows moved ahead of them.
"Those lions," Blueboy whispered.
PAGE SIXTY EIG HI


THE WINDING ROAD
They followed the shadows bright in the moonlight one moment,
and lost in the darkness the next. However quickly they ran it was
impossible to catch up.
"There they are!"
"No, they've gone!'
"Where are they?"
"There they are again."
The winding road had many bends for the shadows to play hide
and seek around. The road itself behaved strangely. It was nothing
for it to disappear and somersault over the top of a hill. At every bend
the shadows lurked, as if in waiting, only to make off faster than eveit "
as the children came upon them. Then the road became long and
straight, like a silver ribbon in the moonlight, and the shadows, swifter
and darker still led them breathlessly in pursuit. At last Blueboy said:
"I can't go any further."
The flute sound came again.
"Just a little tiny bit farther," Merle persuaded. "I can hear the
flute. We must be very near it now, and we have nearly reached the
allotment. I can see the lights."
Bright lights shone through the trees. There was a distant hum
of voices; the hum grew louder as they made their way under the trees.
The sound of the flute died away as the voices grew stronger.
They reached the allotment. There was a high fence around it.
They climbed to the top and peeped over. Many children crowded
around a large white tent.
"I know! The circus is inside that tent," Blueboy said. lam
sure all the mothers and fathers in the world have brought their
children." .
"Everyone is happy," Merle said. "They all seem to be laughing.
"Exact change, please —children half price," a man's voice shouted.
"Oh! We haven't any money," Merle gasped.
"Surely we can go in! Blueboy said.
"I've got money in my moneybox, but it would take too long to
go back for it," Merle said.
They had found the circus but were unable to go in. It was too
disappointing. They watched the crowd around the tent; saw them go
PAGE SIXTY NINI


inside it—and were miserable and disappointed. They seemed to be the
only ones left outside.
• « > Perhaps, if we get over the fence, we could find a place to peep
m, Merle said.
Blueboy dropped to the other side without delay.
Oh! I didn t mean it, Merle said. "It's trespassing.
But Blueboy ran towards the circus and Merle had to follow. She
c mbed carefully over the fence and down the other side and ran quickly
after Blueboy. M y
Fortunately they were at the back of the tent and no one saw them.
I hey tried to peep underneath the canvas, they looked for any kind of
opening that would enable them to see what was going on inside, but
not a peep-hole of any description could they find.
PAGE SEVENTY


CHAPTER 13
THE CIRCUS
HE sound of merry circus music came from the large tent as
Merle and Blueboy tiptoed around it. Shouts of children's laughter
made them more and more envious of those inside and more anxious to
see what was happening.
"Oh, oh! Ido wish we could get in," Blueboy said.
"Surely we can find a peep-hole."
They crept quietly around the tent as far as the entrance, where
a coloured canopy covered it. Turning, they retraced their steps and
walked half way back around the other way. Not a tiny slit in the
canvas enabled them to see what was going on inside. Bursts and peels
of laughter from the audience and the merry circus music became tan-
talizing beyond endurance.
"Oh! I must go in—l must!" Blueboy stamped his foot. "But
how can we? How can we?"
Once again they turned and walked the other way. When half
way around Merle noticed something.
"Look!" she said, staring upwards and pointing to a torn piece of
canvas. "A hole! It is high, but we may be able to see through it."
They both stared with longing eyes. If they could only reach the
hole. They needed a box or something to stand upon.
Blueboy noticed a tree stump close to the tent.
"I could climb that!" he said.
"So we could," Merle said.
"Pll go first and help you up."
It was more difficult to climb on the stump than Blueboy imagined,
and several times while endeavouring to climb up, he slipped. At last,
PAGE SEVENTY-ON


however, he managed to get on to it, but a new difficulty arose. The
stump was rough; he found it difficult to balance himself safely.
Merle came to the rescue. She put her arms around Blueboy's legs
and he put his hand on her shoulder and raised himself gently until he
was the right height to see through the slit in the canvas.
"Oh, oh! 11 he said.
"Let me see! Oh, please, Blueboy, let me up now."
"Oh, oh, oh!" was Blueboy's only answer. "It's wonderful!
"Oh, Blueboy! Don't be selfish. Let me up. Let me see. Oh,
please, please!"
"In a minute when I get down. There's only enough room for one
at a time. Hold my feet tight please. Oh! She's got wings—she can
fly."
A long pause.
"Oh, look, Merle!"
No answer from Merle. Blueboy looked down. Merle stared at
the tent near the ground.
"Perhaps we could crawl under there," she said, pointing.
The tent was loose near the ground.
"The lights are very bright in there. Everyone would see us."
"But we would be behind all the people and they'd be looking at
the circus and never notice us."
Blueboy jumped from the tree stump and down on his hands and
knees, and peeped under the loose canvas.
"We could get in this way," he said. "I'll go first."
He squirmed, wriggled and pushed, then disappeared. Merle
peeped under the canvas, then lying down she struggled through after
Blueboy into darkness, felt him close to her. They stared into the dark'
ness, wondering where all the lights had gone. They groped about with
their hands then stood up cautiously.
They thought at first that they were under the rows of seats, but
moving forward found that they were in a boxdike space. Red, white
and blue lights shone dimly in front of them; they discovered they were
under a platform.
No sooner had they discovered this than music sounded deafeningly
above their heads. They knew then that they were under the band'
ENTY-TW(




stand, and that the red, white and blue lights were flags draped in front
of it.
"It's as good as a curtain," Merle said. "Nobody will be able to
see us and we will be able to peep through it. 11
They crept quietly forward. The flags hung close together and
they could not find a place through which to see. They heard someone
shout, then a crack, and smelt singeing hair. In vain they looked for
an opening.
"I'm sure that the lions are jumping through hoops of fire, 11 Blueboy
said. "Oh! Ido want to see them! 11
Crack! Crack! Crack!
They heard the roar of Hons.
"We're missing everything, 11 Blueboy whispered, and pressed his
face against a flag. "Oh, oh, oh! I can see, 11 he said aloud.
Merle put her face close to Blueboy's, found that the flags were
made of wide mesh, and that they could see and had a view of the
circus ring. With breathless interest they watched the performance. A
man dressed in red and white uniform stood in the centre of the ring. He
cracked a whip. Spaced round the ring were hoops of fire. With every
crack of the whip, a lion sprang through a hoop.
There were two lions. Round and round the ring they went until
ordered to sit on two upturned barrels. This they did and sat quietly
with half'dosed eyes as if by the bright lights.
"I can see through the white stripes best, 11 Blueboy said. "Although
it's funny looking through the blue and red."
Merle had been staring through plain bunting.
"Red, white and blue!" she said.
"And it's the Union Jack," Blueboy said, proud of his knowledge.
Children's shouts drew their attention. They stared again. A
clown tumbled to the centre of the ring. He patted one of the lions
nervously. The lion snarled. Merle and Blueboy became anxious. The
clown pulled the lion's tail. Some of the children in the audience
laughed nervously, then uproariously; the lion, instead of growling as
they had expected, trembled as if afraid.
Blueboy made a discovery.
"Look! There she is again—wings and all." He was excited.
"Who?" Merle said, endeavouring to see to whom Blueboy referred.
PAGE SEVENTH


behind the clown's back. Squeals and gasps came from the children.
The lion crept closer to the garden. Closer . . .
closer . . . Reaching
it he sniffed the flowers. The children laughed.
"Look, clown! . . . Look quickly! The lion
is going to pick one
THE CIRCUS
"Look —up there! Walking on a rope high up above everyone's
head."
"1 can't see!" Merle said.
"Up! Up there—look!"
A clown shouted. Their attention was drawn to the circus ring
again.
"This is my garden," the clown shouted, pointing to a bare plot at
the side of the ring. "When I water the ground, plants will grow."
He sprinkled the ground with water from a small watering'can.
. . . For a few moments nothing happened.
Merle and Blueboy from their position were able to see plainly.
Much to their amazement, green shoots came through the ground.
Leaves unfolded, and from the centre of the leaves a flower bud pushed
its way and gradually opened out into a large flower.
"Why, it's a great big dandelion," Blueboy said.
"It looks like one of Twinkle's animal flowers. I wonder where
the dandies are?"
"I wonder how they grow so quickly. They grow inches at a
time," Blueboy whispered.
"Now!" said the clown, addressing his audience. "Will everyone
watch my garden? Let me know if anyone dares attempt to pick any
of my lovely flowers. A little more water."
Again he sprinkled the flowers.
Blueboy giggled.
"Look! I can see them growing."
The lion whose tail had been pulled, crouched low and crept along
or your flowers,' 1 Blueboy called in a loud voice.
The clown looked over his shoulder and stared towards the band'
stand. Merle and Blueboy shrank back nervously, afraid of being
discovered.
Nothing happened, however. They peeped again.
The lion galloped back to its place, climbed on the barrel and sat
again as if nothing had happened. The clown made a face at the lion.
PAG I
VENTY-FIVI


I HAT BECKONS
THE HO US I
"HI catch you next time! 11 he said.
Everyone laughed.
"Oh, look! It's all rosy and makes everything look different.
"Let me see! 11 Merle pushed Blueboy aside and stared.
"It is the red band. It makes everything look twice as beautiful.
I can see farther too, 11 she said.
Staring upwards she saw a dainty figure balanced on a tight rope
and poised far above the heads of the audience.
"Isn't she lovely? Look at her spangley frock sticking out like a
flower."
The figure seemed to be suspended in the air.
"I wonder if it is Twinkle?" Blueboy said.
"She has a star in her hair," Merle said. "Oh, look at her now!
She's flying."
The figure floating down with outstretched arms and wings alighted
upon the clown's garden.
The clown ran forward, held out his hand and helped the dainty
person upon the petals of a large dandelion. She stood a moment, then
danced from flower to flower.
The audience, watching with delight, seemed unaware that the lion
again crept slyly towards the flowers, and, before anyone had time to
shout, plucked the one upon which the dancer stood. All the children
in the audience shrieked:
"Look out!"
As they did so Blueboy gave a great shout.
"Look! Look! The Dandies!"
"Where? Where?" Merle said.
"Behind each flower." Blueboy pointed.
Slender dancers clad in green wore flowers upon their heads like
hats. These were the clown's dandelions. They now danced together
and made a ring around the lion; threw a daisy chain around his neck;
captured him and led him away.
One of the Dandies held the little dancer poised like a butterfly
upon his shoulder. He carried her to the platform under which Merle
and Blueboy were hidden. She sprang upon it and was lost to sight.
Anxious to see her, the two children for a moment forgot that they
should keep themselves hidden. They pulled aside the Union Jack and
VENT"* 'SI"


THE CIRCUS
endeavoured to look upwards. As they did so, the flag slowly slipped
from the platform, leaving them in full view of the audience.
They stood for a moment, too frightened to move, quite sure that
every eye was upon them. Terrified, they turned to run. Then the
light from the theatre lit upon a cage-like box, in which were two little
animals. Merle and Blueboy stood still for a moment and stared.
"Plat and Kit!" they whispered, then remembering their own plight,
they ran.
It was difficult at first to find the place where they had made their
entrance. When at last they did so they crawled out from under the
tent and ran to the fence. Reaching it, they climbed up and dropped
to the other side, glad of the shelter of the friendly trees. Expecting to
hear footsteps following in pursuit, they only heard the sound of the
flute.
PAGE SEVENTY-SEVEN


3
CHAPTER 14
THE BEGGAR GIRL
Y the time Merle and Blueboy reached the road, the sound of the
flute had died away. They were tired and sat awhile beside a
garden wall. All was quiet, no sound came to them, no shadow
moved. They talked in whispers. They had found Plat and Kit
How delighted Dear Val would be.
They planned to go back to the circus and rescue the platykittens.
If only those flags were in place again, they could do so without
being seen. They were a little nervous so they talked about the wonders
of the circus.
From the quiet shadows something moved towards them.
"The lions! 11 Blueboy whispered.
"No, it isn't, it is a person. 11
A figure came closer.
"Oh! It's Piettra!" Blueboy said.
Piettra passed by without noticing the two children. They stared
after her, there was something in the way she walked, the way she
dressed, that attracted them.
"She is dressed like a beggar girl, but does not look like one," Merle
said. "She walks in a springy kind of way on her toes and she holds
her head high like a Fairy Princess."
"Perhaps she is a Princess in disguise," Blueboy said.
"Look, I wonder why she is doing that?"
Merle and Blueboy saw Piettra peep into a garden and run in at
a gate and out again quickly, run to the next garden and in at the next
gate, and do the same thing all over again at the next one.
PAGE SEVENTY EIGHT


THE BEGGAR GIRL
"She is looking for the house that beckons. I wonder if she will
find it?"
Merle and Blueboy followed. The winding road was long; there
were many houses. Piettra continued to peep into each garden and run
in at every gate. All the gardens were shaped differently; one curved
inwards, another outwards.
"Perhaps she is playing hide and seek with the road and the road
is playing too. Look how it runs around that garden, hides, and comes
out again around another," Blueboy said.
"When she runs, she seems to dance," Merle said, with eyes only
for the little stranger.
"Perhaps she's not a real person," Blueboy said.
"What do you mean?"
"I don't exactly know. The lions weren't real; they were only
shadows. And the way her dress hangs around makes her look like a
flower."
"Of course she is real! Her skirt is uneven and that makes it like
the petals of a flower."
"Why does she go in then out again so quickly?"
"I suppose she knows it isn't the house that beckons when she gets
close enough to see it properly."
"It's a long way and there are lots of houses. I wonder if she will
find it before she gets to the Little Round House."
"I'm going to call her and tell her we will help look for it."
"Oh, no! Please, Blueboy, don't do that! Do be patient. I love
watching her; she is so interesting and she reminds me of someone, and
I am trying to remember who."
They followed Piettra, stopping when she stopped, walking when
she walked, and so on until they came to the Little Round House. Much
to their surprise they saw Piettra enter the gate, run up the garden path
and in through the open door. The moon shone through all the windows,
and when Merle and Blueboy entered the house they saw the beggar
girl dancing on the tips of her toes in and out of moon shadows.
Everyone else was asleep in the Little Round House.
"Perhaps this is the house that beckons after all," Blueboy called
in a loud whisper.
PAGE SEVENTY-NINI


THE HOUSI
THAT BECKONS
Piettra did not answer, but danced in and out, and round about;
into the hallways, through open glass doors, into the sitting rooms, back
to the halls again, then to the playroom. Merle and Blueboy followed
wherever she went.
"What will we do with her?" Merle whispered. "She said that
when she found the house that beckons, she would never leave it. If
we could only get her to Dear Val's house, she could live there. She
has blue eyes."
"There's the guest room where Uncle Timothy sleeps when he comes
to stay, and he's away. She could sleep there tomight," Blueboy
suggested.
Piettra danced on, in and out of the moonbeams.
"I love the Little Round House," she sang in a quiet little voice.
"Please, Piettra, could you stop dancing? lam tired."
Piettra paused, standing on tip toes.
"I'm so happy! I could dance for ever."
"There's a dear little room that you could have," Merle said. "It
has roses on the curtains and chairs, and frills around the dressing table
with roses all over it and wide windows where the moon peeps in all
the time."
"Oh! Can I sleep there?"
"That's what we are trying to tell you."
They led Piettra quietly along the narrow hall to the guest room,
which was also everyone's favourite room. Opening the door, they
pushed her inside; then closing it ran to their own rooms, wondering
what everyone would say the next morning when it was found that there
was a stranger in the house.
After Merle had been in bed for a little while, she wondered about
Piettra and worried at the thought of the little stranger being without
night attire. She quietly left her bed, and tiptoed to the guest's room
with a nightgown over her arm.
Opening the door she peeped in, and thought at first that the room
was empty, but creeping to the bed she saw the ragged dress hanging
over the end of it. Someone slept in the bed with head half covered.
She stood for a moment still worried about Piettra's night attire; then
she turned the bedclothes back.
PAGE EIGHTH


THE BEGGAR GIRL
What a great surprise! Piettra, sleeping soundly, was enfolded in a
pair of wings.
"Oh, oh, oh! It must be Twinkle!"
Merle ran to tell Blueboy, but Blueboy slept soundly.
What a wonderful secret!
Merle went back to bed and very soon was fast asleep. When the
first streak of daylight came she awakened. Remembering the last thing
that had happened before she slept, she sat up in bed, and called to
Blueboy. He answered at once.
"The little Blue Wren has been tapping on my window and wakened
me long ago," he called.
"Put your slippers on and come quickly," Merle said. lt The little
beggar girl has wings! I saw them while she slept."
'Then it is Twinkle!" Blueboy shouted, running from his room into
Merle's.
Together they ran along the narrow hall to the guest room. Opening
the door quietly they peeped in.
The room was empty! The bed seemed not to have been slept in,
the bedclothes were neatly in place.
"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! I know she n>as here."
"Oh, dear! Surely she hasn't gone away," Blueboy said.
Merle went to the wardrobe and opened the door and peeped in,
half expecting to find Piettra. Instead she saw a pair of wings hanging
on a hook.
"She has left her wings behind!" she exclaimed.
Blueboy opened his eyes wide with surprise.
"I knew they were hidden under her ragged dress!"
"Why did she leave them behind?"
"She has surely forgotten them."
"Let us tell Gardener. He's sure to know about Twinkle.'
"He mightn't know her now that she is a little beggar girl."
"Beggar girls don't have wings; so she is still Twinkle. Perhaps
when she was changing from a fairy to a beggar girl, she forgot to change
her wings too, and that's why she has left them in the wardrobe."
"Oh, let's ask Gardener!"
It was very puzzling.
They found Gardener already at work in the garden.


"Pm glad to see you up with the birds, 11 he said. "You both look fresh
happy this morning. 11
"We want to know about Twinkle, 11 Blueboy said.
"I have already told you a great deal about her. 11
"Could she belong to a place where there are too many children? 11
"I should not think so. 11
"Well then, the wings must belong to Piettra. 11
"I don't know what you mean. Have you a new friend? 11
"Yes. But we think she is an old friend. 11
"Where did you find her? 11
"Well tell you."
"Will it take long? 11
"Yes."
"We will find a place where we can sit quietly and you can tell me
Gardener decided.
PAGE EIGHTY TWO


A A
/ 1 /■
W W
CHAPTER 15.
WINGS
ERLE and Blueboy sat on the grass and Gardener sat on
the edge of a rock garden smoking his old pipe. There was a
great deal to explain.
First they told him about the flute with the enticing sound—a sound
they longed to follow and which they had difficulty in resisting; a sound
that made them go out at night when they knew they shouldn't. They
told him that they were quite sure that Piettra was Twinkle in disguise.
Did he think so too?
Gardener shook his head.
"Twinkle is too busy. It will take all her spare moments to keep
her garden in order so that the ring of children's laughter will always
be fresh and lovely." . „
"Perhaps she could be both a beggar girl and a Fairy, Merle
suggested.
Gardener again shook his head.
"She is far, far too busy."
Merle and Blueboy, however, deep down in their hearts were sure
that the little beggar girl was really Twinkle; and it rvas Twinkle who
had slept in the guest room. Who else would have wings?
"What would Twinkle do if she lost her wings?" Blueboy asked.
"Well, well, well! I never gave such a possibility a thought. But
if such a thing did happen, she would still be able to dance and walk and
sing too."
The children exchanged glances.
"Would she be unhappy without her wings?" Merle asked.
PAGE EIGHTY-THREE


"It all depends. Fairies sometimes choose to be mortals. Then, as
you know, they are without wings and they are the happiest of mortals."
Merle and Blueboy looked at one another again. The worried
expression they had worn since finding the wings in the cupboard gave
place to one of relief.
They told Gardener about their night adventure. He looked at them
very seriously. Gardener's eyes seldom wore a serious expression.
"I made a promise to you that I would stay here for ever," he said.
"And now you must make a promise to me. You must promise never,
never to go out at night without asking.
"But . . . but . . . We found Plat and Kit!"
"You found Plat and Kit? Surely you are mistaken."
"No, no! We did find them."
They told him where and how.
"How do you know they were Plat and Kit? It would be impossible
to be sure with only a quick glance."
"They were baby platypuses."
"Yes, of course. Now you had better show me the wings
Gardener said.
Merle ran quickly into the spare room, opened the wardrobe door
and took the wings from a hook. In the daylight they appeared a sad
and sorry sight.
"Surely they could never have belonged to a Fairy. They are just
like the kind I had on my fairy dress for Dear Val's fancy dress party,"
she said to herself.
However, she carried the wings out to the garden to show to
Gardener.
Gardener looked at them thoughtfully.
"Well, well! They are a strange pair of wings. Give them to me.
I'll put them away in my box. It makes me sad to see them limp and
useless."
Merle and Blueboy followed Gardener to the pergola, hoping that
when he opened his box they could peep inside it.
The box stood near the bed. It had fine carving upon it of birds,
flowers and fruit, and something much more interesting. There were
Fairy figures with flowing draperies and delicate wings.
PAGE EIGHTY-FOUR


WINGS
Gardener lifted the lid of the box. A faint perfume came from
inside. The two children sniffed.
"Oooh! What is that?"
"The scent of sandalwood. Do you like it?"
"Yes, it's lovely."
They peeped into the box. It was disappointing; it held only the
box that Twinkle had given Gardener.
"Why, there is nothing in it. It is quite empty."
"Not as empty as it appears. There are secret drawers and secret
springs.
"Can we see?"
"Certainly."
Gardener ran his hand around the edge of the box, pressed some'
thing. The whole side of the box opened and disclosed little niches.
Each niche held a tool. There were tools of all descriptions.
What are the tools for?" Blueboy said.
'They are for all kinds of things. Don't forget that I made your
flute." 1 ..
"And did you carve all the pictures on the box, too? Merle said.
"Perhaps," Gardener answered.
Blueboy's eye caught sight of two books; one very large one, the
other not so large.
"Are there pictures in those?"
Gardener lifted out the books, opened and turned the pages of one.
It had coloured pictures of flowers, fruit and trees. He opened the other
and larger one. It had many pictures and closely printed pages. The
pictures were mysterious and strange.
"What is it all about?" the children inquired.
"It is Fairy Lore and about many magic things. Some day I will
read it to you."
Gardener put the books carefully back in the box, pressed a spring
and the side closed up again. Then he placed the wings carefully inside
the box and shut the lid.
"I think we should go and tell Dear Val about Plat and Kit," Blueboy
said. "It is quite early and we could get there and back before breakfast.
PAGE EIGHTY-Fl\


"So we could. Let us go at once!"
They ran all the way to Brookside. Dear Val was surprised when
she heard about the baby platypuses at the Circus. She was not at all
sure that they were Plat and Kit.
It was very disappointing.
PAGE EIGHTY-SIX


CHAPTER 16
GUESSING
HAT night Merle and Blueboy counted the stars from the heart-
shaped windows. As they counted doubts came to them. Were not
Twinkle's wings safely in Gardener's keeping? Could she be ex-
pected to visit them without wings?
"She doesn't need wings if she is a little beggar girl.
"Why did she choose to be a little beggar girl, I wonder? Merle
ScLld
"Because she likes to go barefooted, I suppose." Blueboy envied
anyone who could be barefooted.
"I wish it was the Little Round House that beckoned. It should
have been, for she has been here so often when she was Twinkle,
Merle said.
"But don't you know that Fairies, when they become human, never
remember about being Fairies or anything that happens when they are?
"But she may have remembered a tiny bit about the Little Round
Garden," Blueboy persisted.
"Yes, she may have," Merle said. "Hush!
She sat up in bed and listened.
That haunting tune came again.
"Oh, dear! Ido wish Gardener hadn't made us promise, Blueboy
groaned. . <
The flute sound seemed specially to belong to him; it came closer
and closer until it sounded beneath the windows.
The two children leaned out of their beds and stared through the
windows out into the darkness. The sound of the flute was clear upon
the night air, but they could not see who played it.
PAGE EIGHTY-SEVEN


"I know it wants us to follow! 11 Blueboy said. He was half out of
bed as he spoke.
"But we promised we wouldn't! 11
Merle put her head under the bedclothes to shut away the enticing
sound.
"Don't listen," she said to Blueboy in a muffled voice.
"I've got to," he answered. "I've got to and I want to know who
plays. I want to play it myself."
The sound died away and then faded into the distance.
"It's gone," Blueboy called to Merle through his window.
Merle did not answer.
"Merle!" he called.
Still she did not answer. He stared into her room, saw her bed
plainly. The bedclothes were rumpled and Merle was not there.
Blueboy was astonished; surely Merle would never break her promise
to Gardener. Yet, where could she be? It was not like her to leave him
out of an adventure if there was to be one. He went back to bed because
he would not break his promise to Gardener. Blueboy never broke his
word to anyone. But he could not sleep, he waited anxiously, thinking
that at any moment Merle would be back.
The moon went behind clouds, then behind trees, and lastly behind
the houses, and everything became dark. Now, he could not see into
Merle's room. Unable to bear the suspense, he slipped out of bed and
went to her door.
"Merle!" he called softly. "Are you hiding?"
No answer. What could he do? Suddenly an idea came to him;
he padded quietly to the end of the passage, opened the door of the guest
room and peeped in. Merle was sitting on the bed with her knees drawn
up under her chin. Piettra was sitting up in bed.
"Why didn't you tell me?" he said.
"When I had my head under the bedclothes I thought of something.
I tried to tell you," Merle said, "but you just went on listening for the
flute and wouldn't listen to me. Then I wondered if Piettra had come
back, and just as I got here, she climbed in the window. I left it open
in case she came back."
"Why did you go away?" Blueboy asked Piettra.
"I had to," Piettra answered. "Then I had to come back."


GUESSING
"Why?"
"Because I am happy here."
"Aren't you always happy?"
"No, I am mostly sad."
"Why do you dance as if you were happy?"
"1 have to dance," Piettra said slowly.
"Blueboy had a new thought.
"Do you know where you came from before you were a little beggar
girl?" he asked.
"Of course I do. What makes you ask?"
"I just wanted to know."
Blueboy was a little nervous and half expected Piettra to disappear
as Gardener had, when he discovered he was a Fairy. But no, Piettra
sat hunched up on the bed, looking comfortable and happy and as if she
never intended to leave again. So he took courage.
"Guess what we guessed?"
Merle nudged him.
"Oh, Blueboy! Don't be stupid."
But Piettra replied: "That my Mother gave me the name of Piettra
because she seemed to hear it on the wind, and thought that perhaps it
belonged to the little people and they wished her to give it to me."
"Oooh! Did she? Tell us about her. I didn't know you had a
Mother."
"I haven't really. I have only been told about her."
"Who told you —the one who has so many children she doesn't
know what to do?"
"Yes."
"You haven't guessed yet, what we guessed."
"I give up! Tell me what it was."
"That you were Twinkle before you were Piettra."
"You are quite wrong. I was Piettra first, and now I'm Twinkle."
The children were thoughtful for a moment. Things seemed to be
the wrong way round. It was puzzling."
"What about the wings you left behind?" Blueboy said.
This caused no embarrassment to Piettra.
"Oh, I have new ones," she said. "Those were too crushed to use
any more.
PAGE EIGHTY-NINI


Blueboy stared at Piettra's shoulders. Merle nudged him once
again.
"IPs rude to stare, 11 she whispered.
"Why did you leave your wings behind? 11 Blueboy asked.
"Because they were worn out. 11
"How did you wear them out? I thought they lasted for ever. 11
Piettra shook her head. "They wear out very quickly. 11
"Have you more than one pair of wings? 11
"Of course I have. 11
"Do you fly very far? 11
"Not so very far, but very high."
"When? 11
"Every night. Not often in the daytime. 11
"It must be wonderful to fly!" Blueboy sighed
"Oh, you soon get used to it. And then you don't notice."
"If I could fly, I would fly high in the sky so that I could go to
the stars. I'd fly from cloud to cloud and rest on one when I was tired."
"I wouldn't do that if I were you," Piettra warned him. "You want
to be sure there is something soft to fall on should you fall."
"Uncle Timothy said that when you fly in an aeroplane, the
clouds are lovely and inviting and make you feel you want to jump on to
one, so when I fly I'm going to."
Piettra looked at him.
"You're very brave," she said.
Blueboy's eyes sparkled. "And I'm going to be an airman when I
grow up instead of an explorer or diver."
"And I am just going to live in the Little Round House for ever,"
sighed Merle.
"I wish 1 could." Piettra sighed, too.
"Why don't you now? Why do you go away?" Blueboy asked.
"Because I have to." Piettra shook her head sadly.
"Why do you have to go away? When you are grown up, you'll
be able to do what you like."
"That is just why I have to go away, because I am not grown up
and I cannot do exactly what I want to do."
AGE NINET\


GUESSING
"We know of a place and someone who wants a little girl with blue
eyes, and you could live with her for ever. If you went to live with
her you could do exactly what you wanted to, Blueboy said.
"Where does she live?"
"She lives in a he use," Merle said, "high up above trees and it looks
down —down —down over the trees to gardens and a lawn far below.
"Tell me some more," Piettra said.
"There's a magnolia tree with great flowers large enough for a fairy
to sleep in."
"Would you like to sleep in a magnolia flower?" Blueboy whispered
to Piettra. "Perhaps you have slept in one!" He expected to catch her
unawares.
"I would love to sleep in one," Piettra said. "Just imagine being
rocked to sleep in a magnolia with the wind singing a lullaby and the
scent making me dream. It would be lovely.
"Well, why don't you?"
Piettra laughed and her laughter floated away into the night like
music. She threw her arms around Blueboy and hugged him tight.
"You are a darling little boy," she said. "How sweet of you to
want such lovely things to happen to people."
"Some platypuses live beneath the tree," Blueboy said. You could
watch them. They have one nest among the roots and another along
a passageway that is a kind of nursery where the mother platypus looks
after her babies. The platypuses come out in the evening and very early
morning and you would be able to see them."
"I love platypuses?"
Dear Val has kangaroos and peacocks in her garden and all kinds of
pets and platypuses. And that's where we want you to live."
"Since I came here, I seem not to want to live anywhere else. I
have almost forgotten to find the house that beckons. I can find my way
here so easily and I come because I want to —although I am not allowed
to do most of the things I want to do."
"That's the same with us. But we seem to be able to do lots of
things, all except going out at night. Then we hear the flute, and it is
very difficult to remember not to."
"Do you like the flute so very much?" Piettra said. "Nothing
would ever make me leave the Little Round House if I didn t have to.
NINETY-ONI


"What about the house that beckons?"
"Yes, of course. Perhaps some day I will find it. I wish I knew
something to help me find it."
"The flute might help you," Merle said.
"Ooooh! I never thought of that," Blueboy said. "Do you think
it could? But we haven't got close to it yet and we don't know who
plays it. Oh, I wish we could!"
"I try not to hear it," Merle said. "I put my head under the bed'
clothes until I'm asleep."
"How do you know when you are asleep?"
"Oh, Blueboy, you do ask questions! Why, I'm nearly asleep now
—and so is Piettra. Come back to bed."
Off they ran to their rooms. They were both wide awake by the
time they reached their beds. And suddenly the flute sounded; first
inside quite close, then far away.
"Oh! It makes me want to go more than ever."
"So it does me," Merle whispered as she settled her head on the
pillow . . . but she fell asleep while listening. She was awakened later, how
ever, by the sound again. She called to Blueboy. The sound had
awakened him, too. A strange thing happened.
They both forgot their promise to Gardener about not going
out in the dark. They dressed hastily and ran to the garden,
out of the gate and on to the winding road. They were relieved to see
a streak of light in the sky, which meant that morning was not far away.
The children followed the sound, which became more enticing every
moment. It led them on and on, through garden gates and out of them,
around every bend in the winding road and away through the wood until
they came to a fence with a stile. They climbed on to this and were
about to jump over to the other side when someone called to them.
They recognised Gardener's voice, and suddenly remembered
they had broken their promise. As Gardener walked towards them, they
hung their heads.
"Never mind; never mind," he said. "I know the sound made you
forget everything and you had to follow. It did the same to me, and
after all it's morning now."
"Where does the sound come from?" Blueboy asked, listening in'
tently. "I can hear it still."
PAGE NINETY-TVv


GUESSING
Gardener shook his head.
"I don't know where it comes from. It is far away now and getting
farther and farther still."
"It always does that and we'll never find it," Blueboy complained.
"What does it matter? Listen to the birds; their notes are as good
as any flute."
"So they are. So they are!" Merle said. "How happily they sing;
and . . . oh! . . . Look at that." She pointed to the sky.
PAGE NINETY-THREE


CHAPTER 17
THE RAINBOW AND THE STILE
ERLE pointed to a wonderful rainbow that stretched from
one side of the sky to the other. Gardener stood a moment
looking at it, then walked to the stile and sat upon it beside the two
children.
"I think this is the earliest hour you have ever been out of your
beds," he said.
"Almost the middle of the night," Blueboy whispered.
They sat awhile on the top of the stile. The sun came above the
horizon in a great glow of crimson; the rainbow grew brighter every
moment.
"Isn't it a beauty?" Gardener said. "Twinkle the Fairy has surely
sent it so that you may be in her ring of laughter."
"It touches the earth just over there," Blueboy said. "I believe I
could get on to it."
"Well, why don't you try?" Gardener said. "Be off as fast as you
can run!"
"Come on, Merle?" Blueboy shouted, jumping from the stile and
running. "If I get on that rainbow, I'll give you a race."
Merle jumped from the stile and ran after Blueboy. He reached
the rainbow and the next moment he was on it and running along a
bright yellow band of colour. When Merle reached the rainbow she
jumped on too and raced beside Blueboy on a cerise band of colour.
"I knew I could get on to a rainbow," Blueboy shouted with laugh-
ter. "Because Twinkle promised to let us in her ring of laughter.'
Merle laughed, too. It was not strange after all to be on a rainbow.
All children could be in Twinkle's ring of laughter.
They ran up —up —up towards the top of the coloured arch.
PAGE NINETY-FOUR


THE RAINBOW AND THE STILE
"Isn't it exciting?" Blueboy called. "I wonder what's on the other
side. I'll race you down."
A little pink cloud floated close to Merle. She put out her hand
to catch it. As she did so, Blueboy ran ahead, reached the top of the
rainbow, and raced down the other side. Merle wanted to catch up to
him, but the pink cloud floated temptingly close.
She stretched out her hand again, stood on tiptoes, slipped, sat down,
and instead of running, slid down the other side of the great arch. Blueboy
kept ahead of her, jumped when he got to the end, and fell on some'
thing soft. Sitting up, he looked around him. He was in a world of
snow. Merle saw Blueboy disappear, but before she had time to be
worried she slipped to the end, and the next moment sat beside him.
"I told you I could beat you!" he said, rolling over laughing.
Merle stared at the snow covered world.
"We must be on the other side of the world," she said.
Little red robins flew from all directions, fluttering about the two
children and chirping in a friendly manner.
"Tweet —tweet —tweet, you darling things," Merle called. "Oh,
dear! I wish I had some crumbs to give you. There isn't much for you
to eat in all this snow."
"Cheerily—cheerily!" the robins cried.
"Cheerily—cheerily!" Merle called back. "How happy you are!"
Blueboy was interested in the robins, but more interested still in how
they were to get home again.
"How are we going to get back?" he asked.
"The way we came, of course."
"But the way isn't there any longer?"
Merle turned to look. The rainbow had disappeared.
"Oh, dear! What will we do? It's all your fault," she said. "Why
did you want to run a race on a rainbow?"
"It's not all my fault," Blueboy said. "You liked it as much as I
did. It's really Twinkle's fault. She got us in her ring of laughter. You
needn't worry, Merle. I'll get you home."
"But how? We can't walk all the way and we wouldn't know which
way to go, because every way you look looks the same."
"Chirp—chirp —chirp!"
PAGE NINETY-FIVE


Little red robins flocked about the children, curious at the sight of
a little boy and girl who had come off the end of the rainbow.
"You do look beautiful! 11 Merle called to the birds, the only patch
of colour in a white world.
"Robins . . . Robins . . . Robins! 11 Blueboy called. "Perhaps you
can tell us how to find our way home. We are lost and do not know
which way to go. 11
"Cheerily—cheerily! 11 the birds answered.
"But it isn't very cheerful to be lost! 11 Blueboy shouted.
"Tut—tut! 11 the birds shouted back and flew away.
The children stared in dismay as the robins became black specks
against the snow before disappearing altogether.
Merle and Blueboy were lonely without the friendly little birds.
"What will we do now? 11 Merle asked. "I wish the robins had
stayed, they are so cheerful. 11
"They've gone to get help," Blueboy said.
"How do you know?"
"I guessed. And we will just have to stay here and not move until
they come back."
They waited patiently, becoming lonelier and lonelier every moment
-until Blueboy had an idea.
"We could build a snow man," he said.
"And play snowballs!" Merle cried. "Oh, quickly—quickly! Let
us start at once. Snowballs and snow men must be in Twinkle's ring of
laughter."
In a few moments laughter rang out across the snow. Merle and
Blueboy made snowballs and flung them at one another; then they built
a snow man.
The robins were almost forgotten when suddenly the birds appeared
again; at first dark specks in the distance, then vivid patches of scarlet
against the snow.
Something else happened ... a distant sound of bells.
PAGE NINETY-SIX


w
CHAPTER 18
FATHER CHRISTMAS
HAT can it be?" Merle and Blueboy whispered to one
another.
"I can see something big coming across the snow," Blueboy said
Tinkle linkle —tinkle linkle —tinkle linkle.
"Bells!" Merle said.
"And horses!" Blueboy said; then added thoughtfully: "But they
don't have horses in snow. Perhaps it is reindeer. It is reindeer and
there is a sleigh; I can see it. Oh, oh, oh! The robins did go for help
after all."
"I wonder if they really did," Merle said.
Jingle—jingle —jingle. The bells came closer
Merle and Blueboy held hands.
"Isn't it exciting?"
A sleigh, drawn by reindeer, drew closer and closer. The sound ot
a whip cracked in the cold clear air. A jolly voice shouted Whoa!
The sleigh came to a standstill.
"Perhaps it's Father Christmas," Merle whispered.
A little man peered from the driver s seat. He had a white beard,
red cheeks, bright eyes, and wore a red coat with fur-trimmed hood.
As he peeped out at the two children, Blueboy whispered:
"It is Father Christmas!" and Merle was speechless with surprise.
"Come on now!" Father Christmas called. No time to waste .. .
Jump in!"
Merle and Blueboy climbed into the back of the sleigh and sat on a
soft fur rug that covered the narrow seat.
"Wrap the rug around you. You will need it," the little man called
over his shoulder. He cracked his whip and called to his deer "Get up!"
PAGE NINETY-SEVEN


Bells rang merrily; they were off.
"Are you taking us home? 11 Blueboy shouted, as the reindeer
gathered speed.
The little man took no heed, but cracked his whip and shouted in a
jolly voice.
"Get up! Now, my beauties. Get up . . . Get up!"
I m sorry to trouble you," Merle said in a gentle voice. "But
please, are you taking us home? It is a long way, I know, but it is all
Blueboy's fault that we came so far and got lost."
You should not blame your little brother," a voice answered.
"Neither of you is to blame; for you both wished to be in Twinkle's
ring of laughter."
"Oh! Are we really in it?" the children called.
Of course you are! Do you think that Twinkle would leave Father
Christmas out of her ring of laughter? Why, he plays the most important
part in it."
are Father Christmas?" Merle and Blueboy both spoke together.
"Of course I am! And lam taking you back as far as last Christmas.
The robins will take you the rest of the way home."
Why are you taking us back to last Christmas?" Merle said.
"Because last Christmas was happy and we do not know about next!"
"Oh!" The two children sighed with contentment. Looking out
of the sleigh, they saw robins fly swiftly beside it.
"Last Christmas isn't nearly as good as next Christmas!" Blueboy
whispered.
"Not quite, because I like to get surprises, and we know what we
had in our stockings last Christmas," Merle answered.
They sat back in the sleigh, cosily wrapped in the rug, too happy
to talk, soothed by the jingle of bells, and watching the snow fly up in
clouds from beneath the feet of the deer.
Swifter —swifter, until the deer seemed to race through the air.
"The snow looks like clouds," Blueboy murmured.
"We are almost flying," Merle said. "I am quite sure we are
rising off the ground. I cannot hear the deer's hoofs."
Both peered over the side of the sleigh. They were still in a white
world.
"Look! Look!" Merle said. "We are in the clouds."
PAGE NINETY-EIGHT


F AT H EI
"I believe we are above all the chimneys in the world," Blueboy
declared
"Whole cities of them," Merle said. "I wonder what the names
of all those places are? I can hear Christmas Carols, so we must be
nearly back to last Christmas. .
Music floated on the air. Children's voices came in happy Christmas
Car °"i wonder why Father Christmas doesn't stop? There are children
waiting in all those houses expecting him to come down the chimney
and leave presents in their stockings." „
"Perhaps we are the only ones going back to last Christmas, tflue-
boy whispered. "And it's the realest Christmas I've ever had, with
the snow and the reindeer . . . and . . . and ...
"And Father Christmas!" The voice came from the driver s seat.
"Look, look, children!" He pointed with his whip.
"What are the names of all the places?" Merle called.
"We have passed over one, its name does not matter; but now we
come to another one. Look closely. This is Holland, where the grown'
up people are young of heart as well as the children. But quickly now.
We are over Belgium, where the children are happy despite the tear
that is in their parents' hearts. And now to France, where the children
are being given the happiest Christmas, for fear that they will never
know another. And now, we are across the seas —and England. Can
you count the chimneys?"
"Would there be a million?" Blueboy asked.
"A million and a few more. Where the chimneys are closest
together, I found no need to pause. The children slept in strange beds
last Christmas and hung their stockings on the mantle-shelf of strange
chimneys. But Father Christmas did not forget them; he saw that they
had a happy Christmas; one they would never forget.
"I do like last Christmas," Blueboy said.
"Well I'm glad, because we are nearly there. . . . With a last merry
jingle of bells, the sleigh came to a halt
"Jump out!" Father Christmas called.
The children jumped out and stared about them.
"Where is Christmas?" Blueboy said.
Father Christmas stood beside them.
PAGE NINETY-NINI


"It is all about you," he said, and laughed a great jolly laugh. His
breath came like thick mist and hid his face from them.
"You are lucky children. Twinkle gathered all the happiness of
bygone Christmasses and you have heard the happy sound in her ring
of laughter. She is working now to keep it unspoilt because it is needed
more than ever. Remember that."
Before Merle and Blueboy had time to thank Father Christmas, he
was in his sleigh again. They heard the jingle of bells as Father Christ'
mas and his sleigh disappeared in a cloud of snow.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED


/ /'t.
CHAPTER 19
THE WAY BACK
ERLE and Blueboy stood looking after Father Christmas.
"We didn't thank him!" Blueboy exclaimed.
" "He didn't give us time," Merle said.
"What are we going to do? We are lost just as much as ever.
"It doesn't seem to matter now. Listen!"
Music filled the air Christmas Carols. There were other sounds,
bells rang out and the merry happy laughter of children echoed on all
sides
"Look!" Blueboy pointed. "It is like a Christmas Card snow on
the trees, on the roofs and chimneys of the houses, and on the churc
It
SPlre it seemed they were in a garden square, with houses on three sides,
and trees on the fourth side. A road ran through the trees and away out
"It is exciting after all to be back to last Christmas, Merle said.
"I've always wanted to see a snow Christmas and to hear Christmas
Carols, and church bells ringing at the same time. , or£>
"I like to hear the children laughing too. I suppose they
laughing at all the surprises they have found in their stockings.
"I love the sound of Christmas Carols across the snow, Merle said
"The snow makes everything so still and quiet and the music soun
clearer **
"No trams, trains or motor cars —just Christmas, Blueboy mur-
mured. "Even the robins are quiet."
"I suppose they are waiting for Christmas said they
would show us the rest of the way home," Merle said.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND ONI


HOUS
THAI
KONS
Suddenly the robins flew from the snow-covered ground to the
branches of a tree and chirped loudly. The noise was deafening.
"They are trying to tell us something, 11 Blueboy said.
The birds flew towards the children chirping louder still.
I know! I know! 11 Blueboy shouted. "They want us to follow
them, and they say it as plain—as plain. Come on! are you
waiting for, Merle? 11
Which way do they mean us to go? They are fluttering and
circling all around us and weM soon get dizzy if we followed. 11
Blueboy tried to follow the birds. He ran round and round in
circles, till he became dizzy, and he laughed so much that he fell in the
snow. Merle ran to pull him up and fell in the snow, too. The birds
continued to circle and flutter.
Cheerily, cheerily! 11 the robins sang.
Merle and Blueboy, on their feet again, shouted:
"What do you want? 11
Tut tut- the birds answered, flicked their tails and flew off in a
straight line.
Come on! Blueboy said. Now we know which way they want
us to go. 11
The birds flew towards the road; the children followed, running
over crisp hard snow. As they neared the trees there was less snow
and the ground only was lightly sprinkled; by the time they reached the
road all the snow had disappeared.
The road was long and narrow and stretched far away into the
distance through a forest of trees. The trees were bare of leaf and those
growing on the roadside made an avenue and an archway through which
the robins flew.
Merle and Blueboy followed, dancing and skipping on the roadway,
jumping over tree shadows etched by the sun. It was their favourite
game and they laughed and shouted to one another as they ran.
By and by the shadows became too wide to jump across, and look-
ing up they found that the trees had leaves. These leaves were golden
brown and made a golden archway stretching far away into the distance.
Crisp curly leaves fluttered to the ground and made a carpet beneath
their feet.
Chirp, chirp, chirp! 11 The robins flew beneath the trees.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND TWO




The children followed, the leaves beneath their feet made the way
easy. They ran on and on, laughing joyously, chasing leaves that blew
about them, catching them as they fell from the trees.
By and by, no leaves fell from the trees and there were none to
walk upon, and looking up they found that those overhead were green.
Sunlight shone through, making a pattern on the road instead of the
carpet of leaves.
u lm tired, 11 Blueboy said. "It is getting too hot to run. 11
"And I'm thirsty! Where are the robins? 11
The robins were nowhere to be seen.
The children sat beneath the trees on a grassy bank. Looking up,
they found the robins. There they were among the green leaves feasting
off ripe peaches.
"You might offer us some! 11 Blueboy shouted
He was sure that the robins called back:
"Cheerily, cheerily! Help yourselves. 11
"Very well! Come on, Merle—we will! 11
The branches were laden with fruit. Both children were able to
reach the lower branches and picked to their hearts 1 content. Then
they sat again beneath the trees to eat the delicious fruit. While they
ate they watched the robins.
The air was warm and made them feel drowsy. They would have
slept but for the noise of the birds. How excited they were. How
greedily they pecked at the fruit. Their appetites were after a time
appeased and off they flew again.
Merle and Blueboy got reluctantly to their feet and followed.
"I'm going to walk. It's too hot to hurry, 11 Blueboy said.
They walked and the birds got far ahead of them. Several times,
arriving at a shady tree, the children sat down to rest, and each time
the robins were perched in the trees waiting for them. After resting
a few moments, the robins started off again and they followed.
"We are still going backwards, 11 Merle said.
"What do you mean? 11
"We are going the wrong way. Winter and snow first, then
Autumn with all the golden leaves, then Summer with the green leaves
and fruit. 11
"I suppose we'll get to Spring soon. I wonder what it will be like. 11
PAGE ONE HUNDI
FOUI


THE WAY BACK
"Blossoms, of course, 11 Merle said. "Oh, look! Look! We are
there already! 11
The trees had blossoms now and formed a fairy avenue of pink
and white. The robins flew excitedly about.
Merle and Blueboy ran about holding out their hands to catch the
pink and white petals fluttering from above. They saw a figure ahead
of them.
"I wonder who that can be, 11 Merle said.
"It looks like someone we know, 11 Blueboy said. "Lm sure I've
seen those coat tails before. 11
They forgot the robins and ran quickly after the distant figure, but
falling petals almost hid him from view. Then a bend in the road and
he was nowhere to be seen.
"The road isn't straight any longer, 11 Blueboy said. Then as they
turned the bend, "There he is again. 11
The road now twisted and turned and at each bend the figure
disappeared again.
"Oh, dear, we'll never catch him! 11 Merle said as they ran breath'
lessly along. Presently they came to a wide sweep in the road which
widened out into a field.
"Why, there is Gardener! 11
Gardener was sitting on the stile.
"Why didn't you come too?" Blueboy shouted.
"Come where?"
"Back to last Christmas."
"Last Christmas! What do you mean?"
"Well, it's in Twinkle's ring of laughter."
"Of course it is. But I'm not a child."
"Oh, of course not . . . We forgot!"
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND FIVI


CHAPTER 20
THE RIGHT WAY TO THE CIRCUS
T is time to start for home," Gardener said, climbing off the stile.
"The rainbow is still there," Blueboy said, pointing to the rainbow
in the sky. "We needn't have come such a long way round, after all."
Merle stared at the rainbow with dreamy eyes.
"I hope we may never hear that flute again," Gardener said.
"Why?" the children asked.
"Because it is too enticing. See how far it has caused us to go
already, even back as far as last Christmas. And getting out of bed
before the night is really over is a bad habit."
"But you do like the flute, don't you?"
"It is wonderful," Gardener replied. "But it makes me want to
dream instead of work. So I hope never to hear it again."
"Was it a dream about the rainbow?"
"I wonder."
"If only we could find out who plays that tune," Blueboy said, "we
would not have to go looking. Although it is fun to have adventures
while we look."
"There are plenty of other kinds of adventures," Gardener said.
"I think you will have to give up looking for the flute'player. Suppose
I take you to the circus to-night?"
"Oh, will you?"
The children jumped with excitement.
"That is if you are allowed to go. You will have to get permission
first."
"Oh, we are sure to be allowed to."
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND SIX


THE RIGHT WAY TO THE CIRCI
They hastened their steps, anxious to get home to ask for permission.
They crossed fields, climbed over fences and took short cuts back to the
winding road. And although they hurried, they found time to tell
Gardener about their adventures on the other side of the rainbow.
When near the Little Round House the children ran ahead, each
anxious to be the first to ask permission about the circus.
Blueboy got there first.
"Can we go to the circus to-night? Gardener says he will take us!
he shouted, running into Little Mother and Big Daddy s room.
"Will he now?" Big Daddy said. "That is very kind of him."
"That is a lovely idea," Little Mother said.
Blueboy ran to tell everyone in the Little Round House.
"We are allowed to go to the circus. This time we won't have to
look through the flag, Merle!"
"Now what are you talking about?" Nanny said. You do talk
nonsense sometimes, talking about a flag as if it was opera glasses. What
next?" . .
Merle and Blueboy did not explain. Nanny did not know
everything.
The day seemed long; the minutes and hours were slow in passing.
"What if Piettra comes when we are out?" Blueboy whispered to
Merle many times.
"She knows how to get in."
"Suppose Nanny or Cookie or someone finds her in bed?"
"We could lock the door and hide the key."
During the day Merle and Blueboy opened the windows in the
spare room and locked the door, unlocked it again, reshut the windows
and continued to do this at intervals. When at last they set out with
Gardener, they were a little confused and worried as to what was the
last thing they had done—left the window open and the door locked, or
the other way around.
"Surely you remember," Merle whispered to Blueboy as they
walked beside Gardener. j-w
"How can I when I don't know whether you did it last or 1 did.
he whispered back.
"Where is the key?"
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN


Blueboy put his hand in his pocket and felt something hard, pulled
it out; it was one of his flutes.
"I never thought of looking in the pocket of my best clothes, he
said. "I wonder if it is my talking flute or the other one."
"But what about the £ep!" Merle was not interested in the flute
only anxious about the key.
"Perhaps I could learn to play this flute as well as the one that
plays at night," he said.
"O/i, Blueboy! Do look in your other pocket and see if you have
the key there."
Blueboy felt in all his pockets. There was no key in any of them.
"What are you two whispering about?" Gardener said. Keep
your eyes open. At the next bend we will be able to see the red light
on the top of the circus tent."
Forgetting the key, they ran to the bend in the winding road. A
red light shone high above the distant trees.
"Quickly—quickly! We are nearly there!" Blueboy called to
Gardener.
"Wait —wait! You cannot get in without paying." Gardener
smiled, jingling money in his pocket. The children waited and together
they all walked the rest of the way to the circus.
"Exact change, please! Children half price!"
Gardener placed some money on the top of the turnstile.
Click —click —click! They were inside the circus the right way.
In a few moments they sat im the front row of seats around the
circus ring; and exactly opposite a platform upon which the bandsmen
sat. Around the platform a number of flags were draped.
"Flags!" Blueboy whispered to Merle.
"Oooh!" Merle looked guiltily towards the platform.
"There is a garden, but where are the dandelions?" she said, looking
around.
"It seems to me that there are hedges instead of flowers. Surely
Twinkle has something to do with this," Gardener said.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT


CHAPTER 21
THE REINDEER
HERE are animals cut in the hedges, 11 Blueboy said. "I wonder
if Twinkle showed them how to do it. 11
"I wonder! 11 Gardener said.
"They are not Hons, 11 Merle said. "What kind of animals are
they? 11
The children stared with curious and interested eyes at the orna'
mental hedges decorating the Clown's garden in the circus ring.
"You will have to guess what they are, 11 Gardener said.
"They look like animals without heads, 11 Blueboy said.
"Yes; but what kind of animals? 11
"Horses? 11
"No. 11
"Donkeys? 11
"No. 11
"I know! Reindeer? 11
"Right! 11
"But why are they without heads? 11 Blueboy said.
"That, you will know very soon. You remember that Cookie told
us that there is the most wonderful magician in the world at this circus?
If you look over there you will see some reindeer heads on brackets. 11
"Where? 11
"On the circus poles. 11
"Oh, yes! They are like the one that hangs in the hall of the Little
Round House. 11
"Do you ever feel sorry for that poor deer hanging up there? 11
"Yes, yes! 11 both children cried.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND NINE


THE HOUSE THAT BECKONS
11 Why?" , ~1 . , «
"Because his eyes look sad and shine as if they had tears in them,
Merle said. , , .
"Because he looks alive and yet he hasn t any legs and has to stay
in one place all the time," Blueboy said.
"The magician is going to change all that," Gardener said. The
poor hunted creatures will once again know how it feels to use t eir
legs, and the huntsman will know what it feels like to be hunted.
"How do you know he will do that? Merle asked.
"Twinkle hinted as much to me when she was preparing her ring
of children's laughter."
"And is the circus in her ring?"
"Of course it is. Everything that makes children happy and makes
them laugh is inside her ring."
"Oh! Isn't it exciting? What are they going to hunt? Blueboy
asked.
"That little clown over there! Won't that make the children
laugh?" Gardener said. "And I'll wager the magician will say Heigh
Presto!' and all those reindeer heads on brackets yonder will disappear
from the brackets and reappear on the deer cut in the hedges."
"Where is the huntsman? I can only see a clown."
"Never mind, he'll do for the huntsman—you'll see."
Gardener was right.
"Attention, please!"
All eyes turned to a magnificent figure who strode into the
ring. He had a long flowing beard, wore a red and gold turban, and
was dressed in a gorgeous costume, a satin coat trimmed with gold braid,
and long baggy trousers caught in at the ankles. His shoes were long
and pointed and curled over the toes.
He held a wand in his hand.
"Attention!" he shouted again. "Are you all ready?"
The magician waved his wand. The lights grew dim, everything
faded out of sight except the heads of the deer. They showed brilliantly.
The eyes shone as if with tears. Merle and Blueboy felt pity in their
hearts for the poor creatures. Lumps rose in their throats and they
found it difficult to swallow.
E ONE HUNDRED AND TEN


THE REINDEEI
"Oh! The poor, poor things! 11 came from many children in the
audience.
Another wave of the wand. The lights went out. There was
complete darkness for a second, then light again. A happy hunting
song from the band —"Tallyho, tallyho." Then there was the sound
of galloping feet.
The deer ran swiftly around the circus ring, then they hunted a poor
creature who fled before them. A huntsman in red hunting jacket,
white breeches and spurred boots, crouched and trembled and dodged
here and there, hid behind the hedge, creep through it, running. The
hunt grew swifter and more exciting every moment.
"Look out! Look out! 11 came from all parts of the great tent.
Sympathy was for the poor hunted huntsman; when he dodged
cleverly, there were cheers. the deer closed in upon him
there were warning shouts. There seemed no chance for the hunted
thing.
"Oh, oh, oh! 11
Then joy! The huntsman had escaped. He was nowhere to be
seen; he had eluded his pursuers.
Suddenly it was discovered that he rode upon one of the deer. As
he rode he pulled off his huntsman s coat and stood upon the deer s
back —he was the clown!
The children laughed shrilly and clapped their hands.
Where were all the deer?
The brackets had deer's heads on them again and the hedges neatly
cut, were the same as before. The magician waved his wand and bowed
and bowed. Everyone clapped and cheered him. He was certainly a
wonderful magician.
The clown continued to ride around the ring.
"It's a horse—not a reindeer!" Blueboy shouted. "It's only got a
deer's head on it."
The clown waved, pulled the great horns off his steed s head and
waved them above his own head, and everyone could see that he was
riding a horse.
"Oh! Wasn't it exciting?" Merle said.
"Very, very much so!" Gardener agreed.
PAGE ONE HUNI


They had hardly recovered from this excitement, than something
more exciting happened. They noticed a dainty figure on a tight rope
high up in the centre of the tent.
"There she is again!" Blueboy said.
Merle clasped his hand.
"But look!" she said. "It's Piettra!"
"Piettra!" Blueboy shrieked.
"What do you mean?" Gardener said. "Are you trying to tell me
that the little circus girl is your friend Piettra who left her wings behind?"
"Yes, yes!" they both said.
"And it doesn't matter about the key after all," Blueboy said. "We'll
be home before her."
"I always knew from the first time I saw her that I had seen her
before; but of course, looking through a flag made her look a little dif-
ferent," Merle said.
They had eyes only for Piettra now, and watcher her with breath-
less interest, as she walked the tight rope balanced above their heads.
They were sure that it was only by the aid of her wings that she was
able to remain so high in the air. When suddenly she floated down to
the ring, they were quite sure that she flew.
"It is Twinkle, isn't it?" they whispered to Gardener.
"I hardly think so," he answered. "But we will have a word with
her and find out."
"Look at her now!" Blueboy squealed.
The ring-master led into the ring a magnificent white horse, with
long mane and flowing tail. It had a bridle studded with gold and no
saddle. It pawed the ground with its hoof and the ring-master had great
difficulty in keeping it quiet.
Without hesitation, Piettra went to the horse, put her hand upon
the bridle and it immediately became quiet; the ring-master assisted her
to its back, with a hand upon the bridle only, and standing on its back
she first galloped, then cantered around the ring.
Each time she passed Merle and Blueboy the horse's pace was
swifter. They sat still, both gasping with excitement.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVI


THE REINDEER
Suppose Piettra should tumble off! Suppose she could not hold on
tight enough? Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Why did she allow the horse to
go faster and faster? Was it because she could not stop it?
They were glad she had wings. Suddenly she used them, sprang to
the ground and the horse galloped through an opening and away.
"How lightly she sprang from the horse," Gardener said.
"You mean she flew!" Blueboy said.
Piettra bowed and smiled and waved to the audience, the next
moment she was gone, gone also to Merle and Blueboy was all the glamour
of the circus. . , „ ,
"Oh, do let us go! Let us go quickly or we will miss her, they
said to Gardener. . , , , ,
There was nothing to do but to leave the circus. Gardener led the
two children quietly from their seats and out of the tent.
For a moment after coming from the bright lights they were unable
to see. Then Gardener turned and pointed to the back of the circus.
"We will probably find her there," he said.
They walked around the large tent and came to another and smaller
one at the back of it.
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN


CHAPTER 22
TWINKLE THE DANCER
HERE were dark shadows upon the canvas of the small tent;
shadows strangely elongated and grotesque.
The children were a little nervous.
Who are all those queer people in there?" Blueboy whispered.
are only the shadows of the circus performers," Gardener
explained. The shape of the tent and the lights at the back of the
people make them look odd. It is in there, however, that I think we
shall find Piettra.
"Listen!" Blueboy stood still. "I can hear the flute."
So can I! Gardener said. "And it is coming from the back of
this tent."
Now we 11 know who plays it. Quickly!" Blueboy said.
They walked quietly to the back of the tent. There Piettra sat upon
an upturned box—playing the flute!
Gardener and the two children were too surprised to speak and
stood a moment listening. The sound was enticing; it called to them.
They found it difficult to resist.
Piettra no longer wore her circus frock; she was dressed in rags and
her feet were bare. Her attention was upon her flute and she did not
know that she had an audience until Blueboy stood in front of her.
Looking up she gave an exclamation of delight and hid the flute
beneath her rags.
"Please go on playing," Merle called.
"Will you sleep in the guest room to-night?" Blueboy whispered.
Piettra shook her head sadly.
"Why not?"
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN


TWINKLE THE DANCER
"Because I must help get ready to leave."
'Tell us, Piettra, how you came to be in a circus? We want to
hear all about you. You are very like a friend of ours called Twinkle ,
Gardener said, sitting on an empty box he found close to her.
Merle and Blueboy leant against his knees.
The flute was attached to a ribbon Piettra wore in a necklace around
her neck. She slipped it inside her blouse.
"Has it always been there?" Blueboy said. "And Ive been longing
to see it. Can't I see it now?" _ .
"Wait until Piettra tells us about everything," Merle said. Are
you Twinkle? Sometimes I think you are and sometimes I think you are
not, and once you said you were Twinkle as well as Piettra. What did
you mean?" 9
"Everyone in the circus calls me Twinkle. See.
'Twinkle" was written in lights across the front of the circus.
"Oh, I see! I see! Gardener said.
"Ooooh! That's different. You aren't Twinkle Fairy? ' Merle
said. "But Twinkle the dancer?"
Piettra nodded. m
"Why have you got wings then?" Blueboy enquired.
"Because it makes me seem to fly when I jump.'
"Who taught you all these things?" Gardener asked.
"I was taught so that I might help the 'old woman who had so
many children she didn't know what to do?
"Are you talking about your mother?"
"No, no!" Piettra shook her head. "Someone who is the other
children's mother."
"You haven't a mother of your own?"
Piettra shook her head. "No, and not even a house. That is why
I want to find the house that beckons."
"Have you been looking for it for a long time?
"As long as I can remember, and that is how I found the circus
and the circus people told me that they would look after me until I found
the house."
"You found it once," Blueboy said.
E ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEF


a.- i YeS ' Ut 1 lost lt again now beckon any more I
think it is because I found the Little Round House. That makes me
happy although I know that it is not the one that beckons."
Blueboy went close to Piettra and whispered:
,^ re ' he circus people looking after the platykittens too."
Platykittens? ... Oh, the platypuses? Yes, I think they are."
Ihe window is open—at least I think it is. If it isn't, I'll open
it when we get home." F
last time t0 be '" Sm ' led ' Tm §oing t0 slee P there for the
Why the last time?"
Because the circus is going farther on and I must go with it."
"r> re taking Plat and Kit?" Blueboy whispered.
Bring the flute," Merle said.
They all said good-night to Piettra. Gardener said-
frnm hy hen w U g^, away With the circus ' iC ma y be on 'y a sho » distance
from here. We will see you again.
Merle was quiet and looked sadly at Piettra as she turned to follow
Urardener and Blueboy.
w ~G ard, e ner and Merle did not notice that Blueboy had disappeared.
Walking home on the winding road, they heard the flute again. Stopping
o listen, they discovered that Blueboy was not with them.
bas , g " ne ahead and will be in bed and fast asleep by the time
we get there, Gardener said. "The flute is following us "
'lt sounds ahead," Merle said.
"The wind carries the sound," Gardener told her.
\A i At j°n, e L J ttle M other waited for the children. She wished to see
Merle and Blueboy into bed safely.
Merle ran into the house alone.
"Where is Blueboy?"
had said 6 S SoUncl aslee P>" Merle said, remembering what Gardener
R W l ke j Litt ! e Mother said, and told Merle to run off to
and that she would tuck her in when she was ready.
Blueboy was not in bed; he was under the platform at the circus
He had returned to get Plat and Kit.
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN


TWINKLE THE DANCER
The platypuses were cuddled together in one corner of the cage-like
box. There was a sack hanging over one end of it. Blueboy took this,
spread it on the ground, picked up the baby platypuses, wrapped them in
the sack and ran as fast as his legs could carry him to the place where
he had entered. Crawling under the flap of the canvas, he ran quickly
to the fence, managed somehow to climb up, and still holding his precious
burden to drop to the other side.
He then set out for Brookside. It was amazing how fast his legs
carried him and how he found his way down the steep steps in the dark
and to the Brook beneath the magnolia tree. He put the sack on the
ground and uncovered the platypuses.
Finding them asleep, cuddled up together, he lifted them out gently,
and put them on the ground, then waited to see what would happen.
The moon shone brightly. . t .
The platypuses stretched themselves lazily like a pair of kittens.
as if suddenly becoming aware of their surroundings, they walked
clumsily to the entrance of the platypus nest and disappeared.
Blueboy was sure that they were Plat and Kit.
With fast- beating heart, he ran quickly up the steep steps, down the
long drive and away otwards home. Arriving there, he was too tired to
worry about the window in the guest room, whether it was open or not.
He undressed quickly, casting his clothes about the floor, and in no time
he was in bed and fast asleep.
D SEVENTEEN
NE HUNDREI


ct4
CHAPTER 23
LITTLE MOTHER MAKES A DISCOVERY
FTER Little Mother had tucked Merle into bed and kissed
her goodnight, she went to Blueboy's room. He was fast
asleep. She kissed the top of his head and tucked him in;
then looked at his clothes strewn about the floor.
She picked up the clothes one by one; among them she found the
trousers Blueboy had discarded when he changed into his best ones. She
felt something hard, put her hand into the pocket and found the key of
the guest room.
Well, well! Here it is, she murmured, "and Eve been searching
the whole evening. 11
She walked to the end of the hall, put the key in the door, opened
it, and was about to close it again when her eye caught sight of the bed
under the window.
Someone is sleeping there, she murmured. "I did not know that
Uncle Timothy had returned. 11
Then she thought for a moment. How did he get in through a
locked door?
She tiptoed to the bed. The moon shone upon a lovely face; long
eyelashes, curling upwards like butterfly wings, lay against delicate cheeks.
Pale gold hair fell heavily across the forehead. Where did this lovely
person come from? Little Mother was astonished.
Gently turning back the bedclothes, she found the sleeping child
enfolded in a pair of gauzy wings.
Oh . . . !
She ran along the hall to her bedroom.
Big Daddy! she said. Come quickly! Ive caught a Fairy at
13>SL •
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN


. » Tt4c L.rflt fmos Twh,


"Steady, steady," Big Daddy said.
Well, if you don't believe me —come and see!"
Big Daddy got lazily out of bed, and stretching his long arms, and
yawning, followed Little Mother to the guest room. A light from the hall
shone into the room. He tiptoed to the bed and stood beside Little Mother
while she turned back the bedclothes. He looked, and then, without a
word, turned and tiptoed out of the door again. Little Mother ran after
him.
What did I tell you?" she whispered.
Those two children," he said, "have surely brought that child home
from the circus."
"Oh!" Little Mother said indignantly. "HI go and ask Gardener."
Big Daddy went back to bed. Little Mother went out to the
garden. It was peaceful; no sound except the croak, croak of a frog and
the singing hum of a lone cricket, disturbed the night.
A light shone in the pergola. Little Mother ran along the garden
path, past the lily pond, under the trees, softly calling:
"Gardener! Gardener!"
Gardener came from the pergola to meet her.
Tell me, she said breathlessly, "has Twinkle, your playmate, come
to live here too?"
"What makes you ask?"
"There is a lovely creature asleep in the guest room. She has a
pair of wings."
"Piettra," Gardener said.
"Who?"
"Piettra, the little circus girl."
Oh! Little Mother said. I think 111 go in now. Thank you,
Gardener."
"Ma'am! If you please, before you go, may I tell you about her?"
It was a long time before Little Mother returned to the Little Round
House; when she did so, Big Daddy was fast asleep. She shook him.
Big Daddy grunted. "Who? . . . What?"
You were quite right; so was I," she murmured. "For she is as
good as any Fairy, and she has come to stay."
"Don't know what you are talking about," Big Daddy replied. "But
you are quite right, I'm sure."
PAGE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY


DISCOVERS
LITTLE MOTHER MAKES
Early the next morning, Dear Val was busy in the garden, cutting
flowers for the house and snipping off the dead ones as she did so.
She walked with a basket on her arm down the long drive, intending to
pick ferns to go with the flowers.
She was surprised to see three figures enter her gate. She recog-
nized Blueboy and Merle; the third stirred some memory.
Where had she seen someone, clothed in rags that fluttered like a
wind-blown flower?
Blueboy ran to her, and when quite close he called in a loud whisper:
"We've got someone with blue eyes for you," and closer still, he
whispered: "I think it's Twinkle!"
"How exciting!" Dear Val said, and stood looking towards Merle
and Piettra, who walked hand in hand up the drive; sunlight trickled
through the trees and fell in bright patterns about them all.
Piettra stared up at the trees. When close to Dear Val, she stood
still opened her mouth to speak, stared with surprise, and was speech-
less for a moment. At last she whispered:
"This is the House that Beckons!"
"I knew we would help you find it," Blueboy said triumphantly.
This made everyone laugh, and when they stopped laughing, every-
thing seemed just as it should be.
"Of course it is the House that Beckons, Dear Val said. And
why didn't you stop the first time you came? What made you run
away?"
"I don't know."
"Where did you hide on the winding road when you followed me
with the flute song?"
"In and out of gardens."
"Why?"
"I was looking for a house."
"What kind of house?"
"One that was promised me and that I knew I would find some
day."
"I thought you were following me.
"I was too, because you sang happily. I wanted to find where you
lived." .
"You stayed outside the garden; you did not come in at once.
D AND TWENTY'ONI
PAGI
E HUNI


"When I did, I sat at the top of the steps and played a tiny tune.
When you came back I ran away. After that I couldn't find the house
again."
"And now that you have found it, you will never leave it again?"
Piettra shook her head.
"No, I never will!"
The Brook echoed these words: "I never will ... I never will."
Kango went thump—thump—thump u pand down the brookside.
He seemed delighted that the platypus babies had been found at last. He
took no exception to his gentle doe, who sat on her haunches beside the
Brook staring at Plat and Kit, giving little grunts and hisses as though
she talked to her own young.
This, at any rate, was not out of place for had not her own baby
grown and even peeped from her pouch.
Shimma spread his tail fanwise to amuse the babies, while Gleam
trailed her long drooping tail beside the Brook.
Splash and Flash played with their babies in the shallow water and
the Brook ran slowly. There was no need to hurry and there was much
to hear and learn in the garden.
THE END


NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 NORTH YORK STREET. SYDNEY




f0MRgKA
-r. v.---; .«; . ■«.,•*•'•:••.'•• •$&&' -vv-;;:-- ;::•■••
i ij: V. V ® v -' O' .• >"'




3 1508 02112640 9
Here is another fantastic story by the writer
of "Little Round House" and "The Little Round
Garden". In it you will once again meet
Merle and Blueboy. Their Aunt Val, otherwise
known as "Dear Val" but as "Dearest" to Merle
and Blueboy, also appears and she it is who
lives in "The House That Beckons".
Merle and Blueboy meet Piettra, and they
are quite certain that she is the fairy Twinkle
disguised as a beggar maid. But who is
Piettra, really? Ah, to discover that you must
read the book.
If you enjoyed "Little Round House" or
"The Little Round Garden", you will be de-
lighted with "The House That Beckons", around
which more things happen, very peculiar
things, than in either of the other two books.


• ' *
; '
i r
•i ' * ft
