

The Attitude of the Church
To Modern Life and Thought
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
THE EE V. JAMES HILL, M.A.
AT THE
Annual Meeting of the Congregational Union,
Held October igih, 1886.
gktjMtctj :
53 Market Street
♦♦♦♦♦♦
EDWARD LEE, EXCELSIOR PRINTING WORKS,




1
!
;;
!♦ i
♦
< ► i
* >
< ' 1
< -
j J
< «
- |
►
- |
►
► 1
• 1
•
' |
:
'M
I
(i: |
II The Attitude of the Church 1
;i|
I . $ |
c To Modern Life and Thought, j
,I |
ti - + _. |
!•: I
;
II AN ADDRESS
♦I 3 3
♦ d
<►3 - J
< * s ►!
;; 3 DELIVERED BY |
11| a |
1 THE EEY. JAMES HILL, M.A. 1
2 1 I
♦ gi
XI ►I
Z a a
2 S AT THE I
t a FI
Ti 1 m
TI g R|
11 Annual Meeting of the Congregational Union, i
|| Held October igth, 1886. I
|| I
I I
II Shjlmeij: I
1 1 EDWARD LEE, EXCELSIOR PRINTING WORKS, 1
Z g 53 Market Street. a
U — I
1 1 1886. I
t I
I Ls




THE ATTITUDE OF THE CHURCH
MODERN LIFE AND THOUGHT.
Fathers and Brethren, —
On such an occasion as the present
it is perhaps well to note some of the dominant tendencies of
the time which often occasion uneasiness and alarm, if for no
other reason than to prepare ourselves for the conflict they
involve and the changes they foreshadow. We cannot forget
that the Church stands in the heart of the world, and is
influenced by its life and thought. It will be well, therefore, for
us to consider
I.—OUR ATTITUDE TO SOCIETY.
The society in which she does her work is not wholly passive in
her hands, but holds elements and materials, forms of thought and
phases of life with which she has to reckon, and that often re-act
on, and in great measure determine the form of her doctrine and
discipline. From overlooking the influence which pre-Christian
and anti-Christian forms of thought have exerted on her life,
many movements within the Church have not been fully under-
stood. Where peoples inherit from their science and civilisation
a system of ideas irreconcilable with the truth, as it is in Christ,
conflict ensues, and a compromise not unfrequently is the conse-
quence. A river takes on the colour and holds in it the properties
of the soil through which it flows. If the country across which
our water supply comes abounds in deleterious elements it cannot
escape contamination. The pure Christian life and thought rising
high up behind the show of earth and sky, flows to us through
human channels, and if they are encrusted with the dust of


decaying systems we cannot have unmixed truth. Christianity
in its historical development is not a hard and fast inflexible
thing, dwelling apart from human life and thought, nor is it a
current flowing in a channel outside the cycle of things which
constitute the culture and civilisation of the time ; but it is a
force which, though originating out of time, has entered into it,
acts upon, and at length transforms all it touches.
Striking its roots wide and deep into the heart of society it may
be found making alliances with forms and institutions which in
course of time it will repudiate. In consequence of the imperfect
state of the society in which it takes root, for a time it may
appear sickly and ready to die. Thus the constitution of human
society, the ways of thinking and the manner of life prevailing in
a nation, exert no mean influence upon the character of the
Christianity which obtains in it. We cannot, therefore, as
Christian workers take refuge within our own borders, and ignore the
society in and on which we discharge our influence. The drift of
practical, scientific and political activity characterising our age
can never be indifferent to us ; since the seed depends for its fruit-
fulness upon the soil in which it is cast, Christianity will remain
to us a mere unfulfilled promise in the absence of good ground
and a genial climate. A wise husbandman breaks up his fallow
ground and removes the weeds that overgrow and choke the soil,
and then scatters the seed. Christian workers are neither
secularists nor iconoclasts; their duty and function is not to
labour to remove abuses in the hope of securing thereby the
regeneration of society. They are wise enough to abstain from
all such activity, and avoid all such expectations ; for they know
that the world is to be raised nearer to God, not from within, but
from a point outside of it. The men who have done most, even for
the materia] well-being of society, have accomplished their pur-
pose, not by faith in political parties, but by the powers of the
world to come; by knowing, believing in, and relying on im-
ponderable and impalpable forces. To resolve ourselves into
societies for the promotion of any party in the State, or to carry
any measure of reform however good in itself, would be to abandon
the very idea of our existence. As Churches we know nothing o
parties or politics or anything local or temporary. Our kingdom
is not of this world \ but while holding fast to this truth it does
not absolve us from all interest in mundane affairs. There
remains to us the task of promoting such growths and movements
in the mind of the nation as will facilitate the establishment ot
God’s kingdom on earth. If we fail to bear our part in raising
the pulse and tone of society, sweetening its atmosphere, and
suppressing all that hinders the acceptance of the Gospel, it will
not become the power of God unto salvation, but will be as fiuit-


less as seed which lacks soil and sunshine—it cannot do its mighty
works whde society is buried and lost under the layers of social
corruption. Seeing that all great movements among mankind,
mental or material, issue in a modification of mind and character,
it surely becomes us to keep a watchful eye over the tendencies
of the time, and to help in creating such an atmosphere and
medium of thought and sentiment as will most favour the trans-
mission of Gospel truth to the souls of men. If we suffer society
to settle to the point of regarding life as a livelihood,” of dis-
carding all ideals of truth and goodness, and making utility the test
of all knowledge, how can we expect it to respond or rise to the
spirituality of the Gospel. If every available hour of life is con-
sumed in a world in which the thought of getting and spending is
supreme, and from which wonder and admiration, disinterestedness,
and all the lower forms of worship are excluded, the house of God
will be deserted, the truth of God set at naught, and the higher
life sacrificed. Every movement, however highly commended by
the promise it holds of promoting the material welfare of society,
should be jealously watched in the interests of the Gospel, for
whatever goes in the direction of drawing men into the regions of
activity and thought, which choke and stifle the spiritual nature,
we are bound to oppose. If we quietly stand aside and suffer to
grow up in our midst a mean, mercenary mode of existence, and
send our children out into the world with only a meagre mercan-
tile irreligious education, what hope is there for the cause of Go I
among us. Gan we expect the Gospel to prosper and prevail in a
society from which all idealism has been eliminated 1
We must learn, therefore, to keep a watchful eye over the
movements of time, checking and repulsing with heroic strength
every tendency which lowers the vitality or vitiates the atmos-
phere of society. Christianity, then, so far from being indifferent
to the movements of the age, requires us in its interests to leave
n filling undone to produce in every province of human activity a
healthy tone and type of existence.
As Oongregationalists, no one, we think, will tax us with
indifference in this direction. Though our numbers are few, our
influence is not insignificant, for we have aimed at producing a
broad and manly type of piety. We have incurred the imputation
of being political dissenters, and up to a certain point and within
certain limits, the designation is correct. For while devoutly
attached to the specially spiritual aspect of life, we are not blind
to the fact that injustice and anamolies in the State hinder the
cause of Christ.
Every movement is welcome to and in harmony with the aims
of our Churches, which seeks to abolish injustice and evil in all


their forms and gradations. Whatever tends to remove wrongs
and prepare the way however partially for realising the Christian
ideal of truth, goodness, and brotherhood, we hail as an emanation
from above, as a ray “ of the true light which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world.”
II. —OUR ATTITUDE TO THE THOUGHT OF THE TIME.
Having spoken of our attitude to society in general, let us
briefly consider our relations to what is called “ Modern
Thought.” We gladly allow there is not a little in modern
though that is hopeful. If some of its conclusions are at enmity
with our most cherished beliefs, we cannot conclusively meet them
except by coming into closer relations with them. For one thing
we cannot afford to indulge in contempt, the cheapest of intellec-
tual virtues. We must come down from that proud aloofness we
have often maintained to listen to what men are thinking about
the great problems of being, if we would render them any service.
Ft is a mark of weakness, and shows a want of knowledge to treat
the tendencies of the times as having nothing to recommend them.
While holding to what is primary and permanent, we therefore
abstain from speaking to the modern world in exclamations and
declamations, for it is the hab:t of thoughtful piety to cultivate
that openness of mind «hich keeps us alive to all the forms and
phases of our progressive existence. As Congregationalists we
sincerely set ourselves to seek in the signs of the times the
presence of One who does all things well. Thus our happy faith
in God and His gracious purposes keeps us from fanatical
outbursts, and enables us to find even in the destruction of our
immediate expectations, materials for fresh hope and endeavour.
We believe that the higher thought of the Church has thrust
upon it the task of patiently considering every position and
partial truth that men hare taken up, and in which they are
tempted to tarry and so fall short of absolute truth. If we are
to do jiood to men let us not be slow to appreciate even their
“ half truths and honest fallacies” to enter into their point of
view in order the better to lead them to see that their position is
partial and only of relative validity. It is surely a Christian duty
for such as have the requisite power and attainments, to point
out to those noble and gifted workers who “ scorn delights and
live laborious days,” that they are doing injustice to the particular
truth they love so well in failing to view it in its relation to the sum
total of all truth ; that they fail to gain the full glory of their own
discoveries in refusing to regard them in relation to the Christ
“ Who was before all things, and by Whom ail things consist.”
The practical work of the Church at the present time, then, does
not lie in one, but in many directions ; for as human life and


interests are growing more complex, it is our part to adjust our
operations to its new requirements. We have a work to do
which our fathers were not called upon to perform. Their
thrilling and hortatory utterances, so admirably adapted to the
mental and moral apathy of their time, must be supplemented in
our day by synthetic expository teaching, by applying the
Christian principle to all the details of our manifold modern
existence. Ideas are now everywhere in the air, and people are
canvassing questions about which our fathers gave themselves
little concern; and it falls to the Church to point out the true
place and value, in the system of truth, of those new ideas which
are coming in like a flood. Human nature and needs are doubtless
substantially the same in all ages, and we are profoundly convinced
that the Gospel is a truth for all time and a message for every
land ; but it requires ever to be brought home to men’s “ business
and bosoms” in their own language, across new routes, and
illustrated, illumined and applied by the newest methods of
argument and persuasion. We need and can never dispense with
that form of Christian activity which seeks by a mental shock to
shake men out of iheir spiritual slumber, and make them aware
of the presence of God and the powers of the world to come. All
agencies which aim at vanquishing the power of sin we
hail with satisfaction. With the one truth and one spirit
let us recognise the need for a diversity of operations.
In a large house there are many vessels. We want com
prehension, a unity of differences, and not a dull, dead
uniformity or a spirit that can endure no deviation from time-
honoured customs. Every man to his work, without challenging
or discrediting another’s. We want our evangelists, but we also
want our teachers, and it is cause for thankfulness that in our
ranks we find such men as Dr. Dale and Principal Pairbairn, who
unite and harmonise practical and speculative gifts to a degree
which gives them a power over the thought of the time, and
shows to all men that it is possible to combine religious fervour
with wide and varied acquirements, to take up and apply the
high and healthy, while rejecting the evil elements of the time.
Our attitude, therefore, to modern thought is not purely polemical,
for we seek to reconcile religion with the deepest thought ol the
HI. OUR ATTITUDE TO FREETHINKERS.
Our knowledge of and sympathy with the hopeful elements of
« Modem Thou-ht” does not blind us to its evils and excesses.
The acid of criticism, ever sour and corrosive, has eaten into and
broken down many fair and rounded forms. Everywhere it has
grown fashionable to assume an attitute of questioning dubiety,
to challenge and discredit all existing things, canvas every


principle and method of human action This polemical spirit
has taken such a hold upon the modern mind as to create a
general impression that the man who is not perpetually examining
and criticising the foundations of his faith, and the principles of
his actions, is lacking intellect and decidedly behind the times.
The mind emancipated from the thraldom of ages seems possessed
by, but has not possession of, the new spirit that has been
evoked. Drunk with the new wine of free thought, not a few
disport themselves after a fashion which can end in no good to any,
and only gives ground for the suspicion entertained by some that
“ men being mostly fools” are not to be entrusted with that which
they only use to their own hurt. We are not of those who can
sink to this cynical sentiment, though often dismayed by the
spectacle of disruption and decay everywhere observable. We
cannot, however, stand aside and witness the evils and excesses
perpetrated in the name of liberty without uttering a warning
note. If we have been made wise by watching the ways of God
and the weakness of men, it is surely our part to protest against
the chaotic condition into which so many things have fallen.
Through the whole currents of our life we are suffering from a
lack of unity and system ill suited to the practical need of human
nature, and which cannot long endure ; for man is so constituted
that he cannot thrive in a world reduced to anarchy and confu-
sion. He suffers at the most vital points of his nature, and can
never become what God intends and requires him to become, in
the absence of a true philosophy and a sound theology. The
heights reached and kept by him in the most heroic periods of
his history were attained by the undivided energy of a mind that
knew, believed, and relied upon, imperishable truths and spiritual
principles, and not in a society where all intellectual and religious
bonds were broken. Heart, intellect, and conscience crave a creed
to believe, a discipline to live by, a truth to serve which, while
they bind, invigorate and strengthen. Where society and all
systems of thought are practically dissolved by the united action
of competition, criticism, and cynicism, what hope is there for the
moral progress of man whose very nature pre-supposes an order of
things in subjection to and in harmony with which he achieves
his freedom 1 We cannot but regard as wanton wickedness that
“ uncharted freedom ” which delights to assail and malign laws of
immemorial sanctity, and to destroy the faith and corrupt the
morals of the people. Religious institutions having their roots far
back and deep down in the soil of humanity, sanctioned by the
concurrent testimony of the wisest and best in all ages, and sup-
ported by a body of evidence which all the devil’s attorneys cannot
invalidate, we are bound to defend against the flippant scepticism
which is ever making haste to proclaim its own folly. Anything


shallower or more unscientific than the notion, with which
ignorant and foolish men are seeking to imbue the minds of y ung
people, that religion is effete, one cannot well imagine; and yet
not a few are carried away by it, not knowing —for they never
hear it from those they elect to follow—that religion is of perennial
interest to man, having its roots in the deepest layers of his being.
Nothing could be further from the truth than to hold or teach
that the advances of civilization, the discoveries of science, the
results of recent research, have silenced the soul’s sad longings
for a solution of life’s deepest problems. The soul of man is
ranged in an order of wants to which the sum of finite knowledge
and reality bear no adequate relations, and which pre-supposes the
attainment of a life in God as the explanation of its existence.
Man has a spiritual nature pervaded by affinities and relations
which fit him for grasping and gaining the prize of eternal life
a life which while enjoyed in time belongs to eternity, a life
including the peace of pardon, the rest of reconciliation, and the
knowledge of ourselves as sons of God.
A time will never come when the “ glorious gains ” of science
or civilization will cancel the craving of the' soul for such a life.
“Those pleasing hopes, fond desires, and longings after immortality”
which lie at the root of all religion, and that deep desire every-
where evinced to know and be reconciled with the Power that
is not ourselves,” are a permanent possession of human nature.
The longing of our life to know and be at peace with God is not a
dream of childhood which perishes before the advance of science,
nor is it a beautiful but an impossible ideal which we who have
fallen upon times of transition are not at liberty to indulge. It
is a want of knowledge to treat ideas which lie at the roots of our
existence, and have done more to decide the destinies of humanity
than all else be ides, as having no validity, or as belonging to a
past phase of human development.
It has been abundantly proved by the profoundest thinkers of
the age that the ideas at the roots of religion are capable of
scientific treatment, and are universal and necessary.
All true scientists cannot fail to see that a universal aspiration,
after intercourse with the unseen and supernatural, must be a
necessary element of our nature and susceptible of scien'ific treat-
ment. How can a thing die and disappear which is founded upon
faculties which enable us to conceive and commune with what is
above our senses and sinful inclinations, which persist through all
changes in carrying us beyond the passing and perishing to the
permanent elements of all existence.
Again, if all our mental faculties are necessary to our existence
and sustain relations to reality without; if our mental craving for


an intelligible order is being answered by the discovery of unity
and continuity in the universe, surely it is a rational thing to con-
clude that man’s religious cravings constitute a ground for believing
in realities corresponding to them. If the stimulus to all scientific
enquiries lies in the consciousness, latent or expressed, of some-
thing to be known akin to our intelligence, and which is ever
exciting our interest, are we wrong in inferring that the religious
nature of man corresponds to and finds its only explanation in a
world of imperishable realities 1 Surely the religious elements of
our nature which have borne such an important part in human
development are as real and permanent as the intellectual and
emotional, and destined to as rich a fulfilment. Would it be
logical to conclude that man is essentially irrational because he has
been found forming crude notions of the universe, because he has
imperfectly apprehended the truth of things 1 In his most rudi-
mentary mental condition man has never been irrational, for he
has been ever doing his best to reach the reality of which he was
dimly conscious. We don’t cast discredit upon human intelli-
gence itself because of its early crudities and credulities; and
shall we challenge and repudiate the religious aspirations of man
because they have often imperfectly expressed themselves 1 Are
we to deny them validity and shut out man from intercourse with
the Divine, and declare that he is deluded 1
IV. OUR RELATIONS TO THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD.
Some of the devotees of physical science, intoxicated by th e
success which their methods and principles have achieved in thei r
own department of activity, have not hesitated to apply them t°
the realm of spirit. Failing to recognise their limits, and seeking
to grasp within them elements of existence that cannot be expressed
in terms of physical science, they have fallen into error. The
upshot of this devotion to physical methods of inquiry has been to
create such an impression in their favour as to discredit all other
principles of reasoning, and to reduce the highest elements of life
to a branch of physiology, a department of physical science, for-
getting that mind is not one fact among others, but that which
underlies all, and in relation to which all things exist. It is this
attempt to deal with the phenomena of consciousness according to
the scientific method which has introduced such confusion into
our life and literature. If there be no higher elements in the
one sphere than in the other, this method is legitimate ; but if
mind is characterised by powers and properties not belonging to
matter, we are in error in interpreting its phenomena in terms of
physical science. A method of enquiry and reasoning applicable
to a material is surely out of place in a spiritual region. The
practical effect of this illegitimate application of the principles and
methods of a lower to a transcendent sphere of existence has been


pernicious. It has lowered the religious and speculative tempera
ture to a point at which spiritual life cannot thrive. The very
name of metaphysics has been hooted down, and reasoning from the
data of consciousness derided, or —if noticed at all—cited as an
extinct method of reasoning. Now what comes of co-ordinating
the two spheres of existence, and applying the same methods and
principles to each 1 Simply this among other things, that it ends
in making the principle of social and political progress and pro-
cedure the law of natural selection. Reduce mind to a mode of
matter and you come at length to the conclusion that self assertion
is the supreme law of existence. If we go to nature for our
principles of action, we shall end by discarding the spirit of self-
sacrifice which is the law of spiritual life. If man is nothing
more than a developed animal, and can never transcend nature,
he is for ever doomed to obey its laws. Thus we find that this
theory is practically pernicious, leading to the negation of all those
powers and virtues which make men noble and keep them so. By
certain writers we are assured that since by reverting to the
beginning of things we find a lowly organization entitled to little
respect, we are quite within our right in holding that all truths of
a higher moral order that have emerged in course of time lack
absolute value and validity : that the first low state in which they
have found man furnishes the real principle of his existence and
action : that all later arrivals in the region of mortals different
from the condition of a war of all against all, are due to
convention, and not a necessary part of a Divine plan. In many
quarters there is a disposition to treat the lower forms of human
development, whether as existing in the individual or society, as
alone worthy of consideration and as exhibiting man’s essential
nature. It betrays a lack of lucidity and logic to hold that the
first developed must necessarily be the final principle of progress.
“ That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural,
and afterwards that which is spiritual.” Let us for the moment
admit that the methods of science have enabled us to say exactly
what the very beginning of human life on the globe was. Let
us further admit the possibility of the Supreme Being, employing
instead of the dust of the earth, some already existing organism
as the basis of man’s physical being. What then h Are we to
accept the first and lowest form of his existence, and the natural
laws which in the first instance pervaded and governed it, as
possessing a permanent right of existence. Shall the “natural,”
which the Apostle tells us is the first condition, avail itself of its
priority in order of development to delay and discredit the holier
and latter attributes of being ? If the first settlers in a colony
live in bark huts it would be absurd to cite that as a reason for
discrediting all subsequent structures and all the fair forms of a


civilized existence. Those lowly structures in which we may be
compelled to begin our colonial existence are simply stages in our
upward course to an ideal of civilization and comfort intended
from the first, and which is a legitimate goal of human striving.
That which is first in order of time is last in order of importance.
A true philosophy shows that the last and highest is the essential,
while the first is the temporary aspect of existence. The higher
truths that have emerged were involved in the very idea of our
existence, and establish claims on our reverence and obedience
which no inspection of rudimentary forms and institutions can
invalidate or destroy. If at one time in the history of humanity
there were not to be found the mental and moral treasures which
now enrich our life, are we therefore to conclude that conscience,
reason, the laws of human thought, the spirit of self-sacrifice, all
that raises us to claim a knowledge of and a kinship with the
Divine, are a tissue of delusions, and which we are at liberty to
discard in favour of what is called the original principles of human
nature 1 A little calm reflection is enough to convince us that
the moral and spiritual truths that have come to us in the course
of history are true revelations of God’s spirit, are the flowers and
fruit of which all previous stages were preparatory and prophetic,,
and which no theory of evolution can cancel. And yet in many
quarters we find running through the thoughts of men a spirit
which treats the deepest deliverances of our spiritual nature
revealed by Apostles, prophets, and lawgivers, as new arrivals
which have hardly any right to be here. “ The fatal first false-
hood ” of allowing the aboriginal elements to be the only rightful
owners of the soil, will, if perpetuated, result in delaying the rise
and growth of the spiritual nature of man, and thus arrest all
true human development.
V. OUR ATTITUDE TO THE NEW ATHEISM.
The old atheism with which our fathers were familiar has
discarded its repulsive garb, ceased to swear, and is generally
improved in manners. It seeks now to captivate unwary souls
with the notion that we can have all the morality peculiar to
Christianity without accepting its essential doctrines. With
inflated self-complacency it is asserted that as the limits of
human thought for ever preclude the possibility of knowing God
and future things, we may with propriety cease to give ourselves
much concern about them : that moral unity and harmony may
be evolved out of human life without reference to any fixed faith
in God. By multitudes this has been hailed as a new Gospel
which abolishes all superstition and puts an end to those aspiring
efforts of the human mind after an impossible ideal which have
delayed the onward progress of humanity. The same new atheism
allays the fears of waverers with the assurance that in breaking


with the past we can carry with us all that is worth preserving,
and are relieved from the necessity of coping with questions too
great for our capacities. Thus not a few have run into the refuge
of blank nescience and think they are safe, as if it were possible
for man ultimately or for long to content himself with knowing-
nothing ! As a self-conscious being he cannot but resist every
attempt to draw him away from the thought of God, which is
inseparable from the thought of self, and to shut him up in a
world of finite reality; for when you have carried your
generalization to the point of conceiving the universe as a mere
correlation of forces, an aggregation of phenomena, the obstinate
questions present themselves : —What is this system of laws and
forces, and how do I stand related to it 1 Who made me and
where am I going ? It is thus impossible to satisfy the needs of
our nature or to secure human development by leaving out all
speculations regarding the destiny of the world and human life.
It cannot be doubted, however, that in many minds the idea of
the invisible has fallen into the background and almost
disappeared. Many causes have combined to bring about this
result. Not to mention the negations of -science which have
exerted a baneful influence on many minds, there are the growing
and multiplying aims of the worldly spirit, together with the
deepening consciousness of our limited powers and narrow
opportunities in the presence of so much new knowledge and
experience. This has had the effect of thrusting into the back-
ground all great thoughts and ultimate questions, and so prepared
the way for the new atheism by which so many have been
ensnared. With an affectation of diffidence, and the excuse that
an ample field for our energies is supplied by the phenomenal
world, many abandon all higher or ulterior considerations and
find enough in finite interests, without reference to anything more
remote or higher to recommend them as worth living for. They
bid us be content to know that we can know nothing, and turn
away from tracing anything back to its central principle. Thus
we find that both the scientific and practical activities of the time
have borne their share in creating this new form of atheism,
which has a modesty and mildness in its manner that tlarows us
off our guard. A form of teaching which confesses its inability
to cope with subjects too high for it, and restricts itself to what
can certainly be known has a strong fascination for the practical
prosaic minds of this generation.
It is quite in keeping with the spirit of the times to omit the
consideration of all large questions, on the plea that the limits of
human thought, the brevity of human life, and the need for
immediate action admit of no other course of conduct. The
modern mind having witnessed the birth of so many new sciences.


the opening up of vast fields of enquiry and enterprise within
the limits of the world, has lost interest in, and is rather
glad to get rid of the idea of the invisible and eternal. We
have now more ideas than we know well how to deal
with ; so much new experience scientific, political and
practical has come to us that for the present we cannot
assimilate it. The world in all its departments is becoming
increasingly complex and interesting, has so much to offer that
we grow impatient with all questions which cannot be expressed
in terms of time. Darwin once said that he did not feel the need
of religion and poetry ; he fortified himself within the limits of
his own science and found enough to employ his powers on what
was immediately before him.
The evident result of all this mental contraction is a lowering
of the spiritual atmosphere ; for when the mind resolutely
refuses to think great thoughts or deal with great subjects, all
idealism and enthusiasm vanish from human life, and we sink to
a low, vulgar, utilitarian pitch of endeavour. The temptation is
keen and strong at present to turn the universe into a means of
making money, to deal only with such aspects of knowledge as
will help to make our lives agreeable and enjoyable. This form
of ambition has doubtless resulted in a series of triumphs which
give us an ease and freedom unknown to our fathers. But despite
our unrivalled prosperity, there is a pessimistic way of thinking
abroad unknown in less prosperous times. How are we to account
for this prevailing pessimism in the presence of such unparalleled
achievements 1 We have all that heart could wish, have abolished
God, overthrown superstitions, and yet we are sad ! We have
taken the ordering of our lives into our own hands, are
untroubled by the dread of an hereafter, and reached a measure of
material well-being, exceeding the fondest dreams of our ancestors,
and yet the age which has witnessed all these things has given
birth to Schopenhaur and Von Hartmann, and started the ques-
tion everywhere, “Is life worth living T Who would have
thought it ? Where is the delight and liberty promised by the
professed liberators of humanity 1 Do these things not show that
man’s nature and constitution require such a form of knowledge
and activity as will satisfy and coincide with his whole being, and
not a mere fraction of it; satisfy his speculative and religious as
well as his practical propensities 1 To arrest those pure, lofty,
disinterested strivings in which the thought of self finds no place,
which carry us out to an ideal of knowledge and truth that
excludes all worldly calculation is to court destruction to our
spiritual nature. Thus a moment’s calm consideration is enough to
show that it matters much every way what views we adopt
respecting the world and our relation towards it. We have


grown infinitely tolerant, or rather indifferent, suffering material-
istic notions to take root as if they were harmless. Opinions
which would have been received with execration and curses in
other days are now propounded from the platform and press, and
suffered to pass into the general life of the time as if they had
little bearing upon the destinies of the human race. Many of us
are oblivious of the fact that the triumph of the new Atheism
means the dissolution of society, and the utter extinction of the
spiritual elements of life. All thoughtful men clearly see that
morality is inseparably bound up with the views men hold
regarding the world and human life. The metaphysician and the
moralist are closely linked. The questions of the metaphysician
which seem remote from and independent of all matters of
morality can be conclusively shown to stand in organic relations
with them ; for the kind of answer given by the metaphysician
to the questions asked of him decides the moral character' of those
who receive it. Shallow thinkers make light of ideas and doc-
trines, holding that what a man thinks or believes matters little
provided only his conduct is correct Such fall into the mistake
of sundering cause from consequence. Conducf is the fruit and
consequence of conducive conditions, is the natural outflow of the
convictions which penetrate and possess the mind. How can you
induce human beings to act nobly who think meanly of their
origin and destiny, and the order of which they form a part.
Lofty conduct never yet grew out of low ideas, a high and holy
mankind from the mire of a materialistic creed. What power does
he possess to tread beneath his feet the base and bruitish passions
of his blood who has imbibed views which deny the spiritual
nature of man, eliminate the idea of a personal God and a pur-
pose in human life 1 What heart or hope is left in a man to
struggle with mean, mercenary impulses bereft of the idea that
there is a Power present in human life, if only we will trust, to
redeem us from sin and make us sons of God 1 Let a people sink
to the notion that the ultimate of ultimates is force “ without a
conscience or an aim,” and it will prove in the long run, say what
you may, the negation of virtue. W T here is the strength to come
from to fight our foes and to keep ourselves from sinking into the
sensual sty, if we imbibe the notion that the very structure of the
universe is indifferent to personal goodness 1 In the absence of
faith in an eternal law of righteousness, which is realising itself
in the universe, no utilitarian system of morals can prevent man
from sinking. The new Atheism, which conceives the universe
as a mere correlation of forces, leaves us to wage a conflict in
which we have no hope of victory \ for the most faultless system
of ethics falls to pieces before temptation where men are not
nerved and strengthened by faith in God. If we know of no one


working with and for us, redeeming our souls from destruction,
leading us away from low and vicious pursuits, a mere sense of
honour, or a desire to stand well with society, will not prevail
against the flesh and the devil. And yet with a light and easy
heart the modern atheist undertakes to conduct humanity with-
out chart or compass. Having cast overboard the Captain of our
Salvation, they install in a position of command the miserable
materialistic philosophy which has neither eyes to see nor hands to
guide Woe to us if we are left to such pilotage It is one of the
saddest sights under heaven to behold human beings placing
themselves in the hands of teachers who can furnish no guidance,
offer us no protection, nor keep us from being driven by the winds
of passion against the rocks of self-assertion. What avails all
the rules and prescriptions of the new Atheism to make us noble
having taken from us the living God ? It is marvellous how men
can be brought to believe that society is safe in such hands, or
that any device can give us goodness without God, or Christianity
without Christ.
It is no common thing, however, to hear it said that men are as
actively beneficent and in every respect as exemplary after they
have adopted the new Atheism. Grant for a moment that this
is so. What does it prove 1 That Atheism is as good as Christ-
ianity 1 No ! Only this, that the new notions imbibed have not
taken root and borne their appropriate fruit; that their habits of
virtue are due to a doctrine and discipline different from and
superior to their new creed ; that they cannot by revolting against
religion efface its impressions from their minds. When individuals
are cited to prove that morality can thrive on an Atheistical
creed, we reply that men who resist and repudiate religion are
not aware of the hold it has upon them, or the depth and extent
of their obligations to it. The principles of morality which some
of the new Atheists promulgate are derived from the religion they
discard, and would never have been conceived or gained currency,
but for those views of God and the meaning of human life which
they repudiate.
These Apostles and prophets of the new Gospel are the worst
of plagiarists, for after borrowing from the Bible all that is good
in their system, and arraying themselves in attributes which their
barren Atheism is incapable of producing, they assail and
malign religion, kick away the ladder by which
they have risen. It would doubtless be a strong point in
their favour if it could be shown that Atheists, pure and simple,
had ever built up a State, framed wise laws, and produced a noble
race. The form and constitution of a state are decided by the
spirit of the people, and when all those Divine ideals which have
produced a high and holy manhood are exchanged for a miserable


materialism, what kind of spirit will be evoked 1 As the charac-
ter of a people determines its constitution, where there is a vicious
character the State will reflect it. Reduce human life to a product
of nature, let people be penetrated by the notion that there is no
higher law than that which has produced the various forms of
animal life on our globe, and what kind of state or social
arrangement will grow out of it 1 What system of morality
can hold its ground where we are taught that the only
real i rinciple of conduct is conflict ? It is clear to all studying
the question that the new Atheism, with its borrowed virtues, is
at heart favourable to vice, however loudly it may resent the con-
clusion. It is no refutation to point to the exemplary lives of
some of its professors, for we have seen that when men cease to
believe in God and take up an antagonistic attitude to religion,
they cannot efface the impressions they have left on their mind or
get beyond the scope of their influence. Religious apostates trade
on capital which is not their own,since it can be conclusively shown
that all that is good in their lives runs back to the religion they
reject and is in no sense due to their miserable creed. Thus we
And that many are in danger of forsaking God and all those insti-
tutions which have brought untold good to mankind from the oft-
repeated assertion that religion is no longer requisite, and that
we can discern in nature a law for human guidance sufficient for
our requirements without burthening our lives by the thought of
God or an invisible order.
VI. —OUR RELATIONS TO THEOLOGY.
We fear that our Churches, in consequence of causes pardy
described, have not that robust theological spirit essential to
effective work. We have seen in the foregoing remarks that the
mind of the Church is modified by the mind of the age, which
seems to lack a proper stand-point, true methods and sound prin-
ciples of interpretation and action. The intellectual and moral
life of the time is of a molluscan type, exhibiting doubtless abun-
dance of talent and information, but unproductive of genius.
There has passed into circulation such a confused and contradictory
mass of theories, as to produce weakness and derangement in all
directions. Look at our magazine literature, glance at the nature
and the number of the questions discussed, the different theories
< f the universe propounded in one and the same periodical. Every
man now-a-days has the “ courage of his crudities,” and finds ample
opportunities of inflicting upon a much-enduring public the most
recent results of his folly. Editors serve up to a people ready
“to spend money for that which is not bread ” masses of matter,
often palatable enough to the reader, but productive of subtle
diseases which drain away the life-blood and spread a sickly pallor
over the face. In attempting to know too much we end by know-


ing too little; in our eagerness to take in and hold together
mutually exclusive ideas and propositions, we weaken the mind
and subvert the character. Religious genius never yet was born
in such a state of society, for although our knowledge is extensive,
and we read and talk about more subjects in heaven and earth
than our fathers dreamt of, the outcome is small. We lack, in spite
of our endless talk, a genuine interest in great subjects, and have
degenerated to a miserable fruitless dilettanteism which never yet
produced high results. Our Church life has not been impervious
to this prevailing dilettanteism, and has lost interest in the great
thoughts which stimulated our more theological forefathers, and
made them “ mighty through God to the pulling down of strong-
holds.” The notion has gained currency that doctrinal Chris-
tianity is too metaphysical, lacks point, precision, and practical
import. A desire for clearness disposes many to look with dis-
trust upon every presentation of religion perplexing the common-
place minds. Too anxious to accommodate ourselves to the tastes
of the times, we are often insensibly drawn into the error of sup-
posing that we must simplify Christianity as much as possible,
and make it palatable and popular to the jaded spirit of the time,
which is impatient with what cannot be apprehended and appre-
ciated without effort. This aversion to doctrinal teaching is not
confined to men who, by training and profession, belong to the
objective world, for we have heaid of a professor who expressed
the opinion that a good literary training was sufficient for the
work of the ministry ; that if theology was taught at all it should
be administered in homoeopathic doses. A true theological spirit
is essential to the life of our Churches, and for lack of it we are
weak and ineffective in our efforts. Where there is a decline of
intellectual interest in the contents of Christianity no measure we
can devise will keep us from deteriorating. A glance at the
history of the Church in general is enough to show that moral
evils have be- n assailed, abuses remedied, and the whole life of
the people raised in the strength supplied by a new interest in and
a profounder knowledge of the truth. If the intellect of the
Church turns away from the study of the truth, its heart cannot
long remain warm nor its hands active. The men whom we are
proud to claim as our spiritual fathers found an ample field 'or
their intellectual powers in the rich contents of Scripture, and
acquired a power and mastery over its truths and principles by
which they moved the multitudes.
In the Church of the wilderness Edwards wrought,
Shaping his creed at the forge of thought,
And with Thor’s own hammer welded and bent
The iron links of his argument,
Which strove to grasp in its mighty span
The purpose of God and the fate of man.


In our zeal to clarify Christianity, as we think, and make it
acceptable to the prosaic intellect of the age, we abstain from
discourses and discussions that would tax the jaded minds of
the hearers to whom all mental efforts and speculative questions
are eminently distasteful. Priding themselves on being plain
matter-of fact men, they turn away from a religion which does
not come home to them across a familiar route of ideas and asso-
ciations, Knowing more of balance-sheets than the Bible, poring
over a ledger all day, and buried in the newspaper at night,
what cannot be expressed in the terms of the counting-house
or exchange is set down as vague and uninteresting. There is
a lamentable lack of interest in the contents of Christianity.
With an affectation of modesty and humility, many ask to be
spared the pains of trying to grasp things too high for them. Such
would reduce religion to certain duties and decencies which all can
understand, as if Christianity concerned itself with manners and
social bearing, and not with the task of establishing between man
and God a new religious relation. The precepts of the Gospels
and Epistles, which some accept as the essence of Christianity, are
not the principles but the practical outcome of Christianity. If
we accept Christianity at all we must accept it in its entirety ; we
cannot divorce duties and directions from those antecedent views
of God and human life on which they repose. The Christian
morality which all are agreed in admiring, and which few are
inclined to reject, is a growth and evolution from ideas which
give it vitality and meaning. Not a few would like to preserve
the perfect morality of the Gospel without accepting the
doctrines from which it is derived ; would like to reap the fruits
without going down to the roots and soil from which it springs.
Just as in our science many are content to trace the connection of
one thing with another without running back to a first cause,
so there is a tendency to take the ethical parts of the Bible and
leave out the essential elements. We cannot, however, surrender
the position, that the moral springs of Christianity run back to
and take their rise in spiritual relations between the heavenly and
the human. Eliminate the heavenly, and an essential element
in the process is wanting. The moral world to which the Gospel
introduces us is bound together by spiritual laws and relations,
rests upon and could never have have been conceived and created
without theology. The precepts and injunctions uttered by CLrist
and exemplified in His life, were derived from the divine know-
ledge and consciousness that lived within Him. Neither would
the great things that have been done by His faithful followers
ever have been aimed at, but for the knowledge of God by which
they were penetrated and possessed. The root and
ground of all goodness being in a true knowledge of


and a living relation with God, it is vain to suppose
that we can keep society together and preserve the fruit
of Christian civilization without it. Seeing that it was a conscious
union with, and a true knowledge of God, which created the men
who went forth to conquer the world, how can we, with the
teaching of history and experience before our eyes, hope to preserve,
far less create, Christian sentiment apart from theology ? A root-
less religion is good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden
under feet of men. Our Puritan forefathers were rooted and
grounded in the knowledge of God, and though we may find
reason to correct and supplement their science, we cannot dispense
with the spirit with which they worked. Their theological spirit
and synthetic method gave them a concentration of mind which
made their lives fruitful in heroic deeds. The abstract eloquence
which marked their utterance produced the most practical results
by stimulating and familiarising the minds of their hearers with
great thoughts. Their elevation of mind and lofty endeavours to
formulate a philosophy of religion of history yielded practical
results in the life which no pragmatical teaching is capable of
producing.
A method of teaching which gives the mind an upward
tendency, and supplies it with lofty thoughts is the only practical
teaching ; for without a bidy of ideas on which we can rest, and
from which we can extract mental and spiritual nutriment, the
highest goodness is unattainable. “ Truth is potential goodness,
and goodness is realised truth”; unless he can above him Self
erect himself, “ how poor a thing is man!” And yet the notion has
got itself established that in order to bring the world round to
see the sweet reasonableness of Christianity, it is needful to omit
all that wears a metaphysical or mystical look, and sec forth its
pure precepts and injunctions ; as if it were possible to make
them prevail apart from that Christian consciousness out of which
they have arisen. All counsel will prove fruitless unsustained by
the “ law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus.” It argues a sweet
simplicity to hold that you can make the ethical elements of
religion prevail apart from its metaphysical. A refined
rationalism would fain make it appear that no perspective or
background is required to secure right action, it being enough to
inculcate those precepts which commend themselves to our reason,
and give direction to our lives. We thus see that the agnostic
philosophy has tinctured the thought of the Church, so that even
in places where the theological spirit was once strong, it has
suffered an eclipse. Under the influence of certain schools of
thought, there has been a lowering of the theological temperature,
a turning away from those enquiries into the nature of God, and
our relations to Him, as if they were the survivals of a
pre-scientific age.


There is need for us to insist upon the truth that the soul of
man will dwindle and grow poor, bereft of the inspiration of
Divine knowledge. The man who attempts to build up human
existence on intellectual enlightenment, science, or maxims of
prudence, will ere long find himself deceived. It is impossible for
human beings to become what God intends and requires them to
be without a true knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, whom He
has sent. Will anyone have the courage to say that the doctrine
of an unknowable and unrevealable God is compatible with right
reason, capable of creating a wholesome atmosphere or conducive
to good conduct 1 On the other hand, let the Christian view of
life prevail, with its doctrines of the Fatherhood of God, the
atonement of Christ and the sonship of believers, and new truth
and power will emerge in our life. Happy in the assured belief
of our acceptance with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, we
take our course along limitless lines rising to higher levels ; for,
no longer vassals, but sons, the world and life and death, and
things present and things to come, all are ours, and we are
Christ’s, and Christ is God’s. It is in a living relation with
Cod that we find a solution of “ the riddle of the painful earth,”
such as no science can give, and enjoy a nearer and clearer
vision of the truth than any specialist can boast, since we see all
things in the light of eternity. There is an imperative need for
union and communion with God, which we dare not leave
ungratified, and we hail with delight the everlasting Gospel which
has procured for and proffered to us that eternal life for which we
were made, and after which we faintly aspire. All religions, even
the most rudimentary, when closely viewed are found striving after
the approbation of God. A secret impulse impels man to seek
that sense of security which the favour of God confers, that
guarantee that our dim and struggling existence will not be “ cast
as rubbish to the void,” and it is in Christianity that we find it
realized and revealed.
Edward Lee, Excelsior Printing Works, 53 MarkeLst., Sydney.


p 104-I^]




