

PRICE - THREEPENCE
THE
GERMAN
PERIL
NEGLECTED
FORECASTS
BY
J. MILDRED CREED
Member of the Legislative Council, N.S.W.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Book Arcade, Melbourne
E. W. COLE, 346 George Street, Sydney-
-67 Bundle Street, Adelaide


PREFACE
I have felt justified in republishing these articles and
letters as showing that in outlying parts of the Empire
the danger of British unpreparedness and German envious
malice was foreseen and should have been guarded against.
The article entitled “A Colonist’s Views on Army
Reform” in The Contemporary of October, 1900, was very
favourably received in the very highest quarters at the
time it appeared. Some of the suggestions then made
have been acted on, but in a half-hearted perfunctory way
which while thus acknowledging their practicability in a
large measure neutralized the good effect which might
fairly have been anticipated. Had the proposal to create
educated regiments been adequately followed up, it is
probable that there would have been a reserve of from
20,000 to 30,000 officers, either still in or having tem-
porarily retired from such regiments. Of what incal-
culable value would such properly trained men be now,
when we are told that at least 1,500 men have been pro-
moted from the ranks to commissions since the commence-
ment of the War. A feeble imitation was made by the
creation of officers’ training corps at the Universities and
Public Schools. The members of such bodies are neces-
sarily young and often not so zealous as such men should
be. The proposed bodies would have secured more mature
men desirous of making arms a profession, whilst the cost
would have been but slightly over that of line regiments
of equal numbers.
Another proposal was to provide country for training
under War conditions in various outlying States. The
value of the idea has received confirmation by the ac-
quisition of Salisbury Plain for such a purpose. This,
Hiough good, so far as it goes, hardly from its com-
paratively small size fulfils the object in view. The
securing of remounts and transport animals was at-
tempted by subsidizing owners and users of horses in
Great Britain on condition that they handed them over
when needed for War. How much more efficient would
have been the supply if the suggestion made by my
article had been acted on.
The change for the better in the dietary of the rank
and file follows and probably goes beyond the suggestion
then made. As to the important aid to the safety of the
Empire from German attack, which the adoption of “Pre-
ferential Trade” would have been, I foresaw the necessity
of its establishment at a time, when the navy of that


foe was practically non-existent, as is shown by a resolu-
tion I moved in the Legislative Council of New South
Wales on December 18th, 1889. I was unable, however,
to convince my fellow members of its necessity, and failed
to carry it. t %
There is some repetition of short passages in my
articles and letters relating to the peril to which the
Empire was exposed from German envy. As, however,
it is fitting that dates of my action should be made mani-
fest, it is not unfitting that the text of the earliest of
my communications to the public press should be pub-
lished.
Finally an article which I wrote so soon after the com-
mencement of hostilities as August 9th, 1914, on the prac-
ticability of the “Abolition of War,” which has not hitherto
been printed is added as possibly being of some interest
to almost everyone. Arbitration without some effective
means of enforcing it is futile, and I venture to believe
that my suggestion in this regard is not beyond possi-
bility when the whole world emerges from the present war,
horror-stricken at the suffering and loss of life of non-
combatants and the cost in soldiers’ lives and national
treasure to the peoples inr lediately involved.


INTRODUCTION TO PAMPHLET
In view of the terrible strife now proceeding between
the majority of the greater Nations, it may not be with-
out interest if articles and letters bearing on the pros-
pective dangers which were placed on record by publica-
tion, are reprinted.
Though believing in the advantages of Free Trade when
such an ideal can be realized, I have during the whole of
my public career protested against the one-sided system
with which Britain has been hitherto content. Whilst
denied access to the markets of other countries on similar
conditions to those granted in their own, our people,
notably in the Mother Country, have so handicapped them-
selves by the general non-imposition of Customs’ restric-
tions on foreign trade as to be unable to make reciprocal
commercial treaties with other Nations. Had the British
in the cases of Germany and Austria imposed similar
restrictions on the import of their manufactures and con-
veyance by their ships, to those which those countries
insisted on maintaining against our Empire, neither would
have been in a position to undertake this frightful War,
Germany would not have had money to create the formid-
able, but apparently useless navy she now possesses
securely bottled up, however, in her own ports; whilst
Austria without her encouragement would not have ex-
pended much otherwise needed money in feebly following
her lead.
The Imperial Government took an important step to-
wards what, until Mr. Joseph Chamberlain made his epoch-
creating announcement, was known as “Fair Trade” by
acting on the recommendation of the Ottawa Conference
of June and July, 1894, and repealing all Imperial Acts
which stood in the way of outlying portions of the Empire
granting “Customs Preference” to British manufactures.
This was later followed on by a conjoint request from the
Colonial Premiers, who were visiting London for Queen
Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee in 1897, to Lord Salisbury,
then Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary, that the
existing treaties regulating trade between Great Britain,
Germany and Belgium respectively should be “denounced.”
This was done, and since that date these agreements have
been continued only from year to year.
Mr. G. H. Reid, then Prime Minister of New South
Wales, was one of those waiting on Lord Salisbury, and
naturally those persons who thought about the subject at
all expected that he would take the necessary step to


enable New South Wales to avail itself of the new con-
ditions thus created. She, by a proviso in the 45th sec-
tion of her Constitution Act, was forbidden to impose
duties on imports which were not equal in amount to those
imposed on British and Colonial goods. No action was
taken by the Prime Minister on his return to Sydney, and
the Mother State remained bound by this proviso until
all administration relating to Customs became the pro-
vince of the Commonwealth Government alone. Before, at
and since that time I have done what I found possible to
call public attention to the advantages of Preferential
Trade, now designated “Tariff Reform,” as a means of
safety against German aggression. I failed, however, to
bring about any action. Now all is changed, and almost
every Briton, formerly so somnolent, is demanding such
action as will render aggression impossible by a rival
Nation by means of accumulated wealth obtained at the
cost of Great Britain. Almost every newspaper and writer
of a letter to the press, is now steadfastly advocating the
future crippling of German and Austrian power of injury
to our Empire by putting every restriction practicable on
their commerce. Demand is made on all patriotic people
not to buy anything made in either of these countries or
in any others which may join them against us. The latter
contingency is, however, not likely to be required to be
met, but such a notification might well be an incentive to
them to join us, were any peoples hesitating as to what
course would be most to their national interest.
Everyone appears Willing HOW t 9 put lip With the t§ffl=
porary inconvenience which the cessation of the import of
German manufactures will cause. Increased output by
the Mother Country or by friendly nations will soon re-
move the difficulty. It will be prudent, however, to
create by conjoint action such legislative enactments for
the Empire as will prevent the present feeling being
merely a temporary patriotic spasm, not to be acted on
even by people now clamorous in its favour, when the
crisis is past, and they feel the early pinch of slightly
higher prices during the transition period. It would be
a prudent course for the Imperial Parliament to create
a law which would arrange for the imposition of such a
high duty on German and Austrian goods as to prac-
tically exclude them from the Empire, arranging by a
special section that the Law should be inoperative until
it has been adopted by the Legislatures of each of the
self-governing dominions respectively.


A COLONIST’S VIEWS ON ARMY REFORM
From the Contemporary Review No. 418, October, 1900.
By the Hon. John M. Creed (M.L.C. Sydney).
In venturing to give publicity to the ideas set forth
in this paper, I do so with the feeling that perhaps they
may be of some use in the elucidation of problems whose
careful working out to practical ends is of vital import-
ance to the Empire. They are but the thoughts of a lay-
man, who of necessity is not acquainted with sundry
details, the effect of which may be to present difficulties
of which he is unaware. But even so, they may perhaps
not be thought unworthy of consideration by the author-
ities whose duty it will be to deal practically with the
reform of our military administration.
1. British sentiment has always been strongly opposed
to compulsory military service; but it will become unavoid-
able, unless we so organise our comparatively small army
as to render it a match for the larger but non-voluntary
hosts of our rivals. No person who has given the subject
due thought will assert for a moment that Great Britain
could assail a first-class European Power on its own soil
with a fair prospect of success, except in conjunction with
a powerful ally. But neither will it probably ever be
necessary for her to do so, in order to the maintenance
of her position as an Imperial Power. For, except in
some outlying locality which international rivalry may
chance to make a field of hostilities, her fleet would be
the all-sufficient means needful to resist and repulse her
foes, whilst to meet the necessities of war in any distant
places the conveyance of a large army, with its equipment,
is possible at the present time to her alone. It is question-
able whether Russia, even when the Trans-Asiatic railway
is completed, could convey troops and stores to the shores
of the Pacific more rapidly than could Great Britain. To
do so by railway would require rolling stock in such vast
quantities as could not be turned out on the spur of the
moment, whilst, if manufactured and stored, it would be,
from original cost and the charges of maintenance, an
intolerable burden on the resources of a country whose
finance minister is reported to have said that “twenty
years of peace” are essential to her solvency.
Probably no person, certainly no foreigner, believed,
until it was accomplished, that Great Britain could in a
few months convey upwards of two hundred thousand
men, with the needful equipment and stores, from one
hemisphere to the other. And still more certain is it that
no one realised that it could be done without disturbing
the ordinary mail and mercantile services of the Empire,


none other than ships under its flag being employed in
the Titanic labour.
When the test of battle has to be met in distant places,
it is obvious that a nation having a comparatively small
force, but one composed of unusually brave, highly-trained
and exceptionally intelligent men, is far more powerful
than another nation with an army perhaps ten times as
large, the units of which do not possess these qualities
in so marked a degree, and whose means of transport are
very inferior. To put it shortly, Great Britain, except on
such fields as the European Continent or the United
States of America, is the most powerful military Power
the world has ever seen, first because of the overwhelming
means of safe marine transport, secured by her fleet,
and, secondly, because of the pluck, intelligence and per-
tinacity of her rank and file. The officers of other armies
are, perhaps, more highly trained, but in heroic bravery
and in consideration for their men, British officers un-
questionably hold the first place.
It is, however, the duty of the nation to see that this
necessary training is ensured in the future, for though
the service counts many of the brightest intellects, yet a
large proportion of the gentlemen who enter the army are
noblemen or sons of rich men who seek commissions rather
as a means of social advancement, or as a dilettante
occupation. What the nation requires is that the pay
and prospects shall be made so good as to induce the best
m§n, though neither nohle nor rich, to adopt the army as
a profession affording the means of livelihood. What can
be done on this principle is shown in the instance of the
British officers in the service of Egypt, than who a more
efficient body of leaders probably never existed, the best
proof being the number of men of the higher rank who
were withdrawn from the Soudan and sent to South Africa
when things were going badly there. If officers of this
type could create the present Egyptian army from the
material at their disposal, what could they not do with the
voluntary recruits of Great Britain and her colonies? Is
it not necessary by judiciously increased pay and allow-
ances to encourage and enable such men as these to devote
their energies and talents to the creation of something
more nearly approaching perfection in the Imperial ser-
vice?
At present an officer of the Imperial army cannot live on
his pay; and thus many gentlemen who would be most
desirable candidates dismiss the army from their thoughts
as impossible, when as youths, they have to make a choice
of a profession. By the adoption of reform on the lines
indicated, the discipline of the service, it cannot but be
thought, would also, so far as the officers are concerned,
be bettered. Such a system is already that of the
Colonies, and should no less be the system of the Imperial
service. No doubt it will need considerable agitation
before such a reform is made, but the present unsatis-


factory state of affairs will hardly be permitted to con-
tinue. The Empire must, in prudence, demand that not
only some prominent individuals, but the whole number of
its officers, shall possess greater’ fitness for command than
that mere personal bravery which enables them to stand
up and be shot; and regard for the lives and efficiency ot
the men under them requires that the latter should not be
thus needlessly deprived of their leaders when they most
want them.
2. But perhaps more immediately important than a
change in the training and remuneration of the officers is
the need of additional regiments, for it is very apparent
that the security of the British Empire will necessitate a
considerable increase of Her Majesty’s standing army. If
so, suggestions as to the means by which such increase
might be created, together with greater efficiency and
economy, may be thought worthy of consideration by the
authorities whose duty it is to deal with the subject. The
war now progressing in South Africa has exposed the
weakness of an ordinary army when operating in a moun-
tainous country against an unusually mobile foe. It has
also shown that men used to the life of pioneers form
extremely effective auxiliary forces, who are able to move
with great rapidity, make unexpected attacks with ex-
treme suddenness, and so harass the enemy, both directly
and by endangering his communications, as frequently to
check his advance.
Though, no doubt, a man who has been used to life in a
new country from boyhood will, all things being equal, be
the preferable recruit for such a force, yet it is also true
that young soldiers from older countries who are per-
severingly trained in suitable localities, under fitting con-
ditions, will run the former very close, and possibly be so
much more amenable to discipline as to be, under some
circumstances, preferable.
The good service of the Colonial troops now at the seat
of hostilities has called the attention of many persons to
the desirability of their employment, or that of somewhat
similar forces, in the wars of the future. As a conse-
quence, many writers advocate the permanent enrolment
in the Imperial army of large numbers of the Colonial
youth, both in Canada and Australia. In the “Spectator”
we find a newspaper of influence suggesting that 20,000
men should be enlisted in Canada and 10,000 in Australia
by the Imperial Government. I do not think the plan of
forming such distinct bodies would work well. The pay
of each man, if we follow the precedent of the present
time, would have, at all events in Australia, to be three
times that of the Imperial service; and so great a differ-
ence of pay would be likely to rouse dissatisfaction in the
home army.
Further, the raising of Imperial troops in the Colonies,
and their control from the War Office in London, which


would be unavoidable, would be the cause of friction
consequent on divided authority; for the Colonial Govern-
ment must, under such conditions, have some voice in the
management, and there would be grave risk that loyaltv
to the Empire would be weakened and perhaps destroyed.
Again, such men would not be so amenable to the strict
discipline of the Imperial Forces as those from the older
countries with different social conditions, and, however
obedient they might be in time of war, during the inaction
°. P eace would be likely to become insubordinate on
trifling occasion. The best men of such forces, moreover,
would not cheerfully leave their own country, had they
formed the opinion that it needed defending against at-
tack, to fight in other fields, even though the general well-
being of the Empire required that one part should be
temporarily sacrificed for the benefit of the whole. Nor
w ?y. ld . colony readily agree to the withdrawal, in
critical times, of its most efficient youths.
It would, I submit, be a more practicable arrangement
lor the Imperial Government to obtain from the various
Governments of Canada, South Africa, Australia and New
Zealand, tracts of land for military stations so situated
that the neighbouring country would afford convenient
exercise ground for operations on an extensive scale under
campaign conditions. Sufficient ground might be chosen
on the level for the huts or barracks, but yet so near to
mountains as to render it possible to use these for more
extended movements, I would recommend that Imperial
troops of all arms be sent to each station and depot
formed, which young colonists might join on English con-
ditions if they chose The men selected for these new
stations should, I think, be recruits, who, having been put
through their preliminary drill at the depot in Great
Britain, where they first joined their selected regiment
require more extended training, such as is not possible
there, and only obtainable under conditions which are pre-
sent in comparatively new countries. If in Australia such
headquarters were established in each colony, the mere
change of station, which should take place every six or
m lf c °nducted under campaign conditions,
would be of the utmost utility as training for active ser-
vice. Fair encouragement should be given for local re-
cruits to join, who, after being rendered effective, might
be drafted to other colonies so as to enlarge their ex-
perience. If the establishment of military depots is made
co-ordinate with the land transport' training stations, as I
suggest further on, mutually increased efficiency would
be obtained, and the cost of each branch of the service
might be reduced. In making this suggestion I do not think
!i. Ca n i • accused of merely studying the interests of
the Colonies, for I believe the greatest gain would be to
Jv e r ®P ir ® generally. If it is obviously necessary that
there should be a very considerable increase in the mili-
tary forces, it is also equally certain that the system of


training must be established on conditions most nearly
resembling those of the countries in which Great Britain
is likely to be engaged in war. For instance, admirable
localities for exercise, having almost exactly similar fea-
tures to the rough country about Ladysmith and in Af-
ghanistan, would be available in the Blue Mountains; in
New England and Monaro in New South Wales; in Gipps-
land in Victoria; Mount Lofty and Gawler Ranges in
South Australia, and the table lands and ranges of
Queensland; whilst the plains of the interior would be very
similar in climate and topography to India proper. With
the army largely increased, it would almost be embarrass-
ing to keep so many soldiers in the United Kingdom, and
it would as a matter of policy be inadvisable to station
more in India at the expense of that Government, even
were it not a fact that the relative cost is greater. In
the more temperate colonies the maintenance of soldiers
would be much less costly, because breadstuffs and meat
are much cheaper, in proof of which I give an example of
what has gone on for many years in large public in-
stitutions in New South Wales, and is still going on with-
out increase in expense. At a cost not exceeding fivepence
a day, each man is provided with a pint of coffee or tea
with milk and sugar, and porridge with treacle or sugar
and bread, or a larger allowance of bread with jam or
honey in lieu of porridge for breakfast. For dinner a
pound of beef or mutton is issued, its mode of cooking
being varied, one day in each week Irish stew, another
haricot, a third curry, and on the remaining four days,
the meat is roasted or boiled. At each midday meal twelve
ounces of vegetables appropriate to the mode of cooking
are served in addition to sufficient bread. For supper a
pint of tea, with sugar and milk, and bread with honey,
jam or treacle is given. That this is a better diet than
falls to the lot of the private soldier, in Great Britain, will
not, I think, be disputed, whilst it is equally beyond ques-
tion that its cost is much less than the inferior meals of
the home barracks.
The capital required for sites and the erection of build-
ings would also be considerably less. The benefit to the
Colonies would be that their forces, both permanent and
auxiliary, would have the advantage of exercising with
regular soldiers, whose proficiency would excite emula-
tion, and that when men were discharged to the Reserves
many would prefer to settle in the country, and would be
most desirable colonists.
A very marked gain to the Empire would also be that
detachments especially fit for service would be available
at shorter distances from India and China, where they
are most likely to be needed, than if they were kept in
Europe, and in the event of the Suez Canai being blocked,
had to proceed round the Cape. As to South Africa, as a
mere precaution and object lesson, the presence of more
than the usual force for some years is necessary, and more


troops might be placed there than in Canada and. Aus-
tralasia, where especial care should be taken to avoid any
excuse for the supposition to arise, either in the minds of
Britons or foreigners, that troops were sent to these
colonies to ensure greater security. It should be under-
stood that their land defence would be still left distinctly
to themselves, and that when occasion arose, every Im-
perial soldier might be removed at a moment’s notice to
any place where he was required in the interests of the
Empire. If such a system were established, probably no
reliefs would be sent direct from the United Kingdom to
India or China, but they would be selected from the
Colonial stations. Egypt, Malta and Gibraltar should, I
think, get their garrisons from troops going home from
the East. The relation which the commanding officer of
the depot should have to the Government of the colony in
which it is situated requires very careful consideration.
It is obvious that it must be so arranged that no clashing
of authority could ever arise. I take it that the con-
ditions existing between the garrisons in Great Britain
and the Lord Lieutenants and governing bodies of the
various counties in which they are stationed will be pretty
much what is required in the Colonies. In the canton-
ment, and when on the march, as a matter of course, the
troops would only be subject to military law, and there-
fore, to their officers. Under other circumstances they
should be as much subject to the civil authorities as any
citizen. The various Governments would always, on feeing
asked, give every facility for the exchange from depot to
depot, and for field exercises on the largest scale, subject,
of course, to due notice and mutual arrangement. The
Imperial Commandant should not be permitted to interfere
in any way, except by the direct request of the provincial
Government concerned, with the defence forces of the
respective Colonies. These must be left entirely to the
management of the Government which employs them, as
at present. I would suggest that the Imperial depot
should not be located near any large town, but placed in
the country district found to be most suitable.
3. The character of the additional regiments to be
created is a subject entitled to very grave thought, and I
venture to suggest that consideration should again be
given, namely, to establishing regiments the men of which
should be enlisted from a social class somewhat higher
than that of the average recruit. For what, no doubt, at
the time appeared good and sufficient reasons, the project
fell through. I am, however, still of the opinion, which
I had formed long prior to the time referred to, that not
only one, but several regiments of this type would be
exceedingly useful. I realise the difficulty which might
arise from the attempt to classify candidates for enrol-
ment by the exceedingly intangible differences which
might be supposed to show one man to be very suitable
for such a force and another not so, but this is not in-


surmountable, and perhaps proof of fair general educa-
tion will be the most practical method.
There is but little question that for fighting qualities
the scions of the higher and upper middle classes of the
British race cannot be surpassed. Those who are not
heirs to property, or who have not acquired a special
calling affording them a fair income, would willingly join
such corps, if relieved from the disagreeable social con-
dition at present inevitable on joining an ordinary regi-
ment. Large numbers of such men cannot now obtain
commissions without doing so, and even then their pros-
pect of getting one is but slight, first on account of their
numbers, and secondly because, perhaps, they have been
unable to pass the necessary examinations before arriving
at the limit age, and so are absolutely cut off from the
only profession in which a very large proportion would
excel. The suggestion, made originally, I believe by
H.R.H. The Prince of Wales, that all barracks should be
so altered or constructed, as to give to every soldier a
separate “cubicle,” will, if carried out, be an extremely
powerful means of raising the moral and social tone of
the army. It would afford every man such privacy as
would enable him to follow his particular intellectual bent,
unrestrained by the chaff and undisturbed by the horse-
play of the present barrack-room. One of the strictest
rules to be enforced when this change is made, must be
that no one but the occupant and the daily inspecting
officer should ever be permitted to enter the apartment.
In no other way could the men desiring personal quiet
be protected from the intrusion of unthinking youngsters,
possibly meaning no ill, but yet so little considerate as to
render a comrade’s life, for the time, almost unbearable.
The ordinary social intercourse of the regiment will be
better kept up in the common room, where meals will be
served, and smoking and amusement permitted. No dif-
ference should be made between the treatment and cloth-
ing of such regiments and those of the rest of the army,
except, perhaps, that, when on leave, men might be per-
mitted to adopt mufti. The men should be encouraged in
every way to study to qualify themselves for commis-
sioned rank, even though there might be but little imme-
diate prospect of vacancies occurring permitting of their
promotion.
The present war is a striking proof of the value which
such a reserve of officers would be to the Empire. The
best teachers should be attached to these regiments, so
that instruction would be avaialble to all, but yet should
not, I submit, be compulsory; for many of the men,
though admirable fighters in the ranks, and therefore
extremely desirable recruits, would be unfit for higher
position. Men of the type of General Hector Macdonald,
who cannot be a solitary instance, except that he has
accomplished what is practically a miracle under existing
conditions—would join with the sole object of advancing
themselves in the vocation they feel is of all others the


one for which they are best fitted. It is even reasonable
to raise the question whether the whole army would not
be better officered, and ultimately more ably led, were it
an inflexible rule that no one should obtain a commission,
except, perhaps, in the Engineers and Artillery, who had
not passed through the ranks of such a regiment. By it
every officer would know from experience what the life,
the wants, the wishes and the feelings of the men in the
ranks were, and so would avoid the unnecessary and silly
social “frills” which so many young greenhorns put on
when first joining, and which are so galling to the men
and so detrimental to efficiency. I fully understand that
there can be no close social intimacy between commis-
sioned officers and the rank and file, even though of equal
position in civil life, but the knowledge gained in passing
through the ranks would enable junior officers to avoid
many trifling causes of irritation to those under them,
. It would also be possible without detriment to the ser-
vice to raise the age at which commissions could be
granted. It should be clearly understood that by joining
such regiments no absolute claim to promotion would be
established, but that every one who qualified should have
preference when opportunity arose, which, if they were
made the schools for the commissioned ranks of the army,
would be constantly the case. It would be quite practic-
able to give considerable encouragement to enthusiastic
men who passed the qualifying examinations for higher
ranks, by making such passing entitle them to propor-
tionately higher pay. In this way deserving priyatgs
might be fittingly remunerated without creating jealousy
amongst comrades of the same service standing’.
That Britons of all classes and countries are willing in
war time to undertake the duties of soldiers is proved by
the instance of the present war, and that the same thing
would occur in peace is certain, were the surroundings of
barrack life made more to accord with their accustomed
social environment. The privacy of the cubicle would be
an important factor in bringing this about amongst men
of the class superior to that from which nearly all re-
cruits are now drawn. What a marvellous fighting force
could be created in this way, and what habits of discipline
and method would be acquired by many young men who
would otherwise be restless, unstable and shiftless! Many
would join in the hope of ultimately obtaining a commis-
sion; others, with less ability and ambition, for a con-
genial occupation, which would, at all events, afford them
support. Specially trained as they could be in such sta-
tions in the Colonies as I have before referred to, a
highly intelligent, skilful and effective force would ’be
created, the reservists from which would be available for
many years. It is certain that a creditable career in such
regiments as these, even if it did not lead to a commission,
would be of great service to the men on their discharge
in securing positions of trust. The recruits of the exist-
ing regiments are of very mixed classes, and so many have


joined because misconduct had left them no alternative,
that the fact of their having been in the army is no
guarantee of their trustworthiness. It would be very dif-
ferent with such regiments as I suggest; and an esprit
de corps would arise which would ensure such general
conduct as to render the service in them a guarantee of
superior character and fair education.
The many services which such a corps could render have
been shown during the present war in South Africa. Many
of the men would have special aptitude for scouting, and
would be better able to convey the information obtained
in a concise and intelligible form. This is proved by
experience to be all-important to every army, but es-
pecially so to that of Great Britain, whose wars gener-
ally occur in wild frontier countries. A few companies
attached to each brigade would do inestimable service by
acting as its intelligence body.
5. The war in South Africa has further shown how even
the most effective fighting force may be completely
neutralized by a defective system of land transport, and
how impossible it is to organise an effective service at
the moment when the occasion arises, even when money
is recklessly spent by agents despatched to every part of
the world to collect the necessary animals. In the present
instance, from the fact that the Boers have no ports, and
therefore no war-ships, sea transport has been untram-
melled by risk of capture or destruction by the enemy’s
ships, which in another case would be attempted at any
sacrifice and any risk. The danger would not be fully
met by the convoy of the carrying vessels. In the first
place the loss of time in collecting the transports before
starting would perhaps occasion an almost fatal delay in
carrying out the campaign determined on, whilst it would
be almost impossible to prevent the destruction of many
of the vessels by torpedoes, or shots fired at the water line
by ships with the speed and mobility of torpedo de-
stroyers. All these risks must be enormously increased if
time and information were afforded to the enemy while
purchase agents were pursuing their work in foreign
countries.
If a land transport system could be organised in peace
time as to afford a service complete in every respect with
regard to vehicles, animals and drivers, immediately on
the apprehension of war, it is unquestionable that the
militant strength of the Empire would be practically
doubled. Could this be done at a cost not exceeding the
annual interest on the immense sums now spent in spas-
modic and extravagant attempts to improvise such a body,
when likely to be wanted, no one would dispute the ad-
visability of doing it.
Shall I be acquitted of presumptuous intrusion if, as a
layman, who has had considerable experience of the con-
ditions necessary, I venture to sketch out a plan which
would do much to accomplish so desirable an end ?
My suggestion is that the Imperial Government should


take steps to secure, in all the British Colonies having
such a climate as not to necessitate the housing of stock
in winter, suitable areas of land for the establishment of
depots upon which to break and train horses, mules and,
perhaps, camels and oxen, for transport purposes. I
would not at present suggest the establishment of breed-
ing farms on the principle of the haras of many foreign
countries, but would provide the most suitable sires at a
very moderate fee and encourage the settlers to rear the
required animals by assuring them of a market at a fair
price. I am of opinion that an ideal transport service
should consist of sound, unstabled animals, not less than
six years old, so broken as to be perfectly staunch and
docile, and used to work on grass or herbage with, when
at work, at most, a feed of corn morning and night. To
bring the cost of maintenance within due limits, I would
suggest that after being broken, and arriving at say
four years, the animals should be let on hire to settlers
and earners at a fair charge, for use in their teams, both
for farm and road work, with the condition that they
should be fairly treated, fittingly fed, and so harnessed as
to exempt them from chronic sore shoulders or backs.
Numerous beasts being available, directly any one became
unfitted for work it should be changed for another and
be allowed a rest-spell. Inspection, of course, would be
necessary, but ex-cavalry non-commissioned officers would
be all-sufficient, the cost would not be great, whilst very
deserving men would thus be provided for on quitting the
service. As every hirer would know that for every tem-
porarily disabled animal he could get another on applica-
tion, there is but little doubt they would not be greatlv
misused.
. One of the greatest drawbacks to a carrier’s prosperity
in Australia is the fact that after possibly a single jour-
ney in drought-stricken country his team may be unfit
for work for months, so that an arrangement by which
he could secure fresh well-conditioned animals as he re-
quired them would be gladly made use of by the best
men. A couple of months’ rest in fair grass would
restore those returned, and the cost would be almost noth-
ing, as they would only replace the beasts for which they
were exchanged. Under any circumstances, the expense
would be trifling, as one shilling a week is a remunerative
price for the safe keeping of a horse in a well-grassed
paddock in most parts of Australia. Such a station as I
suggest could be guarded against fatal drought by a cer-
tain amount of cultivation, the result being made secure
by irrigation, when needed, from a river, or artesian bore
as found best. The forage grown would be harvested!
until wanted, by conversion into hay or ensilage. The
colonies suitable for such stations are Queensland, with
one on the Gulf of Carpentaria, and preferably in the
neighbourhood of Point Parker, as only there can trans-
ports of moderate draught nearly approach the coast. Its
comparative proximity to India and China makes this


point desirable, and there might be another m the south
of that Colony. In New South Wales there should be two
stations, one in average country within 200 miles of the
coast, and another to the west, where the climate would
by its heat make the animals kept especially suitable
for use in India, Persia, Egypt, or countries with similar
conditions. Then we might have one station in Victoria
and one in South Australia, one in North-West Australia
in a district not infested with poison plants dan-
gerous to horse stock—one or two in New Zealand, one in
Natal, one or more in Cape Colony, and one in British
Columbia, where, I am informed, the winters are not so
severe as in Canada. Only careful consideration of every
condition would enable the exact sites to be fixed, and
careful investigation must be made before a final decision
is come to. I can conceive it possible that it might be
preferable to leave the management in private hands, the
Imperial Government securing a certain supply of docile,
sound animals, and paying an annual subsidy, after ascer-
taining that the contract entered into had been faithfully
carried out during the year for which the money would
existing conditions the military authorities avoid
purchasing the necessary animals until a dangerously late
moment, and then do so recklessly, paying enormous
prices frequently for quite unsuitable beasts. Should the
apprehended crisis pass without collision, or as soon as the
war is ended, nearly all are now sold at a low percentage
of their cost but a short time before.
In the colonies, under such a system as I have attempted
to sketch out, not only would an efficient transport be
always at command as near as possible to probable fields
of hostilities, but the re-horsing of cavalry and horse and
field artillery with properly matured, thoroughly trained
horses accustomed during their early lives to live and
work on grass, would be practicable at a much more
reasonable rate than at present. I see much merit in a
system that would enable an army to be supplied with
saddle and draught animals, which, though under harder
stress, would in a large degree continue their work in
climates and conditions to which they had always been
accustomed. The remount officers who are now in Aus-
tralia would be able to give information as to the existing
value of the average cavalry horse in Australia. I think
from £7 10s. to £l2 would secure really superior animals,
especially if breeders were encouraged by being afforded
the use of cheap but good sires, and were ensured a
market. When broken, I think, they might be let out at
such rates as to pay interest and sinking fund to provide
for repayment of original outlay, but, if not, £2 per annum
would be ample for their keep and care when not in
actual use, if kept in numbers in large paddocks.
Another duty which should be undertaken at these
stations would be the training of the animals to unaccus-
tomed food. Without such teaching it would be almost


Impossible to get them to eat substances eminently nu-
tritious, which might be obtainable if their regular diet
were unprocurable. For instance, I have found that the
addition of a fair quantity of moist brown sugar to a feed
of chaff and corn doubles its work-producing power, and
that therefore the ordinary feed may with this aid be
greatly reduced in weight without proportionately reduc-
ing the efficiency of the animal getting it. When no other
feed is obtainable a few pounds of flour, mixed with
enough water to make them easily drinkable, have great
staying power, but few horses would take this, however
hungry, unless they had at some previous time been made
accustomed to it. I have known horses, when there was
little grass, habitually rob the camp of fresh, salt and
dried meat. It is even more certain that no horse would
touch flesh unless at some time accustomed to it. What
strange food graminivorous animals will eat, when habit-
uated to it, is almost beyond belief. In Iceland horses and
cattle are frequently fed on dried fish. I have known
sheep eat meat, fruit, bread, pastry and the like, and
even tobacco, in considerable quantity without harm en-
suing. During the early times of the diggings, when gold
was being found in large quantities, and horse feed,
beyond the grass, was not procurable, many of the rich
claim-holders fed the horses, used in their work on the
mine, with bread, sooner than, suffer delay. Bread, even
unleavened, is better food for horses than raw flour and
water, but it takes time to prepare, and is rarely avail-
able on an emergency, whilst flour is much more likely to
be. In Singapore it is not uncommon for horses to be
given a loaf of bread soaked with a bottle of beer, which
they eat greedily.
5. There is, however, a special branch of the horse sup-
ply, which I submit has hitherto been conducted on mis-
taken lines; and I therefore venture to enter rather more
fully into the question than I otherwise should. It is as
to the class of animal most suited for the work of mounted
infantry.
My experience when exploring in tropical Aus-
tralia and in the bush of New South Wales has
made me realise that, except for some special purpose
which renders mere weight of importance, horses not over
fourteen hands are of much greater general utility than
those above that height. I have found that even with a
weight up to sixteen stone, if not unduly forced in pace
they are as well able to support a long journey as are’
horses if sixteen hands, and even better in mountainous
districts. This conclusion is also justified by accounts of
the Burmese ponies, which, though generally not more
than twelve hands, yet carry sixteen stone from thirty to
forty miles, day after day. Newspaper reports §ay that
the contingent sent to South Africa from Burmah took
these ponies, and that they were found to do well on little
food and to carry the men better than the larger horses
I prefer animals from thirteen to fourteen hands, as


twelve appears to be somewhat small, independently of the
fact that they would be more difficult to procure in num-
bers than others a little larger. The smaller horse will
recuperate during a few hours’ rest in a much greater
degree than the larger one, and will work day after day
with less loss of spirit. Such ponies will keep in con-
dition upon half the food required by the bigger animal,
and they suffer from change of climate or the absence
of shelter from inclement weather in a much less degree.
With this knowledge, I have arrived at the opinion that
for mounted infantry, such mounts are much the most
suitable, because they would be less in original cost,
cheaper to keep, and under campaign conditions much less
likely to succumb.
I take it as accepted that the sole object of mounting
infantry is to save the men’s legs, and to place them in
the fighting line as little fatigued as possible; that, except
in pursuit of a flying enemy, or to carry out some move-
ment which absolutely necessitates gi'eat rapidity, a speed
of four miles an hour would be all that would be required
from such a force when on the march, and that even this
would outstrip their transport ponies for such service, my
experience has taught me, they should, except in snow-
covered countries, not be stabled but turned out to graze in
a paddock, when not in use, having, as required, a small
ration of chaff and corn morning and night. They should
only be sufficiently groomed with a millet brush to keep
their coat and skin in healthy condition, and no unneces-
sary attention should be paid to mere appearance. In all
parts of Australia, in the Southern half of England, South
Africa, and in parts of British Columbia, if placed in
sheltered paddocks having patches of scrub, they would
want no other shelter; but, in the absence of such break-
winds as the bushes would afford, it might be necessary
to erect open sheds, though the side exposed to prevailing
cold winds might be closed. I say this from my experience
in districts having fifteen degrees of frost. Horses fairly
fed, I have always found, feel cold very little, suffering
much more from continued wet, but even this does the
habitually non-stabled horse but little harm.
If small horses were adopted, and treated as I recom-
mend, it would cost but a comparatively small sum to
train the whole of the foot regiments as mounted infantry.
This would be best done by supplying a hundred ponies
to every regiment, and by their means training company
after company. Were this done we should not only have
our linesmen as useful as ever for what has hitherto
been considered their legitimate work, but everyone could
be mounted at any time if the exigencies of the situation
rendered it advisable. I would suggest that the light
company should be the one to which the ponies, when not
in use by others, should be permanently allotted, and it
would, from the lighter weight of the men and their con-
stant mounted drill, be the most fit to unite with similar
bodies from other regiments to form a brigade or division


of that type. Such a company would take its ponies with
it. These animals from their constant work, would have
acquired such knowledge of what was required of them
as to add materially to the efficiency of the force. For
instance, a special arrangement of the bridle its trail
not necessarily on the ground (which might be dangerous
unless the horses were left in open order) would indicate
to them that they had to remain on the spot where they
were without holding, until the rider returned. This is
commonly done by the horses of stockmen and kangaroo
shooters in Australia, scouts in Western America, and, I
am informed, Boers in South Africa. If these men can
teach their horses to do this, our troops can do the same.
It is a mere question of training and practice.
Suitable ponies would be found in Wales, Exmoor, and
the New Forest. These, I think, would be especially suit-
able for sires, should arrangements be made for breeding.
Any number of the right stamp could be purchased at
moderate cost in the Malayan Islands, the best breeds
there being found at Battak in Sumatra, at Sumbawa,
Balli, Timor and Sumba, all islands to the near east of
Java. Those from Sumba are very superior horses, and,
though never fourteen hands, are used by all mounted
officers as also for cavalry by the Dutch in Netherlands-
India.
Very strong, active ponies, able to carry great weight,
are plentiful in Burmah and China, and are also to be
obtained in Japan. The Basuto ponies in South Africa
would also be obtainable in large numbers at a much lower
price than they are bringing now, owing to the Boer War.
JNO. M. CREED.
To The Editor, Sydney “Daily Telegraph,” January 16,
1902.
Sir,
The virulent abuse poured upon our race by the German
press and people has reached a pitch as to render it the
duty of every patriotic Briton to assist as it lies in his
power to show this jealous nation how dangerous to itself
such an exhibition of venomous spleen is.
This hatred so gratuitously exhibited towards us is as
a rule confined to those Teutons who have no personal
knowledge of our governments or people, for, as we all
know, there are no more loyal subjects of the King than
Germans who have made their homes in these colonies,
few of whom have failed to apply for naturalisation.
It is but rarely that any expression of discontent is
heard from any of them, and if one, in a fit of temporary
spleen, begins to grumble, he at once subsides on the sug-
gestion that he should seek a colony under the Kaiser,
or return to his native country.
To amply revenge ourselves we need not resort to war.


Supposing that Great Britain were to follow the ex-
ample of Germany herself, the United States, and all other
nations, and enact similar laws regulating what is known
as the “Coastal trade.” This would forbid the carrying
of any passengers and merchandise between any ports of
the Empire except in ships under the British flag owned
and officered by British subjects. What would be the
effect on German merchant ships? A large proportion
of the ships, at all events, require and receive subsidies
from their government to successfully carry on. What
would happen if their greatest source of employment were
taken away.
If we are so hated, is it not our duty to so weaken our
enemies as to render their malice impotent? To very
effectually do this we have but to penalise German manu-
factures by a higher duty than is imposed on those of other
nations. Might it not be wise on the part of Imperial
Ministers to communicate with the heads of the self-
governing colonies, inquiring if they would be willing in
the interests of the Empire to impose an ad valorem duty
of say 20 per cent, above that collected on the products
of other nations on German goods? If the self-governing
colonies consent, it would be unnecessary to consult those
ruled directly from the Colonial Office. The result must
be a greatly lessened market, and, therefore, immensely
decreased employment for German workers, a consequent
increase of socialism, poverty, and every ill consequence,
certain to lead to popular outbreaks very difficult to deal
with, or harshly suppress with an army drawn universally
from the people it would be ordered to massacre.
We should doubtless suffer some inconvenience for a
time from the suppression of our accustomed sources of
supply, but other peoples would meet the want, and prob-
ably German workers would seek employment in British
territory in their various trades. Since 1897, in which
year the commercial treaty with Germany was denounced,
there has been no permanent agreement on these matters.
A temporary arrangement on the old lines, renewed from
year to year, has taken its place. Therefore, it is in the
power of the Empire to very quickly give effect to re-
taliatory measures such as I suggest. Germany could
not retaliate, at all events on Australia, for her imports
from it are solely of raw material, which she must have
for her workers under any circumstances.
Should, however, war break out between the two Em-
pires, there is no great power with which Great Britain
could so well deal with unassisted by allies.
The blockade of the limited coastline of Germany, and
the capture of her mercantile fleet, would make both the
import of raw material and the export of manufactures
impossible, except by a long railway route through sur-
rounding neutral countries.
The import of sea-borne foodstuffs, which is now neces-
sary to her, would also be prevented, so not only would
the earnings of the workers be destroyed almost entirely,


but the cost of living greatly increased. This would create
such misery, and arouse such discontent, as to threaten,
if not destroy, the Teutonic social edifice. We need not
risk a single soldier against the immense German army,
which could remain in its motherland to stew with the
civil population. It is unlikely, however, that it would
remain unemployed, for France would not be likely to
miss such a good opportunity of recovering Alsace and
Lorraine. Let both British and Germans consider these
possibilities, and think out the problem as to which is
most likely to come best out of the scrimmage. I venture
to believe that the Kaiser would quickly desire to make
terms to avoid the break-up of German unity.
It will be well, however, before such a contingency
arises that Germany should thoughtfully consider the
effect of Dr. Loyds’ expenditure of Transvaal gold, and
of the national exhibition of envious jealousy of British
prosperity, which it has produced.
Yours, etc.,
JOHN M. CREED.
Legislative Council, January 15.
Published in “The Morning Post,” London, on March 11,
1903.
ANTI-BRITISH GERMAN FEELING
To the Editor of “The Morning Post.”
Sir, —Though this will reach London after a consider-
able interval has elapsed since the incident which has
caused me to address you occurred, yet I think it possible
that an expression of opinion from the Antipodes will not
be without interest to your readers. I allude to the letter
said to have been written by Lord George Hamilton to
certain manufacturers in Prussia and Westphalia, who
proposed to tender for Indian railway supplies, informing
them that the violently Anti-British tone of the German
Press and people has created a feeling in the British
Empire which is not compatible with German firms com-
peting for British contracts. The telegram announcing
this, which appeared in the Australian newspapers of the
9th of January, was received with universal approval, as
it was felt that not only the power but the will to retort
on German malice existed and would be exercised. It
was consequently a great shock, productive of much dis-
appointment, when on the following day a denial of the
authenticity of the letter was published. Whatever may
be thought in Great Britain, we feel here that national
forbearance has been overstrained, and that the Govern-
ment of the Empire has too persistently offered the


“other cheek to the smiter.” The thought is always pre-
sent whether it would not be to the benefit of the world
that the Empire should display less exaggerated altruism
and study more selfishly the interests of its people, giving
due advantages only to those nations who reciprocate the
benefits they receive.
In existing circumstances it would not be unfitting if
the Imperial Ministers opened a correspondence with the
various self-governing colonies as to their willingness to
enter into an engagement by which all imports from
Germany should be subject to a Customs duty of, say, 20
per cent, ad valorem over those demanded from more
friendly nations. A proposal somewhere on these lines
has been advanced in New Zealand, and has been received
with considerable enthusiasm. The action of a single
colony, however, is not likely to be very effective. It is
the universal handicap throughout the Empire which is
necessary, and there is but little doubt that in the per-
manent interests of our race the temporary inconvenience
of closing the present source of supply would be borne
with equanimity. The Anti-British feeling of the Ger-
mans is obviously confined to those who have but little
knowledge of the Anglo-Saxon Governments and people.
There are no more loyal, contented, and prosperous sub-
jects of the King than Germans in the colonies. Few who
are more than temporary residents fail to apply for
naturalisation, while many of those who neglect to do so
are influenced by the knowledge that, while granted all
the privileges of subjects except the franchise, they escape
the accompanying duties, notably service on juries. I do
not speak without knowledge, for intimate friends of
German nationality have repeatedly given me this reason
for not acquiring citizenship. If a German in a British
colony in a fit of temporary spleen begins to grumble he
at once subsides on its being suggested that he should
seek a colony under the German Emperor or return to the
land of his birth. Germany would be impotent to re-
taliate so far as her imports from the colonies are con-
cerned, as they entirely consist of raw materials, a con-
tinued supply of which will continue to be essential to the
existence of its reduced manufactures. The lessened out-
put from these would be met by increased activity in
other countries, and, therefore, any lessened demand in
Germany would be counterbalanced by increased demand
elsewhere.
Personally I have always thought that Great Britain
could better alone meet the German Empire in war than
she could any other Great Power. A blockade of its
limited coast line and the capture of its mercantile fleet
would render the import of foodstuff as cheaply as under
normal conditions very difficult. Her factories would have
to close from lack of raw material, and the comparatively
unimportant markets which would be left to her on the
closure of those in our Empire would be gravely weighted
by the increased cost of railway carriage to the ports of


the surrounding neutral countries. To impose this longer
transit it might then be prudent to declare war against
Holland and Belgium, having given up the existing treaty
responsibility for the independence of those countries. We
need not risk a single soldier against the immense Ger-
man Army, for the immediate increase of Socialism which
must follow the break-up of the ordinary means of liveli-
hood of the masses would so imperil her social edifice
as to quickly bring the Government to terms. In these
circumstances the attitude of France would need careful
consideration by Teutonic statesmen. After the published
scheme for the invasion of England by Germany it is not
a trespass on good taste to point out how much more
easily the British could meet her unfriendliness. Suppos-
ing the British Empire were to return to the “coasting
trade” provisions, still universal with other nations, and
forbid the carrying of passengers or merchandise between
any of its ports except in British ships officered and
owned by British subjects, where would be the German
mercantile marine ? At present it requires a subsidy from
its Government and is dependent on the mercantile toler-
ance of Great Britain and its subsidiary States for its
profitable existence. I point this out because if so potent
as to be the more effective weapon in war why cannot
the imposition of disabilities on German ships and manu-
factures be made use of during a pseudo peace in which
the Teutons vilify in so virulent and dastardly a manner
a friendly nation? No permanent commercial treaty
exists between Great Britain and Germany, it having been
denounced at the instance of the Colonial Prime Ministers
in 1897, and there is only an annual arrangement, renewed
from year to year, which could be ended in a few months
at the longest.
For the well-being of the Empire its citizens are willing
to stand together, and when thus united it cannot fail to
be victorious. If the victory can be gained without blood-
shed so much the better, for trade interests are always
paramount and with no people have a weightier influence
for peace than with the Germans. It was realised in Aus-
tralasia at the very first that any backing down in South
Africa meant the early break-up of the Empire, and pat-
riotic feeling was at once aroused, with the result which
the whole world knows. The only doubt ever entertained
has been the question whether Imperial Statesmen might
be absolutely trusted to refuse any settlement which
would leave any seeds of future trouble. As to the selfish,
party-serving, inhumane, and blood-spilling attitude of the
British Pro-Boers, it has been execrated here, and no
words are found strong enough to describe the conduct of
certain noted names among them.—Yours, &c.,
JNO. M. CREED.
Legislative Council, Sydney, N.S.W., Jan. 10, 1903.


PREFERENTIAL TRADE IN THE EMPIRE
(By J. M. Creed, M.L.C. N.S.W.)
This vast question has suddenly become of immediate
interest to the world, by the suggestion of Mr. Chamber-
lain that the subject should receive the earnest con-
sideration of the mother-country and the outlying States
of the British Empire. It is not, however, so novel as it
appears to most persons whose attention has been called
to it for perhaps the first time.
Navigation laws, giving exclusive rights to the ships
of the nation concerned, and discriminating Customs
duties, have always been, and still are, the means by
which all foreign nations have endeavoured to further the
interests of their own subjects. This course was also
adopted by Great Britain until the inception of freetrade,
the most momentous new departure being the abolition
of the corn laws by Sir Robert Peel.
From that time, the doctrine of freetrade has been
universally adopted as most conducive to the well-being
of the British Empire, whilst the marvellous progress in
material prosperity made under it is advanced as absolute
proof of its correctness.
The unique position of Great Britain on the sea, and as
the possessor of established industries, gave her such
immense advantages as enabled her to contemplate with
contemptuous indifference the then puny efforts of rival
nations. It was believed by Cobden, Bright, and the other
leaders of the movement, that the progress and wealth of
Great Britain were so absolute a proof of the gain to the
world of unfettered commerce, that her example would
be universally followed. Had this surmise proved ac-
curate, no such problem would ever have come before our
countrymen for consideration as has now arisen. The
fallacy of the forecast has been shown by the spectacle
of the markets of the British Empire being open to all
nations alike, while her shipping has been handicapped
by the subsidies and exclusive carrying rights granted
to other mercantile fleets, and her manufactures and the
produce of her colonies have been subject to higher duties.
Until recent years our competitors had not realised how
important outlying possessions were to their trade, and
consequently a much greater proportion of the world was
then open to British enterprise than is the case at pre-
sent. For instance, in Africa, until a few years since,
Germany had no possessions, nor had France, excepting
Algeria, with a small area in the neighbourhood of
Senegal.
Now France owns a larger proportion than Great Brit-
ain, and Germany has at least four great possessions in it
on the East and West coasts. Until quite recently the trade


of the Congo Free State, the personal property of the
King of the Belgians, was free, but now high Customs
duties are imposed. The more newly-acquired French pos-
sessions before their annexation were a British field of
enterprise. Now, not only are British goods subject to
differentially high duties, but old-established firms, whose
trading stations had been in existence for years, have
been driven out of the country, exclusive trading rights
having been granted to French subjects.
This is but an example of what has occurred all over
the world, and every effort is being made to exclude the
manufactures of Great Britain from their possessions,
present and prospective, by other nations, the most recent
example of such efforts being the attitude of Russia in
Manchuria, and the intrigues of Germany in the valley
of the Yang Tsze.
We have no just cause of complaint against this, except
that it appears unfair that others should take every
advantage of our markets and give us none in return.
What British opinion generally desires is “universal free-
trade,” but how is this ideal to be obtained? Certainly
not by giving everything, asking nothing, and placing our-
selves in such a position that when we wish to make a
diplomatic bargain with another country, we have nothing
to give in return for the concessions asked.
I submit that the proposition of Mr. Chamberlain is not
put forward for immediate adoption, to be inflexibly main-
tained under every circumstance for a long time, but to
create such a condition of affairs as will induce other
countries to realise the necessity of reciprocity.
The application of preferential rates within the Empire
is now supposed by many people to have been only lately
suggested by the English Government. It did not, how-
ever, originate with the Imperial Ministers, or, even so,
very recently. The first step to this end was taken at
the Conference of Prime Ministers of the self-governing
colonies held in London in July, 1897, when the Premiers,
including Mr. G. H. Reid, unanimously decided to ask
Lord Salisbury to denounce the Belgian and German
treaties because they contained an unfitting provision.
Article 15 of that with Belgium says:—“Articles the
produce or manufacture of Belgium shall not be subject
in the British colonies to other or higher duties than those
which are, or may be, upon similar articles of British
origin.” The treaty with Germany contains a similar con-
dition.
As a consequence, Lord Salisbury, then Foreign Minis-
ter, in a despatch, dated July 28, 1897, addressed to Sir F.
Plunkett in Brussels and Sir F. Lascelles in Berlin,
directed those ambassadors to give the necessary notice
for determining those treaties, which, as a consequence
though still in force, are only so from a temporary ar-
rangement renewed each year.
Our only dangerous trade rivals, either in sea carriage
or manufactures, are Germany and the United States, who


both, exploiting our free markets to the fullest extent,
afford us no reciprocal advantages in return, excluding
or heavily weighting our products by high duties. Ger-
many is only able to compete with the British because
of her cheap labour, and anything which tends to increase
the present cost of production will put her out of the
running. She, therefore, cannot increase the wages of
her workers in the manufacturing districts, who, es-
pecially in Saxony, are so near starvation point that an
official report made therein showed that of the children
attending the schools 30 per cent, never had a warm
dinner or more than a piece of bread, and that more than
60 per cent, of those who were better fed had to be con-
tent with “potatoes and linseed oil.” A comparatively
recent cable said that meat was so dear in Saxony that
the people were killing their dogs for food. When it is
remembered that in spite of these facts, the agrarian
party in the Reichstag has been able to largely increase
all the duties on agricultural produce, how manifestly vast
is the problem which the German Government has to face.
With so small a margin between the workers and starv-
ation, how covetous must it be of continuing to possess
the entry in the world markets of the British on equal
terms with the manufactures of our fellow-countrymen,
and how stupidly imprudent the German nation, from the
Imperial Chancellor to the humblest worker, has shown
himself in destroying the friendly indifference with which
its competition was viewed, by the malevolence exhibited
towards us during the South African War. It is unque§=
tionable that the present crisis has been produced by the
gratuitous hostility then shown to our race, and that but
for it a long time might have elapsed without the ques-
tion being raised. We all thought the friendly feeling we
had towards our Teutonic kinsmen was reciprocated, but,
thank God, we now realise that they hate us, and that
nothing but their impotence prevents them from destroy-
ing us as a nation. We now know it, and no sentimental
folly should prevent us from taking every trade advan-
tage which nature and our national growth has given us.
In writing thus I do so believing that, whilst it is neces-
sary to make the suggested new departure general as
against the world, it is really directed against Germany,
whose competition in manufactures is not only appre-
hended by Great Britain but by the United States. A
large proportion of the imports from the latter country
by Germany other than foodstuffs consists of labour-
saving machinery, which will largely increase her power
of production, and make it even cheaper than it is at
present.
The singularity of the suggested preferential duties is
that they can be consistently accepted by both freetraders
and protectionists in the colonies. By the former, be-
cause their adoption is the only practicable path to real,
and, therefore, universal freetrade throughout the world.
By the latter, because, though it is proposed that such a


difference should be made in the duties levied against
other countries as would give an advantage to British
goods, it in no way necessitates any lowering of the
duties which at present protect the manufactures of the
importing state. As to retaliation, I do not think there
is any real peril, for how quickly German bounce subsided
in reference to Canada when it was found that so for from
producing any weakening on the part of the dominion it
merely elicited sympathy in the other parts of the Empire,
and tended to ripen the growing wish to create a more
just basis of international trade. Germany never volun-
tarily gives up a selfish purpose, but only becomes
generous when incapable of carrying out the end she has
in view.
She at the present time taxes every British product to
the fullest extent compatible with her own wellbeing, and
cannot increase her Customs duties against them except
to her own injury.
The only country that could effectively retaliate would
be the United States, who might do so for some years by
placing an export duty on cotton. She would, however,
find it difficult to utilise the whole of her cotton crop in
her own manufactories, while she would suffer from the
over-production resulting from deficient markets. At the
end of this period, however, she would no longer have
the command of cotton production. The West African
colonies have already commenced to grow this staple, and
are shipping it in steadily increasing quantities. The
greatly increased area of productive land created in
Egypt by the conservation of the Nile flood water in
that dependency of Great Britain will make cotton again
an important industry. India only needs protection against
the competition of America to return to this crop. It is,
therefore, evident that the Empire could supply the
Mother Country with all the raw material she requires
for her manufactories, which, by differential duties would
have a market secured that would enable them to con-
stantly work to their fullest capacity.
Grain is another important necessity to Great Britain,
and this could equally well be supplied by British de-
pendencies. Canada, India, and Australia are capable of
supplying all the wheat required, and no doubt would do
so, but producers are fearful that, did they plant enough
to meet English requirements, they might find prices so
much reduced below the normal level, by forced shipments
from the Western American States, Eastern Europe,
Chili, and the Argentine, as to be insufficient to pay cost.
How important Russia considers Great Britain as a
market for her agricultural products is shown by the
recent visit to England of a deputation of agriculturists
from the former country, who were sent to find out par-
ticulars as to what was likely to be the greatest and
most regular demand.
The attempt of Germany a year or so since to create a
continental combination against Great Britain and her


trade, while insolently claiming an open door in all British
dependencies and spheres of British influence for her own,
shows how little mercy would be shown to us were our
nation as powerless as her rivals wish to make her.
Very recent cables report that the market for British
goods has been so lessened that many thousand spindles
have stopped working in Lancashire.
It is the condition of things thus shown which now
makes that district, the very birthplace of freetrade, the
earliest and most prominent supporter of Mr. Chamber-
lain’s proposal—himself a shrewd, hard-headed, commer-
cial business man and formerly a thorough freetrader.
Differential duties will not necessarily make food
dearer, but it will ensure supplies being drawn from coun-
tries who purchase British manufactures, and so enable
our workers to earn the money to purchase it.
Without them, our exports will gradually dwindle,
whilst our imports of necessaries will remain the same.
With them, the mother country can not only foster her
dependencies, but when prudence dictates it can make
treaties with other nations affording reciprocal trade
advantages.
The time is past when Great Britain could sit still,
assuming an air of commercial superiority, which would
enable her to look with indifference on the puny efforts
of her competitors in what are, if we are to judge by
the policy of other countries, her own exclusive markets.
Though it has never been recently mentioned, it is
probable that the expressed intention of the Dutch party
in Cape Colony to establish such a co-operative commer-
cial system in South Africa as would render the boy-
cotting of British goods practicable has had a very
material influence on Mr. Chamberlain’s opinion in the
direction of differential trade.
There can be no doubt that such a scheme would receive
every assistance from the Germans, who would willingly
expend time, money, and labour to bring it about, and
when started, make every use of it to their national gain.
Mr. Chamberlain’s suggestions, if carried out, will effec-
tively checkmate them. The bearing of the question on
the well-being of Australia, both at the present and in
the future, is the point which of necessity will receive
the most consideration by the average man therein. In
prudence, it should be studied in all its phases.
The market of the greatest moment to our producers is
unquestionably that of the mother country, and anything
which tends to render it more stable is of moment to these
States. Every restriction of her foreign fields of sale
must lessen her manufactures, and, as a consequence,
decrease her manufacturing power of raw material, such
as we produce. Such decadence will gradually weaken
her, and therefore leave her less able to protect and foster
the rising communities which her liberal treatment has
created.


By not aiding her at the present juncture we add to the
potency of her rivals, who, were it in their power, would
eagerly exploit us for their own aggrandisement, quite
indifferent to our well-being. Will it not, therefore, be
prudent to carefully consider a proposition brought for-
ward by so eminently practical a statesman, possessed of
unusual commercial experience, before even talking of
rejecting it?
“Daily Telegraph,” Sydney, June 30, 1903.
BRITAINS PERIL
S.M.H. March 25, 1909.
The Editor, “Sydney Morning Herald.”
Sir,
No reflecting man can doubt the prudence of Australia
making a large contribution towards the Imperial battle-
ships which are required to render the mother country
absolutely safe from German aggression. If only from a
purely selfish point of view, it is necessary that the limbs
should help to ensure the safety of the heart.
It is difficult for any one conscious that the British
people has no thought of aggression to understand the
intense eagerness of the German Government to rival
Great Britain in the strength of its navy, for the danger
of the Teutons is not from Great Britain, but if it exists
from their continental neighbours now happily our most
intimate friends if not allies, the combination is no doubt
a most dangerous one for Germany, but only really peril-
ous if she is the aggressor.
I venture to think that with all her feverish eagerness
for more and more powerful battleships she is not yet rash
enough to attempt to try conclusions by battle on the sea,
unless the characteristic self-confidence of the British
allows her to achieve a relative position which until re-
cently appeared impossible or she is impelled by other
circumstances to risk her very existence upon the cast of
a die.
In my opinion the real cause of German action is her
fear that the policy of “preferential trade,” or as it is
now termed, Tariff Reform, is making such progress as to
endanger her commerce with the Empire both in Home
markets and in those of the outlying states.
The Germans realise that when Britons follow their
example and conserve the commercial and manufacturing
interests of their own people Teutonic well-being will be
very seriously imperilled and ..Germany hopes by the dis-
play of naval'force to make a Liberal Government hesitate
to take the risk and so postpone if not avoid the evil day.
If as in prudence it should have been, this policy had been
initiated a few years ago, she would have been powerless
to resist.


The handicap which her trade would be under by such
a change in British policy may alarm her so much as to
make her stake her very existence on preventing it, even
by a war in which she has not the best chance of suc-
cess.
Let us ask ourselves what would be the probable result
to Australia of a successful attack on the mother country
by Germany.
The terms of peace which she would then be able to
enforce would certainly imply that we should be thrown
on our resources even if we are not separated from the
Empire and possibly made a German possession. If so we
should be mercilessly exploited for the advantage of that
people. Teutonic shipping would be given preferen-
tial advantages and quite possibly an export duty be
placed on our wool unless it was shipped direct to Ger-
many, and the same thing would be enforced with regard
to our mineral ores, Australia would receive less for her
raw products and German manufacturers and metallur-
gists would be placed in a position to rule the world in
these and possibly other now unforeseen directions. The
growing surplus of German population would be sent to
Australia, not for its benefit but as a German garrison
who probably would alone be permitted to bear arms.
This should be sufficient to convince our Government
and people that it will not be generosity but mere pru-
dence for Australia to make the largest contribution pos-
sible to aid in insuring British sea power which will never
be as it has never been used for aggression, but only for
the protection of British interests.
One or two discordant voices suggest that battleships
should be built and kept for Australia, but of what ser-
vice would they be in these seas? Such vessels are only
of use in fleets, and not as solitary units, and must to be
effective be under central control and at the immediate
point of danger.
Our duty is to leave the patrolling of the high seat to
the Imperial Naval authorities, and to so protect our own
coasts and ports as to insure during the absence of the
squadron which the general well-being of the Empire may
render necessary that one or, two of the enemy’s cruisers
who have escaped capture cannot lie off and on and per-
haps block our commerce for months.
It is to prevent such contingencies that the local navy
is required. With it no enemy’s ships could blockade
us with the confidence its absence would give them.
Imagine our position with cables cut, and the mail
steamers only able to sneak out at night without lights.
As to our contribution, it should be large and immediate,
for the moral effect of prompt and efficient aid is as
important as the material assistance.
It is therefore of little consequence whether we give a
lump sum or an increased annual subsidy to pay the in-
terest and create such a sinking-fund as will ensure the
extinction of a loan raised for immediate expenditure


during the life-time of the battleships built with it. Pos-
sibly the last will be preferable, as it will ensure our
contribution being permanent and not a mere spasm.
I venture to think that the contribution should be made
by the Commonwealth, it being recouped by the various
States in proportion to population.
I have written hurriedly but I hope with fair lucidity.
I am, &c.,
JNO. M. CREED.
March 24, 1909.
THE ABOLITION OF WAR
J. Mildred Creed, M.L.C.
Will the present great war make this possible for the
future? If so, how could it be accomplished?
It may become practicable if the great nations get
such an experience as will convince them, or a majority
of them, that all that is now obtained by the crushing
burden of standing armies may be achieved without them.
It is not unjust to say that Germany has been the
exciting cause for many years of military expenditure in
Europe extending to the present time.
Her assertive arrogance has made it absolutely neces-
sary for the surrounding nations to meet her military
preparations for offence by adequate ones for defence.
There appears but little reason to think that any coun-
try would have assailed her.
Russia has so many undeveloped resources that she
could not have been desirous of attacking the Teutons
to increase them. Fear of attack, however, made pre-
paration by her imperative.
France herself even, had settled down to comparative
content at the loss of Alsace and Lorraine, and it can
hardly be conceived that until forced into it by threatened
assault would she ever have willingly commenced a war to
regain them.
Now hostilities have begun it is hardly likely that un-
less compelled to by defeat she will make peace until she
has done so.
Germany since her union in 1870 has been a colossal
burden to the rest of the world, and all other peoples
have been more or less in terror of her. When her fate
has been ascertained, which should be learnt within a
comparatively short time, and it can hardly be likely to
be that of the world’s conqueror, when opposed as she
is by all other peoples except Austria, whom it seems
likely she will find but an impotent ally, and the United
States not aggressive outside America.
The neutrality of Italy is eminently to the advantage of
the Triple Entente, and I venture to think she never was
really a member of the Triple Alliance except with at
least one important reservation. I have always thought


that when she joined it, a secret clause was introduced by
which she avoided acting in the event of Great Britain
being involved.
Gratitude is of little count between nations, though
unquestionably she owes her present position to the
former friendly aid and support of the British power, and
therefore need not be taken into consideration, but mere
self-preservations would be all powerful for with the
abnormal length of coast line, attack on which by the
fleet of Great Britain alone would have been a terrible
danger which she could not afford to disregard.
When the lesson has been learnt it should not be im-
possible or even difficult to bring about an arrangement
which would compel the settlement of international dif-
ferences by arbitration without the necessity of war.
An International Court composed of representatives
from every country, the number to be in proportion to
the literate people of each. I say “literate” because I
think that the educated countries are entitled to propor-
tionately greater representation than those where so large
a proportion are unable to read and write their own
language.
This court should always be in existence and should
have power to appoint sub-courts from its own body which
would inquire into disputes brought before it, and having
arrived at a decision should publish it to the world. It
is probable that in many cases the decision would be
unsatisfactory to one of the countries, when the dissatis-
fied one should be empowered to demand its review by a
court composed of a larger proportion of the members,
or for finality by the whole of that body. In which case
the final decision is given all nations should consider it
indisputable.
It will be asked, how can the finding be enforced? As
things now are it would be impossible to ensure its being
respected by the loser.
It would, however, be possible if the countries of the
world, or even the more powerful ones alone, horrified as
they will be by the criminal waste of life and treasure
in the present war, decided that armies are unnecessary
and that the peace and prosperity of their peoples can be
preserved without them.
I dare to think, that all nations would consent not only
to the disbandment of their soldiers but to the surrender
of all fortifications, arms and materials of war, including
ships, each being only permitted to have weapons of short
range for use by its police for the maintenance of order.
Strict supervision would have to be exercised over fire-
arms, even for sport, and explosives in the possession of
private individuals. If this were done, guns that have no
greater range than one hundred and fifty yards or there-
abouts would be sufficient. I believe that this curtailment
of potency could be brought about by the use of aluminium
bullets, even if for a time the long range rifles were
continued in use.


When all countries are thus brought to the one level it
would be easy to coerce any dissentient from a decision by
the International Court, with a comparatively small army
maintained for that purpose.
This force should be composed of men contributed by
each country in proportion to the number of its in-
habitants. It might at first be requisite to have 250,000
men, but time and experience would I think make it pos-
sible to reduce the number to 50,000.
Some well-situated place should be selected for the
headquarters. I imagine that the Azores Islands would
not be unsuitable; they are comparatively central and I
fancy contain sufficient area for the purposes required
and they possess adequate harbours or places where
such could be created. It might be necessary to establish
a like naval and military depot in the Southern Hemis-
phere and Mauritius, or Bourbon would be suitable. At
these places it would also be necessary to have the head-
quarters of a navy of cruisers to police the seas for the
prevention of piracy, also a fleet of transports to convey
troops to the scenes of action.
The former need not be very powerful vessels as there
would not be anything very strong to deal with, for the
building of any ship fitted to cope with them would be at
once known even if laid down in a distant part of the
world.
The heads of these services should be selected from each
nation as its turn came and should not hold office for more
than two years.
Both land and sea forces should be kept in the state of
the highest efficiency in training, discipline, and arma-
ment, with a fleet of transports ready to convey a suitable
force wherever and whenever ordered by the International
Court.
However dissatisfied any country might be with the
decision of the Court, it should if necessary be merci-
lessly enforced in the interests of the world. For, however
much one might think itself sacrificed, it with every other
would gain immeasurably by the avoidance of war with its
uncertain result.
Were some such means of settlement possible, and only
a comparatively short time will elapse before the date will
arrive for its grave consideration, how great will be the
gain to all, and how immensely the progress and pros-
perity of everyone will be advanced if not assured.
Such a question concerns everyone, individualist or
socialist alike.
My proposal is not impossible to carry out when the
fitting time arrives, as it appears likely to be shortly,
when all have gained such experience as never in the
world’s history could have been obtained before.
This article was written on 9th August, 1914, but feeling
that at so early a period of the war its publication might
be considered premature, I have delayed submitting it to
public attention until the present time.


THE SPECIALTY PRESS Pty. Ltd
ART PRINTERS
189 Lit. Collins St.. MELBOURNE
