



Tn|] COUNTY COUNCIL flT
| ¥ SCHOOL ¥
AWARDED TO 9
} — : —'




/


THE MYSTERY
OF DIAMOND CREEK


BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
50 Old Bailey, LONDON
17 Stanhope Street, Glasgow
BLACKIE & SON (INDIA) LIMITED
Warwick House, Fort Street, Bombay
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LIMITED
1118 Bay Street, Toronto


9


XO BREAK IX T THE HORIZOX T ’S EVEX T CURVE
Frontispiece
Page 17


THE MYSTERY
OF DIAMOND CREEK
ALEXANDER MACDONALD
F.R.G.S.
Author of “Through the Heart of Tibet”
“The White Trail” “The Lost Explorers”
“The Pearl Seekers” &c.
Illustrated by M. Mac kin lay
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
LONDON AND GLASGOW


Wendy
Printed in Great Britain hy
Blackie & Son, Limited, Glasgow


Contents
I. The Boy 9
11. The Birth of the “Mastodon” ... 36
111. Tanami Charlie “at Home” - - - - 59
IV. The Rush at Angel Gully 81
V. Into the Unknown - xi 3
VI. A Welcome Discovery !3 9
VII. The Creek of Diamonds 1-7
VIII. The Region of Twilight .... 208
IX. A Vision in the Night 231
X. The Pool of Terrors 252
XI. Some Mysteries Explained .... 267
XII. Tanami’s Last Trail 294




Illustrations
Facing
No break IN THE horizon’s even curve Frontispiece
Tanami Charlie 64
The Mastodon is saved 128
A quick shot 160
The Patriarch speaks 224
Reunion 256




THE MYSTERY OF
DIAMOND CREEK
CHAPTER I
The Boy
Stuart Notley’s boyhood, like that of so many others
who included the grim war years in their growth, was
an anxious period. Though he was but nine years
old when the world calamity happened, his mind
received impressions of sorrow and unrest which were
even then vaguely disturbing. Previous to this he
had lived in a hazy dreamland of childish delight in
which fairies, and occasionally good-natured giants,
dominated the scene, subduing the wicked ogres and
lurking demons in the woods of his fancy with an easy
grace which he much admired. Sometimes he would
descend from his realm in the clouds, and permit his
baby sister to float around as an elf for a few minutes,
which she would do very daintily, but without the
dignity he desired. She was three years his junior,
and her imagination was not equal to sustaining for
9


long the exalted virtues he would have her possess as
a fairy. Fairies never cry, but Laurel could dissolve
in tears without apparent effort.
“ It’s such a pity you are only a girl,” he would say,
with a solemn shake of the head. On such occasions
his mother would attempt to reprove him, but her
smiling lips could ill convey even trivial censure. She
was such a young-looking mother, too, with gentle
face so roguishly belied by sparkling eyes. In the end
she usually agreed with him, much to his discomfiture,
for she would ask for his manly sympathy with a sex
so obviously disadvantaged.
“ Of course girls can’t do things like boys, Stuart,
and even when they grow up —like us —they are not
nearly so clever as a great big boy, for they cannot
climb trees and precipices, and kill lions and tigers
and —and—crocodiles; they just stay at home and
wait —wait for the big boy to come back ”
Stuart pondered over this speech for quite a while,
then relented.
“ I only meant small baby girls, Mummie,” he
whispered in deep apology.
She laughed and patted the boy’s head tenderly.
For the moment her thoughts had been wholly with
the big boy she had particularly in view, and Stuart,
looking up, was surprised to see a tear steal down the
well-loved cheek.
Stuart’s father, James Notley, M.E., was a mining
engineer of repute, whose work took him all over the
world, and into many strange places. It was seldom


that he got home more than once in a year, and then
his stay might be only a few weeks at most. “ Dad ”
was, in Stuart’s young idea, a wonderful man, a sort of
genie of the lamp, whose sudden if infrequent appear-
ances from distant parts of the unknown globe were
marked by general rejoicing and the spread of much
happiness in his own particular domain; for always
there were presents for him: curiously carved ebony
elephants from India, delightfully serious nodding
images from far-away China, many coloured beads and
pebbles from islands where “ black ” people lived, and
innumerable treasures dear to a boy’s heart, gathered
indiscriminately throughout the wide fairyland where
his dad had wandered.
But Mrs. Notley knew that many of her husband’s
trips into the wild corners of the earth were not without
risk. She feared for him in the great spaces of Siberia,
and shuddered with dread when he was known to be
in the steaming tropical areas where fevers raged. She
longed for the time to come when he might give up this
wandering existence, and share with her the joy of
having a real home, and the gladness of watching their
two children grow up. She sighed at the picture her
fancy conjured up for her. Would it ever come to
pass? Jim’s life seemed to be in his work, or else it was
he wished to save more money than she, at any rate,
wanted.
Now, after a dreadful six months’ silence, she knew
he was coming home to her. His cheery cable from
some unpronounceable place in Australia had told


her that, and yet, for the first time in all these years
since their marriage, she found her heart trembling
with fear instead of joy. For it was the month of
October, 1914, and Britain needed men. She knew that
this was the call that James Notley had heard, and her
soul, at first torn between pride and love, was soon the
abode of fear.
So she wept furtively, while her husband hastened
to her over the mine-strewn ocean, and Stuart watching
with big serious eyes felt that his bright fairyland was
shattered for evermore.
Jim Notley came home, and for a brief fortnight joy
reigned in the household. After their first greetings
were over she urged him to speak of his recent
travels, as she was anxious to hear where he had
been during the months in which she had not heard
from him.
“ I have got quite a strange story to tell you, sweet-
heart,” he said, “ and I’m sure you’ll be deeply in-
terested.”
She drew her chair closer, and looked at him with
eyes that shone with excitement.
“ Tell me Jim. Tell me at once ”
He laughed at her sudden eagerness.
“ Well, it’s about a native, and —a diamond,” he
began.
Her look of surprise changed quickly to one of
inquiry.
“ A diamond!” she echoed. “ Oh, Jim !”
“ And a native, dear,” he reminded her gently. “ I’m


not sure now whether one is more important than the
other.”
She kept silent with difficulty, waiting for him to
continue.
“ As you know, I had to visit a district in the north
of Australia,” he went on after a pause. “ Tanami,
my old bushman friend, who, as you know, accom-
panied me on various Australian journeys, was with
me, and he coaxed me to call in and see the place where
he got his name —Tanami, the gold township up there.
Well, I had a good look round, and one day, while we
were out at a dry creek some way east of the settlement,
a native came along to our camp nearly dead with
thirst. I gave the poor chap a drink from my water-
bag, and while he was gulping this down I saw that
he was wearing a string of curious-looking dull pebbles.
“ He was tall for a black, and had a look in his eyes
that gave me quite a shock, for we are accustomed to
consider the aboriginal as pretty low down on the
human scale. Not only this, but his face had a dignity
of its own. Just fancy that! The features were extra-
ordinarily regular, and instead of the squat nose which
usually distinguishes the native of those parts this
particular specimen had a decidedly well-shaped hooked
proboscis ”
“ But his necklet, dear,” interrupted Mrs. Notley
eagerly.
“ Ah, just like a woman; but I’m coming to that,
though it wasn’t a necklet, it was an armlet, which
again showed an uncommon trait in a tribesman. The


stones were worn embedded in a strip of raw hide,
stuck in position with a powerful cement, and they
were
“ Golden nuggets?” she guessed confidently.
“ Wrong, dear. They were —diamonds!”
“Oh!” She gazed at him incredulously.
“ No mistake about it,” he continued, “ though I
had the greatest difficulty in persuading my visitor to
let me dig out one for inspection. He evidently con-
sidered the armlet as a sacred symbol, and was at first
terrified that I meant to annex it altogether. Anyhow,
I soon satisfied myself that the stones were diamonds.
But when I tried to ask where they came from I could
get nothing but wild shakes of the head and a stream
of lingo that was absolutely unintelligible, though I
have a fair knowledge of the native dialects. I noticed,
too, that he was beginning to show signs of anger, and
at any moment he might have swung at me with the
flint-edged club he carried.”
She shuddered.
“ He might have killed you, Jim.”
“ Not much fear of that, dear, for I was well pre-
pared, only I should have hated to shoot even a black
for attacking me, as he thought, in defence of his
rights. But immediately I stepped back from the
door of the tent, he made a break for the bush and
disappeared.”
She gave a sigh of relief, and Stuart, who had been
absorbing the story with avidity, gazed up with eager
question.


“ Where did he go to, Dad?”
Jim Notley laughed.
“ I didn’t see him again, old man, but listen hard
and I’ll tell you where I think he came from.”
His wife had been pondering things over.
“ Why, Jim,” she exclaimed, “ that must have
happened six months ago, and in your letter you did
not say a word about it. You only mentioned that
you were going to some outlandish place in Queens-
land which, ‘ as the crow flies ’, you said was only
seven hundred miles away.”
“ That was my trouble,” he announced, lightly.
“ I decided to go as near as possible on the lines of
the crow I quoted, because the intervening country
to the eastward called me rather urgently just then.
You see, dear, diamonds have a tremendous value ”
He checked himself before her reproachful gaze.
So often had he promised to take no unnecessary
risks with his life, and yet his confidence always
created a glamour which hid from him the elements
of danger until they became too threateningly close.
He watched her as a big schoolboy might have done
who had been found out in some transgression, and
when she smilingly arose and went over to the book-
case in a corner of the room, his eyes followed her
doubtfully.
She returned immediately with a large atlas which
she plumped upon his knee.
Show me,” she said, with affected grimness,
“ just show me where you’ve been.”


“ When you get on to my tracks with that veracious
volume,” he grumbled, * I recognize that the game
is up. Here is the scene of my delinquency.”
On a map covering the northern division of Australia
he pointed with his forefinger to an area marked “ Terra
Incognita ”.
“ Latitude, twenty-one,” he murmured, abstractedly,
“ longitude just on the other side of a hundred and
thirty ”
“ Oh, Jim,” Mrs. Notley cried, relieved, “ it’s only
a little bit of a corner after all!”
He nodded hastily, realizing that her unaccustomed
eyes had failed to notice the scale; then drew an ima-
ginary line between Tanami in the west and Camoweel
on the Queensland border.
“ That is the diamond trail,” he whispered, mysteri-
ously, “ and when this trouble is over in Europe,
I’m going back to make our fortune. No more wander-
ing all over the earth for fees that are always more or
less uncertain. We’ll be rich, dear, and the future of
our youngsters will be safe. Thank God!
“ Tell me all about it, Jim,” she said quietly, and
her hand sought his and clutched it tightly.
He told her. It was just a simple story of hardship
and determination. He touched but lightly on the
difficulties encountered, thinking bravely that she
might well be spared a knowledge of what man will
endure when the lure is strong. He had started out
with the bushman, Tanami Charlie, their outfit
being carried by a single camel. For many days they
® (D 694 )


had seen not so much as a break on the horizon’s
even curve; all was dreary and uninspiring, and their
feet sank in the yielding sand, making progress slow
beyond all calculations.
“ There was not much hope of finding diamonds—
or anything else, in that quarter,” Jim said ruefully,
and there was a time when I would have given all
the diamonds in the world for a drink of water.
But we just managed to scrape along, and then one
evening Tanami found a native ‘ soak ’ in one of the
most arid-looking creeks I have ever seen. It had a
rock bottom of porphyritic granite. But lam forgetting
that this is not a mining report, so I’ll leave geology
out of it.
“ The country started to improve a bit after that,
but still I could see no likely-looking location for the
diamonds we had come to seek. Anyhow, by this time
those same diamonds had lost a lot of their interest
for us, and when another heavy sand belt had to
be negotiated I began to take a serious view of things.
The camel had held out gamely so far, but now he
began to show signs of exhaustion. We thereupon
jettisoned our whole mining paraphernalia so as to
ease the load on the poor beast, and my sextant was
about the only article I retained—and that nearly
went too.
“ what seemed endless days, a jagged line of
hills appeared on the skyline to the southward of our
course. Whatever stuff they were made of, it was
certainly not desert sandstone, and that was one
( D 694 ) 2


cheering feature, for it indicated a change of country.
We pushed on hopefully until the hills were on our
extreme right, and stretching away from us. They
seemed to rise without warning from the plain; that
is, they did not appear to have any slope at the bottom
—just a row of mouldering pinnacles. There was
nothing to tempt us to pay them a visit. They looked
the very picture of aridity, and, so far as I could judge
at this stage, the tract we were crossing was as dry and
unpromising as ever.
“ We had not seen a sign of life for over a week —
except for half a dozen huge crows that overtook us
when we w r ere a couple of days out and kept circling
overhead every morning as we trudged along. Now,
Tanami insisted that there were blacks about —he
could smell them, he said. If there were, we did not
see any, and I rather think poor Charlie had got to
the state of imagining all sorts of things by this
time.
“ On that same afternoon we came to a dry creek.
It was not the sort of mournful indentation in the
land surface we had been accustomed to. It was a
well-defined channel, with a rocky bank on the far
side, and strewn with great angular boulders. While
Tanami explored around, trying to find water, I in-
vestigated the nature of the strata showing. It was
limestone in one place, and a close conglomerate in
another. The limestone was so oxidized that the
surface was quite black, but my pocket-knife was all
that was necessary to make the hurried examination


I wanted. This, then, was an extension of the hills to
the south. I did not try to reason out the oddity of
limestone occurring in these wastes; the fact was
there, and it very likely meant that water would be
found in the near vicinity.
“ And yet we could find no water. It was then that
we regretted most having discarded our pick and shovel.
We could not dig into the creek with our hands,
though we tried; and meanwhile the camel lay down
and died,”
Oh! said Mrs. Notley, who had been listening
with face tense as if the whole scene were before
her.
He smiled at her concern, and went on:
The sediment in the bed of the creek was quite
damp when we scraped down a few inches, but a
harder bar below defeated all our efforts, though we
tried in a good many places.
“ Night found us still clawing away at the cement-
like gravel, but we were no longer searching for water.
I had laid bare a sample of what I had started out to
seek, and for a time we even forgot that our camel
lay dead a few yards off, that the water-bag contained
only a fraction of a gallon, and that we had some
hundreds of miles to go before there was any cer-
tainty of replenishing it.”
While he was speaking he took from an inner pocket
a small cylindrical box such as is used by miners in
Australia for keeping matches. Taking off the cover,
he emptied into his wife’s hand a tiny spherical package


made up of some layers of tissue-paper wrapped
around a hard substance.
Wonderingly she opened it out. There fell on the
carpet an irregularly-shaped pebble, the size of a
small marble. It rolled over on to the hearth-rug,
where it glittered dully in the firelight. In awe she
picked it up and gazed into it, as if it had been a magic
crystal in which auguries of the future were stored.
Jim Notley, watching her tenderly, hastened the
conclusion of his narrative:
“ I took our position by the sun next morning,
then abandoning everything but the water-bag we
started out on the rather thin chance of reaching
civilization in the east. To Tanami I owe my life.
Without sextant or compass he steered a course true
as a die. He found water where no one else on God’s
earth would have thought of looking for it. He brought
the ship to port, with me, the nominal captain, disabled.
But we’ll return again when this trouble is over.”
Mrs. Notley raised a face bedimmed with sudden
tears.
“ God bless Tanami Charlie,” she murmured,
“ but neither of you must ever go back again. Men’s
lives are worth more than diamonds.”
“ It’s a pity the Kaiser and a few others don’t
think so,” he said, with a rueful shrug of the shoulders.
Then he hastened to create a cheery note in the
atmosphere, for Jim Notley was an optimist of a
particularly manly breed. He predicted that the \\ar
would be over in no time, and that the world there-


after would be a brighter place to live in. Inwardly
he doubted the encouraging words he spoke, yet his
purpose was to comfort the aching heart of the woman,
and to this end he strove with a confident eloquence
that almost if not quite achieved success. As for
returning to the creek of diamonds, he explained that
the terrors of the trail no longer existed for him, since
he knew by experience how to master them by im-
proving his equipment.
She was only half convinced.
“ But think, dear, what it will mean for us,” he
reasoned. “ If it had been merely gold I could agree
to leave it alone with little regret, for I know well
that I could never transport machinery to the spot,
but a fortune in diamonds is a different sort of pro-
position —and there must be a fortune there; it could
be carried away almost in one’s pocket. I found the
place ”
“ Won’t Tanami Charlie outfit an expedition himself
now that you are away,” Mrs. Notley asked with
growing interest.
He shook his head.
“ The men of the bush are not built like that, but
even Tanami, splendid fellow that he is, could not
find his way back to that lonely creek with any cer-
tainty, Bushcraft allows a fairly wide latitude in
direction when making for the markings of civilization.
But to find a single spot in the midst of a Terra In-
cognita is a navigator’s job. When I mention this
I’m not thinking of Tanami, but of anyone else who


might have watched us start out. There are always
people who haunt the pioneer’s footsteps in the hope
of snatching the reward which the poor devil has so
hardly earned.”
Mrs. Notley was quite excited now, and he could
see that the romance of diamond quest had touched
her fancy, obscuring for the moment at least all her
previous fears and hesitation.
“ And that dear man, Tanami Charlie, was willing
that you should come home to me when he must have
so wished to return. Oh, Jim! I think he is wonderful.”
Jim nodded.
“ One of nature’s gentlemen, Wendy, a type of the
human species which grows strongly in the far out-
back of Australia. In appearance rugged and un-
attractive, but a diamond in the rough nevertheless,
with hidden values that come out under test. He was
quicker off the mark than I was w T hen it came to
answering the Call which reached us at a little town-
ship on the edge of the wilderness. ‘ Boss,’ he said
to me in his even-toned, quaint manner of speech,
‘ there ’pears to be a real honest-to-goodness row on
at the other side of the world. ’Tain’t my funeral
mebbe, but there’s a bit o’ me inside that sings out
loud “ Charlie git your gun ”, an’ darn it, I think I’ll
toddle off and lend a hand.’ When I saw him last he
was in uniform, drilling hard, and keen as mustard
to get on board a transport.”
Mrs. Notley’s thoughts overcame her.
“ The best—the very best —in the world are going,”


she sobbed, and this time she would not be comforted.
Stuart, who had possessed himself of the neglected
diamond, looked on the scene with boyish distress.
His young mind was sore perplexed, for the joy of
his dad’s coming was being displaced by an unknown
sorrow which welled up in his throat and brought
fiercely resented tears to his eyes. He endeavoured
to stretch his inadequate arms around the necks of
his parents, who sat there together, the man with the
tired eyes whispering words of cheer to the woman
who mysteriously saw into the future and trembled at
her vision.
Jim Notley forced a laugh of triumph at the touch
of the boy’s hand.
“ See, Wendy,” he cried, “ I live again in this son
of ours. Should I fall by the wayside the boy will
step into the breach. Won’t you, Stuart, old fellow?”
The boy seemed to understand what was required
of him.
“ I am going to try and be like you, Dad,” he
answered soberly, “ for I think you are the bravest
man in the world.”
“ God help me!” Jim muttered in dismay; “ it will
take some doing to live up to that reputation.”
Then it was that his wife smiled through her tears.
“You have always set great store on the youthful
idea, Jim,” she said, “ and now you have your reward,
for ‘ out of the mouths of babes and sucklings cometh
wisdom ’.”
They went out of the room arm in arm. The boy


gazed wistfully after them; then, realizing that he still
clutched the shiny pebble that his father had brought,
he looked around for the little tin case which had
enclosed it. This he found under a chair, where it had
rolled, and near it was a tiny spool of thickish paper
which just fitted within the cylinder. He replaced this
in position, inserted the stone, and fixed the lid.
Then he discovered that as a plaything the box had
quite entrancing possibilities. It would roll merrily
over the carpet, reflecting light from its polished surface,
and the cat pouncing ineffectually at it in its progress
provided him with much diversion.
Jim Notley, returning for the forgotten gem, paused
at the doorway and watched his son and heir make
sport with the treasure he had all but given his life to
win. He knew that the rough diamond would probably
dress into a jewel worth a hundred pounds or more,
but it pleased his droll fancy to see its value more
properly estimated by unsophisticated youth.
“ You may keep the box, old son,” he said, “ but
let me have the bit of glassy stuff inside. I want to give
it to Mother, and when you see it again I’m sure you
won’t know it.”
“ Of course I will, Dad,” returned the boy, taking
a good look at the glittering pebble before handing it
over, “ but it’s a pe’fectly splen-did box, isn’t it?”
Jim Notley went away, and the world’s chaos
engulfed him. To Stuart the long period that followed
was just an unhappy blank relieved at rare intervals


by spasms of delirious joy when his father, mud-
spattered and weary, would make sudden appearance
and remain for a brief space. On these occasions the
boy would ask many questions, and not always was
he satisfied with the answers received. He was growing
up in troublous times, when the mighty events of the
day were thrust upon one and all indiscriminately. The
immature brain was in a forcing house which wrought
deadly effect on the many, but in some cases brought
out an early blossoming, anticipating the years. It
was a tremendous trial for the young, who dimly
grappled with problems they could not possibly under-
stand, and thus their development towards manhood’s
estate was hastened by a ruthless education not to be
denied. Sorrow and suffering were common features
of everyday life. The growing generation felt too early
the heavy hand of affliction, and the sensitive brain
became all too soon aware that the beautiful world was
not quite the happy realm of its dreams, but had a
sinister aspect hidden away, dreadful to behold.
So Stuart at ten was a boy thoughtful beyond his
years, and his mother marvelled at the change, but failed
to realize its cause.
Another year dragged on and then Jim Notley came
home for a longer rest than usual, with a fragment of
shrapnel buried in his skull. Outwardly he was the
same cheery dad Stuart loved to remember, but there
was an indefinable change somewhere. The eyes had
a strained look, and the alert form w r as not quite so
active in its movements. Then Stuart made a discovery


which had been beside him all the time and yet he had
not noticed it!
His mother had developed the same anxious expres-
sion. He looked in the mirror to make quite sure if he
himself had not been affected similarly, but could find
no such symptoms; and because of this he was vaguely
grieved. He felt he was not carrying his share of the
trouble, but when he mentioned this to his father,
Captain Notley roared with laughter, then suddenly
calmed down and patted the boy’s head very gently.
“ You’re carrying enough weight for your young
years, my lad,” he said. “You will help most by
sticking to your lessons, and doing everything you can
for Mother when I’m not here.”
Stuart’s sister Laurel w r as now a quaint little girl of
nine who clung obstinately to his hand at every possible
opportunity. It was she who unconsciously gave the
boy his first knowledge of his parents’ secret concern.
“ What are shares?” she asked.
“ Shares?” he echoed blankly. “ I dunno. What
sort o’ shares?”
“ Oh, I don’t know. I thought they were something
to eat, for I heard Daddy say to Mummie that we could
not live on them, and that he hoped the war would be
over soon.”
Stuart nodded sagely.
“ I understand, Sis,” said he. “ It’s ’bout time I
was grown up, I think.”
Captain Notley returned to his duties, but in the
middle of the fourth year he came home again, and


this time he looked as if he was going to die. He had
been blown up in a sap, and was badly wrenched and
bruised. Stuart hastened to his side the moment he
was allowed.
“ Oh, Dad!” he cried. “ Oh, Dad !”
Jim Notley screwed his face into a wry smile
“ It’s nothing much, old man,” he gasped. “ What’s
the old saying?— Hoist with his own petard—that’s
what happened to me. I was hove up in my own
sap. Engineers’ luck, Stuart, but I can’t complain.
I’ve exploded the other fellows’ picnic often enough,
goodness knows.”
That was the end of the war so far as Stuart was
concerned, for Captain Notley recovered but slowly
and it needed all his wife’s tender care to prevent him
having a relapse. Some strange driving force in the
wasted frame was ever impelling him to be up and
about, yet his physical being refused to respond to the
mental efforts he made, and in grim resentment he
passed slowly through the weary stages of convalescence.
In spite of this, these were the happiest months the
household had experienced for ages, it seemed. The
haunted look left Mrs. Notley’s face, and she became
bright as the summer sunshine. Her husband had been
saved for her. She gave thanks to God. Whatever
worldly matters there were to trouble her were as
nothing against this great blessing.
The Armistice came, and by this time Jim Notley
was able only to hobble around with a stick. It was a
tedious process, this getting well, and the invalid’s


fretting at his own futility did not help matters much.
The cause of his mental unrest was quite common
in those days among professional men of his own
and lesser standing. The income he had been able
to provide when the world was at peace had proved
quite ample for all needs, but the war had altered all
values, and, according to the new standard created,
his savings seemed to him to be hopelessly inadequate.
He had planned great things for Stuart. The boy was
to be sent to a notable school, and afterwards to Oxford,
and nothing was to be too good for the girl who was so
sweetly growing up in her mother’s likeness. The
fault in Jim Notley was that his vision glimpsed too
far ahead. His own boyhood had had few advantages,
and he was determined that the younger generation
should have a happier chance than had fallen to his
lot. It was a lovable fault for which his wife worshipped
him the more though she had no fear for her children’s
welfare. To make matters worse, the investments he
had made had suffered serious shrinkage, and in one
case —a mining property in which he was interested—
the war had brought about a cessation of work and the
company soon collapsed altogether.
On one of his flying “ leave ” visits Jim Notley had
endeavoured to correct the financial leeway he had
made by redistributing his shrunken capital in concerns
that promised big returns. His hasty choice was un-
wise, and only a greater depletion of his resources was
the result. In desperation he placed the remnant of
his funds in Government securities in the name of his


wife. She did not know this at the time or she would
have made objection, but the harassed man had only
one thought in his mind—to protect his family against
himself. He had reached the stage of considering that
he was an utter fool in business. He did not know that
many thousands at this time felt as he did, and from
a similar cause.
In his recurring moments of self-reproach for the
mess he had made of things, he always ended on a
bright note of hope in the near future when he could
resume his professional work.
“ Cheer up, dear,” he would say. “ There will be
lots of big fees waiting for me now that the war is over.
In my own particular job I had the field almost to
myself. I’ll just pop in to some of the mining offices
when I go up to London and see what’s doing,”
Formerly he used to speak so confidently of the
fortune he would find at Diamond Creek. Now he
never mentioned the subject unless in brief flashes
of enthusiasm, for it was clear to him that he could
equip no expedition thoroughly until he had replenished
his resources. Meanwhile he was daily growing
stronger, and with returning health the old whimsical
light came back to his eyes, and there was no longer
any falter in the courageous voice.
He paid his long-promised visit to London in the
spring of 1919. He expected to be absent a week, but
he was back at home within two days, obviously ill at
ease in spite of his assumed <fir of smiling indifference.
He greeted his wife affectionately; she thought he


must have arranged to go away almost at once, and she
did want to remind him about the diamonds.
“ ‘ And there arose kings in Egypt who knew not
Joseph V’ he quoted, with a laugh. “In these four
years my name has vanished into the limbo of things
forgotten. My juniors in the profession—not all of
them British, by the way, have ousted me from my
province. Patriotism in one was opportunity for the
other ”
She put her finger over his mouth.
“ Don’t be bitter, Jim. The whole world has changed,
and we must plan everything afresh. We are not the
only ones who will suffer ”
“ It’s the boy,” he muttered. “He should be at a
good school—among his own kind —but no, I should
not say that. It’s the last dying kick of the snob in me,
I suppose, for the so-called common men I have been
associated with have been heroes —every one of them.”
“ You need not fear for Stuart,” she said, looking
at him with tender pride. “ He has got a model of his
own choice to follow.”
“ God knows how I would fare without you, Wendy.
You have a way of restoring confidence in a man that
makes him want to put up a big fight to justify your
faith in him.”
She was well content.
“You will fight and win as you did before, Jim, and
now I ’ll show you something that will make you forget
your disappointment.”
She left him for a few minutes, and when she


returned she displayed in the palm of her hand a large
sparkling jewel. He gazed at it uncomprehendingly,
then took it between his finger and thumb and examined
it critically.
“ It’s a dashed fine stone, Wendy. Where —where —?
Why, surely this isn’t our diamond?”
She nodded brightly.
“ I had it cut while you were away,” she added.
He was amazed at the transformation that had taken
place. He saw at once that here was a gem without
flaw. It had turned out far better than he had ever
imagined. Indeed, lately he had become so distrustful
of his own judgment that his early bright hope of
making a fortune from his discovery had almost faded
away. All sorts of doubts had entered his mind. And
now, in a flash, he saw clearly again, and his old
confidence returned to him.
“ This is my chance, dear,” he said quietly, “ and
I would have passed it by. I cannot afford to outfit a
proper expedition, but if Tanami is back he’ll be
waiting for me, and he is a host in himself.”
She struggled with the fears that came back to her
at his words.
“ I have —faith in Tanami,” she said.
Stuart was now a manly boy of nearly fourteen. He
had deep blue eyes, firm mouth, and a dominant chin.
His hair w r as a mop of brown w'hich refused to be
tidy unless under the arbitrary correction of the shears,
which were consequently often applied. He liked the
boyish sports of his companions, but still more his


tastes ran towards books, books of mysterious adven-
ture for choice, and Robinson Crusoe had long been
a first favourite with him. Perhaps hereditary influence
had something to do with making him an ardent
student of geography, and in fancy he would often
explore the wilder corners of the earth with a pencil
and atlas for inspiration.
On the night of his father’s return from London he
was deeply engrossed in drawing a chart of an imaginary
journey through the mazes of the South Sea Islands.
His sister, as usual, was watching him with a lively
interest. These two were alone in a room that had long
been considered the boy’s very own retreat. In it were
the toys of bygone years, cricket and football gear of
the present era, and a confused miscellany of books.
These last were spread all over the floor, and though
there was quite a good table in the room, and two
chairs, Stuart preferred to pursue his studies face down
on the carpet. His limbs were not restricted in this
posture, and he liked to be able to swing them around
with freedom.
“Oh, look!” she cried, seizing his arm impulsively.
“ You’re running right into an island. Do be careful,
silly, or we’ll be wrecked among —among caramels.”
He paused to administer a lofty rebuke.
“ Cannibals you mean, Sis. You eat caramels but
cannibals eat you.”
“Oh! Has Dad ever been eaten by a car —I mean a
cannibal? Just a teeny-weeny nibble?”
He grunted his disgust, but refused to be drawn into


further speech on the subject. The illogic of girls was
past his comprehension. To save, as he thought,
further disconcerting interruption, he addressed her
sternly:
“ You’re only a passenger on this ship, and pas-
sengers must never speak to the officer on duty—l’ve
heard Dad say that, so I know it’s right.”
She succumbed to his superior wisdom, and watched
him with increased admiration as he skilfully navigated
the shoals.
By and by Jim Notley came along to see what new
game the youngsters were at. Quietly he stepped into
the room and unnoticed watched the young navigator
bring his phantom craft safely to port at Sydney after
many thrilling escapes from danger on the way. He
echoed the boy’s sigh of relief when the voyage was
over, and Stuart, looking up, found his father’s quizzical
gaze upon him.
“ Hullo, Dad!” said he; “ ever sailed in these
waters?”
His father laid hold of his nether garments in recog-
nized nautical fashion, and executed a few steps of the
sailors hornpipe before replying:
“ I know every wave on that ocean, my bold buc-
caneer. Now turn over the leaf and show me how you
can do a journey in an unknown land
He whispered the last two words with melodramatic
intensity. The boy gravely displayed the map of
Australia, and pointed with his pencil to an area south-
west of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
(D 604)


“ There you are, Dad,” he answered, “ but the
scale is too small to show a decent track, and the name
has taken up all the room.”
Jim Notley got down on his knees to get a closer
view. Over the space marked Terra Incognito a school-
boy hand had superimposed the lettering “ Notley’s
Land ”.
The man arose slowly; of a sudden it seemed to him
that his son was no longer the child he had considered
him, to be appeased by trivial talk. There were latent
possibilities in the lad already crying out for recog-
nition.
“ Tell me,, Stuart, old man,” he said, after a little
while, “ what would you like to be when you grow a
bit older? I think it’s about time that Mother and I
went into this. I’m not so sure that I want to encourage
you to be another Jim Notley.”
Stuart’s face clouded, and his lips set tremulously.
“ I want to be like you, Dad,” he persisted, his
cheeks flushing with growing agitation, “ and Mother
says I should try my hardest so that you’ll be pleased
with me —and I’m trying to learn things. I’m trying
to understand everything I read. I’ll soon be a help
to you, Dad. You just wait —you just wait ”
The words rushed out with scarcely a halt, and left
him breathless.
Jim Notley, though inwardly pleased at the spirit
of the boy’s outburst, was vaguely disturbed by its
determination. It was not in his plan that his son
should follow in his father’s footsteps. Life had many


easier occupations to offer, but he had not the heart
to discourage young enthusiasm at this stage. When he
returned successful from the diamond quest he would
be in a position to deflect Stuart’s course along happier
lines. So he reasoned, in the confidence of his own
knowledge of what the future surely held in store.
He met the eager ga2e of his son, and a glow of
fatherly pride swept over him.
“ I’m leaving next week for —Notley’s Land,” he
said slowly. “ Very important business, old man, and
I may be away for a whole year. When I come back,
you and I shall have a talk over things—and everything
will be all right ”He placed his hand on Stuart’s
shoulder and, after a moment’s hesitation, continued:
“I’m leaving you a real man’s job this time. Take
care of Mother while I’m away. Cheer her up when
letters don’t come; and if I am—delayed, carry on,
lad o’ mine, with a smile and a stiff upper lip.”
Unconsciously the boy felt the deeper meaning in
the words. The young face blanched, then became
more resolute than ever.
“ You can trust me, Dad,” he made answer proudly,
“ and, and—if you get lost in Notley’s Land I’m coming
to find you!”
“ With an atlas and pencil, Stuart?” Jim Notley
queried playfully.
“ No!” cried the boy, his face quivering. “ With a
gun an’ a sextant.”


CHAPTER II
The Birth of the “ Mastodon ”
Stuart’s father had been gone a year, and for the last
eight months no news of any sort had been received
from him. His final letter, written from an isolated
outpost in the far west of Queensland, had conveyed
a message brimful of encouragement. It contained only
one disappointing feature: Tanami Charlie had not
returned from France, and no one had heard anything
of him since his departure. Mrs. Notley’s heart sank
when she read this. Always in her mind there had been
the picture of this rugged strong man accompanying
her husband over the trackless wastes, and the thought
had brought comfort. Jim Notley’s plans, however,
were not upset even by such an unfortunate circum-
stance. He could afford no delay in his arrangements,
his regret was keen at having to go on without his
faithful associate, yet it had to be done.
“I do hope Tanami hasn’t been scuppered over
there,” he wrote. “ I’ll miss him badly, I know. But
I’ll keep his share waiting for him in hope that he may
turn up. I’ve picked up a man here called Jennet,
who in a cautious conversation told me he was a sort
of ‘ expert ’ in diamonds. I have a suspicion that he
knew something about my last expedition, and has been


waiting for me to arrive. Anyhow, I’ll take him along
with me —and keep him out of mischief. I don’t grudge
him a share, and his knowledge may be valuable.”
In a postscript he added: “ Two camels this time
and provisions for six months! Quite a tidy little
expedition, isn’t it?”
Over and over again Mrs. Notley had read this letter
until she could repeat every word of it. She did not
like the reference to the man Jennet; she never had
liked it. She would have been so much more satisfied
if her husband had chosen a simple bushman instead
of this mysterious stranger —she guessed that he was a
stranger —who knew so much about diamonds.
And now a year had passed, and still no joyful
tidings came. She almost resented the covert sympathy
of her few well-meaning friends. What right had they
to assume that disaster had happened to Notley’s
expedition? They did not know Jim Notley as she did.
They did not understand that this calm,fearless husband
of hers would never admit defeat, and that he would
come back to her even from the jaws of death. He
might be delayed, but he would surely come. She
tried to hide the gnawing pain at her heart, and smile
bravely in the presence of her children, but she seemed
to see in Stuart’s eyes a silent understanding. She did
not know that he had been marking off the months ever
since his father had left, in happy anticipation of his
return. She did not know that the boy’s soul, quickened
by the terrible years of war, had overleapt time, and
waited only the physical development of manhood.


It was he who spoke first.
“ Mother,” he said, “ will you let me see Dad’s last
letter again—to read myself?”
It was always with her. She took it from her bosom,
and handed it over. They were in the dining-room,
and Laurel was deftly clearing the table after the
evening meal. Stuart had been using his “ retreat ”
less and less these days, for he hated to leave his
mother alone. Now he had taken the big atlas from
its accustomed place, and opened it out on the table.
“ Good old Dad,” he murmured heartily when he
had read the letter. His mother’s pent-up feelings
gave way.
“ Oh, I wish he hadn’t taken that man with him!”
she cried. “ Why did he do it?”
“ Why, Mother, the letter explains that. Dad
didn’t want to be followed; that’s the reason —an’
mebbe, too, the other man had a camel of his own.
That would help Dad a lot.”
She had not thought of things in that light, but
realized that the boy’s explanation was quite sound.
“ A man who has got to be ‘ kept out of mischief ’
is no safe companion for your dear father, Stuart,”
she persisted. “ He would be scheming and scheming
all the time. Oh, I don’t know what to think!”
The boy opened his eyes wide. Not one shred of
his loyalty would he sacrifice. There could be no
weakness in the armour of his dad.
“ Mother,” he whispered, placing his arms caress-
ingly around her shoulder, “ cheer up. Dad didn’t


get all his medals for nothin’. I’ll show you on the
map where he’ll be. Just wait a minute.”
He went back to his atlas, repeating to himself the
three-syllabled name of the township from which
his father had written.
“ Camoweel . . . Camoweel. But I s’pose it won’t
be marked. Yes, here it is, Mother, all by itself,
an’ ever so far out.”
Mrs. Notley came and looked at it over his shoulder.
Westward a long way and a little to the south the
bare blank area of “ Notley’s Land ” showed up in
a yellow splash of colour. He drew his pencil in a
straight line towards it, and then hesitated.
“ It’s a big place, Mother, though it doesn’t look
so very much on the map. Why, the scale is a hundred
miles to the inch! I never noticed that before.”
Into the woman’s mind there flashed a memory of
her own early mistake in estimating her husband’s
route. She had been gladdened by its apparent
brevity —and he had only smiled in that humoursome
fashion of his, not caring to undeceive her!
The boy’s pencil wavered over the expanse, then
jabbed at a remote extremity in triumph.
“ There’s Tanami, Mother,” he called out eagerly.
“ The printing’s so teeny, you can scarcely see it;
but there it is, an’ I know Dad was there.”
His enthusiasm faded as he calculated the distance
in inches.
“ It’s over five hundred miles from Camoweel to
Tanami,” he said in an awed voice.


“ Five hundred miles of thirst —and savages—
and death,” she said weakly.
Again youth asserted itself.
“ It can’t be so bad all the way, Mother, for I see
a telegraph line marked over an inch away from
Camoweel.”
He ransacked his brains for a minute trying to
recollect scattered bits of conversation that he had
heard between his parents. Nothing that he could
remember seemed to help him. He gave up in despair.
“To find a real place on a map, a man needs to
know the latitude and longitude, Mother. I know,
because Dad told me, and all the exploring books
I’ve got say the same.”
He looked round at his mother with eyes that
sought anxiously for enlightenment.
She shook her head, and answered his unspoken
thoughts, very quietly.
“ I can’t remember figures, dear, I was never
clever like you. You say that a man needs to know
these things, but you are only a boy, Stuart; you
surely could not understand ”
The disappointment in his face hurt her, and with
contracted brow she tried hard to recall the elusive
symbols which her husband had repeated so often.
“ It was twenty —something, and a hundred and
thirty—or perhaps forty.”
Stuart smiled his thanks. He would not for worlds
have let her know that the vague directions given
were useless to man or boy. She had tried to tell


him; his young heart expanded with pride. But
even his schoolboy knowledge told him that there
could be no safety in a surmise such as this. It wobbled
over too wide a space!
Regretfully he abandoned the idea of locating on
the map the goal of Notley’s Expedition, and for the
rest of the evening he pored over a book he had bor-
rowed from the school library; a book that made him
feel that he was sharing the hazards of an explorer’s
life in the interior of Australia. The volume was the
record of gallant Carnegie’s pioneerings, an epic of
calm courage and endurance which stirred the boy’s
heart like a trumpet blast. As he read he pictured his
dad in these lonely wastes, and pride entered into
his being and struggled mightily with the sadness that
was there, dispelling it utterly.
But the weeks and the months flew by, and still
no message! Mrs. Notley’s crumbs of comfort were
dwindling one by one. First she remained strong in
the hope that no news was good news. As time went
on she insisted to herself that the absence of bad
tidings must surely indicate that nothing dreadful had
happened. Now this negative solace was being taken
from her, for the knowledge she so earnestly gleaned
concerning such tracts as “ Notley’s Land ” convinced
her unwilling reason that no news might remain no
news for ever more. The shifting sands, like restless
seas, can keep their secret well.
Then came a time when hope died. Despairingly,
Stuart’s mother had addressed a letter to Charles


Henley (otherwise Tanami Charlie) at the distant
Australian outpost where her husband had expected
to find him. It was a forlorn chance, she knew, for
the bushman —if indeed he were alive —was not
likely to linger long at a civilized settlement. Nearly
six months later, an answer came, written from a
mining camp near the Gulf of Carpentaria. It was
a laborious scrawl, for Tanami Charlie was no pen-
man, and his orthography was atrocious. Neverthe-
less it drew a woman’s tears, a circumstance which,
if the writer had known, would have caused him
honest distress and much wonderment.
“ Dear Mrs. Jim.” he wrote —it was “ Madam ”
originally, and that word had barely lost its identity
in the process of superimposing the less formal term
of address —“ I received your letter after it had gone
all over Ostralya looking for me. I got back to Camo-
weel as soon as I could, for I was a hospital case, worse
luck, an’ thought I was goin’ to peg out. I am down-
right glad you wrote, for I was sore with Jim Notley
for taking a darn Dago with him instead o’ me, only
you has made things mighty clear an’ I am sorrier than
this blinkin’ pen ” —he had a qualifying adjective of
a different nature for the pen, but this had been
blotched over, and there were evidences of other
attempts to find a descriptive word other than the one
finally used —“ can write.
“ Jim Notley was the best mate a man could ever
have, and I am packin’ my swag when I finish this
letter and goin’ out to find him an’ kill the Dago. I


reckon I can cut his tracks all right, an’ if I doesn’t I’ll
go right on like a blackfellow. Cheer up, Mrs. Jim.
No more at present from your friend Tanami.”
The rough sentiment conveyed in these sprawling
lines was as balm to the wounded soul of the woman.
This child of the great bush was calmly undertaking
a desperate venture out of loyalty to a mate, setting no
value on his own life, asking no praise.
The letter had been long on the way; it had been
posted where dispatches of mails were infrequent, and
communication with the outside world slow of estab-
lishment. Hard on its heels came dire intelligence of
the bushman’s failure. It was contained in the cabled
news of the morning paper; just a few printed words
meaning nothing to the many, but oh, so much, to the
woman who waited. The message had been sent from
a repeating station on the overland telegraph line which
cut through the centre of Australia. The operator at his
distant post had tapped to the world news of a simple
bushman’s effort. The message read: “ Bight’s Well
Relaying Station —Charles Henley, suffering from spear
wound, arrived in exhausted condition. Reports un-
successful search Notley’s Expedition.”
That was all; yet it was enough. Stuart’s mother
no longer wept; her gentle eyes just gazed unseeingly
as through a mist. It seemed as if her very soul had
gone questing out into the desert. Her son, watching
anxiously, would rather that tears had come. In vain
he strove to give comfort, but his speech came slowly,
and sounded in his own ears empty and unconvincing.


Deep in his heart was one inflexible purpose, but he
dared not speak of it —yet. He was not old enough to
fulfil the proud boast he had made to his father; still,
he cherished it. He could not help knowing that
the home finances were now woefully straitened; the
evidence of this was constantly before him.
“ I’m not too young to work, Mother,” he broke out
suddenly. “ Dad depended on me. I know that ”
“ Work, dear?” She turned to him questioningly.
“ What could my boy do? No, Stuart, whatever hap-
pens, you’ll finish your education.”
He put his arm around her tenderly.
“ A fine man you would make of me, Mummie,”
he said in earnest reproach. “ What would Dad think
of me if I shirked my promise.”
“ Your promise?” she interrupted in wonder.
“ What could you at your age have promised?”
“To look after you, until he came back, an’—an’
he’s cornin’ back—I’m sure he’s cornin’ back ”
Laurel lent her voice in support of her brother.
“ Of course Dad is coming back,” she proclaimed
stoutly.
Stuart had his way. He found employment with a
firm of motor builders in the district, who required the
services of youthful hands in the construction of certain
delicate pieces of mechanism connected with their
manufactures. He was so naturally adapted for
engineering work that he took an enthusiastic interest
in his occupation, and quickly the manager discovered
that in this boy there were the seeds of mechanical


genius, which he did much to encourage. Perhaps
his interest was occasioned to a certain extent by
his knowledge of Stuart’s history, for he was an
ex-service man, and had a high appreciation of Cap-
tain Notley’s war record, though he knew nothing of
his previous wanderings. Anyhow, he was kind to
the boy and gave him every opportunity for advance-
ment.
Stuart made one strong companionship in these
days. This was with Bob Murray, a young engineering
student whose father had designed a new type of motor
tractor which in experimental form was being evolved
at Gray’s works. Bob was a short and sturdy youth
with a chubby and inordinately red face. He had the
sunniest of dispositions, and was apt to get resentful
only when remarks were made concerning his com-
plexion. He was nearly a year older than Stuart, but
he looked at least as much younger. These two met
first when the “ innards ” of the apparently unwieldy
tractor were being assembled. Murray senior was
there —a gaunt, grey-faced man who seemed half
asleep whilst he was watching most profoundly. What
the new idea was in his invention Stuart had so far not
the slightest inkling. Yet it was his hand that deftly
tightened up the remote screws. It was his slim body
that found passage beneath the undercarriage when
dimly imagined defects had to be found, and duly
marked for later recognition. Bob gazed at him rather
enviously, and, immediately he had a chance, grasped
him by the arm.


“ What d’ye think of the ’bus?” he demanded in a
hoarse whisper.
Stuart did not then know who his interrogator was;
but he had an innate sympathy with the inventor, who
stood aside as if lost in reverie.
“ It’s great,” he answered promptly.
The red-faced youth beamed, showing two rows of
strong white teeth. Under emotion his ruddy cheeks
assumed a deeper hue. Stuart looked at him with
growing surprise, then turned aside.
The other recalled him.
“ You’re a good sort,” said he. “ It’s the Pater’s
’bus. And I know it’s red ”
“ But it isn’t red,” corrected Stuart, misunder-
standing the application.
Bob stretched out his hand.
“ We’re goin’ to be friends,” he said firmly. “My
name’s Murray—Bob Murray. What’s yours?”
This was the beginning of a bond which strengthened
with each boy’s knowledge of the other. Bob had a
tremendous faith in his father.
“ He commanded a tank in the war,” he confided,
soon after their first meeting, “ an’ this new scheme of
his is really a kind of commercial tank for crossing
bad country where there are no roads—l hope the
dashed thing will work as he thinks.”
“ Of course it will work,” Stuart said encouragingly,
as if there could be no possible doubt on the subject.
He was delighted to find himself shortly afterwards
transferred wholly to the Experimental Department


of Grays’ Ltd., where Murray’s “ Mastodon ”, as it was
called, was being slowly pieced together.
“ This is your chance, my laddie,” Macgregor, the
kindly manager, said. “ Get to ken every bolt an’
lever o’ that machine, an’ you’ll grow with it, for
it’s bound to be a verra wonderfu’ success if a’ goes
as it should.”
But the Mastodon was a long time in its evolu-
tionary stage. Bit by bit it underwent alteration
before it reached the point of being ready for trial.
The unwieldy mass of machinery was undergoing
transformation and becoming a more active if less
formidable-looking symbol of progress. When finally
it was given life, and moved its compact bulk around
the enclosed yard with sinuous grace and a lightness
almost incredible, the whole works’ staff seemed to
rejoice. And when it went farther afield, negotiating
hedgerows and sandhills and ditches with equal
ease, it was Stuart who sat by the driver as mechanical
expert for the Mastodon. He had earned the right to
the position by study and ceaseless effort alone.
It had been intended to manufacture the Mastodon
type of vehicle on an extensive scale, for the need of
such a form of transport in many countries was very
great. It so happened, however, that a storm of con-
troversy arose in the technical press about this time
concerning the utility of commerce-carriers of the
kind, and the effect of all this publicity was to create
a doubt in the minds of potential users which was not
to be easily displaced. So the production of Masto-


dons in quantity was delayed pending a more hopeful
outlook in the market, and meanwhile the original of
the species occupied a corner in the workshop where
it had been created. Occasionally Stuart was called
•/
upon to explain its mysteries to interested visitors,
and less frequently he was allowed to pilot it around
the yard for the edification of very special callers.
Bob Murray ceased to be a regular attender at the
works, but as he had long been a caller at the Notley
household, Stuart was sure of seeing his cheery
visage on most evenings of the week. Bob, whose
mother had died in his early childhood, loved to talk
to Mrs. Notley, whose womanly sympathy with him
was unbounded. She had guessed that it was through
his insistence with his father that her boy had been
given his chance, though Bob had always veered
awkwardly off an admission of the sort. Laurel was
a particular favourite with him. She called him, with
impunity, the names he had usually dreaded. He was
to her Red Indian at one time, and the Fat Boy in
Pickwick at another, and to his own astonishment he
found they sounded like endearing epithets and was
absurdly pleased.
Laurel by now was fourteen, a petite and dreamily
pretty girl holding in her large slumbrous eyes the
promise of greater glories to come. She could play
the hoyden one minute and weep bitter tears of
repentance immediately afterwards. Such is the
feminine way even at that blissful age when years are
but harbingers of life’s greater joys.


Time had not effaced Mrs. Notley’s sorrow. Her
eyes had grown more wistful, and her still youthful
face had taken on an aspect of gentle resignation.
She seldom spoke of her husband now, but Stuart
knew that he was never absent from her thoughts,
and the boy growing into manhood would often
clench his hands impotently, and repeat to himself
the well-remembered words of his own wild promise:
“ With a gun and a sextant!” And, now he felt his
growing strength, his years would not keep him
back from making the great endeavour. He had
never for a moment lost sight of his purpose. Latitude
and longitude had become more than mere names to
him; and there was a sextant in his room —a pre-
sentation which his dad had received but never
used —which he gloated over. Still more, there was
a service rifle hanging on the wall. He had all he
required, but —always that “ but ” checked his im-
petuous fancies —his mother was so hopelessly poor.
Bob came in one night with a tale of woe.
“ Poor old Pater has no luck,” he said. “ Some
confounded blighter has crossed the Sahara with a
Mastodon.”
“ I am so glad for your dear father’s sake,” com-
mented Mrs. Notley. “ That should prove how
useful such things can be.”
“ But it isn’t one of our beetles,” he hastened to
explain. “ It’s another make on a similar principle,
an’ now the public will rush it owing to the advertise-
ment an’ poor old Pater’s left in the soup. He’s feeling
(D 694) 4


it pretty bad, for after all he pioneered that sort of
’bus, you know.”
Bob had a shrewd suspicion that his father had been
hard hit financially owing to the failure of his inven-
tion to command public confidence. He could not
help knowing that experimental and construction
costs had been very heavy, and the worst of it was that
Murray senior was just the type of man to neglect
these considerations until too late. So Bob gloomed,
but loyally made no reference to his fears.
Stuart too was strangely silent. His sombre eyes
had lighted up at the news his companion had brought,
only to relapse quickly to their wonted thoughtful
expression. He was deeply interested in Murray’s
Mastodon. He had hoped by his special knowledge
of it to better his position at the works. He had
another hope in which at times the cumbersome
machine faintly figured, only his reason would not
retain it. How could he ever possess such a costly
contrivance?
It was only a few days later that his outlook brightened
tremendously. A letter arrived from Tanami Charlie
enclosing a draft for a hundred pounds. “It ain’t
much,” he wrote, in his characteristic way, “ but it
may help some. I worried the spondulicks out o’ a
little gold reef that looked like a winner, but wasn’t.
I ain’t got much use fer money, never being no good
at figgers, an’ as I is a perishin’ bachelor I ain’t got
no wife to worry me ’bout gettin’ rich. What about
Jim’s boy? He should be chock-full o’ eddication by


now, an’ if you send him to me I’ll teach him to be
a miner like his dad, faster’n he could learn at college.
I don’t use cuss words—much, seein’ no sense in
them ’cept when argyfying with niggers an’ such
like, an’ I have a mighty fine book in my kit called
The Pilgrim's Progress , which I reckon he’d like.”
Again there was a postcript, tantalizingly brief:
“ Had another try to pick up traces of Captain Jim;
was three months out, but couldn’t locate the creek.
Had a long-range scrap with nigs before I cleared.”
He had written long ago explaining his previous
failure, setting it down to his own lack of endurance
and the unexpected hostility of a native tribe. He did
not even mention that he had been speared on this
occasion, not knowing that the fact had been cabled.
Mrs. Notley’s gratitude to her laconic correspondent
was unbounded.
“ Your father said that he was one of nature’s
gentlemen,” she said, handing the letter to her son,
when he came home in the late afternoon, “ and he
spoke truly —a gentle man, the noblest work of
God!”
“ Oh, Mother,” burst out Stuart, “ if I could only
join him! I’m sure he’d help me to —to Oh, you
know what I mean!”
“ Yes, I know,” she answered quietly. “ I have
known for a long time what has been in my boy’s
heart. But where a grown man has failed ?”
He turned aside to hide his disappointment. He had
forgotten that the whereabouts of the creek of diamonds


was unknown to him except in a sense too wide to be of
service. Tanami Charlie’s efforts had proved this
much —and he was a bushman, with a navigator’s
instinct if without his knowledge.
She watched him for a time with anxious eyes. She
feared to let him go from her, even to Tanami’s care,
for he was the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow.
He went upstairs to his old playroom. He meant to
remove the sextant and rifle and hide them from his
sight. They reminded him so persistently of his boyish
promise. The lumber chest in the comer attracted his
attention. It was big enough for his purpose. In it
were stored scarce-remembered relics of earlier years,
remnants they were mostly, broken toys, and almost
leafless picture books, long long ago discarded. Grimly
he lugged the case nearer the window. There was not
space enough for the addition he would make to the
collection, and after a moment’s hesitation he applied
his foot to the chest and toppled its contents out over
the floor. He was not quite sure why he did this: the
impulse just came to him; he was not even conscious
of momentary temper. Among a miscellany of teddy
bears, mechanical trains, model ships, and squeaking
animals of all descriptions, there tinkled forth a small
nickel-plated cylindrical box, not quite so large as an
ordinary bobbin of cotton. It rolled over the carpet
and came to rest in the shadows near the door.
At the sight of it vague memories stirred in him, and
through a confusing medley of thought and associations


his mind groped back and found the clue it sought. It
was the plaything his dad had given him in the dim
past, and—yes —within its shining surface there once
had been a dully glittering pebble on which his parents
had set much store. “ It must have been the diamond!”
he whispered in an awed voice. For a moment his
object in coming into the room was forgotten; he
picked up the little cylinder, and pulled off the cap.
Of course it was empty, for the stone it had enclosed
was now a sparkling jewel in his mother’s keeping.
Yet it was not quite empty after all; a tiny round of
paper was inside, and this he idly tapped out on his
open palm. Five seconds later, his triumphant shout
echoed through the house.
“ I’ve found it! I’ve found it! I’ve found it!”
His sister was the first to appear, breathless in her
haste. He was gazing as if entranced at a small curving
piece of cartridge paper, and every now and then a
chuckle broke from his lips. She gave him a good
shake to break the spell.
“ Found what, silly?” she demanded, then, noticing
the litter created, she questioned further and earnestly:
“ You haven’t gone —gone dotty, have you, stupid?”
“ Twenty-one three, a hundred and thirty-two,” he
repeated, for the first time unconscious of her plea-
santries. “ Now we’ll see if I’m a man or not!”
Following his glance, Laurel saw that the paper had
some dim writing upon it. Peering closely, she read
aloud:
Latitude, twenty-one degrees, three minutes


54 Mystery of Diamond Creek
Longitude, one hundred and thirty degrees, two
minutes.”
Her brother, returned from the clouds, spoke calmly
in explanation.
“ That’s Dad’s own writing, Sis, an’ the figures show
the place where he got Mother’s big diamond. Now I
know where to go, an’ I don’t think Mother will want
to keep me back when she understands.”
He reached for the rifle, suspended on the wall.
“ I don’t want to kill anything ,” he muttered, “ but
blacks aren’t going to stop me.”
Laurel looked a little frightened.
“ Put that horrid thing away!” she cried. “ It looks—
it looks wicked.”
Nothing would content him now but to draw the
sextant from its case, and exhibit its mysteries to the
astonished girl. He had become wonderfully proficient
in the use of the instrument, under the tuition of a
retired sea captain who lived near at hand. His mother
had not cared to damp his ardour in this pet study of
his; she did not dream that a mere boy could ever
grasp a subject of such apparent intricacy, but here
she reckoned without the will of the youthful student.
Perseverance opened the way for him, and his own
strong bent did the rest.
He did not hear his mother enter the room; she had
followed close after his sister, and for fully a minute
had listened to his eager talk, her heart beating heavily
in her breast. Now she came forward from the shadows.
“ My son,” she said very softly, “ it has been God’s


will that you should find the paper which has been
hidden away so many years. I did not know it was
there, and your dear father, I’m sure, had forgotten
it. Now I know that it would be wrong to keep you
here. You will go to your father’s old comrade, with
my blessing. In his goodness he will not allow a
mother’s only son to sacrifice his life in the wilder-
ness ”
She fumbled in her purse with unsteady hands.
“ Here,” she continued, holding out a large gem that
emitted flashing rays, “ is the means for your journey.
Your father considered it valuable —to me it is priceless;
but it is fitting that the diamond that cost the father’s
life should be used by the son on his noble purpose.”
“ Oh, Mother,” cried the boy, throwing his strong
arms around her, “ I’ll go because I promised—and
because I must know what has happened to dear old
Dad. But I can’t take money from you, Mother, when
you have so little. I can’t ”
She interrupted him firmly.
“ I wish it, Stuart,” she said. “ Your father’s friend
has provided enough to make my own little income
eke out —until—until you come back.”
He did not argue further. He prayed that he might
be able to be back soon. It would be his first venture
out into the big world. With God’s help he would
acquit himself like a man, and return with honour.
Downstairs Laurel was holding earnest conversation
with Bob Murray. That young man was much con-
cerned by the portentous tidings which had burst


involuntarily from her lips. Stuart was going away to
a country of Diamonds and Savages! Yes, he had
heard a suggestion of this before—many times—from
the boy himself, but it had always been a shadowy
scheme dependent on so many other happenings. Now,
according to his excited informant, the matter had
suddenly become serious. His face flamed under an
emotion that he could not control.
“ Hang it all, Laurel!” he spluttered, “ I want to be
in this ”
She straightway began to weep.
“ I knew it! I knew it!” she sobbed. “ You’ll both
go away, and—and you’ll be boiled and eaten by the
can —cannibals ”
He was touched by her consideration; but she had
not quite finished. “ But maybe they won’t boil you
very much, ’cause they’ll think you’ve been done
before.”
He groaned lugubriously, but laughed all the
same.
“ It’ B goin’ to be dashed hard to make a hero out
of me,” he admitted. “My peony complexion cooks
my goose at the start.”
She was all contrition on the instant, and, hearing
her brother coming, made prompt and ample amends
while yet there was time: “ I think you’d be just
splendid, even if your face was—green,” she whispered
generously and with desperate finality.
Bob at first could see nothing to prevent him ac-
companying his chum to Australia. His father, he


thought, would offer no objection to his going, for
he often said that travel was necessary to broaden
one’s outlook. Mrs. Notley, however, pointed out
that Stuart’s journey would lead him into an almost
unknown land, and would involve all sorts of risks
not usually undertaken willingly by young men who
make the grand tour for educational purposes alone.
The possible finding of a fortune in diamonds at the
end of the trail she would not consider at all, though
both Stuart and Bob thought this a most reasonable
and mightily fascinating feature.
Bob became very downhearted; it was clear to him
that if Mrs. Notley could draw no encouraging picture
for him, there was less likelihood of his father con-
curring with his optimistic views. His honest soul
was troubled, and he racked his brains to find an argu-
ment that might be convincing in his cause. And at
last inspiration came to him.
“ The Mastodon!” he cried, leaping from his chair,
“ The very thing! Stuart, old sport, the deed’s did.
I’ll be your assistant for a certl Oh, won’t the pater
be pleased!”
Stuart’s eyes opened wide in amazement, then he,
too, jumped to his feet, as excited as the other.
“ You don’t think ?” he stammered.
“ Think? I’m sure! Just imagine how this sort of
thing would cheer him up ”He struck an attitude
and read from an imaginary paper: “ Murray’s
Mastodon, model A, has made the most marvellous
journey in the annals of the motor industry. It has


penetrated the unknown heart of Australia, crossing
a thousand miles of country where it was deadly to
venture even with camel teams, and successfully
returned to its base. At the wheel of the Mastodon
was the inventor’s trusted young engineer, Stuart
Notley, and he was ably assisted by ”
He stopped, and looked around for approval.
Stuart laughed joyously.
“ There would be more even than that to tell, Bob,
but it sounds too good to think about. Your father
would never dream of giving me such a chance?”
“ Wouldn’t he just? I know what the pater thinks
of you, an’ he’ll be tickled to death, as the American’s
say. ’Tisn’t too late. We’ll go along and see him.
Come on!”
The pair dashed madly out of the house, leaving
Mrs. Notley aghast at the suddenness of their decision.
But she smiled to herself when they were gone.
“ Impetuous youth!” she murmured. “ The whole
world is at the feet of impetuous youth.”


CHAPTER 111
Tanami Charlie “ at Home ”
Over the wide sweeping plains of the Northern
Territory a single horseman rode. His swag, con-
taining a coloured blanket and a tent fly, was bound
in a neat roll across the pommel of the saddle, but
attached to the seat and suspended against the animal’s
flanks were sundry impedimenta that at once betrayed
the bushman “ on the Wallaby There was the
inevitable billy for making tea, and to its iron handle
an enamelled pint mug attached itself through the
medium of a twisted strand of wire. On the same side
a gold pan swung, cunningly tethered by unseen means
to the saddle rings. As a counterpoise, a miner’s pick
and short shovel, tied together by a piece of bagging,
dangled in the off direction. To complete its equip-
ment, a curved water-bag fitted around the horse’s
neck and rested on its shoulders. Of foodstuffs there
appeared no evidence; these were carried within the
billy—a frugal supply of flour and tea, sugar and salt
—bare necessaries for a short journey. But the rider
carried a rifle which he shifted from hand to hand,
sometimes resting the butt on his foot when his muscles


grew tired, and by this rifle and the sureness of his
eye he practically lived on the country he traversed.
The man himself looked a part of his bizarre sur-
roundings. He was lean and loose-limbed, evidently
above middle height, with a face that was in repose
half grim and half playful in expression. He had a
thick fair moustache which drooped slightly, giving his
countenance a suggestion of melancholy. His cheeks
were tanned so deeply that they appeared of the texture
of burnished leather, and under shaggy fringes the
eyes looked out upon the world with an unwavering
steadiness that bespoke the child of far horizons.
His age would have been hard to determine; it might
have been around the thirties, or perhaps a little
over. His dress was simplicity itself. He wore tight-
fitting nether garments of an ancient model, which
had obviously seen much service. A raw hide belt
held these in position; a cotton shirt, wide open at
the neck, disclosed the swelling chest. His feet were
encased in loose-fitting boots with elastic sides—the
kind our grandmothers used to wear —for these lend
support to the ankle when the foot is long in the
stirrups. His hat was indeed barely a hat at all; it
was a battered remnant of what might once have
been a decent enough covering of the slouch variety.
Now its rim, by much pulling, hung limp and irregular.
As the horseman ambled on, he hummed to himself
a ditty of weird cadence in a minor key, to which the
jangle of his steed’s accoutrement made apt accompani-
ment. It was the Bushman’s Song he sung, a con-


ception of the wildest fantasy with an alluring synco-
pating air that sychronized at different phases with
the movements of a horse at any pace, from a slow
walk to a furious gallop. The patient beast which he
bestrode pricked up his ears at the first alarm. Well
he knew what was coming. And it came. Uncon-
sciously the singer conveyed through his spurred
heel the varying impulse of the melody. Soon the
amble became a canter which shortly merged into a
thunderous gallop, then ensued a brief respite while
the succeeding verse meandered and gathered strength,
to culminate as before in a valkyrie rush that demanded
so much of equine effort.
It was early afternoon and the sun blazed down from
a sky in which not the suspicion of a cloud could be
seen. Waves of heat seemed to suspend in mid-air
and scorched like the glow of an open furnace. The
stunted trees that dotted the landscape were gnarled,
shrunken, and shadeless; the sparse and spiky vege-
tation under foot was dry as tinder and brittle as glass.
It had been a bad season for rain in these parts. The
tropical showers had not descended much beyond the
coast, and even wild life could now find little sus-
tenance on the arid plains.
The soloist ceased his vocal exercises long before
he had exhausted his plaintive subject. A line of
white in the far westward distance had attracted his
attention.
“ Well I’m jiggered!” he muttered. “ That must be
Pine Creek, ahead. Had no idea I was so near the


blinkin’ place. Hang it all, I must have been kickin’
the old hoss along something cruel. I ain’t fit to be
trusted wi’ a decent nag ”
He drew rein, slithered from his perch, and went
forward to pat the animal’s nose.
“ All the same, Rocket,” he continued, addressing
his dumb listener, “ I’ll give ye a spell right now.
I’ll walk for a bit, an’ you can chase me up an’ bite
me if I don’t go fast enough.”
He started off to plod through the heavy sands that
at this stage intervened, and accomplished a good mile
before his conscience would allow him to ride again.
It was fully an hour before he arrived at the outskirts
of the camp, and then his senses became conscious of a
well-recognized thrill. Here and there a tent was being
dismantled. Men were rushing about in excitement.
Horses were being saddled, and vehicles of all descrip-
tions appeared as if magically evolved from the air.
There was no noise accompanying all this motion. The
whole scene was as a panoramic vision, silent and
impressive.
The new-comer’s unostentatious progress into the
midst of the picture might have passed unobserved
had his own interest not been so thoroughly aroused.
He halted indecisively, the shadow of a frown crossing
his features.
“ Looks like the makin’s o’ a dandy rush,” he
grumbled, “ an’ me not in it!”
A man hastening past looked at him curiously, then
stopped and gave a yell of recognition.


“ I’ll be blowed if it ain’t Tanami Charlie,” he
exclaimed, “ an’ we thought he was a goner!”
“ Tain’t very surprisin’ to see me pokin’ round,
is it,” returned the other coolly, “ seeing as I got
my label ’bout here? What’s the merry party
for?”
But the first speaker was already crowded aside by
a jostling throng more eager to get than to give infor-
mation. Most of those present knew Tanami Charlie
only as a name, but it had magic in it at the moment,
for a fresh gold strike had been made near the blistering
little township of Tanami, and who better than the
pioneer of the field should be able to advise them
concerning it. A great nugget had been found in a
gully to the westward of the camp, but the finder had
disappeared after giving the gold to the bank, and only
vaguely indefinite news had filtered out to the clamorous
public regarding its supposed place of origin. Charlie’s
appearance from the void at this particular juncture
was significant. He must know
“ Not guilty, boys,” said the bushman, when he
saw the trend of remarks. “ I’ve pushed my little cart
over from Queensland. I ain’t no explorer, so I dodged
the sand patch to the south an’ only blew in here
casual-like, headin’ for Darwin.”
If they had any further doubts regarding him, they
were soon dispelled, for the old lure was now upon
him. He wanted more than any of them to follow this
new trail. He slid from his horse.
“ I reckon the whole country must ha’ had nods o’


64 Mystery of Diamond Creek
this flamin’ rush,” he complained, “ an’ I hate to be
in last.”
He walked over to the telegraph office, cogitating
deeply, leaving Rocket to his own devices.
A quarter of an hour later he emerged, feeling con-
siderably comforted, having spoiled many “ forms ”
before the message he wished to send read clearly to
his comprehension; it was addressed to Stuart Notley,
on board the steamer Montoro , and this is what it
said:
“ Welcome to Australia. Got fever bad. Going
Tanami. Hold on till I come. Won’t be long—Charlie.”
In a land of vast distances a few hundred miles are
considered as nothing if there is any possible method
of locomotion. In this case the centre of attraction to
the multitude was full four hundred miles distant.
The men had gathered here mysteriously from
numerous outlying points of the continent. The
whisper had gone forth that gold in abundance had
been discovered in the far-off desert sands, and the
response was immediate. Not many hoped to make a
fortune; it was the glamour that drew them, even as
at the last moment it entered the soul of Tanami
Charlie, surely one of the least mercenary men in the
whole world.
Having sent the telegram, he permitted himself the
pleasing vision of glorious success awaiting him with
open arms at the end of the weary trail. He had these
visions rather frequently; indeed, he could not remem-
ber when they hadn’t been a part of his optimistic


*• M * v
r^ r ,* *
P :
TANAMI CHARLIE




outfit, though until a short time ago he would have had
no idea what to do with embarrassing riches had they
really come his w T ay. Now things were different; he
had Captain Jim’s son to think about, and he must
not forget the boy’s mother, who had so shown her
faith in him.
So he stood on the steps of the little wooden post
office, and thought of all he would do with the rest of
the gold left in the gully so far away. A horse rolling
delightedly in the sand out on the roadway caught his
eye, and he smiled.
“ Havin’ a bath afore he starts out,” he commented.
“ I reckon that is real boss sense.”
He caught sight of a saddle on the animal’s back.
“ This gold business does make some folk dam
foolish,” he reflected wisely, “ any howlin’ idiot should
have knowm never to leave a boss loose wi’ a saddle—
an a billy—an’ a gold pan —! Smashin’ the whole
blinkin’ crockery an’ me watchin’! Woa! Rocket, ye
dam fool. Woa!”
Realization had dawmed on him a shade late, but he
rushed fonvard in time to minimize the damage.
It did not surprise Tanami in the least that a new
strike should have been made in the vicinity of his
old haunts. Where gold w r as concerned, Nature some-
times played strange tricks, hiding her choicest trea-
sure in the most unlikely places, where the uninitiated
was more likely to find it than the experienced miner.
He blamed himself just a little for missing a reef that
was rich enough to shed nuggets into a gully. As for
( D 694 ) 5


the disappearance of the alleged discoverers, he did
not attach any importance to that. They had probably
gone back to work the mine in secret. But then again,
the Warden’s office would have had a record of the
locality if the find had been registered!
“ Mighty funny,” he soliloquized. “ Must be a
Dago crowd, frightened to death that any other poor
devil might get a share.” “ Dago ” was with him a
term of reproach applied to all men who were not of
the Anglo-Saxon race; in this respect the Bushman
was insular to the finger tips.
By the time he had replenished his stores, and
given himself and Rocket some necessary refresh-
ment, it was close on sundown.
The roadway was now deserted, for the rush had
melted away into the southern horizon, where it still
could be seen like a straggling army on the march.
The hotel proprietor became confidential.
“ This new diskivery ’ll mean a lot to me,” he said,
while Tanami was tightening the saddle girths.
Tanami gave a non-committal grunt.
“ I ain’t very sorry for pub-keepers, but I suppose
they’re sort o’ human after all. If the place booms
I reckon you’ll get fatter’n ever ”
“ If it booms, I’m a goner for good and all,” the
other returned sadly, “ for the Government would
extend the railway, an’ leave me perishin’ on the
roadside wi’ all the good money goin’ past in trains—
But say, you’re not hittin’ the trail right away?”—for
Tanami had placed his toe in the stirrup. “ It’ll be


as dark as Hades in half an hour. You won’t be able
to pick up the track.”
“ Rocket an’ me don’t need tracks, old man.”
He was gone without more ado. He knew a native
well at which he would camp that night; a poky
room in a hotel was but a poor substitute for the wdde
vault of heaven, and, besides, the “ rush ” was ahead!
He was at the wrong end of it. He meant to correct
such an unthinkable state of affairs.
But what of his horse? Could Rocket hold out?
This was the disturbing feature in his calculations.
The wiry beast that had just completed one long
journey could scarcely be expected to do much farther
travel without a rest. Consideration for the animal
struggled with the urge of the quest, and a com-
promise was reached. He would walk when his mount
showed signs of distress, and leave Rocket to recupe-
rate until he returned. Tanami thought nothing of
walking, only he could not carry his prospecting
implements, and, of course, his pace would be slower.
Nevertheless he viewed the probable situation ahead
with equanimity. He was in the “ rush ”, that was
the main thing. He would get to his goal somehow.
He camped towards midnight, twenty-five miles
on the way as he had come, but thirty by the bush
track which others usually followed. Here, at the
native well he had fixed upon as his halting-place, he
overtook the bulk of those who had left hours before
him. Only half a dozen buggies, some motors, and,
perhaps, a score of cyclists were yet ahead, so he was


told. He turned his horse loose, lay down on his
blanket, and was immediately fast asleep.
Next day he overtook one of the motors in a sand
patch, and a little farther on he passed a cyclist sitting
by the track, making repairs, but that was all of human
kind he saw before nightfall. On the third morning
Rocket’s distance-covering amble brought him to a
disabled four-wheeler, and then in quick succession
he jogged past quite a stream of strenuous traffic.
The motors all but one were still in front, but he did
not consider motorists as serious rivals. There was
a lengthy patch of bad country still well ahead where
he expected to find the whole bunch of them.
He was right; they were there, a round dozen or
more, each on a track of its own over a wide space,
and all boiling and panting tumultuously but making
no forward movement. Some of the men were busy
trying to clear away the surface sand when Tanami
approached. They were attacking it with shovels
and much energy. The horseman gazed at them
sympathetically.
“ If the jiggers won’t jig, mates,” said he, “ you
shi’d save your wind an’ walk. It’s twenty miles to
the next water.”
They misunderstood his earnest meaning, and
answered him wrathfully in many voices, the purport
of which was that their chariots would soon catch him
up and leave him ignominiously behind. He shook
his head at their lack of wisdom and gravely plodded
on. Rocket had been weakening under him for some


time, and now the heavy country was telling sorely
on the game animal. Soon he began to falter in his
stride and stumble without obvious cause.
“ Tain’t no good, old boss,” spoke Tanami; “ you’ve
done your dash an’ the rest is up to me.”
He climbed down from the saddle, and with barely
a halt proceeded on foot, the horse following after
him as a dog might have done. He made up his mind
to leave Rocket at the next soak, and go on alone.
He had still a hundred and fifty miles to negotiate.
He calculated roughly that he might accomplish this
in another five days. He mused philosophically, as
he laboriously plugged forward, on the vanity of
human effort. These motors behind, he reasoned,
could not possibly get through, and many of the
traps and buckboards that had so gaily started would
never reach the end of the journey. It did not occur
to him that his own plight was in any way to be
pitied. On the contrary he considered himself more
than fortunate.
“ Here’s me,” he gloated mildly, “ wi’ two darn
good legs that need exercise, an’ nary a thing to worry
about.”
He seemed oblivious of the rays of the scorching
sun, and he warded off besieging flies mechanically
and without thought. The heated sand soon made
its fiery influence felt through the thin soles of his
light boots, and he reminded himself reproachfully
that he had shown little sense in not having anticipated
this inevitable happening. He cheered up, however,


when he recollected that heavier footwear might
have impeded his progress, and in a little while he
forgot the trivial discomfort he endured. Mile after
mile he traversed, and his ruminations, after having
revolved around many subjects, fixed upon the fate
of the man he had accompanied all these years back
across the unknown wilderness.
“ A mighty good man was Jim Notley,” he reflected
sadly. “ An’ I would give my blessed hide to pick up
some trace o’ him. But I’ve tried. God knows I’ve
tried —an’—I’ll try again afore I get much older ”
Suddenly he stopped, and a surprised look came
into his face. A faint whirring sound was borne to
his ears from the dim distance whence he had come.
“ It’s one o’ them perishin’ jiggers,” he muttered,
“ an’ I would have bet my hat that it couldn’t be
done.”
For a moment he was tempted to get on Rocket’s
back once again. He realized that he had a reluctance
to be passed. The mood faded when the horse ap-
proached to his call.
“ I promised I’d walk, an’ I ain’t goin’ to go back
on it,” he said to himself sternly, and he doggedly
resumed his march.
The whirring noise increased. At intervals it swelled
into a roar, reminiscent of days when one watched
the sky with anxious interest for the man-made
vultures of death which hovered over the trenches.
Tanami looked into the heavens now, but not a
speck marred the azure dome above. Curiously he


waited. His eyes roved searchingly over the wide
sands and rested on a moving object ever so far away.
A faint cloud of yellow accompanied its advance.
“ Gripes!” he ejaculated, “ them shovellers are a
lively lot after all. No wonder they were sore wi’ me
for sayin’ they couldn’t do it!”
Almost at once he saw his surmise was false; the
approaching vehicle was making rapid headway, and
with no preceding aid. Nearer and nearer it loomed,
disclosing quickly that it was no ordinary motor that
was so easily conquering the wastes. It appeared to
leap forward in a series of swift gliding undulations,
devouring the sand in its passage and spuming it
behind, so that a wake like that created by a ship’s
propeller followed its advance. It had no bodywork
like an ordinary car; it was low set, and curving like
a shell, and all metallic and shiny. The heads of two
begoggled figures protruded from an alcove in the
centre of the machine.
This much Tanami Charlie took in.
“ It’s a tank!” he gasped. “ A blessed baby tank!
Spare m’ days, it’ll run over us in a blinkin’ minute.”
He leaned heavily against Rocket’s flank, in help-
less amazement, and that poor creature, so tired that
it was taking no interest in events, nearly fell down.
He was almost certain he heard someone laugh. The
roar of the engine had been suddenly subdued, and
the mechanical oddity was lurching to a stop. Tanami
looked at the two occupants severely, wondering
which of them had laughed. He could not distinguish


their features owing to their generous coating of dust,
but two pairs of youthful eyes looked out at him from
their protecting coverings.
“ It’s all right, boys,” he said pleasantly, “ don’t
be afraid o’ frightening the old hoss. He ain’t in the
mood to be interested. I reckon you’re goin’ to be
in first wi’ that snorter.”
The figure at the wheel spoke.
“ We’re not trying a race,” he said in a clear voice.
“ We’re on the way to Tanami to see a friend who is
sick. We left Darwin yesterday ”
“ Yesterday? Centipedes an’ caterpillars!”
The second occupant of the car immediately ap-
peared annoyed.
“ No sir!” he corrected. “ This is not a Centipedan
Caterpillar. This is the original Mastodon —Murray’s
Mastodon. The Centipedan, I’m quite certain, is only
a poor copy.”
The bushman’s face showed bewilderment; he
could not imagine how he had offended. The first
speaker meanwhile was nudging his companion vigor-
ously, so that the flow of eloquence ceased abruptly.
“ Bob here —that is my mate —is a bit rusty on
Caterpillars,” he explained, tapping the accelerator
impatiently with his foot. “ We only stopped because
we thought you needed help.”
“ Help! Me? The old hoss has ’bout shot his bolt,
but my machinery’s all right.”
The driver nodded, and pulled at the gear lever,
then a thought seemed to strike him.


“ Is there anything much worse ’n this ahead?” he
asked earnestly. “ You see, our friend may be very
ill, an* I want to get through to-night. I thought
everyone would know him in this country, but no-
body can tell me anything about him.”
“ The man who keeps the pub at Pine Creek said
he never heard of Mr. Henley,” added the individual
called Bob.
Tanami Charlie pondered for an instant.
“ Henley?” he muttered; “ Mr. Henley! Why,
darn it, that’s my go-to-meetin’ handle!”
The yell that followed staggered him, and both
inmates of the car started to climb out of their recessed
seats at opposite sides. The taller of the two tore off
his goggles. Tanami Charlie thought it was a wraith
that came to him with hand outstretched, a rejuvenated
wraith.
“ Jim!” he gasped, “ Jim Notley ”
“ His son,” answered the youth simply. Then the
scales fell from Tanami Charlie’s eyes, and Stuart
Notley’s hand was seized in a steel-like grip.
The Mastodon lay gently panting in its tracks.
Rocket with bowed head stood near, and Bob, after
his first cheery greeting, went over and stroked the
poor brute’s trembling nostrils. Stuart and his new-
found friend had much to talk about; they did not
seem to mind the glare of the sun upon their heads,
but Bob was hot—very hot —and mopped the per-
spiration from his brow continually. He was discover-
ing that his generous waist-line had disadvantages


unanticipated. He felt that he was slowly melting
like an over-heated candle. But at last a movement
was to be made. Tanami Charlie was approaching
him; Stuart had gone to look for a letter packed some-
where in the car.
A smile illuminated the bushman’s gaunt features
as he spoke:
“ That there —Caterpillar is a bosker, Bob. There
can’t be nothin’ to touch it in the world.”
Bob was delighted. Testimony such as this pleased
him mightily; Mr. Henley, he thought, was not such
a back number as he looked. He hesitated before he
asked the crucial question:
“ Do you think it could cross the Sahara, Mr.
Henley?”
Mr. Henley was puzzled. He had heard that name
before, but he could not recollect whether it was a
river or a mountain.
“ Sahara?” he repeated, “ Sahara! Would take it
in its stride, my lad. Never notice it. Fact is, I got
kind o’ bushed wi’ the Henley tag. Seemed as if ye
were speakin’ to somebody else. That blinkin’ ’bus
would just galumph over Sahara ”
“ Thanks—Charlie,” said Bob. “I’ll write an’
tell the pater. He’ll be awfully bucked!”
It was arranged that the Mastodon should proceed
as far as the next water-hole, and there await Charlie’s
arrival, for the bushman could not trust his horse to
follow in its spent condition; besides, he wanted to
do a bit of hard thinking. He had been given two


companions instead of the one expected, two young
men of forceful energy whose unspoken scheme w T as
just beginning to dawn on him. He had forgotten to
ask why they had imagined him to be seriously ill,
and Stuart had been so glad to see him actually in the
flesh, that the cause of the Mastodon’s flying journey
for the moment fled from that young man’s memory
also. But Bob had had time to size up the position.
He thought he saw something humorous in it, so
just before he swung into his seat he asked solicitously
regarding the health of the patient.
“ I s’pose,” he said, with one optic closed tightly,
“ it was Henley who was sick, an’ Charlie took him
out for a walk.”
“ Sick?” questioned Charlie. “ Dam it, young ’un,
I wanted to ask afore what ye meant ”
“ Your telegram mentioned fever,” added Stuart,
“ but I’m so awfully glad you’ve recovered.”
The rugged face of the unwitting culprit became
downcast.
“ An’ I was so very careful ’bout that wire,” he
muttered. “ Reckoned it was plain as a nigger’s face.
It weren’t malaria fever I meant, neither was it scarlet
fever, nor measles. It was gold-fever, an’ I ain’t
recovered yet. It’s got me pretty bad ”
The boys laughed uproariously. Stuart slipped in
the gears, and the uncouth car slowly gathered w r ay,
leaving behind a very crestfallen individual who still
failed to see the joke he had unconsciously perpetrated.
Left alone, he took from his belt the letter Stuart


had brought from his mother. He opened the envelope
with great care, then laboriously began to master the
contents. Mrs. Notley had taken pains to write large
and legibly, but the reader deciphered it with difficulty.
When the end came he straightened his shoulders and
looked unseeingly towards the far horizon.
“ Yes, Mrs. Jim,” he said slowly, “ I’ll look after
the boy.”
He repeated this sentence several times, then,
leading Rocket by the bridle, he strode after the
Mastodon.
That night, around the camp fire, he held earnest
converse with the boys. Never ready with his speech,
his halting sentences, simple in their brevity, failed to
impress on his youthful hearers the note of warning he
strove to sound. His own experiences, so modestly
related, became narratives of travel in which the
speaker played but insignificant part. The gaps he
left unbridged were many. He would not, even if he
could, make much of his own exploits. Only when he
told the story of Jim Notley’s first expedition did he
give any graphic description of dangers encountered
on the trail; in his zeal to do justice to his companion’s
memory he became suddenly possessed of a rugged
eloquence which thrilled the boys; yet they saw only
romance where he would have pictured the grimmest
of perils.
“ I didn’t calc’late them diamonds were any good,”
he concluded, addressing Stuart, “ but your Dad
reckoned diff’rent, an’ ’peared to think we’d make


fortunes out’n the creek —some day. He had two
biggish bits o’ the stuff, an’ he halved wi* me, though
I didn’t want the dam thing.”
“ And have you got it still?” Stuart asked breath-
lessly.
Tanami groped about in his tobacco-pouch, and
calmly displayed the treasure he despised.
“ I keep it for luck” he said, “ an’ goodness knows
why I didn’t heave the flamin’ thing away. Every time
I look at it I get the creeps ”
Stuart could keep his news back no longer.
“ I sold Dad’s diamond for a hundred and twenty
pounds,” he cried, “an’ the man asked me where I
got it. He wrote to Mother just before we came
away and said that the stone was like some others he
had got from Australia from the same place. Wait, I’ll
get the letter; Mother said to show it to you ”
He rose hurriedly and ran off to get his suitcase
from the car, leaving the man dazed with astonishment.
“ A hundred an’ twenty golden goblins; thirty
ounces o’ the best Australian for a perishin’ coloured
pebble! Jim Notley was right an’ I was the thickhead—
as usual. A hundred an’ twenty shinin’ jimmies!”
Bob, who was half dozing by the burning logs, turned
around sleepily. He was half expecting complications
to set in, and that Tanami would add diamond fever
to his list of diseases.
When Stuart returned into the firelight, the bushman
was abstractedly trying to light his pipe from a glowing
ember which he held over the bowl, sucking fiercely


but ineffectively the while. He desisted on the boy’s
appearance, for his inquiring finger had just proved
that a non-combustible substance was blocking his
efforts. He tapped the rough diamond out on his
palm with a grunt of disgust.
“ I’ve got the brains o’ a ’goanna,” he grumbled.
“ Can’t stand them suddent shocks.”
At his direction Stuart read aloud the communica-
tion received from the London diamond merchant.
In the beginning it referred to the purchase of Notley’s
diamond by one of his many agents, and then pro-
ceeded to comment on the fact that an odd lustre in
the stone identified it as probably coming from the
same quarter as a parcel received some time before
from an Australian source. “ If you are in touch with
the owner of this property,” the letter concluded, “ I
shall be glad if you will let me have his address, which
he neglected to leave at my office when he called.”
The bushman got up hastily, and retreated into the
darkness, mumbling strange sounds. The boy, startled,
was about to go after him to inquire the cause of his
odd behaviour, but he heard Charlie’s voice addressing
someone out in the night. Evidently, Stuart reasoned,
some unwelcome visitor had reached the camp, though
he had heard no one arrive. Another kind of explana-
tion, however, was soon forthcoming. Charlie came back
and sat down on the log he had vacated as if no inter-
ruption had taken place.
“ What did Mrs. Jim say?” he demanded suddenly,
without looking up.


“ She said that she thought that diamonds were
all alike, but that you would know ”
“ And what d’you think of it, Stuart?” Charlie’s
voice sounded quite stem.
“ I don’t know what to think,” the boy said with
hesitation. “ It looks as if someone else has found the
place.”
The bushman again rose up, but reseated himself
with an obvious effort.
“ What I thought, my lad, I said—outside, for I
promised Mrs. Jim that you wouldn’t hear cuss words
from me —an’ I ain’t a liar. That —perishin’ Dago
must ha’ saved his own hide someway an’ got clear.
’Tain’t likely he’d ever try to go back, or the crows
would be pickin’ his bones by now. Such miserable
swine follow like dingoes, but they ain’t got the heart
to do a man’s job.”
He relapsed into moody silence. Stuart came to
him, and touched his shoulder almost timidly.
“ I know the position of the creek,” he said in a low
voice, “ an’ I’ve got Dad’s sextant. I’ve come to find
out what happened to him. Boy or no boy, I’m goin’
to do it ”
The man gazing into the fire stirred uneasily. He
was thinking now of the boy’s mother, and of her trust
in him.
“ I ain’t afraid of the trail, lad,” he broke out; “ I
ain’t afraid of anything on God’s earth—though, if the
blacks get us, what would your mother think o’ me?
But I’m goin’, lad. It’ll be Tanami Charlie’s last trail,


I reckon. Mebbe it’ll come all right in the end.”
Bob had been having a nap, and in a short period a
wonderful panoramic vision had appeared to his sub-
conscious mind. He saw hordes of blacks in hot pursuit
of a hundred and twenty golden goblins who were
scurrying about in all directions, making frantic efforts
to escape. But one of the pursued lagged behind. He
was a very rotund little figure, and drops of gilt were
oozing from his shiny body as he ran. The foremost
savage poised his spear and —Bob awoke with a shudder,
calling out for the Mastodon to come to the rescue.
Tanami took up the word. “ Gripes! you’re right,
Bob,” he said; “ that there caterpillar should make a
lot o’ difference if it can carry the stores. Thought you
was asleep, young feller ?”
“ ’Twas only a rumour, Charlie,” the youth replied,
“ an’ not strictly ’cording to fact. I was just thinking
o’ those hundred and twenty golden goblins.”


CHAPTER IV
The Rush at Angel Gully
Angel Gully was the name of an ancient water-
course that tore across the gravelly plains some twenty
miles or so to the east of the comparatively recently
established township of Tanami. At first much was
expected of the Tanami district; it had nearly all the
elements that go towards the making of a successful
gold-field; it was remote, accessible practically only
from one direction—and even then with the greatest
difficulty—and of natural advantages there were none.
In most cases such deterrent features are welcomed by
those who follow the gold lure. There is a proverb
much in use nowadays which says that “ distant hills
are always greenest In this particular quarter the
prevailing hue is not green at all, but then there are
occasions when one becomes curiously colour-blind.
The fact stands out that Nature’s riches are, oftener
than not, set in distant places, and man responds
with strange fervour to the romantic appeal of the
unknown.
But this northern comer of the Australian continent
had not yet fulfilled its promise. Despite not infre-
(l> 694) 81 (,


82 Mystery of Diamond Creek
quent “ rushes ” and sundry minor excitements, it
remained a pioneers’ field, where hardy men still toiled
for a minimum of return, buoyed up always by the
sure conviction that, sooner or later, the place would
boom and become a second Kalgoorlie.
Angel Gully was but a slight gash in the burnt
plateau on the edge of the 11 Never Never . Its title
was bestowed by a forgotten explorer, in some mad
freak of fancy, and it was marked on the map before
any habitation existed within hundreds of miles. There
was certainly nothing angelic about it. Not even a
colour of gold had been found in the vicinity, and
water had not been known to flow in the channel within
the memory of man. Yet this was to be the scene of
the new rush, for it is the unexpected that often happens,
and the unexpected has a glamour that is denied to
merely reasonable occurrences.
On the day when the first definite news of the “ find ”
had been mysteriously spread abroad, two men were
encamped in the bed of Angel Gully. The ridge of
their tent just showed level with the banks of the
creek, and could not be seen even a short distance away.
They had built for themselves a windbreak of branches,
such as wandering aborigines use when on their
nomadic travels, and this sheltered them from the
afternoon sun, and also obscured the white calico tent
from view should anyone approach from the west,
which was the only direction from which white men,
at any rate, could be expected to come.
A blackfellows’ smoke, which means the tiniest fire


that can possibly be kept alight, was smouldering
near at hand, surrounded by the simple cooking
utensils invariably used by prospectors. A horse in
“ hobbles ” limped slowly away from the camp along
the channel. The imprint of a saddle was fresh on its
back, and a salty crust was beginning to form on its
flanks where foam had recently been.
At the moment the owners of the camp were nowhere
to be seen, as if they too were shunning the prying
eyes of possible observers. Their voices, however,
could be heard within the tent, whence also came an
occasional thud, as of a pick-axe at work. Soon the
flap of the calico enclosure was thrust aside, and a man
emerged evidently in high spirits. He was a sallow-
faced individual with dark furtive eyes, and a slightly
crooked mouth. He was clean-shaven, slim of build,
and dressed in exaggerated mining garb. This personage
was known as “ Slim Smith ” to the community of the
settlement a score of miles away. The appellation was
not intended as a reflection on his moral outlook, though
it is true most of his acquaintances suspected that it
would fit him “ both ways ”. He had blown in to the
district two years or so ago, and after some delay had
set himself up as a “ Mining Financier ”, but he had
never been known to finance anyone. Now his unpre-
possessing features were wreathed in smiles, and he
clasped and unclasped his hands exultingly.
“ Come along, Bradley,” he called out. “ I want a
drink of tea before I start back. My throat is like a
sponge.”


“ You didn’t do any worryin’ ’bout my throat,”
came back the sulky growl. “ I could swallow a gallon
o’ the best, an’ ye bring me —water! Does ye think I m
a frog?”
There came the clang of a shovel being thrown on
the ground and the man addressed as Bradley appeared,
still furiously lamenting his arid state. He looked the
typical miner gone wrong through drink. His watery
eyes and fiery nose proclaimed his weakness.
“You can drown yourself in the stuff if you like
when we get this job through, said Slim Smith
airily, “ but until then, Bradley, old man, it’s the water
wagon for you. Another week should do it, and you’ve
got to be able to explain the mine to the —visitors, when
they roll up.”
“ Another week!” moaned Bradley. “ Ain’t ye
registered the gory claim yet?”
Slim Smith smiled craftily.
“ Regulations allow seven clear days after pegging,
and who’s to tell when the posts went in? I want to
give the folks —outside —a chance to get along. It s
the greenhorns who’ve got the money, I tell you.
We’d never get anything from them hard-boiled
citizens in Tanami.” He stopped and laughed out-
right before continuing: “ I’ve got them going some,
Bradley; they’re digging up the country—to the west!”
“ They might find something there,” said Bradley.
“ When I was out Mount Cornish way I saw some
likely looking ”
“ Forget it!” snapped the other, with sudden irri-


tation. “ You’ve never heard of a big strike being made
where the mob thought it was. Angel Gully is the
place that will tickle ’em to death.”
Bradley put the billy on to boil without another
word. His thoughts were exactly a week and a day
ahead. He was a miner—sometimes; but a financier—
never. Only one matter —outside his perennial craving
—now troubled him, and this he brought up while
Slim Smith was gulping down the tea prepared for
him.
“ ’Cordin’ to agreement, boss, when the mine
bottomed on good gold, you was to hand out the
boodle. Twenty ounces an’ twelve grains o’ the best
at four pounds two shillin’s—that makes eighty-five
jimmies ”
“ No, it doesn’t,” interrupted the tea drinker
crossly, “ but I’ve brought the money with me ”
He drew from his hip pocket a roll of notes and
counted them one by one into the grimy hand of the
miner.
“ That’s sixteen fives and two singles, and ” —as
the expectant fist still waited—“ half a dollar.”
The coin he abstracted from another pocket and
thrust it on top of the pile of paper.
“ I’ll lose a mighty sight more than that odd half-
dollar when I sell the stuff,” he grumbled.
Bradley became unexpectedly sympathetic. “ I
reckon you will,” he admitted, but he put the florin
in his own pocket nevertheless.
Slim Smith left the camp just an hour before sun-


down. He did not wish to reach the township until
well after dark. Before riding off he gave his partner
a final warning.
“ If the Rush comes ahead o’ my reckoning and I
don’t get a chance of giving you the tip, show the
mine to nobody until I stroll along. Remember you
promised me first offer”
The miner went back to the tent. He had to climb
over a considerable heap of debris immediately he
entered, and then he found himself ga2ing into a neat
rectangular pit about five feet in depth, and just wide
enough to allow an ordinary-sized man to descend
with freedom. He lit a candle and held it at arm’s
length down into the excavation. The sides seemed to
be composed of crumbly yellow sand, but they were
evidently more stable than they looked, since they held
their geometrical shape so accurately. At the bottom
there was a glimmer of metal twinkling irregularly
from end to end. He appeared satisfied with what he
saw; then snuffing the candle he turned his attention
to the mound of “ mullock ” around him. He took up
a handful and blew at it softly. It disintegrated in a
find cloud of dust and sand, but there remained on
his open palm a tiny glittering particle.
“ A mighty fine show,” he muttered. “ I reckon
a glutton couldn’t want no more.”
The days passed. The mysterious mine was on
everyone’s lips. The township overflowed with eager
visitors drawn from many sources; each hour saw its
quota come, and the contingent from Pine Creek, a


hundred strong, was momentarily expected. At the
end of a week the country for miles around seethed
like a gigantic beehive. Then only was the clue that
the multitudes sought belatedly given.
It was conveyed on an “ application for registration ”
document posted among others on the notice board out-
side the Warden’s office, and the scrawl at the foot was
the authentic signature of Bill Bradley. Bill Bradley!
The crowd roared its delight, for locally Bill was as
well known as the post office. No one had ever sus-
pected him in connexion with the all-important
“ discovery ”, and, understanding his proclivities, a
reason was at once advanced to account for the long
delay in registration. Bill, having “ struck ile ”, had
been manfully resisting the allurements of the settle-
ment. How was he to know that the whole country-
side was in a state of uproar because of a bibulous
rumour?
But, Angel Gully! That was a still more staggering
surprise. Who would have thought of it?
But now that they did think of it, what a tremendous
vista of possibilities was opened out. Angel Gully
had been considered beyond the edge of hope, and
many of the old hands lamented loudly that they had
not recognized its hidden value long before this.
“ Tanami Charlie said there was nothin* there,”
complained one.
“ Ole Charlie oughter had his bumps read,” pro-
claimed another.
But a third preferred to await developments before


criticizing the shortcomings of the absent pioneer.
“ I ain’t cussin’ Charlie for labelling the blanky
place,” he said, “ but I does hope that Beery Bill
ain’t just been seein’ things that ain’t.”
The various opinions of the throng were expressed
tersely—and hurriedly, for each man was concerned
mainly with the thought of how he was to reach
Angel Gully before his neighbour. Within ten minutes
the street was deserted except for a few loungers in
the vicinity of the hotel, whose interest was restricted
on account of the size of their thirst. But they were
not devoid of enthusiasm, for they had quickly devised
a simple means of sustaining excitement, and were
wagering with solemn wisdom on the probable winner
or winners in the mad stampede of their fellows.
Along the quiet thoroughfare a horseman rode at
an easy pace. He seemed surprised at the absence of
the townspeople, and drew up at the hotel to inquire
the cause. The loungers aforesaid quickly enlightened
him.
“ You must have been asleep pretty sound not to
ha’ heard the racket,” one of them said.
“ I was bettin’ on you, Slim Smith,” came an
alcoholic voice from within, “ but now there’s nothin’
doing. You’re scratch, and ain’t got no chance.”
The rider gave a short laugh of contempt.
“ I buy mines. I don’t want to find them. But
Angel Gully? Huh! I don’t like it. Still, if Bill Bradley
has found something really good I may have a look
at it.”


He continued his unhurried progress, idly switching
the flies from his horse’s ears with a light twig he
carried. Happening to glance over his shoulder when
clear of the township, he saw in the northward dis-
tance a great cloud of dust approaching.
“ The Pine Creek bunch, at last,” he chuckled.
“ I’ll just make it in good time.”
Obeying the spur, his horse broke into a hard
canter.
Meanwhile Bill Bradley, his body resting on the
sloping sandy bank of Angel Gully, and only the
head protruding, was scanning the landscape anxiously.
He had been in the same position for over an hour,
and as the minutes passed he grew more and more
fretful.
“ He told me yesterday that the circus was sartin
to be here ’bout midday,” he muttered. “ I ain’t
goin’ to wait much longer for the blinkin’ fools. Mebbe
they won’t come arter all!”
Of a sudden a huge joke thrust itself into his fancy.
He considered it with relish, and a wide grin settled
over his features.
“ An’ why shouldn’t I?” he demanded of himself
in righteous tones. “ The mine’s mine, ain’t it?
Smith ain’t treated me fair—not as he knows of
anyways—leavin’ me here to perish like a Wanky
crow. Serve him right if I does go away —an’ carry
the bloomin’ bonanza wi’ me. Ho! Ho! ”
His amusement crackled back in his throat and
interest in his vigil revived with a vengeance. He had


dimly imagined the possibility of a dozen men, or may-
be a score, arriving to peg out claims along the gully,
and worry him with questions; but what he saw was
a wild army approaching at the charge. There being
no track to follow, the advance guard spread over a
wide front. Buckboards, sulkies, bicycles, and motors
swam into his view, following hard on the heels of
galloping horsemen who ran a neck and neck race.
Bill’s range of vision was restricted. The horde
already was almost upon him.
“ Jumpin’ kangaroos!” he exclaimed. “ The whole
perishin’ world is cornin’!”
He slithered hastily back into the bed of the creek,
and ran to the tent, scarcely disappearing therein
before a bunch of horsemen burst over the bank he
had just vacated. They saw the half-concealed tent,
and leapt from their saddles, each man with an axe
gleaming in his hand. From within the calico enclosure
the rythmic thud of a pick was heard. Those who
stood without tore aside the flap, crowded over the
earthy heap barring their passage, and gazed with
fierce eyes at the man who nonchalantly worked in
the depths.
“ Reef or ’luvial?” they roared.
Bill Bradley took his pipe from his mouth, and
slowly replied:
“ Dunno, mates; but it’s all the same up or down
the gory creek ”
He was alone before he had time to finish.
But not for long was he left in peace. The bulk of


the “ rush ” had hit the creek about a hundred yards
to the south of his camp. An uprearing boulder on
the farther bank had been the attraction; it might
have been the cap of a reef. But it wasn’t; and the
disappointed searchers swarmed towards the tent,
which was now visible to them. They pushed and
jostled their way over Bradley’s cherished dump,
upsetting that individual’s equanimity considerably,
for he was in danger of being overwhelmed by the
debris which showered into his excavation.
“ Keep your blanky feet off ’n my dirt,” he yelled
at last, in desperation. “ I ain’t no sign-post!”
They had no time to quarrel with him, so they fled,
obeying his surly parting injunction to “ mop up the
perishin’ creek ”. And they mopped it up to some
purpose, rushing hither and thither, cutting posts
from the scraggy timber, and driving them into the
sand wherever a vacant patch offered. Yet others
came, a ceaseless stream of them, and quickly a full
mile of Angel Gully was marked and placarded with
formal notices intimating to “ those whom it might
concern ” that a certain area had been duly pegged
by the optimistic individual whose name appeared at
the bottom of the sheet.
Bill Bradley pursued his labours with steady zeal,
unearthing now and then a gleaming piece of heavy
metal when his changing audiences were watchful,
and returning it to the depths when favourable op-
portunity offered. His efforts added nothing to the
size of the heap on top, but none remained long


enough to notice this strange feature. All went their
way, marvelling, and the fame of Bradley’s Bonanza
leapt from mouth to mouth until it reached the farthest
end of the line. Bill, however, was becoming perturbed.
Numbers of those who had duly safeguarded their
holdings according to the law’s requirements had
returned to the centre of attraction, and many pressing
requests were being made to see the bottom of the
“ hole ” which he had dug.
“ Can’t be did, mates,” he said in answer to them
all. “By the look o’ what I’m standin’ on I reckon
it’s too val’able to monkey wi’ just because some
folks are curious’r than others. It’s safer wi’ me
standin’ on it.”
But they clamoured so threateningly that he allowed
them one by one to peep below as he held the candle,
and while full advantage was being taken of this
privilege, Slim Smith elbowed his way through the
throng, his lean face streaked with perspiration.
“ What’s this they tell me you’ve got, Bradley?”
he asked breathlessly. “Is it a real bonanza or just
an ordinary duffer. Let’s have a 100k —” and, as the
man hesitated —“ I’m a buyer if the goods are right,
and the figure right.”
The miner extracted himself from the shaft with
alacrity.
“ If you’re a dinkum buyer, that alters the posish.
I ain’t just too anxious to bust my flamin’ carcass wi’
hard work.”
The bystanders laughed. Bill Bradley’s reputation


as a loafer was pretty widely known. Slim Smith was
likely to get a soft snap —if no one else appeared
willing to offer better terms.
The self-styled financier lost no time in lowering
himself into the shallow working, where he peered
about with the air of one who knew his business
thoroughly. From the surface downwards he examined
the enclosing walls, dabbing at them here and there
with hawk-like action and bringing away in his
fingers sundry sands that often as not contained
some grains that gleamed. He nodded his head know-
ingly and expressed the judicial opinion that there
was “no reef about it anyway ”. This fact, already
obvious to all who could distinguish between a mine
and a wheelbarrow, aroused no comment. He con-
tinued his explorations farther, evidently determined
to express no encouraging criticism, though the be-
holders thought they saw enough to warrant the
enthusiasm of the Bank of England. Meanwhile
Bradley pulled at his pipe in peaceful unconcern.
The investigator’s survey at length was directed to the
lower depths. His whole body was crouched below
the surface. The eager watchers drew nearer until
as many heads as could fit in clustered over the
cavity. No one spoke: the “ bottom ” was now
under observation, and here, if the find was an alluvial
“ wash ”, as most considered likely, the richest treasure
should lie.
There came a muttered exclamation from the grop-
ing figure, then a peremptory call for another candle,


which was speedily forthcoming. The extra illumina-
tion dispelled the lingering shadows, and the dozen
pairs of eyes that viewed from above saw a sight the
like of which they had never before witnessed. The
base of the pit—that part of it which was visible over
Slim Smith’s shoulder —was literally studded with
refulgent points and patches; and when the man
turned to show the light elsewhere, the lambent hue
of gold accompanied the candle in its progress.
A hushed “ Ah-h-h ! ” broke from the lips of
the onlookers.
Slim Smith straightened himself, and held out for
inspection a nugget big as a large-sized marble.
“ It’s a wash, all right,” he said carelessly, “ and
promising—not too bad. I’ll chance a thousand for
it, Bradley!”
A thousand! By the look of things, that much
appeared in sight. The crowd laughed derisively and
expressed its opinion of the timid would-be purchaser
in various mutterings of an uncomplimentary nature.
“ Give old Beer Barrel a fair deal,” someone called
out.
The individual so designated glared around, looking
for the speaker who had applied the opprobrious
title, but failing to locate him, he contented himself
with merely shaking his head at the offer made.
“ Not enough, eh?” Slim Smith snapped, with
every appearance of being very angry indeed. “ Well,
see if any of this interferin’ bunch will do better.”
Bradley took refuge in silence. He was not quite


sure of what was expected of him. His mind was in
a whirl, for he was just beginning to realize that Slim
Smith’s scheme was not so foolish after all. His sym-
pathizers besieged him offering clamorous advice,
which was all they had to give, and in the confusion his
wily partner in the deal casually strolled away as if the
matter concerned him no longer.
The proud pioneer of Bradley’s Bonanza became
disturbed, and listened only half-heartedly to the
counsel of his multitudinous new friends.
“ A thousand?” they echoed, contempt in their
voices. “ A thousand for a show like this!”
He would have given a hundred such mines for such
a sum, and in his abstraction he nearly said so. One
expert calculator loudly gave it as his opinion that
fifty ounces would be a modest estimate of the gold
already showing.
“ No more’n twenty, mate,” volunteered Bradley
absently, with a virtuous eye to accuracy —“ Least-
ways,” he corrected hurriedly, “ I mean there ain’t
no more’n thirty or ”
His agitation passed unnoticed, for a fresh turmoil
outside caused the tent to be emptied in a trice. It
seemed to Bill Bradley that the rush had started all
over again, judging by the noise being made. He
was right in a sense, for the Pine Creek contingent was
approaching, yet the hubbub was created by the earlier
arrivals who had already annexed the Gully as their
own. They were yelling out in wonder at something
that they saw, and in the midst of the disturbance


let loose, Slim Smith suddenly reappeared in the tent.
“ The boobs with the coin are coming,” he an-
nounced to his now rather glum confederate in a
hoarse whisper. “ There isn’t a yard o’ the creek left,
and they’ll all be here in a shake. There’s a motor as
big as a church ”
A storm of huzzahs from without drowned further
conversation. The door of the tent had long since been
tom to fragments, so that Bradley had a view of the
creek and that part of the swaying throng directly before
him.
As he looked, the heterogeneous assembly divided
hurriedly. A monstrous moving shape had appeared
on the opposite bank, black with the forms of men who
clustered on its rounded back. For a moment it re-
mained, balancing on the edge, then down it swooped
into the sand below, and brought up at the tent, where
its human freight disembarked with lightning rapidity,
and scattered up and down the gully in vain search.
There remained, however, in the strange vehicle
two youthful figures who seemed in no hurry to follow
the others; one of them was adjusting the lever con-
trolling the air inlet under the steering wheel, but his
companion was taking a lively interest in the general
surroundings and communicating his excited impres-
sions to his absorbed associate with barely a halt for
breath.
Bill Bradley eyed the apparition at his doorway
with profound concern. Motors he had seen of a
popular and inelegant variety that could make pro-


testing headway even along a bush track, but never
had he heard of such an awesome contrivance as this,
which could deliberately roll into a gully over a high
bank yet suffer no injury.
“ Say, mates,” he began, “ what does ye call this
cavortin’, buckjumpin’ kangarooster ?”
From the voluble one of the pair addressed, a reply
shot back like the rebound of a spring.
“ This, sir, is Murray’s Mastodon, model A, the
only caterpillar in the world capable of undertaking the
gigantic task of crossing the Australian interior. You
will notice that the radiator is quite cool, and that the
differential is in a similar satisfactory condition, also
that the auxiliary ”
But Bill Bradley was already vanquished.
“ Gee!” he murmured, in deep admiration, “an’
I never knew. Gee!”
Vainly endeavouring to assimilate a small portion
of the information received, he retreated as he had come.
When he looked down the shaft in which his treasure
lay, he again ejaculated: “ Gee!”
But, of course, he may have been thinking of some-
thing else by that time.
So did Murray’s Mastodon arrive at Angel Gully.
But, meanwhile, what of Tanami Charlie? He had
been perched on the Mastodon’s back, immediately
behind Stuart and Bob, all the way from the mining
settlement. Others had availed themselves of the
boys’ hearty invitation to “ jump on ”, but Tanami
had not budged an inch from the position where he
( D 694 ) 7


had been established. The sinuous roll of the Masto-
don had more terrors for him than the “ pig jumps ”
and “ roots ”of any bucking horse. True, the surface
to which he clung was not upheaving convulsively and
threatening his constant dislodgement, rather it seemed
that his place of refuge was ever gliding from beneath
him, employing peaceful yet persuasive efforts to bring
about his downfall. He had indeed been in a continual
state of surprise since he joined the crew of the cater-
pillar, for he had expected every instant to be gently
but ignominiously deposited in the sand, and though
this contingency never did occur, his wonder grew the
more at safety so miraculously achieved.
If Tanami’s zest for the gold chase had not suffered
complete revulsion, his meeting with the boys had
most assuredly caused a palliation of the disease from
which he professed to suffer. The old trail had called
again. The mystery surrounding his lost companion’s
fate had deepened. Somewhere in the unknown wastes
a grim secret was held which cried to him for revela-
tion. Then there were the diamonds! He tried to
consider this aspect of the question in an enthusiastic
light, yet he could only regard it impersonally. He
could not bring himself to believe that unattractive
little tinted stones could possibly have value equal to,
or greater than that of gold. They contained no allure
for him simply because he did not understand; yet
at the same time he did not despise their marvellous
possibilities. It was sentiment that controlled him,
though he was unaware that the promptings of his


heart in any way directed his thoughts. The bushman’s
code was indeed so clear in its simplicity that it was
apt to appear profound to those who saw with only
worldly eyes.
Having reached his decision, Tanami was no longer
anxious to lead the rush! Now that he gave the matter
a little unbiased thought he could see quite plainly
that the prize he sought had been thrown open to too
many competitors, and for the first time there came
to him the glimmering of a suspicion. No honest miner
would hold a secret in suspense that could so affect
his mates and cause such widespread agitation and
striving among far-off multitudes.
So Tanami and the boys remained by the well where
they had camped for a full day, making their plans for
their expedition, and considering every possible con-
tingency that might have to be faced. Whilst they
waited, the anxious train of humanity which had been
behind, caught up and passed, last of all being the
motorists who now plodded wearily along on foot. It
was Stuart’s suggestion to take these men on the
Mastodon’s sturdy back, so that after all, those who
were hopelessly behind arrived at their journey’s end
abreast of the others.
Now Tanami had disappeared with them, and so the
boys were left alone. Yet barely five minutes elapsed
before their missing companion returned. He looked
rather sheepish as he approached.
“ Couldn’t help havin’ a look,” he explained, “ but
there ain’t nothin’ in the darn creek but sand as I can


see. Never was nothin’ but sand and snakes in Angel
Gully ”
A disappointed medley of men came surging up,
having realized the impossibility of finding a comer
to call their own throughout the whole length of the
gully. By this time Bill Bradley’s tent was again crowded
to overflowing.
Stuart and Bob both thought they would like to have
a look at the fabulous wealth laid bare so close at hand.
A few moments earlier they might have had ample
opportunity, but they had not dreamt of a mine being
within a tent, and the crowds who could have given
the information had temporarily vanished with the
new-comers to sympathize with their hard luck, or
gloat over their misfortune according to the spirit that
moved them. Bradley’s tent, however, quickly regained
its popularity as a centre of attraction for all and
sundry, and when it began to be whispered about that
the inconsequent owner of the ground showing such
fascinating riches was willing to sell his property at
a reasonable figure, excitement grew more and more
intense.
Meanwhile Tanami gazed languidly on the feverish
scene, concealing an intense curiosity under an air of
supreme indifference. Thus did he endeavour to prove
to his young companions that he had reached immunity
from all gilded temptations.
Inside the tent Bill Bradley stood in the shaft he
had dug, but this time his purpose in being there was
mainly to guard the riches under foot from being picked


at indiscriminately by the many who wished to inspect
the cavity.
“ Tain’t that I don’t trust you, mates,” he kept
calling out, “ but I reckon I’ll stay where I is, unless —
unless some o’ you figure on buyin’ the show.”
On the outskirts of the throng many clamouring
voices were raised at once, among them being Slim
Smith’s high-pitched tones which sounded like a snarl
oft repeated.
“ I’ve offered a thousand if ye like to take it!”
A thousand? Yes, there were several in the audience
who would give more than that sum, and one shrewd
individual was already noisily arranging a syndicate
that could swamp any additional price quoted. At this
point the tent strained from its insecure fastenings and
descended upon those of the boisterous assembly who
were within its shade. In a moment the calico was torn
to shreds, and Angel Gully Discovery Shaft was laid
bare to the heavens. Bill scrambled from his earthy
refuge muttering dire threats, whereat the crowd
laughed uproariously and receded a little way. For-
ward then jostled the would-be purchasers, mainly
strangers to the district.
“ Let me have a look!’
“ An’ me!”
“ An’ me!”
The miner waved to the syndicate promoter. He
had heard various sums being booked by this man, and,
with natural cunning, knew that out of many pockets
the greatest store must come.


“ You first, Rothschild,” said he, “ an’ hurry up, for
the other galoots are waitin’.”
Again was the marvellous golden sight revealed, and
again a murmur of awe broke from the spectators a?
nugget after nugget was handed up from below, picked
haphazard by one whom they all knew had never before
been within hundreds of miles of the gully.
The boys from their elevated perch watched the
proceedings with intense wonder, and when a sample
was being handed round for inspection, a man near by,
noticing their interest, gave the bit of gleaming metal
to Stuart, from whom it was quickly grabbed by Bob,
and as quickly again seized by someone else. In its
quick passage from the boy’s hands, Tanami’s listless
eyes caught the sheen of the specimen, and at once his
attention became surprisingly alert.
The penetrating voice of Slim Smith was now heard.
He had mounted the dump and was addressing the
eager circle of men around the shaft in the manner of
an auctioneer.
“ Bradley’s Bonanza is on offer,” he intoned. “ My
figure was given at a thousand, and there it sticks ”
“Two thousand!” barked a well-known publican
from the coast.
“ Five hundred more!” The speaker was a pros-
perous storekeeper from a distant township.
The head of the hastily gathered syndicate became
anxious.
“ I’ll double the lot!” he interjected hurriedly. “ But
there’s a condition—l’m buyin’ for a Company, an’ I


want some o’ my crowd to have a look, same as me ”
“ You don’t trust your own judgment; you w r ant an
extra report?” Slim Smith sneered. “ Well, call your
man. I’m doing this job for Bill Bradley, though he’s
turned me down. I don’t suppose he’ll even give me
a commission?”
“ Nothin’ doin’,” grunted Bill solemnly. “ You
horned into this push ’thout being asked.”
Slim Smith smiled crookedly and stepped down from
his elevation.
But his absence was not felt. The ball had been
started; it would roll along merrily without further
aid.
The Syndicate became variously alarmed. Other
offers were being whispered; unless the deal was closed
at once the opportunity might quickly be gone. They
volunteered en masse to inspect, and then started to
wrangle among themselves for selection. Finally one
of them caught sight of Tanami Charlie in the back-
ground, and at once he raised the cry:
“ What about Tanami Charlie? He oughter know
gold when he sees it!”
The name w r as caught up with enthusiasm, and a
would-be wag shouted out:
“ Come on, Tanami; ye once said that gold would
never be found in Angel Gully, and now you’ll need
blinkers to keep the yellow dazzle outen your eyes.”
Tanami Charlie heard unmoved his name repeated
again and again. It did not seem as if he wished to
inspect Bradley’s Bonanza, but the foolish taunt last


spoken obviously ruffled his even temper. He started
forward through the human lane that opened before
him, and without a word to anyone descended into the
shaft. His glance below must have been of the hastiest
nature, for he was back on the surface almost im-
mediately with an irregularly shaped nugget in his
hand, which he proceeded to examine with minute
care.
“ I reckon you’ll know that chunk o’ metal next time
you see it,” Bill Bradley commented.
Tanami looked at the speaker, and smiled oddly.
For a moment the miner appeared to be disconcerted
by the bushman’s steady gaze, then he broke out;
“ It’s good gold, isn’t it, darn ye?”
“ It ain’t for me to complain about the gold, if the
bank gives it an Ai ticket,” Tanami said slowly, “ but
the boys want to know about the mine it comes from,
an’ you can tell ’em that better’n me ”
Slim Smith, vastly annoyed, edged his way forward.
“ Quit hedgin’!” he sneered. “ Can’t you say the
mine’s all right an’ be done with it?”
It was a new Tanami that answered him in a voice
that was dangerously calm:
“ You blisterin’ little Dago! Because a beer-swilling
fool goes wrong ’tain’t any reason why I should save
the hides o’ such as you. There’s not a dam one o’
you deserve savin’ anyway ”
“ But the mine? What about the mine?” the or-
ganizer of the Syndicate cried.
“ The mine? There ain’t no mine!”


“ But the gold is there. We seed it ourselves.”
Tanami Charlie looked around and saw Bill Bradley
making a hurried but unobtrusive bee-line for Slim
Smith’s horse, which stood saddled a short way down
the gully.
“ Years ago, mates,” he said, “ I prospected this
here creek and found nothin’. There ain’t any more
now. The gold in Bill Bradley’s shaft don’t belong
hereabout. I reckon it’s Croydon gold, an’ it ain’t
worth more than two pounds odd an ounce ”
“ What!” The shriek came from Slim Smith; and
just then the absence of Bradley was noticed. In the
excitement he had managed to slip away unseen by
all excepting Tanami. Now he was riding as if for
dear life across the plains.
There was no mistaking this time the genuine
nature of Slim Smith’s rage; in a lesser degree it
was shared by all around for a few boisterous minutes
before the humour of the situation began to make its
appeal. It was he who complained most loudly, that
proved beyond all doubt the truth of Tanami’s sur-
mise, for he went into the shaft himself, and scraped
and dug among the residue until he had collected
quite a goodly quantity of the dark yellow nuggets
which had comprised Bradley’s Bonanza. These he
loaded into his pockets, with a scowl at those who
would have protested.
“ He’ll get his gold when I get back my horse,”
he stormed. After all, his argument was reasonable,
and the crowd let him have his way. There was


certainly nothing left at the bottom of the hole to
entice anyone, when he had finished. Then someone
remembered that Bill Bradley had been known to
possess a number of nuggets when he first arrived in
the district. Like many other miners he carried his
available resources around in this way. Gold in most
districts of Australia has a high standard of value,
yet in the quarter where Bill’s treasure had been
originally mined, the metal is alloyed with iron to
such an extent that its worth is very much depreciated.
Yet this impure gold would deceive all but the expert
eye, for it has a rich lustrous sheen which enhances
rather than detracts from its appearance.
The whole country had been hoaxed, and in a man-
ner so subtle that the purpose of the hoax would have
been achieved but for the flaw which Tanami had
immediately noted. Still, within five minutes after
the hurried departure of the man they considered
the sole villain, the crowd of nearly two hundred men
laughed and joked at the circumstance, and made
merry at the explosive indignation of Slim Smith,
who alone seemed to cherish a bitter resentment for
no sufficient understandable reason.
Stuart and Bob watching the proceedings had had
little idea of their gravity. It was only when they
noticed Tanami’s anger flame out at Slim Smith,
that they wondered if their taciturn companion was
really as peaceful in temperament as he looked. Bob
commented upon this incident with much satis-
faction.


“ He doesn’t like that man, that’s sure enough,”
he said.
“ Neither do I!” returned Stuart. “He looks—
treacherous, and I think he’s a foreigner too.”
After that their impressions became mixed. They
could not understand what all the trouble was about.
A hole in the ground was the subject of much con-
tention, yet it wasn’t a very big hole, and there was
lots of room to make more if that one didn’t please.
This was Bob’s reasoning. In the innocence of his
heart he could not grasp the force of Tanami’s cool
indictment. But soon the angry shouts which arose
made it apparent that the trouble was not to be so
easily remedied.
“ I hate gold!” Stuart burst out suddenly. “It
always seems to cause rows. I wish Tanami would
come back.”
He had not been in his usual spirits since arriving at
Angel Gully. Truth to tell, he was worrying about the
Mastodon: the last tw r enty miles negotiated had been
more difficult than anything previously experienced.
Of course, the extra load had made a difference;
but when the large water-tank was filled, and exten-
sive petrol stores taken on, the weight on the travelling
tracks would be equally considerable. Then there
were the foodstuffs and general equipment to consider.
Further than all this, he had gathered from Tanami
that the eastward course beyond Angel Gully led
through a tract of country so arid and drear that
even camels might founder in the wastes.


Stuart’s brain grappled with the problems that
presented themselves. Tanami’s unbounded faith
in the “ mechanical camel ” and Bob’s glowing en-
thusiasm on the same subject left many things out
of account. Assuming that the sinking sand at its
worst might not be impassable, it would at times
doubtless slow the Mastodon’s pace to a mere crawl,
and the water in the radiator was bound to boil and
evaporate rapidly. Already he could forsee that
Tanami’s bushcraft would be the vital aid of the
expedition when it came to replenishing the tank.
He got out of his seat, and opened up the engine
bonnet. It was fiery hot to the touch, for the sun’s
rays had been playing on the aluminium surface like
flames. Next he examined the radiator, but his
inspection here w r as not so satisfying; the water level
was much lower than he anticipated. He frowned
and replaced the cap. Bob had joined Tanami and
stood among a group of miners listening eagerly to
much reminiscent talk of fabulous finds in which
each or other had at one time figured. His hearty
voice could now and again be heard raised in interested
inquiry; but gradually the topic of the Mastodon
was introduced, and this gave him unstinted scope
for all the eloquence at his command. His praise was
not confined to the mechanism of the monster; tribute
was generously given to Stuart as being the one man
in the whole world to demonstrate the Mastodon’s
mighty capabilities.
Stuart was a modest youth whose ideas of his own


worth fell far short of the virtues ascribed to him, but
he could not fail to appreciate the whole-hearted
loyalty of his chum.
“ I only wish I had half the knowledge Bob says
I’ve got,” he murmured under his breath.
The crowds were now beginning to disperse, and
the miscellaneous vehicles on the bank w r ere being
quickly filled with their human complement. Stuart
started up the engine, and began to back the Mastodon
up channel as a preparatory to making a complete
turn. A roar of pained remonstrance from behind
caused him to desist, and for a moment he feared he
had crushed some unfortunate in the sand. He was
soon undeceived. A tall gaunt personage appeared
from somewhere in the rear, and leaning over towards
the driver, spoke hastily and earnestly:
“ I like this bonnie bit o’ machinery, my lad, but
I’m a conscientious objector when it threatens me
wi’ bodily injury. My unworthy carcass being,
how'somever, removed, the course is clear o’ derelicts,
an’ all is well.”
Stuart stared at the man and thought he had never
seen anyone so aggressively ugly in his life. Under
a dilapidated sailor’s cap there looked back at him
a grim angular red visage containing two twinkling
blue eyes deep set beneath shaggy red fringes, a nose
that was distinctly of the snub variety, and a wide
mouth scarce concealed under a scrawny red mous-
tache. His hair w r as of the same prevailing hue as
the rest of his features. Though apparently but


recently shorn, it bristled out in glaring defiance
below his rakish cap, traversed the temples, and
merged with the kindred shade dominating the scene
below.
The man apparently enjoyed Stuart’s scrutiny, for
his gap of a mouth prised apart in a wide smile.
“ My style o’ beauty is mebbe a wee bit overpowerin’
at first,” he suggested encouragingly, “ but you’d
get used to it.”
Stuart laughed in spite of himself.
“ I’m sorry I nearly ran over you,” he said. “ I
didn’t think there was anyone so close.”
He of the crimson countenance chuckled.
“ I was havin’ a si-esta,” he explained. “ When
that gloomy mate o’ yours upset Angel Gully’s apple-
cart, I just thought I’d have a snooze for a bit, in the
shade, before shapin’ my course back to port.”
With a friendly wave of the hand he strode off,
just as Tanami and Bob appeared, followed by the
passenger list for the return journey to the township.
Everyone clambered aboard, and immediately after-
wards the Mastodon, with cut-out open, roared its
way into the yielding bank of the gully, over which
it reared like a thing alive, the rim of the declivity
breaking away in sections as it passed. The forward
gripping tracks of the motor had reached safety and
no more when the wall of the slope disintegrated.
Stuart felt the Mastodon balance uneasily for a brief
fraction of a second before it resumed its sinuous
glide, and he mentally resolved not to tackle a


The Rush at Angel Gully m
similar angle again if it possibly could be avoided.
“ Woa!” said Bob, looking back; “ there’s a chap
running behind. D’ye think the ’bus will stand one
extra?”
The belated one was the same who had had earlier
conversation with Stuart. Now a look of sheer delight
illuminated the rugged face.
“ I watched her take it!” he cried to all in general.
“ She’s a regular daisy!”
“ Thought you had a horse, mate,” said one of the
men, “ or does you mean that someone shook it?
Thar ain’t been no ‘ shes ’ in this outfit.”
“My man,” returned the gaunt enthusiast, “ I
made use o’ a figure o’ speech. I was referrin’ to the
box o’ tricks on which your unworthy anatomy is
restin’. As for my horse, me an’ him has parted
company, an’ he’s gone ahead to spread the glad
tidings.”
“ Squeeze on somewhere,” said Stuart, laughing
again, and once more a start was made.
Bob faced around and eyed the new passenger with
unconcealed interest.
“ D’ye know anything ’bout Caterpillars?” he asked.
“ I mean —this kind of Caterpillar.”
“ In a’ matters connected wi’ engineerin’, my bonnie
boy, I am pro-foundly interested. I ken every type o’
cat-caterpillar invented.”
“ But,” Bob persisted, “ d’ye ken —I mean do you
know anything ’bout this ’bus?”
The other shook his head sadly.


“I am only a der-derelict engineer, an’ you would
bust my bubble reputation right away. I admit I
dinna ken this machine; but I’m willin’ to get off an’
walk if it isn’t a Murray ”
Bob almost choked. He had been preparing an
eloquent discourse on his pet subject, and the flood-
gates had all but opened. He sat back in his seat with
a sigh and thought it over.


CHAPTER V
Into the Unknown
In the excitement of the “ Rush ” the real mission
of the Mastodon aroused no inquiry. It seemed to be
accepted that the desert tractor’s appearance on the
scene was the enterprising move of some outside
capitalists who had secured Tanami’s services for
prospecting on a wide scale. Now that the Angel
Gully bubble was burst and public enthusiasm had
experienced a cold douche, a more normal feeling
began to prevail among the people. Curiosity in the
Mastodon was kindled by the tales that were told of
its marvellous powers, and by the time the return
journey was accomplished the miners had come to
the conclusion that the mechanical camel had proved
itself to be the most wonderful contrivance that
could have been imagined.
Stories were repeated of its flying dash from Port
Darwin, and how it had thrust over creeks and sand
patches as if such obstacles had not existed. True,
it had slowed up in the more difficult country near
Angel Gully, but then it had carried an extra heavy
load, and was obviously not trying to outdistance
other traffic at this stage.
Bill Bradley had disappeared completely. It was
(D 694) 113 o


reported that someone had seen him on the north-
ward trail, well ahead of anyone else. For once he
had evaded the allurements of the township, but
fear rather than the beginning of a moral regeneration
was doubtless the reason for this unprecedented
behaviour. He still rode Slim Smith’s horse, which
all agreed was a sign of insanity, for theft of this
nature was a criminal offence, whereas his “ Bonanza ”
at Angel Gully was just an indication of perverted
humour which the law did not take into account.
Yet, even in this, his reasoning appeared to be sound,
for Slim Smith, despite his fury, would lodge no
formal complaint. He rather seemed anxious to
prevent others from interfering in his interest, and
so he acquired a status among his fellows he had
never before known, for he being most concerned had
forgiven, his hard words were but the outward show-
ing, his heart must be soft within!
When this suggestion was made to him, however,
he stormed so bitterly that it was at once withdrawn,
and his sympathizers thereafter left him severely
alone.
The exodus of disappointed gold-seekers began
without delay. Some started on their return journey
on the same evening of their disillusionment, and the
main army set out on the following day. A few stragglers
remained behind to swell the population of the little
town, but the quiet of the landscape on the second day
was in extreme contrast with the beaver-like industry
which had possessed it previously.


Tanami and the boys had erected their tent on the
eastern outskirts of the camp, and the Mastodon
crouched under the shade of a canvas covering hastily
set up on poles adjacent to them. Here Stuart and
Bob worked hard overhauling and oiling the complex
machinery, and that job accomplished, they set about
filling up with water ballast. This was a tedious occu-
pation, for the water had to be raised by windlass from
a deep well some hundred yards away, and though the
car was brought almost close against the supply, the
raising and lowering of the bucket so many times
was no mean task in the broiling sun. Tanami, however,
insisted on lending a hand during these operations.
His proffered assistance during the lubrication pro-
ceedings had not been accepted for the simple reason
that the bushman’s knowledge of machinery was of the
haziest description, and he had no idea where to apply
the force pump. Now, however, he was in his element,
and bucket after bucket was wound up and splashed
into the tank which fitted within the back portion of the
Mastodon’s framework. The tank was designed to hold
fifty gallons, though up till this time the space had
been used for general impedimenta and sundry stores.
A similar amount of room was available on the opposite
side of the chassis for petrol supplies, and farther back
in the curving shell of the bodywork was a moderate-
sized locker which could be utilized for carrying
necessary supplies.
Tanami was keenly interested in these internal
arrangements. His pondering eyes seemed to sum up


needs and possibilities at a glance. In vain Bob pleaded
for the water supply to be curtailed.
“ Fifty gallons are nearly a quarter of a ton,” he
complained, “ and surely we can’t drink all that before
coming to a well.”
The bushman shook his head in disapproval.
“ A camel can go nine days without a drink,” he
mused aloud, “ and then it can take in thirty gallons
afore it feels comfortable. Supposin’ anything happens
to the—the works, Bob, an’ we don’t reach water
reg’lar ”
“ I agree with you,” Stuart broke in hurriedly
“ You know best what should be done.”
Bob’s opposition collapsed at once.
“ I’m not buttin’ against ‘ safety first ’,” he explained.
“ I was just thinkin’ that the Sahara fellow hadn’t to
carry ’bout a ton o’ dead weight like us.”
“ This ain’t no Sahara, Bob,” returned Tanami with
some grimness. “ There ain’t no track to foller, and
there ain’t no palm trees settin’ aside water-holes, which
a man could see miles away, and the natives ain’t
waitin’ to welcome us unless wi’ spears and boome-
rangs.”
“ Gosh!” Bob muttered in high glee, “ that’ll look
better than ever when it’s all printed at the finish.
But look! Here’s our funny friend cornin’. I thought
he’d left with the rest, an’—an’ I wanted to ask him
how he recognized our ’bus; seein’ that this is the first
of the kind.”
Tanami at the windlass gave closer attention to his


work. He disliked being interrogated regarding the
plans of the party, which he had so far resolutely
refused to disclose to anyone. Stuart turned and
greeted the visitor with a smile. He was such an
extraordinary looking personage. His faded and greasy
uniform cap still perched on the back of his head,
giving little or no protection from the sun, but he had
discarded the flimsy drill coat he had previously worn,
and now appeared in an open-fronted shirt, with
sleeves rolled back above the elbows. His walk was
almost jaunty, and his long arms swung at his side
like pendulums.
He nodded cheerfully to Stuart, and strode over to
the windlass.
“ "When there’s a job o’ work to be done,” he said,
“ I just hate to look on.”
He grabbed the second handle of the windlass barrel
and spun it round with playful energy, so that Tanami
at the other end looked up with a start. But though
the bushman at first resented the new-comer’s presence
he could not fail to appreciate the services so volun-
tarily rendered. His quiet gaze, unknown to the other,
studied him from head to foot, noticed the sinewy neck
and great depth of chest, and took mental stock of the
powerful forearms displayed. For all his apparent
slimness, the red-headed man would be a force to
reckon with in a tight comer. Tanami had come to
this conclusion when he absently asked:
“ Any good in a scrimmage, mate?”
He of the fiery poll laughed loudly.


“ Man, I’ve had a lot of practice. My life’s been a
succession o’ battles an’ fechts, an’ though I say it
mysel’, I havena met the man yet who can afford to
be unceevil to Jock M'Crimmon,”
He sighed prodigiously, then remarked further:
“ An’ I’m a man o’ peace, mind you, an’ I aye keep
repeatin’ that bonnie bit o’ poetry I learned at school—
‘ He that fights and runs away, will live to fight another
day ’. But the beggars don’t always run —you see my
outward showin’ is a delusion an’ a snare, an’ that wi’
my bonnie auburn complexion encourages the mis-
guided deevils ”
“ Hoorah!” shouted Bob, delightedly rushing for-
ward with out-stretched hand, “ red or no red, you’re
a daisy, Jock M'Crimmon. I don’t blame you for
fightin’—not a bit!”
Jock seized the proffered hand in his own ungainly
paw, and surveyed the youth critically, while an ex-
pansive smile gradually spread over his features.
“ Yours is a natural blush, my laddie,” he said.
“ It’s the sign o’ a modest and retirin’ tern-tempera-
ment, which will wear off wi’ years and confidence; but
my halo has been earned in the Arctic, where the frost
burns like fire. Of course my hair was this delicate
shade o’ —o’ auburn at the start, but my skin was as
the driven snaw until the polar blasts roasted it.”
Stuart now became interested.
“ Aren’t you just jokin’?” he said. “ I thought only
the sun could burn.”
“ Jokin’? Me! I never joke. Whaur d’ye think the


Red Indians get their colour? or the Esquimaux? or
the Patagonians? Frost and heat have the same outward
effect, my lad. But to illustrate my point, let me tell
you o’ twa o’ my experiences—one in Greenland, and
the other on the Niger ”
“ Hold hard, mate,” interrupted Tanami. “ The
blisterin’ tank is filled, an’ it might freeze if you un-
hitched the Arctic yarn careless-like. I reckon you’d
better choke it back until we get over to the tent, and
then we’ll all take a whiff o’ the icy breeze.”
Jock M‘Crimmon accepted the invitation promptly,
though Stuart had a shrewd idea that he was more
interested in the Mastodon than in his own proposed
narratives of strange adventure. In this the boy was
right, for when the motor had returned to its shelter,
the lanky engineer calmly forgot the avowed purport
of his visit, and entered into a deep discussion with
Stuart concerning high - speed engines generally,
cleverly narrowing the subject down until it touched
only on the bore and stroke of the Mastodon’s cylinders,
with an occasional diversion to tensile strains and so
forth. Finally Stuart opened up the bonnet of the car
for his inspection, and started the engine; and this was
where the visitor’s enthusiasm reached a climax.
“ It’s a bonnie box o’ machinery,” he commented.
“ Beats anything o’ the kind I have ever seen.”
“ I know there’s nothing to touch it,” Stuart admitted
with quiet pride, “ and the patent gearing’s—great!”
Jock stood back a little and surveyed the Mastodon
as a whole.


“ I’ve seen countries,” he said, “ where it would be
a godsend, oot in the Gobi Desert, for instance ”
“ Thought you kind o’ said you was a sailor sort o’
engineer,” broke in Tanami. “ Thar ain’t no deserts
at sea, I reckon.”
Jock beamed as if sudden inspiration had just burst
upon him.
“ The spirit moves me,” he began, “ to elucidate the
story o’ my wild an’ verra woolly career. Gather
round, laddies; I wad a tale unfold, the record o’ a
blameless life.”
“ Umph!” said Tanami.
“ Umph yersel’!” retorted Jock, smiling blandly, and
straightway he entered upon his thrilling narrative.
It appeared that he had started his wanderings as
junior engineer of an Arctic exploring vessel, and
afterwards had shipped on all sorts of strange craft in
his anxiety to see the world. Often, too, he had adven-
tured ashore in far-off lands, and had so acquired a
wonderful store of experience that tripped off his
tongue without any recollective effort. The boys were
duly impressed with the dramatic recital, for Jock
M'Crimmon’s gift of oratory was of no mean order.
“ So here I stand,” he concluded, “ a monument to
the virtues o’ perseverance an’ —an’ enterprise. I’ve
an extra chief’s ticket laid by somewhere in my exten-
sive wardrobe, and I’ve got twenty-seven and sixpence
in my pocket. I expected to make a fortune, in a quiet
easy way, for I thought that gold sprouted up here
like carrots, by what I heard folks say. But as usual


I bang up against adventure, right into the middle o’t,
for I can see that you’re goin’ to welcome me like a
lost bairn.” His voice sank to an enticing whisper.
“ Don’t you think I could be of some use in the
outfit?”
His gaze rested on each of the three in turn.
Stuart looked his surprise, for words were beyond
him at the moment.
Bob chuckled hugely, thinking it was all a joke;
but in the most unlikely quarter the adventure-seeker
thought he saw a sign of encouragement. The bushman
broke the silence:
“ You don’t know what you’re askin’, mate,” he said
grimly. “We ain’t a prospectin’ expedition as most
folks think ”
“ I heard this verra day that you were goin’ out after
a lost explorer,” said M‘Crimmon.
“ My fault!” muttered Bob, in disgust with himself.
“ I happened to mention it to someone at the post
office this morning. I didn’t think it mattered.”
“ No more it does, Bob,” agreed Tanami, though a
shade of doubt rested on his face nevertheless. “If
any bloomin’ fool wants to follow, he’ll have a hard time,
I reckon, for the crows will eat what the blacks miss.”
The persistent Scot was not perturbed.
“I’m waitin’ like the wandered sheep that wanted
into the fold,” he announced calmly, “ There’s mebbe
a wee tinge o’ black in my fur, but otherwise I’m no a
bad sort o’ sheep ”
Stuart shook his head reluctantly.


“ I believe we would all like you well enough,” he
said, “ but we really haven’t got any money ”
“ Money?” came the indignant retort, “ wha asked
for money? Filthy lucre and romance don’t often go
together. You couldna buy wi’ money, laddie, what
I’m offerin’ for nothin’ —the services o’ a strong arm,
an’ the heart o’ a M'Crimmon!”
His indignation was so extreme that all hastened to
pacify him; the red-headed man had a temper as fiery
as his hair. To the surprise of the boys, Tanami showed
the greatest interest. It almost seemed as if he were
pleased about something, for his eyes gleamed with an
unusual light.
“ I reckon I know a man when I see him, mate,”
he said. “ You ain’t exactly an oil paintin’, an’ the
blacks might be scared a bit by the look o’ your phiz,
but that ain’t here nor there. This expedition ain’t
goin’ to be any picnic, an’ my young mates will have
men’s work to do all the time. I ain’t frightened o’
them, but there’s always a chance o’ a blisterin’ spear
lobbin’ along, an’—an’ well, I think we’d be safer wi’
a standby for emergencies.”
This was a long speech for Tanami to make, and it
dealt with an aspect of things he seldom spoke about
in so serious a tone. Even now Bob thought he was
deliberately trying to frighten off the gaunt engineer.
Stuart knew different. Over and over again he had
fancied that the bushman carried some weight on his
mind of which he feared to speak. Now he gave a
glimmering of it—just a glimmering, and no more.


Jock M'Crimmon was evidently not dismayed by
the prospect set before him.
“ Stand by, is the engineer’s motto,” he cried
cheerily, “ and when danger sticks her red nose round
the corner you may aye depend on Jock M'Crimmon
standin’ by!”
He insisted on shaking hands all round, and after a
while went off in boisterous good humour to fetch his
gear from the hotel.
When he had gone, Bob gave way to uncontrollable
mirth.
“ He’s just like a caricature lifted clean out of a story
book,” he exclaimed. “ I never thought that such
men really existed.”
Tanami nodded thoughtfully, not quite under-
standing.
“ I reckon there’s some mighty strange folk in the
world, Bob, but it’s a very funny thing that every
blinkin’ sinner thinks that it’s the other fellow that’s
funny.”
Stuart laughed, but Bob could see no trace of a smile
on Tanami’s inscrutable countenance.
It had been arranged that the expedition should
start immediately all necessary supplies were secured,
and already everything was to hand except a dozen
gallons of petrol which were required to complete the
quota of fuel decided upon. Enough was being carried,
according to Stuart’s estimate, to last the Mastodon
for nearly a thousand miles—under normal conditions;
so surely, he reasoned, even in face of great disad-


vantages it would suffice for at least half that distance.
In his own province he calculated against the unknown
factor, leaving much to spare, and Tanami, noticing
this, wished that the water supply could be adjusted
in the same fashion. So much depended on the daily
progress made, and this no one could possibly foretell.
When M'Crimmon returned he found all three
grouped about a map which was spread on the ground,
and Stuart was pointing out to the bushman the line
of travel to be taken.
“ ’Tain’t no good tellin’ me latitoods an’ longitoods,
Stuart,” said Tanami, looking dazed. “ If you’re able
to tell me where we are when I ask, I’ll get the direction
all right.”
Jock looked at the trio in unconcealed delight.
“ A chart!” he muttered in a deep husky voice
intended for a whisper. He peered over their shoulders
and commented further: “ A chart —wi’ a wee cross
marked —an’ mysterious talk o’ latitudes! Oh ho, my
bonnie boys, I see ro-mance by the bucketfu’ in this!”
He squatted beside them with a grunt of content.
“ Romance?” echoed Tanami. “ Never noticed any
o’ it hangin’ around on my travels, but I reckon Stuart
will give you the hang o’ the whole story; it’s plumb
full o’ mystery an’ treachery—an’ mebbe worse.”
The engineer listened with rapt attention while the
cause and purpose of the expedition were being ex-
plained, and at the end he was as much affected by the
simple recital as the boy himself.
“ I think you’re a verra brave laddie,” he said in a


subdued voice and rising to his feet. “ Yes, a verra
brave laddie,” he repeated, “ an’ ” he glanced across
at Tanani —“ I’ve got a suspicion that you’re in good
company, barrin’ mysel’, of course ”
“ Barrin’ nothin’,” the bushman said promptly.
“We stand hitched fast together on this job; I ain’t
no hero, mate, so don’t make any mistake ’bout me.”
Jock was rapidly regaining his good spirits. He had
been thinking rapidly and had already come to a
brilliant conclusion.
“ Cheer up, my lad!” he cried, slapping Stuart
heartily on the shoulder. “ Never say die. Your dad
may be still alive, for a’ we ken. Diamonds have aye
been mysterious things, an’ many a good man has been
tugged into nets o’ treachery when a temptin’ fortune
has to be shared. This Dago-man, that Tanami speaks
aboot, may be holdin’ him prisoner, an’ in that case
we’ll upset his little apple-cart sort o’ sudden-like.”
“You mean well, old man,” Tanami conceded, with
a grim smile, “ but diamonds ain’t good digestive food,
an’ I saw nothin’ that would feed even a hungry
muskittie in them parts; but if there’s anything in the
story o’ other diamonds havin’ come from the same
place, then that fetches along all the mystery ye’re
cryin’ for.”
They left it at that, and continued their preparations
for a departure in the early morning. Before evening
came they had many visitors, for Bob’s enthusiastic
loquacity was bearing fruit; his whisper of the morning
had spread around like wildfire, and it seemed as if the


whole populace were aroused. They came in ones and
twos and batches, eagerly questioning. Few remem-
bered Jim Notley’s expedition which had so unob-
trusively started out from their midst, but all had heard
of his ill-fated attempt to penetrate the country from
the other side of the continent. As for Tanami, they
knew that he had made several wild journeys into the
far interior, but they had not realized his compelling
motive. To them he was just an old timer “ with a
rat ” for looking for things that did not exist, and they
could not associate the pensive-eyed bushman with the
daring journeys that the Press had ascribed to him.
Tanami listened to their well-meaning counsel
patiently, but with little comment. He was well aware
that of the number who called many would suspect his
purpose, and others would be openly convinced that he
was on the trail of some previously prospected treasure.
“ We’re goin’ to look for dead men’s bones,” he
explained to them all, “ and mebbe we’ll leave our
own alongside o’ them.”
They left him alone then, and turned their attention
to the other members of the party; Stuart’s presence
they could partly understand, and for the time they
ceased doubting Tanami’s explanations, and gave the
boy a whole-hearted cheer. He appealed to their sense
of manhood.
“ I don’t like keeping anything back from them,”
said Stuart, when the crowd departed. “ It seems mean
not to tell them about the diamonds.”
“ I reckon it would be sure death for many o’ them


if ye did, lad,” replied Tanami. “As it is, we’re like
enough to be followed by some tricky fools who don’t
know when they’re comfortable. Anyways, I ain’t
heard a whisper ’bout diamonds, so if the blisterin’
Dago escaped, he’s kept mighty quiet. I’m beginning
to think he must be a goner after all.”
By this time the Mastodon was packed in every
conceivable corner. The personal belongings of the
party had been cut down to an irreducible minimum,
and only the utmost necessaries in the way of stores
were being carried, yet the bulk to be loaded had
grown and grown, until not a vacant place appeared
even on the running-boards.
Bob’s place by the driver was already in jeopardy,
and he could see that his perch would be higher than
usual, if he had to sit on top of the cases which even
now nearly filled the seat. Where the other two mem-
bers of the party were to balance was a hard proposi-
tion to determine. Rifles, picks, and shovels which
could not be packed elsewhere were lashed on either
side of the bonnet.
“ I was afraid they were cornin’ my way,” confided
Bob to Stuart, with a sigh of relief. “ I don’t mind
sittin’ on a fairly flat surface, but my anatomy would
object to the edge of a shovel. ”
“ Here’s a bonnie box that should meet a ’ your
requirements, then,” announced M'Crimmon. “ Tan-
ami says it has to be kept cool, so don’t hatch it.”
“ Heave it on,” cried the youth; “ it’ll help me a bit
farther up in the world.”


“ I reckon it might,” agreed Tanami, “ but we need
the stuff for other purposes, so don’t be too flamin’
ambitious.”
He turned the case over on the seat with tender care
until it rested to his satisfaction.
Bob, curious to know what breakables it contained,
went near to look for a label that might disclose the
secret. He found it, not a label, but a red stencilled
warning: “ Gelignite —Handle with care.”
“ Gosh!” he muttered, wiping the beading per-
spiration from his brow. “ I’m beginning to think I
should give up my seat to Jock. I’d just hate to be
selfish.”
It was late before the crew of the Mastodon sought
slumber. Everything had been stowed away in the
car, leaving only the bare ground to sleep upon and
no covering at all save the common canopy of the
tent. The boys had rather a dread of the various
crawling things they had seen during the last few days,
and did not relish the idea of lying in over-close contact
with any wandering snakes, scorpions, or centipedes
that might happen along; besides, they had letters to
write which must be posted that night, for there would
be little time to attend to these in the morning, especially
as Tanami insisted on getting a start at daybreak before
any outsiders were likely to be about. This secretive
trait of the bushman had become almost an obsession
lately, so the boys thought. In looking for possible
spies, he had foolishly doubted the good will of all
around. Bob especially rather regretted that an ad-


[M ' \ 'Sr*^^B53 1
J^r* 31 ' i 4 /j/p /** , te
4 H» jIbUt «J!^b
sppi i • L \ V. V ■ rI
i il* Hk
Bjr #7 '•
A1
6oi
THE MASTODON IS SAVED




miring throng would not be present to see them off
the premises. He considered that the Mastodon was
not getting the publicity it deserved! He decided to
suggest this to Tanami before a start was actually
made.
However, both soon became so engrossed in their
writing that all else was quickly forgotten, and while
their pencils flew over the pages so awkwardly balanced
on their knees, Tanami and M : Crimmon talked together
with voices lowered, and in perfect understanding.
These two opposite types had found a bond of fellow-
ship and were well satisfied.
Bob looked up from his work and addressed his
chum with much earnestness.
“ Say, old sport, if you’re writing to —the kid, at
all, you won’t forget to mention that I’ve thinned off
a bit, and that I look just Ai in my helmet?”
“ I’ve done more than that,” Stuart replied. “ I’ve
said —I’ve said —oh, never mind what I’ve said, but
there’s a bit about dynamite in it ”
“ Oh, is there?” grumbled Bob. “ Well, so long
as you don’t say I have to sit on the blessed stuff I’m
not kickin’.”
Their letters written and posted, they listened for
a while to a stirring narrative which M‘Crimmon
was relating with much gusto to Tanami, who was
to all appearance fast asleep in the shadows. He had
come to a particularly thrilling part: “ An’ the bear
made a lumberin’ rush at me. His fangs glistened
like spikes o’ the ice we were standing on, an’ his
(D 694) 9


tr-remendous claws stretched oot to grab me. I hadna
anything but my wee knife, an’ he seemed to ken this,
for the enor-rmous brute laughed—aye, actually laughed
—as I stood there ”
“ Why didn’t you run away?” asked Bob breath-
lessly.
“ Ice floe, my lad. You havena been listenin’ ”
He hastened to catch up the thread of his tale. “As
I stood there—aye, as I stood there I saw him gie a
deliberate wink, an’ then I felt his big hairy paw
grip me around the neck ”
A violent snore from Tanami interrupted him, and
he stopped with his mouth still open and gaped at
his slumbering audience with a sorrowful countenance.
“ And what happened?” inquired Bob, deeply
concerned.
“ This is where ye get the cheerfu’ news ‘ To be
continued in our next ’, my lad. I can hear that it’s
time to seek the arms o’ Murphy, as they say in the
classics ”He broke off in unmusical song: “On
the cauld cauld ground I laid me, I laid me doon wi’
a sigh; but the muskitties cried like a trumpet blast:
‘ Yo ho, we’ll a’ stand by.’ ”
Bob, by dint of shifting his body around in the
loose sand, soon contrived to create a resting-place
that fitted more or less approximately to the contour
of his frame, and soon, in spite of his qualms about
creeping things, he fell fast asleep. Stuart endeavoured
to follow his example but failed miserably. He was
tired, but he tossed around restlessly, his brain sim-


mering with conflicting thoughts and emotions. He
dozed after a while, and to his subconscious mind
there came a vision. A small boy whose face somehow
seemed familiar was standing in a little room the floor
of which was strewn with books, among them being a
large atlas which lay wide open at his feet. Near him,
and regarding the boy intently, stood a tall bronzed
man who smiled as he put the question: “ And how
will you come for me; with an atlas and a pencil?”
Stuart awoke with the boy’s answer trembling on
his lips, and behold memory came to him and he
recognized it as his own. “ With a gun an’ a sextant!
With a gun an’ a sextant!”
And so the boyish promise had come true. Pride
surged into Stuart’s heart, and he recalled the actual
scene of his dream as if it had but recently taken place.
“ I’m coming, Dad,” he whispered, “ I’m coming
as I said —I’m coming ”
He drowsed off again, but this time his period of
unconsciousness was even briefer than before. Vaguely
he heard a metallic clang, subdued yet penetrating to
ears that knew the sound so well. He was awake
before the slight echo had died away. Someone had
moved the swinging bonnet of the Mastodon!
Even as the thought came to him he dismissed it
as absurd. Who could possibly have designs against
the Expedition? Probably a native cat or dingo had
been smelling round. He continued to listen intently.
In the near distance a dingo began to wail dismally,
and at once its call was answered by other denizens


of the night, so that for a short space Bedlam reigned.
He had become accustomed to this sort of distraction,
though it always created in him a sense of eeriness
which he found it hard to shake off. There was no
moon, but in the dim starlight which filtered through
the calico roof he could just make out that his com-
panions had not moved from their positions. They
were all peacefully asleep notwithstanding the dis-
comfort of their sandy couch. The boy’s vigilance
relaxed, and he tried once more to compose his rush-
ing ideas into forgetfulness, but suddenly he became
alert again. The sound had been repeated; it was as
if someone had pressed against the steel covering of
the Mastodon’s engine. Almost simultaneously he
heard the soft scratch of a safety match, and a tiny
dab of illumination flickered for an instant through
the tenuous tent wall.
He did not hesitate now. He was on his feet, and
outside before he had time to wonder what was hap-
pening. In the semi-gloom where the motor lay, he
could distinguish movement, a form darker than the
shadows was stealthily edging away into the bush.
Without a pause the boy sprang after the intruder.
“ Bob!—Tanami!” he cried as he ran.
A hissing spluttering sound now issued from the
region of the motor’s engine, and an acrid odour
assailed the boy as he shouted.
He was answered almost immediately by a loud
“ Yo ho!” from M'Crimmon and an inarticulate roar
from Tanami.


The skulking figure half turned at the alarm, then,
straightening itself, bolted precipitately. He had little
chance of escape in this way. Anxiety lent wings to
Stuart’s headlong dash. Always fleet of foot, he was
now possessed of a raging fury that drove him on
like a whirlwind.
The fugitive, snarling like a wild animal, swung
round.
“ Keep back, you fool!” he gritted.
But Stuart, heedless of the warning, bore down
upon him; his lithe body literally hurled itself against
the man, who crouched like a dog awaiting the on-
slaught. The boy’s whole strength was in his rush;
he meant to hold the unknown enemy at all costs
until help arrived. They rolled over together, the
man desperately slashing at the boy with something
he held in his hand; and one of his fierce lunges
found its mark. Stuart felt a sharp pain in his
arm, and wondered vaguely what it meant until
he found his grasp slipping weakly; then he under-
stood.
It had all happened in less than sixty seconds, as
was proved soon afterwards. With a curse the man
jerked clear of the boy’s failing hold, and darted off
into the night, eluding by little more than a yard the
vengeful approach of Tanami and M'Crimmon.
“ Hurt, lad?” breathed the bushman, bending over
the boy anxiously, and leaving his companion to con-
tinue the chase. Stuart struggled to his feet, scarce
hearing.


“ The engine!” he gasped. “ He’s done something
to the engine!”
Without another word they both rushed back to
the Mastodon, whence came a whispering note that
intermittently crackled like a leaping flame.
“ Good Lord!” groaned Tanami. “ The swine has
fired it. Stand back, lad!”
Stuart in despair was groping over the cylinder
heads, not knowing what he sought. In a corner of
the casing he saw something glow.
“ Back!” roared the bushman’s voice in his ear, and
Tanami’s sinewy hand snatched at the creeping flame.
It came away in his grasp, carrying with it a small
rectangular package. He swung the deadly trophy
from him and it exploded in the air with a thunderous
report.
Stuart leaned weakly against the frame of the Masto-
don. His shirt sleeve was dripping with his own
blood. He knew that; but a great content filled his
heart, and he gave no thought to the wound received.
“Two plugs!” he heard in muttered soliloquy beside
him. “ Two plugs o’ gelignite an’ a sixty-second fuse
to give him time to get clear. I’d a given my shirt to
have a look at his face.”
Then two powerful arms supported Stuart and for
a time he knew no more.
M‘Crimmon came back unsuccessful and breathing
slaughter. He had had no chance of overtaking the
man in the gloom, where every dwarfed shrub loomed
out as the possible quarry.


“ I thought the happy home had been torpedoed,”
he said; “an’ I heard the deevil I was chasin’ laughin’
like to split, though I couldna see him.”
Bob, who had been awakened only by the explosion,
was mournfully regretful that he had missed “ all the
fun ”, but his concern for Stuart kept him quiet for a
time until he was quite sure that his chum was not
seriously injured. The wound in the boy’s arm was a
long ripping cut from shoulder to elbow, not deep
enough to injure the muscles, but sufficient to cause
much weakness through loss of blood. His shirt had
been torn to tatters in the brief struggle, and ominous
slashes in it here and there showed that his night
antagonist had intended doing him more deadly hurt
than was received.
It was clear to all that some unknown enemy had
tried to block the expedition from setting out. The
dynamite used would have shattered the engine and
probably exploded the petrol store, so that complete
destruction would have resulted. Who could have
schemed to bring about such disaster?
Tanami did not say much, but what he said was to
the point. There was no doubt in his mind that the
man behind it all was the same who had taken his
place in Jim Notley’s fateful journey. He had all
along held the strong belief that this mysterious usurper
had not perished with his chief. Now he expressed
himself as being absolutely convinced of this.
“ His name was Jenner or Jennet,” he muttered
savagely, “ and them who saw him told me that he


was a furrin’-lookin’ rat wi’ a black p’inted beard.
Thar ain’t no man o’ the name in this camp, an’ I
shouldn’t expect it nuther, for it would be an unhealthy
label to carry around among Ostralyans who might
remember; and like enough he’s heaved his sizzling
whiskers on the scrap heap too, so we dunno who we’re
up against.”
“ I would know the man who gave me this if I
saw him again,” Stuart said, patting his bandaged arm.
“ He tried to hide his face even though it was pretty
dark, but when I was close up at him I knew I had
seen him somewhere before, at least I’m almost sure.”
Tanami abused himself roundly.
“ I oughter have mounted guard, same as I’d do
among the blacks when they behave nasty. I reckon
I oughter be tomahawked for my dam carelessness in
allowin’ any o’ the gory sinners to nose within coo-ee
o’ this camp.”
Bob said nothing. He was in the throes of aban-
doning a resolution he had made. After all, he had
decided not to speak to Tanami on the subject of
giving the Mastodon a wider publicity at this stage.
There was no thought of further sleep now; anyhow,
the night was far advanced, already Sirius had his
light in the eastern sky heralding the dawn. The sun
had scarcely cleared the horizon before each one was
at his post. Bob swung the starting handle, to save
the battery current, for the dynamo had not been
charging much lately. The eight cylinders of the
Mastodon tuned up from a sibilant murmur to a


reverberating roar which appeared to awaken everyone
within a mile, for each habitation immediately showed
signs of life, and great activity was displayed by the
inmates to get into closer touch with the pulsating
monster that was making unexpected departure into
the wilds.
“ Don’t see any pole-cat wi’ a bomb, sprintin’ along,
does you, Bob?” Tanami asked, settling himself
gingerly among the paraphernalia strapped over his
accustomed place at the back of the motor.
Bob from his elevation on the dynamite case made
diligent survey but failed to locate anything alarming.
“ I’m quite sure he’s not there,” he reported. “ And
now we’re goin’ to have a merry little send-off after
all.”
Stuart was all ready to slip in the starting-gear, but
he delayed, thinking that Tanami might wish an
opportunity to report the night’s occurrence. The
bushman, however, had no such intention. He shouted
out some instructions to an acquaintance which had
to do only with the well-being of his horse. He had
gone into this matter at great length before, but it
still seemed to be all that was concerning him now.
“ An’ Pat,” he added, as an afterthought, in a voice
loud enough to be heard by all, “ if ye run across the
ring-barked son o’ a gun that tried to blow us up last
night, tell him from me that I’ve a bigger score even
than that to settle wi’ him. He’ll understand ”
He said no more; the yell of horror and amazement
that broke from the crowd showed that all had listened.


The Mastodon with open exhaust bellowed mightily
a last good-bye, then, at a touch from Stuart, developed
convulsive action. The great caterpillar tracks spun
around for a few seconds like the wheels of a loco-
motive on wet rails, then suddenly they gripped, and
the mechanical marvel lunged forward. A chorus of
coo-ees arose from all sides. Bob waved his helmet,
and would have drawn attention to the fact that the
engine was pulling with ease a load that would have
paralysed any other contrivance of the kind in the
world, but no one would have heard, so he reluctantly
saved his breath.
Stuart laughed aloud in the sheer joy of definite
movement at last towards the goal of his dreams.
Tanami, just a little nervous about the security of his
balance, puffed hard at his pipe and paid no attention
whatever to outside circumstances. He was rather
envying the luxurious ease in which M'Crimmon lolled
about on a base as unstable as his own. The latter
individual was by no means unmindful of the applause
received, indeed it seemed to affect him deeply, for he
burst into mournful song, proclaiming that there was
“ no place like ho-o-me ” until Bob persuaded him to
desist by threatening to upset the dynamite box on
top of him. So they headed out towards the land of
diamonds, savages, and mystery, and the first rays of
a radiant sun shone in their faces and enveloped the
expedition in a golden glory.


CHAPTER VI
A Welcome Discovery
According to the chart which Stuart had carefully
prepared, an east-north-east course would lead to the
point where the latitude and longitude given would
intersect. Tanami’s information showed that Jim
Notley and he had struck Diamond Creek at a place
where it bore approximately north and south, since
they approached it almost at right angles while
travelling eastward; of course the channel might swing
in any direction at other places, for its origin and
destination were alike unknown. This uncertain
feature, the bushman thought, was probably the reason
for his failure to recognize the creek on his two later
journeys. Being simply a fissure in a sandy waste
similar to scores of others, it might easily be redis-
covered yet not identified. There had been a low
range of jagged hills in the vicinity on the original
journey, and this he saw again, but it was while he was
endeavouring to pick up his bearings from this land-
mark that the blacks appeared on both occasions.
Stuart spread out his map on the ground when
breakfast was being prepared at Angel Gully. The
Mastodon had accomplished twenty miles in two


hours despite the sinking sands in its passage and
the heavy load it carried. It was odd to notice the
confused array of miners’ “ pegs ”, still bearing their
grimy placarding which told a dreary tale of hopes
unfulfilled. The scene of Bradley’s Bonanza bore
eloquent testimony to the excitement that had reigned
here but a few days back. The channel was trampled
into comparative hardness, as if an army had passed
through. The imprint of eager feet would remain
until the “ willy-willys ” blew, and the desert reclaimed
its own. Its brief hour of fantastic fame had come
and gone, and Angel Gully had retired into the soli-
tudes for another aeon of repose.
Tanami, after a glance at the map, turned away
bewildered, and when Stuart, with the prismatic
compass, pointed out the direction of the distant
goal, he was no less confused. He was accustomed
to choose his route with an eye to the possibilities of
the country, correcting finally any error of leeway
by an infallible instinct which he could no more
explain than the mysteries of the stars in the heavens.
“ It’s like this, Stuart,” he said. “ The lie o’ the
land keeps changing. A sand belt may run out to
sunrise, and again it might be headin’ the other way,
or any old way. I guess there ain’t no sense trackin’
across every bad bit o’ country that comes along,
when it could be avoided by slewing sort of sideways.
You see, a man gets thirsty, an’ so does a camel —
now and again, and the main job is always to look
for water without worryin’ ’bout goin’ straight.”


It was all simple enough to the bushman, but to
the boy, whose calculations were desperately worked
out with mathematics, Tanami’s method presented
a maze of difficulties. Yet the logical sense of it was
already apparent. Here where they halted, a shim-
mering expanse stretched ahead until it merged into
the horizon, broken only by rolling dunes that showed
no signs of vegetation, unless where a little to the
south these undulations were sparsely capped with
spiky herbage. Where anything could find root it
was obvious that the soil would be firmer than else-
where. With a sigh Stuart drew a short diverging
line on his chart, altering the course by fifteen degrees.
He did not like the look of things in the almost im-
mediate foreground. The gully seemed to be the
line of demarcation between a coarse heavy sand and
sand of a finer quality. The latter had now to be
faced. Everything would depend on the Mastodon’s
behaviour in this altered element.
M'Crimmon and Bob refused to see anything to
worry about, at least so they proclaimed, and in the
latter case enthusiastic faith easily triumphed over
disloyal doubt, leaving not a shred for argument.
The engineer, however, behind his mask of placid
good humour, concealed a perplexing thought which
he would not speak—lest he should unnecessarily
discourage the party. It had to do with radiation and
evaporation. He was satisfied about all else.
They left Angel Gully at nine o’clock, and this
time the Mastodon did not take the bank at a specta-


cular rush with everyone on board. Stuart was taking
no more risks of that nature; the springs had to be
considered. So he negotiated the slope alone, and at
the easiest point he could find, while his companions
trudged after, catching him up when he stopped the
engine on top, well away from the edge. They clam-
bered to their places with sundry expressions of
satisfaction. Even so short a walk through the sinking
sand was trying after the comfort that had been theirs.
Though it was early, the sun was well started on its
daily round, and the sand was already hot to the tread.
Tanami had now changed seats with Bob, so as to be
nearer to the driver, whom he began to direct in mono-
syllables soon after the motor got under way.
“ Right! Steady! Left! Steady!”
The sun soon appeared a little way to the left,
casting a distorted shadow to the rear of the Mastodon,
which Stuart could just see out of the tail of his eye.
Then Tanami was evidently content.
“ Keep her at that for half an hour, Stuart,” he
said. “ Watch for the shadow; you’ll find it easier
than botherin’ ’bout any foolin’ compass.”
“ But the sun won’t stay in the same place,” Stuart
reasoned, trying to grasp the bushman’s purpose.
“No more it will, lad, but every half-hour or so
you’ll have to swing to the right, bringing the shadow
closer up all the time; an’ then just after midday
I reckon we’ll chase the blinkin’ thing until sundown.
That’s the only way to travel in the bush. There ain’t
any compass that can touch the old sun when you


git to know his track in the sky. Now we’ll make for
a soak that your dad an’ me found; I calc’late it
should be ’bout forty miles from here, an’ by the
time we git there we should know how the jigger’s
goin’ to carry on,”
The first hour passed without event, but the pace
of the Mastodon had become slower and slower, and
at the end of the period the speedometer showed
only eight miles traversed from the gully. By noon
the rate of progress had still further dwindled. The
Mastodon, in M‘Crimmon’s words, was making ‘ bad
weather ’ of it; sometimes she would lie as in the
trough of a sandy sea, and labour just as a storm-
beaten ship might do, her revolving tracks whirling
without forward movement until they had bedded
themselves deep below the surface. These occasions
were not numerous so far, but they served to delay
matters very considerably, and towards evening
Tanami calculated that the whole afternoon’s work
did not exceed twelve miles.
“ That’s forty miles for the day, Stuart,” he re-
marked. “ Darned good goin’, I call it. If we’d been
tuggin’ a perishin’ camel team we could just ha’ made
’bout a third o’ that.”
“ If things get no worse,” the boy admitted, “ the
motor will pull us through, though she’s been boiling
the water away terribly fast.”
Twice since leaving Angel Gully the radiator had
been replenished, and the engine had become so
heated that more than once a voluntary stop had been


made to allow it to cool down. Stuart was now glad
that Tanami’s well was only twenty miles away. At
first he had in thought ridiculed the idea of troubling
about water at such an early stage in the journey;
but in these last few hours he had gathered experience
rapidly. If the bushman had allowed him to take the
mapped course he had planned, what would have
been the result? The Mastodon was skirting the
worst country; he would ignorantly have attempted
to take it as it came. He had an uncomfortable feeling
that he had nearly wrecked the expedition at the
beginning by having any views at all!
The bushman laughed when the boy confided this
much to him.
“ I’m a stubborn sort o’ cuss, Stuart,” he said, “ an’
’tain’t likely I’d let you make what I reckoned was a
mistake. The jigger would need stilts instead o’ wheels
in some parts nor’ard o’ this. As it is, we 11 hit a bad
patch or two afore we’re a couple o’ days older,”
Bob heard this cheerful reflection and groaned in
mild complaint:
“ The old ’bus has been soakin’ into it hard. Ac-
cording to the clock she’s mopped up miles of Australia
that wouldn’t stay in one place. We’ve made the poor
beast into a dredger by carryin’ too much weight ”
Tanami was visibly amused.
“ We’ll dump a few hundredweights in the morning,
Bob,” he interjected quietly.
“ Not the water, surely, old hoss? An’ after all, I
don’t think anything else could be spared.”


“ I reckon we can be spared all right,” returned
Tanami definitely. “We ain’t cripples, an’ at a pinch
we can even push. Blow it! young fellow-me-lad, it’s
downright cruelty to that there box o’ machinery for
us to squat on top o’ it, when it’s grindin’ its heart out
like a human bein’.”
M'Crimmon nodded in agreement. He too had been
thinking of this for some time.
“ Every wee bit helps!” he cried gaily.
And when the plan was tried it did help in some
measure, not so much, perhaps, by relieving the weight
as by providing a ready assistance to turn the balance
when the issue of movement was in any way in doubt.
Yet despite the frantic efforts of all, the Mastodon
proceeded at a snail’s pace, fighting every inch of the
way. The wide steel treads which divided the tra-
velling surface over such a great area were instan-
taneously effective when they could find even moder-
ately stable base beneath, but in places where no semi-
solid foundation existed under the wave-like surface,
the striving motor had literally to compress the sand
it rested upon to a solid before it could make advance.
Thus it made its way in a series of writhes and darts,
fast enough in themselves but painfully hesitant in
their preparatory periods. Mile after mile was crossed
in this way, and through it all Stuart nursed the panting
engine with anxious care, and fed to it the precious
water from the tank as its needs demanded.
Those on foot, by reason of their extra labours,
perspired freely in the broiling sun, except Tanami,
( D 694 ) 10


who through long practice had acquired some of the
properties of a camel. He exerted himself vigorously,
but to all outward appearance remained curiously
unaffected by the heat. Indeed, he seemed to revel in
his efforts.
Towards nightfall a dim blur appeared on the skyline
and was hailed with much relief. It betokened the
presence of timber. Somewhere amid the scraggy
growth was the well which the first expedition had
found so many years before. Now the soil began to
harden perceptibly under the Mastodon’s tracks, and
they gripped with lessening effort. Soon wiry bushes
straggled across the route, and these again gave place
to pygmy eucalyptus brushwood which covered a
gentle upward slope leading to denser vegetation. The
bushman scanned the landscape earnestly seeking for
a sign that he might recognize, and at last he found
it. A little away to the south there was a scarcely
discernible break in the timber line, as if some small
creek had intervened.
“ That’s the blessed place,” said Tanami with
decision. “ It’s only a pesky little gully, but its got a
diorite bottom.”
No other member of the party could see anything,
so no comment was made. All realized that the eyes
of the bushman had a quality almost miraculous, and
their faith in him was unbounded. The Mastodon
crushed through the lesser saplings in its path as if
they were no more than feathers, but before the
objective was reached the sun shot out of sight and


darkness almost immediately descended upon them.
“Just as well to camp here anyways,” remarked
Tanami. “ It’s never very healthy alongside water in
them parts.”
“ Why?” asked Bob, puzzled.
“ Nigs!” came the laconic answer; then, seeing that
the youth was still in doubt, he explained further:
“ The Blacks ’way out in the bush calc’late that their
special god lives where water is, an’ they consider it
right to kill anything or anybody they find tamperin’
wi’ the works. An’ you’ve got to remember that they
never see a white man, an’ most likely would reckon
him to be a sort o’ evil spirit who’d be better dead.”
This information was illuminating; and Bob con-
sidered it at some length. It was all very well to speak
of the danger from Blacks when one was far away
from their habitation; it was a different matter entirely
when the real article might be anywhere around. He
would like to have had the matter elucidated still more,
but meanwhile Stuart was calling for his assistance to
tighten up some bolts.
When he duly came along with his spanner he
discovered that his companion had other subjects to
discuss with him.
“ It’s the water, Bob,” communicated Stuart.
“ We’ve used up ten gallons since morning, and the
radiator level is pretty low now. We’ll have to fill up
again.”
“ Well, what about that, old son? Tanami knows
where there is plenty, and we’ll barge alongside the


supply station first thing after breakfast to-morrow.
What I’m wondering about is whether the Blacks are
cannibals.”
“ And we’ve been heavy on the petrol too, Bob,”
Stuart said a trifle anxiously. He had not noticed his
friend’s digression.
“ It’s a good thing we took an extra stock. Never
mind; we’ve got through the worst; an’ the old ’bus
is goin’ strong.” He hesitated, then ventured a timely
warning in a hoarse whisper: “ The Blacks may attack
us to-night. See that you have your rifle ready!”
But not a sound was heard all through the night,
though Bob, himself restless, noted that Tanami was
equally wide awake, for the bushman got up many
times during the silent hours and prowled around
watchfully. With morning came a sense of relief. The
glaring sunlight revealed no lurking forms; it only
showed up a welter of drooping shrubs that seemed
dry as the soil from which they sprang.
In less than half an hour after a start was made
Tanami’s well was reached. It was just a rock hole
in a diminutive gully protected from enfilading sands
by a ring of boulders evidently put there by human
agency. When rain fell the cavity would collect the
water that drained into it from the surrounding country,
and as it had an impervious base, it would retain its
supply for many seasons, if untouched.
Tanami went on his knees and peered into the
depths.
“ Either the nigs have swallowed the lot or there’s


been no rain for years,” he muttered in deep dis-
appointment.
Stuart’s teeth clenched on his lip; Bob gaped in
incredulous amazement; M‘Crimmon whistled softly
to himself.
The bushman could scarcely believe his eyes. He
picked up a pebble and dropped it into the narrow
aperture. A feeble splash echoed from the bottom.
“ There’s a mixture of some sort left,” he said;
“ most likely a pretty strong essence o’ snakes,
’goannas an’ such like crawlers that have dropped
in.”
He took the bucket which Stuart had optimistically
brought, and prepared to go down himself. On top
they soon heard him swishing the bucket about in
the darkness.
“ No, I reckon I don’t want a light,” he said in
answer to Bob’s inquiry; “ I can dash well see all I
want to see, and then some more.”
He sent the result of his labours to the surface,
and quickly followed in person.
He found his companions gazing as if mesmerized
at a thickish green fluid that contained suspended in
solution many ornithological oddments, while the
stench that rose from it was indescribable. He looked
at them with a grim smile.
“ There you are,” he said. “ I’ve mined a couple
o’ gallons o’ the stuff, an’ you don’t seem happy.
We can get enough to fill the radiator, an’ I reckon it
will give a punch to the ole engine that will make it


sit up an’ take notis. The climate down below ain’t
too bracin’, so I’ll have a breather for a bit.”
“ This is a job that fairly whistles for volunteers,”
spoke M‘Crimmon, “an’ I’m the cheery backslider
that’ll tackle the next desp’rit venture. Hand me the
bucket when you have finished, Stuart. I’ll capture
the next lot.”
Though the task was not inviting, each member of
the party took his share of it. Stuart was thankful
that his beloved engine would be safe for another day,
yet he wondered vaguely what was to happen after-
wards. The tank in two days had been drawn on for
fully half of its original contents, and only sixty miles
had been accomplished. By his figures, over a hundred
miles had yet to be negotiated before the Creek of
Diamonds would be reached —and then there was no
certainty of finding water. Tanami, however, had no
doubt about matters when this stage was reached.
“ Once there,” he said, “ we’ll get water by sinkin’
through the clayey stuff in the channel. Your dad
reckoned so, an’ he knew.”
“ A hundred miles isn’t so very much,” commented
Bob, cheerfully. “I’m sure the ’bus will battle
through.”
Stuart’s lips trembled. More than anything in the
world he wanted to take the chance, but he felt that
he had no right to risk the lives of the others. He said
this, haltingly. Gravely Tanami replied: “ Some-
thing must be left to Providence, my lad, or the job
would be too easy. I ain’t worryin’ any, just yet.”


His calm confidence was inspiring, and the boy was
comforted.
The Mastodon did so well after leaving this place
that the passengers were once more taken up. The
snake juice in the radiator was accredited with this
satisfactory happening by the bushman, and no one
thought of explaining otherwise. The course was
now altered to follow the wooded ridge which stretched
in a north-easterly direction; by doing so the heavier
country on the flat would be for a time avoided. By
twelve o’clock fourteen miles separated them from
the rock hole they had left, and everyone was delighted
with the progress made. The present direction could
not be maintained for long, however; it would take
them too far to the north. Tanami was reluctant to
make a change, but Nature intervened to make his
decision less difficult. The slight elevation they
followed quite suddenly began to merge into the
plains. The vegetation along the crest grew thinner
and thinner, finally ceasing altogether.
“ Dash!” said Bob, surveying the desolate vista.
“ I suppose this is where we get off and work our
passage.”
They stopped for a hasty lunch before endeavouring
to proceed farther. Stuart also wanted to investigate
what wastage had taken place in the radiator, and he
was much cheered to find the diminution almost
negligible. It w r as, he knew, the low gears that did the
damage, and their use could not be avoided in the
deeper sand. Still, it was clear that, under even strongly


adverse conditions, the Mastodon could make a
wonderfully efficient showing.
While the billy was being boiled, the four dis-
cussed their plans on the shady side of the Mastodon’s
stout bulk. Stuart brought out his chart, and showed
the approximate position by dead reckoning; Tanami
noted hastily the space between this and their des-
tination.
“ We’d better steer straight into sunrise now,” he
said reflectively.
Bob had been having a good look at the pencilled
line drawn by Stuart, and observed that it diverged
to the extent of some degrees north of the horizontal.
“ The sun rises in the east and sets in the west,”
he quoted, with a chuckle, “ We’ll miss the blessed
target, Tanami, if you don’t look more carefully!”
He was highly pleased with himself for having, as
he thought, caught the bushman napping.
Tanami turned a pensive glance upon the speaker.
“ Young Solomon,” he said, “ the sun an’ me are
pretty old friends, an’ I can tell you he don’t make a
habit o’ risin’ precisely in the east, in these parts,
unless mebbe once a year to get his balance. I reckon
Stuart can explain, for I ain’t a scholar.”
“ Gosh!” muttered Bob, “ an’ I thought I had a
sure thing that time; but I’m the melon as usual.”
Stuart was too surprised at the bushman’s grasp of
meridional variations to say a word. He was learning
daily that Nature teaches her children in many diverse
ways.


Presently Tanami mounted to the seat of the motor,
and stood aloft, scanning the eastern horizon. He was
trying to locate a landmark which would be easier for
Stuart to steer by than the silhouette of the car.
Where sky and plain met, the line of junction was
slightly wavy, but no definite object could be seen
which would serve as a guide. His glance took in the
nearer distance, and he gave a low whistle of surprise.
“ Bob,” he cried, “ there’s something here for you
to look at, a darn sight more interestin’ than charts.”
The youth was beside the bushman in a bound.
“ I can’t see anything but—but—Why! What
are these black dots? An’ they’re movin’ too! Help!
It’s a whole bunch of natives! Surely —you don’t
think they are coming here, Tanami?”
“ I wish they were, Bob; I reckon I’d like to ask
’em some questions in a way they’d understand.”
Bob hurriedly began to search for a pair of bino-
culars stowed somewhere in the car, and having
found what he sought handed them over to Tanami.
The powerful glasses opened up a new prospect to
the bushman. The wavy sky-line he had seen resolved
itself into a gentle undulation bearing unmistakable
signs of scattered timber. Evidently it was a tongue
of better country running parallel to that they had
just left, but extending farther north. Next he looked
for the Blacks; he had almost forgotten about them,
for, compared with his satisfying view of the farther
distance, they had become of little importance.
“ They’re headin’ the same way as we’ll be doin’


in a minute,” he grunted. “ ’Bout a dozen o’ them,
every darn one carryin’ spears an’ a waddy.”
M'Crimmon swarmed up to have a look, and having
seen, he winked ponderously at Bob and smiled
joyfully.
“ This is where you and me will bask in the lime-
light, my bonnie boy,” he whispered. “ We’ll sweep
them from our path, as the story-books say. Tanami
and Stuart are doin’ their bit. Will it be said that a
M‘Crimmon an’ a Murray shirked their heroic task?
No, never!”
“ Steady on, old sport,” remonstrated Bob. “ Those
fellows are trekkin’ along quite peaceable, and besides,
they’ve got spears, an’ I don’t want to be tickled with
any sharp implement. No, I’m dashed if I do! But —
but ” —his curiosity was rapidly overpowering his
sense of caution—“ what is the bright idea, anyhow?”
The Seeker after Adventure was for the moment
puzzled, but he beamed, craftily, and held up a depre-
cating hand.
“ There ye go already,” he grumbled. “ Blowin’
off at the safety valve wi’ a hundred pounds to the
square inch showing on the dial. Fair burstin’ wi’
bravery ye are, my lad—But mum’s the word! We’ll
work out a bonnie scheme together.”
Tanami eyed the pair sternly.
“ Them nigs,” he said, “ ain’t lookin’ for trouble,
an’ neither are we. Anyway, they’ll clear like red-
shanks when they hear us behind, so there ain’t no
need to worry.”


A little later the expedition resumed its journey,
and almost at once was struggling in the yielding
sands of the treeless plain. Yet though the Mastodon’s
tracks ground deep they met with a firmer resistance
than had been experienced on the previous afternoon,
and progress, if slow, was doggedly sure. The bush-
man’s rough estimate made it about twelve miles to
the welcoming timber country he had seen through
the field-glasses, and it was everyone’s desire to
reach the favoured track before sundown. Stuart’s
one anxiety was the engine. It was hopeless trying to
keep it cool in such arduous circumstances, and he
could only pray that the water would last out. He
relinquished the wheel to Bob after a while, who
again gave place to M‘Crimmon when his energies
had recuperated. In this way each of the three had
brief respite from the trying toil he found on foot.
As for Tanami, he was tireless, and lent his aid cease-
lessly without a murmur.
The Blacks were no longer in sight. The roar of
the Mastodon had alarmed them, and by this time
they were doubtless fleeing wildly in the vicinity of
the timber belt, seeking for shelter from the pursuing
demon. Nevertheless Bob was quite certain that the
Mastodon would inexorably overtake them. He had
been having a hurried conversation with M‘Crimmon
in his spare moments, and that wily gentleman had
evolved a scheme in which these same Blacks had
prominent place. He dilated on his ingenious plan
during a halt while Stuart was refilling the radiator.


“ I’ve worked it a ’ oot,” he gloated. “ Just think
o’ it! A perfect labour-saving device just howlin’ to be
utilized. Good horse-power runnin’ to waste. It’s
against the principles o’ an engineer to see energy
rompin’ around in such a sinfu’ fashion. Further-
more an’ forby, an’ in conclusion, so to speak, this
brilliant brain-wave o’ mine will economize water ”
“ Gosh!” burst out Bob, sudden enlightenment
dawning upon him; “ you don’t mean to say you’d
conscript the blacks to do the pushin’ ?”
“ Pullin’ would gie greater efficiency,” calmly
returned the other, “ The coaxing whisper o’ the
engine astern would inspire enthusiasm, which is
a vera beneficial quality —at times. Work, my lad, is
the salvation o’ the idle, an’ I can see that we’re goin’
to be a blessin’ in disguise to the poor heathen.”
Nothing more was said on the subject for a con-
siderable time, during which the Mastodon and all
hands battled prodigiously. The belt of scraggy
timber now loomed out clearly ahead, and not more
than three miles away.
“ We’ll make it easily, Stuart,” Tanami commented.
“ An’ our camel hasn’t stuck us up once, though its
been mighty hard goin’ —unless when we had to
stop to give her a drink.” This recollection caused
a frown to cross his features, “ It’s thirsty work,”
he added. “ I reckon if we could get along without
swilling so much ourselves, we wouldn’t need to worry,
but I’ll nose around to-night before sundown. If
there’s a drop o’ damp within miles I reckon I’ll find it.”


The sand had become much firmer now, and the
motor began to push forward more freely.
“ All aboard!” cried Stuart, hesitating to slow
down, even for an instant, lest the momentum might
not be regained. Gladly they clutched at the Mastodon
as it drew away from them, and climbed to their
accustomed seats. Immediately he had settled dowm,
Bob turned to his companion, who appeared to be
cogitating deeply.
“ I suppose you were joking in what you said about
the Blacks,” he whispered in M‘Common’s ear.
The engineer made no answer for fully a minute;
then he made a clean breast of it.
“ It was just a wild fancy, laddie, meant to amuse
you, but the funny thing is, I’ve thought of it seriously
since then. It’s no’ an impossible proposition, an’
the?e’s an auld sayin’, ‘ Needs must when the devil
drives ’, which fits in very comfortably.”
“ But how —how are we to capture them—even if
we see the beggars again, which isn’t likely? I shouldn’t
like to shoot them and I don’t see any other w r ay.”
M‘Crimmon shook his head vigorously.
“ I’m a man o’ peace, Bob, an’ whiles a man o’
strategy; but I’m devoid o’ murderin’ instincts, an’
besides, a crippled nig would be a mighty poor power-
generator. No, my bold bad pirate chief, we must
use the guile o’ the serpent to lure the wily savage
from his lair. Once I get my arms round him, I’ll gie
him such a persuasive hug that he’ll follow like
Mary’s lamb. If we’ve the luck to run across a


native camp, you’ll see how easily the job will be
done.”
Bob was duly impressed, but not convinced.
“ But where do I come in?” he demanded. “ I
don’t think I’d be much good at the Samson business.”
“ All you’d have to do, Bob, would be to let them
see you strollin’ round careless-like, wi’ me hidin’
in the vicinity ”
“Not for me!” the youth declared decisively.
“ I’m not built for speed, an’ I’m dashed if you’re
goin’ to use me for bait.”
M‘Crimmon looked forlorn.
“ Man, it would be a grand adventure,” he remarked
enticingly. Then he relapsed into thoughtful silence
and tried to work out a more attractive method of
achieving his earnest purpose.
A camp was made on comparatively firm ground
with yet an hour till sundown, and then Tanami
seized his rifle and prepared to make off into the
thickest part of the scrub. He would allow no one to
accompany him in case the presence of another might
distract his mind and prevent concentration on his
search.
“ I reckon I should be back in an hour or two,”
he said. “ I dunno how far I may have to chase
around, an’ I can get home in the dark if you keep
the fire goin’ strong.”
He had been gone less than five minutes when he
made a hurried reappearance.
“ The nigs ain’t very far away,” he announced.


“ I see their tracks everywhere about —an’ I can smell
’em! Mebbe it would be better to dowse the fire after
dark. Nigs are curious cusses when they get riled.”
He hesitated for an instant. Then addressed Stuart:
“ If you think there’s danger, just let the engine
snort. That should scare ’em.”
He strode off again with a lighter step than before.
If natives remained for the night when they had
ample time to go farther there must be a reason for
their lingering, and it must be a rather cogent reason,
too, since fear of the Mastodon had not driven them
onwards. Thus Tanami thought and felt comforted.
Bob and M‘Crimmon set about preparing the evening
meal. Stuart started to replace a sparking plug which
had not been firing as it should. All three were in a
gloomy frame of mind because of the bushman’s
insistence on going out alone. Each was just a shade
piqued that he should not have been chosen to share
whatever risk there might be. And to them suddenly
came the spirit of emulation. Stuart was the first to
give it expression.
“ I don’t want anything to eat until Tanami comes
back,” he said. ‘ I think I’ll stroll around a bit ”
“ Me too!” cried Bob ambiguously, leaving his post
by the fire and grabbing his rifle, which was lying
near.
It was apparent to them all, however, that it would
be unwise to leave the camp absolutely deserted. One
must stay behind in case Tanami returned earlier than
he expected, or to give the signal arranged by the


Bushman in the unlikely event of the Blacks’ approach.
Stuart had until now heard nothing of M'Crimmon’s
wild plan, which had been confided to Bob’s ear alone.
“ If you did manage to capture one of the Blacks
we might find out from him where the nearest water
is,” he said hopefully. “ I suppose it’s worth trying.”
“ We arranged the whole programme this after-
noon,” broke in Bob eagerly. Until that moment his
enthusiasm for accompanying the lanky Scot had not
been very marked.
“ All right,” Stuart said, with a sigh; “ I’ll wait.”
He watched the two until they vanished among the
shadeless mulga and iron-bark trees upon which the
declining sun was showering its last torrid rays. He
was alone in this great land of silence, and thirst, and
mystery; alone and so utterly helpless. A feeling of
desolation swept into his heart which he strove vainly
to conquer. His responsibility had been too great for
his years. He felt that in some way he had failed in
his reasoning and so brought about a position of un-
certainty which should never have been allowed to
exist. In the west, the sky, blood-red, appeared to him
as an omen of dread. He shivered, though the heat was
still oppressive, and for a dangerous instant almost
abandoned himself to the weakness threatening him.
Then swiftly reaction came, and he jeered at himself
for his foolish imaginings. “ Surely I’m not afraid?”
he said aloud. “ Tanami is really carrying the weight
and not I, and yet he always looks the same no matter
what comes along to worry him. Then M'Crimmon


-®P| jjs f
.> -. .4
A QUICK SHOT




can laugh and make jokes when all that I’m thinking of
is—dead men’s bones —our own bones, of course.
Bob, too, knows quite well what we may be up against
in another day, and yet he only gets funnier than
ever.”
He went over to the motor and examined the tank
at the rear. “ Tanami was right,” he thought. “We
must be drinking a terrible lot, and I’ll try to save my
share for the engine. It’ll be pretty terrible at first,
but I’ll get used to it.” His resolution cheered him
considerably, and hope and faith returned to him in a
life-giving flood.
A subdued chattering in the scrub attracted his
attention. At first he thought it came from a school
of cockatoos he had seen a little while before. But
no! there was a distinctly human note in the medley
of sound he heard. His heart began to beat rapidly.
His peering eyes had caught sight of a black figure!
Then another and another came into view. The boy
noticed quickly that they carried spears, but evidently
they had not seen him yet, for their gaze was fixed on
the Mastodon, and their wild eyes were bulging in
terror. Stuart stood stock still in the belief that his
presence had been unnoticed, but soon he realized that
he was being accepted as part of the fittings. They
pointed at him, jabbering among themselves, and to
his horror one poised a spear as if to throw it. The
boy had scarce realized the action before the weapon
was struck down by the other natives, who then turned
with a yell and rushed back whence they came. There
(D 694 ) II


remained the unkempt savage who had been baulked
in his attempt to throw the spear. His attitude was
clearly one of doubt. Soon he began to edge forward
foot by foot and so slowly that he seemed not to move
at all.
Stuart’s first thought was to make a quick dash to
the starting switch, but to his surprise he found himself
reasoning logically that the result of such action might
alarm Tanami needlessly, for the roar of the Mastodon
would be heard for miles. Instead, he made a crouch-
ing spring for his rifle, which lay against a gnarled
sapling about a dozen feet away.
The shriek of the startled Black rang in his ears;
it was followed immediately by the vicious whiz of a
spear that drove harmlessly overhead. Had the barbed
missile been flung with the usual precision of a savage,
the boy’s life would have ended there and then. As
it was, he merely glimpsed the deadly shaft in its
flight and laughed at the wide aim of the thrower.
Before the rifle was in his grasp another spear zipped
so close to his ear that the wind created by its passage
fanned his cheek. Instinctively he flattened himself
to the ground and just in time to escape a third whistling
dart. No longer doubting the skill of his adversary,
and now thoroughly aroused, Stuart, from his prone
position, took a quick shot at the prancing warrior,
who was already celebrating his supposed victory.
The bullet found its mark. A weird scream issued
from the lips of the savage. His grotesque antics cul-
minated in a wild leap into the air; then he turned and


limped back into the bush with surprising rapidity.
“ Anyhow, I haven’t hurt him much,” the boy
reflected, his anger cooling swiftly as he watched the
wounded Black desperately seeking safety in retreat.
I aimed low on purpose, so I must have plugged him
in the leg. Now, if M'Crimmon had been here he could
have roped that chap in without much trouble.”
He checked his musings suddenly, as an astonishing
thought flashed into his brain.
“ M'Crimmon?” he muttered; “ why shouldn’t I
do it myself? I don’t think the beggar’s got any more
spears, for he threw at least three at me —and he won’t
be able to run very fast.”
His decision was made before the words found
utterance.
He snatched a coil of rope from one of the boxes on
the ground, and with this in one hand and his rifle
in the other made a determined dash after the Black.
It did not occur to him that there was any particular
danger. The wounded native might show fight, cer-
tainly, but he had always understood that the Aus-
tralian aboriginal was a poor specimen of humanity
at the best, and his resistance would be more noisy
than effective at close quarters. He had a momentary
qualm of doubt when a twinge of pain in his arm
reminded him of his own unfitness at the time for a
rough-and-tumble melee. The lamentations of the
escaping savage were a sure enough guide to the
strenuous pursuer, and in a few minutes the quarry
w T as in sight.


The growing gloom of approaching night was creating
fantastic shadows in the motionless pygmy forest, and
the black body of the native was not easily distin-
guishable from its surroundings. With a suppressed
whoop Stuart increased his pace, stumbling over fallen
timber and crashing through the brittle undergrowth
in his impulsive eagerness. Had the warrior ahead not
been so intent on his own shrill bewailings he would
surely have heard the noise the boy made in his passage.
“ He can’t be so badly damaged as all that,” thought
Stuart. “He couldn’t get along so fast if anything
serious was the matter. Maybe—maybe he isn’t really
howling for that at all—he might be shrieking out
some warning to the others, for all that I know.”
It was well that he allowed for this latter possibility
in time. He had utterly forgotten about the rest of the
band until now, and he was already too far away from
the Mastodon for his liking. Reluctantly he slackened
speed, and just then the fleeing savage stopped, and
also ceased his cries. He was less than fifty yards away
from Stuart, and where he halted there grew a cluster
of smooth-boled trees that were straighter and slightly
taller than their rough-barked neighbours. The boy
crept behind a sheltering shrub, and through the
branches watched the surprising actions of his intended
captive. The Black had started to dig furiously into the
loose soil with his hands, unearthing in the process
sundry white objects, which he swallowed with great
gusto. To the looker-on it was a puzzling and amazing
spectacle, and he gazed, wondering and fascinated.


Out of the darkening scrub some half-dozen be-
dizened warriors now evolved as if by magic. Without
a word they laid hold upon their wounded tribesman,
and bore him off in their midst. And now the bush
beyond seemed to be alive with hasty movement and
excited murmurings; twigs crackled, branches broke
asunder, and a dull rhythmic note began to pulsate
through the air.
For the first time Stuart experienced a sense of fear.
Were preparations being made for an attack on the
Mastodon? The sun had set, ; and darkness was
spreading her pall over the landscape. He looked back
as he had come and was reassured by the glow of the
camp fire through the intervening trees; it would guide
his returning tracks —but it would also guide the enemy.
He decided to retrace his steps immediately, and
blanket the fire as Tanami had instructed; but first he
would see what the savage had been digging that he
relished so much. He moved stealthily on and felt for
the trees he had observed to be different from others;
in the deep shadows now prevailing no differentiation
could be made by sight alone. He groped in the
crumbling dryness at their base, and presently his
fingers touched and recoiled from a clammy substance.
He was not to be deterred by his first repugnance; he
thrust down his hand again and drew forth a mollusc-
like object which yielded to pressure like a miniature
balloon.
“ I suppose they’re all right to eat,” Stuart whis-
pered to himself, with a shudder at the thought.


“ Anyhow, I’ll get one or two to show Tanami. He’s
sure to be interested.”
Wrapping the specimens he collected in his handker-
chief, he placed this in the pocket of his open shirt,
then looked about for the fire glimmer that would
direct the speediest way of return. He could not locate
the welcome beacon at first; he had come a little too
far and some trees were obscuring it. So he started off
to reduce the distance until it would come into view
again. He walked, as he thought, about a hundred
yards before he saw a feeble gleam just a little way in
front. Vague echoes now seemed to surround him,
and the monotonous drumming which had ceased for
a space began again with a harsher note than before.
“ I expect Bob and M'Crimmon have got back and
have dowsed the fire,” he muttered. “ They’ll be
worrying about me now, I suppose.” He hurried
forward, anxious to quell the alarm of his companions,
then just on the verge of the narrow illuminated circle,
he drew back with a choking gasp of sheer horror. It
was not Bob and M'Crimmon who were within the
zone of light. It was a group of naked savages that
clustered near the dying embers, and each was laden
with war-like equipment. In the centre a hideously
bescarred creature stood, daubed with white, and of
terrifying countenance. With shrivelled arm that
moved slowly yet with clockwork regularity he beat
at an unseen object which at each concussion emitted
a death-like and hollow sound. At close quarters the
measured reverberations were as those of a tolling bell.


To Stuart they crashed out like a knell of doom.
It was fully a minute before the boy realized that the
camp he looked upon was not the one he had left,
transformed by the fierce-looking horde who now
possessed it. The dim bulk of the Mastodon was
nowhere in evidence and it could not have been spirited
away. Then again, this camp appeared to be in a
clearing in the heart of the wood, and the Mastodon
had come to rest at the beginning of the timber. When
this full knowledge dawned upon him he felt a great
relief. He could not imagine how he had come here,
but it was assuredly most urgent that he should make
immediate escape before he was discovered. He looked
in the heavens for the Southern Cross, and decided to
steer west by keeping the constellation well to his left.
This direction would bring him back to the open plain,
where he would quickly see even the distant light of
Mastodon camp —unless it had been purposely sub-
dued. In the latter case all would still be well, for it
would indicate that his comrades were prepared for
the threatening attack, and as for himself, he did not
much care where he passed the night, so long as they
were safe.
Very cautiously he began to retreat, thankful now
for the darkness which formerly he had feared; still
he found that his purpose was not to be so easily
achieved. The aged native who had been responsible
for the funereal orchestral effects suddenly ceased his
languid labours, and began to harangue his restless
audience in a high toneless voice.


While he was speaking a hush fell on the assembly
so that the slightest movement in the vicinity would
be at once noticeable. Stuart waited impatiently for
the orator to finish, expecting that in the hubbub
he would be enabled to steal away without attracting
attention. The spokesman, he thought, must be a
sort of medicine-man such as he had read of in books,
and he would probably be conveying to the warriors
the messages received from the spirits he conjured
up through the medium of his appalling groaning
instrument which now lay discarded at his feet. As
the speech of the weird old savage proceeded, it was
obvious that the listening circle was much impressed;
rolling eyes were turned upon the speaker, and occa-
sionally murmurs as if of fear passed through the
throng.
The palaver ceased, and at once a wild chattering
arose. Now was Stuart’s time to escape. He turned,
and had taken but one step when a rending crackle
in the brushwood directly in his line of escape caused
him to halt. Someone was clearly in wait in that
direction. The disturbance was of too definite a
nature to pass unnoticed by the Blacks around the fire.
In an instant they came swarming towards him,
all but the medicine-man. With sinking heart the
boy cocked his rifle, and a cry rose involuntarily to
his lips: “ Tanami!” And lo! a well-known figure
bounded out of the shadows on the farther side of
the clearing, and grappled with the medicine-man,
whose shrieks rang fearfully into the night.


“ Don’t shoot, my lad,” the bushman’s voice called
out. “ They daren’t hurt you while I’ve got this old
sinner here.”
The approaching savages were within a few yards
of the boy when the screams of Tanami’s captive
created consternation among them. They hesitated,
uttering strange cries, then a few came on while the
bulk dashed madly back. The boy’s recollection of
further happenings was vague. His startled senses had
scarcely grasped the import of what was occurring,
before they received another shock. From the scrub
at his back, whence the first alarm had come, there
now issued the crash of a breaking branch, followed
by a double thud, and a gasped imprecation. Like a
bolt from a catapult a lean form shot past him and
hurled itself upon the foremost native, forcing him
back upon his fellows. Flail-like arms arose ghostly
through the gloom, smiting heavily and indiscriminately,
and the voice of the smiter jerked into the night in
unmelodious song. Like a whirlwind he passed on to
the succour of the bushman, who seemed likely to be
sore beset.
“ Gosh!” said someone in admiring tones out of
the darkness near by. “ He’s a real dandy in a scrim-
mage.”
“ Come on!” cried Stuart, realizing who was beside
him. “ We’re needed badly, I think.”
Together they rushed to the fray in the wake of
M‘Crimmon. A fallen Black, struggling to his feet as
they passed, swung at them with his waddy. The blow


lacked strength, but Bob, taking it in the rear as he
ran, was urged forward to greater effort. Before them
they dimly saw the Blacks disperse and flee, and in
triumph they reached the bushman’s side. He was
kicking the fire into a blaze when they arrived. The
hostile scene of a minute before now showed a vastly
altered aspect. If the boys expected an appreciation
of their prowess they received none. Tanami looked
from one to the other very gravely, and said:
“So we’re all here! I reckon I mentioned that I
didn’t want company, an’ yet ye roll up an’ cause
trouble which might ha’ meant a funeral. I had
spotted all I wanted, but it didn’t seem worth a possum’s
kick ”
He noticed the look of disappointment on the youth-
ful faces, and at once altered his tone. “Of course,
you weren’t to know that nigs are the curiousest
cusses in the world, an’ dam dangerous when they
get close. I ain’t just talkative enough to explain
things mebbe. Anyways, I reckon I’ve got a mighty
fine lot o’ mates —ain’t skeert at nothin’!”
This, from Tanami, was praise indeed.
M'Crimmon ceased wandering around on the edge
of the clearing and joined his companions. He had
not come off quite scathless in the brief encounter,
and he patted his head tenderly where a waddy had
got in a glancing stroke.
‘‘l’m wounded,” he complained lugubriously. “ A
hefty chap wi’ a face like a burst tar barrel did the
cruel deed, an’ but for the hardness o’ my skull I


might have been numbered wi’ the slain. Am I the
only sinfu’ backslider that bears an honourable scar
o’ the fearfu’ conflict?”
“ I don’t know about the honourable scar,” grumbled
Bob. “ I got what you might call an ignominious
wallop that didn’t hit me on a hard place, and I’m
not sure if I’ll ever be able to sit down again. Just my
rotten luck as usual. Oh, of course, laugh! I’m the
giddy goat all right,”
“ I reckon the laugh will keep, Bob,” Tanami
consoled, expressing unconsciously a truth that the
lad knew full well. “ We’ve got to do a bit o’ worryin’
now.”
He explained his movements since he had left the
camp. He had taken a circuit for miles in the hope
of locating some sign of moisture in the parched scrub
land, and had finally traced a tiny watercourse which
led directly to the clearing occupied by the Blacks.
“I lay doggo in the bush an’ watched them,” he
said. “ I reckoned there was water somewheres near,
an’ that they had hidden it. But them nigs was like
camels; they didn’t seem to want any drink, until
just after sundown a black son o’ a gun came along
sick an’ howling for Bubba. The old joker wi’ the
tom-tom seemed real worried, an’ he came out near
to where I was hidin’ an’ scraped some old timber
away ”
“ I knew all the time you had found it,” broke in
Bob.
Tanami seized a burning log from the fire, and


using it as a torch, led the way to a spot less than a
score of yards distant. Here a cup-shaped depression
showed, littered with debris and loose sand, and in
the very centre a plentiful supply of withered twigs
was strewn. Kicking these aside he thrust the flaming
brand into the depths disclosed. A thin slimy mud
appeared at the bottom, but nothing more.
“We might squeeze out a gallon or two,” said the
bushman. “ We’ll come over in the morning and have
a try.”
“ Well, the Mastodon has a dashed good digestion,”
Bob said cheerily, “ that’s one blessing,”
On the way back to camp the bushman very simply
accounted for the wild stampede of the Blacks. The
near presence of the Mastodon, which they imagined
to be an evil spirit, alarmed them, and the drying of
the well, and the sudden sickness of one of the warriors,
were ascribed to its baleful influence. The latter event
hurried matters.
“ The hoodoo man battered away at his drum for
a good bit afore he gave in,” he remarked; “ but I
calc’late he made up his mind pretty sudden, all the
same. A spirit that can make a nig sick had a darn
big argument. They were scared to death when I
grabbed the old chap at the finish.”
Stuart could hold his news back no longer.
“ I’m glad I was of some use after all,” he said, “ for
I was the spirit that did the damage, and you will find
the spears of the * sick ’ man sticking somewhere around
to prove that I didn’t shoot without cause.”


Bob and M'Crimmon were particularly disgusted
with this information. The former was very sorrowful.
“My luck again,” he muttered. “ The best I could
do was to roost on a tree like a fowl, waiting for some-
thing to happen, an’ I nearly fell off too. That’s what
started the trouble.”
“ Things were gettin’ a wee bit slow,” murmured
M'Crimmon blandly. “ I’ll no’ deny that I gave you
some gentle encouragement.”
“ Well I’m dashed. You bloodthirsty sinner!”
The gaunt engineer chuckled.
“ You’ll no’ forget that I kept whisperin’ in your ear
to run back, not forrard. If you insist on being brave
you shouldna blame me.”
The bright blaze of Mastodon camp was now in
view, and looking back into the darkness Stuart could
also see the red glow they had so recently left.
“ It must have been about here I got slewed in my
bearings,” he exclaimed. “ I had been watching my
savage digging things from the foot of a tree and —why,
I’d forgotten that I’ve got some of the stuff in my
pocket. I’ll show you when we get into the light.”
Tanami at once showed extraordinary interest.
“ If it’s what I think,” he said, “ you’ve mebbe
saved the whole outfit. I won’t say nothin’ more till
I see what you’ve got. I reckon it don’t do to cheer too
sudden.”
Back by the fire, while M‘Crimmon and Bob has-
tened to prepare the long-delayed meal, Stuart took
from his shirt pocket the handkerchief in which he


had wrapped the dubious specimens. In the grey dusk
they had not been over attractive to look at, and he
expected to view them with even less enthusiasm in a
stronger light.
Gingerly he undid the folds and exposed to view—
nothing save a few fibrous and flattened skins, that
might have been once the enclosing fabric of some
organism, but were certainly no longer so. The boy
gazed at these relics in mingled dismay and disgust.
In their earlier state they might have provided suitable
provender for the none too fastidious aborigines, but
he could hardly imagine that any white man would
swallow the curious things. He examined the handker-
chief minutely, but the most careful scrutiny supplied
no clue to the mystery. Whatever he had found had
vanished, leaving only the empty cases behind. Whether
they had been of vegetable or animal nature he had
not the slightest idea. He looked up to find the bush-
man surveying him quizzically, and he regretted he
had mentioned his ridiculous “ find ”.
“ I put them there, all right,” he said, “ but that’s
all I see left. I must have squashed them when I
pressed against the tree I was hiding behind. I
remember feeling something cold go right through to
my skin.”
He put his hand into the empty pocket and shivered.
It was damp to the touch.
Tanami picked up the discarded handkerchief, and
squeezed from it several drops of moisture; then he
clapped the boy heartily on the shoulder.


“ I reckon you’ve done a splendid night’s work,
lad,” he said. “ I’ve seen nigs carryin’ them perishin’
grubs about, but they would never tell where they
found them.”
“ Grubs?” echoed Stuart. “ The dashed things were
like little balloons. They grow at the foot of the tree
with the shiny bark.”
“ They’re called ‘ bardies ’, Stuart. I reckon they
is a kind o’ slug that eats all the moisture outen some
kind o’ trees, an’ if you’ve spotted the tree, we won’t
need to go thirsty yet a bit.”
The boy made a wry face, at which the bushman
laughed heartily.
“ If you can swallow an oyster, a bardie will be easy
goin’. It’s just a nat’ral water-supply which mebbe
Providence —though I’m too ignorant to understand
’bout them things—puts on tap for the thirsty nig in
them dry parts.”
Bob drew near with resolution shining in his eye.
He had heard the most of the conversation and was
profoundly interested.
“ I’ll eat the dashed things if I have to,” he pro-
claimed, “ but as a student of Natural History, I’ve
got an idea that the old Mastodon could wolf them up
without turning a hair —the cases would dissolve in
hot water, an’ I don’t think the radiator will do anything
less than boil on this picnic, so where’s the trouble?”
“ We’ll all have a good try at them before I risk
choking the water-jacket of the engine,” said Stuart
with firmness. “I’m not going to consider my


176 Mystery of Diamond Creek
taste. I’ll go thirsty until I forget I’ve got a taste.”
“ Tea’s ready!” bawled M'Crimmon, “ an’ I’ve
cooked a bonnie damper fu’ o’ slugs—grubs I should
say. No, blow it! I mean currants —an’ I hope ye don’t
think they’re —something else, at an awkward moment.
As for me I’m sure that I’ll have a dream this night,
an’ think old Willie wi’ the drum, that we saw across
the way, is beatin’ bardies down my throat.”


CHAPTER VII
The Creek of Diamonds
In the region of Latitude 20° s. Longitude 132 0 E. the
chance wanderer travelling against the route of the sun
would probably see nothing inspiring in the landscape
and would equally probably at this point be possessed
of but one abiding purpose —to pursue his way with
all possible speed towards more favourable country.
For even to the eye of knowledge this area seems
parched beyond all others; it breathes thirst with all
its lingering horrors, and emanates fear; its spell is
brooding melancholy, which in turn brings hopeless-
ness and despair.
Yet native tracks can be picked up in the sand—if
one is watchful for such signs—and natives in the
flesh would surely be seen if the weary pilgrim halted
in his forward march. A little farther south nature
appears not quite so sombre, for the surface of the
plain is here broken by what seems at a moderate
distance to be a low range of sun-blackened hills.
But the experienced traveller in such a land as this
will shun all broken tracts, for he knows that uprearing
sandstone radiates a fierce heat, far worse than he will
meet on the open flats, and the rough debris in its
(D 694) 177 12


vicinity makes progression even more difficult than
does loose sand. Experience therefore teaches avoidance
of bare elevations when it is almost certain that these
will be but solidified protrusions of the mass from which
they spring, and so in this case the chance wanderer
aforesaid will, if necessary, deviate from his course to
pass the obstruction with a good clearance to the
north.
However, these same weathering hills are not what
they seem. Time was when they must have been of
imposing aspect, showing to east and west myriad
peaks and angular projections. But the years have
ruthlessly laid them low, taking away bit by bit the
outside evidence of their structure, and giving them
deceptive hues in the slow process of oxidation. So
much depends upon the nature of a rock in unknown
territory. It is in itself an indication of good or evil
import, signifying much to the initiated. Desert
sandstone, for instance, would not encourage one to
look for water in the neighbourhood. Limestone, on
the other hand, usually proclaims the presence of
water in some degree, and the blackened range was
limestone!
At fairly close view it presented a serrated appear-
ance, lost in the greater distance. Its crags and spires
were blunted and mouldering, and innumerable
crevices and crannies appeared in the more solid
bulk below. The extreme length of the mass was not
greater than a mile. Towards the middle it appeared
to have considerable thickness, presenting to the eye


an elliptical bulge, with a rim like a battlement. The
entire formation had at no place a greater height
than a hundred feet, yet so steeply did the sides up-
rise from the base, that to climb to the crest of the
ridge would be a formidable if not impossible task.
On the morning following the flight of the Blacks
from the dried-up soak, a strange figure stood on an
eminence of these limestone bluffs, gazing long and
earnestly towards the west. It was that of a man,
bent with age, and of patriarchal aspect. His coun-
tenance was swarthy, but not of aboriginal blackness,
his facial colouring pertaining more to a dark olive.
His features were arresting. His nose, far from being
of the squat negroid variety, curved like an eagle’s beak,
and two flashing eyes, deep-set under bushy fringes,
gave an expression of alertness—or it may have been
fanaticism. He had a long white beard which des-
cended to his waist. For clothing he wore a loosely
fitting robe, to all appearance finely woven of some
delicate vegetable material. As he watched, he com-
muned with himself in a strange language; and he
seemed ill at ease.
“ They come!” was the purport of his speech.
“ They come to disturb the solitude of my people;
to wrest from a dying race the secret of its poor heri-
tage. My forefathers have viewed the ravishing of
our once rich possessions—not by man’s hand but
by the judgment of the All Wise. O ye covetous of
the land! of what avail are the worldly riches ye seek?
Where a bounteous river once flowed ye will find but


the dross of earth, and in the finding ye would destroy
the remnant of a line sunk already near to savagedom.
But a few more years I ask for them and they shall
cumber the earth no more. But a few years and ye
may take all that the encroaching sands have left. . . .
I am the last of a tribe accursed, whose doom was
sealed in ages past, when first our fathers fled from
the oppressor ”
He called out sharply: “ Ibraham!”
A tall native, whose dress was merely a loin-cloth
made out of an animal’s untanned skin, answered the
summons. In appearance he showed the strain of
Asiatic origin, only his colour was almost that of
ebony, and the light of intellect gleamed not at all in
the lustreless vacant eyes.
He emerged from an outlet in the rock which
apparently communicated with some chamber below,
and stood in an attitude of respectful attention before
the old man.
“ They come,” spoke the Patriarch. “ I know not
when they may reach our sunken waters. It is for you
to watch. Stay not their progress if they should press
onward. Let them go their way in peace. But should
they tarry, seize them and bring them hither.”
“ Master! They may carry the hidden thunder
which slew Yacomb.”
“ If so it be, then does our law hold good. ‘ A life
for a life.’ It is just.”
He who was called Ibraham turned to depart, but
the aged chief had further things to say:


“ Ibraham, my son, the airs whisper to me that a
smoking engine bears the invaders to our poor domain.
The message wafted through the heavens speaks of
an evil spirit encased in metal which cries with a loud
voice, but in my greater knowledge I know this to be
but the work of man even as in our far-back history
we ourselves created mighty birds which flew upon
the water. Yet the sands that encompass us may
bring about the destruction of this monster, for surely
they are merciless as our ancient seas. Go! As-
semble a score of chosen warriors, but no more.
Their impatience and growing fierceness might defeat
my purpose. For I say, kill not, and he who dis-
obeyeth shall himself find death. Go! Watch and
wait, that ye may not be found unready.”
Ibraham swung out of sight as silently as he had
appeared, and the venerable one returned to his
study of the western skies. A slight cloud, so tenuous
that it seemed no more than a gossamer haze, floated
lazily just above the far horizon. A further feathery
shape of similar nature quickly made its appearance,
drifting upwards immediately beneath the first, then
another and another wreathing mist shot into view
at irregular intervals, so that the curtain of sky was
soon alive with nebulous specks and patches. The
heavens were declaring their message to the watcher
on the heights.
Seventy miles away the Mastodon was battling
strenuously and to some purpose, with all its crew on


board. It left a wake that was as a clean swath in a
sea of gold. The sun, nearly at its zenith, was like a
great brazen ball thrust out from the sky in stereo-
scopic relief. Its rays seemed to suspend in the lower
air, making phantasmic eddies through which the eye
saw vaguely; waves of filmy heat-mists pulsated over
the scorching sands, and the circlet of the horizon
appeared blurred and wavy and ludicrously close.
All at once Stuart uttered a shout of joy:
“ I see a mountain. It’s quite near. Look! We’ve
maybe come faster than we thought.”
Tanami, sitting beside him, grunted incredulously,
but shading his eyes with his hand he gazed in the
direction indicated by the boy’s pointing finger.
Yes, there was certainly the semblance of a rugged
rocky ridge to be seen. Still, though he saw, the
bushman shook his head.
“ ’Tain’t there, lad,” said he. “ That blinkin’
pictur’ ain’t real.”
“ A mirage!” Bob exclaimed, craning his neck to
look, “an’ we’re runnin’ right into it!”
Even while he spoke the vision came into clearer
focus; for a moment it remained thus in full view,
then it jerkily transported itself upwards as an im-
perfectly adjusted moving picture might do on a
screen, and slowly dissolved into empty space.
From his store of knowledge, M‘Crimmon pro-
vided a few welcome crumbs.
“ I’ve seen them jokers often,” he admitted, “ at
sea as well as on land. You can always tell when


they’re no’ true by lookin’ at the bottom. There is
aye a line o’ weakness at the foundation, for a mirage
hasna got any. It just floats in the air like a spook.
A’ the same a mirage is no more a story-teller than
I am, for it’s a real photograph if no’ actual sub-
stance, a real photograph projected in the sun’s
magic lantern.”
A little before midday they halted, and Stuart
unpacked his sextant. Fairly steady progress had
been made since the start that morning, and even
Tanami agreed that it was time to fix the actual
position on the chart, and make a course direct to the
object of their quest.
With the utmost care the young navigator took the
necessary observations, Bob standing near with the
chronometer to mark the time and record the figures
given. The rim of the visible earth’s surface was
clearly defined, and there was no necessity for em-
ploying artificial aids to assure the correctness of
the angles taken.
“ I make the latitude twenty degrees forty minutes,
and the longitude one hundred and thirty degrees
eight minutes,” Stuart announced, not very long
afterwards. “ We’re too far north, Tanami, by about
twenty miles.”
The bushman nodded. “ I wanted to keep clear o’
the dry country down there,” he commented, waving
his hand towards the south. “ I reckon we can shoot
straight for the creek now. I calc’late it should be
’bout sixty miles into sunrise.”


“ Not so much,” said Stuart, making a rapid cal-
culation. “ Fifty is nearer.”
“ Hoorah!” cried Bob. “ The old ’bus has been
just rompin’ along. Maybe—maybe we could have
a real drink now?”
His eagerness was of no avail.
“ I don’t like them any more than you do,” Stuart
said, with a grimace, “ but we’ve got to stick it out.
We need every drop we’ve got for the engine ”
M'Crimmon drew forth a bucket filled with globular
substances and offered it to Bob.
“ What more do ye want, my sylph-like fairy lad?
Here’s a labour-saving device for your poor overworked
innards —food and drink at one go. Help yersel’.”
And the youth partook of the fare thus given and
said no more.
In the shade of the Mastodon Stuart diligently
filled in the gaps in his chart and plotted the course
afresh.
“ We might make it by to-morrow night,” he said,
“ if I shake things up a bit.”
“ We’d better camp well on this side o’ the gully
if we don’t get in afore dark,” Tanami remarked, with
meaning. “ It’s a different sort o’ nig we’ve got to
tackle ’bout here, as I’ve mighty good reason to know,
though I never got near enough to see the sweeps.
We want to have a bit o’ daylight to begin the circus
and get them frightened off, so’s we can sink a shaft
in the creek in peace. I reckon we should strike water
in ’bout twelve feet there.”


“ We’ll surely be able to see some signs of where
Dad has been,” said Stuart earnestly.
“ Well find out all right, my dear lad,” gravely
returned the bushman. “If the nigs speared him
I’ll get the news out o’ them. But somehow I reckon
they ain’t to blame even though they gave me such
a bad time afterwards. We’ll see, my lad; we’ll
see.”
However, by sunset the following day they were
still a good dozen miles distant from their destination.
Trouble had developed in one of the cylinders, which
was losing compression badly in consequence. Stuart
guessed that an exhaust valve had burnt out, but was
loath to stop to make repairs so long as the Mastodon
could crawl along at reduced speed. The disorder had
been noted in the early afternoon when the speedo-
meter indicated only a bare twenty miles to go. It
would be so much easier to dismantle the heavy
cylinder head castings at the creek than out in the
open. The surface of the ground, too, was hardening
perceptibly, lessening considerably the engine strain.
So the Mastodon limped along for eight miles under
its handicap before approaching darkness caused a
halt. Tanami was dolefully concerned over the occur-
rence. He imagined that the mechanical camel had
developed a complaint which might prove irremediable,
and it was chiefly his anxiety to reach the creek that
influenced the others.
“ We could make the distance easily in the day-
light even if I took time to put in a new valve


before we leave to-morrow,” said Stuart that night.
“ If there’s a kick left in her, I’d rather see our-
selves alongside before you disturb the beast,” Tanami
replied. “ You see, she’s got our whole outfit aboard,
an’ mebbe she won’t carry it farther if you annoy her
by knockin’ her about wi’ a hammer an’ spanner.”
There was a subtle wisdom in the bushman’s remark.
Anything might happen in the process of a hurried
repair, and at this stage a prolonged delay would spell
disaster. He had not yet acquired the confidence in
engineering works which was possessed by one and
all of his companions.
“ I’ll do the job for you, Stuart, when we get there,”
M'Crimmon said. “ You’ll have lots to think about,
an’ I can save you worryin’ wi’ machinery if I’m no’
much use otherwise.”
The boy was grateful, and said so, but he knew he
could never trust the work of repairing the Mastodon’s
engine to any other hands than his own. Even Bob
might not set the valve truly, and M'Crimmon had
never seen the delicate works. He was accustomed
to cumbrous machinery where the error of a hair-
breadth might not be noticed.
“ Ah weel, my lad,” the gaunt Scot continued,
quick to notice the reluctance in the boy’s manner;
“ mebbe ye’ll trust me more some o’ them days,
an’ I’ll aye be standin’ by.”
He looked so sorrowful that Stuart hastened to
appease him.
“ I know so little,” he said. “ Only the works of


the motor, but I understand every bit of it. You
understand so many things, and I hope you aren’t
angry because I’m jealous, really jealous of the Mas-
todon.”
M'Crimmon patted him on the shoulder and
replied, quite solemnly for him; “ I like ye better
for that, Stuart. It’s a dependable man that’s jealous
o’ his work.”
Stuart had been thinking towards evening that it
was time the mountains mentioned by Tanami as
being no great distance from Diamond Creek showed
up. He had expected to see them before now, and
their failure to materialize caused him much mis-
giving. What if his calculations had been wrong,
and the Expedition was now nowhere in the neigh-
bourhood anticipated? The thought alarmed him,
and he struggled with it in secret, not daring to give
it voice, but at last he simply had to speak it. The bush-
man quelled his doubt at once.
“ I reckon I’ve humbugged you some about them
mountains,” he said. “ They ain’t big. It’s only me
bein’ ’customed to the flats judge height a bit different
from you. They’ll show up in the morning or soon
after, never fear.”
Just before the various members of the party lay
down to rest, Bob drew attention to a bright star low
down on the horizon.
“ I don’t remember seein’ that chap before,” he
said. “ What’s his name, Stuart, old sport, an’ you
don’t need to put me off by sayin’ he’s the blighter


called Canopus, for I get him in the eye every morn-
ing.”
But Stuart could not enlighten him, and was indeed
more puzzled at the position of the luminary than his
interrogator.
“ Why, the dashed thing’s blinkin’ like a Morse
code,” complained Bob again, some minutes later,
turning round in his blanket. “ This campin’ out
stunt isn’t what’s it’s cracked up to be. If the moon
isn’t shinin’ on a fellow’s face the bally stars come out
an’ wink at him.”
Stuart raised his head. Where the star had been
only the black void showed.
“ Must have set mighty quick,” he thought, and
lay back to sleep.
The first sight that greeted his eyes on awakening
was the dim outline of Tanami’s mountain rising
like a wraith from the desert. It might not then have
been easily discernible had not the sun directly
behind the obstruction shone through the jagged
peaks. A feeling of joy mingled with awe came into
his heart. Upon this lonely sentinel of the wilderness
his dad had gazed in the years gone by, and now
the son came where the father’s foot had trod. This
was the Notley’s Land he had annexed for his own
in the days far off yet so near —the days of his romantic
hopes and dreamings. Now rosy fancies were behind
with the years where they belonged, and grim facts
alone stood out before his vision.
The bushman saw, and silently held out his hand


to the boy. Undemonstrative always, it was his tribute
to courage and achievement. The boy had not once
faltered on the way; he had proved his worth, modestly
seeking guidance from experience, strong of hope and
sure of purpose as befitted the son of a pioneer.
The Mastodon crept along on the last lap of her
journey, panting stertorously. Within a mile or so
a decided change in the landscape came about. The
unstable sands gave definite place to a loose conglo-
merate gravel, and a sprinkling of trees began to dot
the plain. Here and there, too, ledges of solid rock
broke the surface, showing cleavages in their form
that looked like massive slabs on edge. A geologist
would have understood these signs of remote volcanic
upheaval, and, if curious, might have paused to
examine the nature of the strata exposed; but such
inspection could only have scientific interest, for
even the possible presence of rare minerals in this
inaccessible region would barely justify more than a
passing glance.
“ Jim Notley said the creek was a line of fracture,”
Tanami explained. “ Somethin’ had gone wrong wi’
the works way back afore our time, an’ somethin’
sunk, or somethin’ came up, darned if I know which.”
They were steering some degrees north of the land-
mark they had seen, and which now loomed up dis-
tinctly. Nearer and nearer they drew, and yet no
sign of any ancient watercourse could be traced.
The meagre vegetation of course obscured the view,
but it was abundantly evident that the mysterious


channel did not proclaim its location afar off. A
point was at length reached directly in line with the
mountain; to go farther would leave it to the right,
and behind. Here Stuart switched off the engine
until the mystifying condition of affairs was fully
considered.
“ It’s got me beat,” the bushman said helplessly.
“ We scraped the mud outen the perishin’ place wi’
our hands, havin’ no tools, an’ we could see the moun-
tain just as we see it from here. Mebbe the dam
gully wasn’t a real gully; we didn’t have time to
track it up one way or another.”
“ I’ll soon know where it is,” said Stuart. “ Hand
me the sextant, Bob.”
“ I think it’s your rifle you’ll want in a minute,”
returned the individual addressed. “ I’m almost sure
I saw a native as big as a church steeple lookin’ at us
from behind a tree.”
The bushman glanced around searchingly.
“ There ain’t no protection here,” he muttered,
“an’ these trees come so close up that the nigs could
shelter behind them and spear us afore we’d notice.
Swing her south and head for the mountain where
it’s more open, an’ I’ll prospect around on foot.”
Stuart was less concerned now than the bushman.
He knew that the creek, or whatever it might be, was
not far away. The Mastodon went off on its new
course with a prodigious snort; the engine was over-
heating and cried aloud for attention. The boy earnestly
prayed that it would hold out just a little longer.


However, no more than a quarter of a mile had been
covered in the new direction before the Expedition
came again to a halt, and this time the stoppage was
enforced. The Mastodon without any warning sud-
denly sank into what appeared to be a soft and slimy
soil, and the engine with a great dry gasp gave up
the struggle.
The calamity lost much of its seriousness when it
was realized that the tracks of the motor had laid
bare the channel they sought, not defined, certainly,
but assuredly the source or ending of a watercourse
that bore evidence of moisture even on the surface.
Ahead, a perceptible depression could now be traced,
and looking back as they had come it was clear that
the unusually prolific timber which Tanami had com-
plained about was actually marking a zone of damp-
ness emanating from a probable fissure far below.
“ This explains why I didn’t find the blinkin'
place afore,” Tanami said thoughtfully. “ A creek
that don’t go nowhere but one place is a mighty hard
proposition for an ignorant bushman to find. Any-
way, we’re here, an’ I reckon the rest is easy. The
place where Jim Notley an’ me looked for water an’
found only diamonds must be just a step farther
along. Now we’ll soon know —somethin’.”
He proceeded to unpack the picks and shovels,
saying no word meanwhile. The first business on
hand was to find water, and at the spot where the
diamonds had been unearthed he expected to do
this speedily, and also the dismal proofs of his old


192 Mystery of Diamond Creek
companion’s fate, which he now feared to see.
“ You stay by the jigger, Stuart,” he said, noticing
that all three meant to accompany him. “ Mebbe
it is best that I should go without you first.”
The boy shook his head.
“ I am coming with you,” he said quietly. The
engine will have to wait. We can’t move the Mastodon
now until I take off the cylinder head, and fix up the
broken valve, and that’s quite a long job. And there’s
just enough water in the tank to fill the radiator.
As there were Blacks about it was necessary that
someone should remain with the motor if only to
guard the stores it carried, and M'Crimmon promptly
agreed to be left behind for this purpose.
“ If ye hear me shootin’ ye’ll ken I’m engaging the
enemy,” he said, with much cheerfulness.
“ An’ if you hear us shootin’,” returned the bush-
man, “ lie low, an’ they mightn’t see you.”
Armed with shovels, picks, and rifles the three set
off. They had not far to go. In a few minutes’ walk
the slight concavity they were following abruptly
opened out into a sharply defined channel with a
rocky bank on one side and a sloping indeterminate
conglomerate on the other. Sand and many up-jutting
boulders filled the space between. It seemed to be
but a frivolous freak of nature that the gully so formed
should have existed at all, for a few hundred yards
ahead it appeared not only to level up with the surface
again, but to exist, if exist it did, under a wide capping
stony ridge that led straight as an arrow to the low


mountain range not more than a mile distant. Either
a comparatively recent submergence had taken place,
or a mighty Willy-Willy had at one time drained the
gully of its sandy content at this one weak section,
leaving the years to replace bit by bit the swift denu-
dation it had wrought.
The bushman walked ahead, silent and glooming,
his eyes roving over the bed of the dreary ravine,
searching, searching. ... At last, with a muttered
exclamation, he stopped short. At his feet something
metallic protruded; it was the spidery framework of
a sextant, corroded with rust and almost as fragile
as the web it resembled. He laid his rifle down and
began to slash furiously with his pick at the surrounding
sands, uncovering here and there odd remnants that
his awakened memory recognized. Here had been
thrown the discarded impedimenta of the original
journey in which he had taken part. Only one other
sure proof of the location was wanted, and Bob found
it. Under the steep eastern bank of the creek he saw
something white protrude, and shudderingly he drew
it forth. At the sight Stuart groaned and turned away
his head.
“ ’Tain’t human, lad,” said Tanami, examining the
section of bone which Bob had revealed. “ It’s only
a bit o’ the old camel who thought he had come far
enough.”
But search as they might they could find no other
indication of man’s presence near at hand. It looked
as if the creek had remained unvisited since first its
( D 694) 13


solitudes were invaded by venturesome Jim Notley and
his loyal companion.
“ Where did the diamonds come from?” Stuart
asked. To him the mystery of his father’s fate was
becoming more and more inexplicable.
The bushman nodded as if he had just remembered
something.
“ The little scoops we dug with our hands would
soon silt up,” he replied, “ but I reckon that the same
thing might happen wi’ bigger holes.”
He began to dig with feverish energy at a point
where a small mound appeared to have collected, and
almost after the first stroke or two his eyes gleamed
with the light of certain knowledge. His pick had
embedded in a powdery grey substance before the true
level of the creek sand had been penetrated.
“ It’s a dump!” he exclaimed. “ There’s been a
shaft sunk here, an’ I reckon we’ll find it.”
With a will the boys rushed to help, and in a few
minutes the covering gravel was shovelled aside, close
to the spot where the evidence of excavation had been
found. The clay underlying the drifts was soon
revealed, and then all gazed in wonder at the sight of
a rectangular shape which appeared on the cleared
surface. It was the rim of a cavity which had been
made by the hands of man; the cavity itself w T as filled
with waste blown hither by the winds which had
hastened to fill the void.
Tanami entered without a pause upon the task of
clearing out the debris. In this neither of the boys


could render assistance, for there was room for only
one in the pit that quickly began to appear. He was
standing waist-deep in the hole before he made any
remark, and then, with a grim laugh, he tossed out
a pebble he had picked from the side of the excavation.
“ It’s one o’ them blinkin’ diamonds,” he said.
“ Don’t see how they missed it.”
Stuart picked up the stone, and with scarce a look
handed it to Bob, who gazed at it with entranced
interest.
“ Gosh!” he murmured; “ maybe this is worth a
hundred golden gobbies, and you don’t seem to mind.”
“ I ain’t lookin’ for that stuff just now, Bob,” spoke
Tanami, in the midst of his labours. “ I reckon that
if them things are val’able I could get enough to
make you rich in half an hour. But it’s water we
want —an’ here it is, thank God!”
It was rare for the bushman to express himself so
fervently. He now straightened himself for the first
time since he had begun the work of clearing out the
cavity, and wiped the perspiration from his brow.
The boys bent over and peered into the deepening pit.
At Tanami’s feet a pool of water was beginning to
form, bubbling steadily up from unknown depths.
Stuart’s relief at the welcome sight was beyond his
power to express. Even then his main joy was in the
thought that his dad’s judgment had not been lacking
in this. Unerrngly he must have directed the sinking
of the well—he might even have dug it with his own
hands! Surely, the boy thought, a man of such great


knowledge could not have fallen an easy prey to any-
one.
Yet here was only deeper mystery. With water and
wealth at hand he had disappeared, leaving no trace.
Tanami joined him on the surface and interrupted his
musings. He sensed the emotion that filled the boy’s
heart, and in his rough way tried to give comfort.
“ Lots o’ things could have happened, my lad,” he
said. “ I reckon that so long as we don’t find him
there’s hope. Can’t say there’s much, an’ again there’s
no tellin’. So far’s I can see they only got this here
hole down afore —somethin’ came along. It might
have been nigs, but I hang on to my idea that the
Dago is at the back o’ everything. Don’t grieve, boy,
you’ve done all an’ more than most grown men would
do, an’ don’t despise the fortune that your dad would
like you to take home to your poor worryin’ mother.”
The boy looked up with eyes that saw through a
mist.
“ Whatever is here is yours,” he said brokenly.
“You have done everything, and thought of every-
thing—an’ I couldn’t take more from you.”
Tanami regarded him, slightly perplexed. “ You
see, my lad, I’m only a poor sort o’ groping beetle
at the best. I ain’t even eddicated. If I had lots o’
money I’m darned if I’d know what to do with the
stuff, and besides,” as a new thought struck him,
“ I was only your dad’s partner in this diamond busi-
ness, an’ I reckon his share should make his son rich.
I don’t want nothin’, anyway, an’ what I has is blinkin’


well goin’ home to Mrs. Jim —I mean your mother —
an’ there ain’t a perishin’ word more to say.”
Stuart would have said a great deal more had not
Bob interrupted at that moment with the hoarse
warning that the natives were approaching in force.
He had been looking for tinted pebbles in the bank
of the creek, when he espied them. Now he came
hurrying over to his companions, throwing open the
breach of his rifle as he ran, to make sure that the
magazine was fully charged.
“ Keep down!” he whispered hoarsely, himself
crouching almost double. “ They were quite close
when I spotted them, and they’ve got spears an’
another sort of prodder that I’ve never seen before
outside of a picture.”
The bushman, with movement light as a cat, was
over at the bank in an instant, where he surveyed
the scene through a tuft of wiry grasses growing on
the edge of the slope. He returned almost at once.
“ You’re quite kerect, young man,” he said coolly.
“ I reckon I’ll fill my pipe afore the circus starts. I
doesn’t get nearly so riled when I’m smokin’.”
“ I’d like to remember that,” grumbled Bob,
“ but I’m too dashed nervous.”
“ If we’ve got to shoot,” went on the bushman
with exceeding calmness, “ keep this in mind: aim
low an’ at the ground, a yard or so in front of their
feet. The sand will bounce up in their eyes like buck-
shot. There ain’t no sense in killin’ nigs if they ain’t
doin’ nothin’ ”


“ But dash it all,” broke in Bob, his voice still at
whisper pitch, “ what if the blighters are out to kill
us?”
“ It’s all in the day’s work, lad.” Which was the
nearest Tanami could get to the “ Kismet ” of the
East.
“ Three cheers!” said Bob dismally, going back to
his post of observation.
Now, in his career Tanami had had many brushes
with natives, and with care he considered they could
always be kept at bay, if not actually driven away,
in the daytime. It was the night attack of a frenzied
horde he feared, for then one could often be taken
by surprise, and if once the Blacks got within spear-
throw the situation would be desperate. In the present
instance the Blacks were approaching in orderly
formation and without haste, like a troop on parade,
as the bushman expressed it. He had never known
them attack in this way before.
“ How far off now, Bob?” he asked, having got his
pipe well alight by this time.
“ About two hundred yards, and I don’t like the
look of them one little bit,” replied the youth.
“ Come on, Stuart,” said Tanami. “ This should
be dead easy, for we’ve got good cover and the nigs
ain’t got any. You’ll see ’em run like kangaroos in a
minute.”
Neither of the boys had had much experience
with firearms, though both knew instinctively how
to use them. Stuart’s weapon was a service rifle


which in his steady hand was deadly to anything
aimed at within three hundred yards at least. Bob
and Tanami each had a Winchester of 450 calibre
which threw a bullet heavy enough to stop a buffalo.
Unlike Bob, Stuart showed little trace of excitement.
The presence of danger seemed to take away his
power of speech, and quicken his brain to meet the
emergency. The two ranged themselves one on
either side of Tanami as he directed —and waited.
The advancing Blacks were apparently no nearer
than they had been when first seen. Their march was
taking them farther up towards the thicker timber
where the Mastodon had briefly halted.
“ I don’t think the beggars have seen us at all,”
Bob said, not quite sure whether he was sorry or
glad; “ but I hope they won’t spot the old ’bus.”
“ They can’t miss it,” jerked out Tanami shortly,
“ an’ of course that’s what they’ve come about. I
reckon M‘Crimmon will be up against it if I don’t
switch them off ”
The report of his rifle rang out with startling sud-
denness, and almost simultaneously a small geyser of
gravelly fragments spouted up a short yard in front
of the leading warrior, who wheeled around bewildered.
Another shot, and a fresh deluge of splintering
debris showered up from the savage’s feet. He leaped
into the air this time, and the band pressing behind
huddled together in confusion, uttering loud cries.
Again the bushman fired, but to his amazement the
Blacks, though obviously terrified, made no attempt


to retreat. The tall native whom Tanami had singled
out for his special attention had evidently recovered
from his fright since he found himself undamaged,
and with fierce exhortations he was now haranguing
his followers.
“ Do you think that’s the end of the section?
asked Bob.
“ Don’t like it a bit, lad. Them’s no ordinar’ nigs.
I reckon I’ll have to plug that big chap to sorter
encourage the rest. All together now, boys; we’ll
give ’em a volley for luck!”
Three rifles belched out as one, and the crash of
exploding cordite awoke strange echoes in the creek
and rolled over the plain in quivering waves of sound.
Two of the Blacks fell, struggled back to their feet
again, then sat down wonderingly in the midst of
their brethren, their power of locomotion surprisingly
gone, though they had seen no missile come towards
them.
The warriors surged hither and thither in alarm,
then clashing their spears against their shields they
began to chant a wild war song, stamping their feet
and swaying their bodies in unison to its strains.
Tanami was perplexed. He had never known Blacks
to behave in this fashion in broad daylight. He was
also uncomfortably conscious that their articulation
was markedly different from that of any of the tribes
he had come in contact with. Their voices, harsh and
clear, lacked the guttural timbre that should have
been there.


“ Mebbe the Dago wasn’t to blame after all,” he
muttered; then he glanced over the sights of his
rifle once more, and he no longer aimed as he had
directed his young companions. He shot to cripple
if not to kill. He realized that the position had sud-
denly become fraught with grim possibilities.
He was right. Up to this point much of the band’s
terror had been of the superstitious variety. Out of the
thunders calamity had come, and even the bravest
trembled before that which he could not see. Now,
however, the defenders of the creek could be observed.
They had come into full view, seeking to force the
issue by this show of strength. Three men with
fire-spouting weapons might awe and put to flight
a hundred aborigines, but these were not to be so
easily cowed. With a wolfish roar they saw that this
was the quarry they had come out to seek, and fiercely
they swept to the attack.
Tanami, amazed, saw the rush begin, and now his
eyes glared ceaselessly along his rifle barrel, and
steadily he picked out one by one, so that the number
advancing quickly became depleted. And the boys
too, so suddenly to be tried in Fate’s testing furnace,
endured the ordeal like veterans, their courage shining
forth like pure gold. Not once did they falter when
the dread knowledge grew in their hearts that this
might indeed be the end of all their hopes and all
their strivings. Their rifles had become hot in their
grasp when the first spear came. It had fallen
short, but the momentum had carried it on along


the ground. It rustled to their feet like a snake.
“ Back into the gully,” cried Tanami. “We may
beat them yet.”
Vain hope! Though nearly half the number of the
attacking band had been put out of action, about a
dozen effective warriors were left in the culminating
rush at close quarters.
The trio retreated from the bulwark of the bank as
the foremost savage reached it. The magazines of
their rifles were empty; it was useless trying to re-
charge when in a moment their fate would be sealed.
They stood there at bay, the lean bushman, in whose
eyes gleamed a desperate light, holding aloft his rifle
clubbed to strike, and two boys with powder-begrimed
faces who resolutely followed his example.
There seemed to come a lull in which no one moved
or spoke. The warriors now lined the bank, and in
front and a little ahead was the tall savage whom
Tanami had early noted as the leader. In his hand
he poised a shortened spear like the javelin of ancient
days, but this he made no attempt to throw. In the
breathing space so strangely afforded, Stuart had time
to reflect that the natives had thrown but few spears
in all, despite the heavy losses they endured. He
noticed that each man had still a goodly share of the
deadly barbed missiles slung over his shoulder, and
all were also armed with a short pointed weapon
similar to that held by their leader. Calmly his gaze
rested on the sombre faces, not all of which were cast
in savage mould. Only a few were fierce in expression;


the others had in their staring eyes the wondering
look of children. They had more the appearance of
Arabs than of aborigines. This much Stuart noted
in the brief space while the wonderful silence remained
unbroken.
Quick as a flash came a change. Into the air there
burst a series of mighty reverberations that quickly
ascended in scale to a tumultuous roar. It was the
Mastodon, with life incredibly renewed, hastening to
the rescue! The spell was broken. For a fleeting second
the bushman’s eyes wavered, and in that second his
enemy leaped. The weapon he might in safety have
hurled dropped discarded from his grip and his long
arms stretched out and encircled Tanami’s throat.
The issue of this single challenge, if such it was,
vrould not have remained long in doubt. The bush-
man dropped his rifle, and, with a grunt, locked his
adversary’s oily waist within a grip of steel, bending
the w r rithing body backwards with such fierceness that
a scream of pain broke from the lips of the savage.
But at the heels of their chief his followers came; a
wave of black humanity descended upon the struggling
pair, and in a moment the boys too were surrounded
and overwhelmed.
By this time it had become clear to all three that for
some extraordinary reason or other the savages meant
to take them alive. Talking excitedly among them-
selves they rapidly bound their captives with thongs,
and keeping them in their midst began to hasten south-
ward along the creek. Behind them came the thing


that they dreaded; a flashing monster whose glittering
scales spurned the ground, whose voice was as the
voice of doom. Affrighted, they looked back and saw
the shining terror approaching, and then they hurried
the more.
Twisting in his captor’s grasp, Bob managed to
look round, and his old self, which he thought for ever
dead, revived electrically within him.
“ Gosh!” he chuckled loudly, “ M'Crimmon’s got
the old ’bus on our trail an’ drivin’ her like billy-o!
His ugly face behind the wheel is like the ghost of
Nemesis. We’re safe, Stuart, old top. Rescued by
the Mastodon! That sounds glorious!”
His fellow captives answered him with a shout of
encouragement. They were not accepting their in-
voluntary mode of progression with the same good
grace as their cheerful companion in misfortune.
Tanami’s object in resisting so vigorously was simply
to involve the attention of as many of the natives as
possible, so that perhaps the boys might get a chance
of escape. Stuart had adopted similar tactics for a
reason that had quickly appeared to him. In the
path of their reluctant march the creek was entering
into a rocky cul-de-sac which would prove an effective
barrier to the Mastodon. M'Crimmon behind could not
see this danger, and might find himself in a position
with retreat and advance both cut off if he were not
warned in time. Therefore the boy struggled wildly,
dimly hoping that the natives would be overtaken and
put to flight before this natural obstacle was reached.


The roar of the racing engine, mingling with the
confused cries of the Blacks, created a din indescrib-
able, but so close was M'Crimmon now upon them
that his voice could be heard above the pandemonium,
raised in fierce invective. Tanami with a powerful
effort wrestled clear for a moment and swung around.
The giant motor was less than fifty yards in the rear.
He had a fleeting glimpse of its occupant, stern and
purposeful, tugging at the gear lever.
“ Danger!” he bellowed. “ Get on the bank.”
This was all he could say before he was again over-
whelmed by grasping hands. Despite their terror the
savages were evidently determined to hold their pri-
soners at all costs. Stuart tried to shout a further
warning, but M'Crimmon had by this time seen for
himself. A hoarse yell of disappointment issued from
his lips. Then came a pause in the pursuit, and a
number of bullets whistled overhead. M'Crimmon’s
shooting was not his strong point, and his excitement
did not tend to improve it. Luckily he realized this
in time, for friend and foe were so bunched together
that only the numerical predominance of the latter
would have favoured a lucky hit.
Stuart recognized by the new note of the Mastodon
that it was being forced at the creek bank under a full
throttle; in a minute or two more M‘Crimmon would
be able to bring the terrifying monster ahead. He had
little fear of the result. He imagined that the three
prisoners would be promptly deserted while the Blacks
sought safety in flight. Bob’s belief in such a satis-


factory happening had already grown into a certitude,
which he expressed aloud with great glee. An un-
pleasing possibility quickly flashed across his mind and
damped his enthusiasm somewhat.
“ They may prod us with the prickers they carry
before clearing out.” he said, for Stuart’s sympathetic
ear.
They approached the point where the creek seemed
to end in an uprising mass of rocks and boulders.
Already they could hear the Mastodon panting along
the ridge above. In another moment it would be facing
them as they climbed, and from his vantage point on
top M'Crimmon would be sure to have some surprise
in store. Bob could visualize him waging homeric
combat with the warriors as they came, to the accom-
paniment of the Mastodon’s mighty music, and but
for the disturbing fear that had entered his heart a
little before, his soul would have gloried in the
prospect.
A few yards from the base of the ridge that ter-
minated the career of the channel, the warriors halted
and held hurried conference. The tall leader of the
band, who had ventured to try conclusions with Tanami,
spoke volubly to his associates, pointing backwards to
where the wounded had fallen, some of whom were
screeching lustily. Stuart thought that now, the evil
spirit they feared being no longer visible, they were
arranging for some of their number to return and
bring the stragglers in. Whether he had guessed
rightly or not he was not then to know, for the prisoners


were now urged in front, and with gestures told to
advance.
“ Gosh!” cried Bob. “ They’re lettin’ us go.
Frightened to face the music on top. Hoorah!”
His arms were still bound, however, so he stepped
forward with caution, Stuart and Tanami followed, the
latter expecting every moment that each one would
be speared in the back as he made the slight ascent.
At the base of the stony mound they thought to climb
the creviced rock shone white and polished as if with
much traffic of feet. Above, they heard M'Crimmon’s
eager shout, and his absurdly red head appeared thrust
from behind a boulder on the ridge, where he cau-
tiously sheltered from possible spear attack.
They stepped upon the glistening rock in their
passage to join him, and immediately their foothold
began to subside. It rocked downwards with a de-
liberate and ponderous movement as if they had stood
on a delicately balanced sphere and caused it to rotate.
In another instant they were precipitated into a
cavernous void and the light of day was no more seen.


CHAPTER VIII
The Region of Twilight
The extraordinary happening came about with such
startling suddenness that the swing of the massive
platform had ceased before any of the three could
even dimly realize what was taking place. A surprised
“ Gosh!” from Bob as they were tilted into the depths
was the only sound uttered. They slithered rather
than fell from their sloping foothold, and rolled pro-
miscuously down a continuing declivity that ended
abruptly against a damp rocky floor of unknown
dimensions. They raised themselves to a sitting
posture, and gave vent to their feelings.
“ If they wanted to kill us,” Stuart said hopefully,
“ they didn’t need to go to all this trouble.”
Tanami, unseen though near at hand, agreed with
philosophical cheerfulness.
“ If I can get my blinkin’ hands free,” he muttered,
“ I’ll be able to guess what sort o’ caboose we’re in.”
The boys heard him roll about on the rocky surface,
straining at the things that encircled him. After a
while he spoke again.
“ No nig should know how to tie them sort o’
knots. ’Tain’t reasonable an’ ’tain’t right, but them’s


the funniest nigs I’ve ever seen. They’ve got a sight
more savvy than lots o’ white men I know. Ah! ”
He had found a sharp ledge against which his bonds,
by repeated dialings, would become severed, and with
many grunts he continued to writhe about in the
darkness to accomplish his purpose.
The boys talked together in whispers, fearing to
move lest some yawning chasm might lie beside them.
Their thoughts were gloomy, even despairing, for no
avenue of escape seemed possible now, and they
tried to resign themselves to the worst. Tanami,
hearing them, groaned in spirit, and laboured the more
to free himself, lacerating his bound wrists cruelly in
contact with the edged rock. Gradually the darkness
seemed to lessen; the walls of their prison took in-
definite shape and they were able to distinguish one
another in a vague and shadowy light. And yet no
change was actually occurring. It was simply that their
eyes were accustoming themselves to their new sur-
roundings. The cavern which at first they considered
dark as the blackness of night had in truth never been
dark at all. The transition from the glare of sunlight
to the gloom of this pit had merely caused a temporary
blindness which w r as slowly passing away. They could
even see in sketchy outline the rough passage through
which they had descended. Their prison was in
reality no prison in the restricted sense, for ahead a
spacious corridor could be traced sloping downwards
into the haze of distance.
Tanami, having at last freed himself, performed the
( D 694 ) 14


same service for the boys with the aid of his pocket-
knife; then he stood up with a great sigh of relief.
“ There ain’t such a mystery ’bout this tomfool
business as I thought,” he said. “ The whole blinkin’
place is limestone formation, an’ I never knew. Didn’t
look like the stuff to me, on the outside. I reckon we’ll
find a way out somewhere.”
“ But does that explain the trap-door stunt?” asked
Bob, failing to understand what difference any rock
should make so long as it enclosed them.
“It does, Bob; limestone ain’t very hard, an’ it
frets into the rummiest o’ shapes sometimes. I’ve seen
a chunk o’ it mebbe a hundred tons or more in weight
balancing like an egg, so’s a man could make it wobble
like them toy things that won’t stay down even when
ye slog them. An’ as for caves, I’ve seen ’em around
Chillagoe way in Queensland so’s you could walk for
a blinkin’ mile from one to t’other an’ never see the
sun.”
“ Hang it! I’m sure that’s the old ’bus I hear out-
side,” Bob exclaimed. A dull droning echo had in-
truded upon their senses. It seemed to issue from far
overhead.
“ M'Crimmon will stand by,” Stuart said with
confidence. “ It’s up to us to get out of this as
quick as we can, or he’ll waste all the petrol in
the tank.”
They examined every corner and crevice near at
hand, and tried to move the massive slab which had
provided the means of entrance to their underground


quarters; but their united efforts could make little
impression upon it in an upward direction, and the
damp and slimy under-surface offered no grip for a
vertical pull.
Yet it was obvious that the half-light which filtered
into the cavern must have some connexion with the
outside world. Stuart made several efforts to climb
the slippery walls so that he might investigate, but the
stalactites and tendrils that he clutched at for support
broke away in his grasp at each attempt, and he failed
to get near the top. Still, he could see pin-points of
illumination which communicated through tiny crevices
in the parquetry of glistening boulders forming the
roof. The light, indeed, percolated from the loose
edges of the stony ridge which to their seeming had
displaced the creek.
Tanami did not imagine that the natives would leave
them long to their own devices, and a desperate scheme
had half formed in his mind to lie in wait by the sliding
rock and grapple with them as they came. Possibly
only their leader might appear, thinking the captives
bound and helpless, and then he would find the tables
turned and be forced to show a way of escape if he
would save his own life. The bushman did not speak
of his plan, but the boys saw him grope about looking
for a weapon, and they divined his purpose. He dropped
the flint-edged fragment he had picked up, with a
stifled groan.
“ I reckon I’d do more harm than good. If I messed
the job up, they’d finish us right away. Come on, my


lads! We’ll see how far we can follow this tunnel afore
we take the last chance.”
They moved forward cautiously and in single file;
bats whirred about their ears, and dim-seen creatures,
that looked like giant lizards, scurried in their path.
The white walls on either side dripped with ooze, and
the air became clammy and heavy.
After the scorching heat to which they had been
accustomed, the boys felt the extraordinary coolness
they were experiencing as if it were a chilling
frost.
As they proceeded on their hesitating course, the
width of the natural passage they followed increased,
and the dome above grew farther and farther distant.
They had gone but a hundred yards or so when
Tanami in front halted. To all appearance the way
was leading into the bowels of the earth, whence now
came a faint muffled sound like the far-away muttering
of thunder.
“ God knows where we’re headin’ for,” said the
bushman. “ I don’t like that confounded row, an’
I don’t like gettin’ too far away from the surface.”
“ I don’t think there’s any active volcano in Aus-
tralia,” commented Stuart. “ That rumbling noise
we hear may be just echoes.”
“ I hope it isn’t a blessed earthquake,” murmured
Bob. “ I’ve had all the excitement I want for a quiet
day.”
They resumed their march. The rushing wind
that now met them in the face surely denoted an exit


somewhere into the free air of heaven, though how
such opening could come about so far below the sur-
face none of them could think. This time they had
made only a few steps when a further disturbing
element made its presence felt. It started seemingly
quite close in front as a long dismal wail, eerie and
unutterably melancholy, enough in itself to send fear
to the stoutest heart. Before the single long-drawn
note had ended, a wild chorus of similar yells broke
out, piercing in their shrillness, and trailing off into
mournful cadence.
The boys leaned against the dripping wall, breathing
heavily. What horror was this that waited their
coming? Unarmed, they were helpless against attack
whether by man or beast. The din continued, attaining
a new pitch in which fury was dominant, and into it
were blended snarls and deep-throated bellowings
and the clashing of fangs.
Tanami listened for a full minute without speaking.
He was trying to distinguish between the different
sounds that assailed his ears.
“ Dingoes!” he said, “ and somethin’ else that I
can’t make out, big as a buffalo by the sound he
makes. I thought it was mighty strange for the niggers
to leave the trail clear for us, but they weren’t taking
any risks, darn them,”
“ I thought a dingo wouldn’t attack a man,” Bob
suggested, seeking for a gleam of hope.
“ Not singly, Bob, but in the pack they’re a different
proposition. And when they’re kept hungry as well,


they ain’t healthy things to meet. They are just
wolves, lad.”
The bushman was becoming deeply perplexed.
The presence of animals here was sure proof that
some outlet existed, and it was also nearly sure proof
that the native population actually lived in these
subterranean galleries, for invariably these desert
races and their animal following find shelter under
the same roof.
“ Unless the beggars mean to starve us to death,
I suppose some of them will come along to see how
we are getting on,” Stuart ha2arded. “ You see,” he
added as an afterthought, “ I don’t believe they’d
have saved us up just for fun.”
“ I reckon we’ll get back,” grunted Tanami.
“ M'Crimmon saw where we disappeared, an’ I
somehow think he’s the sort o’ man that’ll open
that sliding door for ever wi’ dynamite if the nigs
give him a chance.”
“ I’m dashed if I thought of that,” reflected Bob,
cheering up instantly. “Of course that’s just what
the reckless blighter will do.”
Thus brightened by a forlorn hope, they started to
retrace their steps just as the howls and shrieks they
were leaving behind died down to a sullen murmur of
animal rage. They did not hear the soft pattering of
bare feet behind.
Had they hesitated a little longer they might have
seen six warriors emerge from the area of discord
and come in their direction. But it was better that


they did not see. Resistance to recapture would have
been futile. The natives following drew close, their
bare feet making no sound. They overtook the down-
cast three and formed in a circle round them, uttering
never a syllable yet conveying in their emotionless
countenances a sense of finality that could not be
misunderstood. Among them was the tall savage
who had led the relentless attack earlier in the day,
and it was he again who took charge of operations.
He peered closely at the prisoners, noticing now
if he had not before that they were no longer
bound, and his lips parted in a wide grin. “ No-
good,” he said, slowly but quite clearly, and shook
his head.
The boys were wildly startled to hear coherent and
familiar words coming from such a source, and Tanami
bent forward as if electrified.
“ You ain’t a real nig,” he cried. “ None o’ ye is
real nigs, though your hides are the same.”
It was plain, however, that the warrior realized
nothing of what was spoken. He gave some rapid
directions to his associates, who were about to bind
the captives once more, and they desisted with obvious
reluctance. His English vocabulary, not quite ex-
hausted, came further into service;
“ Me —Ibraham. Come!”
As he with difficulty formed the words, he changed
the short spear he carried to his left hand, holding
up the right with palm open. He kept it thus for the
space of several seconds then brought it down lightly


on Bob’s shoulder. The youth shivered at the touch,
but recovered himself instantly.
“ Go on. I’m the mug,” he said.
Ibraham, saying no more, began to stride along the
ghostly corridor, still keeping in close contact with
Bob. Tanami and Stuart followed close behind.
Five savages brought up the rear, beating their shields
with their waddies in rhythmic time, heightening the
impression in the minds of the luckless three that
they were being led to ceremonial sacrifice—for
they marched towards the region of weird alarm and
knew nothing of their destined fate.
Yet Tanami talked cheerily on the way. He ex-
plained the significance of the savage’s action in trans-
ferring his weapon so ostentatiously from his right
hand to his left. It was a sign that for the time being
at least no danger need be feared from him. Even
this much was encouraging, and the boys made the
most of it. Luckily for their peace of mind they did
not know anything of the customs of primitive black
races. They had heard stories of African tribes which
were of course pure fiction, and more romantic than
fearful. Their experiences, they thought, might be
terrifying enough while they lasted, but youth, always
resilient, could take little count of the reckoning.
In the heat of battle they had expected the worst,
but in cold blood their hopeful reasoning could not
conceive final disaster, even though they discussed
the possibility in all apparent seriousness.
They came to the zone of ominous sounds, which


now seemed strangely silent, but not for long. All at
once pandemonium broke loose louder and more
terrible than before, and into the heart of it Ibraham
strode with apparent unconcern. The gallery, which
had been ever widening, here bellied out to form a
nearly circular chamber, and it was alive with struggling
shapes that issued from the gloomiest recesses and
streamed towards the centre in a swaying, pulsating
mass. Glistening fangs formed a line on either side,
and slavering jaws drooled in fierce expectancy. The
nerve-shattering bowlings ceased. The creatures were
dingoes, as Tanami had said, but dingoes such as even
he had never seen before. They were large as wolf-
hounds, and of a ferocity scarcely imaginable.
The boys drew back, but their savage guide pointed
to the tautened cords that held each animal to an unseen
stake, and they passed safely through the wolfish lane,
and made entry into a smaller gallery that lay in their
path. Behind now came the angry mouthings of
hungry beasts deprived of their prey, and looking back
Stuart saw the remainder of their escort move among
the frenzied brutes with impunity.
“ I’m dashed glad that’s over,” Bob said fervently,
and no sooner had he spoken than he halted suddenly
in his tracks and clutched Stuart’s arm.
“ Look!” he whispered, pointing into the gloom on
his right.
Ibraham now showed impatience and even fear.
Plainly he did not wish to hesitate at this particular
place. He shouted a string of unintelligible words


accompanied by much shaking of the head. Yet in
the brief stoppage Stuart saw what Bob’s keen eyes
had already perceived—a monstrous shape that sprawled
half-erect in the more distant shadows, its great green
eyes blazing with phosphorescent flame.
“ Seems like a blinkin’ menagerie we’ve struck,”
Tanami grunted, “ but it ain’t no good bein’ surprised.
That blamed thing was a bit like a croc an’ it ’peared
to slither like a seal. Anyways, it stinks mighty power-
ful.”
A rank musky odour filled the air. The thing
emitted a deep throaty bellow as they hurried
on.
The muttering thunder note they had first heard
in the absence of other sounds now assailed their ears
with an increased intensity. It was no longer a vague
rumbling but rather the definite drumming of some
mighty power under restraint, and mingling with it
came a sharp whispering echo such as flood waters
make. The idea became firmly established in Stuart’s
mind that they must be approaching an active volcanic
fissure, for how other could the strange noises be
explained? Escaping steam and bubbling lava might
easily make a similar disturbance, and his own father,
according to Tanami, had stated that the mysterious
creek was just a “ line of weakness The boy did
not know exactly what this term meant, but he had
heard it used in connexion with earthquakes, and a
volcano, he reasoned, was much the same thing on a
smaller scale.


Tanami shook his head, but would venture no other
opinion.
“ Your dad said that the volcanoes in Ostralya have
been dead for thousands of years,” he muttered, “ but
I ain’t goin’ to be surprised at anything that comes
along after this.”
The native had now relinquished his grip of Bob’s
shoulder, and was walking a few paces ahead. Since
Bob had stopped to gaze at the fantastic creature with
the blazing eyes Ibraham had appeared to become
sullen and even nervous. Often he turned to issue
harsh instructions to the armed warriors who still
kept up a faint tattoo with their shields and clubs,
and each time they would draw nearer. Evidently a
close watch was being kept on the captives, though no
reason for this was clear.
And whither were they bound? This question beat
at the hearts of the boys, who expected at most but a
brief journey which would lead them on to welcome
daylight. The drumming chord with its hissing accom-
paniment became more diffused, and the blast of air
that drove into their faces lessened. The crystal
corridor in which they walked was opening out into
gigantic proportions, and suddenly they looked upon
a spectacle so extraordinary that though the eyes saw
the brain would scarce believe.
Almost at their feet there swirled a mighty cauldron
in the centre of which a dense turmoil of waters belched
for fully twenty feet above the surface before dis-
integrating in a sweeping cascade that descended back


upon the pool in a smother of foam. The whole was
set in a gleaming amphitheatre pillared by giant
stalagmites and spanned by a high arched roof that
shone like purest marble. This was not all. Beyond,
and extending into the dim near distance, a broad
and placid river flowed through caverns and crevices
of wonderful beauty whose structure was white as
driven snow.
And yet again came further surprise, for life was here.
In the innumerable alcoves which honeycombed the
rocks on the lower side of the pool whole families seemed
to have their habitation. Groups of natives could be
seen patrolling the river’s edge with fish spears in
their hands; others squatted apart apparently engaged
in domestic pursuits; and some were fashioning
weapons of the chase. Spellbound, the three gazed
at the scene, forgetting for the time their doubts and
fears, knowing only that they saw before them a sight
grand as had ever greeted the eyes of any explorer.
“ Water!” gasped Tanami at length. “ Oceans o’
it, an’ a river that could never dry up. I’m—l’m
jiggered!”
“An underground city! Marble palaces for natives
to live in. Gosh!” So exclaimed Bob, seeing matters
from another aspect.
“ A subterranean river, forced up by pressure from
somewhere,” thought Stuart. “ I wonder where it
comes from, and if it ever gets to the surface?”
So much they saw, and yet their time for seeing was
brief. Ibraham was beside them, gloomy and impatient;


the guard was pressing uncomfortably behind. Still
farther they had to go! And what then? The swarthy
native pointed onward, and they followed.
They skirted the edge of the circling flood, watching
the depths curiously as they went. Here and there a
dark object appeared above the surface and floated
around with the current. Watching one of these, Bob
saw it split in twain into a yawning mouth.
“ Crocs, Bob!” said Tanami; “ the place must be
full of ’em.”
“ Don’t like the look of them much,” answered the
lad. “ I’m dashed if I’d care to go swimmin’ anywhere
about here.”
Stuart’s main interest was in the central upheaving
torrent. It fascinated him. He found himself wonder-
ing from what depth it was being forced. As he looked
he thought he saw a bulbous shape appear beneath
the spray, but it vanished before he could be sure.
He glanced again, and the shock he got made him
stumble on the shelving rocks, and he would have
slipped into the pool had not Tanami’s saving clutch
been there in time. Photographed in his mind was
the picture of an ungainly thing with an enormous
frog-like head and scaly body, its after part submerged.
It might have been a species of crocodile, but he
thought it looked like nothing in the w r orld that he had
ever seen or read about. He noticed that Ibraham kept
his head averted from the pool, and marvelled why.
But nothing could escape Bob, He, too, had seen.
“ Gosh!” he said. “ I should just hate to have that


cheery chap at the end of a fishing line. He’s the same
sort o’ joker we saw in the cave near the dingoes.
Mebbe the natives think he’s just it! ”
Along the rocky edge of the river they went, where
the vast limestone caverns formed the abode of the
strange tribe. The light was in some places quite
bright, but there were areas, too, of darkest gloom,
particularly where the river narrowed in deep-cleft
channels, and the trellised roof descended so close
that it could almost be touched.
The natives they passed on the way eyed them
with sullen resentment but did not come near, for
which all three were thankful. Evidently the bulk of
them were not of naturally ferocious disposition.
Tanami’s mind was in a hopeless maze.
“ Them nigs ain’t real nigs,” he kept on repeating
to himself. “ Not a blinkin’ one of them has got the
nig’s flat nose, an’ they don’t use the lingo neither.
No, them ain’t nigs or I’ll eat my hat.”
Ibraham halted at length where the flowing waters
broadened into a wide lagoon, interrupted by many
masses of the solid formation, which here ascended
like the piers of some enormous bridge. The damp
glistening walls beside them were penetrated by many
great openings which appeared to rise upward into
a region of greater brightness. He led the way into
one of these with a gesture of finality.
With hearts beating high with hope the boys
followed. They were going up at last; up towards
the light of heaven. Tanami thought he saw his


chance. He could have disarmed Ibraham in a trice,
and hurled him backward against his fellows. He
turned deliberately to estimate the fighting value of
the five.
“ I believe we could do it, lads,” he whispered,
“ only I don’t like to deceive even a nig—though he
ain’t. He trusted us, which is mighty strange —No,
I reckon I can’t do it after all. God help me if I’m
makin’ a mistake.”
The natural stone pathway, hollowed into traceable
steps by the multitudinous feet that must have passed,
zigzagged like the stairway of a gigantic building, and
quite suddenly it emerged on a flat flooiway.
Involuntarily an exclamation of surprise burst
from the boys’ lips. The floorway showed the cun-
ning hand of man in its construction. It was tessel-
lated and ground to an even smoothness. It led the
way to a spacious hall which bore evidence of having
been hewn to conformity with a design, and abutting on
this on either side were many entrances into the solid
rock denoted by swinging grass-like curtains which
took the place of doors. Nature and her works were
here, but human handiwork had also wrought its
spell, transforming a cavern into a structure almost
of refinement. Rugs of woven grasses covered the
flagged surface at intervals, and in the centre a rough-
carved symbolical figure stretched out a supplicating
hand.
The aspect presented was Oriental; it showed no
trace of savagery.


Bob gave a huge sigh of relief, and confidence
immediately displaced the foreboding torment chat had
filled his breast. In the exuberance of his spirits he
smote Ibraham’s bare shoulders heartily.
“ What ho! old buck!” he cried. “ This'isn’t too
dusty after that chamber of horrors downstairs.”
The warrior did not even turn his head, but marched
straight on. A curtain swung outwards from what
seemed like the main doorway on the left, and a
native armed with many spears came forth. He eyed
the captives so fiercely that Bob’s growing enthusiasm
underwent a speedy process of revulsion. A moment
more, and the trio were thrust into the room which
he had just vacated, and with a rustling and clattering
of weapons the warrior guard, with Ibraham at their
head, stationed themselves at the entry.
The first impression received by the boys was that
of intense light. Coming from partial gloom their
vision was suddenly blinded, and they thought for
a moment that they stood now in the full glare of the
sun. But the change was far from being so drastic,
and quickly their eyes adjusted themselves to their
altered prospects. The chamber in which they found
themselves was large, and devoid of any form of
furnishing save for sundry mats that strewed the floor.
The walls were carved with hieroglyphics, some so
dim that they appeared only as vague markings in
the marble, but others were chiselled deep as if they
had but recently been created. In a corner was a
pile of yellow rolled packages that looked like ancient


E|| U Ifef--* V H '•,/ y :
By JHBp%' ' X |fa| iL^^Hk. B <
'-JS
If I wm \ - jm I v® & ■
THE PATRIARCH SPEAKS




parchments, and in the centre of the room a skin-
like sheet on which some unfinished writing was
clearly visible was flattened out.
But of human presence there was no sign, and
having realized this, Tanami approached the aperture
whence the light came and looked beyond. To his
surprise he saw the arid plains shimmering into the
distance, and he had thought he was still below the
surface. He called to the boys to come over, and
treading silently they obeyed. They saw the westering
sun yet high in the sky, and a gasp of joy issued from
their lips. The “ window ” was but a movable block
of stone, which at a touch swung wide, allowing ample
room for a man to pass. The same thought had come
to each of them, but it was vain. Craning his neck,
the bushman sought to see what lay immediately
below, and a glance was sufficient. He withdrew his
head and gazed sorrowfully at his companions.
“ We’re inside the blisterin’ mountain,” he said,
“ an’ there’s a sheer drop o’ a hundred feet outside.
I’ll be eternally jiggered if I can make out how we
came here. An’ I reckon it’s goin’ to be mighty hard
gettin’ out.
The boys did not take matters so seriously. They
had not received rough usage at the hands of their
captors and cheerfully expected that their strange
adventure would soon end by their all being set free.
Something in the far distance caught Stuart’s eye—
a cloud of sand and no more.
“ It’s the Mastodon!” he cried.
( D 694 ) 15


He did not care to add what he thought, that
M'Crimmon, considering his comrades must cer-
tainly be killed, was leaving the scene of disaster
with all speed.
“ The nigs are chasing him,” said Tanami. “ I
hope they don’t get him in a soft patch. I reckon
M'Crimmon will stand by ”
A startled “ Gosh!” from Bob interrupted him.
From an unnoticed alcove near, a frail old man in
flowing robes had noiselessly appeared. Bob was
gazing at him with bulging eyes and mouth agape.
Tanami gave an inarticulate grunt, and Stuart
stared at the figure as if it were something unreal
which would quickly vanish away. He had seen such
a picture in books dealing with ages long past. The
venerable man who stood before them looked the
typical patriarch of the olden days, when the known
world was small and tribesmen tended their flocks
and herds. Yet clearly the aged one held supreme
authority here. His unfaltering gaze dwelt searchingly
upon the three, then he motioned them abruptly to
withdraw from the window, at the same time seating
himself cross-legged upon the floor, and beside the
uncompleted parchment. Slowly the boys drew
near to him, but Tanami passed them in a stride,
and the floodgates of his speech were opened in a
wild outpouring of mingled invective and com-
mand.
“ You ain’t a nig, you hoary-headed old heathen!”
he cried savagely; “ and what have ye done with my


mate? If you’ve killed him, may I be pole-axed if I
don’t throttle you right now.”
From without, Ibraham’s voice was raised in loud
alarm, and immediately he and his warriors pressed
inwards with spears poised ready to strike. The old
man had not stirred. His eyes held the bushman, and
in them was no trace of fear. Impatiently he waved
the warriors to be gone, and then he spoke in a slow
halting voice, as if he were striving to find words in an
unknown tongue.
“ I know not what thou speakest, but I read that
which is within thy heart. My time is not yet come, and
mortal threats are naught to one grown old who would
welcome the end of his earthly span. Yet in thy
thoughts there is the cry for justice; and my law is
just. Therefore remain content, for surely knowledge
will be given thee if thou art fitted to receive it. But
thou art come to me to be judged and not to give
judgment. Wherein have my people molested thee,
that thou and the youths should seek to slay them?
Wherefore expect from these of my humble race
treatment other than thou wouldst mete out to them?”
Stuart interposed eagerly:
“We didn’t shoot to kill. They attacked us. We
thought they were savages, but we know now we were
wrong.”
The Patriarch was silent for a space. When he
answered, the words seemed to come in a voice that
was far away.
“ In thy heart is truth which redeemeth all things;


there is hope without which no man liveth; yet also
I see doubt and fear which are as stinging nettles in
the garden of youth. Cast them out. Be not afraid.
Life’s little round is but a breath ”
“ Here, hold on!” cried Bob, seizing upon the last
sentence, sensing some sinister meaning therein. “ It’s
all very well for you, who have had a dashed good
innings in this merry little spot, but have a heart, old
sport. Stuart an’ me are only beginning ”
The seer turned a piercing glance upon the lad, and
in expressionless monotone made reply:
“ An unruly tongue is in thy mouth, but that which
men call honesty is within thy heart. Courage too is
thy portion, and loyalty even to the death.”
He held his peace for fully a minute, and when his
lips gave sound once more the words came feebly.
His shrivelled hawk-like face, since first he had
answered Tanami’s vehement tirade, seemed to have
shrunken and the aged head bowed wearily. He
addressed Tanami again:
“ My warriors would have torn thee limb from limb
had they dared, but my power controls their wayward
desires where my wisdom fails. Still, they chafe at my
guiding hand, and though I would spare, our laws
demand fulfilment as it is written on the tablets of our
history. A life for a life, yes; though it be of one of the
favoured people, it shall not outweigh the black man’s
life in the balance of justice. Ten of my chosen warriors
lie sore stricken, and mayhap some shall die. If so be
they live, then shall no cause be held against thee, save


that thy life must endure within these shadows. If
they die —the law is just. Now I grow tired with the
effort of strange speech, for the words fashion in my
mouth through much study of secret lore, though I
know not the language that they speak. Here in this
twilight land where even I am king, a wise man tarrieth
for the little while of his earthly sojourn. Him would I
have instructed to detail to thee much that I have
spoken, but it is not fitting that he should be called
until a further time.”
He continued to talk, but it was in a language
unknown to his listeners, whom he did not now appear
to see.
Suddenly he recollected himself, and looking around
in surprise he then clapped his hands twice. Ibraham
entered, and to him the Patriarch spoke at length.
“ Gosh!” whispered Bob. “ I’m dashed hungry,
an’ I didn’t notice it before. I suppose Jimmy with the
spear will get us something to eat soon —an’ I do hope
they don’t keep bardies in this giddy little city.”
Ibraham signed to the three to follow, and led the
way to the curtained egress. Stuart, looking back at the
last moment, saw that the old man lay fast asleep
beside his parchment. Outside, Ibraham disbanded
the guard, and this action cheered Bob mightily, and
even Tanami showed an awakened interest in his
surroundings. All hoped that this time their pil-
grimage would be brief, and in this at least their wish
was promptly gratified. They were shown into a wide
chamber on the farther side of the courtyard, and


informed by many gestures that here in future they
were to abide.
“ But what about food, Sunny Jim?” inquired Bob
with much earnestness, opening his mouth like a gaping
fish and compressing his waist-line prodigiously, so
that he might be understood.
Ibraham grinned in the friendliest manner, and
made a surprising flight into English:
“ White man —hims hungree fella. Yes —by dash.
Loon-den —Eedboro—Seed-nee. Ibraham good chap.
Bally heathen—come quick. Hur-ree —Hur-ree.”
Having come to the end of his repertoire, he
vanished.
“ Hoorah!” cried Bob, cheering him on his way.


CHAPTER IX
A Vision in the Night
It is generally understood that truth can be stranger
than any fiction, yet when extraordinary realities appear
in an atmosphere of romance they are seldom appre-
ciated at their full value by those directly involved.
Truth can be rather grim at times when it plays its
part away from the humdrum routine of ordinary life,
and no matter how great may be the glamour surround-
ing it, the central fact persists, and stubbornly obtrudes
its presence. Refusing to be brushed aside like a cobweb
created by fancy, it stalks around, a skeleton at the
feast of illusion, a goblin at a fairy dance.
In some such way as this the boys viewed the
position in which they found themselves, while Tanami
chewed the cud of reflection and found it bitter as
gall. On his shoulders lay the blame for all that had
happened. He had not taken proper precautions, he
had under-estimated the forces arrayed against him, and
last of all he had neglected to realize until too late that
these Blacks were different from all others he had ever
seen. That the result would not have been affected in
any case, he did not pause to think. All that he could
see clearly was that he had failed in a trust he would


have given his life to guard. The underground caverns
which housed a weird people, the mysterious sunken
river, and the uncanny old image who lived within a
rock—all would have been interesting enough to tell
the outside world, but the conviction was strong within
him that he would never leave this place alive. Still,
there was much to think of meanwhile. The wily old
man had surprisingly understood and answered his
demand for knowledge of Jim Notley’s fate, but the
reply was evasive and unsatisfactory.
“ The flamin’ old idol could speak straight enough
when he promised to murder me,” he mused bitterly.
“ I reckon he meant it too, the croaking son o’ a
gun. I’ll have to look round quick an’ lively afore he
comes after me wi’ his tomahawk.”
The boys were seated on the floor of the room dis-
cussing the events of the day in w T hispers. The bush-
man stood moodily by the rock-framed opening which
served as a window. He could see no sign of the
Mastodon out there in the desert, and had sadly
come to the conclusion that M'Crimmon had prob-
ably been captured or slain.
Ibraham had tended to them well. He had brought
such food as they had never expected to see —fish in
abundance, meat of a rank and musty flavour, and a
mess of some kind of grain which had a starchy and
slightly acrid taste. He had also given them to under-
stand by much dumb show and head-shakings that
they were still in a position of great danger. He
emphasized his meaning by making a very fierce face.


and pointing below. Apparently he wished them to
understand that the tribesmen were very angry indeed,
and they accepted the information without in any way
reading its seriousness.
By this time it was nearly sundown, and the region
by the river beneath them was sure to be in total
darkness. Stuart had an idea that by following the
strange waterway in its course, a point must surely
come where it would debouch upon the plain. Here
would be a way of escape even if they had to trust
themselves to the flood and swim with it until day-
light was reached.
“ I noticed that none of the natives went any nearer
to the water than they could help,” he said, “ and I
think even if they saw us plunge in they would be
frightened to follow.”
“ I’m dashed if I’d blame them,” Bob muttered.
“I’m not a bit frightened. Oh no! But there are
some things floatin’ around in that particular ditch
that make me shiver all the same. Gosh! those green-
eyed johnnies give me the creeps!”
Tanami closed the conversation at this juncture.
He had seen a scraggy sandalled foot protrude beneath
the curtain forming the door.
“ I reckon we’re goin’ to be mighty comfortable
here,” he declaimed loudly.
The boys glanced at him in alarm.
But I’m a blisterin’ liar!” he added in an under-
tone.
A slight sound came from outside, as if someone


was gently stealing away. Then they understood.
“ If Methuselah can read what we think, ’tain’t
no good tellin’ him out loud,” whispered Tanami
again. “ We’ll explore the river to-morrow, but even
if we does see a chance well have to wait for M'Crim-
mon to show up afore we try to get clear.”
In their hearts the boys feared for M‘Crimmon,
but they said nothing, and Tanami was relieved. He
wished to keep their minds free from doleful thoughts
as long as possible. He did not know that his own
eloquent silences were to them as a written book.
So that evening they decided to remain within the
four walls of their chamber. It became quite dark.
Bob tiptoed into the hall, curious to see if any lights
showed; but not a glimmer was to be seen anywhere.
Evidently the twilight people had developed eyes
that could see in the night, or they must slumber with
the sun. Not a sound broke the stillness save for the
swishing murmur of the subterranean flood—far in the
depths. He crept back to his companions:
“ The happy home is about as cheery as a morgue.
I’m beginning to feel creepy things runnin’ up and
down my back,”
Tanami had matches, but he hesitated to use them
now as a greater need might arise for the tiny illumi-
nation they would give.
“ I wish the perishin’ place could be set on fire,”
he muttered. “I’d burn the whole boxful darn quick
for that. But I’ll give you a treat, my lads. You can
watch me light my pipe. I reckon it’s the last, for


I ain’t got any tobacco ’cept what’s in the bowl.”
“ Strike the match near the window,” suggested
Stuart, a quick thought coming to him. “ If M‘Com-
mon is anywhere about he may see it.”
The bushman, who had been gazing earnestly from
that vantage until the last vestige of day had disappeared,
humoured the boy’s will. Beyond the solid casement
the twinkling stars appeared, and Bob picked out
some of the brighter ones that used to disturb his
slumbers, and sighed at the memories they brought
back. In the short space of a day there seemed the
lapse of an age.
Tanami’s match flared brightly; but answering a
remark from Stuart, he allowed the feeble flame to
flicker and die out. A second attempt brought little
result. The match-head burst like a tiny bomb, flashed
its brief ray and vanished. But at the third effort the
purpose was achieved.
“ You’ve given the S.O.S. signal,” said Stuart.
“ M'Crimmon told me that ”
“ Gosh!” cried Bob, in his excitement forgetting
to whisper. “ There is the answer. Look!”
Far back upon the dim starlit horizon a fierce
glare shone forth, and, lingering a little while, as
suddenly dissolved into the night. Again it came, a
short sharp spasm of dazzling brightness and then a
return to gloom. And yet once more the answering
beacon blazed, and then no more.
M'Crimmon was standing by.
The thrill that passed through the watchers was


indescribable. M‘Crimmon was not only to the
fore but ceaselessly alert. No need now to think
he had given up the search and w T as on the backward
trail. The electric eyes of the Mastodon were looking
towards them. Their comrade of the mournful
countenance had only made a strategic retreat; it
was clear that he was already planning a return.
“ Good old Ginger!” applauded Bob softly.
They talked together long after this, for they
dreaded sleep amid these eerie surroundings which
were more suggestive of a sepulchre than a home
for breathing life. Tanami seemed to accept the
position with his usual philosophical calm. He coun-
selled only patience, for in this, he reasoned, was
the one hope of escape. Until they could find a means
of exit to the plain it was foolish for M‘Crimmon to
come near.
“ The old heathen across the way knows more’n
is good for him to know,” he said, “ but the rest of
the crowd I’ve seen ain’t overflowing wi’ intelligence,
and mebbe they won’t notice us pokin’ around.
Anyways, I reckon there’s a thing or two I want to
find out before we leaves —if the old sinner doesn’t
want to knock me on the head like a rabbit too sudden-
like.”
This last aspect of things the boys had not under-
stood at all; they had refused to consider it seriously;
yet on reflection they began to realize that the fanaticism
of the Patriarch was too real for their liking. Anything
might happen in his extraordinary domain.


The feet of time were surely leaden that night.
Each moment hesitated on its way; each hour was as
an eternity. In the strained state of their nerves the
boys visualized unconsciously their own thoughts.
Murky shapes evolved out of the dark and held
spectral converse near, and great green eyes appeared
and disappeared wherever they chanced to turn. There
was no door to their cavernous room, and the void
without was haunted to their imagination with all the
unspeakable things that issued from the pools below.
But tired Nature had at length her way, and they
slept. Then Tanami, hearing their regular breathing,
crept quietly towards the unguarded space forming the
entrance, and stretched himself athwart rocky
portals, so that any intruder must stumble over his
body and thus give prompt alarm of his presence.
And to him sleep also came.
Stuart awoke to consciousness with a sigh. He had
had a confused dream in which all his remembered
life had passed in pictured array before his mental
vision. It was just a repetition of his waking thoughts;
even in his dreams his youthful promise came to jeer
at him in his futility. Yet when he awoke he was
surprised to find that fear had left him, and in its place
a powerful stimulus had come. Adventure was here
in its most wonderful guise, and with the Mastodon
out there in the night why should he think of tragedy?
What purpose could the strange old man have in
wishing to keep them captive for all the days of their
lives as he had suggested? Even the idea was absurd.


He put out his hand and touched Bob’s sleeping
form snuggled up beside him, but where Tanami had
lain there was no sign of human shape. Alarmed, he
groped his way around the chamber, getting his
direction from the fragment of starry sky that showed
through the one outlet into the night. At last he found
him, and in the finding came an inkling of the thought
that had caused the bushman to seek this place of rest.
His heart swelled with gratitude, and he was about to
creep noiselessly back when the faintest shadow of a
light gleamed out beyond the portiere. It was but a
tiny flicker, but the boy was interested, for it was the
first sign of illumination to appear that night, and now
he thought the hour must be very late indeed, well
after midnight at least.
He tiptoed lightly over the prostrate form of the
bushman and was pressing through the grassy curtain
into the great hall. He had made no sound, yet sud-
denly his ankle was clutched in a grip that caused him
to wince.
“ It’s just me,” he whispered, “ there’s a light
outside, and I’m going to have a look ”
Tanami released his grip.
“ Be careful, lad,” he muttered drowsily.
Stuart emerged on the flagged floorway of the
central cavern and peered into the shadows. A dim
flicker issued from a distant comer on the opposite
wall. It came from within an enclosure which had
given no evidence of its existence on the outside. Only
a chance crevice now disclosed its presence, and through


this irregular opening a thin streak of light filtered
raggedly. As near as the boy could judge, the hidden
cavity, or whatever it was, must abut on the Patriarch’s
chamber, and yet no semblance of an opening had
been seen on the wall of hieroglyphics they had viewed
when they waited for the venerable man to appear.
Stuart’s heart gave a bound. Here might some secret
be revealed. If the chink in the rock was a clean fissure
he would be able to see right into the room. He
struggled with intruding fear for a moment. Danger
might lurk in the gloom away from his companions,
but if so he would prefer not to drag them into it.
Resolutely he felt his way forward, thinking every
instant to collide with some unknown obstruction. It
had not occurred to him that for his return passage
there would be no beacon to guide him in the darkness.
His stockinged feet made no sound on the smooth
hard rock as he moved step by step towards his goal.
Had the ray that guided him been unexpectedly
quenched he would have become hopelessly bemazed,
for the cathedral-like vault he so cautiously traversed
was black as a tomb save for this one spark. As he drew
close a subdued muttering broke upon the solemn
stillness. It rang in his ears like an incantation, so
weirdly was it pitched. He came to the wall, and to
his bitter disappointment found the crevice far beyond
his reach. The voice ceased as he stood there, and for
a moment Stuart thought his presence had been dis-
covered. But the sing-song chant after a brief pause
was resumed, and he breathed more freely.


He wanted now to return as speedily as possible,
and he decided to follow the wall around past the
Patriarch’s door before making a blind dash across
the open. In this way he would avoid the widest part
of the court, or so he thought, for his memory of
direction was already hazy. With right hand pressing
against the cold stone for guidance, he began the
journey; but much of his courage had deserted him.
The voice within the rock had a haunting quality; it
might have been the wailing of a lost soul, so plaintive
had the tones become. Its persistence was nerve-
shattering.
All at once his hand thrust into a void, and he
lurched in the same direction, a muffled exclamation
forcing itself from his lips as he felt himself falling.
He struggled to his feet hurriedly, and just then a
stream of light issued full on his face. He was in the
room of hieroglyphics, but in the centre of what he
had thought was a solid wall, a high arched opening
appeared, whence came a dazzling effulgence. Framed
in the gap stood the aged seer, clothed in priestly
vestments. He looked in no way surprised, rather
his attitude was one of grave welcome.
He uttered the one word, “ Come!” and the boy
obeyed mechanically, yet noticing as he passed through
the wall that it was indeed a section of solid rock
through which a doorway had been sawn or delicately
chiselled. It led into a lesser chamber lit up by several
torches of resinous twigs, the smoke of which ascended
to the roof. The floor was bare except where stood a


rough-hewn block of massive stone hollowed to be the
resting-place of a mighty crystal which blazed with a
splendour almost overpowering to the eye. Looking
up, Stuart could see the stars.
The old man took the boy by the arm and pointed
to the shining sphere.
“ My son,” he said, “ look into the light for the
knowledge thou seekest, and be satisfied. Even as the
future is revealed through the prophet of his people,
so is the past recorded, and open to eyes that can see.”
“ I don’t believe in magic,” said the boy clearly.
‘ I cannot see what is not there.”
The old man seemed to ponder a while, but at last
he made slow answer:
“ The word in thy mouth has for the wise no
meaning. Either a thing is, or it is not. The airs of
heaven breathe that which the eyes may not see, but
cunning instruments interpret the messages aright.
Yet is not this as magic to the many? To earth’s
meanest mortals the mysteries of Nature are oft
revealed, for they who are close to earth can read her
secrets best. My eyes shall hold the vision of the
sphere, if you will but look. And speedily, for I grow
weary.”
Unwillingly the boy gazed, and it seemed to him that
the orb revolved, emitting lambent flame so that its
outline became as a vague circling mist all glowing.
He would have withdrawn his eyes, but now he could
not. He felt as if he were in a dream, with conscious
will alert but powerless to direct his movements.
( D 694 ) 16


“ The hand of time turns back,” came the solemn
voice of the Patriarch, sounding afar off though it was
so near.
The gyrations of the ball, having attained a mar-
vellous speed, suddenly ceased, and slowly the crystal
began to rotate in a contrary direction. And now in its
translucent depths the flashing lights were still, and
like the iris of a giant eye a curtain seemed to gather
back, disclosing a distant view. At first the
nothing but a shadowy landscape of sand and plain,
desolate and forbidding, over which night gloomed,
for the stars were in the sky.
“ Time broods over the land. It is not yet!” said the
voice.
The scene changed. A blazing sun displaced the
stars, and the parched wastes loomed nearer and more
distinct. Into this picture came life. A man staggering
with weariness and thirst and leading a cumbrously
pacing camel approached over the sand; a second camel
followed, its nose rope attached to the tail of the pre-
ceding animal. Behind, a little way, came another
figure, that of a man who walked with steady step.
The travellers drew near. Their faces and forms were
now clearly distinguishable. He, ahead, was spare of
build. His face was haggard with suffering, yet in his
eyes was an unquenchable fire, and around the mouth
a grim smile played.
“ Dad!” cried the boy eagerly, but though his lips
formed the word no sound was uttered. The speech
was in his heart.


The second member of the party was a bewhiskered
individual with dark roving eyes that seemed never
to be still. As the boy watched, this man hastened his
progress to overtake the rearmost camel and drank
deep from the water-bag that lapped its flank. The
leading figure, which the boy had recognized, kept up
his painful march. At one time he stopped, and coming
near the water-bag, looked at it wistfully; but noticing
how scant was the supply remaining, he shook his
head and wearily returned to his post.
Again a change. It was the creek of diamonds,
reached at last. Two men were digging in the channel.
The camels grazed along the banks where tufts of
spiny grass appeared. It was the figure of Jim Notley
who dug, for a raging thirst was consuming him and
he searched for water. The other was examining the
clay thrown out from the excavation, and picking
therefrom sundry pebbles over which he seemed to
gloat. Occasionally he would lend a hand in clearing
away the debris from the surface, but for the most
part it was the man far spent who laboured. At length
the saving fluid was found, and Jim Notley rested in
the shade of a tree, moistening his dry lips with the
water which he dared not drink until his fever cooled.
His companion was now refilling the great canvas
water-bag carried by the camel, and casting anxious
glances around, as one grown suddenly alarmed.
The day was far advanced; the sun was just over the
western horizon; its rays, blood red, shone in the faces
of the two men at the creek. In the distance dim


shadows of natives could be seen. The men evidently
feared attack, for they had rifles in their hands, and
the camels were again laden as if prepared for a journey.
Jim Notley was loath to go. At his feet was a pile of
pebbles which glistened dully, and he wanted to add
more to the number, but he knew he dared not remain.
The swarthy one was gazing at the hoarded heap,
an evil light in his eye. He glanced at the waiting
camels —the Blacks were yet far off and seemingly
in no hurry to advance —and of a sudden his rifle butt
crashed down on the head of his unsuspecting com-
panion, All this Stuart saw as in a trance. In his heart
he cried out in agony as the fell deed was done.
Jim Notley sank to the ground, and lay still. Jennet
—now Stuart remembered the name —gave one look
at his victim, and his whole face twisted in a snarl of
triumph, and in that instant the boy recognized him
as the man who had schemed to wreck the Mastodon.
He knelt beside the glittering gems, greedily fingering
them before stuffing them into his pockets. In his
gloating joy he did not see a single warrior approach
with hand uplifted, until suddenly raising his head he
found the native regarding him intently. He seized the
rifle from the sand where it had fallen, and in a frenzy
of rage and fear fired at the motionless black, who
staggered weakly for a moment, then fell face down-
ward. The slayer rushed to the camels. The sun had
set. The team marched onward into the night.
“ The slaying of Yacomb!” echoed the distant voice.
It was morning. The warriors sought for their


comrade, and found him dead beside a stranger from
another world, in whom life still pulsed. They debated
among themselves whether this white man should not
immediately be put to death. To them he appeared
as the guilty one. They pronounced his doom clamour-
ously, but a tall native whom Stuart recognized as
Ibraham stayed them with threatening words and
uplifted spear. So they carried him away.
The vision blurred out of focus, then reappeared
fitfully. Now showed a resplendent hall luminous with
soft rainbow shades which descended in dissolving
streams from some unseen source above. Where the
walls narrowed at one end a darksome passage could
be seen, beyond which came the gleam of swdrling
waters. The enclosure was thronged with gesticulating
natives; they formed an agitated circle around a
central figure—a white man —who stood with folded
arms silently watching them. And now the Patriarch
appeared beside him. His lips moved. He seemed to
be addressing the multitude vehemently, and finally
his arms stretched out in vain appeal. The crowd,
apparently composed of two factions, struggled among
themselves, but one party was overwhelmingly domi-
nant; its members broke through the ring, brandishing
their spears and pointing outwards to the pool. They
seized the white man, and bore him forth. ... A
mighty flood surged and foamed with seemingly no
outlet; it writhed around and against a rocky barrier.
They appeared with their victim-
The picture faded into nothingness, and came back


no more. With agony in his heart, the boy looked
closer. The giant eye had closed; the crystal was cold
and lifeless. It rested on its firm base as if it had never
moved. Nor indeed had it moved.
The spell was broken.
“ They killed him!” he cried wildly. “ Oh! they
killed him!”
As if in response, the harsh muttering from below
broke out afresh; it swelled to an ominous roar.
The seer raised a trembling hand, and pointed
outwards.
“ Go!” he said. “My people cry out against me.
They demand the judgment. Be brave—fear not.”
Blindly the boy turned and dashed through the open
doorway. Looking round, he saw the Patriarch crouched
in an attitude of prayer, and through a crevice in the
outer wall, now visible, the first rays of the sun were
stealing. A new day had come at last.
In the room of ancient carvings Tanami stood, grim
and watchful. He had been there for some time. He
said no word, but gripped the boy’s arm protectingly.
They hurried back to join their companion. Out of the
morning light a faint shadow of its glory had percolated
into the wide separating hall, and the stony figure in
the centre was dimly outlined. Tanami wrenched this
from its foundation as he passed, and shattered it
against the floor. From the wreckage of the dismem-
bered image he selected the flinty limbs and carried
them with him.
Bob was still asleep when they reached their rock-


hewn chamber, though by the fierce lunges he was
making at some imaginary enemy and the audible
grunts with which these onslaughts were accompanied,
it was evident that even in his dreams he was having
an anxious time. Stuart roused him ruthlessly.
“ Gosh!” said the youth, sitting up, “ I’m still alive
and kickin’, am I? I thought I was a goner, for the
whole bally population was stickin’ spears into me. I
felt like a hedgehog, with all the spikes sproutin’ out.
Another night in this chamber of horrors, old sport,
an’ I’m cooked. I don’t want to be a hero, dashed if
I do!”
But he promptly forgot his woes when he heard of
Stuart’s excursion during the night, and the grim
knowledge it brought.
“ I thought we were havin’ too easy a time to last,”
he muttered. “ Well, if we’ve got to go under, I
suppose it’s no use whining, but it does seem pretty
hard.”
“ Never say die, my lad,” spoke Tanami. “ I don’t
understand how the old heathen put the picture in the
glass, an’ mebbe it weren’t true anyways.”
Bob selected a jagged piece of rock from the pile the
bushman had brought.
“ I hope it doesn’t break first pop,” he said, eyeing
it dubiously.
The vengeful shoutings in the underground distance
seemed to gather fresh impetus, and yet they came no
nearer. With this menace in their ears inaction became
intolerable to the three. In the upper region of the


rock they were imprisoned like rats in a trap unless
some outlet could be found on the farther side. They
determined to search around in haste, and moved
stealthily outwards into the paved court. High over-
head many slits and crannies could be traced, but not
one aperture of any size, and even had some sufficient
opening showed, it would have been utterly inac-
cessible. Then Stuart remembered that in the room of
the huge crystal he had seen the stars through the roof.
Here might be a possible exit; even if it led only to the
cragged heights, they could stand at bay in the clear
light of heaven, and M‘Crimmon might see 1
They entered the Patriarch’s chamber. It was empty,
and the door in the wall was closed, the hieroglyphic
markings hiding every clue to its presence. They
pressed upon the rock, and Tanami levered power-
fully against it with his shoulders. It was unyielding,
it did not even quiver, and if the Patriarch were within,
he gave no sign. Even the air now seemed charged with
impending disaster; they breathed it into their lungs
like a poisonous gas, and it left them weak and de-
sponding, Afar off the cries continued.
“ I believe vre’d have a chance if we got into the
water,” said Stuart. “ It’s almost bound to come to the
surface somewhere.”
Tanami shook his head.
“ There ain’t no water known in these parts, lad.
If a river o’ such a size flowed south, it couldn’t be
missed all the way. ’Tain’t a real river anyways, an’ I
reckon I’m too ignorant to guess what it is.”


“ Let’s sneak down and see what they’re howling
about,” suggested Bob. “ If we keep close to the wall
they won’t see us, an’ we might be able to make a break
through—somewhere. ’ ’
Bob’s optimism had not failed him even now.
They stood at the head of the natural stairway which
they had ascended so hopefully only the afternoon
before. It was their intuition that warned them of
danger or they might have taken comfort from the
fact that their savage enemies had delayed so long.
The old man had unconsciously deceived them. He
had given them false hope, relying on his own power
to control his angry followers, or else he had spoken
in riddles which they had not understood.
They went down a little way, and again hesitated.
The turbulent echoes resounded hideously through the
vaulted passage, yet still not a soul could be seen.
They neared the area of deepest gloom where the
waters flowed widest; and now they saw the exit
barred by warriors who seemed to be pressing forward
against a living mass without. Clubs were being swung
aloft threateningly, now and then descending swiftly,
and shrieks of pain were mingled with the din let
loose. Ibraham was there; head and shoulders above
the rest he towered, and in the brief intervals of semi-
quiet, his voice arose vociferously.
It was not difficult for the watchers to guess the
position that had arisen, Ibraham’s warriors had been
stationed here throughout the night to guard the
passage. He, at least, had expected some form of revolt,


but it had grown beyond his simple thought, and now
the loyal few he had gathered together were sore beset.
“ It looks as if the whole dashed population was
anxious to get in,” Bob whispered, with sinking heart.
Tanami was grimly silent. Though he counselled hope,
he saw none, and in his breast was a turmoil of mingled
emotions. Here in the denser shadow he thought
they might be passed by when the rush came.
And suddenly the human barrier was broken. With
demoniacal shrieks and yells the besieging horde swept
the defending force before it. Warriors fell and were
trampled upon; the darksome passage was alive
with vengeful hurrying shapes. Vain hope that any-
thing could escape that frenzied band! From the
accustomed eyes of the tribesmen the gloom could
hide no secret. They saw their prey, and bore down
upon it, screaming and chuckling in fiendish glee.
The three stood forth, Stuart and Bob side by side,
Tanami a pace in front. But the bushman did not wait
for the onslaught. A deep-chested grunt issued from
his throat and he heaved himself forward, swinging his
unwieldy weapon with both hands. With superhuman
strength he struck out, and three of his enemies fell
in quick succession, but he himself had been hit by one
of the many clubs that slashed so fiercely at him. For
a moment he staggered, and a savage swung at his
defenceless head. The blow never fell, for Stuart, now
waging furious battle beside him, crashed his brittle
implement into the face of the native, whose waddy
fell from his nerveless grip as he sank back before the


stroke. Bob’s first blow was delivered with such
strenuous force that his bludgeon shivered at the shock.
A moment more and he was struck down from behind.
Stuart saw him fall, and made a wild dash to his aid;
then he, too, fell. Tanami, alone, among a host of foes,
laughed bitterly, and hurled his weighty bolt at the
grinning faces that leered at him out of range. Then,
no longer caring what might happen, he dropped on
his knee by his young companions, and endeavoured
to screen their bodies from further attack by intervening
his own.
He waited for the end, angry now that it should be
further delayed. Yet no one stirred to slay him, and a
hush had come over the scene. Turning round, he
saw that a tall native with shortened spear stood over
him. It was Ibraham, whom single-handed they all
feared. But it was another who restrained the mur-
derous impulse of the crew by offering what they had
first demanded. The Patriarch had come at this
crucial moment. His uplifted hand stayed them. His
quavering tones appeased them. Tanami understood
no word of what he spoke. He was seized by heavy
clutching hands, and, with Bob and Stuart, was borne
forth in triumph.
“To the judgment,” the Patriarch had said. “So
be it, to the judgment.”


CHAPTER X
The Pool of Terrors
When Stuart returned to consciousness, his gaze
rested tranquilly for a moment on a scene of mar-
vellous beauty. He was looking upwards into a latticed
dome of purest crystal from which was suspended a
network of delicate tracery so ethereal that it seemed
like a giant spider’s web materialized in finest glass.
The sun reflecting through the interstices in the outer
canopy shone down upon this maze, and the rays,
transmuted and diffused in a softened glory of colour,
passed on to create on the walls below the dissolving
effects of many rainbows. His eyes took this in, while
reason struggled back to her place. His head throbbed
terribly, strange noises were in his ears. Recollection
came to him like a shattering blow.
“ Bob! Tanami!” he cried.
“ Here, lad,” replied a quiet and steady voice, and
the bushman’s strong arms encircled him and raised
him to his feet. They stood in the centre of a great
stone chamber. Around them, and but a few paces
distant, a dense mass of savages swayed and jostled,
shrieking clamorously. Where the walls narrowed at
one end a gloomy passage appeared, and the dull gleam


of rushing waters could be seen. Stuart had seen this
place before. The crystal had not lied.
Bob, huddled near, slowly raised himself to a sitting
posture, and stared in front blankly.
“ Gosh!” he murmured, “ this is a rotten dream.”
When realization grew upon him that it was no
fantastic unreality that met his troubled view, he
accepted his lot with wonderful calmness.
Some barbaric mockery was about to take place.
Many of the natives now appeared painted and fan-
tastically bedecked. A few had their faces covered
with a white powdery substance which made them
look like ghouls. A greater number w r ere bedaubed
from head to foot with splashes of red colouring, and
quite a lot were got up to represent animals and
reptiles, the characteristics of each creature being
gravely imitated by the masqueraders.
But one ungainly shape came slouching and sprawling
through the dark corridor, that represented no living
thing that Tanami or the boys had ever seen. It was a
blubbery monstrosity, frog-headed, and with flippers
like a seal. Its green eyes were large and round and
unblinking. It moved forward in undulations, ap-
parently having no feet. This horrible freak was being
guided on its way by the white-faced crew, who danced
around it in wild ecstasy. It came near. The Blacks
opened their ranks to let it pass. It slobbered into the
ring where the victims stood, and remained stock still
where the impetus of guiding hands had left it. The
basilisk eyes of the beast blazed uncannily, but never


254 Mystery of Diamond Creek
a movement came. Then suddenly the natives fell on
their faces in worship.
There was no doubt about the thing being real. It
exuded a rank and musty odour; its composite body
oozed slime.
And then the Patriarch appeared, headed by Ibraham
and half a score of armed warriors. A gleam of hope
entered Stuart’s heart, but it was quickly extinguished.
A sullen silence greeted the old man’s approach. The
assembled savages were as children caught in an act
of disobedience, only they gloried in their revolt, and
resented the correcting hand. In a frenzy of horror
he saw the hideous oddity they would propitiate, and
his shrill voice screamed out in condemnation.
He broke through the throng, and facing the thing ,
cursed it passionately. It never blinked an eyelid, but
a deep hollow grunt, like a cow’s bellow cut short,
issued from its mouth. The aged seer stepped back,
raving inarticulately. So far had his tribe degenerated
that they raised for themselves false gods from the
bowels of the earth.
With head bowed in shame, he leaned against
Ibraham for support. A restlessness now seized the
multitude and they made a mighty clamouring. They
cried out for the judgment they desired; they were
impatient of further delay. The Patriarch advanced
with feeble steps towards the foredoomed victims, and
looking at Stuart fixedly he spoke these words slowly:
“ Beware the centre of the pool. It is death. Through
the cavern beneath the waters there may be safety.


He broke off into a wild speech in his own tongue,
which the waiting savages, understanding, applauded
with exultant shouts. He was pronouncing the judg-
ment. It was just, for did not the ancient law demand
fulfilment of its pledge, and in the fulfilment the deity
of the natives would also be appeased.
Those who were to be sacrificed spoke hurriedly
together. They had not seen the pool of terrors; they
could but imagine that it formed a maelstrom whose
centre would indeed lead to death. Through the cavern
beneath the waters! The phrase was ominous. What
meagre chance was hidden in the cryptic words?
The ghoul-like natives came near; they pranced
before the three with clawing hands that gradually
reached closer and closer. The red-painted warriors
marshalled behind them. The miscellaneous animal
representations hopped and crawled and crept around
emitting shrieks of glee. Tanami struck at one of the
leering faces before him; a mighty blow it was, that
hurled the savage backwards across the floor and
against the nameless creature that stood there. The
baleful image slithered over and lay prone. Stuart
heard the Patriarch’s voice raised in screams of eldritch
laughter. Then he was seized and carried forth, along
with his companions. The noise of the flood was in
his ears. He braced himself for the ordeal to come.
But haste had now no part in the proceedings. The
judgment had been delivered. There was to follow
much mysterious rite and ceremonial beloved of the
savage mind, before the crisis came. The unhappy


256 Mystery of Diamond Creek
three were set down by the boiling flood while their
captors indulged in wild celebration. The dreaded
pool was before them. Higher up, and at no great
distance, they could see where the stream showed
wide and sluggish. This was where the path had
ascended to the upper regions where they had thought
to find safety! From that point a change had taken
place. The cavern enclosing the river had contracted;
the channel had narrowed so that it became a defile,
down which the restricted waters rushed. And the
end was here, where they looked! The mad current
was dashing against a rocky barrier, and recoiling,
swirled in a foaming race. Where, on its first appear-
ance from the depths, a giant spout had proclaimed
the vent from which it flowed, now, at the area of
its departure a revolving hollow indicated the place
of vanishment. The basin in which the torrent gyrated
was worn smooth and round, and across its diameter
it might have measured a hundred feet or more.
The natives began their preliminary orgies. Led
by the white-faced ghouls, they started in procession
to encircle the pool, raucously chanting some weird
invocation as they marched. The bedaubed warriors
brandished their clubs, and progressed in a series of
uncouth w T ar dances, advancing and receding before
an imaginary foe, and finally leaping forward in
triumphant bounds. The various animal species
simulated, came next, performing antics peculiar to
their kind. The rank and file followed, pressing
closely, for the path was narrow. Their blank visages


kfe-
f J ■
• ,2*> ■-
'^**‘* rr . ?* ? J* * '
Jr i u\
[ !'
X. /^ s> ' . - •*
—-,
REUNION




showed no understanding of the scene in which they
were taking part. They were excited and expectant,
yet a vague fear of the Patriarch was still in their hearts.
The faith of their fathers had not wholly departed
from them.
For the time being, the prisoners were neglected.
Enclosed by the savage moving ring, retreat was
impossible and in any case futile. Into the whirlpool
they might certainly plunge and thus anticipate the
dread denouement of the mummeries they gazed
upon. The mental outlook of the Blacks did not
allow for such a contingency. No living thing within
their knowledge gave up life voluntarily. It was
unimaginable to them that a victim would wish to
hasten, by a fleeting second, the doom prepared for
him.
But to Tanami and the boys the thought had come
in a flash that here might lie their one faint chance
of discovering the cavern —if it really existed—under
the rim of the rocky basin. If they were thrown
into the water they would be forced towards the
vortex, whose powerful suction would quickly drag
them down. If they slipped in of their own accord
it might be possible to cling to the rocks w'here the
impetus of the current first spent itself. In the direct
line of the torrent’s passage it was conceivable that a
weakness in the barrier should exist.
At such a time as this it could not be expected that
either Stuart or Bob was hopeful. They had resigned
themselves to their fate, seeing no possible way of
(D 694 ) 17


escape. They made no murmur, but a dreariness of
spirit possessed them. Nevertheless their hearts re-
sponded at once to Tanami’s whispered words of cheer.
“ I reckon the rock shelves in, on the lower side,
lads. If there’s an opening somewheres below, it
mebbe leads up into another cave that them perishin’
swine don’t know about. If we float round so far and
ain’t speared, I’ll dive down an’ see what’s there.
Get ready to follow me. Keep your heads well under
—an’ good luck to us!”
They shook hands as men do who set out on a
desperate endeavour. Around pranced the shrieking
horde, their exaltation working up to an extreme
pitch of demoniacal fervour. The end was near.
Already the ghouls had detached themselves from
the ring. They went to fetch the horrible idol. . . .
“ Now!” said Tanami.
Feet foremost and without rising they slid gently
into the foam. Immediately they were swept away in
a smother of leaping waters.
The natives nearest saw their prey disappear, and
raised a loud alarm. In another moment the edge of
the pool was lined with fierce-eyed figures staring
into the depths. The sloping rim of the basin extended
well above the flood and they feared to go too near,
yet those behind, unthinking of the danger to their
fellows, pressed forward eagerly, and lo! the pool
of terrors received unexpected toll, and screams of
agonized fear arose from the realm of shadowed
waters.


Meanwhile Tanami and the boys were struggling
desperately to grip the rock where, underneath, it
shelved inwards. Like limpets they clung for a few
brief moments, and then both Stuart and Bob were
snatched away by the surging tide.
This was what they had feared. Well they knew
that each circuit of that dreadful cauldron would bring
them nearer and nearer to its fatal centre. They
battled against the tug that drew them towards the
zone of death, but their efforts were puny against
the resistless force that encompassed them. They
had not known of the catastrophe which had befallen
their gloating enemies, and now they were astonished
to find themselves not alone in the frothing expanse.
In an inner circle tangled heads bobbed, and passed
them by, and paint-smeared faces appeared with
terror now manifest where ferocity had been—all
carried on a speeding tide that would inexorably
fulfil its grim purpose.
The spectacle cheered Bob mightily. Company
even such as this was heartening on the way. He did
not bother about how they came there; it was obvious
that they had not come willingly.
“ Keep goin’, you rotters!” he gasped. “ You’ll
be an easy first, an’ I’m not a bit jealous. Not a dashed
bit!”
Stuart had wondered why no spears came, but now
he thought he understood. The warriors on the bank
feared to strike in case their own kind, in the confusion,
might be impaled! He gave them credit for a con-


sideration that had not occurred to them. Why should
they slay the victims who were destined to be engulfed?
The inmost circles of their passage would delight the
watchers’ gaze; they waited expectantly for the thrill
that must surely come. They shrilly invoked the aid
of the blubbering image they deified to save their
tribesmen from the threatening death, and calmly
they expected to see a miracle accomplished so
that only their enemies should descend into the
abyss.
So far they had not missed Tanami in the excitement
that prevailed; their eyes were centred on the two
white faces that showed together. They watched
them eagerly.
The first circle was nearing completion, and the
boys were returning to the place where Tanami had
been. They fought desperately to reach the rock, but
despairingly they realized that they would swing past
out of reach. And Tanami was not visible! Had he
too started on the awful journey? At their bitterest
moment their unspoken prayer was answered.
A dark head rose to the surface; a well-known face
appeared.
“ Tanami!” they cried.
He rose like a triton from the depths, breathing in
great gasps. His hand stretched out. They came
nearer. . . . They were passing . . . just out of
reach.
“ Your feet! Your feet!” he shouted hoarsely.
They realized his meaning. Though their heads


were out of range, their feet might swing a yard
nearer
They made an extreme effort to tear their lower
limbs from the suction that pulled so incessantly, and
quite suddenly the task was accomplished. The under
current seemed to weaken. They pivoted round; then
Stuart felt his ankle grasped. He clutched at Bob, and
together they were drawn backwards. Tanami’s toes
had found a niche below in which they wedged
tenaciously, and his straining body now formed a
bulwark for the boys. For a peaceful space the waters
rived at them in vain.
Now the watchers had seen, and were crowding
above, amazed and angry at the miraculous happening
that had so stayed the course of death. They would
not long remain inactive.
Tanami’s breath was still labouring heavily. He had
been long submerged, but he had discovered what he
sought. There teas an opening in the rock, and
in it no suction was felt. He jerked the news out
hastily.
“ It’s mebbe our chance, dear lads,” he gasped.
“ Breathe deep, and hold on to me. Now, all together!”
He detached his foot from its resting-place and,
lowering his head, dived down against the wall. His
right hand gripped Stuart’s wrist, and in turn the boy
clutched at Bob’s arm. Down, down they went. After
the first few seconds Stuart felt himself being dragged
into the rock. All around was blackness. The side of
his body grazed against some obstacle. He dimly


imagined it to be the edge of a cavity. Then, after
what seemed a very long time, he began to move
forward. His lungs were like to burst, ringing noises
were in his ears. Through his brain passed the vague
thought that they were in the vortex of the whirlpool.
Yet he was conscious that the grip on his wrist never
slackened. Tanami’s unfailing instinct for direction
was surely not at fault. Bob, beside him, appeared to
float along without an effort. What did it all mean?
And where —where were they going? A harsh roaring
sound impinged upon his senses before they finally
left him. Then all was peace.
Only one of the three was conscious now. The
bushman’s spirit rose triumphant to its task. It con-
trolled the pounding heart and kept the mental vision
clear. Some seconds yet he knew he could endure.
He fought his fight with inflexible tenacity, and the
reward that attends high courage was soon to be his.
At the head of a deep defile, which clove into the
heart of a massive crystalline rock, a man stood gazing
fixedly at a race of waters miraculously appearing at
his feet. The torrent issued from a tunnel-like opening
in the gleaming strata and flowed swiftly. A short
distance away it emptied ponderously into unplumbed
depths in the earth’s crust, and was seen no more.
He who watched so earnestly was one on whose face
the lines of sorrow were graven deep. His crisping
hair showed grey at the temples, and the steady blue
eyes held an expression gravely sad. No alien was this


though he was garbed in the fashion of an Arab. The
Anglo-Saxon breed was unmistakable.
“ I wonder who the unlucky devils can be,” he
muttered. “ Most likely some poor fools that Jennet
may have sent after the diamonds, though they’re
rather long in coming. . . . No one would think of
looking for me. He was bound to say the natives had
killed me, or something of the sort. ... If my boy
had been old enough —he would have come. Poor little
chap! I can almost hear him saying now, in that quaint
earnest way of his, “ I’m cornin’ to look for you, Dad,
if you don’t come back —with a gun and a sextant!
Thank God, he cannot come. . . .”
Time went on, but still he waited, with an in-
creasing anxiety as the minutes sped.
“ After all, they would scarcely have a dog’s chance,”
he reflected aloud. “ God knows how I managed to
get through —and I’ve often wished since that I hadn’t
managed. Death would have been better than this.
Where the waters shallowed, as they opened out over
a wider area near the mouth of the tunnel, he saw a
head appear, a head that seemed to toss and strain;
then beside it, smothering it, two pallid faces were
thrust into the life-giving air.
The watcher stepped into the channel; even a yard
from the edge the torrent flowed waist high. He
stretched out his arm and snatched, and then fought
fiercely with the current that was loath to loose its
burden. He dragged them to the side —a man and two
youths—hastening feverishly lest he might be too late


to revive the vital spark remaining in their bodies.
They were linked together, hand to hand. A choking
sob rose in the rescuer’s throat when he saw this. “ A
father and his two sons,” he whispered. “ God grant
that I may be in time.”
The man lying face downwards on the rock began
to breathe convulsively, and immediately attempted
to stagger to his feet. Twice he failed, but the third
time he succeeded. Sweeping the wet hair from his
eyes, he glared frantically around seeking for his com-
panions.
He in the Arab costume, who was bending over the
boys, looked up with a smile of thankfulness, and the
two men gazed into each other’s faces. For a moment
they stood as if transfixed, then from one came the
hushed, incredulous, joyful cry:
“ Tanami!”
“ Jim!”
The answer was a struggling gasp. Tanami’s strength
was spent. He could not voice the gladness in his
heart. He pointed mutely to Stuart, and he himself
knelt beside Bob and strove to revive him.
Jim Notley stood by his own son, startled by a
fancied resemblance to the boy he had left behind
in the years gone by, but never dreaming that this was
he. Stuart’s eyes slowly opened. Now the likeness,
treasured by memory, was complete. The man,
speechless, bent forward, watching the lad’s face
eagerly. Surely it was recognition he saw there! He
bent still farther and raised the boy’s head in his arms.


The pale lips moved, and the veriest whisper came
forth:
“ I’ve come . . . Dad . . . with a gun . . . and
a sextant.”
The man bowed his head, overwhelmed by a sudden
deep emotion.
Tanami s drastic methods of resuscitation were
quickly effective with Bob, and that young man came
back to consciousness with the feeling that he had
developed into a pump with two handles, both of
which were in active commission. His lively interest
in the position passed for a time unnoticed by the
bushman, who was performing his office mechanically
and zealously, not expecting that the patient would
show such speedy recovery. He was staggered when
a voice spoke up pathetically:
“ Steady on, old hoss, steady on!”
“ Jumpin’ kangaroos!” ejaculated Tanami. “ I
reckon your heart must be stronger than a bullock’s!”
“ Don’t know about its strength,” muttered the
lad, “ but I’m downright certain it’s not as big as
yours—or I’d bust!”
He stood up giddily, and saw the flood issuing
from the tunnel. He shuddered. Then his glance
took in the stranger who was talking to Stuart in
low tones.
“ Gosh!” he said softly to himself. “ This johnny’s
white!”
Stuart beckoned him. He stepped unsteadily for-
ward. He heard his chum say:


266 Mystery of Diamond Creek
“ Dad, this is Bob,” and he felt his hand gripped
tightly.
Out of bewilderment a great joy came to him, but
for once he kept himself well under control.
“ We’ve had a dashed hard job finding you, sir,”
he said calmly. “ I —l hope you are well.


CHAPTER XI
Some Mysteries Explained
“ And now,” said Jim Notley, with a return to the
buoyant manner of bygone days, “ there is much to
say, and it will be a real treat for me to talk to someone
other than myself. But I’m not going to begin my
end of the story until you’ve had something to eat.
There’s only fruit, but there’s any amount of it, and
that’s one comfort.”
They were in a room not unlike the one they had
so unhappily inhabited the night before, only it
contained some rude furnishings, and the bareness
of the walls was relieved by drapings of some coarse
woven vegetable substance. In the centre of the
floor was a three-legged table with a top composed
of sheets of bark. On this was heaped a plentiful
supply of bananas, paw-paws, grenadillas, and mangoes
—sure evidence that, somewhere near, the earth
yielded bounteous store.
There were many little ornaments in niches here
and there,, and scattered haphazard around—all
bearing witness to the patient labour that had gone
into their construction. So had the heart-weary man
267


sought to beguile the endless hours, his only tool —
a simple pocket-knife!
He noticed them look at his humble handiwork,
and smiled.
“ Idleness was unbearable,” he explained. “At
first I thought I should go mad, and I whittled and
carved for dear life; but later on I found something
better to occupy my mind. Look!”
From an alcove he took a roll of papyrus, and
opening it out a little way showed that it was covered
with minute writings.
“ The old man could spare me only a single sheet,”
he went on, “ and I had to make the most of it. The
ink was no problem, but it was hard to get anything
fine enough to write with. A buzzard’s quill fixed
me up at last. I remembered I used to be able to
inscribe the Lord’s Prayer on a piece of paper the
size of a threepenny bit. I never dreamed that I
should later have to write a volume in the same micro-
scopic hand. But there it is! And there’s some room
left yet. If it is ever transcribed the job will almost
require a magnifying-glass, for I can’t read it my-
self though I’ll guarantee every letter is carefully
formed.”
Stuart took the crackling parchment in his hand,
and examined it with awe. At the top of the curving
page one line stood out bolder than the rest, yet his
sharp eyes could decipher it only with difficulty. He
read aloud:
“ The Story of an Ancient Tribe marooned in the


Heart of Australia at the time of Great Upheaval,
when the Asiatic Continent detached from its Southern
Lands; degenerated at this day almost to the level of
savages owing to the influence of environment, yet
retaining in a line of patriarchs the culture and wisdom
of a once great people. Also is here set down an
astounding explanation of Australia’s underground
water resources, known commonly as the Artesian
Supply, and a revelation is made and the origin
established of a widely discussed Native Superstition.
The whole, narrated by a humble student of geolo-
gical science who forfeited his own liberty in dis-
covering the marvels here related.”
“ This should be the most interesting book in the
world, Dad,” he said with pride.
Jim shook his head, and sighed.
“ The last sentence you read out will apply to all
of us now, my boy, for, though being considered
dead, we might escape in the night to the open bush,
our plight would be worse than ever out there. I
have considered it often. Tanami knows that without
camel transport no white man, at any rate, could have
a hope of life.”
Tanami and Bob both started to speak at once. It
had flashed upon them simultaneously that Jim Notley
knew nothing about the Mastodon. Even they had
forgotten it in the excitement of finding themselves
alive. In the race for speech the boy was an easy
winner. He joyfully proceeded to disperse all un-
pleasing prospects.


270 Mystery of Diamond Creek
“ The Mastodon ”he began eagerly. “ The
Mastodon ”
Jim Notley wheeled about as if expecting to see
some prehistoric monster slouching along the passage.
“ Don’t blame you, my lad,” he muttered. “ Your
nerves have had a pretty rough shaking, but there
isn’t any Mastodon around, thank goodness.”
Stuart started to explain, but Bob desperately bore
down all opposition. Here surely was a chance for
his eloquence.
“ The Mastodon isn’t a beast—it’s—it’s a cater-
pillar. The engineering triumph of the age! Yes,
sir. And it’s come out from England to find you,
an’ I’m dashed if it’s going to go back without you.
It’s the Mastodon —Murray’s Mastodon. Invented
by Colonel Murray—my dad! Nothing like it in the
world ”
He paused for breath.
Notley was obviously impressed. Nay, more, he
was thunderstruck. A glow of joy swept over his
features.
“ Hold on, Bob,” he said hurriedly, taking a step
forward and gripping the lad by the arm. Is this
—Mastodon —out of reach of the natives? They’ll have
wrecked it if it’s any way near. Are you sure it’s all
right?”
His own son could have reassured him in fewer
words, but Bob swept on like a cyclone.
“No dashed fear about that, sir! Red-headed
M‘ Crimmon will be chasin’ round for us at this very


minute. We signalled to him last night. The whole
thing’s goin’ to work out fine. Stuart brought the bally
old chariot here, an’ Stuart will take it away, with us
all stickin’ on like glue, and bound for Home Sweet
Home. That’s what’s goin’ to happen. Gosh! The
story will read even better than I thought.”
Jim Notley looked at his son with eyes that shone
strangely, then his gaze rested on Bob. From one to
the other he turned, mystified, and a gently thoughtful
expression crept into his face.
“ A gun and a sextant!” he murmured. “ Yes, and
■with the latest in science as well. Tanami, old friend,
you and I have seen many strange things, but nothing
so wonderful as this. Great is the glory of youth!”
Stuart flushed, and Bob gasped in alarm, then by
a common impulse the two took hold of Tanami, one
at each arm, and pushed him forward. It was the
spontaneous tribute of youth to experience.
“ And there’s another member of the merry party
who’ll just howl when he hears what he’s missed,”
said Bob. “ Stand-by M'Crimmon would have enjoyed
that bally pool of terrors, an’ the finishin’ stunt would
have tickled him to death.”
“ It might even have done that,” admitted Jim
thoughtfully. “ The point is, how are we going to get
in touch with this fire-eater? I suppose you are quite
sure that he won’t take it into his head to —to go away,
and —leave us here? He must know by this time that
he’s up against a pretty stiff proposition ”
“No need worryin’ ’bout M‘Crimmon, Jim,” inter-


jected Tanami, with a slow smile. “ He’s one o’ them
curious sort o’ cusses that keeps lookin’ for trouble,
but when he finds it I reckon he’s a sticker. He gave
us our signal last night so sudden-like that he must
have been watchin’ like a cat.”
“ What sort of a signal, Tanami? ’
“ Dunno,” replied the bushman hopelessly. “ I
ain’t any idea o’ them things, but Stuart said I gave the
S.O.S. message by accident. The blinkin’ matches
were no good.”
“ He answered it, Dad,” put in Stuart eagerly.
“ The big headlights were switched on three times,
with a short flash in the middle.
“ The Morse answering code. Good!” exclaimed
Notley, with unconcealed delight. “ This M‘Crimmon
is going to be worth his weight in—diamonds. If, as
it seems, he understands Morse, I can talk to him
to-night—if he is within ten miles of us. And that
reminds me—l saw a camp-fire out there a couple of
nights ago; it must have been yours, for Ive never
known natives to make a decent smoke yet. I went
nearly crazy trying to catch your attention, but finally
gave it up, because I was by that time convinced that
I had made a mistake.
“ Gosh!” cried Bob, “ that must have been the
bally old star that was winkin’ in my face when I was
trying to sleep!”
Stuart remembered it too, and sighed to think of the
anxieties all might have been spared had he under-
stood. He went over to the light-giving crevice in the


outer rock and tried to locate in the distance where the
Mastodon had halted. He could find the place quite
easily, for there the sun was shining on something that
reflected its rays in vivid flashes of light. He came back
to the others.
“ He’s there,” he said, “ and he’s facing this way.”
Jim Notley stretched his arms heavenwards, and
gave thanks for his impending deliverance.
“ I have been well down in the slough of despond,
Tanami,” he said gravely; “ and now, while we have
some time to wait, I’ll tell my story, and make it as
short as I can. Afterwards I hope you may all read it—
when it is published as a book. But no! I owe my
life to the Patriarch, and I must keep his secret. I had
not thought of that. Black or no Black he has played
the game, with you as well as with me.”
They gathered around him on the floor.
“ At the beginning,” said Jim, “ I was disappointed
in Jennet. He came to me with the story that he had
been looking for diamonds down in the Macdonald
Ranges, and had afterwards made his way up north by
easy stages prospecting for opals and sapphires on the
route. With that experience at his back I thought that
he would be just the man for me, since Tanami hadn’t
showed up, and in some way too I gathered that he
knew more about my particular mission than he pre-
tended, There had been some whispers going round
about diamonds having been discovered by Tanami
and me on our cross-country journey, and I suppose
that would be enough to attract anyone interested. I
( D 694) 18


rather think now that he had been connected with the
business in Africa, and had to leave the mines there
more or less hurriedly—perhaps he had been mixed
up in 1.D.8. traffic or something of the sort. There
was no doubt about his knowledge on the one subject
of precious stones, however, and it wasn t for me to
question him too carefully.
“We joined forces. I promised him a third interest
in whatever we might find. He haggled for a half, but
I wasn’t going to let my old mate’s share go by the
board. A third it had to be, or I would go alone.”
Tanami interrupted here with a sympathetic grunt,
and then was silent.
“We got going,” continued the narrator, “ and
pretty soon I realized that my partner was a dud. He
got so weak that he couldn’t keep up, though he looked
strong enough all the time. He developed some sort
of grudge against me, too, and he nursed it from day
to day. I suppose I must have been a bit hard on him
to begin with. The first well we reached was dry, and
I cut down our water ration, expecting that all our old
locations might have evaporated in the same way. I
was right in this, but I knew we carried enough in the
water-bags to last, with care, until we reached the creek,
and there I was pretty certain to get water by digging.
... We had a tough time. The funny thing was that
Jennet got strong as I got weak. He was as fit as a
fiddle when we finally reached our destination, but I
was a wreck.”
To Stuart all this was as a story told for the second


time. He had actually viewed it. He knew how Jennet
had kept up his strength, and yet his Dad was unsus-
picious even now! A thrill of wonder passed through
the boy, but he held himself in check. He would not
speak until the grim climax proved beyond all doubt
that the vision of the crystal had not been merely a
deception of his senses.
Bob and Tanami, too, were powerfully moved,
Stuart had told these same happenings to them. They
too sat silent and expectant, awaiting the final verifi-
cation of the mystery.
Notley proceeded. He described how he found water
in the creek after penetrating through a layer of
diamond-bearing clay. He spoke of the natives ap-
pearing in the distance, and how he and his companion
debated as to what should be done.
“ Jennet seemed to go a bit crazy at this time,” he
said quietly. “ The sight of the diamonds acted on
his nerves like a poison. He raved and blasphemed
dreadfully. He was mortally afraid of being speared,
yet he hated to go away. I could see nothing for it
but to get out in a hurry. I explained that we could
reach Tanami by travelling a little to the north of
west, and that we could return with a stronger party.
This appeared to quieten him a bit, but I didn’t like
the nervous way he had of handling his gun. I don’t
believe in shooting Blacks just because they might be
dangerous. I told him this. Perhaps I was rather
irritable and expressed myself too forcibly. You can
imagine that I wasn’t feeling very cheerful at the


time. The diamonds meant —a tremendous lot to
me. He stood aside sulking while I got together the
little store of shining pebbles we had gathered. At
least, I thought, as I looked at them, there would be
a fair value in the little heap. That’s as far as I got.
I heard Jennet move. I thought he was going to
speak. Then something crashed on my head, and that
finished things for me. If I hadn’t been wearing a
helmet, my skull would have been smashed like an
egg-shell. I suppose the mad impulse just came to
him. I should not like to think that he deliberately
tried to kill me ”
He stopped and looked round with some surprise.
His listeners were behaving strangely. They eyed
one another with questioning looks, and Tanami was
muttering vengeance upon the doer of the dastardly
deed.
Stuart could restrain himself no longer.
“ I saw everything in a crystal last night, just as
you say, Dad. I told the old man that I didn’t believe
in magic—and I don’t. But it’s true all the same.
I never knew that there could be anything so wonder-
ful!”
His father gave a short laugh.
“ I thought I wasn’t surprising you very much,”
he said. “ I didn’t know old Zarabisra had been
giving you enlightenment. How far did you see,
Stuart?”
“ That was nearly the last of it,” the boy replied.
“ When the natives came along, they wanted to kill


you, because Jennet had shot one of their warriors,
and I think they thought you had done it. After that
the picture blurred a lot. There was a glimpse of that
hall we were in, where the colours kept changing.
You were there, just the same as we afterwards were,
only I didn’t see that horrible beastly thing. After
that, the awful pool appeared and then the whole
show stopped like a machine run down.”
“You saw the Hall of Rainbows, and the Pool of
Terrors,” reflected Jim. “ Something must have
happened to disturb the sequence.”
“ The fellows below who wanted to get at us
started to kick up a terrible racket ’bout that time,”
Tanami hazarded.
“ Ah, that would do it. The poor old Patriarch has
been testing his will against growing savagery every
since I’ve been here. Probably he recognized then
that he was powerless to save you, and that would
upset his concentration on the one subject he had
been trying to make clear. It is easier for him to talk
to you through your sight than with his speech; but
you can think it out for yourselves when I’ve finished.”
He resumed the thread of his narrative before his
audience had time to digest what he had said.
I came to my senses in the cave you probably
occupied last night. It looks towards the west. I was
there for over a week, I think, before it dawned on
me that my future wasn’t just as safe as it might be.
I dragged this much out of our cheerful friend Ibra-
ham, who attended me. By very expressive signs he


had little difficulty in making it evident to me that
the tribe below thirsted for my life’s blood. Then
the strange old man, who had been a frequent silent
visitor, came along, and, uncannily reading my troubled
thoughts, suddenly spoke to me in my own language
and explained the tribal custom, which demanded a
life for a life. He knew that I was guiltless but the
rest of them didn’t. Consequently I was to be duly
judged and certainly condemned.
“ I won’t harp on the experience I went through.
I should wish no living soul to endure a similar
torment even if he were my worst enemy. Yet, by the
strange workings of fate, my own son and my truest
and best friend have come through the same horrors. ...
I saw the weird ceremonial to the end. The Patriarch
had said plainly that on the south side of the pool
there was a submerged passage. I didn’t believe him.
I thought at that time that he was just a mad old
freak. I would have sold my chance of life for tup-
pence. Still, I clutched at that one slender straw at
the last. I reasoned it all out as I sat there —a spectator
at my own obsequies.
“ The force of that swirling current would beat any
swimmer, and I was weak and not fit to battle long
against odds. If an opening really existed, a long dive
would find it, or oblivion against the rock below. I
had no fancy for exploring the central avenue of exit
from this world, if I could help it.
“ I took the dive at the last moment, just as the
ghoulish gentlemen were coming along to give me a


hand —and I knew no more until Ibraham fished me
out at the same place where I got you. That was —
ages ago. Then came to life the Hermit of the Skies,
the mysterious holy man who lives, none know where.
He is free only because he is feared. Only in a little
less degree than the Patriarch is he feared, for super-
stition rules the herd. But a very fine line separates
fear and hatred, and though none recognize the white
man they slew, in the brown man who is occasionally
seen in their midst, there is little doubt that the latter
inoffensive individual would be cheerfully extinguished
on his own account if the Patriarch lost control of his
people.”
Bob shivered.
“I’d like to poison the whole bally bunch,” he
muttered.
Notley shook his head slowly in reproof.
“ You’re inclined to judge them from a wrong
standard, my lad,” he said. “ I don’t blame you in
the least little bit after what you’ve come through.
All the same, this tribe, taken in the mass, is head
and shoulders above any other savage race you will
see in Australia; and if you consider the Patriarch
alone, I am doubtful if you could find his equal in
some directions nearer than the Potala in Tibet.
And the point is ” —here he addressed Tanami par-
ticularly—“ this tribe is not savage at all! It is not
even properly black. At first sight it might appear to
be an extraordinary misfit in the aboriginal family, but
on close study it becomes something more than that.”


“ I reckon you’re right,” agreed Tanami. “ I ain’t
ever seen nigs like them before, no never.”
Notley smiled. Getting away from the personal
element, he could speak more freely. He was forgetting
self in the interest of his subject.
“ Just you listen to me, Tanami, and I’ll tell you
some of the results of my observations here among
these people. What I have to say will bring in geo-
graphy, geology, history, and—what some Australians
will call mythology, though I shall take the shadow
of a so-called great myth away, and leave a real sub-
stance in its place. You, Stuart, and you, Bob, give
me your closest attention, for what I am to speak
should be of immense interest to the younger genera-
tion who may have a hand in shaping Australia’s
destiny.”
Tanami shuffled about uneasily. He dreaded the
scientific touch, which he could never understand.
He looked plaintively at his old companion, but
Notley’s eyes were now shining with enthusiasm.
The bushman sighed and tried to appear earnestly
engrossed. As for the boys, they pressed nearer,
delight showing on their features. Now they were
to learn the cause of much that was marvellous to
them. They waited to hear, breathlessly.
“ In the long ago,” began Notley, “ but maybe not
so very long ago as most people think, Australia was
not an island.”—Here Tanami sat up and began to
take notice. —“ It was united to the mainland of Asia
up through what is now called the Polynesian Sea.


A chain of islands still marks the route of that ancient
peninsula. You have only to look at a map to see how
naturally the whole world of the East must have
been linked together.
“In that age the earth had wide boundaries. It
was a huge pasture-land for flocks and herds; and
then the business of life was mainly concerned with
flocks and herds. Near the shores of the Mediter-
ranean many important tribes had their habitation,
and to them a great knowledge came. They grew in
numbers and in wisdom, and founded mighty cities
to the glory of God. They fought many wars with
surrounding people, and pursued their ways trium-
phantly, but finally they themselves were subdued by
barbaric hosts from an adjoining country.
“ Some of the tribes escaped the slaughter and
avoided captivity by flight. Harassed by enemies
wherever they went, they could find no rest. They
divided into sections, so as not to appear like an in-
vading army, and to all points of the compass they
scattered, each tribal band being led by its titular
chief or patriarch. Each division became a unit in
itself, and moved on with its sheep, its goats, and
its cattle. Actually it became a travelling city, compact
and self-sustaining.
“ Such a large caravan progressed, as they say of
the armies of to-day, on its belly, and in this case
its belly—which was its flocks and herds—went
ahead. In course of time, a mighty pilgrimage could
be made in this way.


“ Zarabisra’s prototype of that far-off period was the
leader of one section. He must have been a sort of
Moses of his day, intent on getting his people as far
away from danger as possible. Another party, we
know, penetrated through China and into the far
north-east. Whether it ever returned is in no man’s
power to say. But here, beside us, we have the remnant
of the branch that came thus far.”
Bob’s cheeks, which had been puffing alarmingly,
exploded in a terrific “ Gosh!”
“Of course,” continued Notley, “ the natural
conditions of this place then were vastly different
from what they are now. Broad meadows existed
where the sands now lie, and at least one great river
with its branches irrigated the country around. Then
—still in the remote past —the cataclysm took place,
and the shape of the unknown world was altered in
a day. The peninsula or isthmus connecting Australia
with the mainland was shivered and submerged
except for the islands which now appear in its place.
The sea rolled between the tribe and the land of its
forefathers; retreat was now impossible for evermore.
“ Simultaneously, from the Gulf of Carpentaria
southwards, the earth buckled and subsided, and the
waters of the ocean took possession of the low-lying
areas. At a still further distant period, all this region
had been submerged, but Nature was not yet prepared
to repeat the performance. The sea receded when
the turmoil was over, and the people who had taken
shelter in the caves of this very rock rushed out to


find that their worldly possessions had nearly all been
swept away. Of their flocks and herds, numbering
tens of thousands, less than a tenth remained.
“ The river, too, had vanished, but a new flood had
mysteriously appeared issuing from the bowels of the
earth, traversing only a short way before it extinguished
itself in bottomless depths.
“ The Chronicles of the tribe show that in these
altered circumstances they rapidly deteriorated. There
was left to them but one small fertile spot directly
above the river where it widens out into a broad and
shallow lagoon. It is enclosed by a junctioning branch
of this same range which opens out like a gigantic
crater not far from where we are now. You overlook
it from the roof above the Patriarch’s room. You can
see it from here, only it wouldn’t be safe to go on
top.
“In nature nothing stands still. It either advances
or recedes, and so in the case of this tribe, as it couldn’t
possibly progress either mentally or physically in its
new environment, it followed the other sure course
to extinction. Long, long ago the main upper caverns
were set apart for the wise men of the tribe and their
families. They were chiselled out by clever hands,
and furnished and decorated almost luxuriously. The
main population had its home below; it was ready-
made for them and it sheltered them from the fierce
heat of the sun.
“ The wise men had a hopeless task down through
the generations. You must remember that the country


was peopled only by savages, and Zarabisra’s records
show that over and over again the Twilight Dwellers
had to resist attack from hordes of aborigines. This
they did easily enough; then they carried the war
into the enemies’ camp and brought back prisoners.
They became known and feared by the Blacks and
were finally accepted by them as a superior race of
their own kind.
“You might think that when white men came to
inhabit the fringe of the country, the race would have
rehabilitated itself. No. It had gone too far on the
downward grade. Where white man and savage
meet the latter is always hastened on his way to per-
dition. This is a pity, but it is a fact. The white
man’s customs are not good for primitive minds.
In other words, a savage must be brought up by
slow stages to an understanding of civilization.
“ Some notable missionaries, such as Chalmers of
New Guinea, and Baton of the South Seas, knew the
secret that could transform wild humanity into a
state of happy tranquillity, but the secret is not shared
by the rank and file of commercialdom.
“ Therefore the reigning patriarch in his wisdom
strenuously strove to hide the existence of his people
from all Western eyes. Again, you will ask, how did
he know of the white man’s coming to the land? The
answer is simple. First, because the patriarchs devel-
oped a sort of sixth sense in their solitary meditations.
While their tribe diminished and degenerated, they
seemed to have minds that reached towards the stars.


Then again, the natives with whom they are allied
have a method of conveying information that is as
infallible as wireless.
“ As all bushmen know, smoke signals are used for
communicating the presence of one tribe to another,
but I don’t think anyone has ever realized that the
system has wonderful ramifications. It involves a code
that is surprisingly intricate, and news can be sent by
relays over vast distances in a few minutes. Indeed,
before the first signaller has ceased sending up his
‘ smoke clouds ’ the beginning of his message may be
being read many hundreds of miles away. Probably
some of the earlier patriarchs elaborated the first simple
idea so that they might keep in touch with everything
that was going on. Anyhow, the fact is that to-day
the observant Black can read his morning newspaper
in the sky, if he be so inclined.”
“ I reckon that explains how the wells have a habit
of dryin’ up afore we comes along,” Tanami com-
mented.
The narrator nodded, and went on.
“ I have tried to explain why this particular tribe
wished to remain isolated, but you have just reminded
me of another reason which is perhaps more powerful
than any with the bulk of the people. Here, as you
have seen, is water in abundance. This one feature
alone, if it were known, would attract armies of all
sorts and conditions. Prospectors would come in their
myriads, and cattle-men, always on the look out for
good country, would annex the river, and pump the


water over the land by windmills. In a short time it
would really be a case of the desert blossoming like
the rose, but in the process this remnant of a race would
perish utterly. They would be dispossessed of their
heritage, and forced out to the plains to mingle with
their purely savage brethren. Or they might linger
here mute and servile to the intruder. Either way it
would mean the end of them.
“ Then, though we white lords of the world are apt
to think arrogantly that the interests of a poor black
community are as nothing in the path of progress,
it must not be forgotten that the patriarchs have always
held a very different opinion. Only in Zarabisra’s time
has it been necessary to give the ultimate possibility
of dispossession much thought, and to him the bare
idea is dreadful. In the great scheme of things he
imagines his people have been playing quite an im-
portant part. He is quite sure that their degradation is
a punishment for some unknown misdeeds of their
forefathers, and that they must go down to extinction
in fulfilment of a preordained plan. That they will
die out soon is inevitable, and all he asks is that they
may be left in peace until their destiny is accomplished.
“ So far as I can gather, the population of the Twi-
light Kingdom numbered at one time many thousands.
Now, counting men, women, and children —and there
are few of the last—it is no more than three hundred.
Some years back a plague decimated them or they
might have lasted out a little longer. As it is, they
are dwindling year by year —a clear case of race suicide.


And of course they are sunk so low in the social scale
that they are really now only a superior type of savage,
and to the horror of the Patriarch they have come to
the stage of seeking after the gods of the Blacks. Their
minds can no longer grasp the higher teachings, and
have become susceptible to the superstition of the
generality of natives.
“ In one way they have been sorely tempted to de-
fection, for the monstrous thing worshipped by their
outlying neighbours actually had its origin in their
midst. The horrible creature that you saw was the
living actuality of what is generally supposed to be a
myth,”
Tanami was gazing at him blankly:
“ You don’t mean,” he said, “ you don’t mean that
that blinkin’ thing was —was ”
“ I just do,” replied the- other, smiling. “ I rather
thought you would get a shock when you knew it.” 1
“ Dunno,” murmured the bushman, not yet wholly
satisfied. “ Nobody has ever seen the genuine article,
though there is a lot of talk about it. The nigs say it
lives in deep water-holes, and they’re scared to speak
’bout it.”
“ It is not impossible,” continued Notley, “ that the
natives may have sound reason behind what they say,
though they are always disbelieved. If, as I think, this
denizen of the underground here is the elusive freak
one hears so much about, then this must be the dis-
tributing centre for the species!”
I The Bunyip—the fabled monster of the Aborigines.


“ How could that be, Dad?” asked Stuart. “ Since
it is supposed to live in the water, you would not think
it could walk very far.”
“ In explaining this,” Notley said gravely, “ I am
going to touch on a very big subject. In fact, I meant
to tackle it at the beginning, but it seemed necessary
to get you interested in the tribe so that you would be
prepared for much that I have to tell. I am not going
to give scientific reasons now for what I say. I have
gone into the matter thoroughly in my book.
“ Briefly, then, this subterranean flood is a direct
result of the great convulsions of nature which altered
the whole aspect of the country. It opened up a line
of weakness which extends from the snowy heights of
the Himalayas down to the Antarctic, and here is the
first point where pressure against the fluid force was
met. I mean that this river had been deflected up from
a submarine channel by what geologists would call an
intrusion in its course. Originally it may be the melting
snows of Asiatic mountains that we see here. I hold
that view. It just happens to be that an obstruction
was created which compelled the waters to come to
the surface.
“ For all we know, or are ever likely to know, the
torrent might have been passing beyond the three-
mile limit, as the Americans would say, when happy
chance threw it up into Australian strata.”
“ Cornin’ from so far away, I reckon it might have
played the game and been a better emigrant,”
grumbled Tanami. “It only lasts for a mile or less


and then in two perishin’ gulps it is gone. It would
have been a godsend to Australia if it had stayed on
top.”
“ Well, it did the next best thing, old friend. Where
do you think the artesian supply that you find all over
the country comes from?”
The bushman’s eyes opened wide in astonishment.
“I’ll be jiggered!” he said slowly, as comprehension
dawned. “ This here blinkin’ place is going to be
mighty important when folks know.”
The boys, not fully understanding, said nothing.
“ I’ll leave it at that,” Notley reflected aloud. “ The
subject is too big to grip all at once.”
“ But what about our giddy little playmate down-
stairs?” inquired Bob. “ You were going to tell us how
he wandered about frightening the natives all over the
country.”
Notley laughed softly.
“ That outrageous caricature,” he said, “ is a product
of the depths. It normally lives under great pressure,
and that’s why it has no particular shape. It is blind
in the light, so its unwinking eyes give it an appearance
of owlish wisdom. It is forced to the surface occa-
sionally by accident, but it doesn’t enjoy its stay in the
upper waters at all. It finds its way to the exit as
speedily as it can and down it goes again, via the Pool
of Terrors. But it doesn’t get so far down this time,
and wherever the flood may be tapped, naturally or by
bores, it is quite reasonable to expect that a sample of
the species might sometimes be in evidence to alarm
( D 694 ) 19


any beholder. The creature is amphibian to a certain
extent, and one specimen showed such a liking for the
company of the dingo pack kept by the tribe that it
took up its abode near hand. The fiercest animal won’t
go within yards of it, and the people take this fact as
a sign of the Thing’s power. I think myself that it
is on account of the unpleasant odour which emanates
from it.
“ I have nearly finished, because I don’t mean to tell
you now of the incidents that happened during the
weary years. I want only to satisfy your curiosity a
little and hear my own voice, which had gone rusty
with disuse.”
“ I should like very much to know one thing, Dad,”
Stuart broke in, after some hesitation. “ Can you tell
me how it was possible for the Patriarch to speak to us
in our own language if he had never studied it before?”
“ No, my boy, that I cannot do with any certainty
that I would be right. As the great poet said: ‘ There
are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt
of in our philosophy.’ It is beyond me to understand
Zarabisra’s uncanny gifts, though he himself has told
me that they come through concentration of the mind
in some form or other. I know that the Dalai Lama
of Tibet is supposed to be able to converse in any
language, even if he had never heard or thought of it
previously, and I am inclined to think that our poor old
Patriarch has achieved a similar state. The complexity
of the human mind is unknowable; its power is far-
reaching and far-searching.


“ The vision of the crystal can be accounted for only
in the same unsatisfactory way. In the first instance it
had been seen by the seer himself. He found it easier
to make you view the story rather than that he should
speak it. The seeing eye has universal sight, but the
ear can recognize sounds only that it has been educated
to hear. These things do not constitute magic, Stuart;
they can be no more than the revelations of the Science
of Thought.”
He ceased, and his audience too remained silent for
a little while, pondering the things he had said. At
length Bob, whose mind was running along more
practical lines, bestirred himself and ventured a final
question.
“ What about the diamonds in the creek, sir? Do
you think anyone will ever be able to get them?”
The man looked at the boy wonderingly for a
moment, then seemed to recollect something, and
laughed.
“ The diamonds!” he echoed. “ I had actually
forgotten all about them. I scarcely imagine anyone
will rediscover them now, Bob. I thought at first
that Jennet might find his way back, but as you know
from your own experience, the creek is hard to find.
Unless, of course, he remembered the mountain, and
got near enough to take his bearings from it. And that
would certainly be the end of him. Now that there is
a prospect of getting away, I suppose I ought to give
the worldly aspect of things some consideration.”
He rose to his feet, went over to the alcove where his


manuscript was deposited, and returned with a roughly
carved wooden case the size of a large cigar box. It
had no lid, being hewed apparently from a solid block.
He calmly emptied its contents on the floor.
The three beholders gazed in an awed silence at the
array of glittering pebbles strewn before them. Here
was surely treasure in plenty.
Bob swallowed hard and gained his speech at last.
“ Gosh!” he whispered. “ Everything’s happened
just splendidly.”
Notley’s face held an inscrutable smile.
“ These are only a few picked from a considerable
bulk,” he said quietly. “In the canyon below they
occur near the crater where the water finally disap-
pears, just as they did where they were first found. I
have come to the conclusion that this much-vaunted
gem is a scarce commodity in the world only because
its distribution is in the hands of a few who control
the known supply, so far. Nature is not niggardly in
her work where their production is concerned, but her
laboratories, though large, are few. As things are, how-
ever, this little supply represents fortune for each of us.
Many times, in my despair, I cursed the foolish baubles
that had cost me all I held dear in life. But God is
good. . . . Now I am well content.”
“ I don’t want any o’ the blinkin’ things,” spoke
Tanami, “ but I’m downright glad, Jim, that you’ve
got ’em.”
“ If you took all that you see, Tanami, old mate of
mine, you would not be half repaid for your loyalty;


but it is foolish for me to say even this, for I know
that your friendship is far greater than riches.”
“ And I can’t take anything, sir,” protested Bob.
“ I don’t want them, dashed if I do. It was you we
came out to get, and when the old Mastodon gets us
safely out of this, it’ll have made a name for itself that
will be worth a fortune to good old Dad. But I’m
awfully glad. Gosh! lam glad!”
“ What do you say, Stuart?” asked the man who had
endured so much for the wealth that was there. “ How
can I reward my own son for his faithfulness to a
childish promise that has brought me life and gladness
and hope afresh?”
“ You know, Dad, that I don’t want anything more
than I’ve got. But Mother might ”
“ So,” said Jim, “ I cannot even give away what I
struggled so hard to obtain. But I’ll get over the
difficulty by another means. You shall each choose
all that you care to take with you from the pile in the
canyon, and we’ll chance a glut in the market for
Twilight Diamonds.”
There came the sound of slight movement from a
comer of the room. An opening leading to the ridge
overhead was blocked by a descending figure, A
moment more and the Patriarch stood before them.


CHAPTER XII
Tanami’s Last Trail
Zarabisra gazed at the little group with eyes that
seemed to pierce and search into the innermost
chambers of each one’s heart. The boys’ heads lowered;
a feeling of dread came over them. Tanami’s attention
wavered, then wandered to the entrance by which
the old man had arrived. He had not noticed it before,
and Notley had not thought of explaining its presence.
Jim Notley met the seer’s glance steadily, and for
over a minute the two remained motionless and face
to face. To Stuart the silence appeared ominous. Were
all their hopes to be dashed at this last moment by the
intervention of the Patriarch? Why couldn’t he speak,
if only some unintelligible jargon? The tension was
becoming unbearable.
And at last, in a thin, far away voice, the Patriarch
spoke.
“ It is well,” he said. “ Thou and those that are with
thee may pass in peace, and my will, which tumeth
towards thy plannings, shall restrain thee no more.
In thy heart I see but sympathy for the weary prophet
who bears a heavy burden. Because of my faith I shall
let thee go. The smoking chariot evadeth the warriors


who would encompass it. Behold, it vanisheth like a
wind-driven cloud, and no man can pursue it. Yet
I know that even this mighty thing thou hast power to
control, both its coming hither and its going hence.
Again I say, it is well. But beware those of my race who
lie in wait for the fire-breathing thing to come near.
They watch for it night and day, thinking to slay it
as a creature of evil. In their growing darkness they
understand not the wonderful workings of progress,
neither do they see the inscrutable hand of Fate. But
a little while is given me to cumber the earth, and on
Ibraham shall my mantle fall, for none are left of the
ancient fine. He inherits only a warrior’s gifts and his
faith wavers like the reed that bends before the blast.
So, should ye chance to return hither, ye may find my
kingdom gone to its place, leaving only the graven
records of ages where the patriarchs have lived.
These I charge thee then to interpret diligently and
with the understanding that cometh of the heart, so
that the wide world may know how the dwellers of the
Twilight kept the faith. I, Zarabisra, the last of the
prophets, give thee greeting and farewell.”
He raised his gaunt arms in benediction. Almost
at once they dropped to his side; his head sank upon
his breast. He would have fallen had not Notley
leaped to his aid and supported him.
With a clatter of spear and shield Ibraham now
made sudden entry. Evidently he had awaited on top
at the seer’s command.
Zarabisra opened his eyes and spoke in a strange


tongue to the warrior, who, instantly discarding his
weapon, prepared to carry the aged chief forth. But
before he finally went off with his burden he turned
with a smiling flash of white teeth to the mute assembly,
and gave a parting salutation.
“ Ednbro, Loon-den, Seed-nee. Ibraham very
fine fellow. Hoo-ree!”
It was Bob who weakly responded, “ Hoorah!”
The others were lost in thought.
“ That’s the last we’ll see of Zarabisra,” said Notley,
waking up as from a dream; “ and very likely the last
of Ibraham, too. He came to us like the Pharaoh of
old who would not let the people go, but he relented
at the eleventh hour, and has placed his trust in the
white man’s honour. While he lives we must keep his
secret. When Ibraham comes to reign it will be a
different matter. He can never hold the tribe to-
gether. They who may be left will mingle with the
savages on the plains. So the end will come.”
He went over to the aperture commanding a view
of the west, and looked for the sun. It was already
well under the zenith. The afternoon was waning;
night was at hand.
“ Our talk must have taken longer than I thought,”
he said, coming back, “ and I want you to see my
mine before it gets quite dark in the gorge. You’ll
laugh at it, Tanami, for it has been gouged out with
wooden tools that I made myself. It’s no more than
a shallow trench, but such as it is, it served its purpose.”
They returned to the gloomy region where the last


of the sunken river roared its way into the waiting
abyss, and near the point of downfall Jim’s mine was
disclosed. As he had said, the excavation did not go
much below the surface, but it w T as both wide and
long. Near the heaps of bluish clay that had been
thrown out was a pile of nodular fragments similar
to those they had already seen in the box above.
“ There you are,” said Notley, with a laugh. “ I
didn’t even trouble to take this stuff away. The
diamonds were a bit too plentiful for my liking, and
at the best I began to realize they could mean nothing
to me.”
“ And each bally bit may be worth a hundred and
twenty golden goblins!” gasped Bob.
“ Like enough, my lad, but I don’t think the
market would stand too much of a shock, and the
value would be sure to come down if Twilight Diamonds
became numerous. We had better take a few more, all
the same, for the common good, as I don’t think we
are likely to be tempted to come again.”
Bob glanced fearfully at the waters issuing from the
tunnel, and shuddered.
“ It’s lucky for all of us that that escape channel
was there, dreadful as it is,” continued Notley, noticing
the boy’s look. “ After the fact, one can reason it
out calmly and understand just why it is there. It
was no special dispensation of Providence just for
our benefit.”
Tanami’s face assumed a thoughtful expression.
He knew an explanation was coming.


“ Another line o’ weakness, mebbe?” he hazarded
with great good humour.
“ In a sense, yes,” agreed 1 Jim, “ but mainly, I
think, it is a safety-valve provided by Nature. At one
season of the year —when the snows are melting on
the Himalayas—the rush of water that comes along is
vastly increased, and an extra outlet had to be found
to cope with it. The added pressure soon found the
line of least resistance, and there you are.”
Tanami appeared to be duly enlightened, but it
was Bob who was most impressed.
“ Gosh!” exclaimed he. “ If it hadn’t been for that
bally snow making things too lively, we’d have gone
down the big drain sure enough. G-r-r-r!”
“ But ain’t there any way of getting out o’ the
perishin’ place?” demanded Tanami suddenly. “ We’ve
had a pretty long trip inside the old tombstone, an’
I’m getting sort o’ interested in how we’re goin’ to
see the other side again.”
“ Why, the place is honeycombed with exits,”
Notley replied; “ only, you’d have to know your way
about to reach them. The whole length of the rock is
just a maze of caves surrounding the huge central one
where the river flows. But at this end there are no
passage-ways leading from the outside. That is why
the overflow of the pool is unknown to any but the
Patriarch and Ibraham. So far as I am aware, the
only possible way of getting down here from the top
is through the roof of my humble abode. As the rank
and file of the tribe live by the waterside and have


long since lost all interest in climbing, the ridge is
pretty safe from prying eyes. Our only way to reach
the plain safely is by getting aloft and following the
crags to the south. I know a place there where it
will be easy to get down, but next to impossible to
come up.”
“ There won’t be any need to worry very much
about cornin’ up, I hope,” Tanami said devoutly, as
they retraced their steps.
The Mastodon could no longer be seen from the
outlook in the rock when the party returned, but
though this fact perturbed the mind of the bushman
it aroused no forebodings in the hearts of the boys.
To them M‘Crimmon now appeared as a heroic
figure of much resource, who would even then be
planning some desperate measure for a rescue. The
unexpected and hurried repair he had made to the
engine had deeply impressed Stuart, and since the
lad had had more time for reflection it also became
a source of much wonderment.
“ I don’t know how he managed to do it, Dad,”
he said. “ He must have started on the job when he
heard our first shots fired, and carried it through as
if there wasn’t a native within miles. I think he’s
just a marvel.”
“ He certainly showed wonderful nerve and very
sound judgment, Stuart. He knew at once that if
the motor and the stores it contained were taken, the
position would be hopeless for all concerned. From
your description I imagine he is exactly the type of


man I should like to have near me in a tight fix. Still,
he has waited a full day, and he may think you are
all beyond help now.”
It was clear that Notley and Tanami shared the same
feeling of anxiety at this time. M‘Crimmon was not
in sight. Cold logic might have shown him the use-
lessness of a single-handed attack upon a Blacks’
stronghold. If he himself escaped he was sure to return
with reinforcements, yet it was unlikely that he could
break through the cordon of warriors who would be
awaiting him, on the return trail. By this time the
Patriarch’s warnings to allied tribes would have been
read far and wide.
They had a further hasty meal, and, scarcely speak-
ing, waited for the night.
The sun, like a great ball of fire, touched the western
rim of the horizon. For a few short minutes it glowed
redly over the plain in diminishing splendour; then
suddenly it had gone, and the wastes gloomed under
the faint radiance of the stars.
Notley drew from an obscure corner of the room
a block of wood, hollowed in the centre to receive a
short rod of similar hard material. He was sprink-
ling some powdered eucalyptus leaves around the
point of junction preparatory to turning the rod
vigorously between his open palms. The friction
would cause sufficient heat to ignite the tinder-like
substance.
Tanami laughed, and produced the box containing
his few remaining matches.


“ Light the blinkin’ blaze like a Christian, Jim,” he
said. “ It’s sure to burn brighter.”
“ You’ve forgotten about your submarine trip
already, old boss,” exclaimed Bob. “ The bally things
will be wet.”
“ Water-tight, Bob!” exclaimed the bushman, laconi-
cally. “ Always safer that way. A man never knows
what may happen.”
The torch of dried twigs which had been prepared
burst into flame and burned smokily. Holding it in
his left hand, and obscuring it in front with a sheet of
bark tom from the table, Jim approached the window.
All clustered near. The deeper dark had not yet come,
but a thick grey curtain enshrouded the land like an
impenetrable mist.
“ I’ll give the S.O.S. signal first,” said Notley.
“ After that, if he responds, I’ll try to spell out some
instructions. He must approach round by the south,
showing no lights. But I had forgotten that he can’t
blanket the sound of the engine!”
No one had thought of this. Though the Mastodon
roared mightily with the exhaust open, it could also
purr quite softly when there was no particular strain
on the cylinders. But even the smoothest murmur-
ing would echo out in the still air of these soli-
tudes.
“ I’ll tell him not to come too near,” decided Notley
hastily. “ If we get clear away, it will be safer for us
to walk a mile than have the whole tribe waiting to
welcome M'Crimmon. Well, here goes!”


But before he moved the guarding shutter he hesi-
tated once again, then leaned forward in a listening
attitude. He turned and looked at his companions
inquiringly. Yes, they too heard the throbbing note
that had crept into the atmosphere, and on the faces of
each, lit up by the back glare of the torch, abundant
satisfaction showed. The Mastodon was on the move
and was coming towards them. The purposeful
M'Crimmon, with some foolhardy plan, was an-
swering the summons of the night before. Single-
handed he was daring to force an issue with full a
hundred warriors. Even the rising exuberance of Bob
was checked in his throat.
“ It’s fine, but it’s impossible,” said Notley. “It
won’t help matters if he is killed or captured.”
Quickly he flashed the letters: “ S-t-o-p.”
He repeated the signal twice before the pulsations
ceased.
Then came a pause in which the silence seemed to
brood like an ominous cloud over all, then the head-
lights of the Mastodon flamed into life. They glared
through the night like two monstrous eyes.
“ I reckon he’s a good mile off yet,” said Tanami.
“ Keep him there, Jim, and tell him to dowse the
lights.”
Before the suggestion had left his lips the shining
eyes began to blink. M'Crimmon was having his say.
“ A-m c-o-m-i-n-g w-i-t-h b-o-m-b-s; c-h-e-e-r
u-p.
Stuart’s father spelt the words out slowly.


“ God bless my soul!” he ejaculated. “He means
to storm the mountain!”
“ I reckon he’s used up our case of gelignite making
the blinkin’ bombs,” spoke Tanami, “ and if he throws
them around promiscuous-like he’ll do a thundering
lot o’ damage.”
“ But it will require only one chance spear to finish
him,” remarked Notley. “He would be coming to
certain death.”
He began to send back a warning and an instruction:
“ Danger too great. Think can escape south end
ridge. Will be there within ten minutes. Creep in
quietly and wait.”
No answer came to this at once, but after a con-
siderable pause the final message flashed.
“ M'Crimmon —standing by.”
“ There’s a directness about our bloodthirsty friend
that I like,” said Notley. “ Now, my lads, up you go.
Wait for me on top, and don’t move until I come.
You next, Tanami, old mate. I’ll pass up the
treasure.”
Stuart led the way through the exit to the ridge, his
father holding the fading torch for him to see. The
ascent was not so difficult as it seemed, for rough
steps had been cut into the wall at this point, and
though they were nearly vertical they provided solid
foothold. In less than a minute the four were standing
on the rugged summit of the rock which had enclosed
them.
Follow me step by step,” Notley whispered


“ We haven’t quite a hundred yards to go, but every
foot is treacherous.”
They followed him, keeping close in the darkness.
In the fullness of his joy Bob whistled softly to himself.
At another time this pilgrimage over mouldering crags
would have been exciting enough in itself. The rock
at this end had lost its more solid structure and was
weathering rapidly to decay. It was detaching into
blocks and boulders which rested dubiously along the
heights. The fretting hand of time had done its work.
This part of the ridge was already dismembered. Soon
it must topple over and mingle with the dust of the
plains. Like goats they clambered, making light of the
task. Gaunt uprearing structures silhouetted against
the stars, and these were surmounted or skirted
cautiously. The termination of the line came in a
massive knob that looked like a ghostly Brobdingnagian
head. Beyond this point the range melted mysteriously
away. In a broken stream of mighty fragments and
lesser rubble it strewed upon the sands.
Here Notley stopped and gave his instructions for
the descent. A pathway down could with care be
picked among the debris, but the crumbling foothold
would bear but momentary pressure. Thus a return
would be impossible. Once below, if escape was
barred, there could be no retreat. Detection was
inevitable.
Out to the west not a glimmer showed, but listening
attentively a faint rhythmic beat could be heard, and
Tanami hastily fixed a position by the sound. While


they waited, the pulsations ceased. All was still.
In another minute they stood at the base of the
mountain. At last they were free of its imprisoning
walls; only a short distance now separated them from
safety.
“ Thank God!” murmured Tanami fervently, and,
his bushman’s instinct prevailing, he took the lead,
heading outwards towards the Mastodon with infallible
confidence in his direction.
They had gone less than a hundred yards when a
confused disturbance burst upon the air. It began in a
series of shrieks which swelled in chorus until a com-
bined and continuous wail was reached. They halted
and gazed back into the gloom apprehensively. As they
looked, a flare blazed up on the top of the rock they
had so recently left, and now other voices joined in the
uproar. The dirge-like note which had first prevailed
was overwhelmed by an indescribable scream of
triumph, which was taken up and echoed and re-echoed
from end to end of the Twilight Kingdom. Some-
thing unaccountable had surely happened to stir the
dwellers in the underground to such wild heights
of frenzy.
“ I’ve never seen a fire lit there before,” said Notley,
urging his companions onward. “ It is just above the
Patriarch’s praying-room, and the only approach is
through the secret door that you know. It looks
unpleasantly like a signal to other tribes.”
“ If once we get clear of this, Jim,” grunted Tanami,
striding on, “ I reckon we won’t need to worry ’bout
( D 694 ) 20


or’nary nigs. One or two o’ M'Crimmon’s bombs will
frighten them off.”
The fierce medley continued. It appeared to gain
in harshness. The warriors were assembling in the
open. Their clashing spears now added to the din.
“ Gosh!” said Bob, “ they’re a happy family all
right. Dashed good job they’re behind us and not in
front.”
Tanami and Jim at this moment shared a fear they
dared not speak. What would the watchful M'Crimmon
do? His gaze would be fixed on the beacon in dismay.
He would not understand any more than they did the
cause of the natives’ noisy agitation, but he might
wholly misunderstand and then !
“ He’s going!” groaned Tanami, “ and we haven’t
a hope in the world o’ stoppin’ him.”
The Mastodon had suddenly become illuminated.
Not only were the giant head-lamps sending out their
wide-angled rays, but the searchlight too had been
pressed into service. At the same time the engine
throbbed mightily to life.
M‘Crimmon had thrown caution to the winds and
was advancing grimly on his forlorn hope.
Aghast, the watchers stared. Tanami’s matches were
now the only resource, and it was more than doubtful
that their feeble flicker would be seen —unless by the
natives near at hand, who would quickly rush out to
investigate. But this risk could no longer be considered.
The tiny sparks of flame dabbed into the darkness, and
a fresh storm of yells from behind intimated that they


had not been missed in that quarter. Instantly came the
clatter of pursuit.
But it seemed that M‘Crimmon too had observed,
for the Mastodon changed its course and was bearing
down upon the little band at its utmost limit of speed,
the glare of the headlights cutting a channel through
the night. Into the zone of brilliance some lurking
forms made startling appearance. They hovered for
a moment in the act of throwing their spears, like
figures on a kinema screen, then they were literally
ploughed aside. Almost at once a loud explosion took
place in the shadows where they had vanished, and a
blinding flash of flame spurted up from the ground.
M'Crimmon had thrown his first bomb!
It was evident that the hastening four would have
fared badly had they tried to penetrate this cordon, of
which they had known nothing. Unarmed, they would
have fallen easy victims at the very moment of escape.
They recognized this, and even at such a trying time,
when the screams of the pursuing warriors were loud
in their ears, Tanami panted out generous tribute to
the man who had so steadily stood by.
The giant motor was near; it loomed before them,
majestic in its strength; but it was not a minute too
soon. It would snatch the prey from the very teeth of
the pack.
The man behind the wheel laughed aloud in his
glee. He looked strangely bulky as he sat there wedged
in the driver’s seat, and not at all like the lanky indi-
vidual the boys had known, yet a closer glance revealed


how the metamorphosis had been accomplished.
M'Crimmon had surrounded himself with all sorts of
odd lumber to guard his body. His head, too, was
thrust into a packing-case, from which the bottom had
been knocked out. It rested loosely on his shoulders
like a fantastic helmet. His face showed dimly through
a large opening in front.
The motor slowed down but did not stop, and the
quartette leaped aboard as it circled round in its own
length. A shower of spears came whizzing through
the air. Some thudded dully against the metal-work of
the Mastodon, others skimmed high overhead, but one
found a billet. Stuart had scarcely got clear of the
ground when a tearing pain in his foot drew from him
an involuntary cry. The Mastodon was gathering
speed. For a moment he balanced precariously,
clutching wildly with his hands for support, then he
subsided helplessly into the sand. With an inarticulate
roar Tanami jumped after him, and rushing to the boy,
gathered him in his arms as the exultant horde came
up. Carelessly he turned his back upon them and
staggered off with his burden.
The Mastodon was pivoting round —Notley was
rushing to meet him —Bob was already lighting the
fuses of M‘Crimmon’s bombs. The bushman saw all
this before he fell forward. Dimly to his ears came the
fierce sounds of battle.
For the space of about thirty seconds an inferno
raged; but the demoralizing gelignite charges did their
work. The tribe drew back sullenly into the night.


Tanami was trying to sit up when his old comrade
approached. Stuart, in an agony of despair, was assisting
him.
“ I reckon I’m all right, Jim,” he said weakly. “ Just
nip that blinkin’ spear from my back. Break it. Don’t
pull!”
“ Thank God, old mate, there seems to be only one;
I’ll soon fix you up. I’ll —I’ll ”
Notley’s voice failed him. When he felt for the deep
embedded barb he nearly sobbed aloud. Only the
bushman’s iron will was keeping him conscious. Soon
the valiant heart must give way in the unequal struggle.
And yet the sorely wounded man was the most
cheerful of all. Only when he found that he could not
walk unaided did he make any murmur.
“ I just hate to be a hindrance,” he muttered. “ Just
heave me on the old camel anywhere ”
M‘Crimmon had shown no surprise at the addition
of Notley to the party, but now a hurried explanation
was made.
“ I guessed it, man,” said the Scot, “ when the
Morse signals came; an’ it will be a glorious adventure
if good old Tanami isn’t badly hurt.”
In the greater calamity, Stuart’s wound received
little thought. The lad himself would not speak of it,
and, with Bob’s assistance, crawled to his seat with a
heavy heart. For long afterwards the hurt troubled
him, for his foot was gashed from ankle to toe, and
even wiien it healed it left a permanent limp.
He took the w T heel from M'Crimmon, who wished


to be free for any further emergency that might arise.
His bombs, so called, were certainly more effective
than any weapon that could be imagined. In the
night especially their spectacular explosions alone
would awe the most savage enemy.
“ One plug o’ dynamite, one detonator prodded
gently into the middle, one ten-seconds fuse —and
there you are!”
He confided this information to Bob as the Mastodon
got under way.
“ Strategy, my bold laddie, is everything,” he con-
tinued. “ I’m no’ a man to take risks mysel’, being
o’ a peaceful disposition. But still I would whisper
a word o’ wisdom in your shell-like ear. Always sur-
prise the enemy, even if you can’t hurt him much.”
Stuart was steering for the well in the Creek of
Diamonds. Here his father had decided to make a
further stand against the natives, should they follow,
for Tanami’s wound required instant attention.
They drew near on the westward bank. The head-
lights laid bare the channel, and threw into relief
a small tent that had evidently been hastily erected
beside the shaft that Tanami had cleared; but no
human being was in sight. Someone had surely come
—and already had disappeared.
“ The tent wasna here last night,” said M'Crimmon,
“ for I filled the tank at the well in the sma’ hours
an’ I saw no sign o’ anybody.”
“ God help them, whoever they are!” muttered
Notley. “ They may have been taken already.”


Tanami roused himself from apparent unconscious-
ness, and looked dimly at the evidence of man’s
presence in this fateful place. “ Followed—our —
tracks,” he gasped. “ I reckoned he would. . . . Jen-
net. . . . poor devil!”
Notley and M'Crimmon carried him down into the
creek and laid him gently on the sand. Bob stood on
guard. Stuart remained by the engine, almost in a
state of collapse. In his heart he prayed fervently.
Not one but many barbs had pierced the bushman’s
sinewy shoulders, but only one had penetrated deeply
enough to do him deadly hurt. Notley stanched the
blood that welled from the jagged wound, but even
as he did so he knew that his friend was beyond all
human aid. He strove to hide his grief and speak
words of encouragement, but the pretence was vain.
His voice trembled and broke down.
Tanami looked up at him and smiled. “ ’Tain’t
any good, Jim,” he whispered. “ I reckon I’ve got
my call ... I don’t mind goin’, much, though I
ain’t brave, an’ bein’ no scholar I haven’t got a grip
o’ the track. It’s my last trail, Jim . . . Put me on
the course so’s I won’t get bushed in the dark-
ness ”
“ You’re on the course, old mate,” cried Notley
brokenly. “I’m taking my bearings from you.”
Near by M‘Crimmon stood, his forlorn visage
working strangely under a powerful emotion. Tanami
beckoned him with his eyes. He knelt by the dying
man’s side.


“ You’re built o’ the right stuff,” came the weak
voice. “ Good-bye.”
Now he called for the boys. Bob came first, openly
weeping, and said farewell to the man for whom he
had formed a deep and abiding affection. Then
M‘Crimmon carried Stuart to him.
Tanami gazed at the boy with a world of meaning
in his fast dimming eyes.
“ I kept ... my promise . . . too . . . dear lad,”
he murmured. His words were almost inaudible.
Stuart bent closer.
“ My book ... for you ... in my kit. God . . .
bless .. . you ” The tired eyes fluttered and
closed, yet he smiled when his old comrade raised
his head and pillowed it upon his knees.
Though seeming asleep, his lips moved feebly, and
the softest murmur came:
“ Read ... it ... to .. . me —Jim. I need . . .
a hand-
And Jim, calling memory to his aid, repeated, in a
voice grown suddenly strong, the bushman’s favourite
passage from the Pilgrim's Progress :
“ When the Day that he must go hence, was
come, many accompanied him to the River side, into
which, as he went, he said, Death, where is thy Sting?
And as he went down deeper, he said, Grave, where
is thy Victory? So he passed over, and the Trumpets
sounded for him on the other side,”
When he had finished, Tanami’s eyes were open
wide, and staring into the skies; but it was only the


earthly tenement that was there for the watchers to
see. The soul had gone questing on.
“ Vale! brave spirit,” spoke Notley softly, rising
to his feet. “ For you surely will Heaven open her
gates, and let the trail-weary wanderer in.”
He turned and saw two men standing by IVTCrimmon.
One gazed at him confidently, but the other’s eyes
were fixed upon the ground.
He who could look his fellow in the face pointed
to the tent and spoke hurriedly:
“ We got here to-night, following the motor trail,
but cleared into the bush when we heard the Blacks
on the rampage. Our camels are only back ’bout half
a mile. My mate says now that the creek is yours by
right o’ discovery, an’ I ain’t kickin’.”
Notley made his reply to him who had not spoken.
“ I know you, Jennet,” he said quietly. “ I expected
you before now.”
“ I couldn’t make the trail,” replied Jennet in a
low voice. “ I wanted the diamonds but I couldn’t
come alone, and nobody would come with me be-
cause I didn’t know exactly the location of the
place.”
“ You find me where you left me,” continued Jim,
as if the other had not spoken. “ Are you glad or
sorry, man?”
“ Glad!” shouted Jennet. “ Yes, so glad now that
you wouldn’t believe.”
Bob surveyed the speaker curiously. He had seen
that face before, but where was it? All at once he


remembered. It was Slim Smith who stood there so
querulously humble.
Notley pointed to where Tanami lay.
“ There,” he said, “ is my friend, who at the last
moment guessed you were here, and yet sympathized
with you ”
“ Sympathized with me? Why, Tanami has been
hounding me down. He was my bitterest enemy!”
“ And yet he would have saved you from the fate
that will come to you both if you remain here for
many more hours. If he could think this way on the
point of death, when all things appear in their proper
proportion, surely I cannot do less then give you
warning. Go, and forget that this creek exists. Other-
wise it will be your death. As for us, we move out
on the eastern track at sunrise or before. I say to
you both—Go, or it will be too late. Camels are
slow moving. If you are in sight when morning
comes, the natives will certainly take your lives.”
“ I believe you,” answered Jennet, casting a swift
look at the motionless form in the sand. “ You’ve
been mighty decent about it. We’ll clear out right
away.”
His companion stepped forward with outstretched
hand.
“ Thank you, mate,” he said. “ I know you now.
You are Jim Notley that was lost in these parts, an’
I’m mighty glad to see you alive.”
They did not trouble to dismantle the tent. They
departed in haste.


It was a saddened party that remained by the
Creek of Diamonds through the silent watches of the
night. Where great joy might have been, sorrow had
thrust her way. In the moment of triumph, black
tragedy had obtruded its grisly presence.
The flare on the heights to the south had long since
died down, and showed only as an intermittent glow
against the sky when an occasional gentle breeze fanned
the glowing embers. No sound now disturbed the
stillness.
Notley knew that unless at the time of full moon the
natives disliked to attack in the night. Some strong
excitement must have driven them to face the Mas-
todon as they had done. He could not fathom a reason
for their maddened behaviour. The Patriarch had
always held their savage traits in check. At the rising
of the sun they would come again; that was certain.
Labouring strenuously, Notley and M'Crimmon dug
a deep grave on the eastern bank of the channel, and
here by the pale light of the stars Tanami was laid
to rest. They marked the place with a caim of boulders,
and over this the boys placed a rude cross which they
had lovingly fashioned.
The sun’s upper rim had peeped over the horizon
before they were ready to go. Notley had decided on an
eastern route which would take them into Queensland.
They would sooner reach a port of embarkation for
home in this way.
Down by the region of Twilight Land the tribe was
gathering in the open. It was time to depart.


“ Gosh!” said Bob. “ I’m blessed if this isn’t
Ibraham cornin’ to see us off!”
A single native had made startling appearance from
the creek. He advanced with hand upraised.
It was Ibraham certainly, but an Ibraham somehow
changed. His arms and head w r ere bedecked with
weird ornaments and he wore the Patriarch’s cloak —
around his loins. He was evidently much excited and
not a little afraid. His eyes were constantly turning
towards the massing tribe in the distance.
“ Zarabisra—Zarabisra —Me—Me!”
He smote his chest with his hand, and laughed
childishly.
“ I see,” said Notley, after much pantomimic
gesturing from the warrior. “ The Patriarch is dead
and Ibraham reigns in his stead. I am not much
surprised. Now will come the end that the old man
feared. But part of his teaching still lingers in his
savage successor. Ibraham comes to warn us. This
explains much that has happened.”
Without further attempt at speech Ibraham pointed
wildly in the direction of the distant approaching
band, then, turning, he made a bound for the creek
and disappeared, running swiftly.
The Mastodon, with Stuart at the wheel and his
father beside him directing the course, sped on.
Behind, Bob and M'Crimmon were engaged in earnest
conversation.
“I’d better mak’ a clean breast o’ my infamy,” the
man was saying. “ You see, it was this way, Bob.


No’ very long ago, when I was stranded like a fish
in the land o’ my birth, your dad made use o’ my
valuable services in his laboratory, and so it happened
that I saw the first plans o’ the Mastodon before
they ever went near the works. If I may say it, who
shouldn’t, I made one or two suggestions which I
observe have been carried out. Howsomever, the
wandering spirit gripped me, and before you could
say ‘ boo ’ I was sitting under the palm trees o’ the
East, and the spicy breezes were blowin’ through my
whiskers. That is the end o’ part one.
“To continue, and cut a long story short, your dad,
who had a misguided opinion o’ my abilities, asked
me to come back, an’ I was thinkin’ sort o’ seriously
on the same subject when along comes another letter,
entrusting me wi’ a job after my ain heart. Two
young chaps were on the way out to the Australian
Never-Never wi’ a Mastodon in their baggage. Would
I keep a guiding eye on them an’ wi’ much discretion
see that they got safely through their wild adventure?
I ”
“ O-ho!” interrupted Bob, in whom enlightenment
had been steadily growing. “So dear old Dad was
nervous, was he? Gosh! M‘Crimmon, you’re a good
sort. You’ve never once given a hint ”
“ An’ why should I?” demanded the engineer, with
enthusiasm. “ I was accepted as one o’ the party on
my ain merits; an’ it was enough that I should share
your risks —because —because my heart was wi’ ye
both. But I was aye standin’ by in case o’ trouble.


Don’t forget that, my lad, M‘Crimmon was standin’
by.”
In front Notley was talking to his son on a subject
that was dear to them both. They spoke of home,
and the gladness that would await them there.
“ Laurel will be nearly sixteen,” he said tenderly.
“ These years will have made a lot of difference to
her. She’ll be getting quite grown-up.”
“ So Bob thinks,” returned Stuart, with a smile.
The youth in the rear had heard the mention of a
name that interested him exceedingly. He shifted in
his seat and with sudden resolve tapped Notley on the
shoulder.
“ I hope you won’t mind, sir, if I come along and
see Laurel when we get home. She’s been a dashed
good chum to me; but maybe—maybe you’ll think
I’m—not—much —good ”
Captain Jim Notley turned round with eyes that
shone.
“ What I think of you, my boy, would take a long
time to say, but I’ll concentrate it in a single sentence
and address it to you, Bob, to you M'Crimmon, and
to my own son, Stuart:
“ Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.”
The Mastodon thundered on, steering into the sun
which had gloriously arisen.
The morning paper had come. Mrs. Notley turned
over the rustling sheets idly. She noticed briefly that
there was renewed trouble in China, that something


was likely to happen to the gold standard in the near
future, and also that the Aquitania had made another
fast passage over the Atlantic. Then she glanced at a
column headed “ Late Cable News ”, and at once her
apathy vanished.
“ Oh, Laurel!” she cried, after a moment; then
“ Oh!”—again.
The girl came quickly forward, her eyes sparkling
with suppressed excitement.
“ What is it, Mummie? Oh! Let me look!”
Her young eyes scanned the small and blurred type
unerringly and she burst out in a joyful “ Hurrah!”
while her mother unaccountably wept. The message
which had affected them seemingly in such different
fashion was brief but of immense import. It had been
flashed to the world by a lonely operator at his distant
post.
“ Bight’s Well Relaying Station, Transcontinental
Telegraph Line —Notley Relief Expedition, accom-
panied by James Notley, who had been given up as
dead, passed through here to-night. Reports one
member of party, Charles Henley, otherwise Tanami
Charlie, a well-known bushman, killed by natives.
Another member suffering from spear wound. Leader
gives high praise to Murray’s Mastodon Tank car,
model A, which carried the expedition throughout
entire journey of one thousand miles.”
“ Oh, Jim!” cried the woman, in deep thankfulness.
Yet her face streamed with tears. She rejoiced for the
one who was coming back to her, one whom she had


never thought to see again; she rejoiced in the safety
of her fearless son who had brought this marvel about.
But she wept because of a man she had never seen, a
lonely bushman who never more return from
the land where he had pioneered.
Laurel’s dreams were untroubled with any gloomy
thoughts.
“ I think he’s just grand,” she murmured happily,
her mind far away.
“ Who, dear?”
“ Why, Bob, of course,” answered the girl, with fine
indignation.
A V 2-2
fY I 12>£
"N bn


i I


6


I
%


