

Hi H panna 0-
Hi 11" Isa @
iL 1 1 L m
© AND m
% MEMOIRS {
® @
1 FANNY 1
IUTT Tfl
I | n 1 l > »; *
[g] OR THE
|gs Troubles Pastime & Pleasures fg)
2 •
2 A Lady of Fashion. fj
— ip
PRICE 6d. _Jg


•
■
■
; / • l-
■ , K msaaSi
A .r" ‘ *
V
• « •' v , ■, 7 | W f i , >
V v--
. ...• ■ !-• -*■•••.
■ .
* 9 I
...... ■ ■ i . ; \ ■ ; ; , , . - - .• » ' ■ - ■ - ' •
■ .
i-i .
. t ... V V,. . ; » &':A ■ ■■ • ■ -i r
*v'.’ i;;" 4 -’/' 9
-
K* ' >■
•
* ■■ •» fm
• * f ...
w-‘ q
&
y:.
y ‘7
v‘ •
T 1 » #■ ‘ f ' ’■ *
;. : y .
H, |l . f« ' % . - f’ .•
' »V.u> - ! " '
y-j
„ ,;v> ■
■ T rf'ff
IS, '
'.*MrX:«39. UAIU A
sby
/*v.^
'%<■
. • •• ■ ' *• f ,
'V •
■v'. *y :** '•.•?•'' if I 4 '- ;r*
•“ « fr.
••* ,-V-
• * v»
3! ’
■yj?
, , ' iY • KLi .1. JTT
v» -
%■' .vs 7
v,. . .. . •*■• >
•-?> -
.


INTRODUCTION.
Dear Reader,—
In writing this little narrative of my
past misspent life, I hope you will not think too harshly of my conduct
but drop a tear of pity for a poor frail sister, who was mislead, and
seduced by the vile, flattering, and deceitful tongue of man ; who will
pluck you like a rose lrom its parent stem, then cast you aside as a
faded blower.
I sincerly trust that this sad history of my life will be a warning
to all—old and young, grave and gav.
May it be a lesson never to be forgotten. And remember that
that the unfortunate woman is not entirely senseLss, but that—
•While the sharp arrow sinks deed in her soul,
She flies for relief to that traitor the bowl;
Gets stupid and bloated, and lost to all shame,
While a dreadful disease is devouring her frame
Now with eyes dim and languid, the once blooming maid,
In a garret on straw, faint and helpless is laid-
Ah! mark her pale cheeks, she scarce draws her last breath,
And now her blue eyes are sealed up in death.
Now, kind reader, seriously read my life, and profit by the lesson
that it teaches.
FANNY HILL.


LIFE OF FANNY HILL.
I was born January sth, 1772, of poor but honest and?
industrious parents, who resided in a pleasant little village
about forty miles from London. My father held the situ-
ation of Bailiff to a wealthy old squire, who had hut one
son: the sole heir to a vast and extensive domain ; he was
lord of all for miles round, and everybody seemed to be at
his command. It was, as the old adage states—
Gold hath the sway, we all obey,
And a ruthless king is he.
I shall pass over ray early days of childhood, as there
would be nothing interesting in a school-girl’s life. But I
shall commence from the age of fourteen.
On a beautiful summer’s evening in July—my father
was attending to his farm duties, and my mother had gone
to a neighbouring viliage to see a sick friend—l was sitting
by our pretty cottage door, reading the Pilgrim’s Progress
which had been given to me by my school-master, when I
was suddenly startled by a hand being placed on my
sheulders, and the words “ Fanny, dearest, I love you! I
love you ! " whispered in my ear.
I looked up ,* my eyes suddenly met those of the wealthy
young squire’s. I trembled; a sickly death-like feeling
cume over me. I could not speak ; my very tongue seemed
clung t i the roof of my mouth. He still kept his dark eyes
on me. He at last broke the silence with these words, “3My
Fanny, dearest Fanny, I have loved you to destruction ; I
have loved you beyond all bearing. Fanny, Fanny, will
you break my heart by refusing-—or consent, and make
me the happiest man in the world ? Dearest Fanny, I will
make you a lady, you shall have your carriage and pair—
von shall have your servants, your lady’s-maids, your foot-


men, gold, jewels, and everything I possess shall be your’s-
if you will only consent-—it you will only say that you’ll
he mine.” . ,
So saying, he put his arm round my waist, and planted
the first kiss on my lips. I remembered no more for a
time. A giddiness had come over me, and I swooned
away. How long 1 remained m that I cannot say ,
but it must have been tor some time. When I recovered
my senses, 1 found myself seated in a spendid caniage,
that was drawn by four fine horses. My head was faying
on the young squire’s shoulders.
1 at last collected my senses, and summoned resolution
to speak to him. I begged of him to take me back to my
father’s cottage, but he told me he could not, till he had
made me his "wife ; for his honour was at stake. He said
we were near London, where he had a very tine house, of
which I was to be the mistress, and. was to have servants to
wait on me, and everthing that I could wish for at my com-
He then gave me a very costly riding cloak, made of fine
cloth, and lined with rich satin, and a beautiful hat and
feathers. With extreme gentleness he arranged those
things upon my person, and as we drew nearer ©ur desti-
nation, he placed a very handsome gold watch and guard
round my neck, and rings on my fingers. I must confess
these splendid presents partly won my poor girlish silly
heart. . '
At ien o-th we arrived in Ihe busy noisy streets of Lon-
don, winch we speedily drove through, and stopped in
front of a large and splendid mansion at the west-end.
The carriage door and the hall door seemed to open togetuer
and I quickly found myself, with the squire, in a
splendid apartment, such as I had never before
seen. He told me I was mistiess of the mansion
and all that it contained.
It was now late in the evening, and we had some
refreshment. He then rang the bell: the lady s-


6
maid eame, and I had to accompany her to a dres-
sing-room. She then arrayed me in a very hand-
some ball dress, in which I scarcely knew myself
so much was I transformed. 3 *
We went that evening to a casino, where there
was a splendid ball, such as my eyes never before
beheld. This gay life lasted for some time, and he
appeared devotedly fond of me. But, alas! how
the tide of life took its turn. I was scarcely sixteen
years of age, when I was thrown on the town a com-
mon street-walker.
Destitute, pennyless; and miserable, one night I
was parading Holborn Hill, when I was accosted by
a man, apparently from the country, who asked me
if my name was Fanny Hill, and if [ had formerly
belonged to the village of . I sa id, <■ Oh, yes,
it was me. I asked him if he could tell me any ’
thing about my parents. “Ah, Fanny,” he said,
1 am sorry to be the bearer of such bad news •
yoHr poor dear mother died broken-hearted on your
account; your poor father soon followed her. They
are now laying in the village church-yard, in peace
and happiness. But, Fanny, you brought them to
an early grave. ’
, T u lS mou * nfur * news my cup of misery to
the brim I gave way to despair and self-neglect.
I had nothing to live for, nothing to care for. I
gave way to drinking and dissipation of the worst
grade, and used houses of the worst characters. I
was soon m that deplorable and wretched condition,
through want and disease, that I had to be carried
to the workhouse to linger out a miserable awful
existence.


And now the curtain falls upon the last act of
rny strange eventful history, may you learn from it
to pity and not to spurn the unfortunate of my class
who should be led back to the fold of morality by
gentleness and not by scorn and harshness.
And now, poor sisters in sin, kind readers, and
the world, with agonising feelings I now bid vou all
adieu. J
FANNY HILL.
The Tillage-born Beauty.
See the star-breasted villain, to yonder cot bound,
Where the sweet honeysuckle entwines it around
Yet sweeter, far sweeter than flower ere seen, *
Is the poor hedger’s daughter, the pride of the green.
Hut more, never more, will she theie please all ever
Her peace of mind withers, her happiness flies • ’
bhe pauses, sighs, trembles—and yet dares to'roam,
Ihe village-born beauty seduced from her home.
From a post-chase and four, she’s in London set down,
There robb d of her virtue, she’s launch’d on the town •
Her carriage, her servants, and jewels so gay,
Tell bow she is kept, o’er all bears the sway ;
At the Opera, the Playhouse, the Parks, and elsewhere,
Her beauty out-rivals each beauty that’s there
And while big with envy, her downfall they tell
Ihe village-born beauty o’er all bears the belle.’


But soon from iudillen noe, c price, or what not,—*
She’s turned on the world, by her keeper forgot;
Yet fond to be flatter’d and fetter’d in vice,
She’s this man’s or that, as hi cones to her price.
At length, gro wing stale, all her finery sold,
In the bloom of her youth, through diseise 100 king old,
Forsook by her lovers, and sought for no more,
The village-born beauty turns out a street w
Up lanes and through alleys, she now stalks her way.
Exposed to all weathers, by night and by day ;
Cold, houseless, and shiv’ring, and wet to the skin,
With glass after glass, drowns her sorrow with gin.
Distress’d, sore and ragged, and frinedless and poor,
She’s borne to some garret, or workhouse obscure,
Breathes a hope —a prayer to heaven, a sinner to save,
Then the village-born beauty is laiil in the grave.
Then pity, ye fair ones; nor be too severe,
And give a frail sister the boon of a tear;
When prone to condemn them, reflect think awhile,
That the heart often bleeds when the face wears a smile.
Think, too, how through beauty they oft owe their fall,
And what may, through vice, be the fate of you all.
And, oh, while sweet innocence bears a proud sway,
May hell seize the villain that smiles to betray.
Printed by Alfred Savage , Holywell Street, London ,
for the Booksellers.


