

The
Socialist Case
FOR
Conscription
BY D. H. NEWMAN
“When duty whispers low, thou must ,
The youth replies, I can."
Emerson.




FOREWORD.
The argument for conscription here presented is put for-
ward as a reasoned statement of the socialist philosophy
on the burning question of the hour, and in controversion
of sentiments expressed by persons, many of them leaders
in the Labor movement, who, while their utterances show
them to be mere trade unionists, or at the most, laborites,
have, owing to the looseness of expression so common in
newspapers, become known to the general public by the
more comprehensive title of ‘‘socialists. ’ ’
The author is a strong believer in unionism, and is, and
for some years has been, a member of the Federated Clerks’
Union.
Mr. Justice Higgins has been singled out for reply as
being, so far as the author is aware, the only speaker who
has attempted to refute the doctrine, “My country, right
or wrong,” on ethical grounds.
Conscription of wealth, which is the inevitable corollary of
conscription of life, will be discussed in a separate essay,
to be issued shortly, the urgency for getting to press with
the main argument, in view of the forthcoming Referen-
dum, having necessitated the holding over of this important
aspect of the matter, as well as some other vital considera-
tions as to the spirit in which a nation gathers itself up for
its supreme effort.
D. H. NEWMAN.
Valency Rd.,
Gardiner, MELBOURNE.
sth September, 1916.




The Socialist Case for Conscription.
A RIOT OF PARADOX.
In order to arrive at a just estimate of the objections
raised to conscription in Australia, it is necessary to bear
in mind that there is no talk of it unless the proved failure
of the voluntary system shall have made its adoption the
only alternative to abject enslavement. Also, that the
only form of compulsion that has ever been hinted at is a
temporary compulsion, for the duration of the war, and
indeed amounts to no more than a proposal to compel a
man, if necessary, to stand up to the invader, notwith-
standing any preference he may have for lying down. The
real issue before us is not conscription or no conscription,
but Australian conscription, conceived in Australian
minds to fit the Australian temper, and lasting for a few
months, or German conscription for life. For, undis-
mayed by the hypocritical fears expressed in certain
quarters regarding the thin end of the wedge, the intelli-
gent Australian never doubts that, the emergency over,
and security from its recurrence assured, conscription
would be thrown away like an old tool that had served its
purpose, no government having the remotest chance of
living that attempted to retain a purely militarist con-
stitution longer than the danger to the State rendered
imperative. Events to date have amply proved that


nothing short of the utmost strength that the Allies can
bring to bear can save Europe from the defilement of Prus-
sian domination, the immediate result of which to our-
selves would be the unconditional surrender of our country
to the German beast. Surely there could be no more glar-
ing misuse of the sacred word 1 ‘ liberty ’ ’ than to urge in its
name the right of the individual to refuse military ser-
vice when the enemy is at the gate. The proposition
that it shall lie in a man’s choice to offer resistance or not
when a destroying horde of barbarians overruns his coun-
try, seeking his life and the violation of his women, involves
such monstrous cowardice that one wonders how it can ever
have come to be uttered by any considerable section of
Britishers, and especially by the champions of compulsory
unionism, and persons calling themselves socialists. The
doctrine of liberty to be craven is an amazing doctrine,
and the unashamed insistence with which it is pressed in
a country that literally teems with heroes, is no less so.
There are those so strangely forgetful of the true meanings
of words, and so entirely devoid of humour, as to ascribe
their ratting in the hour of their country’s peril to prin-
ciple, and conscientious scruples. One would have
thought that a burglar might with as much show of reason
reflect on the sacredness of his calling as he reverently
picked a lock.
The genuine socialist scornfully repudiates this obvious
prostitution of the socialist ethic of fraternity to the low
purpose of saving coward skins. Socialism, he protests,
is based on compulsion, and assumes always the para-
mountcy of the common cause. It is a policy of discipline,
allowing no more liberty than is consonant with justice.
All its energies are directed to the elimination of the
shirker, and the equitable distribution of the social burden.
The trade union principle is equally emphatic. Com-
pulsory unionism is pure conscription. It insists on the
obligation of militancy in a state of war. The whole
crime of the non-unionist is his non-combatant position.
Trade unionists have ransacked the language for an epithet
sufficiently offensive to describe the spiritless fellow who


refuses to fight the common enemy. The worker parasite
who keeps out of trouble, and lays himself out to reap, in
higher wages and improved conditions of work, the rewards
of other men’s sacrifices, they call a “scab,” but the citizen
parasite who skulks at home enjoying the comforts and
pleasures of a normal existence in a security that is costing
other men’s lives, they exalt into a champion of liberty.
Australian militarism, enforced as a dire necessity, which
sends men forth to fight clean in defence of the national
hearth, is an enemy to be resisted by violence if need be,
but German militarism, running amok with cannon and
liquid fire, with Zeppelin and submarine and gas, in an in-
sane attempt to put humanity under the Prussian heel, and
fling back the socialist tide for ever, is a thing the worker
is told he has no quarrel with. In presence of real dan-
ger these fire eaters of the Trades Hall become men of
peace, preaching scabdom with a kind of religious zeal. A
levy of sixpences to keep the flag flying in an industrial
dispute is one thing, but a levy of fixed bayonets to stave
off political extermination, is quite another. These
socialist impersonators, who prate of fraternity, and call
each other “comrades,” have issued official instructions
that their “comrades” in the trenches can go to hell. They
take credit in the name of unionism for the number of
unionists at the front, but when the cry comes for help,
and it is broadly hinted by those in authority that all who
can must go to their assistance, these everybody’s brothers
develop a conscience: they object to killing on principle,
and, at public meetings, roar like sucking doves their in-
flexible resolve to dodge fighting under any circumstances.
A noticeable feature about the commonly urged pacifist
objections to conscription is that they all apply with equal
or greater force to voluntary enlistment. To those who
object to killing on principle, one would have thought that
for men to spring into the firing line of their own free will,
at* the first call of the State, as the pick of the unionists
did, would be if anything more odious than for them to
do the same thing under compulsion. Also it has to be
borne in mind that the holding back by superior persons
of the hypersensitive sort does not stop slaughter for an


instant, but only arrests the slaughter of the German and
Austrian, the Bulgar and the Turk, while the slaughter of
good Australians and their friends goes on more furiously
than ever. Apart altogether from the overwhelming tes-
timony provided by their press and platform utterances,
it is clear that the anti-conscriptionists are anti-voluntarists
too, and that such laborites as have thrown themselves into
the imminent deadly breach at the bidding of duty, have
done so in defiance of the express wishes and secret in-
nuendoes of their kinder hearted * ‘ comrades. ’ ’
That the conscientious objector understands per-
fectly well that his scrupulosity assists a German
victory, is clearly shown by the line of argument
he takes up, i.e., that labour has no interest in
a capitalist war, that the worker has no stake
in the country worth fighting for; that he would be as
well off under German as under autonomous rule, and so on;
all of which assertions, however reasonably they might
have sounded on the lips of hidebound doctrinaire social-
ists of fifty years ago, are the veriest drivel to-day. Such
peevish despairing wails might even now be wrung with
some honest justification from the anaemic dwarfs who
drag out a miserable existence in the worst of London or
New York slums, but uttered by the able-bodied artisan of
Australia to-day, they are jarring and discordant absurdi-
ties. They are the language of hopelessness, and to be
hopeless in these times is to exhibit either an unpardonable
ignorance of current political events, or a dull, brutish
insensibility to the inspiring human prospect which those
events suggest. So far from the socialist having no inter-
est in the present war, the briefest glance at the actual
position will suffice to demonstrate that the present crisis
is one in which the socialist, as such, is over head and ears
involved, and that the difference to the champions of the
new democracy between a Prussian victory and our vic-
tory, is a difference of life or death, or at least indefinitely
suspended animation.


THE SOCIALIST STAKE.
Going back, as we must do to properly appreciate this
fact, to the pre-war period, and recalling the state of
things existing in July, 1914, which the invasion of Bel-
gium so grievously interrupted, it becomes at once appar-
ent that the Australian socialist is not called upon to
defend the capitalist State, but the socialist State he is
weaving into it, and which is already very far advanced.
At the outbreak of war, the Co-operative Commonwealth
was partly reared. To the seeing eye, socialist charac-
teristics were fast becoming the dominant note in political
architecture. Nowhere was the growing power of socialist
principles at capitalist expense more noticeable than here;
nowhere was the real political issue of our time, i.e., that
of democracy versus privilege, more clearly defined nor
more generally understood. Australia led the world in the
determination to realise the more spacious state of being
which machine production has made possible, to which
the times invite us, and which mismanagement alone pre-
vents; the saner existence, wherein the modern mind shall
be at leisure to address itself to modern problems; wherein
men and women shall have time to think; to gather wisdom,
and order their lives by it, and wherein the stupendous
powers which modern research has enriched us with, in-
stead of possessing us, as they do now, like an uncontroll-
able devil, shall be indeed possessed and turned to profit-
able account by a truly educated people, the rational pur-
port of those powers being properly reflected in the
general discarding of the individual prizes and national
ambitions of more primitive times for the whole-hearted
pursuit of the immensely loftier aims which the new age
inspires.
The must notable advance has, of course, been made
in the economic sphere, which, though by no means
the most important section of the socialist programme,
comes first in order of time. In view of the precarious
existence to which private enterprise had been reduced
in this country in pre-war days, no intelligent observer
could honestly say that we lived under a capitalist regime.


In considering what exactly was the Australian stake in
this war, and the kind of national constitution that a Ger-
man victory would overthrow, the educated socialist of
the time unhesitatingly declared the real danger to be
to the new democracy that was building rather than to
the plutocracy that was already doomed; that, for purposes
of national appraisement, our institutions were in fact far
more truly the things they were becoming than the things
they were ceasing to be, the dominant factor being always
the political trend, and its momentum. It is true that
private enterprise was the order of the day, but what was
the order for to-morrow ? Admittedly we were in the grip
of coal vends and shipping federations, and sugar and gas
monopolies; admittedly our beef and wheat, our fish, our
milk, our dried fruits, and our canned fruits, our paper
and printing materials, our timber and tobacco, our agri-
cultural machinery and our artificial manures, and every
other thing we need and use, were in the absolute control
of rapacious rings.* But for how long? Ask the food-
cornerer, or the land shark, or the trust magnate, of those
days how much sense of security and permanence he had.
The insecurity of vested interests, and the shyness of the
foreign investor had become a byword at annual meetings.
With such heavy pieces of socialist artillery as the Refer-
endum Bills and the abolition of Legislative Councils
trained on to the capitalist citadel from the commanding
eminence of an ever increasing socialist majority, there
was not a man in the city who, just before the war, would
have been willing to embark on a purely monopolist enter-
prise on the assumption of its lasting ten years. Every
market rigger knew that the duration of opportunities for
capitalist exploitation was the merest gamble. The clear
destiny of Australia to be the first great theatre of the
socialist experiment hung over the “smart business man”
like a fate. The steady increase of the Labor vote, the
transparent mockery of Wages Boards and Arbitration
Courts while the fixing of prices lay in the control of the
employer; the threadbare condition of the socialist bogey,
and the evident awakening of the general public to economic
*See “The Trust Movement in Australia,” by H. L. Wilkinson.


truths which he would so much rather they did not know,
reminded him constantly that he was under notice to quit,
and that his most alluring prospect was the use he could
make of such golden capitalist hours as might still remain
to him. That the future was to the socialist, the complete
absence of an alternative policy bore eloquent testimony.
In face of the patent impossibility of moving a step for-
ward without trespassing on socialist ground, liberalism
had become narrowed down to a sullen policy of obstruc-
tion, and postponement of the inevitable climax. In the
Federal arena, a liberal government had just managed
to eke out a miserable existence through two depressing
sessions by the agitation of such burning public questions
as the postal vote, and anti-preference to unionists in casual
employ; while, in Victoria, practically the only State still
left to liberalism, we find the Peacock Ministry clinging tc
office through nameless humiliations on an audibly creak-
ing single-plank platform of keeping Labor out. Add to
this that a general election was approaching, in which, the
double dissolution notwithstanding, Labor had at least a
reasonable prospect of victory, and it is clear that on the
fateful day that saw the Austrian ultimatum delivered to
Servia, the Australian socialist had every reason to be
satisfied with the political outlook.
No doubt the picture here drawn will seem to the afore-
said smart business man a ludicrous exaggeration of the
Labor Party ’s power in this country. Wholesale butchers,
aflame with the desire to feed the British army with surrep-
titious consignments of meat consigned to private clients,
“two-up schools” in wheat, and “expert channels” gener-
ally, having in mind the steadying effect of the responsi-
bilities of office on hair-brained Labor leaders, will very
probably regard the possibility of a real live socialist
regime in these realms as an enjoyable lunch-hour joke.
So, doubtless, did the Lords of England regard the threat
to swamp their chamber by the creation of new peers when
they challenged the Commons by their contemptuous re-
jection of the 1909 Budget;* and so, doubtless, did the
*For very interesting account of the passing of the Parliament
Bill, see “The Old Order Changeth,” by Frank Dilnot.


Catholic hierarchy regard the threat of disestablishment,
when they openly defied the government of France. Yet,
with all their solid-seeming prestige, both institutions were
overthrown at the first serious attack. They were
anachronisms, wielding an unreal power; the time for
their overthrow was ripe. Capitalist sway over the people’s
lives and fortunes is, in the present state of knowledge,
and in view of the present temper of the Australian people,
as repeatedly declared at the polls, just such another
anachronism. The hour of socialism has struck. To the
great majority of persons exercising the Australian fran-
chise the claims of the smart business man to run the com-
munity’s affairs in his own private interests instead of in
the community’s, is as preposterous as was the claim of
the noble Dukes of Windlestraw to dissolve the British
Parliament whenever it displeased them, by virtue of their
birth, or the claim of the Roman priesthood to hold up
democracy in France for no better reason than that demo-
cracy did" not suit them.* We have reached a stage when
men and women will no longer tolerate the daily levying
upon them, by private business associations, of fresh taxes,
in the shape of arbitrarily raised prices of all the things
essential to life and comfort, and the people’s representa-
tives are being returned to parliament with a mandate
always growing in sternness to put a stop to it. There
stands between the Australian people and nationalisation
just what stood between the British people and freedom
from an oppressive hereditary caste, and between the
French and disestablishment, i.e., the passing of a law or
a series of laws, and at the time we speak of there was
every indication that the laws would shortly be passed.
The day of trial had dawned. After a pitched battle
waged ceaselessly throughout the twenty-five years of the
Labor Party’s parliamentary existence, between private
enterprise employers solemnly pledged to defend privilege
and monopoly to the last ditch, and industrial workers
pledged just as solemnly to destroy them, we had arrived
at a political crisis of more than ordinary importance, t
•See “Disestablishment in France,'' by Paul Sabatier.
tFor good account of the origin and growth of the Australian
Labor Party, see Spence's “Australia's Awakening."


The light of modernism, which at the beginning of the
nineteenth century had already gilded the highest mental
peaks, had for over a hundred years been steadily but
surely spreading down the slopes, until, while the twentieth
century was still young, its cheering beams had penetrated
somewhat into the deepest recesses of the valley. Com-
pulsory education, miserable dole that it was, had yet
served to rouse the toiling masses from their long deep
sleep, and such temporary expedients as Wages Boards
and Arbitration Courts had freed them from the chronic
strangling poverty which it is one of the first principles
of capitalist policy to keep them in, and which, combined
with brutish ignorance of all that is meant by culture (the
second capitalist principle) had held them easy victims
to merciless exploitation. Other essentials to industrial
success, such as the right to combine, and the extension of
the franchise, had been wrung from the monopolists, and
used with such astonishing effect that now, for the first
time in history, the masses and the classes contended in
the legislative field on fairly level terms. The money
power, perfectly organised, in the market, in the press,
and in the church,* and too contemptuous of its employees
even to speak of them as human beings, faced the “hand”
no less perfectly organised, in the trade unions. The
People’s Party, the People’s Liberal Party and the “God
and Country” women stood frowning at the Leagues. It
was not a mere change of Ministry that was pending, but
a political revolution. Socialism in these parts was
to be lifted out of the theoretical stage into the experi-
mental, and all the brilliant prognostications of its adher-
ents, and the dismal jeremiads of the “antis” were about
to be put to the proof. We had reached the very brink
of those awful precipices of riotous extravagance, and finan-
cial wreck of which we had been so often and so solemnly
warned, and of which the Commonwealth Bank is such a
signal example. The wild-cat schemes of destructive
socialists yearning for a post to lean upon were to be
seen in active operation, and the Australian electorate
*The Women’s National League is practically an association of
churchwomen.


would at last be put in a position to form their own
judgment upon them, instead of taking their opinions
secondhand from biassed party journals. Given the fair
field of a safe majority, and nothing was more certain
than that things would soon be very much better or very
much worse for the people of this continent. The life
of a single parliament would of course not be long enough
to instal the socialist State as a going concern, but it
would afford ample opportunity for revealing the socialist
character in its true light. The early passing of the Re-
ferendum Bills, which a safe majority would have indi-
cated, would in three years’ time have brought about
changes sufficiently marked to furnish a good idea of
their practicability, and of their worth, as well as a very
tolerable index to the real direction in which the Labor
Party was moving. Before the next general election we
should have seen enough of the horrors or benefits of
state enterprise to enable us to know what to do. With
regard to some of the more flagrant monopolies at least,
we should have had ocular demonstration whether the con-
trol of prices of the necessaries of life by the State, or by
interested trade combines and business understandings was
best for us. The immediate future would decide whether,
given plenty of rope, Labor would prove to be sufficiently
seized of the real political needs of our time to lift itself
permanently into the legislative saddle, or a mere trade
union conspiracy with just enough brains to hang itself.
Such was the fateful position in the Australian Dominion,
from a socialist point of view, about the time that some
obscure political fanatic fired the fatal shots at Serajevo
that exploded the German mine.
BUILDING OPERATIONS SUSPENDED.
We now enter on the second act of a great political
drama. On the eve of the most momentous general elec-
tion that the country has yet seen, the boom of German


cannon apprised ns with terrible distinctness that the race
between socialist efforts throughout the world to avert the
threatened Armageddon, and militarist preparation for it,
had been won by the latter, and the Co-operative Common-
wealth was besieged. Labor came back with an invincible
majority, but with all the avenues of its progress bolted
and barred. The paramount necessity for self preserva-
tion brought all building operations to a standstill. Not
only had the party’s economic and industrial proposals to
be laid aside, in view of the present emergency, but the
infinitely greater and grander portion of the socialist pro-
gramme that waits on these; the nationalisation of all
social services of whatsoever kind, to which the nationalisa-
tion of industry and commerce are the necessary prelude;
the rounded flesh and spiritual beauty of socialism, of which
the mere rearrangement of work and wages is but the crude,
unlovely skeleton; schemes for the releasing of our medical
and legal and educational systems from the grip of the
vested interests that now obstruct their usefulness, and
for the remodelling of these on a truly national basis that
will make the prevention of disease as profitable to the
physician as its cure, that will purge our courts of the
disfiguring presence of the casuist attorney, hired as often
to defeat justice as to promote it, and will assure to all
men and women that free access to the highest culture
which is necessary to rid us for ever of that standing
national menace, the unthinking herd; schemes for the
scientific draining of the morass of ignorance, whose
noxious vapors still enfeeble the minds of so large a propor-
tion of Australian voters, and especially of the so-called
educated, with the subtle poison of apathy, and lend to
the unscrupulous, and to the charlatan, in the press, and
oil the platform, an undue advantage, and to the inculca-
tion of irrational heresies an unnatural strength. All these,
and a hundred other no less vital socialist measures for
the linking up of our disjointed public service into a har-
monious whole, and directing the national energies towards
the one single objective of the common good, have had to
be hurriedly poked out of sight, and pigeon-holed for future
reference when happily the times shall again permit.


POLITICAL ASSES.
Meantime the world has become a battlefield. The two
conflicting sections of humanity, representing the ancient
and modern ideas, are locked in deadly grips. The male
population of the Germanic Powers have undertaken to
revive the discarded institution of helotry on a scale of
unprecedented magnificence, and the manhood of the world
have sworn that they shall not. The Hun, having deliber-
ately sealed his ears to all those inward promptings, obedi-
ence to which distinguishes the human from the brute, and
having closed his mind to all the known contrary tendencies
of political evolution, has essayed the lunatic task of
creating another Roman Empire two thousand years late.
In flat defiance of the universal democratic trend, and of the
growing abhorrence of war, the civilised world is to be
converted into a superior militarist State, ruling subject
peoples by fear of death, at the nod of the Hohenzollerns.
Thought is to stumble along in chains, forged by a royal
fanatic and riveted by professors of his own choosing.
Intellectual expansion is to be locked up by the police and
instead we are to have German expansion merely; a matter
of swelled head. Internationalism is a buccaneering ven-
ture for the Prussianising of the world. The spoils of
brigandage are to yield a material prosperity that shall
lull the socialist to sleep. The philosopher is to be
prompted, the press is to be gagged. The chemist, the
metallurgist, and the electrician, are to cease their bene-
ficent labors, and direct their supreme effOxTs to the per-
fecting of engines of human slaughter in furtherance of
the divine purpose to make Germany top dog. When
society is in labor with a renaissance of reason beside which
the old-time renaissance of mysticism is as the dawn of
a winter ’s morning to the bright midsummer noon, this
race of braggarts can find nothing better to do than this.
What a conception to give the name of culture to. What
a revolting political miscarriage to ask the world to take


seriously and to admire for a modern constitution.* Was
ever distraught madman the victim of a more dangerous
hallucination than this, under whose malign spell an entire
nation has been brought to run amok? If anything were
wanting to prove the unbearable rottenness of the auto-
cratic regime, surely this latest revelation of its inherent
defects abundantly provides it. Surely there could be
no better set-off against the stuff that still finds a place in
conservative journals anent the failure of democracy!
(while democracy is yet in the making) than this horrify-
ing example of the malevolent power of absolutism, whether
of a monarch or of a class, to suppress the popular voice,
to poison the springs of intellectual renewal, to flout experi-
ence, to outrage decency, and generally to annul the natural
safeguards against national insanity with such success that
a considerable people in the very heart of civilisation can
be lured so far on such an impossible road, in quest of a
place in the sun.
For an impossible road it is. It is not thinkable that
civilisation can be brought to nothing by a colossal mis-
take ; that the survival of the species lies at the mercy of a
maggot of the brain, or that man’s body can survive, and
his intellectual activity cease, and that is what the German
idea involves. No intelligent person believes that it is
possible for a nation, or a dozen nations, of malice afore-
thought, to stop the clock of progress. The combined
cussedness of the entire human family would not be equal
to the task. Progress is not a chance affair, the sport of
cults and ’isms. Our capacity for surrendering ourselves
to ideas is happily limited by the power of mental gravity.
*Well might Yon Billow say that political talent had been denied
his people (“Imperial Germany/ 9 p. 107). He might also have
added, “and himself.” His book displays just that amount of
political sagacity and benevolent conservatism that we generally
associate with English country squires,
tAll the failures of disorganisation alleged against democracy
are palpably capitalist failures. The most serious stumbling block
to British organisation when once the gravity of the emergency
became apparent, was the greed of profit hunting manufacturers
and merchants, and the industrial disaffection that it bred.


We have a latitude of aberration, we can wander by the
way, but the truth will draw us onwards in spite of our
worst excesses. The expedient of sitting on the safety
valve is always a dangerous one, and the Prussian Eoyal-
ists and their misguided dupes, who would travel not by
reason, but by sheer force of will, are tempting fate just
as surely as did the French Eoyalists of the old regime.
German expansion got by this means is apt to be disas-
trously sudden and complete. German superiority, and
the divine German mission to rule the world, are stupid
superstitions which no amount of cultivation can make into
facts. Industrial efficiency and organising skill do not
make a nation great; nor even does a pre-eminence in the
making of dyestuffs and electrical goods; nor the most
perfect system of espionage that unscrupulousness can in-
vent. To be great, it is necessary to be wise, and wisdom
consists, not in the manufacture of revelation, but in the
reading of it. The divine ordinance has to be interpreted,
not faked. The German coup d’etat is doomed to failure.
Civilisation, at this juncture, is threatened, not with ex-
tinction, but with eclipse, and if the united strength of
the Allies should not now avail to ward this calamity off,
there would in time arise within the Greater Germany that
must result the power that would ultimately break the Ger-
man bonds. The accumulated efforts of the race have a
higher object to serve than to minister to parochial vanity,
and a barbaric lust for rule. The greater powers that
man has wrested from nature are not to be restricted in
their exercise to old constitutional forms, because their full
expression requires new ones. The grander civilisation
that lies within this lesser will sooner or later emerge, no
matter what hell may intervene between us and its com-
ing, because it is due, and progress is the law of being.
This is the socialist creed; the evolutionist view of society.
CA IRA, CA IRA.
So then we have no fear for the ultimate destiny of the
race, in spite of anything that the German mad dog can do.
It is not, however, with man’s ultimate destiny that we are


concerned, but with his present,-and his immediate future.
Let it be granted that the permanent installation of a
Greater Germany holding the non-German world in sub-
jection as a Greater Alsace, is a grotesque absurdity, and
that no discovered or discoverable lethal devilry that the
Deutschland über alles mania may suggest can be effective
to stop the clock. Nevertheless there may quite conceiv-
ably be brought about a disastrous slowing down, and it
is this, and all the evils attendant upon it, that the present
generation, and above all, the socialist, is challenged, by
every dictate of reason, by every appeal of conscience, by
every instinct of manhood, by every human impulse and
every sacred tie, at all costs to prevent. We are the
guardians of our own time. The defence of all our cher-
ished institutions that are so brutally assailed is a life and
death matter for every earnest soul. The issues are too
tremendous to be postponed for an hour. It is only the
pseudo-philosopher (than whom there is no greater fool),
who would drivel of allowing things to take their course,
and straightening themselves out somehow in a remote
future. This is no time for the aloof judicial attitude of
abstract philosophy. To be unmoved in these days is to
be either a traitor or a coward. Cool brains indeed are
needed, but anger is quite properly at white heat. It is
only the German or pro-German amongst us who is not in
deadly earnest about victory. When the world is a battle-
field we cannot think in geological periods. We cannot
wait the indefinite time it may take for the German insanity
to run its course, for the resumption of the threads of nor-
mal life, and for the further pursuit of our ideals. It is
as necessary for us now to will and do the right as it is
futile in the long run for Germany to will and do the
wrong. Social evolution does not do itself. It is a con-
scious process, and by our determined resistance to threa-
tened slavery, and our solemn refusal to sheathe the sword
until the German microbe of 1870 is exterminated, does
mental gravity work.
Until the German has tasted of that utter humi-
liation which alone can purge him of his unclean-
ness, there is no safety for woman, and no rest for


an honest man. Until again we can look on the German
features without feeling something of that creepy loathing
that we get from looking on a snake, until the sound of the
German voice no longer calls to the mind the cries of
drowning civilians, and of soldiers writhing in the death
agonies from liquid fire and gas, until once more we can
trade with the German without knowing that we are rob-
bing the honored dead of the fruits of their sacrifice, until
the retention of a single German, naturalised or other, in
government employ has ceased to be an offence against
decency, and a political disgrace, our battle cry must be
the grim slogan of 1789, 44 1 t shall go on,” 44 1 t shall go on.”
We will not indeed give ourselves up to the blind frenzy
of the Sansculottes. Democracy has long since ceased to
be a howling mob, to whom liberty is but a figure of speech,
or a mythical entity to raise a statue to. We do not stand
where they did, in the midst of inarticulate political con-
fusion, of social instability, and mental flux, that made the
old order intolerable, yet left the new no more tangible than
a dancing mirage of brilliant possibilities. We are no
longer at the edge of the Age of Reason, but far advanced
into it. We know our course, our goals are well defined.
Democracy has developed method, its advance is steady
and sure, and the besotted people who would cross its path
must pay the penalty to the uttermost farthing. When
the outer works of privilege and monopoly have been bat-
tered in, and thrones are tottering everywhere to their final
overthrow, twentieth century democracy is in no mood to
brook the holding up of liberty which it has taken cease-
less struggle from the French Revolution until now to bring
within its grasp, while the resuscitated Wahr-Wolf enjoys
a ghastly flutter. The answer of democracy to any
such insolent demand is to be found in the solid wall of
stern, unyielding warriors who hold the bloody trenches
from the Flemish coast to Switzerland, from Riga to Rou-
mania, on the Alpine crests of the Tyrol, in the Egyptian
desert, in the East African jungle, and in the wilds of
Asia Minor.
The physical flower of Europe and Canada, and Aus-
tralasia, have taken up their stations on the thresh


hold of the better life, swearing that only through their
dead bodies shall the defiling invader pass. The despised
Indian, and the repeatedly insulted Japanese have not hesi-
tated to take a hand, and, though the lust-inflamed monster
has been trying to hack his way through human bowels
during two of the longest years in history, democracy still
stands, and its trusty guardians still cheerfully and deter-
minedly come on, in ever augmenting numbers, to fill the
breach, and bar his beastly path. In thousands of hospi-
tals, crammed to the doors with every possible mutilation,
in legions of lifelong cripples who command our sympathy
and admiration at every turn, and in innumerable graves,
the Wahr-wolf has stamped his unforgettably disgusting
trail. In ruined cities, in wasted countrysides, in mur-
dered babies and ravished women, and in the treacherously
drowned, we see his loathsome desolating work. And still
the war-bronzed cheek of outraged humanity does not
blench. The philosophy of brute force fails miserably
in practice. As the fight grows more prolonged, so the
resolution of the Allies hardens. The Italian grows more
daring, the Russian gets more skill, and French and Bri-
tish and Anzac features become more set. Belgium and
Servia and Montenegro have been blotted out; all to no
purpose. The retreat from Mons, the fall of Brussels
and Rheims and Warsaw, the tragedies of Gallipoli and
Kut-el-Amara avail nothing to loosen the ever-tightening
grip. At Verdun, at Pozieres, at Goritzia, at Lemberg
and at Lutsk, the fast wearying German feels the strain.
While the ground in the actual theatre of battle is shaken
and torn by the ceaseless bombardment, every city behind
the lines is atremble with the whirr of munition-making
machines. The Greater Germany, frowning terribly over
a Greater Alsace, is farther off than ever. The people who,
having all there was to have, were not content, who would
set the mode in culture, and who would teach us that honor
is useless, that virtue is for fools; and that because we can
no longer bow down to the God of Abraham, we can bow
down to none, are about to get our answer. The parvenu
nation that would be first by the good offices of a Wahr-
Wolf is within measurable distance of finding its proper
place.


WAR STONES IN THE SOCIALIST EDIFICE.
Greater than all, the Co-operative Commonwealth has
withstood the shock. While the general scheme of build-
ing operations which were in progress at the outbreak
of war as part of a connected programme of political re-
form have had to be suspended, certain sections of the
edifice were pushed on with in feverish haste as a means of
self-defence. It became necessary to institute immediately
such large measures of State-control in England that, in
the words of Mr. Arthur Greenwood, u ln a month Britain
came nearer than ever before to being a Co-operative Com-
monwealth. ’ State control of finance, of the railways,
of the liquor trade, of supplies of sugar and cotton, and
of the manufacture of munitions, State regulation of the
price of foodstuffs, and war profits, were only a few of the
dangerous socialist experiments that have been resorted
to with marked success to save the Empire from perdition.
It was the same here. The tangled threads of the Metal
Trade had to be straightened out and gathered up in the
strong hands of Mr. Hughes. The export and marketing
of the entire wheat crop had to be State controlled, and
the export of meat and coal, and butter, and other commo-
dities to be restricted. A price fixing board has been
formed, and the rate of local freights regulated, and, last
but not least, the nucleus of a Commonwealth fleet of
steamers has been purchased.
More than this, the treacherous behaviour of private
manufacturers and merchants, seeking only to extort pro-
fits, from the government, or from the people, while the
country is fighting for its life, has had a splendid gratui-
tous advertisement. The dangers of promiscuous trading
have been convincingly shown by the enemy's control of
the market of even our own products, and the principle of
subordination of trade to political necessities has been
established by the Paris Conference. To quote Mr. Green-
wood again, “It has been realised that industry and com-
merce are not primarily intended as a means for exploita-
*War and Democracy, 311.


tion and profit, but are essential national services in as
true a sense as are the army and navy.”*
Of equal, if not greater importance, from a socialist
standpoint, are the universal fraternising, in the trenches,
and at home, that has linked all classes together in the
common bond of the national danger, and the greater in-
terest in social problems and the greater earnestness of
mind which the ordeal of battle has instilled into the
general community.
By these means*, and a hundred others which there is no
space here to enumerate, socialism, both in the economic
and spiritual spheres, has had a tremendous uplift, and the
public mind has been prepared for that political and social
reconstruction which is the socialist objective, so that, on
the resumption of normal conditions, much of the opposi-
tion which met the reformer in pre-war times, as the result
of capitalist engineering, will certainly be withdrawn, and
the building of the Co-operative Commonwealth will pro-
ceed at a more rapid rate than ever. Thus the war, which
had as one of its principal objects with its promoters the
final overthrow of socialism,! has had the exactly reverse
*War and Democracy, p. 311.
tNo one familiar with the growing power of the Social Demo-
cratic Party in Germany, and the standing menace it is to the
Hohenzollern regime, can possibly doubt this: —
See the “Bed Danger” in “War and Democracy,” pp. 114-5.
“Imperial Germany,” page 203, where “a vigorous national
policy” is recommended as the remedy against the S.D. move-
ment, and “The true means is by preaching nationalism, the idea
of the nation, as such, must again and again be emphasized by
dealing with national problems, so that this idea my continue to
move, to unite, and to separate the parties. We must pursue
a courageous, wide-minded policy, which can maintain the nation's
satisfaction in the present conditions of life, a policy which brings
the best power of the nation into play; which supports and
strengthens the middle classes, already numerous and increasing
in number, the vast majority of whom steadily uphold the
Monarchy and the State.”
(To the retort that I am preaching nationalism too, it is replied
that there is wide difference between the nationalism that designs
to defend the democratic State, and the nationalism that designs
to prevent the democratic State from coming into existence).
Cn page 207 of the same work, we have this: “No one can


effect of immensely strengthening the socialist position,
which a victory for the Allies must inevitably consolidate.
All the indications are that dangerous experiments in
socialism which have proved the Empire’s salvation in the
crisis of war, will be still further resorted to to preserve it
in a state of peace.
But the end is not yet. The battle still rages, and men
still suffer and die. Always fresh breaches have to be
refilled. Munitions are pouring in, and men are being
gathered and formed up behind the lines with unflagging
zeal to take the vacant places. Every inch of ground is
being fought to the death. Demolished villages and ruined
farms are being taken and retaken a dozen times in a day,
and in the din of conflict is heard, clear and insistent, the
call from Headquarters for reinforcements; for fresh men
to relieve the heroes in the firing line, broken and spent by
a tension which the flesh and blood even of heroes can only
stand for short spells at a time.
TRAITORS.
And this is the epic struggle from which the anti-conscrip-
tionists hold serenely aloof, mouthing specious theoretical
drivel about the supposed dangers of compulsion. This
is the call to which they remain stubbornly and callously
deaf. A summons loud and prolonged enough almost to
wake the dead, fails to waken these deep sleepers from their
self-centred trance. The trance condition is, however,
only partial, allowing the mental apparatus to respond
freely to every stimulus but that of battle. The war
apart, these psychological freaks are perfectly wide-awake.
They go about their avocations as usual, and pursue their
normal lives, conscious apparently of everything but that
believe to-day that the S.D. movement will cease to exist within
a measurable time, or to be a power and a great danger in our
public life, but the fight against it is not hopeless if we can 'suc-
ceed in confining it to the proletariat. y ’ (He dreads its spread
to the middle classes).
See also “Socialism and Democracy in Europe, ’ 9 by S. P. Orth,
pp. 188*90.


the worst war in history is raging on their very doorstep,
and they are expected to take a hand. Their peculiarity
is that they can live apart from the war, and remain normal
in such abnormal times. That they can read the war
cables and remain in temper as if they had not read them;
that they can go straight from the perusal of a casualty
list, containing the names of some of their fellow-unionists,
to the racecourse, or to the football field; that, with the
very air charged with the fury of Lonesome Pine or
Pozieres, they will crowd nightly to the picture shows, or
stuff the stadium to suffocation to see a couple of pugilists
punching one another.
For a long while we regarded these men charitably, as
only extraordinarily thick in the head. We took the
lenient view that they failed to realise the full significance
of the issues that are at stake. We can do this no longer.
As time goes on the matter assumes a more serious aspect,
as it becomes only too plain that the anti-conscriptionists
do realise the issues, hut that they don y t care . Citizens
who, in these days, can meet together in the Melbourne and
Sydney Unions, to discuss the abstract merits of conscrip-
tion, as men might do on some Antarctic icefield on which
they had had the ill fortune to become entombed since
before the beginning of the war, with only penguins and
seals for company, are dangerous. Trade Union leaders
who, in an emergency like the present, send out instructions
that military census cards are to be ignored, are just as
treacherous, and as little entitled to remain at large among
us, as are Roman Catholic priests, who, on the mor-
row of the Sinn Fein rebellion, publicly remind their
following (in speaking to a charge of political disloyalty)
that their allegiance is owed to the Pope. They are an
offence to the mothers and widows of the fallen, and to
the true men who even now, heedless of rebel sneers, are
gallantly preparing to take their places. They are not
socialists, but socialist impersonators. They are cowards,
seeking to give a socialist flavor to their cowardice* by
excusing it on anti-militarist grounds. They have no
more affinity with the true socialist than has Dr. Mannix
with the true Christ. Men who, when the preservation of


the national hearth from Prussian defilement depends
upon a constant stream of reinforcements, preach the
cynical doctrine of leaving their fellow unionists and
fellow Catholics in the inferno of battle to their fate
(which it is openly hinted is good enough for them, for
being there) are just as truly rebels as were the green-
coated Irishmen who fought behind the Dublin barricades.
They are Sinn Feiners without the Sinn Feiners’ pluck
to put into deeds the foul treachery that is in their hearts,
and pay the penalty; moreover, they are, as likely as not,
like the Sinn Feiners, in German pay.
THE SOCIALIST IDEAL.
The true socialist is a cosmopolitan. For himself, and
as his as yet purely intellectual affair, he despises
patriotism, as the virtue of barbarians. In the world as
he would have it patriotism is as obsolete as war, being but
the obverse of racial antipathies of which his ideal man is
no more conscious than of the gill clefts which biologists
assure us still lurk in the human anatomy.* He insists
that the proper effect of the railway, the* steamboat, and
the telegraph, is to make of him a citizen, not of London
or Paris, but of the world. A reflecting mortal, not
entirely engrossed with bread and butter questions, nor
with sport, the present state of knowledge, and all that it
portends, suggest to his critical moments a field for present
activity, and a future prospect, which are the exact anti-
thesis of any that the promoters of war can possibly enter-
tain. To him, war is the epitome of all those errors of
speech and practice which still hold the present in bondage
assert that the human embryo recapitulates the
various stages of development through which the human body has
travelled to its present perfection from lower animal forms. The
gill-clefts, or gill arches, which are visible, about the third and
fourth weeks, are taken to be a kind of physiological memory of
the time when what is now man was a marine animal.
For very interesting account of vestigial structures, see
“Ascent of Man,” Chap. 2, by Henry Drummond, who graphically
describes them as “the scaffolding left in the body.”


to the past, and which will have to be eschewed before the
intellectual man takes his final leave of his brute pro-
genitor, to make his permanent abode in the world of the
mind’s eye.
The anti-militarism of the true socialist does not denote
merely a pious horror of war. It is something more than
an attitude of mind. It is a constructive policy for the
prevention of war by the scientific removal of its prizes.
He designs, by nationalising industry and commerce, and
so restricting trade to its proper function of supplying
demand, to eliminate from business the profit factor, which,
by the fierce competition it entails for the possession of
new markets, under the private enterprise system, furnishes
a perennial incentive to war.
IDEAL AND REAL.
These are the true socialist’s ideals, but he is a practical
man, who does not mix up his vision with his facts. His
real and ideal are in their proper places. He keeps his
being and becoming always in touch, but is never guilty of
the crass folly of mistaking the one for the other. He
certainly does not propose, pending the translation of his
ideals into general practice, to imagine himself already
arrived at that improved human condition which is his pre-
sent goal by the simple expedient of ignoring hard facts.
When war is raging in three quarters of the globe, all
policies for war prevention in the future become automa-
tically suspended by the supreme urgency for stopping this
one. Every fit man is called upon to do his best, and the
only use for conscientious scruples is to restrict him to
fighting clean. When our kindred are being overwhelmed
by superior numbers, the abstract ethics of war have no
more bearing on what a man shall do than has the question
of whether or not there be people in Mars. The socialist
dictum that war is a crime does not affect by one iota the
morality of self defence.


OUR JUSTIFICATION.
Nay more; with the national existence itself at stake, not
only are the abstract ethics of war of no account, but even
the justice of our particular side in this particular war. It is
true that, to all Britishers, our cause in the present instance
has a very special justification. The overwhelming
weight of evidence goes to prove that war has been deliber-
ately made upon us, after years of scheming and prepara-
tion for it. Everyone who has followed recent events,
and read the significant disclosures of German readiness
and British unreadiness sufficiently to be able to form an
opinion at all, is convinced that England could not possibly
have kept out of this war and preserved her autonomy.
All such know that, apart altogether from our sacred
obligation to Belgium, the invasion of that country was but
the prelude to the invasion of England, or that the con-
quest of France would have left the British Empire, and
incidentally Australia, at the mercy of Germany. All
such know that the German people had, for fifteen years at
least prior to the declaration of war, cultivated with the
perseverance and thoroughness for which they are famous,
a national obsession to dominate the human race.* It is
equally well known that the means to be employed to this
end was the “peaceful penetration” of the German citizen
abroad, driven home by a ruthless application of the mailed
fist. It is no secret that, by the outbreak of war, Ger-
many had built a vast navy, and the country itself had
become a huge factory and storehouse of engines of death,
for this express purpose when “the day” should arrive.
No less clear is it that the German trader in our midst is a
political agent and a military spy; that the German settler
on the neighbouring farm regards himself, and through the
agency of German schools, brings his children up to
regard themselves as the advance guard of our enemy, pre-
pared, in return for the hospitality extended to them
*For some recent testimony in this connection, see 41 The Kaiser’s
War,” by Austin Harrison. “The Soul of Europe” (German
Section) by Joseph McCabe.


wherever the British flag flew, to fall upon us at a given
signal from their cursed fatherland.* This is how we read
the German aims and German method by the lurid light of
the constant stream of high explosive shells that for over
two years have rained death for our kinsmen to the weird
accompaniment of the fanatic war chant of “ Germany
over all.”
NOT DISPUTED.
So impossible of argument is any other view of the pre-
sent crisis, and so entirely beyond question is the justice of
our cause, so patent is it that Germany was the aggressor,
and that we have become involved in the cataclysm against
our will, that not even the anti-conscriptionist has ven-
tured to dispute it. No Trade Hall pacifist has yet taken
up the position that, so far as we are concerned, this is
an aggressive war, into which the British people have been
seduced by interested capitalists with ulterior motives,
and, if any did so, he is abundantly contradicted by the
contrary admissions and asseverations of the German
socialists themselves.
To speak, however, in vindication of the British cause is
but to labor the obvious, and our only excuse for recapi-
tulating even so briefly, facts so well known is the bearing
they have on the specious plea of internationalism which
our pseudo-socialist sets up.
*New light is thrown on the treacherous Delbruck law, which was
deliberately designed to make the naturalization of Germans
abroad a mere enemy disguise, by the following significant passage
in Imperial Germany, dealing with Poland, p. 272: —-“ We must
not deceive ourselves in the point that the German in the struggle
between nationalities does not yet always possess the desirable
power of resistance, and that only too often he runs the risk in
such a struggle of losing his nationality if the State does not
protect and support him. ... It is our duty to see that the
Germans and their nationality do not succumb.”


MY COUNTRY, RIGHT OR WRONG.
Let us suppose, by way of argument, that the facts were
all the other way. That our bona tides were open to sus-
picion, and that the British Empire found itself at this
moment in the position of having been lured to imminent
destruction by its own false captains. It would still be
every Britisher’s bounden duty to do his best to save it;
then, having saved it, we should have leisure to deal with
the false captains, and to so put our house in order that
the like could never happen again. Conscientious scruples
do not absolve a man from the claims of country. “My
country, right or wrong” is, with all due respect to Mr.
Justice Higgins, perfectly sound philosophy, being exactly
of a piece with the Labor Party’s injunction, “The Party,
right or wrong.” If it is right for a politician to subor-
dinate* his individual opinion to that of the majority in
circumstances that affect his party’s existence, as we claim
it is, surely it is right for the individual citizen to do so
when the existence of his nation is in the balance. Before
it is possible to discuss conscription at all, it is necessary
to premise that we live in a war environment; that is to
say that the contingency of war is one of the conditions of
life. This may be, and indeed is, a deplorable fact, but
it is nevertheless indisputable, and since (the noble science
of faith healing being still in its infancy) it is not possible
to alter our environment by an act of will, one of the legi-
timate objects of a national census will be to inform the
government of the numerical strength of its male popula-
tion in case of attack. From a count of heads, after de-
ducting the unfit, the government has every right to
estimate the balance as fixed bayonets, if the emergency
should arise. No nation could possibly carry on if its
means of self-preservation in the last resort must remain
an entirely unknown and unknowable quantity until the
catastrophe discovers it. When, in her dire extremity,
the country summons all men to a feast of victory or
death, it cannot be left open for one to say, “I have taken a
wife,” or for another, “I have bought a piece of fernd,” or
“I am an everybody’s brother, or a son of peculiar people.”


Everything, excepting the formless abstraction of a pseudo-
philosopher, has a limit, and we reach the limit of free
will here. The circumstances preclude the admissibility of
individual opinion.
It is just this failure to define the limits of
free will that invalidates all Judge Higgins’ points.
It is as necessary for the anti-conscriptionist to
state his premises as it is for the conscriptionist to do so.
The conscriptionist has stated his, i.e., “That, the national
existence being imperilled, it is the duty for avery man fit
to do so to serve in its defence.” Since Mr. Higgins has
not disputed the premises,—that the national existence is
imperilled—it is fair to assume that he accepts them. He
must stand where we do, under the shadow of fixed bayonets
and belching cannon. It is only wasting time, when we
are speaking to a concrete issue, to indulge in formless
abstractions, in the consideration of which it is impossible
to grapple. Let us now see the service rendered to society
by the learned judge’s contribution to this momentous
discussion.
Taking the report of his speech in the Australian Church
that appeared in the Melbourne “Argus” of 29th April
last,* we find that the first thing noticeable about his
advocacy of freedom of speech and opinion for those who
have sworn publicly to punish freedom of speech and
opinion with political death, is the judge’s anxiety that we
should free our minds of cant.
The next remarkable point is that those “more fanatical
and ignorant persons” who interfered with “earnest per-
sons of public spirit who felt impelled to discuss such
abstract questions as the abolition of war for the future”
(and who incidentally would convince us that we should
be as well off under Prussian as under native rule; that
the worker has no stake in the country worth fighting for,
that conscription would make Australians Prussians, and
that democracy is dead) “have a want of sense of per-
spective, a want of humour, a want of common sense.”
(Applause.) Later we are informed bluntly that the
*See Appendix.


phrase, ‘‘My country right or wrong” is cant, and “If
it meant, as it was used to mean, that we were to be-
lieve, or say we believed our country to be right when
we believed her to be wrong, that we ought to help the
government for the time being to do an injustice because
it was doing it in the name of the country, it was arrant
nonsense.” And yet once again, “Even if our duty to
the State transcended the interests of ourselves and of
our families, yet there was a duty which transcended
even our duty to the State, our duty to God and humanity.”
(Applause.) “Happily there was no obligation whether
legal or moral, or of expediency, for a loyal subject to say,
when his country is at war, that his country was in the
right. There was no such divorce between truth and
patriotism, between justice and loyalty, as certain unwise
teachers would have us suppose.”
We join issue with the learned judge on every one of
these points. In the first place, we dispute the fairness
of charging those earnest persons who, in presence of a
national calamity, prefer concrete to abstract issues, and
feel impelled to restrict discussion concerning the war
that is raging to the war that is raging, with being “More
ignorant and fanatical” or “With a want of perspective,
a want of humour, and a want of commonsense.” We
contend that, for all the purposes of this discussion, the
nearest thing in point of size and importance is the war
itself, and that to speak of war in the abstract, is to
make this war remote, and is an exact inversion of per-
spective. As to humour, we should say that persons who
seriously defend the whimsicality of running away from
battle from a sense of duty, have not much humour to brag
about; while as to commonsense, it is acknowledged by
implication later in the speech that anti-conscriptionists
are in the minority—a minority, indeed, which, we believe,
will at the forthcoming referendum, put their common
sense on much the same level as that of the five tailors of
Tooley Street.
We can only pause briefly to call attention to the assump-
tion observable all through the judge’s remarks that anti-
conscriptionists object to serving in the war on the ground


that our participation in it has no moral justification, and
to his citation of the cases of other good men who, in former
times, were similarly persecuted for protesting against such
unjustifiable wars as that waged by Britain against
her American colonies, and the China opium war.
This is entirely irrelevant, seeing that, as already
pointed out, anti-conscriptionists have never taken up
this ground. A close study of their position dis-
closes the fact that they base their objections to
compulsion on the ground that it threatens industrial sub-
jugation. This, with an internationalist smattering, is
their main contention. The irrelevancy is, however, only
mentioned by the way, as the thing here claimed is that
no reason whatever can be urged in justification of leaving
one’s country to its fate. We claim that the anti-conscrip-
tionist has even less right to plead conscience in extenua-
tion of an act of treachery to the State, than has the
Catholic Pederationist to plead conscience in extenuation
of an act of treachery to his party. A man has no more
ethical warrant for being a renegade by conviction, than
for committing a murder because he believes in murder.
If a man’s personal views can be taken to justify his leav-
ing the State to be destroyed, they can equally justify
him in helping to destroy it, as the Sinn Peiners did. The
Sinn Peiners honestly followed their lights. Whether
the State be destroyed by an act of omission or of com-
mission makes no moral difference. A man who stands
idly by with folded arms and sees murder done is only a
shade less guilty than the murderer himself.
THE STATE CAN DO NO WRONG.
We contend that a man who helps the Government for
the time being to do an act of injustice (or wha,t he
believes to be an injustice, for that is what the judge
means) in the name of the country, is performing his plain
duty, from the highest ethical motives, and that the con


trary view, the arrant nonsense view, is based on a fallacy
which we shall now disclose. While it would be wrong
for one man to abet another in the commission of a crime,
or what he believed to be a crime, it is not wrong for
him to so abet the State. And for this reason, that a
‘man cannot separate himself from his citizenship; he
cannot stand towards the State in the same relation that he
stands in towards another man, as the judge begins by
implying he does. The matter can be simply expressed
thus:—For the cohesion of society there must be in it some
divine authority, something sacred, some power that we
will not dispute, some definiteness, some limit beyond which
the free will must not go. If not the Divine right of
kings, then the Divine right of democracy, the people.
Relative finality is just as essential in human affairs as
absolute finality is absurd. The power of the government
must be absolute. Authority never dies; it must repose
somewhere. The king is dead; long live the king. And,
further, just as the principle in British law that the king
can do no wrong is strictly ethical, having the ethical war-
rant of necessity, so the principle that has evolved from
it, i.e., that the State can do no wrong, is strictly ethical.
Even a bad law must hold. A bad State must be obeyed.
All beyond this is anarchy. Society is an organism, and
must function from a controlling centre. The aim of the
socialist is not to get above authority, but to liberalise it,
to bring the will of the people and the act of the State
in ever closer approximation. Here we come again in
presence of the problem of ideal and real. The individual
ideal must always remain a private affair. The man and
the citizen may be in conflict, but it is as a citizen only
that the State knows him. He may be what he likes to
himself, but as a citizen he is the State’s, and must con-
form to its divine will.
In primitive times, as all students of sociology
know, the king and the divinity were one and the
same person. Amd so they ought to be. The
divorce between the temporal and spiritual powers is
not essential, but accidental, being due to the impossibility
of a single individual administering both provinces, as


society developed.* Socialism aims to bring the political
and moral provinces together again in the democratic
State. Not, indeed, to relegate the temporal power to
hole-and-corner mystics, but to inspire the Government
with a rational divinity that shall, at any given time, make
morality synonymous with law, and the voice of the people
with the voice of God. There can only be one highest,
one embodiment of truth, and the government ought to be
it. We cannot live in separate compartments, and dis-
tinguish between “Our duty to the State” and “Our duty
to God and humanity.” It is the judge himself who is
so unwise as to divorce “ Truth and patriotism, justice and
loyalty,” by setting the State and “God and humanity”
in artificial opposition. In truth it is no less disloyal for
Judge Higgins to attempt to wean us away from our
loyalty to the State by reminding us of the allegiance we
owe to God than it is for Dr. Mannix to seek to do so by
reminding his flock that their allegiance is owed to the
Pope. By no possible reasoning can God or humanity be
distinguished from the State. If the act of the government
is not the act of God, i.e., the highest that can be con-
ceived of, the government needs amending, not defying;
and this continuous amendment, or adjustment of real and
ideal, is one of those normal processes of reform that the
socialist is always busy with, but which, as we have seen,
must be suspended under stress of war, in favor of more
urgent means necessary to be taken for present preserva-
tion. It is this removal of the Court of Appeal from
the natural to the supernatural, this whittling away of
God (the good) from the bulk and tangibility that belong
to it in human conduct (where its presence or absence is
instantly recognised) until God becomes a mere meta-
physical abstraction, that is so destructive of all true
they still are in China and Japan, and elsewhere.
See H. Spencer’s “Principles of Sociology,” Vol. 111., page 56.
Also, one of the still remaining titles of our own king is
* 1 Defender of the Faith, ’ 1 and the custom still survives of opening
the sittings of our Parliaments with prayer.
In derivation and meaning, the words religion and law are
identical: expressing authority, something binding (from the
Latin ligo, I bind).


morality. The schism in the conscience between the Sunday
and week-day proprieties, the subtle differentiation of
earth from heaven, which finds its typical expression in the
church, is an unfailing cause of ethical obscurity. Under
cover of the obliquity of vision thus produced the spiritual
High Court quickly degenerates, as, under the present
system of special pleading by hired advocates, our legal
High Court is in danger of degenerating, into a mere means
of escape for rascality that would certainly be punished
by the ordinary canons obtaining with honorable men.
Separate Courts of Appeal are logically indefensible.
If a court is not qualified to give a perfect decision,
amend it. Do not create another which is still more liable to
error. For the multiplication of Courts of Appeal always
removes the cause to be tried farther away from the facts
into the limbo of hugger-mugger and hairsplitting, till it
becomes possible (so interminable is human loquacity when
the brains run short) to argue for months together as to
whether there is or is not a dispute before the Court, or
for hundreds of years at a stretch as to whether the body
and blood of Christ are really present in a consecrated
wafer and a glass of wine. The Kingdom of God, says the
rationalist, is within me; or it is nowhere. If the intellect
is not the soul, it is the road to it, and culture is the means.
The appeal to conscience is an internal, introspective
matter. I want no reference to divinity specialists to
interpret the message that my heart is throbbing with. I
will not bow to an usurped authority with a mock humility.
I will not try to be good by deputy. I will take my sins
upon me, and exact due credit from my fellows, and from
life, for all the good I do. I will take my penalties and
my rewards in my greater misery and in my added joy
in living. If there be a lodestar of truth, and mental
gravity works, I want no outside assistance, and if there
be not, or if there be truth, and, through some constitu-
tional flaw in me, I have no cunning to read it, the whole
College of Cardinals cannot make the circuit of intelli-
gence good. I will take my stand with Emerson, and
live from the truth that is within myself; or, if it be
no better, then from the devil that I am, rather than enjoy


a spurious saintliness per favor of an equally peccant priest.
In proportion as the individual man is true, will the
popular voice, and the communal act which it inspires, he
divine. Dual authority means dual morality, and that is
the father of hypocrisy, and, if Mr. Justice Higgins will
allow us to say so, of cant. By it, under the plea of
political expediency, government becomes mere shameless
opportunism, and under the subterfuge that “business is
business,” business becomes corrupt. The true socialist
is ipso facto a rationalist; a religious man absorbed in poli-
tics, a politician who transacts his politics in a religious
spirit, from his holiest depths, and the true rationalist high
priest in a socialist democracy is the Prime Minister of the
day.
That the above reasoning justifies the Germans in fight-
ing to the last gasp does not in the least invalidate it. Of
course they are justified now that they are in it, in going
through with the business as best they can. What they do is
their affair. It is ours to so thrash them that we shall be
in a position at the close of hostilities to free the Germanic
people from the monarchical thraldom that has corrupted
them, and so enable them to recover their lost place in
the human concert. That is what we are fighting for.
Not the extermination of the Germans, but the cleansing of
them, by the overthrow of the monarchy that has used them
for its own disgraceful ends. Having done that, the
ordinary sequence of events confronts us with the necessity
for the overthrow of absolute monarchy wherever it exists,
and, if the victory of the Allies did not seem to pave the
way to that consummation, this pamphlet would never have
been written.
So then there is no metaphysical way out of national
service any more than a moral one. The compulsory
unionist must be a compulsory nationalist too. In return
for the protection of country he must bear the burden of
country. The socialist does not shed his nationality with
his political superstitions. He is still a British, or a Rus-
sian, or a French socialist. The internationalist does not
become ipso facto a neutral. In the present state of poli


tical evolution the non-national man is an absurdity; a
mere figment of the brain. We can only throw off one
nationality by assuming another, and no ethical warrant
could be found for a lightning change of that sort in pres-
ence of the enemy. That would be rank desertion. Citi-
zenship is not a thing to be retained as long as convenient,
and thrown off when it no longer suits, on a false plea of
cosmopolitanism. Fraternity does not hold with a
brother who denies his fraternity by pointing a bayonet at
our vitals. We Australians have enjoyed for so long the
protection of the British Flag, and by it have been kept
so secure from war's alarms, that we find it hard to realize
that, even in times of peace, we lived under war conditions;
that our country has been kept inviolate all this time by
force; and that, throughout all the peaceful years of our
occupation, it has been necessary for England to stand
outside the Australian gate, on guard. All honest minds,
however, do realize this now. We all understand that
England's downfall is our downfall. Clear-thinking,
straight-seeing labor men, with their hearts in the right
place, have been as quick as any to appreciate the fact,
and to admit that even if it were not so, even supposing that
England's ruin did not necessarily involve our own, we are
under an obligation that the past years have been piling
up to fight for her. It was this instinct that spurred the
best of the unionists to obey unquestioning the country's
call.
If it is hard, and hard indeed it is, to be involved in a
war that we have had no hand in making, so have we been
fortunate through all those years of peace that we did
nothing to secure. If we are peaceable men, and did not
make the turbulent conditions under which we live, neither
did we make civilization. Neither did we make the steam
engine, nor the telephone, nor chloroform, nor art, nor
letters, nor the thousand other things which make life
so well worth living, and so hard to give up. Neither did
we pass the Reform Bill which had to precede the Referen-
dum, nor the English Factory Acts, on which our own are
based. This present life may be far below the level of
the socialist ideal, but it is infinitely above that of the


caves, where, for all that the individual efforts of any of us
have accomplished, we should still be. But these are ethi-
cal considerations, and the anti-conscriptionist has no time
for these, the only thing he is really in earnest about is
the urgency for saving his skin, and he is desperately, nay,
fanatically in earnest about that.
INDUSTRIAL SUBJUGATION.
We now come to examine the objection that conscription,
wherever it obtains, is used as a means of industrial sub-
jugation, and the inference sought to be drawn from this,
i.e., that it would be so used in Australia. To shorten
the argument, we will admit the correctness of the state-
ment, in the first clause (though in the case of France it
could certainly be disputed), but we deny the fairness
of the inference. For, supposing it could be established
that, as regards all other countries, conscription was em-
ployed as an instrument of oppression, it would still re-
main to be proved, for the inference to be sustained, that
the circumstances in Australia are identical with those of
all other countries, or approximately so. Whereas they
are not, but are, on the contrary, as we have partly shown
in our brief resume of the Australian political position in
pre-war days, and as we shall endeavour still further to
prove, altogether unique. Just as we insisted on the
logical necessity for our opponents to argue the war as a
concrete issue, and not as an abstract proposition, so now
we insist that in order to draw a reasonable inference as
to the uses to which conscription might be put in this
country in times of peace, it is necessary to take into con-
sideration the special circumstances existing here; or, in
other words, that anti-conscriptionists, for the purposes of
this discussion, must not treat country any more than war
as a mere metaphysical abstraction.
If our reading of Australian history, and of the political
outlook for the Dominion be the correct one, it is plain


that, so far at any rate as any opposition it is likely to
meet with from outside the Labor Party is concerned,
socialism is indisputable master of the political situation;
that, in fact, Liberalism being dead, nothing can stay the
progress of socialistic reform save a schism occurring within
the Labor Party itself. It is entirely illogical to assume
that because in Germany, under an absolute monarchical
despotism capable of using the Reichstag for the cynical
purpose of registering the royal decree over the heads of
the people, conscription is a means of oppression, it would
necessarily be so in Australia, where the popular voice and
the act of the State are in closer accord than anywhere
else in the world. It is just as absurd to pretend that a
country where the press is suborned, where the chairs of
philosophy are mere vehicles for the royal prerogative,
where the ministry is a royal nominee ministry, and the
schools are a close royalist preserve, offers any reasonable
analogy to a country where the press is free, where the
schools are under the control of local Boards, where the
franchise is absolutely free, and the Ministry is representa-
tive of parliament. Even if it were not as impossible here
as it is easy in Germany, to interfere with the natural safe-
guards against national insanity, there is still the factor
of temperament to reckon with. To confuse for a moment
the sturdy, self-reliant, free thinking,, fearless-speaking
Australian, who is distinguished for his initiative wherever
he goes, with a people who, for all their arrogance towards
foreigners, are, amongst themselves, docile as sheep, is
not to argue, but only to make a noise.
One might as well live in dread of waking up one
morning to find this a Roman Catholic country, with every
book that had not a jesuitical taint about it expunged from
the libraries, and the sum total of present-day knowledge
erased for ever from the tablets of the human under-
standing by a snuffling papal encyclical, as to fear that
Australian bushmen, or the boys in our public schools,
could, by any conceivable process, be transformed into
clockwork Prussian privates submitting to be driven into
battle with kicks and cuffs by officers who even when
wounded, refuse to ride in the same trucks with them. It


must be confessed that debating with anti-conscriptionists
is no child’s play. No sooner are we safely through, as
we opine, with the problem of dual authority, than this
dual personality surprise is sprung upon us. It really
would seem as if the psychological freaks had started breed-
ing, and this Australian Dr. Jekyll and Prussian Mr. Hyde
were the first fruits.
But, assuming a miracle, just to give the other side a
chance, and taking it for granted that, on the well known
principle that a man who eats hen eggs is in danger of
growing feathers, Australians would shrink under the
incubus of conscription from their present stature, to the
diminutive proportions of goose-step automata and capi-
talist pawns, what about the industrial subjugation that a
German victory would involve?
We have already seen something of the kind of political
constitution that “Deutschland über alles” has in store
for us, and to those socialists who think the picture over-
drawn, the following quotation from Yon Bulow will be
instructive;— “ln Germany , Prussia is the leading state
and the Social Democratic movement is the antithesis of the
Prussian State," and on the next page, “Prussia obtained
her greatness as a country of soldiers and officials. To
this day she is still in all essentials a country of soldiers
and. officials
But the whole book, which is after all only a moderate
statement of the German expansionist creed,, exhibits on
every page the absolute irreconcilability of Pan-Germanic
and socialist ideals, and the open and deadly enmity of
the two schools.
The supreme inconsistency of the pacifists consists in the
fact that they dread more the Prussianising of Australians
by Australians than the Prussianising that is threatened by
the Prussians themselves, which, in addition to every other
abomination, would suppress English speech, make every
Australian a sort of tieket-of-leave man answerable to the
police for his most trivial actions, and give to the swash-
*“lmperial Germany,” pp. 191-2.


buckling lieutenant the sacred right to hack the ears off
any urchin who so far forgot himself as to giggle in his
face.
THE ADVANCE GUARD AT WORK.
Ridiculous, however, as is the industrial subjugation plea
in itself, the fact that this flimsy bogey of a possible Aus-
tralian militarism should be pitted against the present hor-
ror of the German article has its serious side. The mad-
ness of these pacifists has some method in it, and what at
first sight looked like a mere stupid Labor counterpart of
a stupid Liberal myth, is something more. On closer
examination, we cannot fail to recognise under his
sickly sentimental internationalist disguise; our old friend
the German colonist, and his half-breed spawn. What-
ever else may be responsible for the very tight position in
which the Kaiser finds himself just now, the Delbruck law,
and the German schools, have not failed him. The
advance guard of the enemy is doing his bit for his cursed
fatherland, and Since, through the complete failure of all
the plans of the grotesque little monster of Potsdam, the
signal to fall upon us has never been given, he is doing the
next best thing by impairing as far as possible our military
efficiency.
AND SYNDICALISTS.
Another equally undesirable class of persons in our
midst, whose presence is betrayed by this frantic dread of
compulsion in spite of the crying need of it, is the Syndi-
calist—or the “One Big Unionist,’ 9 as the Sydney
“Worker” would prefer to call him, —who thinks he sees
in compulsion the frustration of his dearly loved project
of a general strike. It is hardly necessary to repeat here


what Mr. Hughes so forcibly emphasised on the eve of his
departure for England, i.e., that Syndicalism is not
Socialism.* Socialism works through the ballot box. Its
aims and method are political throughout. Tactics which
might be quite justifiable in Belgium, in view of the
strength of the Clericals there,f would be quite inexcusable
here, because the worker in this country is too politically
powerful to make them necessary. We cannot see any re-
mote possibility of an industrial crisis so acute as to war-
rant a general strike, but, if such circumstances ever arose,
there is an added safety to the industrial in the conscript
system, because, under it, the worker retains in the army
the majority he enjoys at the polls. The citizen army will
always be in closer sympathy with the worker than a hired
army, trained to the one single occupation of war, and
whose ordinary citizen sympathies are weakened by the
artificial isolation of the soldier from the man, which gives
rise to, and fosters, the military caste. In England,
under the voluntary system, the “whiff of grapeshot” has
always been ready in the last resort to quell strike troubles,
as the worker very well knows. On the other hand, if a
general strike were engineered without warrant, the Aus-
tralian army is already a conscript one for home defence,
whether the enemies of the State prove to be Industrial
Workers of the World within our gates, or a swarm of
Huns on the Ninety-Mile Beach.
CONSCRIPTION IN PATCHES.
In this connection it has further to be borne in mind
that the voluntary system is not in actual fact so voluntary
as it appears; for, under it, without issuing any formal
ukase, it is possible for the employing classes to exert an
*See Report of Prime Minister's speech at Melbourne Town Hall,
“ Argus," 14/1/'l6.
t Catholic Pederationists would do well to contrast the account
given of Catholic Social Action in Belgium by Rev. Pr. Le
Maitre in the pamphlet published by the Australian Catholic Truth
Society, with that of S. P. Orth in “Socialism and Democracy in
Europe."


economic pressure to which the wage workers are specially
amenable, by the closing of all avenues of employment,
where women’s labor can be substituted, to men capable of
bearing arms. We have read over and over again of a
widespread practice amongst employers in England and
Canada, to dismiss all their eligible men, and so force them
to go to the war, or starve. We do not know to what ex-
tent this practice has been resorted to in Australia, but we
do know that trade unionists themselves have complained
that compulsion of this kind was being exerted in Mel-
bourne, and we do know that at least two Shire Councils
(Lismore, N.S.W.,* and Fern Tree Gully )f offered their
employees the alternative of enlistment or dismissal. Now
here we have the most vicious form of compulsion possible;
i.e., that which leaves it in the power of the employing
classes to usurp the functions of the government, by using
a man’s economic necessities as a lever to push him into the
firing line, while the enlistment of eligible employers them-
selves, or their eligible sons, remains a matter of choice; in
other words, a conscription which discriminates between
rich and poor.
NO PRECEDENT?
We have now driven the anti-conscriptionist to his last
ditch. When everything else fails, he falls back on the plea
that there is no warrant of precedent. There is a fiction
going about that voluntary service is settled British policy.
It is no such thing, and never was. British policy is to sur-
vive, and we have always had conscription in reserve
against national overthrow. It makes no difference that
until now Britain has managed to fight her battles with
volunteers. Never before was British autonomy so seri*
ously threatened. Does any sane man suppose that, if
*“Argus/' 24/8/T5.
f' Argus/ ’ 22/3/T6.


the Armada of Philip of Spain had not been so easily scat-
tered, the Spaniards, or, if Napoleon had not been routed
at Waterloo, the French, would have been allowed to en-
slave England for want of conscription when volunteers
ran short? It is unthinkable.
THE ONE LEGITIMATE EXCUSE.
We close the argument with a point which, if not the
most important to the socialist case, is certainly the most
pressing for the country just now, in view of the Referen-
dum that is to be taken on the 28th October next. It
might be asked:—“lf the shirkers are in such a minority,
is it worth while going the length of compelling them?
Would it not be better, for the honor of Australia, perhaps,
to keep our skeleton in the cupboard, where, at any rate,
it can do only the minimum of harm, than to dilute our
force of willing fighters with an admixture of curs?” This
would be sound reasoning were it not for the fact that the
non-compulsion of the shirker affords the one legitimate
excuse for the man who is willing to take his share of the
national burden, but who may quite properly refuse to
take another man’s share as well, while that other stays at
home, and openly calls him a fool for his pains. The
social residuum of out and out shirkers would be insignifi-
cant did it not have the effect of keeping at home an army
of men who, while they may be heroes, have no fancy for
mock heroics, engineered by tub-thumping and specious
arguments of the high-falutin order.


APPENDIX.
FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
MR. JUSTICE HIGGINS’S SUPPORT.
“Argus,” 20/4/16.
“CLEAR OUR MINDS OF CANT.”
Under the auspices of the Australian Church Guild, Mr.
Justice Higgins delivered a lecture on “ Freedom of
Speech in War” before a large audience in the Australian
Church last night. The Eev. Dr Strong presided.
Mr. Justice Higgins asked the attention of the audience
while he recalled some of the numerous instances in which
the right of men to criticise the conduct of their Govern-
ments in making war, or in allowing war to happen or to
continue, had been asserted or discussed. One found in
every war the same phenomena. The public were intensely
eager and excited and anxious. They felt the national
glory, the national resources, the national honour, the
national liberties, perhaps the national existence at stake,
and the lives of their men in danger, and those who took
the unpopular step of condemning the war or the Govern-
ment which produced it were liable to be treated as ‘ 4 dis-
loyal,” as enemies of their country, even as traitors. The
fact that the critics of the war had nothing to gain from
opposing the public mood had generally to face the pros-
pect of loss, did not deter the more fanatical and ignorant
from interference with them in their civil rights, from
hreahing up their meetings, from doing personal violence,
from persecution, and there had not been wanting some


times sinister symptoms of the officers of the law, or even
the courts, truckling to the popular fury. It was always
unpleasant, of course, when one felt very strongly on a
subject to find other persons maintaining what one regarded
as a wrong opinion, but the unpleasantness was tenfold
in the supreme ordeal of war. There was a strong temp-
tation to get rid of the unpleasantness by stifling free
speech; we would not brook the expression of unpleasant
opinion. We insisted on its suppression.
It was therefore but natural that the problem as to the
treatment of critics of an existing war should reappear
from time to time, and he wanted to refer to the mode in
which the problem had been solved. As for interferences
with earnest persons of public spirit who felt impelled to
discuss such abstract questions as the abolition of war for
the future or the proper system of readjusting States or
other such questions, he did not think it necessary to adduce
any instances. Interference with free discussion in such
cases was too absurd to be countenanced in any civilised
community. It showed on the part of those who inter-
fered a want of sense of perspective, a leant of humour,
a want of common sense . (Applause.) The important
question was how far were subjects of a nation held to be
justified in attaching the conduct of that nation as to
war, held justified by the best men of their own times and
by posterity.
Mr. Justice Higgins proceeded to outline the case of
Thiers and the war of 1870. The crowds of Paris were
shouting “To Berlin.’ ’ Thiers endeavoured to stem the
current. He implored the Chamber of Deputies to post-
pone its decision. Thiers was called the unpatriotic
trumpet of disaster. Fifteen days later the series of
calamities began. The Empress Regent sent Prosper
Merrimee, a political opponent, to Thiers, asking him to
form a Ministry, but it was too late. The truth was that
there had often been efforts on the part of Governments
which had plunged the country into war, efforts also on
the part of the professional fighting classes, hoping for
Inch, distinction, promotion, to make the people think that


the causes of a war must not he criticised, and the efforts
the causes of a war must not be criticised, and the efforts
had often been successful with unthinking people.
But the idea was preposterous. (Applause.) Mr.
Chamberlain put the position with his usual lucidity
when his opponents accused him of unpatriotic
conduct in condemning the Afghan war. He referred
with scathing irony to ‘ 1 those members who had invented
a convenient theory by which opposition was silenced in
the presence of foreign complications.” Every act of
every Government was open to criticism, and the gravest
act that any Government could commit, the act of making
war, was not an exception. The law certainly did not
treat any such criticism as an offence. As Sir James
Stephen said, in his digest of the criminal law, “An inten-
tion to show that His Majesty has been misled or mis-
taken in his measures is not a seditious intention.” But
it was urged that even if adverse comment on a war was
not a legal offence, it was a moral offence, or some kind of
offence against expediency and patriotism. Such was
not the principle sanctioned by the great men of British
history. In the war against the American colonies there
were public men in England who, regardless of contumely
and abuse, urged the reasonableness of the American
view. Those were the men whose names were now the
most cherished and honoured of that epoch, the Earl of
Chatham, Rockingham, Fox, Burke, Savile, Hartley, and
Keppel. There were other historic parallels—Robert Burns
and his opposition to the war against France in 1793, Sir
Robert Peel and the opium war with China in 1840, and
John Bright and the Crimean war.
“MY COUNTRY, RIGHT OR WRONG.”
Surely on this subject, above all subjects, Mr. Justice
Higgins continued, there was need to clear our minds of
cant, and the phrase, “My country, right or wrong, ” was
cant. If it meant that we were to love our country, to
do our best for it, even if she had made mistakes, the
phrase would be unexceptionable; hut if it meant, as it


was used to mean, that we tv ere to believe, or say we
believed, our country to be right when we believed her to
be wrong, that we ought to help the Government of the
time being to do an injustice because it was doing it in
the of our country, it was arrant nonsense. Some
might think that he was taking up too much time in com-
bating this phrase, but if they would consider the matter
a little they would find that the phrase or the state of
feeling which it implied was at the very root of wars. It
made wars possible. It was the principle which animated
millions of Germans and Austrians, and Turks and Bul-
gars, when they faced with a courage and self-sacrifice equal
to that of our own men the fury of shrapnel and shells.
We could not expect our enemies to abandon this false
principle unless we abandoned it ourselves, unless we
recognised that even if our duty to the State transcended
the interests of ourselves and of our families, yet there was
a duty which transcended even our duty to the State, our
duty to God and humanity. (Applause.) Happily, there
was no obligation, whether legal or moral or of expediency
for a loyal subject to say, when his country was at war,
that his country was in the right. There was no such
divorce between truth and, patriotism, between justice and
loyalty, as certain univise teachers would have us suppose.
(Applause.) In the British Empire, at all events, we
were not forced to the bitter choice between loyalty to the
King and loyalty to our highest and holiest ideals. It
might prevent some misapprehension when he said that, in
the present horrible war, he regarded our cause as the cause
of justice and humanity. (Applause.) He was in Lon-
don when war was declared, and he was in the House of
Commons nearly every day, and he was convinced that the
people of the old country did not want war. But his
personal opinion did not affect his argument. He granted
that we should retain and cherish the right of full freedom
of speech. Let minorities have their say. The best way
often to kill a mistaken opinion was to let it be exposed to
the full light. We prided ourselves on having left be-
hind us persecution for religious observances and opinions,
but the spirit of persecution still lived. Men should be


allowed to say what was in them, and should not be made
liars and hypocrites. “As for ourselves,” said Mr. Justice
Higgins, in conclusion, “it is an essential moral discipline
to let those who differ from us have their say, to consider
their views if there be opportunity, and, if we find that we
have been wrong, to admit and change our ways.” (Ap-
plause.)


AN
Australian Girl
in Germany
Through PEACE to WAR
Jan.-Oct. 1914
The story is written from a diary of happen-
ings and conversations, and includes translations
of cuttings fro3n German Newspapers which
were smuggled out from Germany, and on the
author’s return to Australia proved invaluable.
A Few of the Chapters .
First Days in Germany—War Fever—The
Declaration of War—My Country Right or
Wrong—The First German Victory—The Fall
of Brussels—The Way to Paris Open—England
through German Eyes—ln Berlin.
Not a romance, a work of imagination, or an
“after the event” story polished for effect.
Paper 2/6 Cloth 3/6
ALL BOOKSELLERS
The Specialty Press Pty. Ltd., 189-191 Little Collins St., Melbourne,
