

THE
ELECTORAL ACT,
1863.
MELBOURNE:
BY AUTHORITY [?]MENT PRINTER;
F. [?] AST.
PRICE SIXPEN [?] ONE SHILLING.




VICTORIÆ REGINÆ.
VICTORIA.
ANNO VICESIMO SEPTIMO
No. CLXVIII.
An Act to amend the Law relating to the Qualifi-
cations and Legislation of Electors of Members
to serve in Parliament and to regulate proceedings
at Parliamentary Elections. [3 (PA June , 1863.
WHEEEAS it is expedient to amend tlie law relating to tlie quali-
fications and registration of electors of members to serve in
Parliament and to regulate the proceedings at Parliamentary elections
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly of Victoria in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same as follows (that is to say)—
Introduction.
I. This Act may be cited as “ The Electoral Act 1863.”
11. This Act is divided into the introduction and two chapters
whereof the first relates to the qualifications and registration of electors
and the second to proceedings at elections.
111. The first chapter is divided into four parts relating respectively
to the following subject matters: —
The first part to the issue of electors’ rights and the preparation
of lists of electors.
The second part to revision courts and the preparation of ordinary
electoral rolls.
The third part to. the rolls of ratepaying electors.
The fourth part to miscellaneous subjects.
The second chapter is divided into three parts relating to the follow-
ing subject matters: —
The first part to preliminary arrangement for elections.
The second part to the conduct of elections.
The third part to the regulation of elections.
IV. The several Acts and parts of Acts mentioned in schedule A to
this Act to the extent to which such Acts and parts of Acts are in and
by the said schedule expressed to be repealed shall be and the same
are hereby repealed but all penalties incurred under the enactments
hereby repealed or any of them shall be enforced against all persons
liable thereto as if no such repeal had taken place.
A
Preamble.
Title of Act.
Repeal of Acts.


Provision as to
and' 1 Christmas
nay. "
Commencement
of Act.
Divisions under
divisions under
this Act.
Appointment of
electoral regis-
trars.
Kequisites to en-
title electors to
votefor election
of a member of
Farliament.
Y. Whenever any day provided or appointed by or under this Act
for any purpose shall in any year happen on a Sunday Good Friday
or Christmas Day then such provision and appointment shall take effect
as for the day following and all further changes of time rendered
necessary by any such alteration may also lawfully be made.
YI. The several portions of this Act next hereinafter mentioned
shall take effect from and after the thirty-first day of October in this
present year that is to say—
The section thereof relating to the repeal of Acts and portions of
, Acts
So much of the first chapter thereof as enacts that no person shall
be entitled to vote unless either he be the owner of an elector’s
right and be enrolled upon an ordinary roll or he be enrolled on
a roll of ratepaying electors for the division and so much thereof
as enacts that any roll transmitted hereunder to the returning
officer of any province or district shall be an ordinary general
or supplementary roll or a roll of ratepaying electors as the case
may be for the division to which the same shall relate
The second chapter thereof
And the remainder of this Act shall take effect from and after the
passing thereof.
CHAP. I.
Qualifications and Eegistbation of Electoes.
Paet I.— lssue of Electoes’ Eights and peepabation of Lists
of Electoes.
YII. The divisions of the several electoral provinces and electoral
districts hereinafter called respectively provinces and districts which
shall at the passing of this Act be subsisting under the provisions of
the Act numbered LXXXI. shall be deemed to be and shall be divisions
thereof respectively under ' his Act.
YIII. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from time to
time to appoint a fit person to be the “electoral registrar” of and for
each division and such person from time to time to remove from his
office and every such person may resign his office and no person shall
be the electoral registrar for more divisions than one unless such
divisions shall be adjoining each other and every such appointment
or removal shall forthwith be published in the Government Gazette
Provided that no person shall be appointed or continue electoral
registrar unless he shall reside in some one of the divisions for which
he shall act as such.
IX. No person shall be entitled to vote in the election of any mem-
ber to serve in Parliament for any province or district unless he shall
be the holder of an elector’s right issued to him for the division of such
province or district in which he claims to vote purporting to entitle him
so to do and his name with the number of such his elector’s right affixed
be upon an ordinary electoral roll in force for the time being for such
division of the province or district as the case may be and he be at the
time of voting possessed of the qualification in respect of which such
right was issued or unless his name (where the vote shall be for the
election of a member of the Assembly) shall be upon a “roll of rate-paying
electors” in force for the division of the district in which such vote is to be
given Provided that after the issue to any person of an elector’s right
if he shall have parted with the whole or any part of his qualifying pro-
perty in the division to which .such right shall relate but retain in the
same or some other division of the same province or district property
of value sufficient to qualify him to vote at elections for the same
respectively or he shall have removed his residence from the division
to which such right shall relate but have thenceforward continuously


resided in some other division or divisions of the same province or dis-
trict and if such person in either such case shall not have taken out a
transferred elector’s right for such other division where as the case
may be his property is situated or he resides he shall not be deemed
by reason only of such alienation of property or change of residence
as the case may be to be dispossessed of the qualification which he may
have had for the division in respect of which such first mentioned
elector’s right was issued.
X. Every person who under the Act numbered XXXIII. shall have
either a qualification of which residence forms no part hereinafter called
a non-residential qualification to vote for members of Parliament for
any province or district or a qualification so to vote of which residence
forms a part hereinafter called a residential qualification and shall
derive his qualification in the division of such province or district to
which his application shall relate and shall if claiming in respect of a
residential qualification have resided in Victoria for twelve months and
in the same or some other division of the province or district as the
case may be for three months last past before such application shall
subject to the provisions next hereinafter contained be entitled to have
an elector’s right issued to him for such first mentioned division of the
province or district as the case may be and to have his name retained
upon an ordinary list and roll to be made hereunder for such division.
*XI. Save in the several cases hereinafter mentioned no elector’s
right shall be issued to any person who shall previously have received
an elector’s right purporting to entitle him to vote in the same province
or district as the case may be and no elector’s right in respect of a
residential qualification shall be issued to any person who shad pre-
viously have received any elector’s right purporting to entitle him to
vote in respect of a residential qualification in any division of any
province or district as the case may be whatsoever and no elector’s
right purporting to entitle the holder to vote for members to serve in
the Assembly for any district in any divi|jon thereof shall be issued to
any person whose name shall at the time be on the roll (if any) of rate-
paying electors for any division of the same district.
XII. Xo elector’s right shall be issued to any person who shall at:
the time be receiving relief as an inmate of any eleemosynary or
charitable institution.
XIII. The Minister in whose department this Act shall for the time i
being be administered shall from time to time cause to be printed on
suitable paper in red ink certificates with butts or counterfoils herein-
after called butts in the forms contained in schedules B and C to this
Act and also in black ink other certificates with butts in the forms
contained in schedules D and E to this Act and shall from time to time
cause a sufficient number of the said certificates to be numbered in a
regular arithmetical series each with a different number commencing
with the certificates framed after the form in schedule B at the number
one and proceeding upwards through the certificates framed after the
forms in schedules BCD and E in order and resuming the series of
numbers upon each successive numbering of certificates of one or more
forms in the like order from the number then last impressed upon any
certificate whatsoever and such numbering shall be effected by printing
or stamping the number in blue ink in the body and also in the butt of
each certificate and such certificates shall upon issue as hereinafter'
provided be called “ Electors’ Bights.”
XIY. The Minister in whose department this Act shall for the time :
being be administered shall from time to time cause the certificates
so printed and numbered as aforesaid to be bound together alter the
form after which severally they are framed in separate books containing
not less than one hundred nor more than two hundred in each book and
also cause a sufficient number of certificates unnumbered to be bound
A 2
Persons entitled to
electors’ rights
and to have
names retained
on roll.
Elector’s right not
to issue for di-
vision or district
to person who
has previously-
received elec-
tor’s right for
such division or
district.
Persons receiving
charitable relief
not entitled to
elector’s right.
Certificates to be
printed and
numbered.
And issued as
“Electors’
Eights.”
Numbered and
unnumbered
certificates to
be bound in
separate books
and transmitted
to electoral re-
gistrars .


Applicant forelec-
tor’s right to
answer ques-
tions sign name
and pay fee.
Duties of registrar
bein tlon
emg ma e.
Power to put
questions.
together after the form after which severally they are framed in separate
books containing the like quantity and shall as soon as may be after the
passing of this Act and from time to time as it shall be needful transmit
to each electoral registrar so many books of certificates of each form
and numbered as aforesaid and also so many of each form without any
number as may be required by such registrar for the purposes herein-
after mentioned.
XV. If any person who shall be entitled hereunder to have an
elector’s right issued to him for any division of a province or district
shall apply in person to the registrar of such division for the purpose
and shall by his answers to the questions put to him as hereinafter
provided show his right to exercise the vote in respect of which he
claims and shall in the presence of the registrar sign his name in a book
to be kept for the purpose and also severally in the body and the butt
of the elector’s right to be issued before issue thereof and pay to the
registrar the sum of one shilling the registrar shall after ascertaining
(where the application is in respect of a right of voting for the Legis-
lative Assembly) that the applicant’s name is not on any roll of rate-
paying electors in force for any division of the district fill up a certifi-
cate in one of the forms and numbered as aforesaid purporting to
entitle such person to vote in and for such division in elections of
members to serve either in the Legislative Council or Legislative
Assembly and either in respect of a residential or of a non-residential
qualification as the case may be according to the tenor of such person’s
application and stating with regard to such person the several parti-
culars required and contained in each form and shall sign and issue to
the applicant such elector’s right and shall at the time of issuing such
elector’s right enter in the butt thereof the several particulars hereby
required to be stated in the elector’s right.
XVI. The registrar before issuing any elector’s right under the pre-
ceding provisions shall put to the person applying for the same the
following questions (that is Cd say)—
1. What are your Christian names surname residence and occu-
pation ?
2. Are you of the full age of twenty-one years ?
3. Are you a natural born or a naturalized or denizen subject
of Iler Majesty Queen Victoria and which ?— [And if the
answer he “naturalized” or “denizen”] —Have you resided
in Victoria for twelve months previous to the first day of
January [or if the case so require April July or October] last
and were you naturalized or made denizen for three (3) years
at least next preceding that day ?
4. [lf the elector s right sought for be a non-residential qualifi-
cation]—Have you before received an elector’s right for any
division of this province [or district as the case may he] ?
5. [lffor a residential qualification ] —Have you before received
an elector’s right in respect of residence for any division of
any province [or any division of any district as the case may
he] in Victoria ? and what division and province [or district
as the case may he.]
6. [lf the elector’s right sought he for a non-residential qualifica-
tion] —What is the situation name or other description of
the lands for which you claim and— [if the claim he in
respect of the Council] —whether do you claim as being seised
of the freehold or as the lessee or assignee of the lease or as
the occupying tenant and are the value and your tenure of
and the time for which you have already so held the lands
such as are required by law for this purpose [lf in respect
of the Assembly] —Are you seised of the lands for an estate
of freehold and are the value of the lands and the time for


which, you have already so held them such as are required
by law for this purpose ?
7. {lf the elector's right he sought for a residential qualifica-
tion]—Do you now reside in Victoria and for what time
during the last twelve months have you so resided ? —Do
you now reside in the division for which you apply—and
during what time now last past have you so resided therein
or as well therein as in some other division of the province
{or district if the case so require ) and in what division ? {lf
the claim he in respect of the Legislative Council add ] — 1
What is the precise professional or other qualification for
which you claim ?
And may if he shall think fit put the following question (that is to say)—
8. Are you at present receiving relief as an inmate of any elee-
mosynary or charitable institution ?
And any person who shall wilfully and knowingly make a false answer to
any of the questions so put to him by the registrar shall upon conviction
by any two justices of such offence be imprisoned for any time not
exceeding six calendar months.
XVII. If the holder of an elector’s right in respect of a non-residential
qualification for any division of a province or district shall have the like
qualification for some other division of the same province or district and
shall be desirous of obtaining an elector’s right in respect of such last
mentioned qualification for such other division or if the holder of an
elector’s right in respect of a residential qualification for any division of
a province or district shall reside with a sufficient residential qualifica-
tion in any other division of the same province or district or in any
division of any other province or district or shall have a non-residential
qualification for the division to which his elector’s right relates and
shall be desirous of obtaining an elector’s right in respect of such last
mentioned residential or non-residential qualifications (as the case may
be) for the division in which he shall so reMde or shall so have such non-
residential qualification as the case may be every such holder may obtain
a transferred elector’s right in manner next hereinafter mentioned
Provided that where such elector’s right shall be in respect of voting for
members of the Legislative Assembly the holder thereof shall not obtain
any such transferred elector’s right if his name shall be upon a roll of
ratepaying electors for any division of the district to which his claim for
a transferred elector’s right relates.
XVIII. If such person as last aforesaid shall personally apply for the
purpose to the registrar of the division in which he shall then possess
his qualification or reside as the case may be and shall by his answers to
the questions put to him as hereinafter required show his title under the
provisions hereof to have such transferred elector’s right issued to him
and.sign his name in the presence of the registrar in a book to be kept
by the registrar for the purpose and also severally in the body and the
butt of the right to be issued before issue thereof and pay the registrar-
the sum of one shilling and deliver up his former elector’s right such
registrar after ascertaining (where the application is in respect of a right
of voting for the Legislative Assembly) that such person is not entered
on any such roll of ratepaying electors as last aforesaid shall write m the
body and also in the butt of an unnumbered certificate in such one of
the prescribed forms as shall correspond with the form of the elector s
right so delivered up the number of the said elector’s right and shall hit
up sign and issue to the applicant such transferred elector s right for the
division of the applicant’s qualification or residence in like manner and
form in all respects as hereinbefore provided with regard to an original
elector’s right. , . '
XIX. The registrar shall before issuing any elector s right under the
last preceding section put to any person applying for the same as well
Giving false an-
swer an offence.
Elector’s right
under residen-
tial qualifica-
tion may be
made a trans-
ferred elector’s
right.
On personal ap-
plication and
answeringques-
tions, &c.
Duties of regis-
trar in respect
thereto.
Additional ques-
tions to be put
to applicant


for transferred
elector’s right.
False answer an
offence.
original right to
transmitted 8 to
registrar.
To be filed by him
ceiied' 3Utt Can ”
Registrar to make
celled rights,
And transmit
iu 6l officer tUril
Substituted elect-
ors’ rights may
be issued if
originals be lost
torn or defaced.
On persona] ap-
plication and
answering.
And payment of
fee &c.
i the questions hereinbefore required to be put to any applicant for an
original elector’s right as also the following additional questions :
Are you the person named as [A. B.] in the elector’s right now
produced and was the same issued to you?
Is the signature appearing thereon your signature ?
\_lf the application he in respect of a residential qualification ] —Have
you ceased to reside in the division for which the elector’s right
now produced by you was issued ?
And any person who shall wilfully and knowingly make a false answer
to any question put under this section shall upon conviction by any two
justices of such offence be imprisoned for any term not exceeding six
calendar months.
XX. The registrar shall forthwith cancel the elector’s right so delivered
up to him by writing across the same the words “ new certificate issued”
and shall affix thereto his signature and the date of such cancellation
together with the name of the province or district as the case may be
and the division for which the new certificate shall have been issued and
shall without delay transmit such cancelled elector’s right to the registrar
of the division for which the same shall have been issued or if he be him-
self such registrar shall retain such cancelled elector’s right.
XXI. The registrar who under the last preceding section shall have
had transmitted to him or have retained any can'celled elector’s right
shall forthwith file the same in his office and shall cancel the butt be-
longing thereto by writing across it the words “ new certificate issued by
[A. B.] registrar of the division of the province (or of
the electoral district of as the case may he )” and shall affix his
signature thereto and the date of so doing.
XXII. Every registrar who as last aforesaid shall have had transmitted
to him or retained any cancelled electors’ rights shall within three days
after the commencement of each month make out in alphabetical order
of the surnames in the form in schedule F separate lists one
for the electors’ rights relating to the Legislative Council and one for
those relating to the Legislative Assembly of all persons named as electors
in such cancelled electors’ rights with the several particulars required by
the said schedule as appearing by the said rights and the butts thereof
and shall append to the same the numbers prefixed to the said names
upon the ordinary electoral roll of the division upon which the same shall
appear and shall forthwith certify under his hand and transmit .to the
returning officer for the province or district as the case may be each such
list and upon such transmission all such names shall be by the returning
officer and be deemed to be and shall be dealt with for all purposes as if
erased from the ordinary electoral roll in which the same shall appear.
XXIII. If any elector’s right shall after the issue thereof be lost or
. so torn or defaced as to be in any essential part illegible and (where such
elector’s right shall be in respect of voting for members of the Legislative
Assembly) if the name of the holder thereof shall not be upon a roll of
ratepaying electors for the division to which such right shall relate the
holder thereof being still qualified to vote in such division according to
the tenor of such right may obtain in lieu of such lost torn or defaced
right a substituted elector’s right of the like purport for such division in
manner next hereinafter mentioned.
XXIY. If any such person as last aforesaid shall personally apply for
the purpose to the registrar of the division for which such lost tern or
defaced right was issued and shall duly by his answers to the questions
put to him as hereinafter required and on production to him of the butt
of the said right by the registrar show his title hereunder to have such
substituted right issued to him and sign his name in the presence of the
registrar in a book to be kept by such registrar for that purpose and also
severally in the body and the butt of the right to be issued before issue
thereof and pay to such registrar the sum of one shilling and upon


delivery to such registrar (if such right be only torn or defaced) of the
same or the remnant thereof such registrar shall after ascertaining the
number of the right so lost torn or defaced enter the said number in
the body and in the butt of an unnumbered certificate in such one ot
the said forms as shall be required by the tenor of the application
and shall fill up sign and issue to the applicant such substituted
elector’s right in like manner and form in all respects as is hereinbefore
provided with regard to an original elector’s right and shall write across
the face of such substituted elector’s right and across the butt thereof
the word “Substituted.” . ,
XXY. The registrar shall before issuing any substituted elector s
right under the last section put to any person applying for the same as
well the questions hereinbefore required to be put to any applicant for
an original elector’s right as also the following additional questions that
[lf the elector's right he stated to he lost] Have you made diligent
search for the original elector’s right in respect of the loss of
which you now claim and to the best of your belief is the
same wholly lost ? ,
[lf the electors right he stated to he defaced or torn] Is the
elector’s right now delivered by you the original elector s
right in respect of which you now claim or so much as
remains thereof? . ,
Are you the person named [A. B.] of . _ [occupation]
in the butt now shown to you and is the signature appearing
thereon your signature ? _ .
And any person who shall wilfully and knowingly make, a ialse answer
to any question put under this section shall upon conviction by any two
justices of such offence be imprisoned for any time not exceeding six
calendar months. . , „
XXYI. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained it the. le-
gistrar upon comparison of the name appealing upon the elector s right
so delivered up with the name so to be signed by such applicant m the
book elector’s right or butt as last aforesaid shall find that the same
respectively are not in the same handwriting with each other he shall not
then issue a substituted elector’s right but any police magistrate, upon
the complaint of such applicant and upon proof such applicant s title to
have such substituted right issued to him and upon being satisfied upon
such comparison as aforesaid that the said names are in the same hand-
writing may order such registrar to issue such right and he shall issue
the same accordingly. «. . , ... ,
XXVII. The registrar shall forthwith upon the issue of any substituted
elector’s right as aforesaid cancel the butt of the original elector s light
on which the same number shall have appeared by writing across the
same the words “ new certificate issued” and shall affix thereto his signa-
ture and the date of such cancellation. . . ,
XXYIII. Every electoral registrar may and shall issue miners rights
under the second section of the Act No. XXXII. to all such persons as
shall apply for the same and every person who shall have a miner s right
so issued to him by any such registrar may then and there have issued
to him an original or transferred or substituted elector’s right without any
payment if he be entitled to such issue under the other provisions of this Act.
XXIX. Every electoral registrar shall during the week ending on the
first day of August in every year make out according to the form m
schedule G to this Act for each division of any province and according,
to the form in schedule H to this Act for each division of any district of
which respectively he is registrar and shall sign a general list arranged
in alphabetical order of the surnames of all persons whose names shall
then be upon any ordinary electoral roll in force hereunder or sue
division of the province or district as the case may be ana oi all persons
Registrar to put
additional ques-
tions.
False answer a
misdemeanor.
Police magistrate
to adjudicate in
cases of doubt-
ful identity of
handwriting.
Registrar to can-
cel butt of ori-
ginal right.
Registrar may
issue miner’s
right and also
an elector’s
right.
Registrars to
make out gene-
ral lists of elec-
tors.


Also supplemen-
tary lists.
And have copies
printed and
transmitted to
clerks of revi-
sion courts.
And advertise
lists for inspec-
tion.
Persons may ob-
ject to names
on lists.
who shall by the butts of electors’ rights in the possession of such
registrar appear to have taken out original or transferred electors’ rights
for such division and have not been since the issue of such rights included
in any general list or roll or any such supplementary list or roll as here-
inafter mentioned for such division but shall omit from such general list
the names of all persons who shall appear from the cancelled electors’
rights transmitted to such registrar since the making of the last general
roll for the division to have had issued to them substituted electors’
rights in respect of a residential qualification for any other division
whether of any province or district or who where the list relates to the
Legislative Assembly shall by the roll of ratepaying electors if any in
force for such first mentioned division appear to be named in such roll
and the registrar shall in making out such list state therein from the
said rolls and butts respectively the several particulars regarding each
person required in and by the said schedule.
XXX. Every electoral registrar shall during the weeks ending re-
spectively on the first day of November the first day of February and the
first day of May in each year make out according to the form in schedule
G to this Act for each division of any province and according to the
form in schedule H for each division of any district of which respectively
he is registrar and shall sign a supplementary list arranged in alphabetical
order of the surnames of all persons who sliall by the butts in the
possession of such registrar appear to have had issued to them electors’
rights as yet uncancelled for the division and not since the issue of such
rights included in any general or supplementary list for such division
and shall state in every such list from the said butts the several
particulars regarding each person required in and by the said sche-
dule.
XXXI. The registrar shall forthwith after making out any general or
supplementary list for any division cause copies of the same to be printed
and shall before or on the twenty-first day of August in each year sign
and transmit two copies of each general list for that year to the clerk
of the revision court for that division and shall before or on the twenty-
first day of November the twenty-first day of February and the
twenty-first day of May respectively sign and transmit to the said clerk
two copies of each supplementary list which shall on each of those days
be awaiting revision as herein provided.
XXXII. The registrar shall forthwith after the printing of any such
list notify by public advertisement twice in some newspaper generally
circulating in the division the fact that a copy of such list is in his
custody and ready to be inspected by any person interested therein and
shall keep such list or a copy thereof to be inspected by any such person
and permit such inspection without fee at all reasonable hours during
the day time until the day before the holding of the revision court and
shall also deliver a printed copy of every such list before the revision
thereof to any person requiring the same on payment for each such copy
after the rate to be determined as hereinafter mentioned.
XXXIII. Any person may in manner next hereinafter mentioned
object to the name of any other person being retained in any list for a
division of a province or district that is to say the objector shall before
or on the fourth day of September if the name objected to appear upon
a general list and in all other cases before or on such one of the following
days that is to say the fourth day of December the fourth day of March
and the fourth day of June respectively as shall immediately precede the
time of revising the list in which the name objected to appears sign and
deliver or cause to be delivered to the registrar for the division and also
to the person objected to notice of such objection according to the form
in schedule I to this Act stating the grounds of his objection and pay to
the registrar on delivery of such notice of objection the sum of one
shilling.


XXXIV. It shall be sufficient in every case of notice to any person
objected to in any electoral list if the notice so required to be given as
aforesaid shall be sent by post the sum chargeable as postage for the
same being first paid directed to the person to whom the same shall be
sent at his place of abode as described in the said list and. when any
person shall be desirous of sending any such notice of objection by the
post he shall deliver the same duly directed open and in duplicate to the
postmaster of any post office within such hours as shall have been pre-
viously given notice of at such post office and under such regulations
with respect to the registration of such letters and the fee to be paid for
such registration (which fee shall in no case exceed twopence over and
above the ordinary rate of postage) as shall from time to time be made
by the Postmaster-General in that behalf and in all cases in which such
fee shall have been duly paid the postmaster shall compare the said
notice and duplicate and on being satisfied that they are alike in their
address and their contents shall seal or secure and forward one of them
to its address by the post and shall return the other to the party bringing
the same duly stamped with the stamp of the said post office and the
production by the party who posted such notice of such stamped dupli-
cate shall be evidence of the notice having been given to the person at
the place mentioned in such duplicate on the day which such notice
would in the ordinary course of post have been delivered.
XXXV. The registrar forthwith after such days respectively as last
mentioned shall make out for each division of any province and for each
division of any district of which he is registrar a list of the names of all
persons so objected to in respect of such division arranged in alphabetical
order of the surnames according to tbe form in schedule II and shall
state therein against each name the several particulars required in and
by such schedule as appearing by the ordinary list and by the notice of
objection and shall forthwith sign a copy of each such list and transmit
the same to the clerk of the revision court for the division and shall also
forthwith publish such list twice in somf newspaper published in the
district or if none such be published then in a Melbourne daily news-
paper and shall keep the said list or a copy thereof to be inspected by
any person interested therein and permit such inspection without fee at
all reasonable hours until the day before the holding of the revision court.
XXXVI. The registrar for any division of a province or district shall
be bound by the answers of any applicant for the issue of an elector’s
right to the questions to be put under the provisions hereof as affirming
or negativing the title of such applicant to such issue but may object to
the name of any such applicant when entered upon the list to be made
as herein provided by entering at the time of making out such list in the
proper column against such name the words “objected to” with the
cause of objection clearly stated and appending his initials thereto and
shall insert the name and the particulars relating to the person so
objected to in the list of objections lastly hereinbefore mentioned and
give notice to such person as required in other cases and no costs shall
be awarded by any revision court against any registrar in respect of such
objection in any case whatsoever.
Part II. — Revision Courts and preparation of Ordinary
Electoral Rolls.
XXXVII. The revision court for each division of a province or
district shall be the court of petty sessions (if any) holden within the
division and if there be two or more such courts within the division then
that one of such courts and if there be no such court in the division then
that court of petty sessions which shall be holden nearest to the office of
the registrar Provided that for the purpose of constituting such court
one police magistrate shall be counted as two justices.
XXXVIII. A revision court for each division shall sit at the place
Notice of objec-
tion may be
sent through
the post.
Registrar to make
lists of such
names and send
copy to clerk of
revision court.
Registrar to be
bound by an-
swers to ques-
tions but may
“object” to
applicant.
Bevision court to
petty sessions,
Time of holding
revision court.


Adjournment.
Revision court to
revise lists.
Registrar to at-
tend and pro-
duce all books
and documents.
Revision court
may summon
persons and
take evidence.
Refusal to obey
summons to be
dealt with un-
der sec. 7 of 11
and 12 Tic. c.
43.
Questions to be
decided by ma-
jority of revi-
sion court chair-
man having a
casting vote.
Revision court to
retain on lists
all names of
electors whose
disqualification
is not satisfac-
torily estab-
lished.
appointed for holding such court of petty sessions according to law and
at ten of the clock in the forenoon upon the days following that is to say
for the revision of the general lists on the eighteenth day of September
in each year and for the revision of the supplementary lists on the
eighteenth day of December the eighteenth day of March and the
eighteenth day of June in each year and every such court may be
adjourned and if for one hour after the time appointed for holding any
such court or to which any court has been adjourned two justices or a
police magistrate shall not be present then any one justice and if none
be present then the clerk of the court of petty sessions (herein called the
clerk of the revision court) may adjourn the court to a future day
Provided that no such court shall be adjourned beyond eight days from
the day hereby appointed for holding the same.
XXXIX. The revision court for each division shall at the time
and place aforesaid revise as hereinafter provided the general or supple-
mentary lists as the case may be which shall have been last made out by
the registrar of the division and transmitted to" the clerk of the court
and the registrar or if he be unavoidably prevented some person on his
behalf shall attend the court and shall produce to the said court all
books and butts of electors’ rights and notices of objection and news-
papers containing lists of the names of persons objected to and other
books lists papers and documents connected with his office which shall
be in the custody of the registrar or under his control and the clerk of
the court shall produce to the court the several lists which shall have
been transmitted to him as herein provided.
XL. The revision court shall have authority to hear receive and
examine evidence and by summons under the hand of any one of the
justices composing the court to require all such persons as they may
think fit to appear personally before them at a time and place to be
named in such summons and to produce to the court all such books and
papers in their possession or under their control as may appear necessary
for the purpose of their examination and any person so required as
aforesaid who shall without just excuse neglect or refuse to comply
with the tenor of such summons or having appeared before the said
court shall without just excuse refuse to be examined on oath or affir-
mation concerning the premises or to take such oath or affirmation or
having taken such oath or affirmation to answer such questions concerning
the premises as shall be put to him shall and may be dealt with in all
respects as by the seventh section of the statute passed in the twelfth
year of Her Majesty’s reign chapter XLIII. persons so refusing or
neglecting are to be dealt with in such like case.
XLI. The said court shall upon hearing in open court determine
by the decision of a majority of them upon all matters submitted for
their decision as hereinafter mentioned and the chairman of the court
who may be chosen at the commencement of the court from amongst
themselves by the voices of the majority of justices present or if they be
equally divided in opinion then by lot shall besides his own vote have a
casting vote.
XLII. The revision court shall retain on the list under revision
the names of all persons to whom no objection shall have been duly
made and shall also retain on the list the name of every person who
shall have been objected to by any other person unless the party so
objecting shall appear in person in support of such objection and prove
the due delivery of his notice of objection and publication thereof in
the list of objections and when the name of any person inserted in any
list shall have been duly objected to and the person objecting shall
appear in person in support of such objection and make proof of the
matters aforesaid the court shall require proof of so much of the quali-
fication of the person so objected to as shall be embraced in the grounds
of objection so to be stated as aforesaid and no more and in case such


qualification of such person shall not be proved to the satisfaction of
the court the court shall expunge the name of every such person from
the list and shall also expunge therefrom the name of every person ol
whose death the court shall be satisfied by evidence or otherwise or who
shall when the vote is for the Legislative Assembly have his name m
the roll (if any) of rate paying electors for the division and the court
shall correct any mistake and supply any omission which shall be
proved to have been made in the list in respect of the name or place ot
abode of any person who shall be included therein or in the local
description of his residence or qualification Provided always that no
person’s name shall be expunged from any list except in the case of
death or of his name being upon the list of ratepaying electors unless
notice shall have been given as is hereinbefore required m that behalf.
XLIII. If from any cause the name of any person to whom an elec-
tor’s right shall have been issued and who shall by reason thereof have
been entitled to have his name inserted in any ordinary list shall have
been omitted therefrom and if such person shall produce to the revision
court by which such list shall be revised the elector’s right so issued to
him as aforesaid such court may after inspection of the butt of such
right in possession of the registrar and on such evidence being given as
may be required insert the name of such person together with the
several particulars relating to the same and appearing in such elector’s
right in such list so under revision.
XLIV. If under the provisions hereinbefore contained the name ot
any person shall have been expunged from any list by the revision
court the elector’s right in respect of which such person shall have been
entered in such list or in any roll from which the same may have been
made shall be deemed to all intents and purposes to, be. as to the
division to which the same shall relate a defaced elector s right under
the provisions hereof and any substituted right which such person may
afterwards obtain for the same shall for purpose of entry in any
future list be deemed to be an original elector’s right according to the
purport thereof.
XLY. The revision court may order the clerk of the court to cause
notice of objection in the form in schedule J to be forthwith given to
any person whose name shall appear upon any list under revision by
such court and who shall be deemed by such court not to be entitled
to be retained thereon or to be left at or sent by post in a letter ad-
dressed to such person at the premises at which by the list he shall
appear to reside and may adjourn the question relating to such name
to some future day not less than three days from the making of such
order to which such court shall be lawfully adjourned for the revision
of such list and such clerk shall not be bound to appear in support of
such objection nor shall costs be awarded against such clerk in respect
of any such objection in any case whatsoever and on proof of the clerk
having so given such notice the court may and shall proceed as in other
cases of objection.
XLVI. In case it shall appear to the court that any person has made
or attempted to sustain any frivolous or vexatious objection to any
name being retained on any list it shall be lawful for them to award
such costs not exceeding five pounds as to them shall seem meet to be
paid by such person to the person resisting such objection and the same
may in default of payment be recovered before any justice.
XL VII. The chairman of the Revision court shall in open court write
his initials against the names struck out as aforesaid from any list and
against any part of any list in which any mistake shall have been cor-
rected or omission supplied and shall sign his name to every page of the
list so settled and shall then cause to be written at the foot or end of
each list a certificate that the same has been revised and is correct and
the justices present shall date and severally sign such certificate.
Mistakes in lists
may he correc-
ted'or omissions
supplied.
Name omitted
from list may
he inserted by-
revision court.
Provision when
name expunged.
Revision court
may order clerk
to give notice
of objection to
persons on list
and adjourn the
question rela-
ting to such
names.
Costs may be
awarded in
cases of frivo-
lous objection.
Mode of certifying
lists.


Certified lists to
be delivered to
registrar.
Who will prepare
roll 3.
Have them print-
ed.
And transmit
them to return-
ing officer.
Copies may be
purchased.
Such rolls to be
the “ Ordinary”
Electoral Rolls.
Lists or docu-
ments not to be
invalidated.
When no revision
made Governor
in Council to
appoint another
day for such
revision.
Unlawful posses-
sion &c. of
blank certifi-
cates a misde-
meanor.
Transfer &c. of
elector’s right
prohibited.
Ratepaying elec-
tors on roll not
XLYIII. The list so signed and certified shall be forthwith delivered
1 to the registrar and the registrar shall forthwith cause the names there-
on to be copied and printed in a roll to be called the general roll or the
1 first second or third supplementary roll as the case may be and arranged
in alphabetical order of the surnames in the forms contained in and
with the several particulars required by schedules K and L respectively
and shall prefix to every name in such roll a number beginning such
numbers at the first name on the said roll with the number one and
continuing them on in regular arithmetical series to the last name
thereon and shall cause a sufficient number of copies of such roll to be
printed and shall before or on the twelfth day of October in the case of
the general roll and if the roll be a supplementary roll before or on
such one of the following days that is to say the twelfth day of January
the twelfth day of April and the twelfth day of July as shall next suc-
ceed the revision thereof sign and transmit the said roll to the returning
officer for the province or district and shall also furnish to him from
time to time so many copies thereof as shall be required and shall
furnish copies to any person requiring them on the payment of a price
for the same to be determined as hereinafter mentioned.
XLIX. Each printed roll so signed by the registrar and transmitted
to the returning officer shall be an ordinary electoral roll for the division
of the province or district as the case may be and be called according
to the tenor thereof the general roll or the first second or third supple-
mentary roll for the division and shall remain in force until the coming
into operation of a new general roll hereunder whether such new
general roll shall have been made at the time herein appointed for
the purpose or at any time afterwards.
L. No list or other document shall be invalidated by reason only
that it shall not have been printed kept or published in the place
or manner or for the time herein required for such purposes
respectively.
LI. If from any cause me revision of any lists awaiting revision
under this Act shall not have been made or completed within the time
herein appointed for that purpose it shall be lawful for the Governor
in Council to appoint a day not more than twenty days from the last
day upon which such revision might have been made to be the day for
holding a revision court for revising the said lists and such day shall as
to all such Acts and proceedings as shall yet remain to be done or had
with respect to such lists be deemed to be for all intents and purposes
the day appointed hereby for such revision and the time herein
appointed for the transmission of the roll shall be extended in the same
proportion.
LII. If any person without the authority of the minister in whose
department this Act shall for the time being be administered and
without lawful excuse the proof whereof shall be upon the person
charged shall print supply issue or have in his possession any certificate
in the form or resembling or apparently intended to resemble the form
set forth in schedules B C D or E or shall forge or utter knowing the
same to be forged any certificate or elector’s, right he shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
LIII. Save in the cases herein provided for no transfer delivery
pledge sale or gift of an elector’s right shall be valid against the person
to whom the same was issued and any justice on complaint of any such
person that any other person detains or has in his possession any such
elector’s right and on proof of the same and of due demand and of
refusal to deliver up such right to the person to whom it was issued
may order that the same be delivered up to such last-mentioned person
and every person so detaining an elector’s right shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding ten pounds.
Llv. If any person whose name shall be upon a roll of ratepaying


electors for any division shall knowingly and wilfully apply to the
registrar of such division for the issue of an elector’s right in respect of
the Legislative Assembly for such division he shall for such offence
forfeit and pay on conviction a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
LY. In the third year after the making of the first general list
hereunder and in each third year afterwards the registrar for each
division of a province or district shall at the time hereby appointed in
that behalf make out the ordinary general list not from any ordinary
general or supplementary rolls as hereinbefore mentioned but only
from the elector’s rights issued for the division of the province or
district as the case may be to persons who shall since the making out
of the last ordinary general list for such division have taken out electors
rights for such division Provided that all persous who shall be holders
of electors’ rights for such division may after the making of the last
such list have renewed electors’ rights in the like form and. tenor issued
to them on delivering up such first-mentioned electors’ rights and all
the provisions hereof relating to defaced electors’ rights shall in such
case so far as relates to such issue apply to the electors’ rights issued
under this section.
Past 111. —Rolls of Ratepayino Electors.
LYI. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
law Act or statute all persons who shall under the Acts relating to
the corporations of the City of Melbourne and Town of .Geelong and
municipal institutions or under The Municipal Corporations Act 1863
or under The Local Government Act 1863 be enrolled upon the citizen
or burgess roll of the said city or town or any ward thereof respectively
or upon the ratepayers’ roll of any municipal district or the burgess roll
of any borough or any ward thereof or the voters’ roll cf any shire or
district or any riding or subdivision thereof respectively constituted
by or under the two last mentioned Acts respectively in. respect of
rateable property situated in any division*of an electoral district shall
be entitled to be enrolled at the time and in the manner next herein-
after mentioned upon a roll of ratepaying electors for such division and
being so enrolled shall be qualified and entitled to vote in the election
of members of the Legislative Assembly for such electoral district in
such division thereof. . ,
LVII. The town clerk of the said city or town and ot each sucn
borough and the secretary or clerk of the council or board of each such
shire and district and the clerk or other like officer of any municipal
council shall between the first and twelfth days of August in each year
make out in the form contained in schedule M for each division or part
of a division of every electoral district which shall be within such city-
town borough shire or district from every citizen or burgess roll of such
city town or borough or ward thereof respectively in force for the time
being and from every voters’ roll for such shire or district or subdivision
thereof in force for the time being a separate roll in alphabetical order
of the surnames of all persons who shall be entered upon any such
citizen or burgess roll or voters’ roll in respect of rateable property
situated within such division or part of a division as the case may be
and shall certify the same under his hand and transmit the same so
certified to the registrar of the district to which or to part of which the
same shall relate. , , „ , , . ,
LVIII. If before or on the twentieth day of August m each year the
registrar of any such division shall have, received as aforesaid from any
or”all of such town clerks secretaries, or clerks as aforesaid a greater
number than one of such rolls relating each to separate, parts o any
division of which he shall be registrar he shall forthwith make out
from the same in the form in schedule N one roll for such division
for
Periods for mak-
ing out general
lists.
Roll of “ Rate-
paying Electors
for Legislative
Assembly.”
, .
To c^k c s lcr £ f s
trict councils in
electoral «vi-
rolls,
And transmit
to re g ,s-
Ke^ rar o £


ed 6
mit one to the
returning of-
C °purchased y be
Duties of regis-
oidy'for'a'divl-
sion be sent,
Copies may be
purchased.
Boils of “rate-
toyiremataorin
force till. new
roils prepared,
Attendance of
registrar regu-
lated.
Appropriation of
fees.
Penalty for dis-
obedience of
this Act.
Appointment of
returning of-
ficers.
in alphabetical order of surnames of all persons named in such
several rolls and shall prefix to each name on such roll a number
beginning such numbers with the first name on such roll with the
number one and continuing them on in regular arithmetical series to
the last name on such roll and shall cause a sufficient number of copies
of the roll so made out to he printed and shall certify under his hand
one of such copies and send to the returning officer of the district the
copy so certified and shall from time to time furnish to him so many
more copies thereof as shall be required and also furnish copies thereof
to any person requiring them on payment of a reasonable price for the
same.
LIX. If before or on the day last aforesaid the registrar of any such
division shall have received as aforesaid but one such roll in respect of
such division whether for a part or the whole thereof he shall forthwith
prefix to each name on such roll a number beginning such numbers at
the first name on the said roll with the number one and continuing them
on in regular arithmetical series to the last name thereon and cause a
sufficient number of copies thereof to be printed and certify under his
hand one of such copies and transmit to • the returning officer of the
district the copy so certified and shall also furnish to him from time to
time so many copies thereof as shall be required and also furnish copies
thereof to any person requiring them on payment of a reasonable price
for the same,
LX. The rolls so certified and transmitted as in this part before
provided and called herein “ rolls of ratepaying electors ” shall severally
become and be electoral rolls for the district in the division to which
the same shall refer and shall each continue in force until another roll
of ratepaying electors shall have been so certified and transmitted as
herein provided whether such new roll shall have been made at the
time herein appointed for the purpose or at any time afterwards.
Paet'TV. —Miscellaneous.
LXI. It shall be lawful for the minister in whose department this
Act shall for the time being be administered from time to time to make
and to revoke rules and regulations as to the days hours and places on
and at which any registrar shall attend at his office or offices for the
purposes of this Act and as to what shall be deemed a reasonable price
or payment for any voters’ rolls or other matters regarding which it is
hereinbefore provided that reasonable price be paid for the same.
• LXII. All moneys received by any registrar or other officer under
the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be received on account of
and be paid to the consolidated revenue of Victoria.
LXIII. If any registrar secretary clerk or other officer or person
shall be guilty of any wilful misfeasance or wilful or negligent act of
commission or omission contrary to the provisions of this chapter he
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAP. 11.
Peoceeuing-s at Elections.
Past I.— Peeliminaey Aeeangkements.
LXIV. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from time to
time to appoint a fit person to be returning officer for each province and
each district and every such person at any time may if it seem fit be
removed by the Governor in Council from or may resign such office and
no person shall be so appointed who shall at the time be a candidate at
any election for the province or district as the case may be for which
such appointment is to be made.


LXV. No returning officer for any province or district and no person
who shall have been such returning officer and shall not by writing
under his hand addressed to the Governor have resigned such his office
at least fourteen days before the day of nomination for any election for
the same respectively and no deputy returning officer for any province
or district shall be a candidate or be elected or returned or be or
continue a member for such province or district as the case may be.
LXVI. Every returning officer shall before he shall enter upon any
of the duties hereby assigned to him make and sign before some justice
a declaration to the effect following :
I TA. B.] do solemnly declare that I will faithfully and im-
partially according to the best of my skill and judgment exercise
and perform all the powers authorities and duties reposed in or
required of me by “ The Electoral Act 1863” as returning officer
for the electoral province \or the electoral district of
as the case may require\.
LXVII. The Governor in Council shall within thirty days after the
commencement hereof and afterwards as he. shall see fit from time to
time appoint within and for each division of every province and district
respectively one place and not more for taking the poll in such division
at contested elections for the province or district and every such
appointment may revoke Provided that if the returning officer of the
province or district and any police magistrate or superintendent of
police acting in the locality shall by writing under thcir hands certify to
the Governor that it is necessary so to do it shall be lawful for the
Governor in Council from time to time to appoint as aforesaid m and
for such division one or more polling piace or places and the appoint-
ment of such place or places or any of them from time to time to revoke
Provided also that no appointment of any polling place in or for any
division of a province or district shall be revoked between the issue of
any writ for election for the same and the return of such writ.
Part ll.—Conduct of Election.
LXVIII. Writs for the election of members to serve in the Legis-
lative Council in all cases of vacancy therein whether by retirement in
rotation or otherwise and for every general election of members to
serve in the Legislative Assembly shall be issued by the Governor for
each province and district as occasion may require. .
LXIX. Whenever after any general election of the Legislative
Assembly and before the dissolution or other lawful determination of
such Assembly any seat therein shall have become vacant a writ for the
election of a member to serve in the place so vacant shall be issued by
the Speaker of the said Assembly under his hand and seal but if at the
time of such occurrence of any such vacancy there be no Speaker and
the Assembly be not in session or if the Speaker be absent from
Victoria such writ shall be issued by the Governor under his hand and
the seal of the colony.
LXX. The day before which nominations of candidates at and tor
any election must be made under this Act hereinafter called the day
of nomination and the day of polling should the election be contested
shall respectively be appointed by the Governor or the Speaker who-
soever according to the provisions hereof shall issue the writ Provided
that the day of nomination shall not be less than seven nor more than
twenty-one clear days from the day of such issue and that the day of
polling shall be not less than three nor more than fourteen clear days
from the day of nomination. .
LXXI. For the purpose of every general election of members to
serve in the Legislative Assembly the electoral districts shall be divided
into three classes according to the schedule PP and the day of nomina-
Returning officer
or deputy not
to be a candi-
date.
Returning officer
to make decla-
ration.
Governor in Coun-
cil to appoint
polling places.
Governor to issue
ri ‘ s n f ge c n 0 e u r '’j
elections,
Speaker to do so
in other cases -
Nomination day
to be appointed,
when polling to
take place,
nays of nomina-
elections! 61 ' 6 ™ 1


Notice to be given
by Speaker be-
fore issuing
writ.
When and to
whom writ re-
turnable.
What to be con-
tained in the
writ.
Duties of return-
ing officer on
receipt of writ.
Returning officer
to appoint sub-
stitute.
When substitute
may act.
Returning officer
to post names
of candidates.
How candidate
to be nomi-
nated.
tion for all districts in class numbered 2 shall not be less than seven
days nor more than ten days after the last day of polling for any of
the districts in the class numbered 1 and the days of nomination for
all the districts of class numbered 3 shall be not less than seven days
nor more than ten days after the last day of polling in any of the
districts in the class numbered 2.
LXXII. At least two clear days before the Speaker shall issue any
such writ as aforesaid he shall give notice in writing under his hand to
the minister in whose department this Act shall for the time being be
administered of his intention to issue the same and such minister shall
forthwith publish such notice in the Government Gazette.
LXXIII. Every writ shall be returnable to the Governor or the
Speaker as the case may be on such day within forty days from the
day of issue thereof as shall be appointed by the Governor or the
Speaker and named therein and in every such writ shall also be named
the day of nomination the day for taking the poll in the event of the
election being contested and the polling places lawfully appointed for
taking the poll at such election in the several divisions of the province
or district and every such writ may be in the form contained in schedule
YY and shall be directed to the returning officer of the province or
district as the case may be.
LXXIV. The returning officer shall upon the receipt by him of any
writ of election forthwith endorse thereon the date of such receipt and
shall also forthwith give public notice by advertisement in some news-
paper published in the province or district or if none such be published
then in a Melbourne daily newspaper of the purport of the said writ and
of the day of nomination the day of polling the polling places and the
return day respectively mentioned therein and also of a place within the
province or district to be appointed by such returning officer at which he
will receive the nomination papers and payments hereinafter mentioned.
LXXY. The returning officer shall forthwith on the receipt by him of
any such writ of election as (yforesaid appoint by writing under his hand
some fit person to be substitute as hereinafter mentioned for such
returning officer and such returning officer shall in person or by such
substitute attend at all reasonable hours in the daytime in the interval
between the receipt of such writ and the day of nomination at the place
so appointed for receiving the said nomination papers and payments and
if at any time during such interval the returning officer shall be absent
at the time or place hereby appointed for the doing or suffering by him
of any act or thing relating to such election then such substitute may
and shall do or suffer such act or thing or if during such interval the
returning officer shall die or if by reason of his sickness or any other
unavoidable cause he shall be unable to do or suffer such acts or things
and shall notify the same to such substitute then such substitute may
and shall as and for the returning officer do and suffer all such acts and
things.
LXXVI. The returning officer shall upon each day between the
receipt by him of any writ of election and the day of nomination for
such election mentioned in such writ post and keep posted outside the
place so named as aforesaid for receiving the nomination papers in some
public and conspicuous place the names and descriptions of all persons
who shall previously have duly become candidates for such election.
LXXVII. In order that any person may become or be a candidate at
any election he shall be nominated by not less than ten persons entitled
to vote at such election in manner following (that is to say) after the
issue of the writ and before the day of nomination there shall be
delivered to the returning officer who shall if required give a receipt for the
same a nomination paper in the form in schedule 0 naming such person
as a candidate at such election and signed by the persons nominating as
aforesaid and having at the foot thereof a statement under the hand of


the person so nominated that he consents to such nomination and such
person or some person for him or on his behalf shall at the time of the
delivery of such paper pay to the returning officer in the case of an
election for the Legislative Council the sum of one hundred pounds and
in the case of an election for the Legislative Assembly the sum of fifty
pounds to be dealt with as hereinafter provided and no person who shall
not have been so nominated or by or for whom or on whose behalf such
payment shall not have been so made shall be or be deemed to be a
candidate at any election for the purposes of this part of the Apt.
LXXYIII. Where a poll shall take place as hereinafter provided the
returning officer shall apply the moneys so paid to him as aforesaid at any
election by all such candidates as shall not afterwards have received at
the same a number of votes equal at least to one-fifth part of the votes
received by the successful candidate if only one or by such one of the
successful candidates if there shall be more than one as shall have
received the smallest number of votes in and towards defraying the
necessary expenses whether incurred before or after such payment
of all such acts and things relating to such election as he is hereby
authorised or required to do or provide and shall repay to each of the
candidates who shall have retired from his candidature under the
provisions hereinafter contained or who shall have been returned without
a poll or who shall so have received a number of votes equal at least to
such fifth part whether declared elected or not all moneys so paid by or
for him or them respectively.
LXXIX. Every returning officer shall keep a separate account for each
election held by him of all moneys received and expended by him as
aforesaid at and about such election and shall not less than three nor
more than six months after the declaration of the polling at such elec-
tion send to the Commissioners of Audit a copy of such account certified
under his hand together with all receipts accounts and vouchers relating
to the same and the said commissioners shall forthwith examine and
compare the same respectively and shall immediately after such exami-
nation and comparison make and sign a report of the result thereof
respectively in such form as the Governor in Council shall from time to
time direct and shall sign an acquittance for so much of such moneys as
shall have been ascertained by them to have been duly and properly
expended and for the said purposes the commissioners shall have the
same powers as by the sections numbered from forty to forty-three both
inclusive of the Act numbered LXXXVI. are vested in the said commis-
sioners for the purposes of that Act.
LXXX. If the number of persons who shall have become candidates
at any election shall not exceed the number of members then and there
to be elected the returning officer shall at noon on the day pf nomination
at the place named as aforesaid for the delivery of the nomination papers
publicly declare such candidates to be duly elected and make his return
accordingly.
LXXXI. If the number of such persons who shall have become can-
didates shall exceed the number of members to be elected then for
deciding between such candidates a poll shall take place on the day
named in the writ for that purpose and at the several polling places for
the province or district and the returning officer shall at noon on the
day and at the place named as aforesaid for the delivery of the nomi-
nation papers publicly announce that a poll will be so taken and the
names of the persons who shall have become candidates and shall also
forthwith publish in some newspaper published in the province or dis-
trict the like announcement or if none such be published then in a
Melbourne daily newspaper.
LXXXII. Forthwith after a poll shall stand appointed for any election
the returning officer shall cause voting papers to be printed with the
Christian names and surnames of all the candidates at such election and
B
Appropriation
under preced-
ing section,
Separate
such moneys
and copies to
£ e om Xio n ers°
0 f Audit,
Duties of the
commissioners,
Duties of retum-
s^ e 0 r f w c h a e "
didatcs does not
be elected,
when candidates
c^ e em “““ to
be elected poll
t 0 t>e taken,
Voting papers to
be printed and
signed.


How and when
retire l8 * 6 ™ ay
Ana duty of re-
tiiereupon° fflCer
Bo iths to be erec-
ted or rooms
hired.
When more than
one booth where
electors to vote.
Common school
and other build-
ings may be
used as polling
booths.
How booths to be
arranged and
fitted.
Beturning officer
to preside at
of no other persons in full in the form in schedule Q and shall sign or
initial a sufficient number of such voting papers to be used as hereinafter
mentioned and if the Christian names and surnames of any two or more
candidates be the same they shall be distinguished upon such voting
papers by the addition of their residence and occupation and the
directions in the said schedule shall be of the same force as if they had
been provisions contained in this Act.
LXXXIII. If any candidate for any election and any seven of the
persons having signed the paper nominating him as aforesaid shall be
desirous that he retire from such candidature such candidate and such
seven persons as aforesaid not later than two clear days before the day
of polling may sign and deliver to the returning officer a notice in the
form in schedule R stating that such candidate so retires and may publish
in some newspaper published in the province or district or if none such
be published then in a Melbourne daily newspaper a copy of such notice
and the returning officer on the receipt of such notice and on sufficient
proof of such publication as aforesaid shall erase the name of such person
so retiring from the voting papers to be used at the said election if any
of such papers shall have been printed and such person shall thereupon
not be capable of being elected at such election and if the number of
candidates shall thereby be reduced to the number of persons to be
elected at such election then the returning officer shall forthwith declare
the remaining candidates to be duly elected.
LXXXIY. For taking the poll at any election the returning officer
shall cause booths to be erected or rooms to be hired or otherwise
provided and used as such booths at each polling place as occasion may
require but so that there shall be at each polling place one booth at least
for every six hundred electors entitled to vote at such polling place and
for any fractional number exceeding six hundred or any multiple thereof
and if under this provision there shall be more than one booth at any
polling place there shall be affixed over the entrance of each booth in
succession so many letters of the alphabet in their alphabetical order as
shall denote the booth at each elector according to the initial
letter of his surname is to vote and no elector shall be permitted to vote
in any booth save that which is so denoted by the initial letter of his
surname Provided always that no polling booth shall be in any house
licensed for the sale of fermented or spirituous liquors or upon the
premises appertaining to such house.
LXXXY. The returning officer for every electoral province or district
is hereby empowered at any election to take and use as a polling booth
or polling booths to be occupied for that purpose during the day of
election but no longer upon giving seven days’ notice of his intention to
that effect any room or rooms of competent space in any school-house or
building supported wholly or in part by any public funds or by any per-
petual endowment or which has been built or is supported wholly or in
part by any Grant and he shall pay the full costs of repairing any injury
or damage which may be occasioned to the premises or the furniture
thereof by the said use such hire and damages in the event of the re-
turning officer and the managers trustees or owners of the said premises
differing about the same to be recovered upon complaint of such managers
trustees or owners before two justices of the peace.
LXXXVI. Each booth shall be so divided or arranged that there shall
be in the same one or more inner compartments opening only into that
part of the booth in which the ballot box is kept and the returning
officer or his deputy shall provide in every such compartment pencils or
pens and ink for the use of the electors and shall also provide for each
booth a box having a lock and key and with a cleft or opening therein
capable of receiving the voting papers herein mentioned.
LXXXVII. The returning officer shall preside and take the poll at
some one booth of such polling place within the province or district as


he shall see fit and such polling place shall be deemed the principal
polling place and he shall by writing under his hand appoint a deputy to
act for him and take the poll at each of the other booths of the several
polling places and may also in like manner appoint one or more persons
to be poll clerks and assist himself and his several deputies in taking
the poll as he may see fit.
LXXXVIII. Every deputy returning officer and poll clerk shall before
he shall enter upon any of the duties hereby assigned to him with regard
to any election make and sign before some justice a declaration to the
effect following—
I [A. B.] do solemnly declare that I will faithfully and impar-
tially according to the best of my skill and judgment exercise and
perform all the powers authorities and duties reposed in or
required of me by “ The Electoral Act 1863” as deputy returning
officer [or poll clerk as the case may be] with regard to the election
of a member for the province [or district of ].
LXXXIX. Before the day of polling the returning officer shall deliver
to each of the deputies for use at each polling booth copies of all rolls in
force for the division of the province or district as the case may be in
and for which the poll is to be taken thereat certified under his hand to
be true copies and shall also deliver to each deputy and himself retain
such numbers respectively of the voting papers so signed or initialed as
shall be sufficient for the use of the electors who shall be entitled to vote
at each booth at which such returning officer and deputies respectively
are to take the poll and every returning officer and deputy shall keep an
exact account of all such signed voting papers.
XC. Each candidate or if he omit to do so his nominators or any
three of them together shall be entitled to appoint in writing under his
or their hands one person to be scrutineer on behalf of such candidate at
each polling booth and every such scrutineer shall be entitled to be
present in that part of the booth in which the voting papers are received
as hereinafter provided. #
XCI. Every scrutineer before he shall act as such at any polling booth
shall make and sign before the returning officer or deputy as the case
may be who shall take the poll at such booth a declaration to the effect
following—
“ I [A.B.] (scrutineer for C. D. a candidate at the present
election for the province [or district] of ) do solemnly
declare that I will faithfully observe all the provisions of ‘ The
Electoral Act 1863 ’ which relate to such my office of scrutineer.”
XCII. The returning officer or deputy the poll clerks and the scru-
tineers duly appointed hereunder and any voters not exceeding six in
number being actually engaged in voting to be designated if necessary
by the returning officer or deputy shall alone be permitted at any one
time without the consent of the returning officer or deputy to enter or
remain in the polling room during the taking of the poll.
XCIII. Immediately before proceeding to take the poll at any booth
the returning officer or deputy as the case may be shall exhibit for the
inspection of the candidates and scrutineers and poll clerks who may be
present the box hereinbefore mentioned open and empty and shall forth-
with thereafter close and lock the same being still empty and set and
keep the said box unopened upon the table at which he is to preside
and in view of such persons as shall from time to time be present in the
polling booth and shall keep the key thereof.
XCIY. Every polling shall commence on the day appointed for the
same at nine of the clock in the forenoon and shall unless lawfully ad-
journed finally close at four of the clock in the afternoon of the same
day and shall be conducted in manner hereinafter mentioned.
XCY. Every person who shall for the time being be enrolled upon an
ordinary electoral roll in force for any division of a province or district
B 2
one booth and
appoint deputies
at others.
Poll clerks ap-
pointed.
Deputy returning
officer and poll
clerk to make
declarations.
Deputy returning
officers to be
furnished with
copies of rolls.
Duties of return-
ing officer and
deputies in
taking poll.
How scrutineers
to be appointed.
Scrutineer to
make declara-
tion.
Who may be pre-
sent in polling
room.
Returning officer
to exhibit box
before taking
the poll.
Hour of com-
mencing and
closing the poll.
Who may vote
and where.


How votes to be
tendered.
Duty of returning
officer or deputy
on vote being
tendered.
And questions
may be put.
Voter may be re-
quired to sign
book.
as the case may be and shall be the holder of an elector’s right issued
under the provisions of this Act purporting to entitle him to vote in and
for such division and shall be possessed as hereinbefore provided in that
behalf of the qualification in respect of which such right was issued and
every person who shall for the time being be enrolled on any roll of
ratepaying electors for any division of a district shall be entitled to vote
in such division of the province or district as the case may be at the
polling place for such division and no person shall vote more than once at
the same election Provided that no person shall be permitted to vote
at any election in respect of a residential qualification who has not
resided in Victoria for at least six months of the twelve months last past
before such election.
: . XCVI. Every person tendering his vote shall do so in manner follow-
ing that is to say he shall state to the returning officer or deputy his
Christian names and surname and such other particulars of those hereby
required to be expressed in the electoral roll as the said returning officer or
deputy may for the purpose only of ascertaining upon the roll the name
intended by such person require and shall also if he claim to vote as the
holder of an elector’s right exhibit to the returning officer or deputy the
elector’s right which shall purport to entitle him to exercise such right
of voting and shall demand a voting paper.
XCVII. When any person shall have tendered his vote at any polling
place in manner hereinbefore required the returning officer or' deputy
shall ascertain that the name given by such person is upon the elector’s
right if any exhibited by him and also as the case may be upon an
ordinary roll or upon the roll of ratepaying electors in force for the
division for which such polling place is appointed of the province or
district and shall compare such elector’s right with such name upon the
roll and the particulars stated against the same so as by inspection to
satisfy himself of the identity of the person to whom such elector’s right
shall have been issued with the person so named on the roll.
XCVIII. After having found upon the proper roll the name intended
by any person tendering his 'vote the returning officer or deputy may
if he think fit and shall if required so to do by any scrutineer or by any
two persons entitled to vote at the polling place at which he presides put
to any such person before he shall have received a voting paper and not
afterwards the questions following hereinafter called “ The prescribed
questions ” (that is to say)—
1. Are you the person whose name appears as [A. B. No. ]in
the general roll [or as the case may require the first (second
or third) supplementary] roll [or the roll of ratepaying
electors] in force for this division of the province [or
district] ?
2. [lf the person claims as the holder of an elector s right ] Was
the elector’s right now exhibited by you issued to you and
have you now the qualification in respect of which the same
was issued or the like qualification in some other division
of this province or district and in what division and is the
signature [A. B.] appearing thereon your signature 1
3. [lf he claims for a residential qualification] Have you resided
in Victoria for at least six months of the twelve months now
last past ?
4. Have you already voted in this province [or district] at the
present election P
XCIX. The returning officer or deputy may if he think fit and shall
if required so to do by any scrutineer or by any two persons entitled to
vote at the polling place at which he presides require any person
tendering his vote before he shall receive a voting paper to sign his name
in a book to be kept for that purpose and if such person claim to vote as
the holder of an elector’s right the returning officer shall compare such


signature with the signature purporting to be that of the holder of such
elector’s right and appearing thereon as hereinbefore provided.
C. The returning officer or deputy may if he think fit and shall
if called upon so to do by any scrutineer require of any person tendering
his vote before he shall receive a voting paper to make a solemn decla-
ration against bribery in the manner and form following (that is to say)—
I [A. B.] do solemnly declare that I have not received or had
by myself or any person whatsoever in trust for me or for my use
or benefit or for the use or benefit of any member of my family
or kindred or any friend or dependent directly or indirectly any
sum of money office place of emolument gift or reward or any
promise or security for nor do I expect to receive any money
office place of emolument gift or reward by way of consideration
either expressed implied or understood for giving my vote at this
election.
Cl. If any person having tendered his vote to whom the pre-
scribed questions shall be so put as aforesaid shall refuse or omit dis-
tinctly to answer the same and each part thereof or shall not answer
absolutely in the affirmative such of the first three of the prescribed
questions as shall apply to his claim to vote naming truly as to the third
question the division in which his present qualification arises and abso-
lutely iu the negative the fourth of the prescribed questions and if any
person having tendered his vote as the holder of any elector’s right and
being so required to sign his name as aforesaid shall refuse or omit to
do so and if any person having tendered his vote as a ratepaying elector
shall being required and being able so to do refuse or omit to sign his
name as aforesaid and if any person having tendered his vote and being
so required to make such declaration as aforesaid shall refuse or omit so
to do he shall be and be deemed prohibited from voting then or after-
wards at such election and shall be guilty of an offence and on con-
viction shall forfeit and pay for the same a penalty not exceeding twenty
pounds. $
CII. No person having tendered his vote as the holder or a substituted
elector’s right shall be entitled to exercise the right of voting or to
demand a voting paper if such substituted elector’s right shall appear by
the date thereon to have been issued within one month before the day
appointed for the polling at the election at which such substituted
elector’s right shall be exhibited.
CIII. When any person shall have tendered his vote in manner here-
inbefore mentioned and the name in which he shall demand to vote shall
appear as well in an ordinary roll in force for the division of the province
or district as in the elector’s right produced by him or shajl appear in the
roll of ratepaying electors in force for the division of the district the
returning officer or deputy shall unless such person be prohibited from
voting for some of the causes hereinbefore mentioned forthwith write
upon one of the voting papers so signed or initialed as aforesaid the
number corresponding to the number set opposite such person’s name in
such roll together with the figures and initial letters of the title of such
roll and deliver to such person such voting paper and shall forthwith
mark upon a certified copy of such roll against the name of such person
the fact of his having received such voting paper and mark such elector’s
right with his initials and with the date expressed in the following
figures that is to say the number of the day in the month the number of
the month in the year and the number of the year in the century of our
Lord and return the same to such person.
CIY. Every person to whom a voting paper shall have been delivered
as aforesaid shall forthwith retire alone to some unoccupied compartment
of the polling booth and shall there alone and without delay strike out
from such voting paper the names of the candidates for whom he does
not intend to vote so and shall forthwith fold up such voting paper in
Declaration
0 f voter,
on f li *® i 1 OI t 1 o
questions ns s 7gn
name or make
tlon an
No vote under
i„ one mouth,
Duty of returning
appears in or-
td“,asry™}}teleoc;
ro n 0 f ratepay-
ing electors,
How vote to be
recorded,


Number of can-
didates to be
voted for.
Duty of returning
officer when a
second vote is
tendered for one
name.
His duty when
signatures ap-
pear to differ.
How vote of
blind or unedu-
cated voter to
taken.
No voting paper
to be taken out
of polling booth.
Obstruction of
proceedings an
offence.
False answer to
questions &c.or
double voting a
misdemeanor.
Returning officer
or deputy may
cause arrest of
offenders under
this Act.
such manner as will conceal from those there present the names of the
candidates and deposit it in the box aforesaid in the presence of the
returning officer or deputy.
. CV. At every election for any province or district each elector may
give and exercise as many votes as there are members to be then and
there elected for such district and at every such election every such
elector may give not more than one vote to each or any candidate not
exceeding the number of members then to be elected and any voting
paper recording more then the legal number of votes at any election
shall be rejected at the close of the poll.
p VI- If a t any polling booth any voting paper shall have been
delivered to any person having tendered his vote and if any other
person shall afterwards tender his vote at such booth as of the same
person in whose name such first-mentioned person shall have received
such voting paper the returning officer or deputy shall put to the person
so secondly tendering the prescribed questions and also shall require
him to sign his name in manner aforesaid and such person shall and may
be dealt with in all respects in like manner as any other person having
tendered his vote but the voting paper of such person shall not be
deposited in the box or allowed by the returning officer or deputy and
shall be set aside by him for separate custody.
CVII. If any person shall have tendered his vote as the holder of an
elector’s right and his writing in the book hereinbefore mentioned of the
name in which he shall demand to vote shall not in the opinion of the
returning officer or deputy be of the same handwriting as the signature
appearing upon the elector’s right produced by him and purporting to
be the signature of the holder thereof the returning officer or deputy
shall set aside for separate custody as in the next preceding section
mentioned the voting paper of such person and shall not allow the
same.
CVIII. If any person to whom a voting paper shall have been de-
livered as aforesaid shall be bjuid or being a ratepaying elector be unable
to read and. shall signify the same to the returning officer or deputy
such returning officer or deputy may and shall at the request of such
person and for him and in presence of a witness if so desired by such
holder of a voting paper in the polling booth strike out from such voting
paper the names of such candidates as such person may designate. °
CIX. During the polling at any election no person shall take any
voting paper out of the polling booth save into one of the compartments
aforesaid and no person shall enter any such compartment while any
other person shall be therein and no person being in any such compart-
ment shall remain there for a longer time than such as shall be reason-
ably required for the purpose of striking out the names from his voting
paper and any person wilfully offending against the preceding provisions
of this section or otherwise obstructing or unnecessarily delaying the
proceedings at any such polling shall on conviction forfeit and pay for
every such offence a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds.
CX. If any person to whom any of the prescribed questions shall be
so put as aforesaid shall wilfully make a false answer to the same or any
part thereof and if any person being so required to write his name as
aforesaid shall wilfully write as his own name the name of any other
person or any name not being his own name and if any person shall
wilfully make a false declaration in manner aforesaid or shall personate
any elector for the purpose of voting at any election or shall vote twice
at any election for the same province or district or wilfully or knowingly
deposit in the box at any polling place more voting papers than one he
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
CXI. Every returning officer and deputy shall have power and
authority to maintain order and keep the peace at any election or polling
held by him and without any other warrant than this Act to cause to be


arrested and taken before a justice any person reasonably suspected of
committing or attempting to commit at any polling place any of the
offences which are made misdemeanors hereby and also to cause to be
removed any person who shall obstruct the approaches to any polling
booth or wilfully or unnecessarily obstruct or delay the proceedings at
the polling or conduct himself in a disorderly manner or cause a disturb-
ance at any election and all constables and peace officers shall aid and
assist such returning officer or deputy in the performance of his duty.
CXII- Immediately upon the close of the poll the returning officer
and every deputy at the polling place at which each shall preside, shall
in the presence and subject to the inspection of such of the scrutineers
as choose to be present and the poll clerks if any but of no other persons
open the box aforesaid and proceed to ascertain the number of votes for
each candidate and every deputy shall immediately afterwards forward to
the returning officer the voting papers sealed up together with the
certified copies of the rolls supplied to him and signed by him and any
books kept by him during the polling and also in a separate parcel any
voting papers supplied to him which shall be unused and in another
separate parcel any voting papers received but set aside by him for
separate custody as aforesaid and a list signed by him and the poll clerk
of the total votes for each candidate.
CXIII. The returning officer shall make up from the lists so for-
warded by the deputy returning officers as last aforesaid the general
state of the poll and shall as soon as conveniently may be after the
taking of the poll at the principal polling place by notice signed by him
and posted in some conspicuous place and published in some newspaper
published in the province or district or if none such be published then
in a Melbourne daily newspaper announce the number of votes given
to each candidate and declare those candidates not exceeding the
number to be elected who have received at all the polling places the
greatest number of votes to be duly elected as members for the province
or district as the case may be and if two ©r more candidates shall have
received an equal number of votes the returning officer shall in such
case have the casting vote but shall not otherwise vote at such election
and the names of the persons so elected shall be endorsed on the writ
by the returning officer and the writ shall be by him returned to the
Governor or Speaker whosoever shall have issued the same within the
time specified therein.
CXIV. The returning officer shall forthwith after the declaration
of the poll cause all the voting papers to be arranged for convenient
reference as nearly as may be in the order of the numbers shown thereon
and shall cause them to be delivered to the clerk of the peace of the
court of general sessions for the district in which the place of nomina-
tion shall have been situated to be by him kept with and in like manner
in all respects as the records of his office.
CXV. When the proceedings for taking of the poll at any election
shall be interrupted or obstructed at any place by any riot or open
violence the returning officer or deputy as the case may be shall not
for such cause finally close the poll but . shall adj ourn the taking of the
poll at the polling place at which such interruption or obstruction shall
have happened to the following day and if necessary such returning
officer or deputy shall further adjourn such poll until such interruption
or obstruction shall have ceased w r hen such returning officer or deputy
shall again proceed with the taking of the poll at the place at which the
same may have been so interrupted or obstructed.
CXVI. If from any cause not being such as lastly hereinbefore
mentioned no polling shall have been opened at any booth of a polling
place for any province or district on the day named for the purpose in
any writ of election for the same the polling at such booth shall stand
adjourned to the Monday following the day upon which such polling
How and when
tained.
™ h to be
papers rolls &c.
Declaration of
re-
casting vote of
g e c t e “ rniug ot '
Arrangement and
f/J°J er ° s f a v °‘;
poll declared,
polling may be
t a e %°™ if
riot or open
violence,
Adjournment of
01 otl ' er


On adjournment
by deputy no-
tice to be given
to returning
officer.
Limit of adjourn-
ments.
Election not to be
void for want
of or defect in
title of officers.
Nor for omission
&c. of a formal
nature.
Governor in Coun-
cil to take mea-
sures to cure
defect.
Penalty for ne-
glect &c. by re-
turning officer.
Meaning of term
“ candidate.”
w S”r,fs U hable of &r
bribery. r
was to have taken place and the returning officer or deputy as the case
may be shall forthwith cause public notice to be given thereof.
EXVII. Where any poll shall have been adjourned as aforesaid by
any deputy of the returning officer such deputy shall forthwith give
notice thereof to the returning officer and in every such case and also
where any polling shall stand adjourned as lastly hereinbefore men-
tioned the returning officer Bliall not notify the total number of votes
given or finally declare upon which candidates the election has fallen
until the poll so adjourned shall have been finally closed and the
voting papers transmitted to the returning officer.
CXVIII. No such adjournment as aforesaid of the proceedings at
any election shall be made or extend to the day named as the return
day in the writ for such election and if the polling shall not have been
completed before the day so named the returning officer shall forthwith
endorse that fact upon the writ and shall return the same.
CXIX. No election shall be liable to be questioned by reason
only of any defect in the title or any want of title of the person by or
before whom such election or any polling for the same shall have been
held if such person have been actually appointed to preside or have been
acting in the office giving the right so to preside at such election.
CXX. No election shall be void in consequence only of there
having been no returning officer at the time of the issue of the writ or
of any delay in the return of the writ and where any impediment mis-
feasance or omission of a merely formal nature shall have happened the
Governor in Council may take all such measures as may be necessary
for removing such impediment or rectifying such misfeasance or omission
or may declare any or all of the proceedings at or for any election
valid as to and notwithstanding such impediment misfeasance or omission
and every such Order in Council shall be forthwith published in the
Government Gazette.
CXXI. If the returning officer of any province or district or if
any person having been dnAy appointed hereunder to act as such
returning officer or his substitute or deputy returning officer at any
election for the same respectively and undertaken so to act shall be
guilty of any wilful misfeasance or wilful or negligent act of commission
or omission contrary to any of the provisions herein contained he shall
upon conviction by and before any court of general sessions having
jurisdiction in any part of such province or district forfeit and pay for
every such offence a penalty not less than ten or more than two hundred
pounds and every such court may and shall hear and determine such
charge in a summary way.
Past lll. —Regulation oe Elections.
CXXII. For the purposes of the succeeding provisions of this Act
the words “ candidate at an election ” and the words “ candidate at any
election” shall include all persons elected to serve in Parliament at such
election and all persons nominated as candidates at such election or who
shall on or after the day of the issuing the writ for such election or after
the dissolution or vacancy in consequence of which such writ shall have
been issued have declared their intention of becoming candidates at such
election or their consent so to do and the words “ at an election ” “ at any
election” and “ during any election” as used in this part of this Act shall
mean and include the whole period from the day of nomination named in
any writ of election until the day on which the returning officer shall pub-
licly publish and declare the result of such election both days inclusive.
CXXIII. The following persons shall be guilty of bribery and shali
be punished accordingly—
(l.) Every person who shall directly or indirectly by himself or
by any other person on his behalf give or lend or agree to
give or lend or shall offer promise or procure or promise or


endeavor to procure any money or valuable consideration
to or for any elector or any other person on behalf of any
elector in order to induce any elector to vote or refrain from
voting or shall knowingly do any such act as aforesaid on
account of such elector having voted or refrained from
voting at any election.
(2.) Every person who shall directly or indirectly by himself or
by any other person on his behalf give or procure or agree
to give or procure offer promise or promise to procure or to
endeavor to procure any office place or employment to or
for any elector or any other person or who shall retain or
dismiss any elector or other person in or from any office
place or employment in order to induce such elector to vote
or refrain from voting or shall knowingly do any such act as
aforesaid on account of any elector having voted or refrained
from voting at any election.
(3.) Every person who shall directly or indirectly by himself or
by any other person on his behalf make any such gift loan
offer promise procurement or agreement as aforesaid to or
for any person in order to induce such person to procure
or endeavor to procure the return of any person to serve
as a member of the Council or Assembly respectively or the
vote of any elector at any election.
(4.) Every person who shall upon or in consequence of any such
gift loan offer promise procurement or agreement procure
or engage promise or endeavor to procure the return of any
person to serve as a member of the Council or Assembly or
the vote of any elector at any election
(5.) Every person who shall advance or pay or cause to be
advanced or paid any money to or for the use of any other
person with the intent that such money or any part thereof
shall be expended in bribery <git any election or who shall
knowingly pay or cause to be paid any money to an}'’ person
in discharge or repayment of any money wholly or in part
expended in bribery at an election.
And any person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
on conviction be punishable accordingly Provided that the aforesaid
provisions shall not extend or be construed to extend to any money
paid for or on account of any law expenses bond fide incurred at or
concerning any election.
CXXIY. The following persons shall also be deemed guilty of
bribery and shall be punishable accordingly— _
(1.) Every elector who shall before or during any election
directly or indirectly by himself or by any other person on
his behalf receive agree or contract for any money or
valuable consideration office place or employment for him-
self or for any other person for voting or agreeing to vote
or for refraining or agreeing to refrain from voting or for
inducing any other person to vote or to refrain from voting
at any election.
(2.) Every person who shall before during or after any election
directly or indirectly by himself or by any other person on
his behalf receive any money or valuable consideration on
account of any person having voted or refrained from voting
or having induced any other person to vote or to refrain
from voting at any election.
And any elector or person so offending shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall on conviction be punishable accordingly.
CXXV. Every candidate at an election who shall corruptly by himself
or by or with any person or by any other ways or means on his behalf at
Bribery a misde-
meanor -
Bribery on partof
demeanor.
“ Treating” and
co 'iscquen-


Penalty for
“ treating.”
“ Intimidation.”
Wearing carrying
or providing
cockades flags
&c. prohibited.
No action &c. for
goods or work
or service in
prosecuting an
election.
Proviso as to offi-
cers under this
Act.
Candidates guilty
of offences
under this Act
incapable of
sitting or being
elected.
any time either before or during any election directly or indirectly give
or provide or cause to be given or provided or shall be accessory to the
giving or providing or shall pay or allow any person to pay on his
behalf wholly or in part any expenses incurred for any meat drink
entertainment or provisions to or for any person in order to forward his
election or for being elected or for the purpose of corruptly influencing
such person or any other person to give or refrain from giving his vote
at such .election or on account of such person having voted or refrained
from voting or being about to vote or refrain from voting at such elec-
tion shall be deemed guilty of the misdemeanor of treating and every
elector who shall corruptly accept or take any meat drink refreshment
or provision so paid for given or provided shall be incapable of voting at
such election and his vote if given shall be utterly void and of no
effect.
CXXVI. .Any person who shall give or cause to be given to any
elector during any election on account of such elector having voted or
being about to vote any meat drink or entertainment by way of refresh-
ment or any money or ticket to enable such elector to obtain refresh-
ment shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction
be punished accordingly.
CXXVII. Every person who shall directly or indirectly by himself or
by any other person on his behalf make use of or threaten to make use
of any force violence or restraint or inflict or threaten the infliction by
himself or by or through any other person of any injury damage harm
or loss or m any other manner practise intimidation upon or against any
person in order to induce or compel such person to vote or refrain from
voting or on account of such person having voted or refrained from
voting at any election, or who shall by abduction duress or any fraudulent
device or contrivance impede prevent or otherwise interfere with the free
exercise of the franchise by any elector or shall thereby compel or induce
or prevail upon any elector, either to give or refrain from giving his vote
at any election shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine and
imprisonment.
CXXVIII. No candidate before during or after any election shall in
regard to such election wear or carry or by himself or agent directly or
indirectly give or provide to or for any person having a vote at such
election or to or for any inhabitant of the province or district for which
such election is had any cockade ribbon or other mark of distinction and
every person so giving or providing shall for every such offence forfeit
and pay on conviction the sum of ten pounds and all payments made
for or on account of any chairing or any such cockade ribbon or mark
of distinction as aforesaid or of any bands of music or flags or banners
shall be deemed illegal payments within this Act.
CXXIX. No action suit or other proceeding whatsoever shall be
brought or maintained whereby to charge any person upon any contract
or agreement for the loan of money or the doing of any work or service
or the supply of any goods for or towards or concerning or in carrying
on or prosecuting any election Provided that this section shall nol
apply to contracts agreements or payments by officers or others
appointed by or under this Act in carrying out the several matters or
things herein or hereby authorised and required.
CXXX. If any candidate at any election for any province or district
shall be declared by any election committee of the Council or Assembly
respectively guilty of bribery treating or undue influence at any election
or of having made any payment or satisfaction the making whereof is
hereby made a misdemeanor such candidate shall be incapable of being
elected or sitting as a member for any province during the period of .five
years from the day of declaration of the election at which he shall have
committed such offence or of being elected or sitting as a member for
any district until the following general election.


CXXXI. Any person who shall make any wager bet or other risk of
anv nature whatsoever upon the result of any election for members of the
Council or Assembly shall forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding twenty
pounds and every such wager bet or other risk shall be and is hereby
declared an illegal act.
CXXXII. Any person not being duly authorised who shall wear carry
or have on or about his person any gun pistol sword bludgeon or other
offensive weapon at any election shall forfeit and pay a penalty not
exceeding twenty pounds nor less than two pounds and every such person
so offending shall be liable to be apprehended by any constable or other
peace officer either upon the view of ' such constable or other peace officer
or by direction of any returning or deputy returning officer and such
person when so apprehended shall be conveyed to any place of confine-
ment until he can be brought before some justice of the peace to be
dealt with according to law.
CXXXIII. No person shall be liable to any penalty forfeiture or
punishment imposed by this Act unless the prosecution for the offence
committed shall be commenced against such persons within the space of
three months next after such offence against this Act shall have been
committed.
SCHEDULES.
Wagers &c. on
result of elec-
tions prohibited
Carrying offen-
sive weapons at
elections , pun-
ishable.
Limitation of time
SCHEDULE A.
Sec, X.
Date.
Extent of KepeaL
19 Vic., No. XI.
19 Vic., No. XII.
The whole.
Sections 1 to 57 except section 55 and the schedules referred to
in those sections.
Act No. LXXXI.
The whole.
Act No. XCIV.
The whole.
Act No. CXXXVII.
The whole.
Act No. CLXIV.
The whole.
SCHEDULE B.
(Butt.)
No.
Province.
Division.
Non-Residential Qualification.
Name of person to whom issued—
Residence and Occupation-
Qualification —
Situation or other description of qualify-
ing property—
(E. F.) Registrar.
(A. B.) abovenamed.
No.
Elector’s Right.
Province.
Division.
• Non-Residential Qualification.
The holder hereof . °f
(a blank to be left here for occupation, fire.) whose
name is signed hereunder is entitled being duly en-
rolled to vote at elections of members of the Council
in the above division of the above Province for tenure
of land of adequate value situated at
and known as
Signature of Registrar—
(E. E.) Registrar.
Signature of holdei —
(A. B.) abovenamed.
The day of 186 .
SCHEDULE C.
(Butt.)
No.
Province.
Division.
Residential Qualification.
Name of person to whom issued—
Residence and occupation—
Professional or other residential qualifi-
cation—
(E. F.) Registrar.
(A. B.) abovenamed.
No. .
Elector’s Right.
Province.
Division.
Residential Qualification.
The holder hereof of
(a blank to be left here for occupation ) whose name is
signed hereunder is entitled being duly enrolled to
vote at elections of members of the Council in the
above division of the above province being qualified
as a (the profession ox other
qualification) residing in such division.
Signature of Registrar—
(E. P.) Registrar.
Signature of holder—
(A. B.) abovenamed.
The day of 186 .


SCHEDULE D.
(Butt.)
No.
Electoral District of
Division.
Non-resideniial Qualification.
Name of person to whom issued—
Residence and occupation—
Qualification —
Situation or other description of quali-
fying property—
(E. F.) Registrar.
(A. B.) abovenamed.
No.
Electob’s Right.
Electoral District of
Division.
Non-residmtial Qualification.
The holder hereof ' of
[blank to be left here for occupation ]
whose name is signed hereunder is entitled being
duly enrolled to vote at Elections of Members of the
Assembly in the above division of the above district
being qualified for tenure of land of adequate value
situated at and
known as
Signature of Registrar—
(E. F.) Registrar.
Signature of holder—
(A. B.) abovenamed.
The day of 186 .
SCHEDULE E.
(Butt.)
No.
Electoral District of
Division.
Residential Qualification.
Name of person to whom issued—
Residence and Occupation-
Qualification —Manhood and residence
in above division.
(E. F.) Registrar.
(A. B.) abovenamed.
No.
Electob’s Right.
Electoral District of
Division.
Residential Qualification.
The holder hereof of
[plank to be left here for occupation ]
whose name is signed hereunder is entitled being
duly enrolled to vote at elections of Members of the
Assembly in the above division of the above district
being qualified in respect of manhood and of resi-
dence in such division.
Signature of Iteqistrar—
(E. F.) Registrar.
Signature of holder—
(A. B.) abovenamed.
The day of 186 .
SCHEDULE F.
Monthly List oe Cancelled Electob’s Rights.
Legislative Council (or Legislative Assembly if the case be so) Provinca
(or Electoral District of ) Division.
Number
of
Eight.
Whether Non-Eesi-
dential or Eesi-
dential Qualification.
Name
of
Holder.
Eesidence
of
Holder.
Occupation
of
Holder.
Nature
of
Qualification.
Date
of
Cancellation.
(E. F.) Registrar.
(Date )
SCHEDULE G.
a n 18 Province.
A.D. ib . Division.
General [or (as the case may be) First Second or Third Supplementary] List of Persons claiming
to be entitled to vote for Members of the Legislative Council of Yictona.
Number
of j
Elector’s
Right.
Surname
in full.
Christian
Names
in full.
Residence.
Occupation.
Nature of
of
Qualification
Situation or other
description of
qualifying
Property if any.
(Signed)
(E. F.) Registrar.


SCHEDULE H.
Electoral District of
A.D. 18 . Division.
General [or (as the case may be) First Second or Third Supplementary List of Persons claiming
to be entitled to vote for Members of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria.
Number of
Elector’s
Bight.
Surname
in full.
Christian
Name in full.
Residence.
Occupa-
tion.
Nature of
Qualifica-
tion.
Situation or
other description
of qualifying
Property if any.
(Signed) j (E. F.) Registrar.
SCHEDULE I.
Notice of Objection.
Province [or Electoral District of 1.
Division.
I hereby object to the name of (A. 8.) described as upon the general [or
(as the case may be) the First Second or Third Supplementary] List for the above division ol the
above-named province [or district as the case may be] now awaiting revision being retained upon
such list and the grounds of my objection are the following [here state grounds ].
Dated this day of 18
(Signed)
of [state residence].
SCHEDULE 11.
Province [or Electoral District of ].
Division.
A.D. 18 .
List of Names objected to upon General [or [as the case may be) First, Second, or Third,
Supplementary] List*
Number of
Elector’s Right.
Surname of
person objected
to in full.
Christian Names
in full.
•
Residence.
Occupation.
Nature of
Qualification.
Name of
objector.
Residence of
objector.
Ground of
objection
shortly stated.
Column for
objections by
Registrar.
Grounds of
Registrar’s
objection.
(E. E.) Registrar.
SCHEDULE J.
Notice of Objection.
Province [or Electoral District of J.
Division.
By order of the Revision Court.
I hereby object to the name of (A. 8.) described as upon the general
[or [as the case may be) First Second or Third Supplementary] List for the above division of the
above-named province [or district as the case may be] now awaiting revision being retained
thereon and the following are the grounds of such objection [here state grounds ] and I hereby
give notice to the said (A. 8.) to come before the Revision Court at on
the day of 18 at o’clock and prove
so much of his qualification as is herein objected to or his name will be expunged from the said
list/
(G.H.) Clerk of the Revision Court.


SCHEDULE K.
Province.
Division.
General [or (as the case map be) First Second or Third Supplementary] Roll of persons entitled
to vote for members of the Legislative Council of Victoria.
M .
<V
P
Number of
Elector’s
Eight.
Surname
in full.
Christian
Name
in full.
Eesidence.
Occupation.
Nature
of
Qualification
Situation or
other de-
scription of
qualifying
Property
(if any).
(Signed)
(E. F.) Registrar.
SCHEDULE L.
Electoral District of
Division.
General [or (as the case map be) First Second or Third Supplementary] Roll of Person entitled to
vote for Members of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria.
Number j
on Roll.
U ,
a> & J
”2 £ _ S Surname
in full.
Christian
Name
in full.
Residence.
Occupation
Nature of
Qualifi-
cation.
Situation or
other description
of Property
(if any).
1
(Signed) Registrar.
SCHEDULE M.
City of [or town of or borough of or rural district of ].
A.D. 18 .
List of Ratepayers in respect of rateable property situated in the
Division of the Electoral District of
Surname in full.
Christian Name
in full.
Residence.
Occupation, j ■■tBWIHy
(Signed) (E. F.) Registrar.
SCHEDULE K.
Electoral District of
Division.
A.D. 18 .
Roll of Ratkpaying Electors.
| Number
1 on Boll.
Surname
in full.
Christian
Name
in full.
Besidence.
Occupa-
tion.
Corporate limits
within which
rateable Property
is situated.
Ward or
Subdivision
in which
rateable
Property is
situated.
Situation
or other
description
of
rateable
Property.
(E. F.) 'Registrar.


SCHEDULE O.
Form of Nomination.
The day of 186
AVe the undersigned electors of the Provinoe [or electoral district of
] do hereby nominate [stating Christian or surname ]
of [state occupation] for the office of member of the
Legislative Council [or Legislative Assembly] for the said province [or district] at the election
to be held for the said province [or district] in pursuance of a writ issued the
day of A.D. 18 .
[Here are to follow the Signatures.]
and I the above-named do hereby consent to such nomination.
(Signed)
SCHEDULE PP.
No. 1.
South Bourke
Evelyn
Mornington
North Gipps Land
South Gipps Land
East Bourke
West Bourke
Dalhousie
South Grant
Ripon and Hampden
Polwarth and South Grenville
Villiers and Heytesbury
Dundas
Wimmera
Normanby
Grenville
No. 2.
Rodney
Murray
Maryborough
Creswick
Avoca
Mandurang
Maldon
Ovens
Crowlands
Ararat
No. 3.
Kilmore
Kyneton Boroughs
Castlemaine
Sandhurst
Belfast
Warrnambool
Portland
Ballaarat East
Ballaarat West
West Melbourne
East Melbourne
North Melbourne
Emerald Hill
Sandridge
Williamstown
Collingwood
Richmond
St. Kilda
Brighton
East Bourke Boroughs
Murray Boroughs
Geelong East
Geelong West
SCHEDULE Q.
Form of Voting Paper.
Province [or district of ' » ]
Candidates’ names ( arranged in alphabetical order of surname).
A. B.
C. D.
E. F.
G. H.
DIRECTIONS.
The voter is to strike out the name of the candidate or candidates for whom he does not
intend to vote by drawing a line through the same with a pen or pencil.
He must be careful not to leave uncancelled more than otherwise this paper will bo
invalid.
The voting paper so marked by or for the voter is to be dropped by him into the box.
The voter is not permitted to take his voting paper out of the polling booth.
SCHEDULE R.
Form of Withdrawal.
We the undersigned nominators of [A. B.] as a candidate at the election of member of the
Legislative Council [or Legislative Assembly] to be held in pursuance of a writ issued on the
day of do hereby withdraw the said A.B. as such candidate.
(Here follow signatures of nominators)
and I the said A.B. do hereby retire from being such candidate. (Signed) [A.B.]
SCHEDULE YY.
Form of Writ.
Victoria by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen
Defender of the Faith. To the Returning Officer of the Province (or as the case may
require Electoral District of ) greeting. We command you that you proceed according to
law to the election of Member to serve in the Legislative for the said Province
[or if the case so require District]. And we do hereby appoint the day of
in the year of our Lord to be the day before which nominations of candidates at and for
the said Election are to be made. And we do further command you that in the event of the said
Election being contested the Poll shall be taken on the day of at for the
division and at for the division and (&c.) of the said and that this
Our Writ with the name of the person so elected endorsed hereon by you shall be returned to Us
here on the day of
Witness His Excellency Governor in Chief and Captain-General of the colony
of Victoria and Vice-Admiral of the same (or if the case so require) President
of our [or Speaker of our ) at Melbourne the day of
in the year of Our Reign.
By Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.




