

■■ i ■■mi luiiuimii'ijnmigj ■ ■ ■imiawwil ■ PIU IIMWtllTIlTlTrTTTlTnfMIfTlIfr"
THE WESTMINSTER GAZETTE, 3
_. - ■■ ■ ■ "" ' -
iVILLOW WILLOW WALY!
Ah Bee and Ah Li, having created this horrible
THE COLONIAL VIEW OF CHINESE IMMIGRATION
By M. Allerdale Grainger. v
The disregard of Colonial opinion has shown itself with
unexpected frankness in this discussion. In the Colonies there
has been a chill feeling of surprise that we should be shouldered
out from the affair in the once-familiar manner of English arro-
gance that of late we had been enabled to forget. It is somewhat
woundingly implied that England is tired of our vociferation. Dear
gods S only yesterday it was that we joined hands and broached
the patriotic cask, let enthusiasm flow—toasting our Imperial
fellows, the friends in need.
Nothing is more striking to a Colonial observer of the Chinese
propaganda in England than the absorption of the disputants in
their local politics." It appears that to people who might well have
yielded to it a very perfunctory interest the Transvaal question
has been made manifest as magnificent material for party warfare.
Suspicion is strengthened when we observe how speakers and
Press are occupied with one another. To embarrass the Govern-
ment, to produce destructive criticism of the utterar -es of So-
and-so, t-iese are worthy objects worthily opposed by ingenious
financial reasoning and the sheer weight of names. “ Lord Milner
says . . .! ” There is little conviction of first principles.
We have a spectacle of school-men happily absorbed in the inge-
nuities of debate.
Here it is that the Colonial gets the clearer view. He has at
first hand an acquaintance with the Chinese question, with mining
work, with the practical matters involved ; he is aloof, moreover,
from the party struggle. The fetish of great names does not
extort his mechanical obedience. Indeed, it is to be remembered
that his past has given him some knowledge of the proconsul—
some experience of the other end of the stick that is wielded by
Downing Street.
To the Colonial mind there is everything of the appearance ot a
class struggle about the matter. Capitalist mine-owners discover
a method of making their mines pay, or pay better, and they
advocate this method with a natural and simple zeal for the
possible efficiency of payment. That the method replaces
a possible working-class population by a substitute superior as a
dividend-earning machine is a double advantage in the eyes of
certain classes of the English nation—classes not consciously
corrupt, but still shareholding, dividend-receiving classes that in
the happy presence ot working-class apathy are directing classes.
To neutralise this class bias by exciting that ot the working-man
were clearly legitimate, but, as things are, it is plain that oppo-
sition, to have any chance of success, should devote itselt to
arousing the conscience of the governing class by a plain insistence
on fundamental principles of racial morality compared with which
the local details ot circumstance in the Transvaal situation are of
infinitesimal importance. It has been an astonishing thing to
Colonial people that instead of this simple crusade the actual
opposition should have so readily mixed the issue by admitting
the importance, in the discussion of financial facts, of the Chinese
character, of matters comparatively trivial and frivolous, and
by joining, as it were, in a competition of facts with people who
were in a position to manufacture the better facts themselves.
The history of Chinese immigration has been much the same
in California, in Australia, in British Columbia. In the early
stages of each Colony a scanty and expensive white working
population has been the despair of the capitalist panting to utilise
natural opportunities under dread of Colonial Legislatures. The
immigrant Chinaman was a godsend. His cheap labour was to
render possible an immediate commercial expansion ; there was
need of hurry—there always is.
It was due to the accident that the voting power lay with the
people tvffh whom he successfully competed that the Chinaman
was taxed and ultimately prohibited from entering the countries.
The capitalist could often point with perfect justice to industrial
progress retarded ahd to capital discouraged—-definite material
loss incurred arbitrarily for the sake of intangible moral gain.
Decades of factory legislation have, in similar manner, limited the
commercial activity ot England.
But to-day we perceive some effect ot Chinese prohibition. It
is not too much to say that the bulk of the working-classes in the
Colonies owe their very existence to this prohibition. Countries
that might well have become new provinces of China with, it is
true, a skeleton directorate ot white men, have been saved for the
white race, and for just that section and class ot it to whom
England made so necessary and so successful an appeal during
the late war. Better this, we say, than the,commercial prosperi-
ties of a dozen Congo Free Colonies or the affluence of John Bull
Cohen. Is the develooment of the human being promoted in
England by so many industries that she can afford to lose the
mining work of South Africa, work that has elsewhere evolved and
attracted so high a type of man ? There was need of this
opportunity of work in South Africa ; opportunity that was dearly
paid for. Another foothold on existence has been relinquished
to the yellow man. Little satisfaction is there in the thought
are now compelled to drag it over the bridge.
monster ,
that with all its probability there is no absolute certainty that
Chinese mining labour under the proposed conditions of working
will prove directly cheaper than the white. It is true that the
only important and thorough < xperiment with white labour under
the local conditions (that of Mr. Cresswell) gave results of little
encouragement to the pro-Chinese, and we may remark that we
have practically no figures as to the cost of Chinese mining
labour. On the great Cariboo Mine (in British Columbia), indeed,
Mr. Hobson arrived at these figures as the result of experiment
on a large scale—that the average work of the whits man was to
the average work of the Chinaman as nine is to four ; so that
although the white man was paid 2’75d015. and the Chinaman
l.SOdols., the white man was the cheaper.
No ; the probable direct cheapness is but one of the reasons
that endear the Chinaman to the capitalist. The latter “ does
not want a white proletariat ” in the Rand or anywhere else ; and
in that he shows a very proper astuteness and concern for the
efficient development of his business, and for that merely. We
may also observe without animosity the strenuous receiver of
dividends who desire' t crease ‘’ v, ~ ' .eceipts by all means
"•’thin the limb-: ct Gt, .htih.... ::: sue. hauveen these
people and the public is plain and straightforward.
But the Colonial gorge rises at the adroit presentment of cir-
cumstances ot commercial collapse in the Rand —circumstances
that are the mere commonplaces of mining life in Colonies where
booms are always bursting. Painful is the sight of honest
ignorance in England (gulled by description so essentially false)
reluctantly admitting a proved impossibility of white mining labour.
There is an air so hopelessly amateur about the discussion ot the
proofs.
How refreshing to mining men is this assumption that mines
have this divine right to pay dividends ! How absurd the assertion
of, and the inferences drawn from, the acquiescence of the employees
of the Rand ; or the deductions from the failure of an attempt to
introduce ready-made a white labouring population into South
Africa in the case of the railway navvies ! But the religious oppor-
tunities ot the compounds ! ! Are there terms of sufficient violence
to express the feelings ot the Colonial who realises that childish
hands are tampering with the works of his destiny ; that a
bureaucracy, under all the discredit of a recent exposure, has
regained its old confidence in dealing with the unknown ?
L’Envoi.
Sentiment alone has importance for us in this question : a con-
fession to be made unashamed, with some bitter satisfaction.
For these English gentlemen who can put sentiment aside with so
fine an air, indicating impatiently the serious financial reasons for
discussion, will presently become aware of a very practical effect
of sentiment. We note that these were the very people—
Imperialists, Jingoes, call them what you will—who incited us to
dreams of a British Empire,
Years ago, in the Transvaal, surrender to the Chinaman could
helped to produce.
Is not the sequel dramatic? WHle still it glowed with the
exaltation of racial feeling, their aflfet ion tor the mother-country
is quenched by a callous surrender ot the results of war to the
yellow race, from peril of which eac.h Colony has, shuddering,
emerged.
We see now the great gulf that separates us in sentiment from
this English nation. It were easier for Capital to join hands in
affection with Labour than for the Colonial democracies to draw
nearer in “ bonds ot unity ” with the plutocracy that dominates the
mother-country at this moment
MINISTERIALIST LUNCHES.
To the Editor of The Westminster Gazette.
Sir, —In to-day’s Westminster , in explanation of a certain
regrettable incident, you state that the Ministerialist lunches at
the Carlton, Prince’s, or Constitutional, where he spends thirty
shillings, including coffee, Kimmel, cigar, and a liqueur brandy, and is,
therefore, not up to time, while the Irishman dines for a shilling at
Westminster. I protest against the descriptive reporter of your
“ Unionist contemporary ” and his Belshazzar’s feast. A dog-
biscuit and a glass of water is more the sort of .thing (so far as
I am concerned) than the fatuous rubbish of his 30s. lunch at the
Constitutional (!).
Why not the Cheshire Cheese, which is more in his line, down
Fleet-street way ?• —I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
F. CARNE Rasch, M.P. Mid-Essex.
Danbury, Essex, March 19.
[Sir F. Came Rasch’s quarrel is really with the St. James's
Gazette , from which we quoted.— Ed.]
FRY’S PURE CONCENTRATED COCOA.—“It deserves all the Praise it kas received
from the Leaders of tho Profession.”—Medical Ma.WN*«ie. A Half-Teasf oonful is sufficient
to make a cun ol most delicious Cocoa.
MESSRS. CONSTABLE’S LIST
NOW READY AT ALL LIBRARIES.
AMERICAN TARIFF CONTROVERSIES
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
By EDWARD STARWOOD. 2 vols, demy Bvo, 18s. net.
BEATTIE AND HIS FRIENDS.
By MARGARET FORBES, Demy Bvo. 15s. net,
NEW Ss. FICTION.
THE DELIVERANCE.
A Romance of the Virginian Tobacco Fields. By ELLEN GLASGOW, Anther
of “The Battle-ground,” &c. With Coloured Illustrations.
“An unusual and remarkable novel which will add fresh laurels to Miss Glasgow's fame.
There is a breadth of treatment, a skilful handling of great natural emotions, an all-pervadinf
atmosphere which mark out this novel from its fellows.”— Academy.
THE TUTOR’S LOVE STORY.
By WALTER FRITH, Author of “In Search of Quiet,” 4*
A LADDER OF TEARS.
By G, COLMORE, Author of “ The Strange Story of Hester Wynne," fee,
THE BINDWEED.
By NELLIE K. BLISSETT, Author of “The Concert Director,” “Brass,” &•,
JEWEL: A Chapter in Her Life.
By CLARA LOUISE BURNHAM, Author of “A Right Princess,” 4c.
“ Jewel is a real and radiant little creature.”— Bookman. “As a study of a child Jewrf
is delightful.”— Academy. “ Her child heroine is real and very lovable.”— World.
A. CONSTABLE and CO., Ltd., Westminster.
At all Libraries and Booksellers\
THE LOVE THAT HE PASSED BY.
By Iza Duffus Hardy, Author of “A New Othello,” “Butterfly.”
With Frontispiece by Harold Piflord. Cloth, 6s. Cheap edition.
Morning Post says: “A really clever Spectator says: “ A vigorously written,
novel, expressed by graphic portrayal of interesting story of Californian life. Calaatha
Californian life and manners. This is a is a powenul sketch. It is one of the best of
fascinating romance, every chapter of which the class of fiction to which it belongs.”
is well worth reading.”
THE DIAMONDS. By J. S. Fletcher, Author
of “When Charles the First was King,” &c. With five full-paga
Illustrations by Harold Pifford. Cloth, 6s. Second Impression.
Scotsman: “ A remarkably clever story.” Court Circular : “A rattling good story.”
Irish Times : “ A really exciting story;” Leeds Mercury; “Thoroughly interesting.”
Liverpool Post : “A most thrilling tale.” To-Day : “A well-told story of sensation.”
Belfast Northern Whig : “A remarkable Morning Leader: “An excellent detec-
story.” I live story.”
of A FAITHFUL LOVER. By o. Ecreaford
ns FitzGerald. Author of “The Minor Canon,” “The Kingdom That
fever Came,” Cloth, 6s.
“A w .11-writren ana exci ' mtly contri-. _d story, with p'*ntv o f charac' era, incidents, and
sentiment .”— Dundee Advertiser. “Wil be cordially wi. T -.ned by man/
the author’s other work, ‘The Minor Canon.’ Tho story is admirabl.r told.”— Leicesteh
Post.
London: DIGBY, LONG, and CO., IS, Bouveric-sfzeet, Fleet-street, E.C,
HURST & BLACKETT’S NEW NOVELS.
NOW READY. 1 Vol., 3s. Sd.
TALLY.
By Mrs. FINNEMORE,
Author of “ Uncle Isaac’s Money,” “A Man’s Mirror,” 4c.
SECOND EDITION. 1 Vol., 6s.
the man from downing street
By WILLIAM LE QUEUX.
“ One of the best stories the author has ever told.”— Scotsman.
“The novel will be enjoyed to the full” — Pall Mall Gazette.
“ One of the best books of its kind 1 have read for a long time past. me rELiCAw.
NOW IN DEMAND. 1 Vol., 6s.
AN INARTICULATE GENIUS.
By W. R, H. TROWBRIDGE,
Author of “Ths Situations of Lady Patricia.”
“Full of cleverness and real thought.”—The Athenaeum. . .
“ All the characters are drawn with refreshing vitality, especially th« enuarea.
fictfon is one of literary distinction, and its problem and the human materials used
to demonstrate it are singularly interesting.”— Dundee Advertiser.
A SENSATIONAL STORY. I Vol., 6s.
THE TURNSTILE OF NIGHT.
By Mrs. C. N. WILLIAMSON,
Author of “ The Barn Stormers,” “ The Silent Battle,” 4c.
“ There can be no doubt that the work is a good one of its own sensational kind.
GLA “ J,lrs wonderful imagination has served her well.”—Dundee Apvertisek.
icaio dgu, ill . A LOVE STORY. 1 Vol., 6s.
have been made with little effect 01 the Colonies. Hut once i/iynnAMG "TT&JSC WOPI O
Colonial interest had been aroused anc "olonial help welcomed in THE i nig VlfUnLUi
the toil ot securing this new country, ; was inevitable that the By STEPHEN HARDING. _
Colonies should feel some concern for mat which their labour had “Just woRLD St ° ry beautifully told > and not without some really dramatic situations. -
helped to produce. “We have read this book with great enjoyment.”— Ladies’ Field.
•• vv C nave re a. a luis uuun wim uujvjmuuv. <
■" READY MARCH 29. 1n1V01.,65,
A GOD OF CLAY.
By BERTRAND WAUGH.
HURST & BLACKETT, Ltd., 13, Great Marlborougb-street, W.
First Innings, I 0
| Sixpence Net; at all Booßscllers. |
The SATURDAY WESTMINSTER (Weekly Edition) gives you for One Penny every-
thing that you could expect to find in a kigh-class weekly review, together with all Mr,
F. C. GOULD’S CARTOONS OF THE WEEK, and many ether popular features. Sixteen
pages, One Penny. in London and all parts ef the country every Satnrday morning
Subscription rates : Inlaid Is. Bd., abroad 2s. 2d., per .quarter, free.—Offices: WEST*
MINSTER GAZETTE. Tuder-streefc London, E.C.
