

-THE-
NEW SOUTH WALES
Pure food manual
BEING
A COMPLETE “VALE MECUM”
TO
THE PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
AND THE
REGULATIONS,
ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED, WITH AN
Inder of Subjects.
Compiled for the use of the Mercantile and Legal Communities.
BY
H. C. BRIERLEY, F.I.A.V., F.F.I.A., F.C.P.A.,
BRIEBLKY AND BRIERLKY,
Incorporated Public Accountants, Sydney.
AND
E. H. TEBBUTT, SOLICITOR OF THE SUPREME COURT
(Co-author “Local Government Manual,” “Defamation Law,” &c.).










The Home of PURE FOODS is...
The Vegetarian Cafe,
45 HUNTER ST., SYDNEY
(One Door from Castlereagh Street).
You can always depend upon obtaining
something pure and wholesome there.
Price Lists and other Literature on Application.
ARE YOU SATISFIED
with your
PRINTING & STATIONERY
Then, do business with
The Simmons-Bloxham Printing Company
They supply all kinds of
Man& r Pure Food Act
under the. *
Their Work is Right!
and Orders are executed without needless delay.
Their Price is Right!
A satisfactory combination— and in your Interests, too I
LETTERPRESS° LABEL PRINTERS,
KENT & DRUITT STS., SYDNEY.


-THE-
NEW SOUTH WALES
Pure food manual
BEING
A COMPLETE “YALE MECUM”
TO
THE PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
AND THE
REGULATIONS.
ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED, WITH AN
ITnbex of Subjects.
Compiled for the use of the Mercantile and Legal Communities.
BY
H. C. BRIERLEY, F.I.A.V., F.F.I.A., F.C.P.A.,
Brierley and Brierley,
Incorporated Public Accountants, Sydney.
AND
E. H. TEBBUTT, Solicitor of the Supreme Court
(Co-author “Local Government Manual, 5 ’ “Defamation Law,” &c.).


and at London, Tamworth and Cootamunowa.
H. C. BRIERLEY, F.I.A V , F.F.i.A , F.C P.A.
Lionel C Brierley, A F.I A , F.A.I.S
BRIERLEY & BRIERLEY,
Incorporated Public Accountants,
and Auditors,
10 CASTLEREACH STREET,
SYDNEY.


PREFATORY NOTE.
This Manual is intended chiefly for the Mercantile
Community, but, it is believed, will be found of use
in legal and official circles. The rapid evolution of a
modern “ Pure Food ” law in New South Wales, ren-
dered necessary by an increasing complexity in the
constituents and the manufacture of dietary subjects,
has made some such work as the present a necessary
adjunct to the desk of manufacturer and merchant.
The Act, the Regulations, the machinery of adminis-
tration are with us —“ for good,” and the authors
trust that their effort to supply a convenient and
time-saving guide will result in an economy of patience
to all concerned.
The plan adopted in this Manual is one which
takes facility of reference as a cardinal virtue. To
secure this result, indeed, it has been sometimes
necessary to re-iterate the same language under two
heads, but it is believed that an occasional re-iteration
will be overlooked, when it results in practical advan-
tage. The whole of the Act and the Regulations are
condensed into as small a compass as possible, while
lengthy citations of “ Case-law ” —and the matters
more adapted to the legal student —have been largely
dispensed with.


CONTENTS.
Pages,
The Pure Food Act and its Administration .. .. 5-10
An Alphabetical Compendium of the Act and
Regulations .. .. .. ~12 55
Regulations as Gazetted ~ .. .. 57-105
NOTE AS TO ABBREVIATIONS.
1. “ S.” means Section. Thus : “S. 48 ” stands for
section forty-eight of the Pure Food Act, 1908.
2. “ R. 20 ” means Regulation 20 under the same Act.


Introduction.
THE PURE FOOD ACT AND ITS ADMINISTRATION.
ADMINISTRATIVE DETAILS, Etc.
The Pure Food Act, No. 31, 1908, was passed
into law at the instance of the Wade Government, the
measure receiving the Governor’s assent 'on 24th
December, 1908. It did not, however, come into force
till Ist July, 1909. This novel and important statute
is designed as supplementary to the Public Health
Act, No. 30, 1902 (the “ Principal Act ”), with which
indeed it is to be (legally) construed. That Act,
though still a powerful engine of health and hygiene,
was admittedly obsolete in respect of Food and Drugs,
not only because certain of its sections were technically
defective, but also because the increasing complexity
of the subject matter—under modern auspices, de-
manded special regulation. The Public Health Act
is now partly repealed, i.e., in its definition of “ food,”
and in respect of Part IX. (sections 76-93), dealing
with “ Unwholesome or adulterated Food and Drugs.”
THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
In common with other statutes bearing on the
same subject (viz., Cattle Slaughtering, Dairies
Supervision, Noxious Trades, Public Health, etc.),
the Pure Food Act, 1908, is under the administration,
for governmental purposes, of the Chief Secretary’s
Department, of which the “ Department of Public
Health ”is a scion. The head of the latter Depart


ment is Dr. Ashburton Thompson, M.D.,
and the Secretary Mr. G. H. S. King.
In addition to these there is a staff of medical
and inspecting experts and the Advisory Committee.
See pp. 9, 10, 17.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
By S. 9 of the Act “ the administration and the
enforcing of the provisions of this Act shall primarily
be the duty of the Board of Health, but may, by the
direction of the Governor, be left in any case to the
local authority, who shall, however, be subject to the
provisions of Section Twenty-four of the Public Health
Act, 1902.”
The Board of Health consists of not less than seven
nor more than ten Members, including the President.
Four must be legally qualified medical practitioners.
They are appointed by the Governor, the quorum is
four.
Section 24 of the Act mentioned reads :
S. 24 (1). “ Where any power, except a power
to make regulations or by-laws conferred by any
statute, regulation or by-law on any local authority
for the preservation of the Public Health
has in the opinion of the Board not been
duly exercised by the local authority and
the failure to exercise the power is in the opinion
of the Board likely to endanger the public health,
the Board may, by notice in writing, signed by its
President or Secretary, require the local authority to
exercise the power within the time mentioned in the
notice.
(2) If the said requirement is disobeyed or is
not complied with,the Board may exercise the power.


and, where the local authority is a Municipal Council,
may recover from it the expenses thereby incurred.”
In a Municipality or Shire the “ local authority ”
is the Council, and in unincorporated districts a
specially appointed police officer.
At the time of going to press (August, 1910),
delegation of power (to the extent of authorising the
Council’s inspector as an officer of the Board of Health
for collection of samples and instituting proceedings
for adulteration), has been granted to a number of
Municipalities having a population of two thousand or
more.
The question as to whether the scope of local
administration of the Act will be gradually enlarged
must, however, remain for the present a matter of
conjecture only.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND REGULATIONS.
An “Advisory Committee ” of experts is an im-
portant element in the sphere of this Act. For per-
sonnel see p. 17.
The Committee at present numbers nine members,
representing various governmental, trade, and pro-
fessional interests. An important aspect of the Com-
mittee’s work is in the “ Regulations,” really the
heart of Pure Food affairs, and which are made by the
Board only on the advice of the Committee. The
Regulations will be found printed in full at the end of
this publication, and will of course speak for them-
selves. Before the final gazetting of these Regulations
Dr. Thompson said ( S . M. Herald, 22/10/09), “ that
the New South Wales Regulations would when com-
pleted, go further than the Victorian code, which was
largely based upon the United States set, introduced in


1906 or 1907. He had been giving this question of
framing suitable regulations his special attention,
and endeavouring in every way whilst conforming to
the spirit of the Act to make them practicable to the
trading interests. The committee had no desire to
interfere with the course of trade more than was abso-
lutely unavoidable. He was glad to say that difficul-
ties were being smoothed away. The resultant
improvement in the conditions of trading would do
more to prevent the greater part of the adulteration
heretofore practised than anything else we had known,
and the regulations, when in full working order, would
be welcomed by the majority of traders and the con-
suming public.”
FEDERAL LAW.
During May, 1910, an Interstate Food Confer-
ence, which had for its object the harmon-
izing of the regulations in the different States, made
under the various State Acts was held in Sydney.
Generally speaking the Conference recommended
that the legislation of the whole Commonwealth should
be assimilated to that of New South Wales. It is
possible, therefore, that a uniform Federal Law may
so be gradually brought into force at a future date.
A “ Report ” of the Conference is available at the
Government Printing Office, and it will be needless
here to set out the many “ resolutions ” at this impor-
tant gathering, where, with the exception of Western
Australia, all the States were represented. Dr. J.
Ashburton Thompson, Chief Medical Officer of the
Government of New South Wales, was elected Chair-
man. Associated with him in the representation of


this State were Mr. W. M. Hamlet, Government
Analyst, and Mr. J. D. Fisher, commercial represen-
tative. The other States were represented by the
following :
Victoria Dr. B. Burnett Ham, Chief Medical
Officer ; Mr. P. Rankin Scott, Analyst; Mr. A. R.
Bailey, Analyst; and Mr. W. Harper, commercial
representative.
South Australia Dr. W. Ramsay Smith,
Chief Medical Officer, and Mr. J. W. Grasby, commer-
cial representative.
Queensland : Dr. J. S. C. Elkington, Commis-
sioner of Public Health, and Mr. J. Brownlie Hender-
son, Government Analyst.
Tasmania Dr. J. S. Purdy, Chief Health Officer,
and Mr. W. F. Ward, Government Analyst.
The Federal Government was represented by
Dr. W. Perrin Norris, Director of Quarantine, and
Mr. W.P. Wilkinson, Federal Analyst.
Mr. G. H. King, Secretary of the Board of Health,
acted as secretary.
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF FOR THE PURE
FOOD ACT.
Dr. J. Ashburton Thompson, President of the Board
of Health and of the Advisory Committee.
Dr. C. S. Willis.
Dr. F. M. Suckling.
Senior Inspector Arthur Kench.
Inspector Chas. Francis.
Inspector Guy A. Griffin.
And see “ Advisory Committee.” Its personnel
is given at p. 17.


OFFICERS AUTHORISED TO “INSPECT
AND ENTER.”
(Gazette of 27th July, 1910.)
Department of Public Health, New South Wales,
Sydney, 27th July, 1910.
It is hereby notified, for public information, that
the undermentioned officers of this Department have
been authorised by the Board of Health, pursuant to
the provisions of section 22 (1) of the Pure Food Act
1908 ;
Dr. C. S. Willis, Principal Assistant Medical
Officer of the Government; Dr. W. G. Armstrong,
Medical Officer of Health, Metropolitan Combined
Sanitary Districts ; Dr. T. W. Sinclair, Assistant
Medical Officer of Health, Metropolitan Combined
Sanitary Districts; Dr. Robert Dick, Medical Officer
of Health, Hunter River Combined Sanitary Dis-
tricts, Newcastle; P. E. Getting, Chief Sanitary
Inspector. Sanitary Inspectors : K. B. Kenway,
E. A. Creswick, E. M. Jackson, J. Abberton, G. H.
Godfrey. Inspectors under the Pure Food Act :
A. Kench, C. Y. Francis, G. A. Griffin, C. J. Yyner,
Chief Veterinary Inspector. Dairy Inspectors :
T. V. Blomfield, J. G. R. Booking, Will D. Campbell,
E. P. Foster, S. C. Flood, W. A. Mackie, A. Siddins,
J. Yeo.
G. H. KING,
Secretary.


New South Males
Pure Food Manual.
ACT. ‘ The Pure Food Act,” No. 31, 1908, assented to
24th December, 1908, came into force on Ist July,
1909 (S. 1). The responsible Minister is the Colonial
Secretary. The Act is administered by the “ Board
of Health,” a body of from seven to 10 members,
appointed by the Governor under the Public Health
Act, 1902. But limited execution may be left to a
“ Local authority ” (Shire or Municipality, etc.), and
in any case Municipalities with more than 2000
population may nominate their Sanitary Inspector
as an “officer.” See Advisory Committee.
ADULTERATION. —Defined by S. 5, the definition being
a part reproduction of the United States and Victorian
law. The maximum penalty for selling adulterated
food or drugs is £2O, £5O, and £lOO for first, second
and third offences. If the “ Adulteration ”is injurious
to health, wilful, or negligent, the adulterator may be
imprisoned for six months (S. 36).
ADVERTISE. —“ To advertise ”is defined in S. 4. The
Board may examine and report upon Food, etc.,
advertised, and then publish the report in the Gazette
and newspapers. No libel action will lie. The Gover-
nor may under penalty prohibit the advertising or sale
of any food, drug or appliance which is injurious or
useless. This will not apply to trade journals, price
lists, nor to doctors’ prescriptions (SS. 16, 17). An
Analysis is not to be used for advertising (S. 35).
The Board may advertise the names of offenders and
particulars of offences relating to the sale of food,
etc., after a second conviction (S. 53).


ADVISORY COMMITTEE. —Of not more than twelve
persons, appointed by the Governor for two years and
removable by the Governor. Five members are a
quorum, and those not in the Public Service are paid
£2 2s. per sitting (SS. 6-8). The “ Regulations ” are
made on the Committee’s advice (S. 54), and it may
require the Board of Health to “ examine ” and
report on any food or drug (S. 16).
AERATED WATERS.—Defined by R.56(1) When con-
taining salts the label must show percentages, except
for lithia, potash, and seltzer water [R. 56 (3)]. See
Summer Drinks.
AGENT OR SERVANT. —Is liable to prosecution “ for
sale,” as well as his principal, unless he proves (if in a
shop, etc)., the personal superintendence of the
principal. If the agent proves ignorance of intent
he may in turn recover the penalty imposed from his
employer (S. 49). Special provision is made by S. 50
for exoneration of an innocent employee, employed
by a “ guaranteed ” vendor (S. 50).
ALCOHOL, ALCOHOLIC LlQUORS.—Alcoholic liquors
which pay Customs and excise duties need not be
labelled as to measure, volume, etc. (R. 17). Proprietary
medicines compounded with more than 2| per cent,
ethylic alcohol by volume, require the special label
of [R. 66 (3)] and see [(4)] as to when a mixture
contains both alcohol and a declarable drug. The
apparatus and method for determining the strength
of spirits or alcoholic liquors as prescribed (R. 71).
ANALYST —ANALYSIS. —Analysts are appointed by the
Governor and the list annually revised (S. 27), or a
Council may appoint (S. 28). Extensive powers of
entry and inspection are given for obtaining and
removing samples for analysis (S. 22).
On payment or tender by an “ officer,” he may
demand and select samples, also any person on paying
fee of 20s. (R. 75), may demand that the officer take a


sample for analysis (S. 23). The officer on getting
the sample must notify his intention, divide sample
into three parts, seal and label them, give one "to
owner, send the other to analyst, and retain the third.
If the locality is more than 15 miles from the G.P.0.,
the sample may be forwarded by post for analysis
(SS. 24, 25). The Board may require Councils to
forward samples as specified annually (S. 26). The
analyst s certificate is prima facie evidence, costs of
analysis are recoverable and a copy of it shall be
supplied to the manufacturer if required at a fee of ss.
(R. 76). An official analysis must not be used for
advertising purposes (SS. 29-35). The forms of
certificate are given in RR. 72-74.
APPEAL. Where the Board ‘'recommends” and the
Governor then prohibits the sale of food, drugs, disin-
fectants, etc., any person aggrieved may appeal from the
Board’s report or recommendation to a District Court
Judge. No regulations are yet made in pursuance
of this Part (SS. 16-20) of the Act. “ Publication of
names ” (under S. 53), is not to be mads pending ap-
peal from conviction.
APPLIANCE.— Defined,—S. 4.
ARTlCLE. —Defined, —S. 4.
AUTHORISED. By Board or local authority, generally
or specially, defined, —S. 4.
BAKING POWDER. —Defined by R, 21.
BOARD. The Bohrd of Health ”of from seven to ten
members, including President, appointed by the
Governor (Act No. 30, 1902, SS. 5-7), administers
and enforces the Public Health Act and also the Pure
Food Act (S. 9), and is to be distinguished from the
“ Advisory Committee,” which see.
BACTERIOLOGIST.— Member of Advisory Committee. —
S. 6.


BOILER PRESERVATIVES must not contain arsenic, anti-
mony, phosphorus (where the steam is in contact with
food for sale), nor must the water contain zinc., etc.,
in larger quantities than the Regs, allow for food
(R. 11.)
BOOKS. —The President of the Board of Health has power
to require a person suspected by him of selling, manu-
facturing, etc., in contravention of the Act to produce
to any officer authorised, any books of the nature of
Store records, or which deal with the reception,
possession, or delivery of food, drugs, etc. The
President may make copies. Refusal to comply with
his requirements is penalised (£10). Officers must
maintain secrecy, penalty £5O (S. 51).
BORAX SOAP. —Defined (R. 68 (6)).
BORIC ACID. —See Butter, etc.
BRANDY. —Standard of strength, not more than 25
degrees U.P. (R. 64).
BREAD. —The definition (R. 18) specifies bread to be well
baked of “ standard ” flour ; not more than 45 parts
p.c. of water, not more than two parts p.c. of total
ash or parts p.c. of ash insoluble in acid. No added
foreign substance, and 10 grams from centre shall not
contain more acid than is required for neutralisation
of 5 C.C. of decinormal Sol. of Sod. Hydroxide.
Brown, barley, rye bread. See R. 18 (3). Its weight
and sale are provided for in the Bread Act of 1901.
BRITISH PHARMACOPOEIA. —Drugs, unless gazetted
in a list of Exceptions, must comply with description
and tests in latest edition of B.P. (S. 12). (A list of
“ Exceptions ” was published in Gazette of 11th May,
1910, fol. 2597.)
BULK of food or drug must not be fraudulently increased,
under penalty (S. 12).
BUTTER. —To contain not less than 82 parts p.c. milk-fat,
nor more than 16 of water. No foreign fat nor added


colouring matter, etc., except salt and preservative.
Proportion of boric acid not to exceed \ part p.c.
“ Renovated,” or “ process ” butter is defined, and
must be labelled “ Renovated Butter.” (R. 35).
See Margarine Butter containing preservative must
always be so labelled (R. 8 (4) ).
CASSIA & CASSIA BUDS.— Defined (R. 40 (2)).
CASTOR OIL. — If for “ internal use,” must be so labelled
(R. 68).
CERTIFICATE.— AnaIysts —that seal of sample unbroken
is sufficient (S. 25),
The Form of Analyst’s Certificate as to food,
drugs, or articles are given, by R, 72 for Fresh Milk ;
by R. 73 for Condensed Milk ; by R, 74 for other
articles. The Certificate is prima facie evidence (S. 29)
in legal proceedings. A copy of the Analyst’s Cer-
tificate is to be served with the Summons, in food and
drug prosecutions (S. 43).
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.—
Each has one representative on Advisory Committee
(S. 6).
CHEESE. —Must not contain less than 50 parts p.c. of
milk-fat in its water free substance, nor any foreign
fat. “ Skim Milk Cheese” (10 p.c. milk-fat), is defined
and must be so labelled. Cream Cheese—not less
than 60 parts p.c. of milk-fat (R. 36).
CHICORY. —(Cichorium intyhus) defined (S. 38 (3)). See
COFFEE.
CHLOROFORM. —Packet need not be labelled when less
than | of 1 part p.c. contained in the mixture (R. 65
(4), S 5 (k) ).
CHOCOLATE. —In its various forms defined by R. 39 (7).
(To contain not less than 32 parts p.c. Cocoa-Paste).
CINNAMON. —Cinnamomum Zeylanicum, defined, R. 40 (1).
Powdered Cinnamon must not contain Cassia, etc. (3).
n


CITRAL. The chemical method 5 for determining
Citral in Oil of Lemon and in Essence of Lemon is set
out by R. 70.
CITRIC ACID.— To contain not more than of a grain
of arsenic (cal. as arsenious oxide), nor more than A
of a grain of lead to the pound (R. 54).
CLOVES. —Eugenia Carophyllota. Defined by R. 40 (4).
(No exhausted cloves, foreign substances, nor more
than 5 to 100 weight clove-stems).
COCOA. Cocoa-leaves, cocoa-paste, cocoa powder, soluble
cocoa, prepared cocoa and chocolate, are defined by
R. 39. Prepared cocoa, compounded cocoa, homoeo-
pathic cocoa, or sweetened cocoa must be labelled
with their percentage of cocoa (R. 39 (6) ).
Cocoa-husks, any weighty substance, paraffin or,
foreign fat—prohibited (R. 39 (8) ).
COD LIVER OIL. —Malt Extract and Cod Liver Oil de-
fined (R, 23 (5) ) (15 p.c. weight Cod Liver Oil).
COFFEE. —“ The seed of Coffea Arabica or Coffea Liberica.”
Ground Coffee, not less than 10 parts p.c. fat, not more
than 1 part p.c. Saccharine matter, not more than 6
parts p.c. Ash. No added substance (R. 38 (1) (2) ).
“ Coffee and Chicory mixture ” not to contain
added substance, and to be so labelled, showing parts
of each (R. 38 (5)).
Coffee Essence, to contain not less than | part p.c.
Caffeine, and labelled as per R. 38 (7). No mixture to
contain less than 50 parts p.c. Coffee Essence or
Extract.
COLOURING. —To so conceal damage or inferiority in food
or drugs is an offence (S. 5). Injurious colouring
of food or drugs forbidden, (manufacture or sale),
by s, 11. “Artificially coloured, or Flavoured”
food must be so labelled, (R. 9), except confectionery,
cheese, cordials, spirits, sauces, etc. Certain colour


ings (Arsenic, lead, picric acid, etc.), are wholly
forbidden by R. 10, except where the Regulations
specifically permit them.
COMMITTEE, ADVISORY.— Present members (July, 1910):
Dr. J. Ashburton Thompson (Pres.), Hon. J. A. Far-
leigh, M.L.C. (Chamber of Commerce), J. D. Fisher
(Chamber of Manufactures), W. M. Hamlet (Govern-
ment Analyst), G. S. Littlejohn (Commerce), T. S.
Loney (Chemist), Dr. W. G. Armstrong (Medical
Officer of Health), Dr. J. B. Cleland (Bacteriologist),
C. E, Fawsitt (Professor of Chemistry, Syd. Univ.).
The Committee was gazetted on 3rd February, 1909,
and the “ Regulations ” for their procedure on 14th
April, 1909. See Advisory Committee.
COMMONWEALTH— During May, 1910, a Conference of
representatives of all States except W.A. was held at
Sydney. A uniform standard for foods and drugs
throughout the Commonwealth was agreed upon, to
be carried into effect by joint State Legislation. With a
few slight alterations the standard and regulations
prescribed are those of New South Wales. Copies
may be obtained from the Board of Health.
COMPANY. —The address of a Registered Company need
not go on food labels, nor the address of a registered
firm (S. 14). A “guaranteeing” Company must be
registered in N.S.W. (S. 47). Form of Guarantee
(R. 1).
CONDENSED MILK. —To contain (in parts p.c.) not less
than—
Unsweetened. Sweetened.
Milk Solids (not fat) .. 2 2 r%
Milk-fat .. .. 7 r 7 r , 8&
No foreign No foreign subs-
substance tance save sugar.
It must be labelled with directions as to “ making”
(R. 32 (1) (2) (3) ).


Condensed, Skim or Separated Milk is defined,
and must be labelled “ Condensed Skim Milk (R. 31
(5) (6) ). For Analyst’s Certificate, see R. 73.
“For the first time,” says Dr. Ashburton Thomp-
son ($. M. Herald , 4/11/9), “ those persons who feed
their babies with Condensed Milk will know exactly
what strength of milk they are giving, and the danger
of starving the child will be easily avoided.”
CONDIMENTS. —See Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, etc.
CONFECTIONERY. —Defined (does not include medicated
lozenges). Packages must not be re-used. Medicated
Confectionery must be labelled “ Medicated ” (R. 46)
CONSERVE.— See Jam.
CORDIAL AND SYRUPS. —Defined, and must be labelled
with name of fruit from which prepared. Preserva-
tive : not more than 2 grains sulphur dioxide to pint
(R. 57). ¥
CORDIALS (COMPOUND) - Orange Bitters, &c., &c„
defined ; must be labelled “ Compound Cordial ”
Preservative : as above, (R. 58).
CORDIALS & SYRUPS (ARTIFICIAL). —Defined, must be
labelled “Artificial Cordial,” or “Artificial Syrup,”
and it is forbidden to use labels as to “ natural fruit
juices.” Preservative : as above (R. 59).
CONFIDENTIAL. —See Secrecy.
COUNCIL (LOCAL GOVERNMENT). —A Shire or Municipal
Council is a “ local authority,” (S. 4), to which the
Governor may “ leave ” the administration of the Act
(S. 9). The Board may require a Council to submit
for analysis each year three or more specified samples
per each 1000 of its population (S. 26), and Councils
may (singly or in combination) appoint and remunerate
Analysts (S. 28).
To what extent the Councils will administer the
Act depends much on the zeal they indicate. Lack of


funds or of expert advice appears to disable many of
the smaller Councils in affecting to use their statutory
powers.
COW. —It is an offence to sell milk for food from a diseased
cow ; the presence of the latter in the milking-herd is
prima facie evidence of a sale. The Governor may
declare what are “ diseases ” (S. 21). See Milk
It is forbidden to milk a cow unless the udder and teats
are clean, as well as the hands of the milker (R. 34 (8)).
CREAM.— To contain not less than 40 parts p.o. of milk-
fat, and no foreign substance (S. 31 (2) ).
CREAM CHEESE.— To contain not less than 60 parts p.c.
milk fat in water-free substance (R. 36 (4) ).
CREAM OF TARTAR (Potassium Citartrate KHC± // 4 0 6 ).
—Sold for other than medical use, defined (R. 20).
DECLARATION OF CERTAIN DRUGS.—(R. 66). See
Drug.
DESTRUCTION.— The Court may after adjudication order
unfit or prohibited foods, drugs, etc., to be destroyed
(S. 22 (7) ).
DIETETIC ESSENCES.— (R. 53). See Essences.
DISEASE.— It is an ofience (penalty £2O) for a person
suffering from any infectious or contagious disease to
be engaged in the manufacture, carriage, packing,
etc., of food or drugs (R. 14) (2).
Disease in cows may be declared (specified), by
the Governor (S. 21). See Cow.
Generally the subject is dealt with in the Public
Health Act, 1902.
DISINFECTANT.— Germicide, antiseptic, or preservative.
Sale of may be prohibited by Governor, on Board s
recommendation, or of D. C. Judge’s on appeal (S. 18).
Board may require special directions on label (S. 19),


DISTRICT COURT JUDGE. —An appeal lies to him when
the Board recommends the prohibition of sale of druo- s
appliances or disinfectants. He may hear in private
and may vary or rescind report or recommendations
or make fresh ones (S. 20).
DRINKS. “ Non-excisable fermented,” defined (Sac-
charm Preservative allowed, 3 grains to the gallon)
' t- *'■ rhey must not contain more than 2 parts
p.(. P ro °f s pi r it> and not more than unavoidable
traces of Sulphur Dioxide.
‘‘Summer or Temperance,” defined. Sulphur
rD° Xl fo\^ reSerVa^V 6 n 1 grain to the pint
(K. 62). See Aerated Waters, Artificial Cordials
and Syrups, etc.
DRUG.—“ Includes medicines for internal and external
consumption or use by man, and soaps, dusting pow-
ders, essences, and unguents used by man; and
disinfectants, germicides, antiseptics, and preserva-
tives used for any purpose ” (S. 4).
The adulteration ”or “ false description ”of a
drug is copiously defined by S. 5, the sale of such
forbidden under heavy penalty by S. 10, as also (S. 11);
the mixing of injurious ingredients with drugs, mixing
to increase weight, or measure, or to conceal inferiority,
also the selling of drugs “ not of the nature, substance
or quality demanded ” (S. 12).
Drugs must, with certain exceptions (given in
K. 15 and in a list in Gazette of 11/5/10), comply with
B. P, tests (S. 12 (4) ). Drugs sold in a mixture must
be appropriately labelled as such, except (a) a drug
generally known as mixture, or a drug not in the
R.T. ; ( b ) doctor’s prescriptions; (c) mixtures ex-
empted by regulation ; ( d ) mixtures for immediate
consumption (S. 13),
Trade formulae of proprietary drugs (containing
no unwholesome ingredient), need not be disclosed
(S. 5). The Board may examine advertised drugs and
publish their report (S. 16), and the Governor, on the


Board’s recommendation, may prohibit the advertising
or sale of injurious drugs, subject to appeal (S. 17).
Packages which include certain substances (ace-
tanilide oil or rue, veronal, etc., etc.) must be so
“ declared ” by label (R. 66). See Alcohol, Pro-
prietary Medicine, Chloroform, etc.
DUST.— Butchers’ shops must be protected from flies and
dust by glass or wire gauze, only where the Local
Government Ordinances so require. See also R. 14 (6).
EMPLOYER. —Penalty for contravention of Act may be
recovered from, by agent or servant who has been fined,
if he prove that food, drug or article was sold without
knowledge that Act had been contravened or not
complied with (S. 49 (1) ).
ESSENCES, DIETETIC. —To be wholesome flavouring sub-
stance in ethylic alcohol or water, with or without
harmless colouring matter (R. 53).
ESSENCE OF LEMON. —Method for determination of
Citral (R. 70). Flavouring extract from oil of lemon or
lemon peel or both, to contain not less than 5 per cent,
oil of lemon and to conform with general standard
for essences (R. 53).
EUCALYPTUS OIL. For internal use by man, to be colour-
less or pale yellow oil distilled from eucalyptus,
rectified, and possessing characteristic aromatic colour
and pungent cooling taste. To contain not less than
50 per cent, of eucalyptol (cineol). Specific gravity
and tests described. To be labelled “ For internal
use ” (R. 67).
EVIDENCE. —Presence of diseased cow in milking herd of
person who sells milk to be jprima jade evidence that
milk of such cow has been sold for food of man (S. 21),
Presence of food or drug in any place to be evidence
that such was intended to be sold or used (S. 2 (8) ).
Certificate of analyst that sample received without
broken seal to be sufficient evidence of identity (S. 25).
Production of certificate purporting to be signed by


analyst to be prima facie evidence of food, drug, etc.,
analysed and of result of analysis ; proof of signature of
analyst not necessary (S. 29); of analysis by other
than prescribed method is permissible, and may be
brought to show that prescribed method not correct
(S. 30).
1 roof of possession by any person or article seized,
marked, etc., a sample of which has been proved by
analysis to be adulterated or falsely described, is
prima facie evidence that same is in his possession for
sale in contravention of Act (S. 44).
Onus of proof that food or drug not sold for use
by man to be on defendant (S. 46).
May be given in prosecutions for sale of food or
drugs by person by whom any guarantee is alleged to
have been given where defendant attempts to prove
that food or drug were guaranteed (S. 47).
EXAMINATIONS. Board may cause to be examined any
advertised food, drug, or appliance and report on
comparison as to composition, properties and price of
article advertised with that examined. Such report
may be published in the Gazette and any newspaper,
and no action shall lie in respect of such publication
(S. 16).
EXEMPTION.— Of certain drugs from the provision of the
Act requiring drugs sold under name included in
British Pharmacopoeia to comply with descriptions
given and test prescribed in latest edition, with
amendments, thereof (S. 12). List of these exempted
drugs is published in Gazette 11/5/10, p. 2597, and see
p. 103 following.
It is not necessary to observe the provisions of the
Act regarding “ mixtures,” in the case of compounds
recognised by the British Pharmacopoeia, or in drugs
supplied on prescriptions, or mixtures exempted by
the Regulations, or mixtures supplied by Pharmacist
for consumption on premises (S. 13),


Of certain foods from all requirements as to
labelling (S. 14 and R. 15).
From statement of trade description and measure
of contents (S. 14 and R. 16).
From statement of weights (S. 14 and R. 17).
FATS AND OILS, EDIBLE. —To be the oils and fats com-
monly recognised as wholesome food stuffs, free from
rancidity, decomposition, and offensive odour and
taste, to contain no mineral oil. Package containing
mixture of diverse origin to state the kinds of oils and
fats contained (R. 29).
FEES. —Members of Advisory Committee other than Public
Servants shall be paid fees to be prescribed not
exceeding £2 2s. per sitting (S. 8).
Person from whom food, drug or article is taken
for analysis may obtain copy of result of analysis on
payment of fee to be fixed, not exceeding ten shillings
and sixpence (S. 34).
FLAVOURlNG.— “Artificially flavoured,” food must be so
labelled, except confectionery, cheese, cakes, pastry,
biscuits, ices, jelly crystals, cordials, spirits, vinegar,
sauce, etc. (R. 9).
FLIES. —Butchers’ shops must be enclosed with glass or
wire gauze to exclude flies and dust, where the L. G.
Ordinances so require. See also R. 14 (6).
FLOOR. —Place used for preparing meat or fat for sale for
human food to have floor of tiles, cement, mineral
asphalt, or material impervious to water, with smooth
surface and drained so that liquid flows off (R. 27).
FLOUR.— To be fine, clean, sound product obtained by
bolting wheat-meal, not to contain more than 14 per
cent, of moisture nor less than 1 per cent, nitrogen,
nor more than £ per cent, fibre, and to yield not more
than 1 per cent ash. Not to contain any added foreign
matter (R. 18).


LY MIXTURES. (Poisonous) —Composed of arsenic acid
sawdust, etc. At the time of publication the Phar-
macy Board has recommended a regulation prohibit-
ing the use of such mixtures where food is stored and
sold.
FOOD.— Or “ articles of food,” means articles used for
food or drink by man, and includes confectionery, and
any article that enters into or is used in the composi-
tion oi properation of food, and any spices, flavouring
substances, essences, and colouring matters so used
(S, 4).
FOOD SUBSTITUTE. —Sold under fancy, suggestive, pro-
prietary or registered name, not exempt from provi-
sions of the Act (S. 52).
FOOD PROTECTION.— Persons engaged in manufacture,
etc., to keep clothing and body clean. No person
suffering from disease to engage in manufacture, etc.
Receptacles, etc., to be kept clean, free from foul
odours, and from flies and dust. Place of manufac-
ture, etc., not to be used for other purposes. Vehicles
to be kept clean and not used to convey contaminating
matter. Food not to be packed in paper or material
which is not clean or which has writing on it (R. 14).
FORFEITURE. —Court, upon conviction, may order
forfeiture of any food, drug or article to which the
conviction relates, and such forfeiture may extend
to the whole of the article, or any similar article, and
to packages or vessels containing any similar article
of the defendant’s or found on his premises at the time
of the committing of the offence (S. 39),
FRUlT. —Preserved fruit to be sound fruit or fruit sub-
stance preserved by drying or immersion in fruit juice
or water—not to contain any added substance save
sugar—to be labelled with name or names of fruit
(R. 50).


FRUIT JELLY. —A compound of fruit juice and sugar—
not to contain vegetable substance save that derived
from sound fruit of the variety designated on the
label, nor any glucose, gelatine, starch jelly, or other
foreign substance (R. 51 (6) ).
GAZETTE. —Report of examination by Board of any
advertised food, drug, or appliance and comparison
as to composition, properties, and price with article
examined may be published in Gazette (S. 16).
Sale of any substance as disinfectant, germicide,
antiseptic or preservative may be prohibited (S. 18).
Notice may be given that directions which Board
may require shall be set out on label of substance
sold as germicide, disinfectant, antiseptic or preser-
vative (S. 19).
Notification of name of any person wdxo has or
whose servants or agents have previously been con-
victed of any offence, and who is or whose servants
or agents are subsequently convicted, may be gazetted
within 21 days of the subsequent conviction, together
with particulars of address, trade or company, name,
description of the offence, the decision of the Court,
the penalty of any forfeiture. When food, drug or
article was sold to person convicted by some other
person, and sold by former in the state which he
received it, then the name of the supplier, his address,
the nature of his trade may, after notice to him, be
also published in such notification (S. 53).
Notification prohibiting advertising or sale of
food, drug or appliance injurious to life or health, or
which is useless (S. 17).
GELATINE.— For consumption by man, to be clean,
wholesome product obtained from skin, membranes,
bones, or other collaginous bodies. Test described.
Preservative in certain proportions may be used—to
be labelled “ for food ” (R, 28).


GERMICIDE. —SaIe may be prohibited by notification in
Gazette (S, 18.) Direction may be given in Gazette
that information or directions which Board may
require shall be set out on label of packet containing
Germicide (S. 19).
GIN. —Standard of strength to be not more than 35 Q under-
proof (R. 64).
GINGER. —To be washed or dried, or the decortiated
and dried rhizome of zingiber officinale—not to con-
tain any exhausted ginger or foreign vegetable or
mineral substance (R. 40 (5) )
GLUCOSE. —Mixing or confectioner’s glucose—tests des-
cribed—not to contain arsenic or harmful substance
(R. 44).
GROCERIES. —(RetaiI). Certain Food Substances (un-
sealed) exempt from labelling provisions (S. 14 ; R. 15).
GUARANTEE. —ln prosecution for sale in contravention
of Act by servant of person who purchased under a
guarantee, servant shall be entitled to be discharged
on proving that he had no reason to believe food,
drug or article was adulterated or falsely described, or
was sold in state different from that in which it was
purchased by the person employing him, or was other
than that demanded by the prosecutor (S. 50).
In prosecution for sale in contravention of Act,
a person shall be entitled to be discharged upon proving
that he had received from the person from whom he
purchased the food, etc., or his duly authorised agent,
written guarantee that the same is not adulterated,
falsely described, or mixed, coloured, etc., in contra-
vention of Act, and that he had no reason to believe
same was adulterated or falsely described, and that
he sold it in the same state as when he purchased it
(S 47).
Note.— The person giving a guarantee must be
resident in New South Wales, or if a company, must
have a registered office in N.S.W. The name,
address of place of business, and trade name of
guarantor must be stated. The guarantee may be


general or specific. A general guarantee applies
to the sale of the goods or description of goods
named therein, and a copy shall be filed in the
Treasury. The serial number allotted to such
to be placed by guarantor on each package of such
goods sold by him with the words “ guaranteed
under the Pure Food Act, 1908,” with name of
guarantor. Guarantee shall not apply to any
package of goods unless such number and words
are placed thereon. A specific guarantee applies to
the sale of specific goods and refers to a bill of sale,
invoice, bill of lading, or other document describing
the goods and the weight, measure and number of
the same, but it is not available as a defence unless
defendant within seven days after service of sum-
mons, sent to the purchaser a copy of such guarantee
with a written statement that he intends to rely on
same as a defence, and specifying the name and
address of place of business of the person giving the
guarantee, and has also sent a like notice of his
intention to the person giving the guarantee. The
person alleged to have given any guarantee may give
evidence at the hearing, and a Court may adjourn
to enable him to do so The forms of guarantees
are prescribed by regulation number one. Use of
the expression “ guarantee ” in connection with
goods which are not guaranteed is prohibited under-
penalty of £2O (R. 1).
HEROIN. —A Drug is falsely described if the package or
label does not bear a statement of the quantity of any
. Heroin or derivative or preparation thereof (S. 5).
HONEY. —The nectar and saccharine exudations of plants
gathered and stored in comb by honey bee, not to
contain more than 26 per cent, water, nor less than
60 per cent reducing sugars, not to yield over | per
cent. ash. Not to include product of bees fed on sugar
or glucose, and not to contain added sugar or glucose,
artificial sweetening, colouring, or other foreign sub-
stance (R. 45).


ICES.— Any preparation of wholesome food stuffs with or
without harmless flavouring and colouring, sterilised
or pasteurised, and frozen—to be thereafter protected
from contamination—(R. 48).
ICE CREAM. —Food stuff composed of milk and of cream
with sugar, with or without fresh eggs, and with or
without not more than one part per cent of gelatine,
flavoured with fruit or fruit juice or pulp, nuts or
harmless dietetic essences, coloured or not, and with
or without candied fruits, liquors, or spirits, sterilised,
or pasteurised, frozen, and protected from contami-
nation—not to contain less than 10 per cent, of milk
fat in form of cream (R. 48).
ICE CREAM SALE. —Ice cream or ices declared to be of the
flavouring of a fruit or fruits not to be sold if flavoured
wholly or in part with another substance, unless name
of fruit is conjoined with word “ Flavour,” or
“ Flavouring ” (R. 48).
INFANTS’ FOOD. —Any food described or sold as article
of food specially suitable for infants under 12 months
—not to contain any woody fibre or mineral substance
not soluble in acid—no package containing starch to
be sold unless labelled suitable for infants over six
months only (R. 22).
INSECTICIDES. —Containing strychnine, arsenic, or other
poison not to be kept or used so as to expose any food
for sale to risk of contamination (R. 12).
INSPECTION. —Officer may enter and inspect any place
which he believes is kept or used for the sale, storage,
delivery, conveyance, manufacture or preparation for
sale of any article used, or which he believes is intended
to be used as a food or drug, or which he believes is a
prohibited article ; and may inspect any such article;
officers of the Board or local authority or police force
must have written authority, which may be general or
limited to a specified place. Entry may be made


only at reasonable times in the day, except where any
article is sold, delivered, conveyed, manufactured, or
prepared for sale during the night. Inspection may
be made of any article used, or believed to be used as
a food or drug, or which is or is believed to be a pro-
hibited article whilst being conveyed through any
public street or road, or in a vessel or boat, or by rail-
way, for purposes of trade, sale, or delivery. Officers
of a local authority may exercise power in the area of
the local authority, and on any part of a road, river,
stream or water course which forms a common
boundary between such area and an adjoining area.
Officers may examine and open article or packages,
remove portions or samples for examination or
analysis, weigh, count, measure, gauge, or mark
articles or packages, and fasten, secure, or seal the
same, or any door or opening affording access to same,
and may seize any article which is or appears to be
dangerous or injurious to health, or unwholesome, or
unfit for use, or to be a prohibited article, and any
package or vessel enclosing or containing the same
(S. 22).
Production of books in the nature of store records
required (S. 51).
JAM.— And conserve, to be product of boiling one kind of
sound fruit with sugar—not to contain glucose,
starch-jelly, apple pulp (except in apple jam), or other
added substances except spices and apple juice (latter
not to exceed 4 per cent.). Addition of harmless
enuring to raspberry and plum jams permitted
JELLY CRYSTALS. —Fruit jelly crystals to be confection
of gelatine, sugar, and citric or tartaric acid, flavoured
from fruits or other vegetable substance, to be labelled
“ fruit jelly crystals’’—jelly crystals to be confec-
tioned of gelatine, sugar, and citric or tartaric acid,
coloured and flavoured with harmless substances—to
be labelled “ jelly crystals ” (R. 52).


LABEL. —Term “ statement or label ” means any written,
pictorial or other matter written on or attached to any
package containing a food or drug for sale (R. 2).
Descriptive matter or label not to contain any
false or misleading particulars—not to contain
reference to requirement of Act so as to qualify or
modify compliance with any such requirements.
Sale of food in contravention of regulation forbidden,
(R. 3).
Certain foods are exempted from the necessity of
being labelled. These are described in R. 15, but
this does not exempt from the statement of preservative
prescribed in R. 8.
Gazette notice may be given that information
or directions which board require shall be set out on
label or package containing substance or compound
sold as a disinfectant, germicide, antiseptic, or pre-
servative (S. 19).
Certain articles are exempted from provisions of
S. 14, requiring label to shew trade name, weight,
number and volume. These articles are described in
R. 16.
“ Substitute for . . . .” on a label will not
(probably) exempt the vendor from his ordinary
liability.
LARD. —Fat rendered from meat of hog —free from ran-
cidity —not to contain more than one per cent, of
substance other than hog fat necessarily incorporated in
rendering —not to contain more than 1 per cent, water
nor any foreign substance (R. 24 (9) ).
LEGAL PROCEDURE.— See “ Penalties, ’ “ Prosecutions/'
“ Summons,” “ Evidence,” “ Witness.”
LEMON, ESSENCE OF.— See Essence,
LIBEL.— No action shall lie in respect of publication in the
Gazetteer newspaper of any report of the Board on
comparison as to composition, properties, and price of
article advertised with article examined by the Board
(S. 16).


No action shall lie in respect of publication in the
Gazette within twenty-one days of conviction of any
person, his servants or agents, of a notification of the
name, etc., of such person if he or his servants or agents
have previously been convicted of an offence. Such
notification may, if the Board direct, be republished
in any newspaper circulating in N.S.W., and no action
shall lie for such republication (S. 53).
LIME JUICE.— To be expressed juice of fruit of citrus
medica variety acida, to contain not less than six
per cent citric acid naturally present in fruit, and no
added citric acid. Cordial or syrup to be composed of
lime juice, sugar, and potable water, and to contain
no added substance. Sulphur dioxide may be added
as preservation to lime juice and cordial or syrup in
proportions not exceeding two grains to the pint
(R. 60).
LIQUOR.— The prescribed apparatus shall be used and
method observed in determining the degree of strength
of any spirits (S. 31). This is prescribed by R. 71.
The measures set forth in any act dealing with
excise or Customs duty on liquors shall be held to
satisfy the requirements of this (Pure Food) Act with
respect to indicating the true measure of every package
(S. 14 (2) ).
LITHIA WATER.— To conform to general standard of
aerated waters —to contain not less than five grains
of lithium carbonate to the pint (R. 56 (3) ).
LOCAL AUTHORITY.— Means council of a municipality
or shire, or, in police districts outside municipalities
and shires, a member of the police force appointed
under the Public Health Act, 1902 (S. 4).
Officer of local authority to exercise powers of
inspection must have written authority (S. 22). See
also Inspection.
LOZENGES.— Containing drug for the wholesale supply of
which to registered pharmacist restrictive law or
c


regulation is m force, are exempt from provisions of
R. 46, prohibiting manufactures of confections con-
taining such drugs (R. 46).
MAC ®-r:J“ the d ™ d arrillus of Myrutim Program,
not to contain arnllus of any other variety of Myristica
including M. Malabarica or Fatua (BombayVace)’
and M. Argentea (Wild Mace) (R. 40 (7)). 7 ’
MAL JjrJ O be i the ° f barley or some other desig-
nated cereal which has been caused to germinate
hl h U)^ SeqUontl J be6n dried ~ to contain not more
than 100th gram of arsenic (Arsenious oxide) to the
pound of malt (R. 23 (1)).
MALT EXTRACT. —To be obtained by evaporating an
aqueous extract of malt at temperature not exceeding
55 C.-to contain not less than 70 per cent, solids,
ana conform to characters and tests given in British
armaceutical Codex, 1907. Baker’s or commercial,
or baker s maltose to contain not less than 70 per cent
solids wholly derived from malt. Liquid malt extract
to contain not less than 50 per cent, of solids, and
possess diastasic power proportionately equal to that
of malt extract. With Cod Liver Oil to be an emulsion
laTter 11 (R g 23) t 15 by Wei £ ht ° f
MARGARINE.—IncIude every preparation of animal or
vegetable fat or oil churned with milk or separated milk
which is intended to be, or may be used in place of
butter, and which contains fats other than milk fat.
*° be sold unless mixed with 5 per cent, of sesame
oil ( besamum mdicum or S. Oriental), unless it con-
forms to general standard of edible oils and fats, does
not contain more than 16 per cent, water, does not
contain any colouring matter nor any other substance
save salt {sodium chloride), and preservative, but an
additional proportion of sesame oil or other edible
vegetable oil may be added. Boric acid may be added
as a preservative in proportion not exceeding one half


per cent. Packet to be labelled “ Margarine.” Material
for consumption on premises by customers to be
labelled, and use of expressions “ butter ” and
“ butterine ” are forbidden (R. 30).
MARMALADE. —To be product obtained by boiling sound
citrus fruit with sugar, not to contain added substance
(R. 51)
MEALS. —See “ Oatmeal ” and “ Mixed Meals.”
MEASURE. —Mixing to fraudulently increase weight or
measure is prohibited (S. 12).
To be indicated on label of every package of food
(S. 14). Certain articles described in R. 15 are
exempted. See also RR. 16 and 17. Measures in
Customs and Excise Acts satisfy requirements if
liquors paying duty (S. 14). To be expressed in cus-
tomary way by stating on package containing less
than 14 lbs. number of pounds and ounces, and on
package of liquid less than 1 gallon number of quarts,
pints or ounces (R. 4). The variation of the measure
stated from the actual measure must not exceed five
per cent., and then only if six packages weighed
together are of or above the measure stated (R. 5).
MEAT. —To be edible part of any mammal, fish, fowl,
crustacean, mollusc, or other animal generally used as
food, properly dressed. Fresh or chilled meat to be
kept at temperatare above 35° F. Frozen meat is
any meat which has been exposed to temperature of
35° F., or below. Salted, pickled, corned or smoked
meat is meat preserved with salt, saltpetre (potassium
or sodium nitrate), sugar, vinegar, spices, and smoke,
singly or in combination. Manufactured meat is meat
other than those above referred to, simple, or mixed
whole, minced or comminuted, cooked or uncooked, in
bulk or package, with or without addition of salt,
saltpetre, sugar, vinegar, spices, herbs, smoke, oils,
or rendered meat fat, singly or in combination. Salt-
petre not to be mixed with any meat in larger pro


portion than J per cent, calculated as K.N. 0 3 . Manu-
factured meat to be labelled with name of meat or
meats, and not to be sold in contravention of regu-
lation (R. 2t). See also the Cattle Slaughtering and
Diseased Animals and Meat Act, No. 36, 1902, and
the Abattoirs Act, 14 Yic. 36. Flies and dust, see
R. 14 (4).
MEAT EXTRACT. —Not to contain any added substance
save salt (sodium chloride ) and condiments (R. 26),
MEAT PRODUCT. —Provisions for securing cleanliness
and freedom from contamination described (R. 27),
MEDICATED SOAP. —To be conformable with general
standard for soap and mixed with a drug or disinfectant
to be specially labelled (R. 69).
MILK. To sell lor food of man milk of a cow which is
suffering from any disease is prohibited. The fact
that diseased cow is in herd is primci facie evidence
that the milk of such cow has been sold for food of
man. Governor may declare what are diseases (S. 21).
To be normal, sweet and clean secretion from udder
of healthy cow properly fed and kept, excluding that
got during the ten days immediately following on
paiturition to contain not less than per cent, of
milk solids, not fat, and per centum of milk fat—
not to contain any added water or any foreign sub-
stance. Skim or separated milk to contain in it fat
free liquid not less than B r % per cent, of milk solids not
fat (R. 31). For form of Analyst’s Certificate see
R. 71. For general provisions for securing cleanliness
and freedom from contamination see R. 34,
Carrying milk and water at the same time is
prohibited (R. 78),
In Kench v. O'Sullivan (Banco, 3/8/10) the


Supreme Court apparently decided that once
analysis shows milk to be otherwise than the “ milk ”
of Reg. 31 then it is of no avail for the vendor to
prove honesty in the matter, that the milk was the
normal px’oduct of a healthy cow, etc. Ex parte
Wedlock (1899) 20 L.R. 343, is thus now not so
authoritative. That case decided that it was no
offence to sell milk below standard, if supplied as it
came from the cow.
(, DAIRIES : See the Dairies Supervision Act,
No. 46,1901).
MINCED (OR SAUSAGE) MEAT— To be chopped or
comminuted meat, with or without salt, sugar, spices,
herbs, saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate), whole-
some farinaceous substances, or armenian bole—
not to contain less than 75 per cent, of meat of the kind
designated on label, not more than eight grains of
armenian bole, nor more than 13 grains of saltpetre
to the pound. If enclosed in skin of animal origin,
skin to be deemed portion of meat. Skin may be
marked with Bismarck brown or with roseine. Addi-
tion of sulphur dioxide in proportion not exceeding
three and half grains to the pound is permitted (R. 25).
MIXTURE. —Where food or drug is a mixture the in_
gredients should be pure, and to be delivered to pur
chaser in package labelled as a mixture with the names
of the ingredients, and, in the case of food, the pro-
portions of such when so prescribed (S. 13). See also
“ Exemptions.”
An article of food or a drug is adulterated or
falesly described when it is mixed with any substance
in any quantity or proportion which diminishes its
food value as compared with such articles in a pure or
normal state, and in an undeteriorated or sound
condition, or when it is mixed with any substance of a
lower commercial value, but such article or drug
shall not be deemed to be adulterated or falsely de-
scribed, if it is sold as a mixture in accordance with
the (Act S. 5).


Mixing or causing or permitting to be mixed for
purposes of sale any ingredient or material with any
rood or drug in order to fraudulently increase its weight
bulk, or measure, or to conceal its inferior quality, or
to sell any such mixture, is prohibited (S. 12).
MORPHINE.— A drug is falsely described if the package
or label fails to bear a statement of the quality of any
morphine or derivative, or preparation thereof (S. 5).
MUNICIPALITY. —IncIudes the City of Sydney (S. 4).
A ™ un icipal or shire council is the “ local au-
fc° w^ ich the administration of the Act may
be “ left” (S. 9). J
MUSTARD. —Mustard flour to be ground seed of Sinavis
alba, Brasstca juncea, and Brassica nigra, not to yield
more than 8 per cent, total ash, not to contain any
added substance except wheaten flour, which must not
exceed 2| per cent. Mustard pastes to be mustard
flour to be mixed with water, salt (sodium chloride),
verjuice, white wine, vinegar, tartaric or citric acid,
sugar, tumeric, and spices, singly or in combination—
not to contain flour of any foreign seed, dextrine or
added mineral matter save salt (R. 40 (6) ).
NAME. Articles of food sold under a fancy, suggestive,
proprietary, or registered name, which are, or are
intended to be, substitutes, in part or in whole, for
any article of food, are not exempt from the pro-
visions of the Act for that reason (S. 52).
Name of person twice offending against pro-
visions of Act may be published (S. 53).
Any person who appears from the label or any
packet containing any food, etc., in connection with
which there is a contravention of the Act, to have
imported, manufactured or prepared, or enclosed such
food or drug, shall, unless he proves to the contrary,
be deemed to have imported, manufactured, prepared
or enclosed such food or drug, and shall, unless the
contravention is due to the person upon whose pre-


raises the package is found, or to deterioration, or
other cause beyond his control, be guilty of an offence
(S. 15).
NATURE, SUBSTANCE OR QUALITY.— SaIe of food or
drug not of the nature, substance, or quality demanded
by the purchaser is prohibited. It is not necessary in
prosecutions to prove that any food or drug is defective
in all three respects (S. 12).
See “ Public Health Act,” (p. 44).
NEWSPAPER.— See “ Publication.”
NUTMEG. —To be dried seed of Myristica Fragrans,
deprived of its testa. Ground nutmeg not to contain
any foreign substance (R. 40 (7) ).
OATMEAL. —The meal produced by grinding oats (Avena
saliva) after removal of the husk, to contain not less
than 5 per cent, of fats or ethereal extract, and not
more than 2£ per cent, of meal derived from other
grains (R. 19).
OFFICER. —Includes any medical officer of health, assist-
ant medical officer of health, officer of the Board or of
a local authority, and superintendent, inspector, sub-
inspector, or sergeant of police, or any constable
specially authorised by the Inspector-General, or any
Superintendent of Police (S. 4).
Officer may, upon request of President of Board,
inspect books of the nature of store records, etc.,
where there is ground for suspecting that any person
is in possession for purposes of sale or manufacture
in contravention of the Act. Officer not maintaining
secrecy as to such records is liable to penalty (S. 51).
May enter and inspect. If an officer of the Board,
or Local Authority, or member of the police force, he
must be authorised in writing. He may open and
examine packages, remove samples for analysis,
weigh, measure and count packages, and secure and
seal unwholesome, or prohibited article (S. 22) —not


oompellcd to produce confidential reports received in
official capacity (S. 45).
OILS, EDIBLE. —See “Fats (and Oils), Edible.”
OIL OF LEMON. The volatile oil obtained by expression
or alcoholic solution from the fresh peel of the lemon
{Citrus Limonum, L.)— tests described. Terpeneless
oil of lemon to be oil of lemons from which all or nearly
all the terpenes have been removed (R. 53).
OLIVE OIL. Obtained by cold expression from the sound
mature fruit of cultivated olive tree {Olea Europea L.)
—tests described—to conform to the general standard
of edible oils and fats (R. 29 (3) ).
OPIUM. —A drug is falsely described if label does not bear
a statement of the quantity of any opium, or deri-
vative, or preparations thereof (S. 5).
PACKAGE.— lncludes everything in or by which goods are
cased, covered, enclosed, contained, or packed (S. 4).
9 f food enclosed for sale to bear statement or
label indicating trade name or description, net weight
or number, true measure or volume of contents, name
and address of vendor or maker, or of the agent or
owner of the rights of manufacture. A company or
firm registered under the Companies Act or the Regis-
tration of Firms Act may omit the address. The
sale of food in packages not so labelled prohibited
(S. 14).
An article of food or a drug is adulterated or
falsely described if th. 6 contents of a package as
originally put up, have been removed in whole or in
part, and other contents substituted, or if it fails to
bear a label showing the quantity or proportion of
‘morphine, etc., or if the weight or measure of the
contents are incorrectly stated, or if the label bears a
false or misleading statement (S. 5).
PASTRY.— To include pastry, cakes, and biscuits—to be
the product of the mixture of two or more of certain


substances described —not to contain dried albumen,
yolk of egg preserved with preservative substance,
nor any artificial sweetening substance, mineral oil
or fat, alum, or sulphate of copper (R, 47).
PENALTY. —For using analysis made under the Act for
trade purposes (S. 35).
For contravention, or non-compliance or offence,
if not expressly provided, shall be, for first offence
not exceeding £2O, for second not exceeding £5O,
and for third and subsequent not exceeding £ 00.
Upon certificate of Government Analyst, that adul-
terated article is injurious to health, or if the Court
holds the offence was committed wilfully, or by cul-
pable negligence, such person may, in addition or in
lieu of penalties, be liable to imprisonment with or
without hard labour for not exceeding six months
(S. 36).
For removing, erasing, altering, breaking, or
opening marks, seals, or fastenings, placed by officer
on food, drug, article, or package, or upon door
giving access to same, £2O (S. 37).
For assaulting, intimidating, obstructing, or
attempting to obstruct officer or authorised person
in exercise of powers or discharge of duties, refusing to
allow samples to be taken, giving, procuring, offering,
or promising any bribe to influence officer or person
or retaking or attempting to retake any food, drug,
or article seized or sold, or resisting or attempting to
prevent such seizure, not exceeding £2O (S. 38).
An agent or servant, who proves that he sold
food or drug without knowledge of any contra-
vention of Act, may, whether his principal or employer
has been fined or not, recover the amount of the penalty
with costs from his principal or employer (S. 49).
For giving false guarantee (S. 47 (2) ).
For refusing to produce books of the nature of
store records for inspection where there is ground for


suspecting a person is in possession of food, drug, or
article for sale or manufacture, and penalty ’on
officer for not maintaining secrecy as to contents of
such, books (S. 51).
Board may make regulations prescribing penalties
not exceeding £2O, or a continuing penalty not ex-
ceeding £2 per diem, for contravention of any regu-
lation (S. 54), ®
For contravention or non-compliance with regu-
lations not more than £2O, or for continuing the
offence, not more than £2 for each day offence con-
tinues (R. 77).
Penalties are specially provided in Regulations
14, 27, 34 and 49, for protection of food, meat, milk,
ices, ice cream from contamination.
PEPPER.— BIack (Piper nigrum L.) tests described-
white (mature berry of Piper Nigrum L., from which
outer coating removed). Cayenne, dried fruit of
Capsicum, tests described, not to contain added
substance —Ground, to be ground white or ground black
or ground black and white, with no added substance
may be mixed with flour in proportion of fifty parts to
fifty, but then to be labelled “ Pepper Mixture,” and
proportions stated (R. 40).
PHARMACIST. Mixture sold by pharmacist for con-
sumption on premises, exempt from provisions of Act
re Mixtures (S. 13).
Restrictions on manufacture of confectionery as
to inclusion of drugs, does not apply to lozenges
supplied on order of pharmacist (R. 46).
PHARMACY BOARD. —Representative of, to sit on
Advisory Committee (S, 6).
The Board is constituted, and the registration of
Pharmacists provided for. bv the Pharmacy Act Nn
7,1897. " 3 ’
PICKLES.— To be sound vegetable or fruit, preserved in
manner prescribed (R. 43).


PLACE. —Includes any house, premises, or building (S. 4).
POISONS. —The regulation of Poisons is effected under the
Poisons Act, No. 65, 1902. The Pharmacy Board
issue certificates enabling registered pharmacists to
deal in poisons—books and records of sale to be kept.
It is prohibited to sell certain poisons to “ unknown ”
persons, or those under 18, or to sell rat or vermin
poison to other than householders. There are various
other provisions.
The Act does not apply to wholesale dealers,
patent vendors, medical prescriptions, photographic
materials, veterinary medicines, fly poisons, and
poisonous mixtures for vermin, if marked as such.
Under the Pure Food Act, the Governor may
prohibit the sale of injurious food, drugs or appliances
—subject to appeal. See S. 17.
POLICE. —Member of the police force, if authorised in
writing by the Inspector-General, has power to enter
and inspect (S. 22).
An “ appointed ” police officer is local authority
in police districts outside Shires or Municipalities
(S. 4).
POTABLE WATER. —Water which has been distilled oa:
filtered through one of the filters named, and kept
between distillation or filtration and sale so as to
be preserved from contamination (R. 55).
POTASH WATER. —To conform with general standard for
aerated waters, to contain not less than 15 grains of
potassium bicarbonate to the pint (R. 56).
PRESCRIBED. —Means prescribed by the Act or Regu-
lations (S. 4).
PRESCRIPTION.— It is not necessary to attach a statement
or label to a package of food or drug which is a mix-
ture, if supplied by prescription or order signed by a
legally qualified medical practitioner (S. 13).


Prohibition of sale of injurious or useless drugs
shall not apply to drugs supplied by prescription or
order of any legally qualified practitioner for use of
any person under his care and treatment (S. 17).
Regulation 65 requires pharmacist in certain cases to
keep records of number of times a drug is supplied on
order of practitioner.
PRESERVATIVE. —By notice in Gazette the Governor may
prohibit sale of any substance or compound as a pre-
servative (S. 18).
By notice in Gazette Board may require substance
sold as preservative to have statement or label con-
taining such information or directions as it deems
fit (S. 19).
Use of preservative substance, unless specially
permitted, is prohibited. Preservatives are per-
mitted in the following cases, viz. Minced meat,
sausage meat, or saveloy (R. 25) ; Gelatine (R. 28) ;
Margarine (R. 30) ; Butter (R. 35) ; Cordials (R. 57) ;
Compound Cordials (R. 58) ; Artificial Cordials and
Syrups (R. 59) ; Lime Juice (R. 60) ; Non-excisable
Fermented Drinks (R. 61) ; Summer or Temperance
Drinks (R. 62), Preservatives prescribed. Not more
than one preservative to be added. Packages con-
taining preserved food to be specially labelled. No
food to be sold in contravention of Regulation. Regu-
tation not to apply to common salt, sugar, spices,
wood-smoke, vinegar, and acetic acid added to food
(R. 8).
PROHIBITED ARTICLE. —Means article, the manufacture,
sale or use of, or other dealing with which in its then
state or condition is prohibited by this Act, or the
regulations, either absolutely or conditionally (S. 4).
PROHIBITION. —By notification in Gazette or newspaper,
Governor may prohibit advertising or sale of food, etc,,
which in the opinion of the Board, or on appeal, of a
Dictrict Court Judge, is injurious or useless for the
advertised purposes of cure (S. 17).


By Gazette notice Governor may prohibit sale
of any substance or compound as a disinfectant,
germicide, antiseptic, or preservative (S. 18).
PROPRIETARY FOODS OR DRUGS.— Proprietors not
required to disclose trade formulae if there are no
unwholesome ingredients, except as Act makes
necessary to secure freedom from adulteration or
false description (S. 5).
PROPRIETARY MEDICINES.— SoId for internal or ex-
ternal use by man not to contain any methylic alcohol
(R. 66 (2) ).
PROSECUTION. —In respect of food, etc., taken for
analysis, shall not be instituted after the expiration
of fifty days from the time when it was taken (S. 41).
In prosecutions concerning food, etc., summons
shall not be made returnable in less than ten days
from the day on which served (S. 42).
In prosecutions concerning food, etc., a copy of
any analyst’s certificate for the prosecution shall be
served with summons (S. 43).
Witness on behalf of prosecution not compelled
to disclose the fact that he received any information,
the nature of information, or the name of the person
giving such, and no officer compelled to produce
confidential reports received or made officially (S. 45).
A person is entitled to be discharged from prose-
cution upon proving that he has received from person
from whom he purchased any food, drug, or article,
or his duly authorised agent, a guarantee that the
food, drug, or article in respect of which the action is
brought is not adulterated, falsely described, or mixed,
coloured, etc., contrary to the Act, and upon proving
that he had no reason to believe the same was adul-
terated, or falsely described, and that he sold it in
the same state as when he purchased it (S. 47).
Proceedings against persons giving false guar-
antee may be taken before a court having jurisdiction,


where the guarantee was given (S. 47 (3) ), or where
sale was effected.
It is no defence in a prosecution for the sale of
any food, drug, or article that the defendant is only
the agent or servant of the owner or person dealing in
the food, etc. The agent, servant, and owner are
liable, provided that a servant shall not be liable if he
prove that the offence was committed in a store, shop,
stall, or similar place in which business was at the
time conducted under the personal superintendence of
the owner or his manager (S. 48).
PUBLICATION.—In Gazette and newspaper of report of
Board on any advertised food, drug, or appliance, and
comparison as to composition, properties, and price
with article examined—no action shall lie for such
publication (S. 16).
Of name of any person who has, or whose servants
or agents have previously been convicted of an offence,
and who is, or whose servants or agents are, subse-
quently convicted, together with particulars of address,
trade or company name, description of offence,
decision of the court, penalty, and forfeiture —no
action shall lie for such publication in Gazette or re-
publication in newspaper. In cases where food, etc.,
sold to convicted person was sold by him in state in
which he received it, the name of the supplier, his
address, and nature of his trade may be included in
such notice (S. 53).
Regulations to be published (S. 55).
Of notification prohibiting the advertising or sale
of food, drug, or appliance, which is injurious to life
or health, or is useless (S. 17).
PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1902.—Referred to as “ Principal
Act ” with which Pure Food Act is to be construed
(S. 1).
Section 3, so far as it defines “ Food ” and sections
76-93 inclusive, are repealed by Pure Food Act (S. 3)


In administering provisions of Pure Food Act,
local authorities are subject to the provisions of S. 24
of the Public Health Act (S. 9) ; and, if inefficient,
their administration may be superseded.
PURE. Shall not be written on packet containing food
unless such is as prescribed by Act and Regulations
(R. 6).
QUININE TONIC WATERS.-To be labelled with state-
ment of proportion of Quinine, which shall not be less
than one-third of a grain to the pint (R. 63).
REGISTRATION OF FIRMS ACT. —Firm registered under
may omit address on label of package of food (S. 14).
REGULATIONS.—Board, on recommendation of the
Advisory Committee, to make regulations (varying in
their application according to time or place or desti-
nation of articles referred to), for prescribing standards
for the composition, etc., any food or drug, for pro-
hibiting specified appliances, specified modes of manu-
facture, preparation and preservation, for prescribing
the method of analysis, for exempting any food from
requirements of Act re marking, for prohibiting certain
methods of treating animals shortly prior to being
killed for food, for requiring destruction of deteriorated
articles, for requiring packages to bear statement, and
labels, for fixing rates for payment of samples, and for
payment of analysts, for prescribing penalties, and for
carrying out the provisions of the Act (S. 54).
Must be approved by the Governor and gazetted,
and after gazettal must be laid before Parliament,
which may, by resolution of either House, disallow
any regulation (S. 55).
May be made relating to meetings of the Advisory
Committee (S. 7).
May be made prescribing the fees to be paid to
members of the Advisory Commiteee (S. 8).


Respecting appeals against action of Board in
reporting an examination and prohibiting sale of food,
etc. (S. 20).
Respecting qualifications of analysts (S. 27).
Exhibiting.
Regulations to be exhibited —Regulations 14, 27, 34
and 49, regarding the protection from contamination
of food, meat, milk, and ices and ice-cream, require
that copies shall be exhibited in places where food, etc,,
is made or sold, etc.
The Regulations themselves are given at p. 57
following. Besides these there are Regulations for
the procedure of the Advisory Committee, gazetted
4/4/1909, not given in this publication, being of only
departmental importance.
REPEAL.— Section three of Public Health Act, 1902, so
far as it defines “food,” and sections 76-93 of that
Act repealed (B. 3).
Of Regulations previously issued. See Preamble
to Regulations at p. 57 following.
RETAIL TRADES.— Means trading with the consumer
(S. 4).
RICE. —lt is understood that the Advisory Board object
to rice being polished, either by attrition, or by talc,
dyes, etc.
RUM. —Standard of strength to be not more than 35°
underproof (R. 64).
SALE.— Selling includes bartering, to offer or attempt to
sell, or receive, or have in possession for sale, expose,
forward, or deliver for sale, to cause, suffer, or allow
to be sold, offered, or exposed for sale, but refers only
to selling for consumption or use by man (S. 4).
Of any food or drug which is adulterated, falsely
described, or packed or enclosed for sale contrary to
the Act, is prohibited (S. 10).
Of any injurious or useless food or drug may be
prohibited by Gazette notice (S. 17).


Seizure, marking, fastening or securing an article
by an officer in any place is evidence that same is in
possession of person for sale (S. 44).
SALTPETRE. —(Potassium or sodium nitrate) not to be
mixed with salted, pickled, corned, smoked, or manu-
factured meat in larger proportion than one-fourth
per cent, calculated as K.N.Oj. (R. 24 (6) ).
SAMPLE.— Where sample of an article has been proved to
be adulterated, or falsely described, the seizing,
marking, fastening or securing of such article shall be
evidence of sale (S. 44).
An officer may demand, select and take samples
of any food or drug on tendering value (current market
or prescribed) to any person selling or preparing such
food or drug, or to his servant or agent. Any person
on payment of a fee and cost of sample may require
an officer to purchase a sample and submit same for
analysis (S. 23). Cost may not exceed 10s R.SO.p 105.
Upon taking samples for analysis, the intention
shall be stated to the owner, agent, servant, or person
in charge. Such samples must be divided into three
parts, each to be labelled or marked, and sealed, and
one part left with the owner, servant or agent, one kept
for comparison, and one submitted for analysis (S. 24).
Upon receipt of sample by post, the certificate of
an analyst that the seal was unbroken, shall be
sufficient evidence of identity (S. 25).
Board may require councils to submit three
samples during each year (S. 26).
Council or councils may appoint analyst to
examine samples, per 1000 pop. (S. 26).
SAUSAGE MEAT.— See “Minced (or Sausage) Meat.”
SAUCES. —To be liquid or semi-liquid mixtures of whole-
some food stuffs, with spices and condiments, with or
without harmless flavouring and colouring (R. 41).
D


SECRECY.— Must under penalty be maintained of matters
coming withip the knowledge of officers inspecting
books in the nature of store records, produced by
a person suspected of having in his possession any
food, drug, or article in contravention of the Act
(S. 51).
Witness for prosecution not compelled to dis-
close that he received information or the nature of
such, or the name of person giving such. Officer not
compelled to produce reports made or received con-
fidentially in official capacity (S. 45).
Trade formulae of proprietary foods or drugs
which contain no unwholesome matter need not be
disclosed except to secure freedom from adulteration
or false description (S. 6).
SEAL. —An officer may seal any article or package found
in a place reasonably suspected of being kept or used
for the sale, manufacture, etc., of food or drugs, in
contravention of the Act, and may seal any door
affording access to same (S. 22).
In taking samples for analysis, three parts must
be separated, and each sealed (S. 24).
An analyst’s certificate that the seal on a sample
was unbroken shall be evidence of identity (S. 25).
Any unauthorised person breaking a seal placed
by an officer on any food, drug, article or package, or
door giving access to same, is liable to a penalty of
£2O (S. 37).
SELL.— See “ Sale.”
SELTZER WATER. —To conform to general standard for
aerated waters —to contain not less than fifteen grains
of sodium chloride, two grains of sodium bicarbonate,
four grains of magnesium chloride, and four grains of
calcium chloride to the pint (R. 56).
SERVANT. —In prosecutions it is no defence that the
defendant is only the servant or agent of the owner
or person dealing in the food, etc,, but a servant is


not liable upon proving that the offence was com-
mitted in a shop or other similar place in which busi-
ness was at the time of the offence conducted under
the personal superintendence of the owner or his
manager (S. 48).
Upon proving that he sold food, etc., without
knowledge that the Act had been contravened may
recover from his employer any penalty, together with
costs arising out of his conviction. The operation of
a conviction may be suspended for three months to
enable a servant so to recover (S. 49).
Not liable if place in which offence committed
is store or similar place in which business conducted
under personal superintendence of owner or manager
(S. 48).
Shall be entitled to be discharged from a prose-
cution for sale of any food, etc., which is sold in con-
travention of the Act, when the food was purchased
under guarantee of his employer, and the servant
proves that he had no reason to believe that the
food was adulterated or falsely described, or was sold
in a state different from that in which it was pur-
chased by his employer, or was other than demanded
by the prosecutor (S. 50).
SOAP. To be product derived from action of solution of
alkali on fats, oils or resins, to contain not less than
59 per cent, of fatty acids, not more than one-tenth
per cent, of free caustic alkali, not more than three
per cent, carbonate of soda, and no other substance
save water, perfume, and harmless colouring, but
resin acids are reckoned as fatty acids (R. 69).
SOAP MIXTURE.— Soap as in general standard, mixed
with mineral or vegetable substances, drugs and disin-
fectants excepted, but amount of such mixed sub-
stances limited as specified. Mixtures sold for
abrasive purposes which cannot be used for personal
ablution or for laundry, may contain any proportion


of abrasive substance. To be specially labelled
(R. 69).
SOAP (Medicated) —Soap as per standard, mixed with
drug or disinfectant. (R, 69 (4) ).
SOA P r ( 6 B 9°(G) X )^~ NOt than 2 PartS P6r C6nt ' b ° raX
SOFT SOAP. Regulations do not apply to soft soap, nor
to mixtures of dry and powdered soap with soda,
—ly called soap powder or extract of soap
SODA WATER.— An aerated water with or without
admixture of sodium, carbonate or bicarbonate
(R. 56).
SPlCES.— Various spices and condiments described (R.
40). See under headings of “ Cinnamon,” etc.
SPIRITS.— For determining the degree of strength, such
apparatus shall be used and method observed, as may
be prescribed (S. 31). Apparatus, etc., is prescribed
by R. 71.
Standard of strength for brandy, whisky, rum and
gin prescribed (R. 64). See “ Brandy,” etc.
STARCH-SUGAR.— The solid product obtained by
hydrolising starch or starch containing substance
until greater part converted into dextrose—Anhy-
drous starch sugar to contain not less than 95 per cent,
of dextrose, and eight-tenths per cent. ash. Hydrous
starch-sugar or “ 70 sugar,” or “ brewer’s sugar,” to
contain not less than 70 per cent, dextrose, and
“ climax ” or “ acme ” or “ 80 sugar ” not less than
80 per cent, dextrose or per cent. ash. Not to
contain arsenic or other harmful substance (R. 44),
STRYCHNINE. —Food not to be exposed to, (R. 12).


“ SUBSTITUTE. It is questionable how far the use
of this qualification on a label or otherwise will dis-
charge a vendor from his ordinary liability. The whole
tenor of the Act is against such a conclusion, and it is
understood that the crown law officers have given an
opinion adverse to the order that “ Substitutes ” will
have any exemption.
See ‘Vinegar Substitute,’ R. 42 (5) (6) (7), and
‘ Vanilla Substitutes ’ (R. 53).
Food, under fancy names, sold as a substitute,
is (expressly) not exempt from the Act (S. 52).
SUGAR.— To be product chemically known as sucrose or
saccharose —granulated, loaf, cut, milled and pow-
dered sugar to contain at least 991 per cent, of suc-
rose (R. 44). See also “ Starch-sugar.”
SUMMER DRINKS.— See Temperance Drinks, p. 52 & 93.
SUMMONS.— May be issued by any justice calling upon
owner of an article seized, or in whose possession found,
to show cause why the article and package or vessel
should not be forfeited and destroyed (S. 22).
In respect of prosecution concerning food, etc.
shall not be made returnable in less than ten days —
from the day on which it was served (S. 42).
Copy of analyst’s certificate to accompany (S. 43).
Summary procedure (S. 40), will be regulated by
the Justices Act, 1902.
SWEETENING. —Sale of food containing saccharin, saxin,
dulcin, glucin, or other synthetic sweetening sub-
stance not specially allowed by Regulations, forbidden
(R. 13).
SYRUP.— To be composed of natural juices of sound fruit
or vegetable extractives, potable water, and sugar
with or without citric or tartaric acid, vinegar or
acetic acid, and harmless colouring, to contain not
less than 35 per cent, sugar, not to contain other
flavouring than that naturally present in fruit or


vegetable, nor any added substance—to be specially
labelled—may contain as a preservative sulphur
dioxide not exceeding two grains to the pint (R. 57).
SYRUP (ARTIFICIAL). —To be composed of harmless
dietetic essences, sugar, potable water, and citric or
tartaric acid, or with harmless colouring—to contain
not less than 35 per cent, sugar, and to be specially
labelled may contain two grains of sulphur dioxide
as preservative (R. 59).
TARTARIC ACID—Not to contain more than one-hun-
dredth of grain of arsenic (arsenious oxide), nor
more than one-seventh of a grain of lead to the pound
(R. 54), r
TEA.—To be the leaves or leaf buds of Thea prepared by
fermenting, drying and firing—not to contain exhaus-
ted leaves nor foreign matter, and not inferior in
composition or quality to standard fixed by Minister
for Trade and Customs under Commonwealth Customs
Act. Tea dust described—label bearing name of
country of origin to be correct statement (R. 37).
TEMPERANCE DRINKS.—To be composed of potable
water, sugar, and harmless dietetic essences, or vege-
table extractives or infusions impregnated with car-
bon dioxide under pressure or not, with or without
citric oi tartaric acid and harmless colouring. Sul-
phur dioxide may be added as preservative not ex-
ceeding one grain to the pint (R. 62).
There is no compulsory registration of manu-
facturers of these drinks.
TERPENELESS OIL OF LEMON.-See “ Oil of Lemon.”
TOMATO SAUCE.—To be prepared from pulp of sound and
ripe tomatoes, to conform with general standard for
sauces, and not to contain any foreign vegetable
substance save spices and condiments (R. 41).
TRADE DESCRIPTION.—Brewed ginger beer, lemonade
and ginger ale are exempt from provisions of Act


requiring information on label regarding trade name
or description, and weight or measure of contents
(R. 16).
TRADE FORMULAE.— The provisions of the Act do not
require proprietors or manufacturers of proprietary
foods or drugs which contain no unwholesome added
ingredients to disclose their trade formulae except in
so far as is required to secure freedom from adultera-
tion or false description (S. 5).
In all other cases food packages must have state-
ment or label, with Trade Description, etc., thereon.
TRADE MARK. —S. 14 requires food packages to bear a
label with name and address of vendor. But the
Board of Health may grant exemption from thiswhero
the goods bear a registered trade mark, and whe re the
applicant otherwise complies with the prescribed
requirements. Exemption ceases when the trade mark
is assigned or transmitted, or where the proprietor’s
address is changed, unless the Board re-approve.
See Reg. 79.
TYPES. —Required to be written of not less than six points
face measurement, may be written on labels in pro-
portionately smaller type when package too small to
prevent use of types prescribed (R. 7). And see the
Regulations generally as to type for labels.
UNIVERSITY. —Professor of Chemistry to be member of
Advisory Committee (S. 6). See Committee.
VANILLA BEAN. —Dried fruit of Vanille Planifolia, con-
taining the odoriferous principle or aldehyde known
as vanillin (R. 53 (6) ).
VANILLA ESSENCE. —Alcoholic extract of vanilla bean
—to contain not less than two-tenths per cent, of
natural vanillin, to conform to general standard for
essences (R. 53 (7) ).


VANILLA SUBSTITUTES. —To be specially labelled (R, 53
(8, 9) ). v
VESSELS.— For conveying for sale skim-milk or separated
milk to be specially labelled (E. 33).
VINEGAR.— Liquid derived from alcoholic and acetous
fermentations, to contain not less than 4 per cent,
acetic acid, and no sulphuric or other mineral acid,
lead, copper, or added substance except caramel.
Varieties of vinegar described—to be specially labelled.
Vinegar substitutes described—to be specially labelled
(E. 42). 7
VOLUME.— Eequired by the Act to be stated on every
package to be expressed in customary way by stating
on package of solid food less than 14 ounces, number
of pounds, ounces, etc and on package of liquid
food containing less quantity than one gallon num-
ber of quarts, pints, ounces, etc. (E. 4).
WALLS. —Place used for preparing meat to have internal
walls constructed of brick, tiles, stone, cement or other
material impervious to water, to be kept constantly
clean by washing with water or lime. Walls may be
constructed of wood if internal surface covered with
smooth iron, painted white, to height of 6 feet, and
above iron to be kept constantly clean by painting
white and washing or lime-washing from time to time
(E. 27). Somewhat similar provisions apply with
regard to manufacture of ice-cream. See E. 49.
WATER. —Must not be carried with milk (E. 78).
WATER, POTABLE. —See “ Potable Water.”
WEIGHT. Mixing or selling any mixture of any ingredient
or material with food in order to fraudulently increase
its weight, is prohibited (S. 12).
In the case of the weight stated on a package or
label, an approximation, the degree of which is fixed
by Regulation 5, will be allowed (S. 14).


WINE. —Not specifically referred to in the Pure Food
Act. Wine, its manufacture, sale, analysis, Ac., is
provided for in the Wine Adulteration Act, No. 107,
1902. The definition in that Act is that wine must
be “ the product of the alcoholic fermentation of the
juice or must of fresh grapes.” Among the prohibi-
tions are that “no person shall expose or offer for
sale, deliver for sale, or sell as wine any bottled liquid,
unless each bottle is distinctly labelled with the name
and address of the bottler” (S. 6). The Act should
be referred to, in its many other applications.
WITNESS. —For prosecution is not compelled to disclose
that he received information, or the nature of such,
or the name of person giving such. No officer is com-
pelled to produce reports made or received confiden-
tially in his official capacity (S. 45).
WHISKY. —Standard of strength to be not more than 25°
underproof (R. 64).
WRITING . —Expressions referring to writing, include
printing, stencilling, typing, or any mode of represent-
ing or reproducing words or figures in a visible form
(S. 4).




Regulations.
[Published as Supplement to the Government Gazette No. 74
of 11th May, 1910.]
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 11th May, 1910.
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to approve of the following Regu-
lations under the “Pure Food Act, 1908,” which have been
made by the Board of Health, on the recommendation of the
Advisory Committee, under the powers conferred by that Act.
W. H. Wood.
“PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.”
All previous Regulations are hereby repealed, and the
following substituted therefor: —
GENERAL REGULATIONS.
Regulation I.—Form of Guarantee.
(1) A general guarantee given by an individual shall be
in the following form:
I, , being a resident in New South Wales,
carrying on business at under the name of
, do hereby guarantee that the goods or
classes of goods hereunder described are, as sold by
me, and marked with the serial number allotted and
■with the words of guarantee prescribed in paragraph
( d ) of subsection three of section 47 of the “Pure
Food Act, 1908,” not adulterated, falsely described,
mixed, coloured, composed or constituted in contra-
vention of any provision of the said Act.
Goods and Classes of Goods guaranteed: —
Guarantor.
Witness.
Filed in the Treasury
Serial No. Allotted
(2) A general guarantee given by a company shall be
in the following form: —
The Company having a registered office in New
South Wales, and carrying on business at
under the name of , doth hereby guarantee


that the goods or classes of goods hereunder set out
are, as sold by the Company and marked with the
serial number allotted, and with the words of guar-
antee prescribed in paragraph ( d ) of subsection three
of section 47 of the “Pure Food Act, 1908,” not
adulterated, falsely described, mixed, coloured, com-
posed, or constituted in contravention of any provision
of the said Act.
Goods and Classes of Goods guaranteed: —
Seal of Company.
Witness,
Filed in the Treasury
Serial No. allotted
(3) A specific guarantee given by an individual shall be
in the following form:—
, being a resident in New South Wales,
carrying on business at , under the name
°f , do hereby guarantee that the goods
hereunder specified and contained in the bill of sale,
invoice, bill of lading, or other document describing the
goods and their weight, measure and number of the
same, referred to herein or attached hereto, are not
adulterated, falsely described, mixed, coloured, com-
posed or constituted in contravention of any provision
of the “Pure Food Act,” 1908.”
Goods guaranteed: —
[Description of bill of sale, invoice, bill of lading, or other
document .]
Guarantor.
Witness.
day of
(4) A specific guarantee given by a company shall be in
the following form:—
The Company, having a registered office in
New South Wales, and carrying on business at
, under the name of ,
doth hereby guarantee that the goods hereunder
specified and contained in the bill of sale, invoice, bill
of lading, or other document describing the goods and
the weight, measure, and number of the same, referred
to herein or attached hereto, are not adulterated, falsely
described, mixed, coloured, composed or constituted in
contravention of any provision of the “Pure Food
Act, 1908.”


Goods guaranteed: —
[Description of bill of sale, invoice, bill of lading, or other
document .]
Seal of the Company.
Witness.
day of
. number allotted to each general guarantee
shall be placed by the guarantor on each package of the goods
form- 68 ° f g °° fls named in the guarantee, in the following
\Here insert the allotted number ] guaranteed under the
‘ Pure Food Act, 1908,” by [here insert the name of
the registered guarantor and repeat the allotted num-
ber.]
(6) l\o person shall sell any food or drug contained in a
package on or attached to which is a statement or label con-
taining the word ‘‘guaranteed” or “guarantee,” or con-
taining any expression which implies that the contents are
guaranteed unless a guarantee has been given under section
ot the Act, applicable to the food or drug contained in the
package.
(7) If any person sells any food or drug contained in a
package in respect of which any of the provisions contained
m clauses (5) and (6) of this Eegulation is contravened, he
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
Regulation 2.—Label.
The term “statement or label” shall mean any written
pictorial, or other matter, written on or attached to any package
containing a food or drug for sale.
Regulation 3—Descriptive Matter on Labels.
(1) The trade name or description, and descriptive matter
written on the statement or label attached to any package which
contains a food or drug, or any substance intended to be used
or which may be used as an addition to a food or drug shall
not contain any statement, claim, design, device, fancy name or
abbreviation which is false or misleading in any "particular
concerning the articles, or the ingredients or substances, con-
tained therein, or concerning the quality or the place of origin
ot the said ingredients or substances.
(2) Descriptive matter written on or attached to a package
which contains any food or drug shall not include any comment
on, reference to, or explanation of, any statement or label
required by the Act or by the Regulations to be written on or
attached to any package containing a food or drug which


directly or by implication, contradicts, qualifies, or modifies
such statement or the contents of such label.
(3) No person shall sell any food or drug contained in a
package in respect of which any of the provisions contained in
this Regulation is contravened.
Regulation 4. —Statement of Measure or Volume.
The statement of the true measure or volume of the con-
tents required by the Act to be -written on or attached to every
package of food packed or enclosed for sale shall be expressed
in the customary way, namely:
(1) In the case of every package of solid food which
contains a less quantity than fourteen pounds weight,
in pounds, ounces, etc.
(2) In the case of every package of liquid food which con-
tains a less quantity than one gallon, in quarts or
pints, ounces, etc.
Regulation s.—Permitted Variation from Stated Measure
or Volume.
A variation from the stated measure or volume which shall
not exceed five parts per centum shall be permitted if the
weight or measure of six packages of the same description
and brand of food when weighed or measured together is found
to be of or above the stated measure or volume.
Regulation 6—Use of the word “pure.”
No person shall sell any food contained in a package on
which the word “pure,” or expressions which include the
said word, are written unless the food is of the composition,
strength, purity, or quality prescribed in the Act and by the
Regulations, or which contains any foreign substance save as
specifically permitted by the regulations.
Regulation 7.—Prescribed Size of Types.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these Regu-
lations contained, prescribed words ordered to be written in
types of size of not less than six points face measurement may
be written in types of proportionately reduced size when the
package containing a food or drug for sale is so small as to
prevent the use of types of the prescribed size.
Regulation B.—Preservatives.
(1) The addition of a preservative substance or prepara-
tion of a preservative substance to any food, except as
specifically permitted by the Regulations, is hereby prohibited.


(2) Saccharin, saxin, dulcin, gluein, and the like substances,
formic aldehyde, boric acid, hydrofluoric acid, hydrofluosilic acid,
sulphurous acid, benzoic acid, salicylic acid, beta-napthol, and
preparations, compounds, and derivatives of the said substances
or of any of them, and every substance which when added to
food has the property of preventing, impeding, or arresting
fermentation or putrefaction of food, shall be deemed to be
pieservative substances within the meaning and for the purposes
of the Regulations.
(3) No more than one kind of preservative substance shall
be added to any one kind of food, nor to any mixture of two
or more kinds of food.
(4) There shall be attached to the outside of every package
containing any food mixed with a preservative substance, or
with a preparation of a preservative substance, a separate label
in the following form:
PRESERVATISED.
This food contains not more than [here insert the
quantity of preservative added ] of [here insert the
chemical name of the preservative ] to the [here
insert the word “pound” in the case of solid food,
and the word “pint” in the case of liquid food.]
This label shall be written in bold-faced sans-seriff capital
types of not less size than six points face measurement in black
ink on a white ground, and no other words than the words pre-
scribed by this Regulation shall be written on it.
(5) No person shall sell any package containing food
mixed with a preservative substance in contravention of the
provisions of this Regulation.
(6) This Regulation shall not apply to common salt, sugar
spices, wood-smoke, vinegar, and acetic acid added to food.'
Regulation 9.—Colourings and Flavourings.
Where artificial colourings or artificial flavouring is per-
mitted by the Regulations the manufacturer or packer shall
cause to be written on or attached to every package containing
any food which is admixed with any foreign colouring sub-
stance, or with any foreign flavouring 'substance, a statement or
label in that one of the three forms following which indicates
the fact of admixed colouring or of admixed flavouring or of
both, as the case may require.
ARTIFICIALLY COLOURED
or
ARTIFICIALLY FLAVOURED
or
ARTIFICIALY COLOURED AND FLAVOURED;


And the words “Artificially coloured,” Artificially flavoured,”
or “Artificially coloured and flavoured” shall be written in
bold-faced sans-seriff capital types of not less size than six
points face measurement:
Provided that this Regulation shall not apply to the follow-
ing foods: —
Whole-milk cheese.
Confectionery, cakes, pastry, biscuits, ice-cream and ices,
jelly crystals.
Cordials and syrups labelled as prescribed by Regu-
lation 59.
Spirits, vinegar, sauces, non-excisable fermented drinks;
summer or temperance drinks, when they are arti-
ficially coloured with caramel only.
Regulation 10.—Prohibited Colourings,
No person shall sell any article of food to which any
colouring matter containing any of the following substances,
or their compounds, has been added save as specifically per-
mitted by the Regulations: —
Arsenic, antimony, barium, chromium, cobalt, nickel, copper,
iron, lead, manganese, mercury, tin, zinc, gamboge,
and picric acid.
Regulation 11.—Boiler Preservatives.
(1) No person shall use, or cause or suffer to be used,
in any boiler for producing steam which is brought into contact
with food for sale, any boiler preservative containing any of
the following substances or compounds of them: —Arsenic,
antimony, phosphorus.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer, or permit the water of
any boiler which, by priming or otherwise, may come into
contact with food for sale to contain any zinc or other
harmful substance in any larger proportion than that in which
it is allowed by the Regulations to be present in food.
Regulation 12.—Insecticides.
No person shall keep, spread, or use, or suffer to be kept,
spread, or used, any preparation containing arsenic, strychnine,
or other poison, so as to expose any food for sale to risk of
contamination therewith.
Regulation 13.—Artificial Sweetening Substances.
No person shall sell any food containing saccharin, saxin,
dulcin, glucin, or any synthetic sweetening substance, except
as specifically allowed by the Regulations.


Regulation 14. —Protection of Food from Contamination.
(1) Every person who is engaged in the manufacture, pre-
paration, storage, packing, carriage, or delivery of food for sale
shall when so engaged maintain his clothing and his body
clean.
(2) No person who is suffering from any infectious or
contagious disease shall engage in the manufacture, preparation,
storage, packing, carriage, or delivery for sale of any food
or drug, or of any article used or intended to be used as a
food or drug.
(3) Every receptacle, article, and place used for or in
connection with the manufacture, preparation, storage Or
packing of any food for sale shall at all times be kept clean
and free from foul odours, and, as far as practicable, from
flies and dust.
(4) Every place used for or in connection with the sale,
manufacture, preparation, storage, or packing of any food for
sale shall, so far as practicable, be used for that purpose only;
and no place shall be so used which is at any time used as a
sleeping apartment, or in w'hich any thing is kept, or any
animal is allowed to be, or in which any work is carried on,
w r hich would be likely to contaminate such food or injuriously
to affect its wholesomeness or cleanliness.
(5) Vehicles and receptacles which are used in the carriage
or delivery of any food shall be kept at all times clean; no
such vehicle or receptacle shall at any time be used for the
carriage of any matter w'hereby the wholesomeness, cleanliness,
and freedom from contamination of any food carried or
usually carried therein would or might be endangered.
(6) Every person who sells any food which is ordinarily
consumed in the state in which it is sold shall protect such
food, until it is delivered to a purchaser, from dust and flies
by storage in covered receptacles, by covering with gauze, 01
by other effectual means; and no vendor shall carry such food
through the streets unless it be protected as aforesaid.
(7) No person shall sell any food so packed that it can
come into contact with paper or other material which is not
clean or wdth any writing on any paper or material.
(8) A copy of this Regulation, as supplied on demand
by the Department of Public Health, shall be conspicuously
displayed in every place w'here food is prepared, stoied,
or deposited for sale, and shall be there constantly maintained
clean, visible, and legible, by the proprietor, manager, and per-
son in charge thereof.
(9) If any person contravene any of the provisions of this
Regulation he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
E


Regulation 16.~Exemptions from all the Labelling Pro-
visions of Section 14.
Packages of food named or indicated hereunder shall be
exempt from all the provisions of section 14 of the “Pure
Pood Act, 1908,“ relating to labelling:
(1) Food substances weighed, counted, or measured, and
packed in the presence of the purchaser.
(2) Bread.
(3) Food substances (except tea, coffee, pepper-mixtures
and coffee-mixtures) in unsealed packages packed on retail
grocer 's premises for ready sale thereon.
Regulation 16. —Exemption from Statement of Trade Des-
cription and Measure of Contents, Section 14.
Packages of food named or indicated hereunder shall be
exempt from such of the provisions of section 14 of the
“Pure Food Act, 1908,“ as require information, by an accom-
panying or attached label or statement, as to the trade name
or description and as to the weight or number or measure or
volume of the contents;—
BreM-ed ginger beer.
Lemonade.
Ginger ale.
Regulation 17.—Exemptions from Statement of Weight,
Section 14.
Packages of food named or indicated hereunder shall be
exempt from such of the provisions of section 14 of the ‘ ‘ Pure
Food Act, 1908, ’ ’ as require information, by an accompanying
or attached label or statement, as to the weight or number or
measure or volume of the contents: —
Aerated waters.
Alcoholic liquors which pay Customs or Excise duty.
Anchovies.
Australian wines.
Calves' feet jelly in tins or bottles.
Capers, in bottles.
Cheeses marked with a statement of weight, followed by
the w'ords ‘ ‘ when packed. ’ ’
Chutney, in bottles.
Confectionery in fancy boxes.
Cordials and syrups, artificial cordials and syrups, com-
pound cordials.
Curry powder, in bottles.
Custard powders.
Dried culinary herbs.
Dried codfish in blocks.


Dried figs.
Fish, in tins.
Flour in bags of twenty-five pounds weight and over.
Fruits, in bottles.
Ginger, in jars or in fancy packages.
Ginger-beer powders and other beverage powders.
Hams marked with a statement of weight, followed by the
words ‘ ‘ when packed. ’ ’
Hops in packets not exceeding one pound in weight.
Infants’ foods.
Jelly crystals, blanc mange crystals, and other food sub-
substances sold with directions to dilute to a definite
amount or to taste; condensed milks excepted.
Ox tongues.
Pickles, in bottles.
Pop-corn.
Potted meat and pastes.
Rennet.
Salt, in tins or bottles.
Salt substitutes, in tins or bottles.
Sauces.
Soup, in packets.
Soup sausages.
Vegetables, preserved, in tins.
Food substances, supplied in bulk for resale.
This Regulation shall not apply to any of the said foods
when it is packed or enclosed in a different manner from that
specified herein.
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
Regulation 18.—Flour and Bread.
Flour.
(1) Flour shall be the fine, clean, and sound product
obtained by bolting wheat-meal; it shall contain not more than
fourteen parts per centum of moisture, not less than one and
six tenths parts per centum of nitrogen, not more than one-half
of one part per centum of fibre, and shall yield not more than
one part per centum of ash. It shall not contain any added
foreign matter.
Bread.
(2) Bread shall be the porous substance obtained by
moistening and kneading flour which conforms with the
standard for flour, with provision for the mechanical separation
of the dough by air or carbonic acid gas, properly baked;
it shall not contain more than forty-five parts per centum of
water in any part of the loaf, and it shall not yield more than
two parts per centum of total ash, nor more than one-tenth
of one part per centum of ash insoluble in acid. It shall not


contain any added foreign substance; and ten grama of the
crumb, taken from the centre of the loaf, shall not contain
more acid than is required for neutralisation of five cubic
centimeters of decinormal solution of sodium hydroxide.
Brown Bread, Barley or Eye Bread.
(3) Brown Bread (varieties) and bread made from other
that wheat grain shall be the porous substance obtained by
the moistening, kneading, panification, and baking of the meal
obtained by grinding sound clean grain.
Regulation 19.—Meals.
Oatmeal.
(1) Oatmeal shall be the meal produced by grinding oats
{Arena saliva ) after removal of the husk; it shall contain
not less than five parts per centum of fats or of ethereal
extract, and it shall not contain more than two and one-half
parts per centum of meal derived from other grain than oats.
Mixed Meals.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing mixed meals a statement or label, on which the
words “Mixed Meals” are written in larger letters than any
other letter on the statement or label immediately followed by
a statement uniformly written in saus-seriff capital letters of
not less size than six points face measurement, of the names
of the several ingredients present in the contents of the pack-
age, in the following form:—
MIXED MEALS.
This package contains a mixture of meals made from
{here insert the names of the seeds from which the
meals have been prepared).
(3) No person shall sell any package containing mixed
meals in contravention of the provisions of clause 2 of this
Regulation.
Regulation 20. —Cream of Tartar.
Cream of tartar (potassium bitartrate KH.C 4 H 4 O a sold
for other than medicinal use shall be the purified product ob-
tained by recrystallisation of crude argols or wine-lees; it shall
contain not less than ninety-five parts per centum of acid tar-
trates calculated as potassium acid tartrate KH.G 4 H 4 O e , not
more than one and five-tenths parts per centum of sulphates
calculated as calcium sulphate (CaSO4), not more than one


one-hundredth of a grain ot arsenic calculated as arsenious
oxide to the pound, and not more than one-seventh of a grain of
lead to the pound.
Regulation 21.—Baking Powder.
Baking powder shall be a salt or mixture of salts, with
or without a farinaceous diluent substance, which evolves car-
bon dioxide on being moistened or heated, and which may be
used in the preparation of articles of food as a chemical leven;
it shall contain not more than one and five-tenths parts per
centum of sulphates calculated as calcium sulphate, it shall
yield not less than ten parts per centum by weight of carbon
dioxide, and it shall not contain any alum.
Regulation 22. —Infants’ Food.
(1) Infants’ food shall be any food described or sold as
an article of food especially suitable for infants of or under
twelve months of age; it shall not contain any woody fibre,
nor any mineral substance which is insoluble in acid.
(2) No person shall sell any package of infants’ food con-
taining starch unless there be written on or attached to it a
statement that its contents are suitable for feeding infants of
or above the age of six months only.
Regulation 23.—Malt.
(1) Malt shall be the seed of barley, or of some other
designated cereal, which has been caused to germinate and
which has been subsequently dried; it shall contain not more
than one one-hundredth part of a grain of arsenic, calculated
as arsenious oxide, to the pound of malt.
Malt-extract.
(2) Malt-extract shall be the substance obtained by
evaporating an aqueous extract of malt at a temperature not
exceeding 55° C; it shall contain not less than seventy parts
per centum of solids wholly derived from malt, and it shall
conform to the characters and tests for malt extinct given in
the British Pharmaceutical Codex, 1907.
Commercial Malt-extract.
(3) Bakers’, or commercial malt-extract, or bakers’
maltose, shall contain not less than seventy parts per centum of
solids wholly derived from malt.
Liquid Malt-extract.
(4) Liquid malt-extract shall contain not less than fifty
parts per centum of solids wdiolly derived from malt; it shall


possess diastasic power proportionately equal to that of
malt-extract.
Malt-extract and Cod-liver oil.
(5) Malt-extract and cod-liver oil shall be an emlusion
composed of malt-extract and cod-liver oil; it shall contain
not less than fifteen parts per centum by weight of cod-liver oil.
Regulation 24.—Meat and Meat Products.
General Standard for Meat.
(1) Meat shall be the edible part of any mammal, fish,
fowl, crustacean, mollusc, or other animal generally used as
food, properly dressed.
Fresh or Chilled Meat.
(2) Fresh or chilled meat shall be meat which has been
kept at any temperature above 35° F.
Frozen Meat.
(3) Frozen meat shall be meat which has been exposed to
any temperature at or below 35° F.
Fielded and Smoked Meat.
(4) Salted, pickled or corned, and smoked meat, shall be
meat preserved with salt, saltpetre (potassium or sodium
nitrate) sugar, vinegar, spices, and smoke, singly or in com-
bination
Manufactured Meat.
(3) Manufactured meat shall be meats other than those
referred to under clauses 2,3, and 4 of this Regulation, simple
or mixed, whole, minced, or comminuted, cooked or uncooked, in
bulk or in package with or without addition of salt, saltpetre
(potassium or sodium nitrate) sugar, vinegar, spices, herbs,
smoke, oils, or rendered meat fat, singly or in combination.
Prohibition.
(6) Saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate) shall not bo
mixed with salted, pickled, or corned, smoked, or manufactured
meat in any larger proportion than one-fourth of one part per
centum calculated as KNO3.
Labelling.
(7) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains manufactured meat a label or statement on
which shall be written in sans-seriff capital letters, of not less
size than six points face measurement the name or names of
the meat or meats contained in it; and no person shall sell any
such package in contravention of the provisions of clauses (6)
and (7) of this Regulation.


Dripping.
(8) Dripping shall be fat rendered from meat; it shall
contain no added substance, save salt (sodium chloride).
Lard.
(9) Lard shall be the fat rendered from the meat of the
hog; it shall be free from rancidity. It shall not contain more
than one part per centum of substance other than hog fat
necessarily incorporated with it in the course of rendering, and
not more than one part per centum of water. It shall not
contain any foreign substance.
Regulation 25.—Minced or Sausage Meat.
General Standard for Minced or Sausage Meat.
(1) Minced-meat or sausage-meat or saveloy sausage-meat
shall be chopped, or comminuted meat, with or without salt,
sugar, spices, herbs, saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate),
wholesome farinaceous substances, or Armenian bole; it shall
contain not less than seventy-five parts per centum of meat of
the kind or kinds designated on a label or statement attached
to the outside of the package in which it is contained, not
more than eight grains of Armenian bole, nor more thirteen
grains of saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate) to the
pound:
Provided that if sausage-meat, minced-meat, or saveloy
sausage-meat be sold enclosed in a skin of animal origin, the
said skin shall be deemed to be an integral portion of the
said meat:
Provided further that the said skins may be dyed with
Bismarck brown or with roseine.
Preservative.
(2) The addition to minced-meat, or sausage-meat, or
saveloy sausage-meat or a preparation of the preservative
substance, sulphur dioxide, in proportion not exceeding three
and one-half grains of sulphur dioxide to the pound, is hereby
permitted.
Regulation 26. —Meat Extract.
Meat Extract.
Meat extract shall not contain any added substance, save
salt (sodium chloride) and condiments.
Regulation 27.—For securing the Cleanliness and Freedom
Contamination of Meat Products.
(1) No person shall use, or suffer to be used, any room or
place for the boning, curing, canning, salting, mincing, or


other similar process of preparation of the meat or fat of
animals for sale for human food, except it be provided with a
floor of tiles, cement, mineral asphalt, or some other material
impervious to water, having a smooth surface, and graded and
drained so that all liquids spilt on it may flow oft it without
impediment. If any such floor be constructed of tiles, the
joints between the tiles shall be of a material which is imper-
vious to water. Such floors shall at all times be kept in good
repair, smooth, and free from cracks and inequalities.
(2) No person shall use, or suffer to be used, any such
floor as referred to in the last preceding paragraph, unless
it be free from accumulations of fat, dirt, grease, or debris of
meat. Such floors shall be thoroughly cleansed at least once
daily with the aid of hot water, and they shall at all times
be kept in a state of reasonable cleanliness.
(3) No person shall keep, or suffer to remain, any bones
or waste matters of any kind for longer than eight hours in
any room, or on any floor, in or on which any process of pre-
paration of meat or of fat for sale for human food is, or
usually is, carried on.
(4) No person shall use, or suffer to be used, any room
or place for the boning, curing, canning, salting, mincing, or
other similar process of preparation of meat or fat of animals
for human food, unless its internal walls are constructed of
bricks, tiles, stone, cement, or other material impervious to
water, which shall at all times be kept constantly clean, either
by washing with water or by lime-washing from time to time:
Provided that such walls may be constructed of -wood, if the
internal surfaces be covered with smooth iron, painted white,
to a height of 6 feet from the floor, and if the portion of
the walls above the iron be kept constantly clean, either by
painting white and washing from time to time, or by lime-
washing from time to time.
(5) No person shall use any room or place for the boning,
curing, canning, salting, mincing, or other similar process of
the preparation of meat or fat of animals for sale for human
food, which is in direct communication with a stable, urinal,
privy, or water-closet, or which has in it an opening into any
drain or sewer.
(6) A copy of this Regulation, as supplied on demand by
the Department of Public Health, shall be conspicuously dis-
played in every place where the boning, curing, canning, salting,
mincing, or other similar process of preparation of the meat
or fat of animals for sale for human food is carried on, and
shall be there constantly maintained clean, visible, and legible
by the proprietor, manager, and person in charge thereof.
(7) If any person contravene any of the provisions of
this Regulation he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.


Regulation 28.—Gelatine for Consumption by Man.
(1) Gelatine sold for consumption by man shall be the
clean, wholesome product obtained from skin, membranes, bones,
and other collaginous bodies. It shall yield not more than
three parts per centum of ash. A five per cent, aqueous solu-
tion shall form a stiff jelly. A five per cent, aqueous solu-
tion shall not become alkaline, or emit any unpleasant odour,
after standing for two days exposed to the air at a temperature
of 80° F.
Preservative.
(2) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be mixed with
gelatine in proportions not exceeding three and one-half grains
of sulphur dioxide to the pound of dry, marketable gelatine
sold for consumption by man.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains gelatine sold for consumption by man a state-
ment or label, on which shall be written in bold-faced sans-
seriff capital letters of not less size than six points face
measurement, the words “For food.”
Regulation 29.—Edible Oils and Fats.
General standard for Edible Oils and Fats.
(1) Edible oils and fats shall be the oils and fats com-
monly recognised as wholesome food stuffs; they shall be free
from rancidity and decomposition, and from offensive odor and
taste. They shall not contain any mineral oil.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains a mixture of edible oils or fats of diverse origin
a statement or label, on which is written in sans-seriff capitals
of not less size than six points face measurement a statement of
the kinds of oils and fats which the mixture contains.
Olive Oil.
(3) Olive oil shall be the oil obtained by cold expression
from the sound, mature fruit of the cultivated olive-tree ( Olea
Europea, L.) ; it shall have a specific gravity of from 0.914 to
0.919, at a temperature of 60° F., a saponification value between
185 and 196, and an iodine value of 79 to 90. It shall conform
with the general standard for edible oils and fats.
(4) “Lucca oil” shall be an oil which conforms with the
standard for olive oil, and with the general standard for edible
oils and fats.


Labelling.
(5) No person shall sell any package containing any oil
which does not conform to the standard for oilve oil and to
the general standard for edible oils and fats, on or to which is
written or attached the word ‘ ‘ Lucca ’ ’ or the word ‘ ‘ Olive ’ ’
or any expression which includes the said words or either of
them:
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a state-
ment of the kinds of oil contained in a mixture of oils and
fats, as required by paragraph (2) of this regulation.
Regulation 30.—Margarine.
(1) The term “margarine” shall include every pre-
paration of animal or vegetable fat or oil churned with milk
or with separated milk, which is intended to be, or which may
be, used in place of butter, and which contains any fat other
than milk-fat,
(2) No person shall sell margarine unless (a) it is mixed
with not less than five parts per centum by weight of sesame
oil ( sesamum indicum or sesamum orientals) ; (h) it conforms
with the general standard for edible oils and fats; (o) it does
not contain more than sixteen parts per centum of water;
( d ) it does not contain any added colouring matter, nor any
other substance, save salt (sodium chloride) and preservative:
Provided that an additional proportion of sesame oil, or of
some other edible vegetable oil, may be added to margarine
if desired.
Preservative.
(2) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, boric acid may be added to margarine
in proportion not exceeding one half of one part of boric acid
per centum.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains margarine a statement or label, on which is
written in black sans-seriff capital letters of not less size than
thirty points face measurements, the word “Margarine.”
(4) There shall be conspicuously attached to every vessel
used to hold margarine for consumption on the premises by
customers in any place where food is sold, the word “Mar-
garine, ’ ’ written in black sans-seriff capital letters of not less
size than eighteen points face measurement.
(5) The words “Butter” and “Butterine,” and expres-
sions which include the said words, may not be written on
the statement or label written on, or attached to, any package
which contains margarine, nor on any vessel used as aforesaid.


Regulation 31.—Milk, Cream, and Skim- or Separated-milk.
Milk.
(1) Milk shall be the normal, clean, and sweet secretion
obtained from the udder of the healthy cow properly fed and
kept, excluding that got during the ten days immediately
following on parturition. It shall contain not less than eight
and five-tenths parts per centum of milk-solids not fat, and
three and two-tenths parts per centum of milk fat. It shall
not contain any added water nor any foreign substance.
Cream.
(2) Cream shall contain not less than forty parts per
centum of milk-fat. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Skim- or Separated-milk.
(3) Skim- or separated-milk shall contain in its fat-free
liquid not less than eight and eight-tenths parts per centum
of milk-solids not fat.
Regulation 32.—Condensed Milks.
Unsweetened Condensed Milk.
(1) Unsweetened condensed milk shall contain not less
than twenty and four-tenths parts per centum of milk-solids
not fat, and seven and seven-tenths parts per centum of milk-
fat. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Sweetened Condensed Milk.
(2) Sweetened condensed milk shall contain not less than
twenty-two and five-tenths parts per centum of milk-solids not
fat, and not less than eight and five-tenths parts per centum
of milk-fat. It shall not contain any foreign substance save
sugar.
Labelling.
(B) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing condensed milk a statement or label, on which
shall be written in sans-seriff capital types of not less size
than six points face measurement, directions for making, with
its contents, milk of composition at least equal to that of fresh
milk, as standardised by Regulation 31, in the following
form;—
To make milk not below the composition of
fresh milk with the contents of this package add
[here insert the number of parts ] of water by
volume.
Provided that the presence of sugar in the contents of any
such package, when diluted in accordance with such statement,
shall not be deemed to constitute a contravention of the Regu-
lations.


Condensed Skim or Separated Milk.
(4) Condensed skim- or separated-milk shall be skim- or
separated-milk from which a considerable proportion of water
has been evaporated. Its fat-free liquid shall contain not less
than twenty-six and four-tenths parts per centum of milk-solids
not fat. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing condensed skim- or separated-milk a statement or
label, on which shall be written the words ‘ ‘ Condensed skim-
milk, ’ ’ together with such other matter as the law requires, and
any trade announcement; and, additionally, there shall be
written across such matter, on a diagonal line in a transparent
red colour, the words “Skim-milk,” in bold-faced sans-seriff
capital types of not less size than forty-eight points face
measurement.
(6) No person shall sell any condensed milk in respect of
which any of the provisions contained in clause (3) of this
Regulation have not been complied with.
Regulation 33—Prescribing the Method of Labelling
Vessels containing Skimmed or Separated Milk.
No person shall carry for sale in any can or other vessel
any skim-milk or separated-milk unless the said can or vessel
is durably marked with the following words: —
“ SKIMMED MILK,”
or (alternatively)
“ SEPARATED MILK.”
The said words shall be written on the side, shoulder, or neck
of the can or other vessel in bold-faced sans-seriff capital
letters, of not less size than seventy-two points face measure-
ment, in black ink on a white ground.
Regulation 34 —For Securing Cleanliness and Freedom
from Contamination of Milk.
(1) No person shall allow his hands or any part of his
body to come into contact with any milk for sale.
(2) No person shall apply to his mouth any vessel or
utensil which contains, or which comes into contact with, any
milk for sale.
(3) No person shall keep, store, carry, or place, or suffer
to be kept stored, carried, or placed, any milk for sale or in
course of delivery to any customer, so as to be exposed to
flies or dust, or so as to be accessible to any animal.


(4) No person shall suffer the interior of any vessel
used for containing or for measuring milk to be exposed to
flies or dust.
(5) No person shall keep, measure, carry, or deliver any
milk for sale, or cause or suffer any such milk to be kept,
measured, carried, or delivered, in any vessel which is not clean.
(6) No person shall use any vessel with rough or torn
edyes or surtace for containing, measuring, or carrying any
milk for sale or for delivery to any customer.
(7) No person shall store, keep, or sell milk in any place
m which is stored, kept, or sold any kerosene, vegetables, fish,
meat (except meat in hermetically sealed tins), or any other
substance by which milk for sale is, or is liable to be, con-
taminated; nor in any room used as a sleeping-room, whether
continuously or occasionally.
(8) No person shall milk any cow, or cause or suffer any
cor\ under his control to be milked, for the purpose of
obtaining milk for sale —
(a) unless at the time of milking the udder and teats of
the cow are clean;
(h) unless the hands of the person milking such cow are
clean and free from all contamination or infection.
(9) No person shall use, or suffer or cause to be used,
for closing or for helping to close, any churn, tin, or other
vessel containing milk for sale, any rag, Canvas, paper, wood,
or other absorbent material.
(10) In every place where milk is sold, and in every place
where any cow is milked for the purpose of obtaining milk for
sale, a copy of this Regulation, as supplied on demand by the
Department of Public Health, shall be conspicuously displayed,
and shall be there constantly maintained clean, visible, and
legible by the proprietor, manager, and person in charge
thereof.
(11) If any person contravene any of the provisions of
this Regulation, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
Regulation 35—Butter.
General Standard for Butter.
(1) Butter shall be the fatty substance obtained by churn-
ing milk or cream. It shall conform with the general standard
for edible oils and fats. It shall contain not less than eighty-
two parts per centum of milk-fat. It shall not contain more
than sixteen parts per centum of water. It shall not be mixed
with any foreign fat, and it shall not contain any added
colouring matter or other added substance save salt (sodium
chloride) and preservative.


Preservative.
(2) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, boric acid, may be mixed with butter
in proportion not exceeding one-half of. one part per centum
of boric acid.
Benovated or Process Butter.
(3) Renovated or process butter shall be the product
obtained by reworking butter without the addition of any sub-
stance except milk, cream, water, and salt. It shall contain
not less than eighty-two parts per centum of milk-fat, and not
more than sixteen parts per centum of water. It shall conform
with the general standard for edible oils and fats, and it shall
not contain any foreign fat.
Labelling.
(4) There shall be attached to every package which con-
tains renovated or process butter a statement or label, on which
shall be written in bold-faced sans-seriff capital letters of not
less size than thirty points face measurement, in black ink
on a white ground, the words ‘‘Renovated butter.”
Regulation 36—Cheese.
General Standard for Cheese.
(1) Cheese shall be the solid or semi-solid product obtained
by coagulating milk with rennet or acid, with or without the
addition of ripening ferments, seasonings, common salt, and
harmless vegetable colouring matter. It shall contain not less
than fifty parts per centum of milk-fat in its water-free sub-
stance, and it shall not contain any foreign fat.
Skim-milk Cheese.
(2) Skim-milk cheese shall be cheese made from milk from
which part of its fat has been removed; it shall contain not
less than ten parts per centum of milk-fat in its water-free
substance.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be attached to every package which con-
tains skim-milk cheese a statement or label, on which shall be
written in bold faced sans-seriff capital letters of not less size
than thirty points face measurement, in black ink on a white
ground, the words ‘ 1 Skim-milk cheese.
Cream Cheese.
(4) Cream cheese shall be cheese made from milk and
cream; it shall contain not less than sixty parts per centum of
milk-fat in its water-free substance.


Regulation 37—Tea.
General standard for Tea.
(1) Tea shall be the leaves and leaf-buds of species of
Thea, prepared by fermenting, drying, and firing; it shall
not contain any exhausted or partly exhausted leaves, not any
foreign matter, and it shall not be inferior in composition,
nor in quality, to the standard fixed by the Minister for Trade
and Customs under the provisions of the Commonwealth
Customs Act, and for the time being in force.
Tea Dust.
(2) Tea dust, and tea siftings or fanuings shall be res-
pectively the dust and the siftings or fannings of tea which
conforms with the general standard for tea; it shall not con-
tain more than five parts per centum of ash insoluble in water.
Labelling.
(3) When tea is contained in a package on or attached to
which is a statement or label describing the tea as the product
of a particular country or district, such tea shall be the product
of that country or district.
Regulation 38—Coffee.
(I) Coffee shall be the seed of Coffea Arabica or Coffea
Liberica.
(2) Ground coffee shall contain not less than ten parts
per centum of fat, not more than one part per centum of
saccharine matter, and not more than six parts per centum
of ash (of which the proportion soluble in water shall be not
less than seventy-five parts per centum); it shall not contain
any added substance.
Chicory.
(3) Chicory shall be the dried and roasted root of
Cichorium intybus.
Coffee and Chicory Mixture.
(-1) Coffee-aud-chicory mixture shall be a mixture of
ground coffee and ground chicory; it shall not contain any
added substance.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains coffee mixed with chicory a statement or label
on which the words “coffee-and-chicory-mixture” are written
in larger letters than any other letter on the statement or
label, immediately followed by a statement of the percentage
proportions in which the ingredients of the mixture are present
uniformly written in bold-faced sans-seriff capitals of not less


size than six points face measurement, and in the following
form: —
Containing not more than ( here insert the number of parts
per cent, of chicory ) parts of chicory to ( here insert
the number of parts per cent, of coffee) parts of
Coffee Essence.
(6) Coffee essence or coffee extract shall be an extract
of coffee; it shall contain not less than one-half of one part
per centum of caffeine naturally present in the coffee.
Labelling.
(7) There shall be written onmr attached to every package
which contains coffee extract mixed with any other wholesome
food-stuff a statement or label on which shall be uniformly
written in sans-seriff capitals of not less size than six points
face measurement the percentage proportion of coffee essence
contained in it, in the following form:
This mixture contains ( here insert the number of parts)
parts per cent, of coffee essence.
Provided, that no such mixture shall contain less than fifty
parts per centum of coffee essence or extract.
Regulation 39 —Cocoa.
General Standard for Cocoa.
(1) Cocoa-beans shall be the seed of Theobroma cacao
L.; cocoa-nibs, or cracked cocoa, shall be roasted, broken, cocoa-
bean freed from its shell or husk, with or without the germ.
(2) Cocoa-paste (cocoa-mass or cocoa-slab), shall be the
solid or semi solid mass produced by grinding cocoa-nibs; it
shall contain not less than forty-five parts per centum of cocoa
fat. The fat-free residue of cocoa-paste shall contain not
more than twenty-two parts per centum of the starch natural
to cocoa; not more than six and one-third parts per centum or
crude fibre; not more than eight parts per centum ot total
ash; not more than five and one-half parts per centum of ash
insoluble in -water; and not more than two-fifths of one part
per centum of ferric oxide.
Cocoa Powder.
(3) Cocoa or powdered cocoa shall be powdered cocoa-
paste deprived or not of a portion of its fat; its fat-free
residue shall conform with the general standard for cocoa.
Soluble Cocoa.
(4) Soluble cocoa or cocoa-essence shall be the product
obtained by treating cocoa-paste deprived or not of a portion
of its fat with alkali or alkaline salts; it shall contain not
more than three parts per centum of added alkali or alkaline


salt estimated as potassium carbonate, and its fat- and alkali-
free residue shall conform with the general standard for cocoa.
Prepared cocoa.
(5) Prepared compounded, homoeopathic, or sweetened cocoa
shall be cocoa-powder mixed with other wholesome food-stuffs;
it shall contain not less than forty parts per centum of cocoa-
powder, and its fat-free cocoa content shall conform with the
general standard for cocoa.
Labelling.
(6) There shall be written on or attached to every
package which contains prepared, compounded, homoeopathic,
or sweetened cocoa a statement or label on which is uniformly
written in sans-seriff capitals of not less size than six points
face measurement a statement in the following form;—
Prepared cocoa, compounded cocoa, homoeopathic cocoa, or
sweetened cocoa (as the case may be) containing not
less than (here insert the number of parts per cent.)
per cent, of cocoa.
Chocolate.
(7) Chocolate-paste, confectioners’ chocolate, chocolate
coating, and chocolate powder shall be cocoa-paste mixed with
sugar, with or without addition or subtraction of cocoa-fat,
and of spices or harmless flavourings. They shall respectively
contain not less than thirty-two parts per centum of cocoa-
paste, and their sugar-, fat-, and spice-free residue shall con-
form with the general standard for cocoa.
Prohibition.
(8) The addition of cocoa-husks, any weighty substance,
paraffin, or foreign fat, to cocoa or to any preparation of cocoa
is hereby prohibited.
Regulation 40—Spices and Condiments.
Cinnamon.
(1) Cinnamon shall be the dried bark of Cinnamomum
Zeylanicum, from which the outer layers may or may not have
been removed.
(2) Cassia and Cassia-buds shall be respectively the bark
and the dried immature fruit of Cinnamomum cassia.
(3) Powdered cinnamon shall not contain any cassia or
other foreign vegetable or mineral substance.
Cloves.
(4) Cloves shall be the dried flower-buds of Eugenia
caryophyllata. They shall not contain any exhausted or partly
exhausted cloves, or any foreign vegetable or mineral sub-
F


stance, nor more than five parts in one hundred parts by
weight of clove stems.
Ginger and Ground Ginger.
(5) Ginger shall be the washed and dried, or the decor-
ticated and dried, rhizome of Zingiber officinale; it shall not
contain any exhausted or partly exhausted ginger, nor any
foreign vegetable or mineral substance.
(6) Ground ginger shall not contain any exhausted or
partly exhausted ginger, or any foreign vegetable or mineral
substance.
Mace and Nutmeg.
(7) Mace shall be the dried arillus of Myristica fragrans;
it shall not contain the arillus of any other variety of Myristica,
including M. Malabarica or fatua (Bombay Mace)’ and M.
argentea (Wild Mace).
(8) Nutmeg shall be dried seed of M. fragrans, deprived
of its testa.
(9) Ground nutmeg shall not contain any foreign sub-
stance.
Black Pepper.
(10) Black pepper shall be the dried immature berry
of Piper nigrum L.; it shall contain not less than six parts
per centum of extract soluble in ether, not more than seven
parts per centum of total ash, and not less than eight parts
per centum of extractive matter soluble in ethylic alcohol.
White Pepper.
(11) White pepper shall be the dried mature berry of
Piper nigrum L. from which the outer coating has been
removed; it shall contain not less than six parts per centum of
extract soluble in ether, not more than three and one-half
parts per centum of ash, and not less than seven parts per
centum of extractive matter soluble in ethylic alcohol.
Cayenne Pepper.
(12) Cayenne pepper, or cayenne, shall be the dried fruit
of various species of Capsicum; it shall contain not less than
fifteen parts per centum of ether extractives, and not more than
six parts per centum of total ash; it shall not contain any
added substance.
Ground Pepper.
(13) Ground pepper shall bo ground white or black pepper,
or ground white and black pepper; it shall not contain any
added substance.
Pepper and Flour.
(14) Ground pepper may be mixed with flour of any
wholesome origin, provided that the proportion of added flour


shall in no case be greater than fifty parts of flour to fifty
parts of ground pepper.
Labelling.
' (15) There shall be written on or attached to every pack-
age which contains ground pepper mixed with flour a state-
ment or label, on which the words “Pepper-Mixture” are
written in larger letters than any other letter on the statement
or label, immediately followed by a statement of the percentage
proportions in which the ingredients of the mixture are present,
written in sans-seriff capital letters of not less size than six
point face measurement, and in the following form: —
PEPPER MIXTURE.
Containing not more than [here insert the number of
■parts per cent, of flour] parts of [here insert the
name of the kind of flour ] flour to [here insert the
number of parts per cent, of pepper ] parts of ground
pepper.
Mustard Flour.
(16) Mustard flour shall be the ground seed of Sinapis
alba, Brassica juncea, and Brassica nigra; one hundred parts
shall not yield more than eight parts of total ash. It shall
not contain any added substance, except wheaten flour; Pro-
vided that the proportion of wheaten flour shall not be more
than two and a half parts per centum.
Mustard Pastes.
(17) Mustard pastes shall be mustard flour mixed with
water, salt (sodium chloride), verjuice, white wine, vinegar,
tartaric or citric acid, sugar, turmeric, and spices, singly or
in combination. Mustard pastes shall not contain the flour
of any foreign seed, dextrine, or added mineral matter save
salt (sodium chloride).
Regulation 41—Sauces.
General standard for Sauces.
(1) Sauces shall be liquid or semi-liquid mixtures of
wholesome foodstuffs with spices and condiments, with or
without harmless colouring and flavouring substances.
Tomato Sauce.
(2) Tomato sauce shall be prepared from the pulp of
sound and ripe tomatoes; it shall conform with the general
standard for sauces, and it shall not contain any foreign vege-
table substance, save spices and condiments.


Regulation 42—Vinegar.
General Standard for Vinegar,
(1) Vinegar shall be the liquid derived from alcoholic
and acetous fermentations; it shall contain not less than four
parts _ of acetic acid in one hundred parts, and it shall not
contain any sulphuric or other mineral acid, lead, or copper,
nor shall it contain any added substance, except caramel.
Varieties.
(2) Malt vinegar, wine vinegar, apple or cider vinegar,
and fruit vinegar shall be prepared from an infusion of malt
or of cereals whose starch has been converted by malt, from
wine, from apples, and from other fruits, respectively, and shall
conform w r ith the general standard for vinegar.
Sugar vinegar shall be vinegar prepared from a solution
of sugar; malt-and-sugar vinegar shall be vinegar prepared
from malt and sugar; honey vinegar shall be vinegar prepared
from honey; glucose vinegar shall be vinegar prepared from a
liquid containing glucose; spirit or alcohol vinegar shall be
vinegar prepared from distilled and diluted alcohol; malt-and-
alcohol or malt-and-spirit vinegar shall be vinegar prepared
from malt and distilled and diluted alcohol.
Sugar vinegar, honey vinegar, malt-and-sugar vinegar,
glucose vinegar, spirit or alcohol vinegar, and malt-and-alcohol
or malt-and-spirit vinegar, shall conform with the general
standard for vinegars.
Distilled vinegar shall be the distillate of a vinegar which
conforms with the general standard for vinegars; it shall
contain not_ less than four parts of acetic acid in one hundred
parts, and it shall not contain any added substance.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains vinegar a statement or label, on which shall be
written, in types of not less size than twenty-four points face
measurement, the word “ vinegar” (or alternatively the words
"brewed vinegar’’), accompanied with a statement of the
material or materials from which the vinegar was brewed,
written in bold-faced sans-seriff capital types of not less than
twelve-points face measurement, and in the following form:—
Brewed from [ here insert the names of the materials from
which the contents were brewed.]
Vinegar Substitutes.
(4) Acetic mixtures sold for the purpose of being used,
or which may be used as vinegar shall be dilutions of pure
acetic acid in containing not less than four parts of


acetic acid in one hundred parts; they shall not contain any
sulphuric or other mineral acid, lead, or copper, nor any added
substance, except caramel.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains an acetic mixture sold for the purpose of
being used, or which may be used, as vinegar a statement or
label, on which the words “vinegar-substitute’ ’ are uniformly
written in bold-faced sans-seriff capitals of not less size than
twenty-four points face measurement.
Prohibition.
(6) The word ‘ ‘ Vinegar, ” and expressions which include
the w’ord ‘vinegar” shall not be written on any statement or
label written on or attached to a package which contains an
acetic mixture sold for the purpose of being used, or which
may be used, as vinegar, unless it be conjoined with the word
‘ ‘ substitute. ’ ’
Regulation 43—Pickles.
Pickles shall be sound vegetables or sound fruits preserved
in salt, vinegar, or acetic acid, with or without spices, condi-
ments, or sugar, and with or without harmless colouring or
flavouring substances; they shall not contain any added metallic
compound, save common salt. Pickles which have been made
with bleached vegetables shall contain no more that unavoidable
traces of sulphurous acid, or its compounds, derived from the
bleaching process.
Regulation 44—Sugar and Glucose.
Sugar.
(1) Sugar shall be the product chemically known as sucrose
or saccharose.
(2) Granulated, loaf, cut, milled, and powdered sugar
shall contain at least ninety-nine and a half parts of surcrose
in every hundred parts.
St arch-sugar.
(3) Starch-sugar shall be the solid product obtained by
hydrolysing starch or a wholesome starch-containing substance
until the greater part of the starch has been converted into
dextrose.
(4) Anhydrous starch-sugar shall contain not less than
ninety-five parts per centum of dextrose, and not more than
eight-tenths of one part per centum of ash.
(5) Hydrous starch-sugar, or ‘‘7o sugar,” or ‘‘brewer’s
sugar,” shall contain not less than seventy parts per centum of


dextrose, and not more than eight-tenths of one part per
centum of ash; and “climax,” or “acme,” or “80 sugar,”
shall contain not less than eighty parts per centum of dextrose,
and not more than one and one-half parts per centum of ash.
(6) Glucose (mixing or confectioners’ glucose) shall have
a specific gravity of fr0m1.398 to 1.455, at a temperature of 37.5
C., and within those limits shall conform in specific gravity with
the specific gravity ascribed to it by the seller; at a specific
gravity of 1.398 it shall contain not more than twenty-one
parts per centum of water, and at a specific gravity of 1.455 it
shall contain not more than fourteen parts per centum of
water; it shall contain not more than one part per centum of
ash, calculated on the basis of a specific gravity of 1.398, which
shall consist chiefly of chlorides and sulphates.
(7) None of the products mentioned in tins Regulation
shall contain any arsenic or other harmful substance.
Regulation 45—Honey.
Honey shall be the nectar and saccharine exudations of
plants, gathered, modified, and stored in the comb by the honey-
bee; it shall contain not more than twenty-six parts per
centum of water, not less than sixty parts per centum of
reducing sugars, and shall not yield more than three-fourths
of one part per centum of ash. It shall not include the
product of bees fed wholly or in part on sugar or on glucose.
It shall not contain any added sugar or glucose, artificial
sweetening substance, added colouring matter, or other foreign
substance.
Regulation 46-—Confectionery.
General Standard for Confectionery.
(1) Confectionery shall be the product made from sugar,
confectioner’s glucose, or other saccharine substances, with or
without the addition of harmless colouring or flavouring, or
filling materials, and with or without other food substances,
such as butter, fresh eggs, milk, chocolate, nuts, and fruits;
it shall not contain any paraffin, nor resin, nor any added
mineral substance except drugs; nor any drug concerning which
any restrictive law or regulation is in force; nor shall it enclose
any alcholic liquor or compound:
Provided that nothing in this Regulation contained shall be
taken to prohibit the manufacture by confectioners of lozenges
and the like which contain a drug concerning which any re-
strictive law or regulation is in force for wholesale supply to
the order of a registered pharmacist.
(2) No person shall refill with confectionery for sale any
once-used package which is made wholly or in part of wood,


paper, cardboard, or the like absorbent material, and no person
shall sell any such package so refilled.
Labelling.
(B) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains confectionery medicated by the addition of any
drug concerning which there is no restrictive law or regula-
tion in force, a statement or label, on which shall be written,
in bold-faced sans-seriff capital types of not less size than
twelve points face measurement, the word “Medicated.” No
person shall sell any package containing any such confectionery
in respect of which the provisions of this clause (3) of this
Regulation have not been complied with.
Regulation 47—Pastry.
In the Regulations the word ‘ ‘ pastry ’ ’ shall include pastry,
cakes, and biscuits. Pastry shall be a product of the mixture
of two or more of the following substances, selected, combined,
and cooked, as may be desired: —Various kinds of flour or
starch, water, fresh or separated milk; cream, fresh eggs,
butter, vegetable or animal edible fats; sugar, honey, or
molasses; almonds or other oleaginous seeds; sound fruits or
preparations of sound fruits; other wholesome food-substances;
harmless flavourings; harmless colouring matters. Pastry shall
not contain any dried albumen, yolk of egg preserved with any
preservative substance, nor any artificial sweetening substance,
mineral oil or fat, alum, or sulphate of copper.
Regulation 48—Ice-cream.
(1) Ice-cream shall be a food-stuff composed of milk and
of cream with sugar, with or without fresh eggs, and with or
without not more than one part per centum of gelatine con-
formable with the standard for gelatine, flavoured with fruit
or with the juice or pulp of fruit, or with nuts, or with harmless
dietetic essences, coloured or not with harmless colouring sub-
stances, and with or without candied fruits,_ liqueurs, or spirits,
sterilised by boiling, or pasteurised by being kept at a tem-
perature of not less than 156° P. for twenty minutes, or of not
less than 165° F. for ten minutes, subsequently frozen, and
thereafter so kept as to be protected from contamination. Ice-
cream shall contain not less than ten parts per centum of milk-
fat present in the form of cream.
Ices.
(2) Ices shall be any preparation of wholesome food-stulfs,
with or without addition of harmless flavourings and of harm-
less colouring matter, sterilised by boiling, or pasteurised by


being kept at a temperature of not less than 156° F. for twenty
minutes, or of not less than 165° F. for ten minutes, and sub-
sequently frozen. Ices thereafter shall be so kept as to be
protected from contamination.
(3) No person shall sell any ice-cream or ices of which the
nature or flavouring is indicated or declared by the name of
any fruit or fruits, flavoured wholly or in part with any
substance save the fruit or fruits named, unless the said name
is conjoined with the word “flavour” or “flavouring.”
Regulation 49—Providing for the Cleanliness and freedom
from contamination of ice-cream and ices.
(1) No person shall for sale manufacture, store, or deposit
any ice-cream or ices, or suffer them to be manufactured, stored,
or deposited in any open shed or unenclosed space.
(2) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit any
ice-cream or ices for sale, or suffer them to be manufactured
for sale, stored, or deposited in any room or building—
(a) Unless such room or building is provided with tight,
close-jointed walls and floors.
(b) Unless the internal walls are covered with tiles, smooth
iron, or smooth plaster, cement, or wood painted or
colour-washed or frequently lime-washed.
(c) Unless the floors are constructed of cement, concrete,
tiles, or well-smoothed wood.
(d) Unless it is well lighted and ventilated.
(e) Unless all interior surfaces of the walls and floors
thereof are kept constantly clean.
(3) No person shall manufacture, store or deposit ice-
cream or ices, or suffer them to be manufactured, stored, or
deposited in any dwelling-room or in any room communicating
directly with a privy or water-closet, or stable, or with an
apartment used for sleeping, or in any room having an opening
communicating directly with any drain or sewer.
(4) No person engaged in the manufacture or sale of ice-
cream or of ices shall suffer his hands or any part of his
person to come in contact with any ice-cream or ices.
(5) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit any
ice-cream or ices in any vessel which is not clean; and every
person engaged in the manufacture or sale of ice-cream or of
ices shall at all times maintain all vessels and utensils used
for containing or coming in contact with ice-cream or ices in
a condition of cleanliness.
(6) No person shall sell any ice-cream or ices which, after
having been once frozen, have run down or melted and which
have been again frozen.
(7) A copy of this Regulation, as supplied on demand
by the Deaprtment of Public Health, shall be conspicuously


displayed in every place where ice-cream or ices are made for
sale, and shall be there constantly maintained clean, visible,
and legible, by the proprietor, manager, and person in charge
thereof.
(8) If any person contravene any of the provisions of this
Regulation he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
Regulation 50.—Fruit and Fruit Products.
Preserved Fruit.
(1) Preserved fruit shall be any sound fruit or fruit
substance preserved either by drying or by immersion in fruit-
juice or in water. It shall not contain any added substance save
sugar.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every
package of preserved fruit a statement or label, on which the
name or names of the fruit or fruits contained in the package
are written in types of not less size than eighteen points face
measurement.
Regulation 51—Jam, and Conserve, and Marmalade.
Jam and Conserve.
(1) Jam and conserve shall be products obtained by boil-
ing some one kind of sound fruit with sugar; they shall not
contain any added glucose, nor any gelatine, starch-jelly, apple-
pulp (except in the case of apple-jam), or other added sub-
stance, except spices and apple-juice:
Provided that the proportion of added apple-juice shall in
no case exceed four parts per centum;
Provided further, that the addition of harmless colouring
matter to raspberry jam and to plum jam shall not be deemed
to be a contravention of this Regulation.
Marmalade.
(2) Marmalade shall be the product obtained by boiling
sound citrus fruits with sugar; it shall not contain any added
substance.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains jam, conserve, or marmalade a statement or
label, on which shall be written, in types of not less size than
eighteen points face measurement, the word “jam,” “con-
serve,” or “marmalade,” as the case may require. In the
case of jam or conserve, there shall also be uniformly written
on the said statement or label, in bold-faced capital types of
not less size than eighteen points face measurement, the name


of the fruit from which the contents of the package have been
prepared.
Mixed Jam.
(4) Mixed jam shall be the product obtained by boiling
two or more varieties of sound fruit with sugar. It_ shall not
contain any vegetable substance other than that derived from
fruits of the varieties designated on the statement or label,
except spices. It shall contain not less than fifty parts per
centum of the variety of fruit first named on the statement or
label. It shall not contain any added glucose, gelatine, starch-
jelly, or other foreign substance.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains mixed jam a statement or label on which shall
be written, in types of not less size than eighteen points face
measurement the words “mixed jam.” There shall also be
uniformly written on the said statement or label, in bold-faced
capital types of not less size than eighteen points face measure-
ment, the names of the fruits from which the mixture has been
prepared.
Fruit Jelly.
(6) Fruit jelly shall be a compound prepared from the
juice of fruit and' sugar; it shall not contain any vegetable
substance other than that derived from sound fruit of the
variety or varieties designated on the statement or label, nor
any added glucose, gelatine, starch-jelly, or other foreign
substance.
Labelling.
(7) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains fruit jelly a statement or label on which shall
be written, in types of not less size than eighteen points face
measurement, the words “fruit jelly.’ There shall also be
uniformly written on the said statement or label in bold-taeed
capital types of not less size than eighteen points face measure-
ment, the name or names of the variety or varieties of fruits
from which the contents have been prepared, and the product
of the fruit which is first named shall be present in the contents
of the package in larger proportion that the product of any
other fruit.
Regulation 52—Jelly Crystals.
Fruit-jelly Crystals.
(1) Fruit-jelly crystals shall be a confection of gelatine,
sugar and citric‘or tartaric acid, flavoured with wholesome
substances wholly derived from fruits or from other sound
vegetable substances.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains fruit-jelly crystals a statement or label on
which the words “fruit-jelly crystals” are uniformly written
in bold-faced types of not less size than eight points face
measurement, which words may be accompanied by any word
descriptive of the character of the flavouring.
Jelly Crystals.
(3) .Telly crystals shall be a confection of gelatine, sugar,
and citric or tartaric acid, coloured and flavoured with harmless
colouring matters and with harmless flavouring substances.
Labelling.
(4) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains jelly crystals a statement or label on which the
words “jelly crystals” are uniformly written in bold-faced
types of not less size than eight points face measurement, which
words “jelly crystals” are uniformly written in bold-faced
charactei of the flavouring.
Regulation 53—Dietetic Essences.
General Standard for Essences.
(1) Essences shall be solutions of wholesome flavouring
substances in ethylie alcohol or in water, with or without harm-
less colouring matter.
Essence of Lemon.
(2) Essence of lemon shall be the flavouring extract pre-
pared from oil of lemon, or from lemon-peel, or from both;
it shall contain not less than five parts per centum by volume
of oil of lemon, and shall conform with the general standard
for essences.
Oil of Lemon.
(8) Oil of lemon shall be the volatile oil obtained by
expression or alcoholic solution from the fresh peel of the
lemon (Citrus limonvm, L.); it shall have an optical rotation
of not less than plus 59° in a 100 m.ra. tube, and it shall
contain not less than four parts per centum by weight of
citral.
Terpeneless Essence of J^emon.
(4) Terpeneless essence of lemon shall be the flavouring
extract, prepared by dissolving terpeneless oil of lemon in
dilute alcohol or water; it shall contain not less than two-tenths
of one part per centum by weight of citral derived from oil of
lemon, and shall conform with the general standard for
essences.


Terpeneless Oil of Lemon.
(5) Terpeneless oil of lemon shall be oil of lemon from
which all, or nearly all, the terpenes have been removed.
Vanilla Bean.
(6) Vanilla bean shall be the dried fruit of Vanilla plani-
folia (species), containing the odoriferous principle, or alde-
hyde, known as vanillin.
Vanilla Essence.
(7) Vanilla essence shall be an alcoholic extract of vanilla
bean, and shall contain not less than two-tenths of one part
per centum of natural vanillin; it shall conform with the
general standard for essences.
Vanilla Substitutes — Labelling.
(8) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing a substance which consists wholly or in part of a
substitute tor vanilla a statement or label on which shall be
uniformly written in sans-seriff capitals of not less size than
six points face measurement the words “Vanilla-substitute.”
Prohibition.
(9) The word “vanilla” shall not be written on the state-
ment or label attached to a package containing a substance
which consists wholly or in part of a substitute for vanilla
unless conjoined with the word “substitute,” in the following
form: —‘ ‘ Vanilla-substitute. ’ ’
Regulation 54—Citric and Tartaric Acid.
Citric and tartaric acids shall not contain more than one
one-hundredth of a grain of arsenic (calculated as arsenious
oxide) nor more than one-seventh of a grain of lead to the
pound.
Regulation 55—Potable Water.
For the purposes of the Regulations, potable water shall
be water which has been distilled, or which has been filtered
through a Boulton’s porcelain, Berkefeld, Pasteur Chamberland,
Abbott, or Pinnacle candle, or a Delphin candle made in one
piece, and which has been so kept between distillation or
filtration (as the case may be) and bottling for sale, as to
preserve it from contamination.
Regulation 58—Aerated Waters.
General Standard for Aerated Waters.
(1) Aerated waters shall be potable water impregnated
with carbon dioxide, or with oxygen, or with both, under


pressure, with or without admixture of soda, potash, lithia or
the like salts; they shall not contain any lead or other poisonous
metal, nor any added foreign substance.
Soda Water,
(2) Soda water shall be an aerated water, with or without
admixture of sodium carbonate or sodium bicarbonate.
Lithia, Potash, and Seltzer Waters.
(3) Lithia, potash, and seltzer water shall be waters which
conform with the general standard for aerated waters; lithia
nater, and potash water, shall respectively contain not less
than five grains of lithium carbonate, and not less than fifteen
grains of potassium bicarbonate, to the pint. Seltzer water
shall contain not than fifteen grains of sodium chloride,
not less than two grains of sodium bicarbonate, not less than
four grains of magnesium chloride, and not less than four
grains of calcium chloride, to the pint.
Labelling.
(4) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing an aerated water, mixed with a salt or with salts,
a statement or label on which shall be written the name of the
added salt or salts, and the percentage proportion in which it
or they are present in it at the least:
Provided, nevertheless, that it shall not be necessary so
to label lithia, potash, and seltzer water, composed as prescribed
by this Regulation.
Regulation 57— Cordials and Syrups.
(1) Cordials and syrups shall be composed of the natural
juices of sound fruit or of sound vegetable extractives, potable
water, and sugar, with or without added citric or tartaric
acid, vinegar or acetic acid, and harmless colouring matter.
They shall contain not less than thirty-five parts per centum
by weight of sugar. They shall not contain any other flavour-
ing substance than that naturally present in the fruit or fruits
from which they have been prepared, nor any added substance.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains a cordial or syrup the name or names of the
fruit or fruits from which its contents have been prepared.
Preservative.
(3) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be added to
cordials and syrups in proportion not exceeding two grains of
sulphur dioxide to the pint.


Regulation 58—Compound Cordials.
(1) Compound cordials (Orange Bitters, Sarsaparilla,
Ginger, Hop Bitters, Tonic, and the like preparations) shall
consist of potable water, of vegetable extracts or infusions, or
of alcoholic tinctures, or of both, or of any combination of
varieties of either or of both, and sugar, with or without citric
or tartaric acid, harmless dietetic essences, and harmless colour-
ing matter.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains a compound cordial a statement or label on
which shall be written in bold-faced sans-seriff capital types of
not less size than twelve points face measurement the words
‘ ‘ Compound Cordial. ’ ’
Preservative.
(3) The preservative substance or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be added to com-
pound cordials in proportion not exceeding two grains of sul-
phur dioxide to the pint.
Regulation 59—Artificial Cordials and Syrups.
(1) Artificial cordials and syrups shall be composed of
harmless dietetic essences, sugar, potable water, and citric or
tartaric acid, with or without harmless colouring matter. They
shall contain not less than thirty-five parts per centum by
weight of sugar.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing an artificial cordial or syrup a statement or label
on which shall be uniformly written in bold faced sans-sentt
capital types of not less size than eighteen points face measure-
ment the words, “Artificial Cordial” or Artificial Syrup,
the name of the flavour, and the word “Flavour,” in the
following form: —
ARTIFICIAL CORDIAL
or
ARTIFICIAL SYRUP
[here insert the name of the
flavour ] FLAVOUR.
(3) Expressions which indicate that the contents of any
package which contains an artificial cordial or syrup consist
wholly or in part of natural fruit juices shall not be written
on the statement or label attached to any such package.
Preservative.
(4) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be added to arti-


fieial cordials or syrups in proportions not exceeding two grains
of sulphur dioxide to the pint.
Regulation 60 —Lime Juice.
(1) Lime juice shall be the expressed juice of the fruit
of Citrus medico, variety acida; it shall contain not less than
six parts per centum of citric acid, naturally present in the
fruit from which it has been produced. It shall not contain
any added citric acid.
Lime Juice Cordial or Syrup.
(2) Lime juice cordial or syrup shall be composed of lime
juice, sugar, and potable water; it shall not contain any added
substance.
Preservative.
(3) The preservative substance or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be added to lime-
juice and to lime-juice cordial or syrup, in proportion not
exceeding two grains of sulphur dioxide to the pint.
Regulation 61 —Non-excisable Fermented Drinks.
(1) Non-excisable fermented drinks shall be composed of
boiled water, vegetable extractives or infusions, and sugar,
with or without the addition of harmless dietetic essences, citric
or tartaric acid, and harmless colouring matter. They shall con-
tain not more than two parts per centum of proof spirit, and not
more than traces of sulphur dioxide unavoidably derived from
the processes of fining and of cleansing casks.
Preservative.
(2) The addition of saccharin to non-excisable fermented
drinks in proportion not exceeding three grains to the gallon,
is hereby permitted.
Regulation 62 —Summer or Temperance Drinks.
General Standard for Summer or Temperance Brinies.
(1) Summer or temperance drinks shall be composed of
potable water, sugar, and harmless dietetic essences, or vege-
table extractives or infusions, impregnated -with carbon dioxide
under pressure or not, with or without citric or tartaric acid,
and with or without harmless colouring matter.
Preservative.
(2) The preservative substance, or a preparation of the
preservative substance, sulphur dioxide, may be added to
summer drinks, in proportion not exceeding one grain of
sulphur dioxide to the pint.


Regulation 63—Quinine Tonic Waters.
There shall be written on or attached to every package
'which contains a drink the name or trade description of which
includes the word “quinine,” a statement or label, on which
shall be written in sans-seriff capital types, of not less size than
six points face measurement, the proportion of quinine therein
contained.
The proportion of quinine contained in a drink sold under
the said name or trade description shall be not less than one-
third of one grain to the pint.
Regulation 64—Standard of Strength for Spirits.
The standard of strength for spirits shall be as follows: —
Brandy, not more than 25 degrees underproof.
Whisky, not more than 25 degrees underproof.
Rum, not more than 35 degrees underproof.
Gin, not more than 35 degrees underproof.
Regulation 65—Drugs.
(1) Drugs which are not included in the latest edition
with amendments of the British Pharmacopoeia and which are
included in the latest edition of the British Pharmaceutical
Codex shall conform to the descriptions and tests respectively
prescribed for them in the said Codex, unless otherwise
standardised in these Regulations, or in any Act in force in
New South Wales, or in Regulations made thereunder:
Provided that the drugs described in the said Codex, below
mentioned, shall not be deemed to be adulterated in so far as
they are compounded with cotton seed ( Gossypium Her'baceum)
oil: —
Unguentum Acidi Carbolic! Compositum.
Unguentum Adipis Lanee.
Unguentum Diachyli.
Unguentum Calamin®.
Linimentum Mentholis.
Linimentum Succini Compositum.
Provided further that the drugs described in the said
Codex below mentioned shall not be deemed to be adulterated
in so far as they are compounded with an Australian wine con-
taining not more than sixteen parts per centum of ethylic
alcohol;
Vinum Aloes.
Vinum Coudurango.
Yinum Ergot®.
Yinum Ferri citratis.
Vinum Ferri et quininse.
Yinum Pepsin®.
Yinum Rhei.
Yinum Opii.


(2) A drug bearing a name recognised in the British Phar-
maceutical Codex which does not conform to the description and
tests prescribed in the said Codex, and which is not standardised
in the Act or in the Regulations shall not be deemed to be
adulterated if it be labelled so as to indicate a different
standard of strength, quality, or purity, and if it conform to
its labelled standard:
Provided that no such drug shall be sold unless it be
specificially demanded by the purchaser.
(3) Every pharmacist who supplies any drug on a pres-
cription or order signed by a legally qualified medical prac-
titioner which contains a direction that the drug prescribed
may be supplied a stated number of times, shall each time he
supplies the drug write in durable and legible letters on the
prescription or order a statement that he has supplied it, in
the following form:
Supplied ( here insert the date and the pharmacist’s signa-
ture).
(4) The drug below mentioned is hereby exempted from
that part of the provisions of the “Pure Food Act, 1908,”
section 5, subsection (k), which requires that every packet
containing chloroform shall on a label attached thereto bear a
statement of the quantity or proportion of any chloroform con-
tained therein, namely:
Every mixture which contains chloroform in proportion not
exceeding one-fourth of one part per centum of chloroform.
Regulation 66 —Declaration of certain Drugs.
(1) There shall be written on or attached to every
package which contains any of the substances, or preparations,
derivatives, or alkaloids of" any of the substances named in this
Regulation, a statement or label, on which shall be uniformly
written in sans seriff capitals of not less size than six points
face measurement a statement of the name of the substance
or substances, or of the preparation, derivative, or alkaloid of
the substance or substances, contained in it, and of the quantity
or proportion present in it in the following form: —
This mixture [or alternatively ] the contents of this
package includes [or] include [here insert the name
of the drug or drugs required to he declared, and the
quantity or proportion of each contained in the mixture
or package.]
Acetanilide.
Adrenals, extracts and preparations of.
Alpha eucaine.
Arsenic.
Barium.
Belladonna.
G


Beta eucaine.
Bromine.
Bromoform.
Cannabis indica.
Carbolic acid.
Chloroform.
Chloral hydrate.
Coca.
Copper.
Creasotum.
Cresylie acid.
Cotton root.
Cantharides.
Ergot.
Heroin.
Hydrocyanic acid.
lodine.
Lead.
Lobelia.
Mercury.
Nitro-glyeerine.
Nux vomica.
Oil of pennyroyal,
Oil of rue,
Oil of savin,
Oil of tansy,
Oil of parsley,
And any other reputed emraenagogue
or abortifacient substance.
Opium.
Paraldehyde.
Phenacetin.
Phenazone.
Phosphorus (free).
Stramonium.
Sulphonal,
Trional,
Veronal,
And other synthetic hypnotic and analgesic
substances.
Provided that this Regulation shall not apply to drugs
supplied in accordance with the provisions of the ‘ ‘ Pure Food
Act, 1908,” section 13 (1), (b), and (d).
(2) Proprietary medicines sold for internal or external
use by man shall not contain any met hylic alcohol.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
containing a proprietary medicine sold for internal use by
man which is compounded with ethylic alcohol in greater pro-
portion that two and one-half parts per centum by volume, a
label or statement on which shall be written in sans-seriff
capitals of not less size than six points face measurement, the
percentage proportion of alcohol contained in it, expressed in
terms of proof spirit, in the following form;


ALCOHOL.
This mixture contains [here insert the number of parts
per centum ] per centum of proof spirit.
(4) When a mixture contains both alcohol and some drug
required to be declared, then to the declaration concerning
alcohol made in the form prescribed in clause (3) of this
Regulation may be added the words ‘ ‘ and includes ’ ’ followed
by the declaration of a drug or drugs in the form prescribed
in clause (1) of this Regulation,
Regulation 67—Eucalyptus Oil.
(1) Eucalyptus oil prepared for internal use by man
shall be the colourless or pale yellow oil distilled from the
leaves of various species of eucalyptus, subsequently rectified,
and possessing a characteristic aromatic odour and pungent
cooling taste. Its specific gravity at a temperature of 60°
F. shall be from 0.910 to 0.930. It shall contain not less than
fifty parts per centum of eucalyptol (eineol) as determined
by the phosphoric acid method; mixed with one-third of its
volume of phosphoric acid of specific gravity 1.75, it shall
quickly become semi-solid. It shall be soluble in three volumes
of seventy per centum alcohol; and its refractive index at 60°
F. shall be below 1.4800.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains eucalyptus oil prepared for internal use by man
a statement or label, on which shall be written in sans-seriff
capitals of not less size than six points face measurement, the
words “For internal use.” No person shall sell any package
containing eucalyptus oil in respect of which the provisions of
this Regulation have not been complied with.
Regulation 68—Castor Oil.
Labelling.
There shall be written on or attached to every package
castor oil w T hich is sold for internal use by man, a
statement or label on which is written in sans-seriff capital
letters of not less size than six points face measurement, the
w r ords “for internal use.” No person shall sell any package
containing castor oil in respect of wdiich the provisions of this
Regulation have not been complied with.
Regulation 69—Soap.
General Standard for Soap.
(1) Soap shall be a product derived from the action of a
solution of alkali on fats, oils, or resins; it shall contain


not less than fifty-nine parts per centum of fatty acids, not
more than one-tenth of one part per centum of free caustic
alkali, and not more than three parts per centum of carbonate
of soda. It shall not contain any other substance, save
water, perfume, and harmless colouring matter:
Provided, that resin acids shall be reckoned as fatty acids.
Soap Mixture.
(2) Soap mixture shall be soap which conforms with the
general standard for soap mixed with mineral or vegetable
substances, drugs and disinfectants excepted. The total amount
of mineral or of vegetable substance, or of both together,
that is to say, including the proportion of mineral matter
permitted by clause (1) of this Regulation, shall not exceed
ten parts per centum by weight of any soap mixture:
Provided, that soap mixtures which are sold for abrasive
purposes, and which cannot be used for personal ablution
or for laundry work, may contain any proportion of an abrasive
mineral substance.
(3) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains a soap mixture a statement or label, on which
shall be uniformly written in bold faced sans-seriff capital
types of not less size than thirty-six points face measurement,
the words “soap mixed with” followed by the name of the
admixed substance or substances, in the following form:—
SOAP MIXED WITH
(here insert the name of the admixed
substance or substances.)
Provided, that soap mixture sold in bars is hereby exempted
from so much of the provisions of the ‘ ‘ Pure Food Act, 1908, ’ ’
section 13, as requires that a statement or label shall be written
on or attached to a package containing it, stating that it is a
mixture and the names of the ingredients, provided that the
words prescribed above are impressed in letters of the prescribed
size on each bar of soap mixture.
Medicated Soap.
(4) Medicated soap shall be soap conformable with the
general standard for soap mixed with a drug or with a
disinfectant.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package
which contains a medicated soap a statement or label, on which
shall be written in bold faced sans-seriff types of not less
size than twelve points face measurement, the word “medi-
cated ’’ ] the said word may be followed by the word ‘ ‘ soap. ’ ’


Borax Soap.
(6) Borax soap shall be soap which conforms with the
general standard for soap mixed with not less than two parts
per centum of borax.
Soft Soap, and Soap Powder or “Extract.”
(7) This Regulation shall not apply to soft soap, nor to
mixtures of dried and powdered soap with soda, commonly
called soap powder or extract of soap.
(8) No person shall sell any package containing soap
in respect of which the provisions of clause (5) of this Regu-
lation' have not been complied with.
Regulation 70— Prescribing Method for the Determination
of Cital— (a) in Oil of Lemon; and (b) in Essence of
Lemon.
(a) Twenty grams of oil of lemon are mixed with 20
cubic centimeters of N/2 solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride
in 80 per cent, alcohol, and to the mixture is added 8 cubic
centimeters of N/l alcoholic potash and 20 cubic centimeters of
strong alcohol (which is sufficient to procure complete solution
when hot). The mixture is boiled gently under a reflux con-
denser for half an hour, and then allowed to cool. The con-
denser is washed down, and the contents of the flask diluted
with about 250 cubic centimeters of water, and neutralised to
phenolphthalein. The liquid is then titrated with N/2 sulphuric
acid until a drop taken from the liquid, and brought into
contact, on a white plate with a very dilute aqueous solution
of methyl orange, shows that neutralisation is complete. The
number of cubic centimeters of acid required is substracted
from the number used in a blank experiment (carried out in
exactly the same manner, but without any oil of lemon).
The figure so obtained when multiplied by 0.076, gives the
weight of citral in 20 grams of oil of lemon.
(b) Fifty grams of essence of lemon are mixed with 20
cubic centimeters of N/10 solution of hydroxylamine hydro-
chloride in 80 per cent, alcohol, and to the mixture is added
15 cubic centimeters of N/10 alcoholic potash, and if necessary,
enough strong alcohol to procure complete solution when hot.
The mixture is boiled gently under a reflux condenser for half
an hour and then allowed to cool. The condenser is washed
down, and the contents of the flask diluted with about 250
cubic centimeters of water and neutralised to phenolphthalein.
The liquid is titrated with N/10 sulphuric acid in the manner
described under (a). The number of cubic centimeters of
acid required is subtracted from the number used in a blank
experiment (carried out in exactly the same manner, but with-
out any essence of lemon). The figure so obtained, when


multiplied by 0.0152, gives the weight of citral in 50 grams
of essence.
Regulation 71—Prescribing Apparatus and Method for
Determining the Strength of Spirits or Alcoholic
Liquors in Accordance with Section 31 of the Act.
Apparatus required.
1. A revenue still, made either of glass or copper, consisting
of a flask holding about one quarter of a litre connected with
a spiral worm attached to a cold water supply, or other efficient
condensing arrangement.
2. A glass flask, with a gauged mark on its neck, having a
capacity of from 50 to 100 cubic centimeters.
3. A Chemical balance to carry 100 grams, and to be
sensitive to 1 milligram.
4. A correctly adjusted set of weights, ranging from 50
or 100 grams to 1 milligram.
5. One Chemical thermometer, graduated on the stem in
degrees Centigrade or Fahrenheit,
6. A specific gravity flask, having a capacity from about
25 to about 50 cubic centimeters, provided with "overflow side
tube and cap, and a ground stopper in the neck, through which
passes a thermometer.
7. The set of alcohol tables contained in Stevenson’s
Treatise on Alcohol, published in London by Gurney and Jack-
son.
Method of Testing the Strength of Spirits.
The degree of strength of spirituous liquors shall bo
determined in the following manner: —
From 50 to 100 cubic centimeters (preferably the larger
amount) of the sample to be tested shall "be measured
at a temperature of 15% degrees Centigrade or 00
degrees Fahrenheit in the gauged flask, and completely
transferred to the still.
The liquid shall then be distilled, until at least three-fourths
have passed over, and the distillate shall be collected
in the gauged flask in which the sample to be tested
was first measured. The volume of the liquid is
brought up to the gauged mark at a temperature of
15% degrees Centigrade or 60 degrees Farenheit by
the addition of distilled water.
The specific gravity of the distillate shall be taken by
filling the specific gravity flask with the same, at a
temperature or 15% degrees Centigrade or 60 degrees
Fahrenheit. From the book of spirit tables mentioned
above, the equivalent proportion of proof spirit and of
absolute alcohol by weight and volume may then be
obtained.


Regulation 72—Fresh Milk: Form of Analyst’s Certificate.
Every certificate given by an Analyst of the result of his
analysis of fresh milk shall be in the following form: —
Form No.
Analysis No.
“PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.”
Analyst’s Certificate.
I hereby certify that I, , an Analyst duly
appointed under the provisions of the ‘ ‘ Pure Food Act, 1908, ’ ’
section 27, have analysed a sample of milk delivered to me
by on the day of ,
19 , marked . and properly sealed and fastened, that I
found the seal intact and unbroken, and that the said sample
had undergone no change which would have interfered with
the analysis. I further certify the result of such analysis to
be as follows:
Signed this day of , 19 .
Analyst’s signature
Address
Regulation 73—Condensed Milk: Form of Analyst’s Certi-
ficate.
Every certificate given by an Analyst of the result of hia
analysis of Condensed Milk shall be in the following form; —
Form No.
Analysis No.
“PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.”
Analyst’s Certificate.
I hereby certify that I, , an Analyst duly
appointed under the provisions of the “Pure Food Act, 1908,”
section 27, have analysed a sample of* condensed
milk delivered to me by on the day
of , 19 , marked , and properly sealed
and fastened; that I found the seal intact and unbroken,
and that the said sample had undergone no change which would
have interfered wifh the analysis. I further certify the result
of such analysis to be as follows:
Signed this day of ,19 .
Analyst ’s signature
Address
* Unsweetened, sweetened, skimmed.


Regulation 74—Articles other than Milk and Condensed
Milk: Form of Analyst’s Certificate.
Every certificate given by an Analyst of the result of his
analysis of any article other than Fresh and Condensed Milk
shall be in the following form: —
Form No.
Analysis No.
“PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.”
Analyst’s Certificate.
I hereby certify that I, , an Analyst duly
appointed under the provisions of the ‘ ‘ Pure Food Act, 1908, ’
section 27, have analysed a sample of , which was
delivered to me by on the day of
, 19* , marked , and properly sealed and
fastened, that I found the seal intact and unbroken, and that
I made the analysis by the method for analysing
prescribed by Regulation , made under the provisions of the
‘ ‘ Pure Food Act, 1908, ’ ’ section 54,
I further certify the result of such analysis to be as
follows: —
Signed this day of •
Analyst’s signature
Address
Regulation 75—Fee to be Prepaid for Analysis.
The fee to be prepaid by a person who requires any officer
to purchase a sample of any food or drug, and submit the same
to analysis, shall be twenty shillings.
Regulation 76—Fee to be Paid for Copy of Analyst’s
Certificate.
The fee to be paid for a copy of the result of any analysis
of a food, drug, or article, by the person from whom the food,
drug or article was obtained, or by the manufacturer or his
agent in New South Wales, shall be five shillings.
Regulation 77—Penalties for Breaches.
Except where a penalty is otherwise provided in the Act
or in these Regulations, any person who contravenes or fails to
comply with any provision of these Regulations shall forfeit,
on conviction, a penalty of not more than twenty pounds, and
for a continuing offence, not more than two pounds for every
day during which the offence shall be continued.


“PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.”
I HEREBY authorise the following exceptions from the provisions
of the “Pure Food Act, 1908,” section 12, subsection 4 m
lieu of those published in Government Gazette No. 112 of 18th
August, 1909, and in Government Gazette No. 143 of 10th
November, 1909, respectively:— , an
('ll The following drugs are hereby excepted from so
much of the provisions of the “Pure Food Act, 1908 section
12 (4) as requires that they shall be compounded with alcohol,
in accordance with the British Pharmacopoeia, and the said
drugs shall not be deemed to be adulterated in so far as t hey
are compounded with an equivalent proportion of methylated
spirit; —
Linimentum Aconiti.
Linimentum Belladonnas.
Linimentum Camphor® Ammoniatum.
Linimentum Saponis.
(21 The following drugs are hereby excepted nom so
much of the provisions of the ‘ ‘ Pure Food Act, 1908, section
12 (4). as requires that they shall be compounded with olive
oil, or with pea-nut (Arachis hypogoea) oil, in accordance with
the British Pharmacopoeia, and the said drugs shalli notbe
deemed to be adulterated in so far as they are componded with
an equivalent proportion of cotton seed (Gossypmm herhaceum)
Emplastrum Ammoniaci cum Hydrargyio.
Emplastrum Picis.
Emplastrum Hydrargyri.
Emplastrum Plurabi.
Linimentum Ammonite.
Linimentum Calcis.
Linimentum Camphor®.
Sapo Mollis.
Sapo Durus,
Unguentum Capsici.
Unguentum Hydrargyri Compositum.
Unguentum Hydrargyri Nitratis.
Unguentum Resin®.
(3) The following drugs are hereby excepted from so
much of the provisions of the “Pure Food Act, 1908,” section
12 (4), as requires that they shaU be compounded with vinum
xericum in accordance with the British Pharmacopoeia, and the
said drugs shall not be deemed to be adulterated in so far as
they are compounded with an Australian wine containing not
more than sixteen parts per centum by weight of ethylic
alcohol: —
Vinum Antimoniale.
Vinum Colchici.
H


Yinum Ipecacuanhas.
Yinum Ferri.
Yinum Quinina).
(4) The following drug is hereby excepted from so much
of the provisions of the “ Pure Food Act, 1908,” section 12
(4), as requires that it shall comply with the description given
of and tests prescribed for it in the latest edition with
amendments of the British Pharmacopoeia:
Oleum Eucalypti.
Given under my Hand at the Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, this eleventh day of May, 1910.
W. H. WOOD,
Chief Secretary.
FURTHER REGULATIONS.
Gazette of 10 th August, 1910.
Regulation 78.—Carrying Water and Milk at the same
time.
No person while carrying milk for sale or for delivery to
a customer shall carry any water.
Regulation 79. —Trade-marks.
(1) Exemptions from so much of the provisions of the
“Pure Pood Act, 1908,” section 14, as requires that there
shall be legibly written on or attached to every package of
food packed or enclosed for sale a label or statement indicating
the name and address of the vendor or the maker thereof, or
the agent therefor, or the owner of the rights of manufacture,
may be granted on application made to the Board of Health
by the said vendor, maker, agent, or owner, or by his duly
appointed representative in this State, under the following-
conditions; —
(a) The goods in respect of which exemption is sought
shall bear a trade mark duly registered under the laws
in force in New South Wales.
(h) The application shall be accompanied (1) by evidence
that applicant (if not a principal) is duly authorised
to apply by his principal; (2) by a certified copy of
the register of the trade-mark, and (3) by a declara-
tion that the registered name and address are the
present name and address of the proprietor of the
trade-mark.
(c) The application shall further be accompanied by »
signed list of the kinds or descriptions of foods to


which the trade-mark or trade-marks is or are to be
applied.
( d ) Exemption granted under the privilege of this Regula-
tion shall cease and determine upon assignment or
transmission of any trade-mark by the registered
proprietor thereof, or upon the registered address
ceasing to be the address of such proprietor, unless
notice of assignment, transmission, or changed address
shall have been first given to the Board and have been
approved by it.
(2) No person shall sell any package of food in contraven-
tion of any of the provisions of this Regulation.
FURTHER REGULATIONS.
Gazette of September , 1910.
Regulation 80. —Rates of Payment for Samples.
Whenever the current market value of any article exceeds
ten shillings, the rate of payment for any sample of such
article demanded, selected, taken, or obtained by an officer,
shall be ten shillings.
SPECIAL NOTE FOR NON-MANUFACTURING
VENDORS.
Persons who sell, but do not manufacture, Food will
find the undernoted headings in this Manual of special
interest ; “ Advertise,” “ Agent or Servant,”
“Appeal,” “Books,” “Bulk,” “Disease,” “Employer,”
“ Evidence,” “ Exemption,” “ Food Protection,” “ For-
feiture,” “Gazette,” “Guarantee,” “Groceries—
Retail,” “Inspection,” “Label,” “Libel,” “Measure,”
“Mixture,” “Name,” “Nature, etc.,” “ Officer,”
“ Package,” “ Penalty,” “ Police,” “ Preservative,”
“Prohibited Articles,” “Prosecution,” “Publication,"
“ Pure,” “ Regulations,” “ Retail Trades,” “ Sale,”
“ Sample,” “ Seal,” “ Servant,” as well as the various
headings indicating articles of food.
Simmons-Bloiham Printing Company Dhuitt & Kknt Stm., Sybnky.






