

The J j*
Adventurous Elves
i.i i ipTn.i n m iTij'i.i i.i > iXi.i.i.i.i i i.i i i.i.ri irrrrTTi^^^j
An Authoritative Fairy Story
May Lillian Paten


v /
L, wm


o.i,
.
3A


?






THE ADVENTUROUS ELVES


The Book of Elisabeth and Frances
who have long known and enjoyed
the Elves.




THE FAIRIES? FEAST


B - ? !?
4*
?i*
+
" ?? ? ???? ?? ?
The Adventurous Elves
oAn cAuthoritatire Fairy Story
MAY LILLIAN PATEN
Author of
" Frances of the Farm?
Illustrated by
CHRISTIAN YANDELL
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
EDWARD A. VIDLER
178 Collins Street
Melbourne


First Impression?August, 1926
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY W. A. HAMER
21 JONES LANE. OFF 118 LONSDALE STREET. MELBOURNE


8 - Arr ms
The Watermelon ... ... ... 11
The New Home ... ... ... 20
Peter and his Mates ... ... ... 25
The Tambourine Fairy?s Wedding ... 36
A Journey in the Air ... ... ... 43
A Visit to Fairyland ... ... ... 49


ILLUSTRATIONS
The Fairies? Feast Frontispiece
A Perfectly Scrumptious Watermelon 15
Father Jack closed one eye ... ... 22
Ariel Crossed the Log Bridge ... ... 39
The Airman did not fall ... ... 47


The Adventurous Elves
THE WATERMELON
OXE day Chit, Chat and Chut Elve got per-
mission from their mother to go for a long walk
into the country. They got up very early and
had a hasty breakfast and set out, determined
to make the day as long as they could. The
sun was only just getting up as they left home.
At first they walked briskly, but soon their pace
slackened, and they were walking very slowly
indeed, not because they were tired, but because
there were so many perfectly thrilling things
to look at, and to hear.
They had decided to go to The Gap, which
they had not yet visited, a beautiful valley in
the western ranges near Brisbane. They had no
sooner got amongst the gum trees than things
began to happen. As it was only a short time
since the brothers had left Elfland they had not
forgotten the language of birds and beasts, so
they knew that the magpies in a tree bv the creek
were saying,
?Good-morning, lads, isn?t it splendid to be
alive on such a glorious morning-
� o


Even when a family of kookaburras, high up
on a gum bough, burst suddenly into such up-
roarious laughter that they, taken by surprise,
got quite a fright, they soon got over it, for
they knew that the ?kookies? were only saying
the same thing. So when Father ?Jack? called
down to know if they had seen the Early Worm
anywhere about, they were able to answer, most
politely, that they had not seen him yet; but now
that they knew he was to be expected they would
keep a good look out for him. Father Jack was
so pleased with them that he said he would
tell them something he would not tell to every-
one. If they kept right on along the road for
about a mile, and then turned to the right and
crossed a creek, they would find a field of water-
melons, the finest melons he had ever seen, and
just in perfect condition to meet the taste of
small lads like themselves. They thanked him
and hurried on. They knew all about water-
melons, their father had brought some home only
the week before, and they thought they had never
tasted anything more delicious, even in their old
home.
Presently turning a corner they found them-
selves face to face with a huge four-footed beast
with a red and white coat and very long horns.
Chut, who was the first to see it, gave a terri-
fied cry and fell into a big rut in the road, where
he lay shaking with fright, while his brothers


ran under the fence at the side of the road. The
grandmotherly old cow, for that is what it was,
stood quite still, looking very surprised indeed.
Then she opened her mouth and laughed. At
least that is what she meant to do, and what
she thought she was doing, but what she really
did was to make an exceedingly frightening
noise to the ears of little fellows who did not
know cows. They thought it was the noise an
ogre makes before he eats little boys up.
Seeing their fright, Mrs. Cow, who really was
the kindest-hearted old thing in the world, left
off laughing, and called out, in the gentlest tone
she could manage, not to be frightened, she
never ate little boys, they were far too indigest-
ible, and at her age she had to be exceedingly
careful what she ate. Just then a pert Willy
Wagtail flew across the road and perched on
her back.
?It?s quite true,? he said, as he began nimbly
dance the bambalina, ?she?s the kindest old
thing. I?ve known her ever since I left the nest,
and she?s never done me any harm,?
So Chit and Chat came back and pulled Chut
out of his hole, and after telling Mrs. Cow they
were sorry they had mistaken her for an Ogre,
they hurried on again to search for the water-
melon field. They soon found it, and right on
the edge, nearly hidden by the vine, was a per-
fectly scrumptious melon. It was so big that


Chit, who was the tallest, could not see over
the top of it. It was so beautifully hard, and
round, and green, and -shiny that they knew
it must be most deliciously pink and white in-
side. But how to open it? They had no knife.
Chat, who was the brainy one of the family,
solved the problem. Running back to the road
he found a stone with a sharp edge, and with
that they chipped off pieces of rind until they
were able to get their sharp little teeth into
the flesh. They were such little fellows, and
so unused to the ways of Manland, that they
did not know that they were doing wrong.
They did not know that the melons belonged
to a man who had to work very hard to clear
the ground and plough it, and sow the seed
that turned into melons, and that no one else
had any right to take the fruit when it came.
By this time it was nearly noon, and as Chit,
Chat and Chut had forgotten to bring any lunch
with them, they were very hungry. When they
had scooped a hole through the white flesh,
which they knew they must not eat, and had
come to the pink they ate, and ate, and ate,
getting deeper and deeper into the melon until,
when at last they felt they could not eat another
bite, they were very near the centre. It was
deliciously cool and soft in there, and they were
now feeling drowsy, so they decided to have
a nap before they left it.




By and bye a man came into the field with
a dray, and began to collect ripe melons to take
to market. It was almost dusk when he came
to the melon which contained the sleeping elves.
Without noticing the small hole in it he picked
up the big melon and threw it on top of the
loaded dray. This rather rough treatment woke
the sleepers, and for a while they could not make
out where they were. When they remembered,
they were very frightened indeed, especially as
the dray was now moving, and the melons were
jostling one another uncomfortably as it bumped
over rough ground. It seemed a very long time
to them before the horrible rocking motion
stopped, and there was a rattling of harness and
stamping of hooves, which meant that the horse
was being taken out of the dray, which had
been backed into a big shed. The brothers were
now very wide awake, and very miserable. This
made them quarrelsome.
?It?s all your fault,? Chit told Chut, most un-
fairly, ?it was you who got us into this mess,
and now we?ll be punished when we get home
?if we ever do get home,? he added, dismally.
This was too much for Chut, who began to
cry, and Chat, who was about to say something
angrily to Chit, forgot it in trying to comfort
the little fellow, who was such a tiny wee thing
that he just had to be looked after and petted
by the other two.


As it was pitch dark in the shed, and they
had heard the sound of a key being turned in
the lock of the door, they knew it was no good
trying to escape then; they would have to wait
until daylight and see what happened. It wor-
ried them dreadfully to know that their parents
would be very anxious about them, and they
would willingly have taken any punishment to
have been safe in their own little beds at that
moment, but as there was nothing else they
could do they ate some more of their prison and
then curled themselves up and went to sleep.
At daybreak they were awakened once more
by the jolting of the dray on its way to market.
The prisoners did not know where they were
going, of course, and they could not even get
a chance to see, for there was no sign of the
hole by which they had entered the melon, so
they had still to wait as patiently as they could
for something to happen to release them. After
what seemed a long time the dray stopped, and
men began to take out the melons, putting them
down on the floor in a big shed. The one with
the elves in it was amongst the first to be lifted
out.
"Hullo,? said a voice, ?the rats have been
having ago at this one. It?ll have to go to the
pigs,? and there was a thump and a bump as
the melon flew through the air and landed in
a large tin. It was well for Chit and his bro-


thers that it was still fairly well lined. As it
was they were terribly frightened, and thought
that if ever they got safely home again they
would never, never leave it. They did not know
what pigs were, but they felt sure they must be
something very nasty, and they had no wish to
make their acquaintance. But they were really
eame little fellows, and when thev had recovered
a bit from this new shock they began to look
about for means of escape. Still there was no
sign of the hole in their melon. It must be
underneath, they thought.
?There?s only one thing to do,? said Chit,
?we must make another hole.?
?Oh, look,? said Chat, who had been poking
around, ?I?m sure there?s a crack in the rind.
Let?s all push hard just here.?
They set to work with a will and pushed so
hard that presently there was a sharp snap, and
the rind parted enough for them to squeeze
through. How pleased they were to be outside
again. But, alas! their troubles were not ended
yet. All round them was a high wall of tin,
perfectly smooth. At first sight it seemed im-
possible" to climb it, but Chit put one foot on the
broken edge of the melon and drew himself up
until he could take hold of the stalk on the top,
and by its aid pull himself up till he stood on
the outside. Then he leaned carefully over and
helped Chat up, and when they had both rested


a while, he bent his back, Chat stepped up on
it, and caugdit hold of the top of the tin. Chit
gave him a push, and soon he was seated on it.
All he had to do then was to drop to the ground
on the other side. Fortunately, although it was
a big drop for anyone his size, the ground was
soft and he was not hurt. Picking himself up
he hunted about until he found " a piece of
strong string. Then he gathered some pieces
of wood and put them against the tin, and climb-
ing up on them he let one end of the string
down to Chit, who by this time had pulled
Chut up beside him. Chit now tied the string
about the little chap?s waist, and, with Chat pull-
ing and himself pushing, Chut was safely landed
beside Chat, who now tied a piece of wood on
to the string and let it down to Chit. By
standing on this he was able to reach the top
himself, and soon he was over, and all three
were hurrying homeward as fast as their leo-s
would go.


THE NEW HOME
FOR some time the Five family had been
living in a tree in a large park. One day some
men came and stood by the tree and began to
tap and prod it, while the small family listened
anxiously to know what it all meant.
?Rotten to the core,? said one, ?it will have
to come down. Even half a gale might bring
it on our heads.?
The Elves got a great shock. They had been
so comfortable inside that roomy old tree, and
had had no idea that they were in any danger.
?We must find another house at once,? said
Mother.
So the very next day all the family set out ta
look for a suitable tree, and although they
searched until it was nearly dark they could not
find one that would do.
?We shall have to go into another district,?
said Father.
That night there was a storm, and though
it was not very heavy, and the wind was not


very severe, they spent an uneasy time, fear-
ing their home might be wrecked. But the sun
shone brightly next morning, and no damage
had been done. They set out early, as it was
decided to search for a suitable tree in the
?country.
?Let?s go out where we found the water-
melon, said Chit, to his brothers, ?there?s hun-
dreds of trees out there, and if we find a good
one Mum and Father might be so pleased that
they wouldn?t mind it being so far from town.?
So they slipped away quickly while their parents
were inspecting and arguing about a tree, which
Mum had seen at a glance was not at all the
kind of tree they would like to live in.
It was splendid to be out so early, with the
dewdrops still sparkling on the leaves and in the
cobwebs that looked like lace in the paddocks.
They soon came upon the Kookaburra family en-
joying their morning laugh, and when they had
answered Father Jack?s usual question about the
Early Worm, Chit told him about their search
for a new home.
?Oh, that?s quite easy to find,? he said, ?we?ll
all help } ou, and he and Mrs. Kookaburra and
all the little Burras sat solemnly in a row and
thought about the matter. They thought so hard
that they fell asleep, and the Elves, who had
been playing marbles with duranta berries while
they waited, finished their game and decided




to go on and continue their search. Just then
Father Jack opened one eye and said, in a
gruff voice,
?Go to Walton Bridge and see Mr. Mickie.?
He then closed his eye, and must have gone
fast asleep again, for to all their questions he
turned a deaf ear, so there was nothing to be
done but go in search of Mr. Mickie. They did
not even know who he was, but they thought that
if they went to the Bridge they might find some-
one who would know him. They had not gone
very far when a big thing which looked like a box
on wheels passed them and stopped, and some
people got out. Before it could start again the
Elves had hopped onto the step. It was great fun
riding there, but Chut nearly fell off several times
as it swayed and bumped on the rough road, and
the others had to leave off laughing to hold him
with one hand and keep themselves from falling
off with the other. The thing, which was called
a bus, stopped again, and they narrowly escaped
being squashed by a pair of enormous
boots belonging to a perfect giant of a man,
and a little later Chat got one finger badly
bruised by the pointed heel of a woman?s shoe,
and he howled so loudly that someone told the
driver his wheds needed grease, and was growled
at for his pains. Chit, whose ears were very
sharp, heard some one say the ?bus stopped at


the Bridge, and presently the long stone wall
came in sight, and they crossed it and stopped.
The three Elves jumped off quickly to avoid
further injury, and ran down to the creek. It
and the big arches of the Bridge were perfectly
fascinating; they felt that if they could only
find a home cmite close to them thev would be
M -?
perfectly happy. They had not seen a spot they
liked so well since they left Fairyland. It was
such fun paddling in the shallow water, and
running over the stone causeway which spanned
it like a miniature bridge beside a giant, that
they even forgot for a while what they had
come to seek. Then Chut fell into the water
and got wet through, and they had to take off
his clothes and spread them on bushes to dry,
which he thought was great fun, because he
could go on splashing and paddling while they
did it, and the other two thought they might as
well bathe too. It was early yet, and they
were having a glorious time, when suddenly
there was a flapping of wings and an angry
chattering, and a gray bird with a yellow bill
and white spots near its eyes flew out of a bush
and seemed as if about to attack them.
Chut, who was easily frightened, burst into
tears. His brothers were frightened, too, but they
felt they were too old to show it ?Chut was really
only a baby ?so they stood still, and Chit, in a
voice that trembled only a little bit, asked the bird


what he was so angry about. Seeing their dis-
tress, and being really kind-hearted when spoken
to nicely, the bird left off his angry chatter,
and perching on a bough near by said he was
sorry he had alarmed the little fellow; he did not
want to do them any harm, but his wife was
sitting on some beautiful little eggs on their nest,
and when they came so very near to it, he had
feared for the moment that they had meant to
disturb her.
They told him that nothing was further from
their thoughts, and they had not even seen the
nest. And then, remembering their quest, Chit
asked him if he could tell them where they could
find Mr. Mickie.
?I am Mr. Mickie,? he said.
So Chit explained about the house they were
seeking.
Why, I know the very place that would suit
you,? said Mrs. Mickie, who had come out to
see what all the fuss was about, ?but there?s a
snake in the next flat, and Trn sure your parents
wouldn?t like that. It?s a pity, for it?s really a
very nice place, with all the latest improve-
ments.?
?As for that,? said Mr. Mickie, ?Snake might
be persuaded to move. If you think our eggs
can spare you for a few minutes longer, my
dear, we might try what we can do. I think


perhaps you could put the case more forcibly
before him than I.?
His wife thought so too, so they flew away
to interview Mr. Snake, and see if he would
move into another house. But although they
talked and talked, and got angrier and angrier,
until Mrs. Mickie scolded herself hoarse, Mr.
Snake refused to leave. He?d found the house
first, he said, and he?d move for no one.
?Selfish old thing,? screamed Mrs. Mickie,
who really w r as not quite a lady, ?we?ll see about
that,? and she flew away into another tree with
her husband, and began to talk earnestly to
him. He tried to tell her that their eggs would
be getting cold, but she was too angry to listen.
Snakes always made her mad, she said, and
she was not going to be beaten by that particu-
larly ugly one. Not she!
At first Mr. Mickie did not seem to like what
she was saying, and hopped impatiently from
one twig to another, but presently he remained
quiet.
?Very well, my dear, I?ll go and see old Jack,?
he said, ?but I warn you, I take no responsibility
in the matter. Now, please, do go back to the
nest. I?d hate to have those beautiful eggs
spoiled.?
?You do worry,? said Mrs. Mickie, but she flew
back to their tree, while her husband set off


on a longer flight to the home of the Kooka-
burra family whom the Elves knew.
Father Jack listened to his tale with interest.
It was too bad, he agreed, that such a nice
family should be kept out of a suitable home
by a snake. He knew that particular one who was
very wicked indeed, and it would give him
much pleasure to come and turn him out. So
he and Mr. Mickie flew back to the creek where
Chit, Chat and Chut were waiting, dressed
again after their bathe, and getting anxious, be-
cause nearly half the day had gone, and they
would soon have to be returning home. They
were glad to see Mr. Jack, as they felt that he
would be able to help them, and they followed
him to the tree on the edge of a scrub where
the snake lived. They were quite sure they
wanted it for their home when they saw it, and
they thought that their parents could hardly
help but be pleased with it, so they watched
anxiously to see if Mr, Snake would leave now.
They saw Mr. Jack perch on a limb quite close
to his hole, while Mr. Mickie settled on another
tree and became as quiet as he. After what
seemed a long time Mr. Snake poked his head
out, turning it from side to side to see if any-
one were near. There was a flash, and Father
Jack had him by the neck. He was not a very
big snake, but he was very strong, and the
more Father Jack pulled the more he hunsr on
05


by his tail. He could not bite because his neck
was held so tightly in the big beak. It was a
fierce fight, watched by quite a number of pairs
of eyes from the neighbouring trees, as well as
by the rather scared little Elves on the ground.
But at last, with a mighty jerk, the big bird
drew the snake out of the hole. He flew with
him to a branch near the top of a tall gum and
then let him fall to the ground, where he lay dead.
That was the end of Mr. Snake, and that was
how the Elve family came to live near Walton
Bridge; for when Mr. and Mrs. Elve heard what
the birds had done for them they felt they must
come and take that house, and when they saw it
they liked it quite as much as their children did.


PETER AND HIS MATES
WHILE playing in the creek near their new
home one day, the Elves were startled by the
sudden appearance of three dogs. One of them
was so big and black that Chut began to cry,
and the other two did not feel as calm as they
tried to seem.
?What are you crying for?? asked the big dog,
whose name was Peter, looking at Chut, and
smiling and wagging his tail in the most friendly
manner. ?Have you hurt yourself??
His voice and manner were so nice that even
the tiniest Elve had no excuse for being afraid
of him.
?Oh . . h,? said Chut, wiping his eyes, ?I
thought you were an ogre coming to eat us up.?
?What, me?? said Peter, ?Why, I could put
you in a hollow tooth and never know you were
there, young fellow-me-lad. Much good you
would do me!?
His two mates had been standing quietly be-
side him all this time, but smiling and wag'ging
their tails to show that they, too, were friendly.
Now they jumped into the water and began


swimming about. One of them was 800, because
that was the only name a very small girl could
say about the time when he was needing one.
He was scarcely half Peter?s size, and his coat
was yellow and white, and he had particularly
nice eyes. The youngest of the three was called
Digger. He had a coat, and though
he was not exactly handsome, he was a very
nice little fellow. Peter did not like water, so
whenever the other two went in for a swim
he stood on the bank and watched them until
he thought it was time they came out. Then
he would give several short, sharp barks.
?Hey, you fellows, time you came out,?? he
would say, and if they did not come at once there
would be trouble in store for them later. So
out they came, pretty quickly, gave themselves
a shake that was as good as a shower bath to
anyone standing near, and then, choosing the
dustiest place they could see, they started to roll
themselves dry. After that they shook them-
selves again to get rid of the dust. The Elves
thought it was very funny as they watched them
doing it, and wondered what their mother would
do if they took their bath in that peculiar fashion.
By this time they were beginnng to feel quite
at home with their visitors, even Chut, who by
this time was standing close to Peter, and some-
times stroked one of his legs, which was the
?only part of him he could reach.


?Where do you live, Mr. Peter?? he asked.
?At the Big House over there,? said Peter,
nodding in the direction. ?Would you like to
come and see it, sonny? It?s not a bad kind of
a place, really. You might find something to
amuse you.?
The Elves said yes, please, they would like to
see it very much. They had not had an ad-
venture worth mentioning for quite twenty-four
hours, and they felt it was time something hap-
pened. Peter led the way, pausing sometimes
to see if they were following, and once he rolled
800 in the grass and cuffed him soundly, be-
cause he had carelessly run against Chut and
nearly knocked him over. 800, who had been
nicely brought up, apologised to Chut at once.
It was an accident, he said; he did not mean
to hurt the little chap.
Along a straight road they went and came
to the back of the house where there was a green
tree-bordered lawn, and many roses in bloom.
The Elves hung back in alarm as they approached
the gate which led into this, for two ponies, one
white and the other red, stood in front of it.
?Come on,? said Peter, ?that?s only Toddles
and Ichy; they?re as tame as cats. You could
tickle their heels and they wouldn?t mind.?
?Watch me,? said Digger, and running for-
ward he playfully pulled Ichy?s tail. But though
he gave a good hard tweak, she did not move.


?They are waiting for a piece of bread,? ex-
plained 800, making a playful dive at Toodles,
who put down her head and gave him an equally
playful push.
Peter introduced the Elves, after he had asked
them their names, and the ponies greeted them
politely.
?I?d give you a ride,? said Toddles, ?but I
don?t know how you could get on my back.
You are very small, aren?t you??
?We?re no smaller than other Elves,? said
Chit, who hated to be told he was small, be-
cause he thought he was really quite big for his
age.
?I wish we could have a ride, Miss Toddles,?
said Chat, who did not know what a ride was
like, but wanted to know.
?Well,? said Toddles, ?do you think you could
climb up my neck?? and she held her head near
the ground.
?Easily,? said the Elves in chorus, as they
skipped nimbly up, the two elder ones helping
Chut, as usual.
Toddles said they had better stay on her neck,
so that they could hold on by her mane.
?Are you ready?? said she.
?Yes,? said they.
Off flew Toddles, with a kick of her heels and
a toss of her head, off went the dogs after her,
barking and leaping, and off went the Elves ?into


a tuft of grass, fortunately, so no one was hurt.
Toddles and the dogs stopped at once, and though
they looked as though they wanted to smile they
were too polite to do it. Toddles asked the
Elves if they would like to try again, but they
said they would rather try something else, if
Miss Toddles didn?t mind.
?How about a ride in a lift?? asked Peter, ?I
see the Gas Weight is just going up,? and he
pointed to a round disk of metal, attached to
wire ropes, and now lying on the ground. ?You?d
have a grand ride, right up to the A op of those
poles.?
The Elves were always willing to try any new
thing once, so off they ran and climbed on to
the weight just as it began to move. Up they
went, very slowly and steadily, and they had
a grand view of the country, and were enjoying
themselves very much until the top of the poles
was reached, and the weight stopped. The
ground and their new friends looked very far
beneath, and suddenly it occurred to them to
wonder how they were going to get down, for
they had quite ceased to move, and their ?lift?
seemed to have no intention of taking them down
again.
?Oh, dear, whatever shall we do?? said Chut,
looking ready to burst into tears. ?It?s cold up
here. I want to go down.?


?Be quiet, silly,? said Chit, ?of course we?ll
go down sometime. This thing couldn?t come
up if it doesn?t go down, and it does come up,
because it has.?
?But I want to go down now,? cried Chut.
?When does this lift come down?? shouted
Chat, to Peter, who was looking rather foolish.
?Not for hours,? he called back. ?I?m very
sorry, lads. I should have remembered that be-
fore, and that you are too small to climb down
the poles. I?m awfully sorry, but I?m afraid
you?ll have to stay there all night.?
?We can?t,? Chat called back, ?Father said
he?d give us a thrashing if we ever stayed out all
night again.?
Just then a big Iguana, who had been passing,
and had stopped to listen, approached one of the
poles.
?I?ll go up and fetch them down,? he said.
?They can ride on my back. One of them saved
my son when he fell into the creek last week.
But for him wading in and helping him he would
certainly have been drowned.?
Now, if anyone thinks it is easy to come down
a high pole clinging to the back of a slippery,
scaly creature, and hanging head down, let them
try it. The Elves had had some queer adventures,
but none more startling than this one. As
Chut could not be trusted to travel alone, he
and Chit had to be brought down together, with


Chit hanging to Iguana?s neck, and Chut cling-
ing to him. None of them had a good time, but
poor Iguana had the worst, because he was
nearly choked by Chit?s arms, and he had to
carry a double weight. Several times Chut nearly
slid off, and several times he nearly dragged
Chit off too, but at last they were down, and
their poor rescuer, after a brief rest, started
back to bring down their brother. This he
accomplished safely, and with greater ease, be-
cause Chat, not being burdened by Chut, was
easier to carry. They all thanked Iguana for his
great kindness, and told him they would always
be glad to do anything they could for him, and
he hurried away to attend to his neglected busi-
ness.
It was now nearly sunset, and the Elves said
they must go home. They felt that they had
had enough adventures for one day, so the dogs
went with them to the road, and Peter said he
hoped they would forgive him for his forgetful-
ness about the Weight, and come again another
day.


THE ELVES AT THE FAIRIES?
WEDDING
THE Tambourine Fairies have their home on
one of the most beautiful mountains in the world,
and they were going to have a wedding. Pretty
little Fairy Fernie was going to marry Brownie
Peat. As she was a niece of Mrs. Five?s, all
the Elve family was invited to the wedding. Chit
and his brothers were very excited about it;
they had never been to one before, and they
had never been to Tambourine, though they had
heard all kinds of wonderful things about it from
their mother, who had once spent a whole month
there.
They were to travel all the way from the
city by motor, and that in itself was exciting.
They laughed and chattered so much on the
journey that it was marvellous that the humans
who were their fellow passengers did not hear
them. Only a lonely little girl of five, who sat
very still beside her mother, did, and she did
not say anything about them because she knew
most human people do not believe in fairies.
They would only laugh and tease her, and say
she was talking nonsense. So she sat quite still


and listened, and heard all about the fairies they
were going to visit, and the wedding. How she
wished she could go with them!
When they came to the foot of the mountain,
and began to climb it by a road that wound' like
a black ribbon ?in and out and round about,?
as the little girl, whose name was Ariel, said to
herself, and she looked down on fairy glens full
of the most wonderful trees, and tall palms wdih
huge clusters of red berries hanging from them,
and ferns and flowers growing at their feet, and
saw red and blue parrots darting to and fro
amongst them, she wished it more than erer.
?How lovely to be a fairy. Is that where
yours live? she said softly, dhe Klves were
so astonished to hear a little human girl speak-
ing to them that for a moment they could not
reply; then they left their seats and pushed so
close to her that their poor mother became
quite alarmed that they would fall out into the
road. Their fairies did not live there, they told
her, but in a scrub quite as wonderful right on
top of the mountain.
?Do you think I might see them?? she asked,
eagerly, ?and the wedding too??
Chit said it might be managed, he thought.
She must come alone to the edge of the scrub
next day, at sunrise, and they would look out
for her and show her the way. Their mother
had told them that weddings took place either


at sunrise or in the moonlight, for then there
were not many humans likely to be about.
Everyone knows how big and clumsy and blind
they are, and how they could walk right over a
whole wedding procession and never see it.
?But you're not big or clumsy,? they hastened
to assure her, for fear they had hurt her feel-
ings; ?we know you can see us, and wouldn?t
hurt us.?
Ariel said of course she wouldn?t hurt them.
She loved them all, and only wished she could
live with them and be a fairy herself.
All this while they had been steadily climbing
the mountain, and now they were passing a
waterfall. After passing over smooth rocks the
water rippled and fell in a silver cascade, dowai,
down into a deep, dark pool. The Elves told Ariel
that some bad fairies lived on the edge of that
pool, and they were always waiting for some-
one to fall over the precipice so they could push
them into the pool and hold them under until
they drowned. They pointed out a log bridge
which spanned the water where it was shallow,
and told her it was the entrance to Fairyland.
They would get out as soon as the car stopped
and cross it. The car stopped at a village, and,
warning her not to be late in the morning, they
said good-bye and scrambled out.
Ariel awoke early the next morning and
dressed herself quietly, without disturbing her




mother, who disliked being wakened early. She
put on one of her best frocks, because she was
going to a wedding. The sun was just peep-
ing above the horizon when she left the house
and ran off to find the Elves. When she reached
the Falls she was careful not to go near the
edge, for she remembered about the bad fairies
who lived beneath them, so she crossed the log
bridge, holding fast to the guide rope. The
Elves were not in sight, but she heard their
voices, and presently saw them standing beside
a big water-wheel, which they told her had once
been used by water-fairies to cut trees into tim-
ber to build houses for humans. But there was
no time for her to see it now. They must hurry
or they would be late.
They walked through the scrub until they
came to a place where big trees met overhead,
making a beautiful archway of leaves through
which only the daintiest of sunbeams could enter
and fill the place with soft light, while the path
was carpeted with brown leaves, and the decora-
tions were purple, white and yellow orchids, with
ferns and staghorns. This was the Fairies?
church, where the wedding was to take place.
Quite a number of guests had already arrived.
They looked alarmed when they saw Ariel, but
the Elves explained who she was, and that she
was a friend of theirs, and would like to be a
Fairy herself. Just then their father and mother


came in sight, and when they introduced Ariel
to them Mrs. Elve turned quite pale, and looked
very hard at her.
?Why,? she said, ?she is just like my sister?s
little daughter, who was stolen by the wicked
Fairy, Enva, and has never been seen since.?
?Oh, Mother,? said Chat, ?Ariel can speak to
us, and is just like us, only she is so big. Do
you think she can really be our cousin ??
?Perhaps. I do not know,? said his mother.
?But you must be quick and get seats, for here
comes the wedding party.?
Down the path came a Brownie, wearing a
green uniform, a hat with a bird?s feather in it,
and red stockings and green shoes. As he
walked he blew on a snail?s shell, and everyone
took their seats and became silent, for that was
the signal that the bridegroom and bride were
coming.
First came the Bishop and the lesser clergy,
who were to perform the service. They had
green robes, and the Bishop had a long necklace
of white orchids round his neck. A little way
behind them came Brownie Peat, walking
between his father and mother. The bridegroom
was dressed in a brown suit, and had a posy
of orange-blossom orchid in his button-hole, and
he carried a big hat with a long pheasant feather
dangling from the brim. He was a very fine look-
ing young fellow, but no one had much time to


look at him, for now the bride was in sight, walk-
ing between her parents, and following them was
a bevy of pretty maidens. Ariel held her breath
for joy as she watched them, they were all so
lovely, but the loveliest of all was Fairy Fernie.
Her frock was made of the finest silver cobweb,
and it was covered with dewdrops which sparkled
every time a sunbeam touched them, making
her seem like a sunbeam herself. Her bright
hair was covered by a filmy veil of the same stuff,
and it was held in place by a wreath of orange-
blossom orchid, and sprays of the same lovely
flowers made the bridal bouquet. The brides-
maids all wore pink, and they had long neck-
laces made from the wild cherry, and wore
wreaths of the berries and their leaves in their
hair.
Everyone said it was a beautiful wedding, and
when the bride and bridegroom turned to walk
down the aisle together all the birds in the scrub,
who had gathered together for that purpose,
burst into song, clear joyous notes of praise and
thanksgiving, and everyone was happy and
smiling, except poor little Ariel, who had en-
joyed it all so very much, and now remembered
that she was only a little girl, and must leave
the dear Fairyland she loved and longed to
share, and go home to breakfast.


A JOURNEY IN THE AIR
ONE day Chit, Chat and Chut crept under a
fence and found themselves in an Aerodrome.
They did not know what it was, but when they
saw what they thought was a huge bird strug-
gling on the ground they were so curious that they
went up quite close to it. It was making queer
noises, and seemed anxious to get away. As
they crept nearer they saw that it was not a
bird at all, but an aeroplane. They had often
seen one in the air, but had never been so close
to one before. It was delightfully exciting to the
two elder ones, but little Chut was frightened,
and wanted to run away, especially when he saw
a queer-looking man all wrapped up, with a funny
helmet on his head and big goggles. He thought
it was an ogre, and his brothers had to
hold him or he would have quite spoilt all their
fun.
The man stepped into the ?plane and sat down,
and began to fasten himself in with straps. In
a flash Chit and Chat, dragging poor Chut with
them, were in beside him. There were no straps
for them, but that did not worry them. They
?did not like being tied up, anyway; they never


knew when they might want to run home. So
they settled themselves as comfortably as pos-
sible at his feet. The man called something - to
the men on the ground. They loosened the
ropes, there was a gliding movement, and the
big machine began to rise from the ground. Up,
up it went, and the three stowaways began to
feel very uncomfortable, and to wish for the
straps they had despised a moment before. Chut
by this time was weeping loudly, but his brothers
had no time to notice him; they were too busy
holding him and themselves in. Most heartily
they wished they were all safe on the ground,
which by now seemed so awfully far away. It
made them giddy just to look down upon it, so
they looked away and clung tightly to the
airman?s boots, which seemed to them the best
thing to cling to, for humans were very queer
people, who did very queer things, but always
seemed to get safely back to their homes in time.
It was as well that they did cling tightly, for
now very strange things began to happen. 'That
awful, bird-like thing began to turn somersaults,
to stand on its head, to spin, and perform
other hair-raising movements, which by this
time the three unfortunates were in no condi-
tion to appreciate. They felt sure they were
going to die, especially when the airman sud-
denly jerked his feet so violently that he nearly
knocked them out of the ?plane. It was dread-


ful! Nothing like it had happened to them be-
fore. They were quite resolved that if ever they
got home again they would never, never do any-
thing their parents would not approve of again.
They would leave off being the sticky-beaks
their mother was always telling them they were,
and be good.
They were very cold, for now they were up
among the clouds, and they had no warm coats
or goggles to protect their eyes. They felt they
would be frozen if they stayed where they were
much longer. Something must be done. They
were more used to the motion of the plane now,
they must try and climb up and share the man?s
coat. Chit crept up first, inch by inch, until
he reached the man?s knee, then holding by one
hand to the nice warm coat he reached down
and caught hold of Chut. Chat pushed and he
pulled, and at last the little fellow was beside
him. Then Chat come up, and they worked
themselves up a little higher and crept into a big
pocket. Oh, how deliciously warm it was in
there, away from the wind! Chut curled up at
once and went to sleep, but the other two were
anxious to know what was going to happen
next.
And what happened next was even more
marvellous and frightening than all that had
happened before. The man, who had been very
still and quiet, suddenly began to be very ac-


tive. He unbuckled the straps which kept him
in his seat, then he crept along - one of the wing's
of the machine, and without a moment?s hesita-
tion stepped into space. Two pairs of eyes
peering over the edge of his pocket nearly popped
out of their owners? heads with fright. Now
they knew they would never see their parents
and home again. They had looked over the edge,,
and they knew that manland was miles and miles,
beneath them, and you cannot fall miles and
miles and not be killed.
But this was a day of surprises. The man
did not fall. A curious thing which was strapped
to his shoulders opened up till it was like the
umbrellas humans carry to keep the sun or rain
off them, and instead of falling like a stone they
began to glide down ever so gently and slowly.
Down, down they went until, after what seemed
hours, but really was only a short time, they
landed in a grassy paddock, frightening some
horses badly, and causing them to take to their
heels and gallop wildly round and round, stop-
ping sometimes with up-thrown heads to snort
angrily, and view with astonishment nothing
more dangerous than a man quietly walking
across the paddock. Many miles away a big
bird-like machine crashed to the ground, and
lay broken and bent, but the elves did not know
that. What was worrying them now was how
they were going to get out of their hiding-place,.




But it turned out to be quite simple, after all.
After walking a while the man came to a rail-
way station and got into a train. Before sitting
down he threw his big coat, which he had been
carrying over his arm for some time, on the
seat. Quickly they crept out of the pocket, but
r emained hidden under its folds until the train
stopped. When the man picked up the coat and
left the train they skipped out after him, and
found they were not very far from their home.
So they hurried toward it as fast as they could
go, firmly determined never, never to enter an
aeroplane again as long as they lived.


A VISIT TO FAIRYLAND
BS m
IcSS LaS
ONCE every year the parents of Chit, Chat
and Chut took them to spend a holiday in their
old home in Fairyland. They looked forward
to this with great joy, for they loved playing
with the fairy children and the lovely toys, which
were so different from those they had in Man-
land.
The time had now come to set out, and they
were so excited that their mother could hardly
get them to stand still while she got them ready
for the journey. They did not take any luggage
with them, because in Fairyland they would wear
beautiful clothes made of flowers and leaves.
They would take off their Manland clothes as
soon as they got there, and only put them on
again when they were leaving.
The Entrance to Fairyland which lay nearest
to their home was a big cave which was hidden
in the mountains, and they had to go quite a


long way to get to it. They went part of the
way by tram, and they did not have to pay any
fare, because, of course, the conductor did
not see them. There are only a very
few people who can see Fairies, and there
did not happen to be any of them on that tram.
Of course, they had to be very careful not
to be sat upon, or squashed by big feet. That
was one of the things which made travelling in
Manland so exciting. Mother Five said it made
her quite nervous, but Father only laughed, and
said it would make the youngsters careful, and
teach them smartness. They had some distance
to walk when they got off the tram, but they
did not mind that; fairies do not easily get tired.
When they reached the cave Father pulled
aside some bushes which hid the entrance, and
they stepped into a little room with a sandy
floor and a low roof. There did not seem to
be any way out but the one by which they had
entered, but Father rapped on the opposite wall
with a stone, and presently a tiny door opened
and an elve stood before them. He wore a suit
made of green leaves, and his stockings and cap
were red. On his feet he wore shoes made of
a kind of brown bark. He greeted them kindly
and told them to follow him, and move care-
fully, for the light in the passage was dim to
eyes which had just come from the strong sun-
light of Manland. When they had gone some


distance he opened a door, and they stepped
straight into Fairyland. It was a big and very
beautiful garden, and there were crowds of tiny
people, all of them happy and smiling. There
was not a cross or ugly face to be seen, because
anyone having such a thing would not have been
allowed to stay there. Bad, cross or ugly people
were either sent to a distant part of the kingdom,
where they could not spoil the happiness of
others, or to Manland, where they had to remain
until they became better. Not "to be pleasant-
faced, happy and smiling is a very big sin in
Fairyland. Even the King and Queen and their
family would be turned out if they became ugly,
for an ugly face, the fairies know, is the sure sign
of an ugly soul. It does not matter how plain a
face is, it is never ugly as long as the soul which
belongs to it is a good one.
'I he father of Chit, Chat and Chut was Cap-
tain of the police, who are sent to Manland to
guard the good fairies and keep the bad ones
from doing harm.
Everyone except the very old, or the very
young, and the injured has to do some work in
Fairyland, otherwise they get nothing to eat.
Even visitors must do their bit towards keeping
the garden tidy, and everyone happy. The old
must be cared for, the children taught, and the
injured nursed. There are no sick people except
those who have had an accident, because the


things which cause sickness are not permitted to
enter the garden.
The morning after the Elves? arrival the three
brothers were told to sweep leaves from some
paths. It was not hard work, but it had to
be done properly before the Head Gardener
said they could go and play. As soon as they
were free they raced off to the Playground,
where they found some of their chums who had
finished their morning task, and they had great
fun until the school bell called them to the big
tree where school was held. There were rows
of big and little toadstools for desks and seats,
pink ones for girls, blue for boys, and green for
the teachers. Visiting children went to school
with the others, and they did not mind, school
was so interesting. They learnt so much about
the world they lived in, the birds and animals
and flowers, and other nice things.
When it was time for meals everyone went
to a part of the garden called the Dining Hall,
which was in charge of a rather fat fairy named
Aida, who had a staff of maids under her. It
was their business to see that everyone had food,
that nothing was wasted, and that the little
Elves and Fairies did not eat things which were
not good for them. There was no cooking to
be done, for all the food grew in the form of
gigantic mushrooms. Some of these were very
beautiful in shape and colour, some had delicious


flavours like passion fruit, pineapple, ice cream
or chocolate. Others were like meat and vege-
tables, or fish, or cheese. Whatever was asked for
was almost sure to be growing in the garden which
surrounded the Dining Hall, and as fast as the
maids gathered food from a mushroom more
came, so that there was always plenty to eat. The
tables and chairs were toadstools of various
colours, the plates were leaves, and cups and
mugs were flowers. Knives and forks and spoons
were made from wood, all beautifully polished.
The most beautiful flowers decorated the tables,
and everything was so beautifully served that
eating a meal was like a Dream-Come-True.
Water to drink was got from a fountain which
threw a spray high into the air, from where
it fell into a crystal bowl, where it sparkled and
glistened in the sunshine like myriads of beau-
tiful jewels.
Chit and his brothers loved every moment of
their holiday, and the other children of Fairy-
land never tired of asking them questions about
their adventures in Manland. They thought it
must be a wonderful place, and only wished they
had the luck to be there themselves. Trams,
trains, motor cars and aeroplanes must be heaps
more exciting than birds and butterflies and
things of that kind, they said, and the visitors
said, rather, riding around on those things was
a game for kids, they were glad they were going


back where there were real things, and a fellow
could get a thrill with his fun. But all the same
they were just a little bit sad when the time
came to say good-bye to their old home for
another year.






t


.
? JB
911
*


3 1508 02085095 9


