

i/he tfeerets
and
Kove to geeome an Operator.
'Clairveiianee
Mesmerism and psychology t
jKx\d Kow to ?eeome a f [
/ >
jVtesmeriser and ? sYehologijt. < i


SAPPHO * Or, Paris Life and Morals,
B, ALPHONSE DADDET. Is. 6d. Post Free.
ARISTOTLE’S WORKS.
The rare and original edition contains his complete mas
terpiece, his Experienced Midwife, Recipes for Nurses,
with coloured and other plates, cloth, gilt back. Price [ss.
post paid.
CAMILLE * Or, The Lady with the Camellias
By ALEX. DUMAS. Is. 9d- Post free.
Genufhe Translation from the French.
THE SECRETS OF CLAIRVOYANCE
And how to become a MESMERISER AND PSYCHOLOGIST,
Being a complete embodiment of all the curious facts con-
nected with the above strange science, with instructions how
to become a medium. Post Free, Is, 6d.
MARIA MONK,
Or Awful Disclosures in a Nunnery.
No one would believe the enormities exposed by this book,
tbe appaling scenes herein described, the iniquities practised,
the cruelties inflicte<|, and the shocking 'scenee witnessed.
1/C, posted.
READ THE FAMOUS
FRUITS OF PHILOSOPHY,
BESANT-BRADLAUGH PROSECUTED WORK
Advocating Regulating the Size of Your Family According to
Your Means.
CAN YOU AFFORD TO KEEP A LARGE FAMILY?—
I ou may have a fixeid income or weekly wage sufficient to en-
able you to keep a family of two or three children in comfort
and to lay by a few pounds for a “rainy day.” But divided
»tnong a family of six or seven your income would be quite
inadequate to provide proper food, clothing and housing. Your
means would be swallowed up in living from day to day, and
sickness or misfortune would find you unprepared and help-
less. The care of a large family exhausts the mother by un-
ceasing and harassing toil, and frequent child-bearing under-
mines her health. Such are some of the miseries attendant
upon TOO LARGE FAMILIES.
“THE FRUITS OF PHILOSOPHY”
Contains Reliable Information, and the Medical Directions are
Easy, Plain, Explicit, though Chaste and Delicate.
Securely wrapped and Free from Observation, Is. 3d. in stamps
Wl BOBERT BEAR. SyiitT'i CktiMil Back Stars. 17 69 Market Streak




THE SECRETS
CLAIRVOYANCE!!
AND HOW TO
BECOME AN OPERATOR.
MESMERISM
AND
PSYCHOLOGY,
AND HOW TO BECOME A
MESMERISES AND PSYCHOLOGIST.
Being a Complete Embodiment of all the Curious Facts
connected with the above Strange Sciences, with
Instructions How to Become a Medium-
SYDNEY:
THE RESEARCH PUBLISHING COMPANY.
E. T. Eadcliffe, Printer, 44 Campbell at., Sydney


• , t ... ' : X
i & : ' Ii
m& ; '
c
O i '. j yUfyi'i }
gO-i; ' "*
.
1 - ■" . m
; j


CLAIRVOYANCE.
French word which literally signifies “clearsighted-
ness,” a power attributed to persons (usually in a state
ifrJLla of trance, of seeing what is not cognizable by either
B of the external senses. Much has been claimed on
behalf of this power which seems to most minds almost
incredible. Yet the power itself is nevertheless a
reality. Clairvoyance may be truthfully termed the art and power
of knowing or cognizing facts, things, and principles by methods
totally distinct from those usually pursued in their attainment.
To give our readers a correct idea when and how Clairvoyance
first dawned on this always-seeking-for-something-new world of
ours, it will be necessary to go back to the introduction of Mes-
merism in France.
In the year 1778 Mesmer left Germany for the capital of France,
where there was as great a “penchant” for the supernatural as
perhaps can be found upon the earth; and in Paris he soon made
the science a source of fame and emolument. Great numbers
of the sick were collected from various and.distant parts of the
country, upon whom Mesmer was reaping immense emoluments,
and ever proclaiming the most miraculous cures. He made
many converts, even among learned and scientific physicians, who
soon attempted to share the spoils with their great master.
Among these M. d’Eslon, a member of the Medical Faculty of
Paris, became most conspicuous; and in 1874, the subject had
attracted so much public attention, that a royal commission was
appointed, and also one from the Academie de Sciences, to in-
vestigate the subject. Of the character of this commission,
and the weight to which their opinions are entitled, it Is only
necessary to record that Baily, the historian of Astronomy, Lavoi-
sier and Berthollet, the distinguished chemists and philosophers,
together with the celebrated Benjamin Franklin, who was at
that time in France, were among the number. ' After a patient
attention to the public and private experiments for five months
successively, the commissioners reported tha! there were “no
proofs of the existence of Animal Magnetism; that all the effects
ascribed to it were purely owing to the power of imagination;
the tendency of imitation natural to all mankind, and the
mechanical influence of touching and frictions on the most sen-
sitive parts of the body; and that the practice of it was both
hurtful and dangerous in society, especially in a moral point
of view.”
But although this learned and able report was, as might be
expedted, fatal to the pretensions of Mesmerism, strictly so called,
yet the Marquis de Puysegur, one of Mesmer’s followers, now
introduced Animal Magnetism in a new and improved form, and
proclaimed the discovery of “Somnambulism” or “Magnetic sleep.”
Before his time, “convulsions” had been the result’ of the ex-
periments; but now somnambulism became the universal effect
of manipulations. The Marquis, unable to attend to the multi-
tude of patients who sought sleep at his hands, determined upon
experimenting on a large scale. He therefore “magnetized a
tree,” from which he suspended cords, to each of which a patient


aU . united by their thumbs, he passed
around among them with his mystic rod, anci magnetized them bv
wholesale. ‘Expect a miracle and it will happen”; and according!^
that his slee Ping patients, when in a crisis.,
were gifted with supernatural vision, and this he denominated
clairvoyance.” While in this state, he called them “medecines
endormis, sleeping physicians; because of the wonderful dis-
coveries in the nature and cure of diseases, in which thev
instructed their magnetizer himself. Meanwhile other practi-
tioners were producing the same effects, by different means’'
some of them, like the Chevalier de Barbarin, offering prayer!
at the bedsides of the sick, which produced all the phenomena
seen under the magnetic tree. This new form of Animal Mag-
netism spread rapidly over France, Germany, Switzerland Russia
and Sweden, and continued with the rage of an Epidemic until
1779, when the French Revolution interrupted and almost an-
nihilated the science. Since that day to the present the belief
m Clairvoyance has spread so rapidly that in point of numbers
the believers equal if not exceed any one of the Religious De-
nominations in this or any other Christian Country. Who are
those that have investigated the Phenomena of Clairvoyance suf-
ficient to find facts enough to base a belief upon? Are thev
the ignorant and unlearned? We must frankly admit they are
not, but on the contrary are men and women that will rank
favorably with the members or attendants of any Church of a «r
land. m
To those desiring to become Clairvoyants, either for their
own enjoyment or f6r Professional purposes, we know of no better
advice to give them than the instructions and hints given in a.
very comprehensive work entitled “Seership, or a Practical
Guide to those who aspire to Clairvoyance,” bound in cloth, from
which we herein make some extracts.
“On earth man is greatest, mind the greatest part of man,
clairvoyance the greatest part of mind. . . . Clairvoyance
depends upon a peculiar condition of the nerves and brain
« is compatible with the most robust health, albeit ofteneat
resulting from disordered nerves. The discovery consists In the
knowledge of the exact method ‘how,’ the precise spot 'where/
•and the proper time ‘when’ to apply the specific mesmeric current
to any given person, in order to produce the coma and lueiditv
A careful following of the rules herein laid o down is generally
sufficient to enable the aspirant to attain his or her end.”
“At the start let it be distinctly understood that fear, doubt
riervous agitation, coarse habits, or bad intent, will retard success
and may prevent it altogether.”
"At first, clairvoyance, like any movement, nervous or mus-
cular, requires a special effort, but it soon becomes automatic
involuntary, mechanical. Keep your design constantly before
you, and your soul and inner senses will make grooves for them-
selves, and continue to move in them as cars on rails or wheels
"in ruts. Let your groove be clair-voyance!”
"Clairvoyance is an art, like any other. The elements exist,
out to be useful must be systematized. It has hitherto been
Srarsued, not rationally, but empirically—as a blind habit, a sort oC
gymnastics, a means to swindle people, and scarce ever under in*


telligent guidance like the logical or mathematical or musical
faculties of the soul, albeit more valuable than either, ana like
them, too, subject to the laws of growth. It is far-reaching, ansi,
once attained, though the road is difficult, amply repays tfca
time and labor spent.” , , . . . .
“Intuition—The highest quality of the human mind—is intent
in most people, developable in nearly all; is trainable, ai *d’
active, is the highest kind of clairvoyance. It is the effortless,
instantaneous perception of facts, principles events and things-
The rule for its promotion simply. When it tells a tale to test
it at once. In a brief time the perceptions will grow clearer,
stronger, more full, frequent, and free.”
“The difference between clairvoyance, feeling, or psychometry.
and intuition, are these; the first sees, the second feels, the thir
"In our ordinary state, we see through a glass darkly; in clair-
voyance, we see with more or less distinctness; m psychometry,
we ‘feel' with greater or less intensity, and m intuition we leap
to 6 results at a single bound. There are hundreds who imagine
they possess one or all of these faculties
arrogate much importance, merely because the idea has made
a strong impression on their minds; or perhaps they have seen
one or two visions or spectral sparks or flashes. Such are what
they claim to be, only in the wish. They need training. For
clairvoyance is a thing of actual system, rule and law, and who-
ever would have it in its completeness or 'complexity, must con-
form to the ‘science’ thereof, if they expect good results to ensue.
“No two persons’ clairvoyance is precisely alike. Lach one
has a ‘personal idiosyncrasy’ that invariably determines his or
her specialty, and, whatever that specialty may chance to be,
should he encouraged, for in that he or she will in
too’ other. The attempt to force nature will be bo much lost
time and wasted effort.” , ,
“And so I say to all clairvoyant aspirants. Adopt a specialty,
and pursue it steadily during your life-” . . , ,
“When a mesmeric ‘Circle/ self-magnetizing, or varied experi-
ment for clairvoyance, bids fair to become a success, and the
subject sees flashes, sparks, white clouds, rolling halls of ugaf
vapor, or is partially lucid, the tendency of the mind should he
carefully noted, and the future direction of the power or faculty
fee fully decided on, sought for, aimed at, and strictly, persistently,
faithfully followed, until a splendid and
triumph and success crown your efforts. If you intend to examine
and prescribe for disease; ‘will-throwing,’ or read people; to hunt
up lost goods; detect thieves; make business examinations—
in short, any special thing; cultivate that thing and no other,
else you will spoil your sight, dim your light, and become a
sort of Jack-at-all-trades, master of none. You cannot excel
in finding lost property, reading the love-life of amoroua people,
and also describe and prescribe for sick folks. No, me raw
is One thing, and that thing well. Let the rest alone.
“Again; people are too impatient. They push a aomnambm*
too fast and too far. Be careful, if you look for success; go
short journeys, at a slow pace, if you expect to hold out.
“Very few persons will fail who strictly conform to iho


general rules here laid down, and fewer still who follow the special
plans determined upon. As a rule, I find it safe to declare,
that m every one hundred cases, seventy-five can become partly
lucid; sixty-three can become sensitives; forty-five can reach the
second, thirty-two the third, fourteen the fourth, five the fifth
and two the highest degree of clairvoyance their peculiar or-
ganisation is capable of attaining. Of one hundred men, fifty-six
can become seers; of two hundred women, one hundred and
eighty can become so.”
‘ Magnetic clairvoyance is that induced by holding the head
close to the open horns of a large and powerful horse-shoe mag-
net. It may be suspended from the ceiling and held to the
head lying down, so that when let go it will spring away or come
in contact with its armature (a nail will do) so as to close the
circuit. A quartz crystal is nearly as good for this purpose
horse ' shoe but I Prefer a bar magnet to either”
Mesmeric circles differ from all others, in that to be proper
all who are in one should be insulated; the chairs and tables*
and footstools should rest on glass knobs made on purpose*
In these circles, the chances are ten to one that some will go
off into the mesmeric coma on the first trial. The circle
must wish, will desire, and favorable results are almost sure to
foHow. Have patience, if they do not.”
“Note.—All clairvoyants should, to be useful, successful and
enduring, cultivate the ‘habit’ of deep breathing; for all brain
power depends upon lung power, nor can continued ability ejfist
if this be neglected. All clairvoyants should feed on the best
things attainable. Again, all clairvoyants must use great caution
in matters of sex. Abstinence is good; totally so, is better"
for an error in that direction is fatal to clear vision, or its per-
petuity when possessed.”
“In all mesmeric experiments, individual or collective, very few
become, at first trial, true hypnotic subjects, and some can never
be, owing to peculiarities of organization. The matter can be
tested in a variety of ways—as, for instance, the usual ‘passes’
may be reversed. Or the doubtful subject may look ‘steadily’ at
a speck on the wall for six minutes. If drowsy at the end
of that time, and the eyeballs have a tendency to roll up the
person ‘is’ a subject, and all that is required is patience ’ ‘Or’
breathe rapidly, forcibly, for ninety seconds. It makes you
dizzy, you are a subject, and can enter the somnambulic state in
any one of a dozen ways. This same operation, often repeated
is almost certain to produce coma; and if done while lying
aov/n, in connection with the horse-shoe magnet operation will
prove successful in enabling the person to see without eyes’ In
all cases the room should be quite dark. (N.B.—‘All’ magnetic
odyilic, and mesmeric processes are twenty times oftener produc-
tive of grand results if conducted in a dark chamber than in nn«
lighted artificially, or by the sun. Next to a thorouehlv darir
room, moonlight is best, and starlight better still.) if at *he
end of a few minutes, sparks, flashes, streaks of quick and linger-
ing light are seen, or phosphor clouds float before the face
then one of two things is immediately probable. First that the
party by continuance and repetition can be clairvoyant* or' se-
cond, if not too ‘scary,’ these clouds and sparks may resolve them-


selves into beatified forms of friends long gone, but unlost.”
“Concentrate your attention on a single point in the subject's
bead; keep it there. Do not let your thoughts wander. Gaze
steadily at it, and it alone, gently waving ‘your’ head and hands
over it from right to left, left to right. Repeat the process at
the ‘same time’ daily' for one hour, till the sleep is thoroughly
induced. When it is, and you are perfectly satisfied of the
fact, will be ‘strongly’ tempted to ask questions. ‘Don’t you do
it*’ Resist it. Deepen the slumber in ‘seven sittings after
perfect insensibility ensues!’ The eighth time you may ask
a few questions, and but a few. Lead the subject slowly, ten-
derly, holily, gently along, step by step, one subject at a time,
and that subject ‘thoroughly’—not forgetting what I have said
about ‘specialities.’ ”
“Persons ambitious to become clairvoyants must not forget
that a full habit, amorous pleasures, high living, and mental
excitement, all are disqualifications. The entire diet must
be changed; the linen often; the skin, especially the head and
hair must be kept scrupulously clean; and, to insure speedy
success, the food should be very light; fruit, and tea, coffee and
milk may be freely used; but no chocolate, fat, oysters, pastry,
and but very little sugar. Nor should the person fail to
think, wish, and will the end aimed at continually. Soft
and plaintive music is a capital adjunct.”
“The experiments should always be made at first with but
few spectators, in a darkened room; and perfect trust should
exist between operator and subject. And here let me. state
that no woman should allow herself to be mesmerized by a man
whose principles she cannot fully trust to, for any man can seduce
any woman whom he sits by, in magnetic rapport.”
“I now give the special method of thorough magnetization.
First: Let the room be darkened.. Let there be a mirror in the
north end. Let the subject’s back be toward that mirror, but
take care that he or she sits so that the reflected ray of light
(magnetism) from the operator’s eye will strike the back of his
or her head, the subject receiving the reflected ray—or operator,
subject, and mirror, forming a triangle, which any. schoolboy
can arange in a moment. Now, the subject sits in a chair,
fully insulated, the feet being on an insulated stool, and no part
of the dress or chair touching the floor. The operator also
stands or sits on the insulated stool, and, if he is weak in nervous
force, should be fully charged with electricity, or from a battery.
If spectators are present seat them silently in. the south,
east, and west, but not a soul in the north. No silk, not even
a cravat, must be allowed in the room. If a piano is there,
let some soft and tender chord be played; but take care not
to play more than that one on that evening. Previous to the
experiment two magnets have been suspended, one north pole up,
the other down, so as to embrace the subject’s head without
much pressure; the poles must antagonise, and a current will
•be sent entirely through the head. ‘Now be careful!' You
have already prepared a magnet, or magnetic bar, and when
the subject is seated, and the magnets arranged, the operator
looks steadily at that point of the looking-glass, whence the
reflected ray will glance off and strike the back of the subject’s


head, just between the fork of the northern magnet, and while-
S f°*f o the bar magnet directly towards the open
meek of the subject. In a few minutes there ought to be a per*
feco magnetic slumber, and frequently the most surprising clair--
I°^ ce ®^ ted - «is still better if all the spectators grasp
c cord on which a copper and iron wire has been bound the
ends being fastened to a chair, so that they point directly to
)™2? J 2?i% b ii d7 ' If these directions be faithfully observed,
success will follow nine times in every ten experiments.”
I may also observe that a slight alteration will render this
circle unequalled for different purposes. In such cases let all
a table itself the chair? and Vis ?n-
---sulated. If the room be darkened, you may and probably will
St T v 0 o ? Ur , i m ® ntal Phenomena. But I advise the chord to be
played all the time till results sought for are obtained. Again
south . msulated, with the magnets
, contact as before—the person being alone—and the results
“,S red are ? lmost <=<«ata follow 8 But let me here “ay
that no one m or out of a circle can reach good and speedy
results unless perfectly and absolutely clean. The bath is the
0^? r ? parat ! on for these experiments, and cannot be
Witb impdnity - 1 have known many successes and
wome failures in conducting all of the above experiments both in
this country, England, and France, and I give it as my deliberate
oSm toUv h ??rf n M one .. need , fai ? them, and will not Unless their
own tolly and impatience’ ruin all.”
advantage can a person have by pursuing the search
* r ber own P erson ? To which I answer.”
First. Not ten per cent, of what passes for spiritual in* -
tercourse has a higher origin than the medium’s mind.”
An ° n .® sees » teels, hears, is positive proof to
jj? Ttf- All ®P intu al communications come second handed,
S ® eS directly ’ and reaches knowledge by the
*" T * ird ' If pfer ?,? n 13 lucid (clairvoyant), he or she has a
r Xtev P e°r/' Ve P ° Wer * and need not coaault a “ y °*er
‘Mediumship’ is automacy; a medium is a machine
played on and worked by others, when it really exists; but the
clairvoyant sees, knows, understands, learns, and grows in ner
sonal magnetic and mental power day by day; and while embodied
makes the very best possible preparations for the certain and ab-
solute life beyond the grave, which awaits us all when this
Tever called living is over at last.’ ”
_ Clairvoyance necessarily subtilizes and refines the
mind, body, tastes, passions, and tendencies of every one who
possesses and practises it.”
V irtue is not a myth; Death is; but by clairvoyance the -
bars of Death are beaten down, and it opens the gates*^ of Glory
aU , doubti ?S souls the light and life beyond. And why
tMr, 18 d ? ne? 18 yours? If not > this divine
t&mg will enable you to more effectually accomplish it”
of do not count themselves as altogether
Sw B Jr®L ld ’ f ° r the y are In connection with, and do the work
oetow of the ethereal peoples of the starry skies. By mean*


4j£ this royal road, the true seer or seeress is enabled to read
the varied scrolls of human life frequently to explain the real
significance of dreams and visions; examine and prescribe for
those who are sick or ailing in body, soul, mind, heart, affec-
lions, hope, ambition, love, aspiration, losses, gains, fears, and.
troubles of every character, healing bodies, minds, souls; eean-
ning by real positive mental vision, not merely the secrets ot a
man’s or woman’s lives and loves, and keeping them as wisdom
seeds, to grow into good fruitage presently but also reaching
the perfect comprehension of the sublime fact that organize .10 a
determines destinies—which of course begets charity to toe
neighbor, and love to all mankind; hence it is possible to foretell
events that must inevitably come to pass, either in the general
or special plane of an individual’s life and experience There
are ever two roads and three choices before every intelligent
human being, and clairvoyance alone is competent to decide which
is best, for only this magnificent science and power can enable
us to reach the penetralium.” -
*We know that the sick are healed by its strength, that
homes are made happy by its power; that love itself comes
to man through its divine agency; that woman can realize her
hopes, ‘in many directions,’ through its resistless force; that God
is Will, and whoso hath its fullest and finest, most resembleth
him! ‘Steady willing* will bring lucidity of vision and of soul.
By it also, those who love or would, who seek the occult,
and strongly desire to reach the cryptic light beneath the floors
of the waking world—l mean the sons and daughters of sor-
row, anguish, and the Light; the loving, unloved ones of the
earth* the lonely pilgrims over desert sands; the heart-reft mar-
iners’now sailing and surging over the stormy waters of the
bitter sea of Circumstance —for these are the God-sent, and
they travel evtr the roughest paths. To all such, will, and
especially Clairvoyance, is a boon, a true friend, saying: Come
unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will
point the road to rest!’—clairvoyance I mean —not automacy
* n then, is clairvoyance? I reply: It is the Light which
the seer reaches sometimes through years of agony, by wading
through oceans, as it were, of tears and blood; it is an interior
uufoldment of native powers, culminating in somnambulic Vision
through the mesmeric process; and the comprehension and ap-
plication of the principles that underlie and overflow human
nature and the physical universe, together with a knowledge or
toe principia of the vast spirit-sea whereon the worlds of spac©
are cushioned. Thus true clairvoyance ‘generally’ is knowledge
resulting from experiment, horn of agony, and purified by the
baptism of fire.”
“In the attempt to reach clairvoyance, most people are al-
together in too great a hurry to reach grand results, ann
in that haste neglect the very means required, permitting the
mind to wander all over creation —from the consideration of a>
miserable love affair of no account whatever, to an exploration
of the mysteries enshrouding the great nebulae of Orion
or Centauri. *Now that won’t do. If one wants to be able
'to peruse the life-scroll of others, the ‘first’ thing learned most


* fi + Xin \ <5 mind and P ur Pose, aim, and intent upon a
single point, wholly void of other thought or object. The
Steadilv r 3fv?\ en V S: ‘ T £? nk the c l° sel y; and ‘third, will
steadily, firmly, to know the correct solution of the problem in
hand, and then the probabilities are a hundred to ten that the
vision thereof, or the Phantorama of it, will pass before you like
conviction 6 0? ’truth ” WHI ““ h aCrOSS y °" mtad
“We cannot mow doubt that the Temples of Isis and Osiris
wm^ P nla APOIIC \ End S SCulapias ’ and the schools of the Prophets!
weie places where the art of Somnambulism, with more than
p t^ie P stho e od^.» WaS practised and tau^ht h y the ancient
*.nd he yio, n^! ent P rieats , were also the only natural philosophers;
aad ’ remarked certain wonderful phenomena to arise
spontaneously m natural somnambulism, catalepsy, and other
°/ tlie , system, they did not despair in imitating
S, nat . ure had demonstrated to be possible; and by
study and experiment they at last succeeded in rivalling the
wonders of nature. And this will account for the wisest men
Iying wonder b s eheVmg “ th ® reality of what we now re &*a as
to P i Ut^ r + ch *v and the other wise men of Greece did not affect
to doubt the reality of the “affatus” of the Pythoness l or the
SteT?ha D ?”^T S °' ( the oracle ' In facl ' * e imt
rate perhaps all that was true and useful in the ancient temnles
fnr?n r “ adern hos P itals - by the use of opium, hemp, ether, chloro-
gases/ aad especially by “Mesmerism,” which is
acquainted e£ESCtUaI st!mulallt «t the brain we are
® va 7 thing goea ta P/ove that the oracles receded in dreams
and the cures which followed them were the consequences of
what we now call the mesmeric exaltation of the nervous system
variously brought about, no doubt, but frequently by the modem
method of manipulations, assisted by breathing m
Indeed, it is impossible that, in the long course of ages this
faculty in man should not have been observed. It was so iD
fact, and the pagan priests explored it to their own advantke-e
y giving the credit to the Temples of Isis, Serapis and Es-
culapius. Knowing how to produce and direct somnambulism
they placed the person whom they knew to be gifted with the
power of distant vision and of prevision in the sanctuary of the
temple to be the organ of the god, who, it was pretended pos-
sessed him. Another, in his state ot exaltation felt the
diseases of those who approached him, perceived the state of
their organs, indicating the accessions of their comnlaints and
prescribed remedies; these were destined to play the Dart of Es
culapiu#, or that of somnambulist priests; for it ought to be
remembered that there were priests in those temples who
dreamed for the patients, if they were not able to enter into
somnambulism themselves. Besides, every consultant assisted
state lf v eceptio ?' • had indicated in the somnambulistic
state his complaint and its remedy, as he lost all recollection
ot it °n awaking, the priests, who had carefully taken down his
words, did not fail to persuade him that all was the work of the


»&£&&& rhiof the
SLiIP where the god appeared to them in dreams, and re-
vealed’the remedies dfcat ought to be resorted to for . cu T®'
WhiPn thp patients raleived no communication from the d.vinity,
slept in their places, and the
god no longer withheld the hoped-for boon.
S The oracle of Trophonius was m full operation m the time
of Pausanias who himself consulted it; from b,s account it
appears that persons resorting to it were thrown into a state
of somnambulism, whatever the means might be.
“Among other ceremonies, the inquirer was led to the two
fountains of Oblivion and Memory, from the first of which he
that he mi w ht forget all his previous ideas, and from the
latter’that he might retain recollection of what he should see m
bl -oe O s n cending n by a ladder into the cave he lay down^on t the
around placed his feet in a small orifice, and, following ™em
with his knees, immediately found his whole body
wards as if by the vortex of a mighty rushing river, his return,
and feet foremost was by the same office. He came forth m
a state of great disturbance and unconscious of hn “ s ®H,
those around him, and in this state was immediately placed on
the chair of memory by the priests, who then obtained fro
Tiim by inquiries, all that he had seen or heard. He was then
delivered to his friends, and time came to his usua
<ipn<?ps and found himself cheerful. „ . . -
The “Grotto del Came” at Naples might easily be converted
into a modern “Cave of Trophonius” by substituting men for
d °Dacier thus notices the belief of the ancients in oracular
dr, There was nothing more common among the «^Fwafso
■SKSS sas.T SKE
ESS
S had r no?spoto O? what S happened to them in dreams
te stifle at ''lie °ha ten curad° by remedies reveaied to
Tiim in sleen Svnecius assures us that he had avoided great
by the saS? means, ana it is Known what Socrates says
the gratitude of Antonius to Serapis was so lively
that he struck several medals in his honor that may be seen in
P£ We see among the Jews numerous examples of the natural
faculty of Seal instinct, of distant vision, and of the power
of prevision; and in the majority of instances, it is easy not t
confound such cases with those of a still higher order. ■ 5 P


~hZcd. so many prophets as the Jews. Without counting those
of the Lord, we see around Ahab seven hundred prophets of Bag I
men, women, youths and old men prophesied. They marched in
troops through the cities and fields, with musical instruments
playing before them. There were scboqls and colleges where
the sons of the prophets, and young Hqjjhfews who showed the
prophetic temperament, were taught tcr®perfect natural
abilities under the instruction of the old and experienced.
When the prophetic spirit did not carry them towards sacred
subjects, they made use of it for the usual purposes of life.
They healed the sick, as Elijah did the child of the widow of
Zareptha, and told how to find lost goods. “Let us consult
the seer, Saul said, when having lost his father’s asses, he went
to consult Samuel and carried with.him the small fee usual on
jrach occasions. It is worthy of remark that, when the Divine
Influence was communicated to a chosen individual, this spiritual
power was “signified” by terms which strongly recall to man
the means by which he also can exercise a mental influence over
bis fellow-men.
At the moment of inspiration, the sacred writings say—“ ‘The
hand of God descended upon him.” (Deut.)
When Moses wished to fill Joshua with the spirit of wisdom,,
"he ‘laid his hands ’upon him.” (Deut.)
In Deuteronomy it is also said: “God ‘impcsed his hand"
upon him, and he prophesied.’’
It _ must undoubtedly appear, that the mental relations of the
parties in the Mesmeric communications is such, that the train
of thought in the one governs, more or less, that of the other.,
la virtue of the mysterious intercourse established, the mind of
the one is led by that of the other to the contemplation of what-
ever scenes and objects it is pleased to array before it. The-
evidence of this, as a matter of fact, is altogether too strong to'
ha resisted, and to this extent the claims of what is termed Clair-
voyance are by multitudes admitted. But hesitation immediately
ensues when we go beyond this, and affirm the possibility of a
sight or perception on the part of the subject,entirely transcend-
ing the range of the operator’s knowledge or his actual imagin-
ings. This, it is said, brings at once into the region of the in-
credible, as it invests the spirit with the power of kind of
übiquitous presence which can only be ascribed to the Deity.
All objections, however, of this nature must give way before the
clear evidence of facts, and facts may be adduced in abundance
to show that the range of clairvoyant vision is not limited by
the conceptions of the guiding mind. We do not say that this
power is capable of being elicited in every instance in which the
subject gives proof of being cognizant of the thoughts of an-
other, and is able to describe the scenes and objects on which his
mental eye is fixed. But that that which is frequently termed
the “faculty of independent clairvoyance” does exist, and that
incontestable proofs of it are often afforded, we affirm without
hesitation. Both the private experiences and the public vouchers
of those who are conversant with the subject are rich in tes-
timonies on this head.
A remarkable form of this power is evinced in the knowledge
whieii magnetic subjects when in that state, however locally and:


hodilv remote, have of each other. The fact is beyond question.
33 will be attested by all those who are familiar with the
phenomena, and can only be accounted for on the ground of the
truth of Swedenborg’s assertion, that “real space is
tent in the spiritual world, and that nothing more is te-
aring spirits into conjunction with each other than similarity
of states,” coupled with a desire to that effect. It has been
riven to see how similitude of state conjoins and contracts the
extension of space or distance, and how dissimilitude separates
and produces extension of space or distance. There they who o>
Spearance are at the distance of a thousand miles from each
SS be present in a moment when the love of one to the
other is excited, and on the other hand, they who are discoursing
together can be separated in like manner the moment any aver-
is excited.” —Ath. Creed, 106. If this is the law of con-
junction between spirits in the other life, it is not perhaps
difficult to conceive that it should be somewhat strikingly rea ze
inthe case of two Mesmeric subjects coming, as they do, in
cvifwl measure into tlie spiritual sphore.
Yet it is to be remarked, that the exhibition of tne power
is usually governed by some hidden laws that have reference to
use The phenomena are perhaps most frequently evinced in
( -ase3 where the object is to indicate the nature or the cure of
'disease Nothing is more common than to submit to a sub-
S the case of one, removed it may be to the distance of hun-
dreds of miles, who is laboring under any particu ar malady,
which however, is not known in any of its particulars, to the
?onsulter but which he wishes to have investigated A cor-
rect report is often made of such cases, and that without the
slightest previous knowledge of the person or his ailment, a.
*aet which cannot be accounted for hut upon the supposition
of some kind of “going forth of the spirit,” which at the same
ineTs not incompatible with its still adhering to the body to
which it belongs. The mind of the clairvoyant does undoubtedly
Sf some way come in contact with the essential being of the
person in question and through that is made acquainted witti
the condition of the material organism, which stends in indio-
s-oiuhle relation to the soul that pervades and animates it. Thai.
Sere is an actual cognizance of the individual thus spiritually
Sed is evident from the fact that when such a person is sub-
sequently brought into the presence of the clairvoyant when.
In the Mesmeric state, he will immediately recognise him as
one he has seen before, and will minutely describe all the par-
ticulars of the previous vision. We by no means affirm that
these phenomena occur with clairvoyant, hut they nevertheless
occur, as I have often witnessed, and more especially if the Mes-
meric seer is furnished with a lock of hair, or any article ot dress
or ornament worn upon the person of the other party, which,
may serve as a medium for establishing the mysterious com-
munication between them. The fact is doubtless very astonish-
ing, but is rendered much more credible by Swedenborgs
Si respecting the nature of spirits and the modes of Itor
intercourse, a portion of which we shall soon present to the
But the first step is to adduce evidence of the fact.


patients "
*■* jlst m4SSa a ‘n e r , pStlamSS e ° tSs “9"?
freedom from vanity + ot less + absolute than her
and though I have no dn /S to exer , t her clairvoyance,
tinned /till iT/d* j[: ~
she ever exert it but from a dpoiro to n hL O ert t ’ ? or would
aware of the presence of others g m ' n ° r does slie if
The pTce Vwhteh hfor XTiTand a' ‘T*’ ’^“ibl
xS“S»E"iS.#§SS
ae'tim| ,^ l d“V 1 t 0 “lrttv’ 1 i e t n afte klleW d notllI 5 g 01 tt^“® O °S
she would tell: and till Sth „fi?Z ardS ' Far Jnore than thii >
merous things relatin'--- to nth a< ? curac y»" and predict nu-
Place. But I will not venUiZ &YG si ? ce exactly taken
anything but superstition*- am irdPPd r 6 at pr . es ® nt - l am
testimony on qii maHona’ a f n in( ieed very sceptical of human
PoSThave laborioSSranfriildTf'loS 1 < n ( ature; ,, but thes ”
positively In exerting +*,£, rifalclj - y looked into, and can speak
wrinkles her forehead vertically"°«ddeSi e » kn ‘i tS her ,lrows “3
bral- exertion. The Sat' oe "-
epeak clairvoyantly, is the centre of the forehpqd mid 4 SO , to
tween the temples, but a littlelowert tan M» SL le-
the root of the nose and the top of the forehead—eicirtlv 17*?*
s&tsss? by some cerebral Bhysi “ t?ri ,y a a ‘ th o ?
of her face. Her seat may be placed again” lly of the -waS?
roora wl tkout altering her ability. y lilo Waiis
m Wither from her being in a very delicate state nf hpoith
or hot, she exerts the power -with great effort and nf tan ~ a k
repeated efforts in the direction at successive sittin/beforp
she sees what I desirS her to see. Any temporary SpLp S
debility any headache or other distressing sensation r- n, O
-lightest uncomfortable emotion prevents its exertion tn mnnh
purpose or altogether. Before she could discern roSJL
are strangers to her, many attempts for very nSn?daysJl™
required She then saw them more clearly ev^da^g™ 6
times she can see persons but for an instant a7 a tfme Xd


sometimes not more than once in this momentary manner during
my visit. She seldom saw the whole oi a room at once. Ihe
Z °Mademoi'selle whose disease and its treatment have been
minutely reported by Dr. Klein, her physician, appears to have
been one of the most extraordinary natural somnamoalists and
“Clairvoyants” upon record. The following facts concerning her,
which Dr. Klein has slightly alluded to from motives of delicacy
towards the family, are related m the third volume of the Bib o
theque du Magnetisme Animal,” by an eye-witness who is worthy
“After Mademoiselle W. had arrived at the house of M. St. ■ —-—,
a respectable and opulent man, whose family is one of the
mnS distinguished in the country, this gentleman, who had
previously heard of the accidental somnambulism of this young
lady looked upon her as a very extraordinary person, & ud re-
quested her to give him, as she had already done on several
former occasions, some proofs of the accuracy and extent o
her ‘magnetic telescope/ and to direct it towards his son an
officer in the army, at that time serving m Russia. From that
moment, Mademoiselle W. directed her thoughts to the young-
man and in all her paroxysms, although she had never seen him,
she drew his portrait exactly as if she had him before her eyes.
She said that he was constantly present to her mind she accom-
panied him in all his military movements, and observed that,
naturally brave he exposed himself too inconsiderately to danger.
She frequently asked the sister of this young officer, whether
she did not see him in a corner of the room; and one day, upon
receiving a negative answer, she said: ‘Well, then, ask him any
questions you please, and I shall return his answers. The sister,
having consented, asked all sorts of, questions relative to family
matters which were unknown to the somnambulist, who answer-
ed them all in a manner so precise and so accurate, that the
interrogator afterwards declared that she felt herseif seized with
, cold nersoiration, and was several times on the point of faint-
ing with fright, during what she called the dialogue of the spirits.
“In another scene, the somnambulist declared to the father,
that she saw his son at the hospital, with a piece of white linen
wrapt round his chin—that he was wounded m the face—that
he was unable to eat, but, at the same time, that he was in na
danger. Some days later, she said that he was now able to eat,
and that he was much better. „
“The family soon ceased to pay much attention to these visions,
probably putting little faith in them, when, some weeks after-
wards, a courier arrived from the army. M. St. immediately
went to Count Th. to inquire what news he had received. The
latter at once, set his mind completely at ease, by informing
him that his son’s name was not in the Hst of funded, &c.
Transported with joy, he returned home, and said to Mademoiselle
W., who was, at that time, in her somnambulic sleep, that, for
once, she had not divined accurately, and that, fortunately for his
sen and himself, she had been completely deceived At these
words—‘divined/ ‘deceived’—the young lady felt much offended,
,and, in an angry and energetic tone, assured the father that she
was quite certain of the truth of what she had said—that, at


that moment, she saw his son at the hosnital with hi« *
m white linen, and that in the state in whicTsh? then
was quite impossible she could be deceived
there came a note from Count T.; which, after some SnrelsTons
of politeness mid condolence, contained the following inSfigenS
tie n a a mfTn-i iSt ° f tbe woup ded had arrived fn which wli
bis son ’ who bad been struck by a musket-ball on
.he chin, and was under medical treatment in the hospital, &c.
“According to my information, the veracitv of the
npon whose authority the preceding narrative hafwn
given, lies under no suspicion.—“Isis Revelata,” Vol. 11., p. 93.96
+v ," Mada “ e Bussiere, being magnetised at eleven o’clock in
i-he morning told me that she was better hut +v„+
tv , about herself—having something upon her
nnnd which distracted her thoughts; and not being able to
5“ “V 6 USe °K f “S’ 'she .M me to “LS
her. I did so by the means usually employed under
cjrcumstanees. She retired within hefselt?-™ LS
afterwards she burst into tears, and said to me- ‘I see m?
thf ISS- la Mq w?f°e iS f , Libourne: be has inflammation <k
tne lungs, his wife wrote to me yesterday to inform me of
“ d the letter will arrive this
quests me to go to Libourne.’ After a minute’s silence- «r
p™ l1 ' “6 I/ear that this letter when it arrives %il{
rfhl, LT ore s, 1 beg of you - <® w awaking, to tatom me
he to"*' 0111 ( especially tell that Id™
„ absent at the most more than twelve davs hecanne
C before.* d 7 t . 11 happen; 1 cannot see this till the even-
-tZtTi 11 ® awakened ker ’ 1 a‘l as she had directed me, insisting
account of her heaUh CeSS 7 ° £ “ er returMng ™ «*> 26th, on
“In the evening her husband sent me the letter
during her sleep; its contents were precisely those which
6 Bussiere bwd told me -” “Newnham’s An. Mag.” p.
Cases of a similar character to the foregoing conld
easily multiplied, but to the sceptic they would nrohnhiTr vfL
unavailing, and to the believer useless. Our object wm Lvp
been answered if we have succeeded in presenting the evidence
-of a mentai phenomenon, which finds its solution !n the parMlel
developments of Swedenborg. Our drift is all alone S
fac * B ” by “ laws - ’ Tb e **7 be doubted ot
by those who have witnessed nothing like them but we have
much less solicitude for those who, deny the facts than for
aose who, upon satisfactory proof, admit the fact? w
who have hitherto been ignorant of the laws. It will be’ seen
*f om follows that nothing more is develoDed in
the facts than the laws of spiritual existence gives us reason
iLn iCipate -, involved in the phenomena re Tte
+? e f Sr^ d principle that “man is a spirit as to his interiors ”
and that his spiritual nature “in” the body often mS-


tests itself according to the laws which govern it “cut” of the
body.
"The spirits who are thought of by others (as those who
have been in any degree acquainted together during the life
of the body) are present in a moment, when it is granted by
the Lord, and so' very near that they can hear and touch
each other, or at any little distance, notwithstanding they
might have been thousands of miles distant, yea, even at the
stars, the reason is, because distance of place does not operate
in the other life." —"A. C." p. 1274.
"All conjunction in the spiritual world is done by looking;
when any one there thinks concerning another from an affec-
tion of speaking with him, the other becomes present on
the spot; and one sees the other face to face; the like is
done when any one thinks concerning another from an affec-
tion of love; by this affection conjunction takes place, but
only presence takes place by the other; this is peculiar to
the spiritual world; the reason is because all there are
spiritual; it is otherwise in the natural world, In which all
are material; in the natural world, the like takes place with
men in the affections and thoughts of their spirit; but be-
cause in the natural world there are spaces, but in the spiritual
world spaces are only appearances, therefore in the latter
world that takes place actually which takes place in the thought
of any spirit."—“D. P." 29.
"Since angels and spirits are affections which are of love,
and thoughts thence, therefore neither are they in space and’
time hut only in. the appearance of them; the appearance of
space and time is to them according to the states of the
affections, and thence of the thoughts wherefore, when any-
one thinks about another from affection, with the intention
that he wishes to see him, or to speak with him, he is set
forthwith present. Hence it is, that spirits are present with
every man, who are in like affection with him; evil spirits with
him who is in the affection of like evil, and good spirits with
him who is in the affection of like good, and they are
so present as when one is included in society; space and
time make nothing towards presence, for the reason that
affection and thence thought are not in space and time; and
spirits and angels are affections; and thence thoughts.* That
it is so, has been given to know from a living experience
of many years, and also from this that I have spoken with
many after death, as well as with those who are in Europe
and its various kingdoms, as with those who were in Asia
and Africa and their various kingdoms; and they were all
me; wherefore if there had been space and time to them,
journeying and the time of Journeying would have intervened.
*ea, every man knows that from what is implanted in himself
or in his mind; which became evidenced to me by this,
that no one thought of any distance of space, when
J related what I have spoken with any one deceased in
Asia, Africa, or Europe; as, for example, with Calvin, Luther,
•Melancthon, or with any king, officer or priest, in a
distant country; and it did at all fall in their thoughts, how one
could) come to and be present with him, when yet lands and


seas intervene; from this it has also been manifest
to me, that no one thinks from space and time, when he
thinks concerning those who are in the spiritual world.”—
“D. P.” 50.
“Although all things in heaven appear in place and in space
just as in the world, still the angels have no notion and idea
of place and space. Because this cannot but appear as a
paradox, I wish to present the subject in a clear light, because
it is of great importance.
“All progressions in the spiritual world are made by changes
of the state of the interiors, so that progressions are nothing
else than changes of state; thus also I have been conducted
by the Lord into the heavens, and likewise to the earths in
the universe, and this as to the spirit, while the body remained
in the same place. Thus all the angels move; hence to them there
are no distances, and if there are not distances, neither
are there spaces, but instead of them states and their
changes. ,
“Because progressions are made thus, it is evident that
approximations are similitudes as to the state of the in-
teriors, and that removals are dissimilitudes. Thence it is
that those are near to each, other who are in a similar
state; and those at a distance ws>o are in a dissimilar
state, and that spaces in heaven are nothing else than ex-
ternal states corresponding to internal. It is from no
other source that the heavens are distinct from each other,
and also the societies of each heaven, and every one in the
society. Thence likewise it is, that the hells are entirely
separated from the heavens, because they are in a contrary
state.
“From this cause also it is, that in the spiritual world one
is exhibited as present to another, if he only intensely desires
his presence, for thus he sees him in thought, and puts
himself in his state; and conversely, that one is removed
from another as far as he is averse to him. And because
all aversion is from contrariety of the affections, and from
disagreement of the thoughts, thence it comes to pass, that
several who are in one place there appear to each other so*
long as they agree, but as soon as they disagree they disappear.”
—“H. & H.” 191-194.
“Interior sight in the spiritual world conjoins; interior sight
is thought, and in a society there, when several act as one,
and also in choirs, what one thinks another also thinks, thus
thought conjoins; and likewise when any one thinks of another,
he is presented to view, thus also thought conjoins.”—“A. C."
5975.
“Man at this day, to whom the interiors are closed, knows
nothing of these things which exist in the spiritual world or
heaven; he says indeed from the Word and from doctrine,
that there is a heaven, and that angels, who are there, are
in joy and in glory, and he knows nothing besides. He
wishes indeed to know how the case is there, but when he is
told, he still believes nothing, by reason that in heart he
denies the existence of things; when he wishes to know, it
is only because then he is in curiosity from doctrine, not in


faith, deny also in heart. But they who believe, procure to
themselves ideas concerning heaven, its joy and glory, from
various things, every one from such things as are of his own
science and. intelligence; and the simple from sensitive things
which are of the body.
“Nevertheless most persons do not apprehend that spirits
and angels have sensations much more exquisite than men
in the world; namely, sight, hearing, smelling, something
analogous to taste, and touch, and especially the delights of
•the affections. If they only believed that their interior essence
was a spirit, and that the body, together with its sensations
and members, is only adequate to uses in the world, and
that the spirits and its sensations and organs are adequate
to uses in the other life, then they would come of themselves,
and almost spontaneously into ideas concerning the state
of their spirits after death. For then they would think with
themselves, that his spirit is the very man himself who thinks,
and who lusts, who desires and is affected, and further that all
the sensitive, which appears in the body is properly of its
spirit, and of the body only by influx: and these things they
would afterwards confirm with themselves by many things, and
thus at length would be delighted with those things which are off
their spirit, more than those which are of their body.
In reality also this is the case, that it is not the body
which sees, hears, smells, feels, but its spirit; wherefore when
the spirit is freed from the body, it is then in its own
sensations, in which it had been when in the body, and indeed
in those much more exquisite; for corporeal things, because
respectively gross, rendered the sensations obtuse, and still
more obtuse, because it immersed them in earthly and worldly
things. ■
“This I can assert, that a spirit has much more exquisite
sight than a man in the body, and also hearing, and, what
will seem surprising, more exquisite sense of smell, and
especially sense of touch, for they see each other, hear each
other, and touch each other. This also he who believes a
life after death might conclude from this, that no life can he
given without sense, and that the quality of the life is according
to the quality of the sense; yea, that the intellectual is nothing
but an exquisite sense of interior things and the superior in-
tellectual of spiritual things; hence also the things which
are of the intellectual and of its perceptions are called the
internal senses. With the sensitive of man immediately after
death the case is this: As soon as a man dies,
and the corporeal things with him grow cold, he is raised
up into life, and then into all the state of all sensations, insomuch
that at first he scarcely knows otherwise than that hems still
in the body; for the sensations in which he is, lead him so to
believe. But when he perceives that he has more exquisite sen-
sations, and this especially when he begins to speak with
other spirits, he then takes notice that he is in another
life, and that the death of his body was the continuation of
the life of his spirit. I have spoken with two with whom
I had been acquainted, on the same day that they were
buried, and with one who saw through my eyes his own coffin


and bier, and inasmuch as he was in every sensation ins.
which he had been in the world, he talked with me about
the obsequies, when I was following his funeral, and
also about his body, saying, that they reject it because he him-
self lives.
“But it is to be known, that they who are in the other
life, cannot see anything which is in the world through the
eyes of any man; the reason why they could see through my
eyes was, because I am in the spirit with them, and at the
same time in the body with those who are in the world. And
it is further to be known, that I did not see those with whom
I discoursed in the other life, with the eyes of my body, hut
with the eyes of my spirit, and still as clearly and sometimes
more clearly, than with the eyes of my body, for, by the divine
mercy of the Lord, the things which are of my spirit have
been opened.
“But I am aware that the things which have been heretofore
said will not be believed by those who are immersed in the
corporeal, terrestrial, and worldly things, that is by such of
them as hold those things for an end, for these have no appre-
hension of those which are dissipated by death. lam aware also,
that neither will they believe, who have thought and inquired
much about the soul, and have not at the same time compre-
hended that the soul is man’s spirit, and that his spirit is his
very man which lives in the body. For these cannot conceive
any other notion about the soul, than that it is something cogi-
tative, or filmy, or ethereal, which only acts into the organic
forms of the body, and not into the purer forms which are of
its spirit in the body; and thus such that it is dissipated with
the body; and this is especially the case with those, who
have confirmed themselves in such notions by views puffed up
by the persuasion of their own superior wisdom.” —“A. C.”
4622.
“The divine omnipresence may be illustrated by the won-
derful presence of angels and spirits in the spiritual world.
In this world, because there is no space, but only an appear-
ance of space, an angel or a spirit may, in a moment,
become present to another, provided he comes into a similar
affection of love, and thence thought, for these two make
the appearance of space. That such is the piesence of all
there, was manifest to me from this, that I could see Afri-
cans and Indians there very near me, although they are so
many miles distant upon earth; nay, that I could become
present to those who are in the planets in other systems,
out of this solar system. By virtue of this presence, not of
place, but of the appearance of place, I have j conversed
with apostles, deceased popes, emperors and kings; with the
founders of the present church, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon;
and with others from distant countries. Since such is the
presence of angels and spirits, what limits can be set to the
Divine presence in the universe, which is infinite! The reason,
that angels and spirits have such presence, is because
every affection of love, and thence every thought of the under-
standing, is in space without space, and in time without time,
for anyone can think of a brother, relation, or friend: in


the Indies, and then have him, as it were, present
to him; in like manner he may be affected with their
love by recollection. By these things, because they are familiar
to every one, the divine omnipresence may in some degree,
he illustrated; and also by human thoughts, as when any
one recalls to his remembrance what he has seen upon
a journey in various places, he is, as it were, present at
those places. Nay, the sight of the body emulates that
«ame presence; the eye does not perceive distance, except
by intermediate objects, which, as it were, measure them.
The sun itself would be near the eye, nay, in the eye, unless
intermediate objects discovered that it is so distant; that
3 a so, writers on optics have also observed in their
hooks. Such presence has each sight of man, both intellectual
and corporal, because his spirit sees through his eyes.”—
‘"T.C.R.” 64.
With these citations before us, what doubt can possibly
remain, that Swedenborg has developed the rationale of the
manifestations of which we are now treating? Is not the
parallelism as obvious as the facts? and are not the facts sus-
tained by competent testimony? Our appeal, however,
23 to those who admit the facts, and to all such we propose
the query, whether the evidence is not conclusive, that Sweden-
borg has penetrated the mystery of these startling
phenomena? Has he not lifted the curtain and exposed to
view the spiritual machinery, so to speak, upon which these
marvellous results depend? Here are adequate causes assigned
lor obvious effects, and what is the ground, we ask,
cm which Swedenborg is to be written a “dreaming vision-
ary,” merely for affirming a psychology which completely
solves the problems of experience? Surely, if we behold in
Mesmerism phenomena which irresistibly refer themselves to a
spiritual world—if we admit that such a world exists—if the
mind of man, while sojourning in the body, is really a
denizen of that world —then we feel at liberty to claim that
Swedenborg has been admitted into it, and has laid open its
hidden laws. How could such a claim be substantiated other-
wise than by the very evidence which is set before our eyes,
to wit, the accordance of known facts with the asserted law?
We may here advert to another phase of the Mesmeric mar-
vels of a similar character to the preceding. It is known
that clairvoyant subjects are sometimes sent on an ideal
excursion to the moon or to the various planets of the system.
As to the accuracy of their reports we have nothing to say,
for we have no doubt that, owing to causes which Swedenborg
has also unfolded, there is frequently a large admixture of the
fanciful and the illusive in the impressions received by Mes-
meric subjects. This circumstance, however, does not coun-
tervail the equally clear evidence of truth in regard to many of
ifeeir statements, and in the present case we have to do with,
the simple possibility of the thing itself. Does the clairvoyant
state enable one to visit mentally the distant regions of the
universe? It is not, perhaps, easy to limit the capability dis-
closed in the foregoing extracts. If mind or spirit really rises
superior to all relation to space—if the sole condition of being


present to another person in any part of the globe be the
“wish” to that effect —then we may doubtless conceive that by
the same law one may be transported, so to speak, to the
remotest bounds of creation. On this subject Swendenborg
speaks as follows: —
"They who are in heaven can discourse and converse with
angels and spirits, who are not only from the earths in this
solar system, but also from other earths m the universe out
of this system; and not only with the spirits and angels there,
but also with the inhabitants, themselves, only, however, with
those whose interiors are open so that they can hear such
as speak from heaven: the same is the case with man, during
his abode in the world, to whom it has been given of the Lord
to discourse with spirits and angels; for man is a spirit as to
his interiors, the body which he carries about in the world only
serving him for the performing functions in this natural or
terrestrial sphere, which is the ultimate of all spheres. But it
is given to no one to discover that he can consociate with angels,
as to faith and love; nor can he so consociate, unless he have
faith and love in the Lord, for man is joined to the Lord by
faith and love to him, that is by truths of doctrine, and good
principles of life derived from him; and when he is joined to
the Lord he is secure from the assaults of evil spirits from
hell; with others the interiors cannot be so far opened, since
they are not in the Lord. This is the reason why there are
few at this day, to whom it is given to speak and converse with
angels: a manifest proof whereof is, that the existence of
spirits and angels is scarce believed at this day, much less that
they are attendant on every man, and that by them man has con-
nection with heaven, and by heaven with the Lord; still less is it
believed, that man, when he dies as to the body, lives a spirit,
even in a human form as before. . .
“Inasmuch as there are many at this day in the church
who have no faith concerning a life after death, and scarce any
concerning heaven, or concerning the Lord as being the God
of heaven and earth, therefore the interiors appertaining to
my spirit are open by the Lord, so that I am enabled during
my abode in the body, to have converse with the angels in
heaven and not only to discourse with them, but also to see
the' astonishing things of their kingdom and to describe the
same in order to check from henceforth the cavils of those
who urge- ‘Bid ever any one come from heaven and assure us
that such a place exists, and acquaint us with what is doing
there?’ Nevertheless. I am aware that they who m heart
have heretofore denied a heaven and a hell, and a life after
death will even still continue in the obstinacy of unbelief and
denial • for it is easier to make a raven white than to make
those believe who have once in heart rejected faith; the reason
is, because such persons always think about matters of faith
from a negative principle and not from an affirmative. May the
things however, which have been hitherto declared, and which
we have further to declare, concerning angels and spirits be
for the use of those few who are principled in faith! .■whilst
it is permitted, in order to bring others to somewhat ot
acknowledgment, to relate spch particulars, as delight and


engage the attention of persons desirous of knowledge: for
which purpose we shall now proceed to give an account of
123 i24 rtilS m s^arry heaven.”—“Earths in the Universe,” p.
The reason may indeed be declared why going, journeying,
sojourning have such significations, but that reason is
w. b ’+>, bat xt can hardly be received by those who do not know
ie case . ls with motions in the other life. Motions there
P r ogressions, are nothing else, because from no other
J than changes of state of life, which changes appear in
externals altogether as progressions from place to place: that
life- +• m be COI l? r1 ?®? fr° m much experience in the other
ml* a T£ wal J ed ther ® m c s P ir it with the inhabitants, and
i through, several of their abodes, and this notwith-
standing I had remained m the same place as to the body, Ii
have also discoursed with them as to how this could be and
hfJ e wi? i e ph n r. n f StrUCted ’ at - the / e are changes of the state
life, which cause piogressxons in the spiritual world* which was
SjeTaf tllat * P u iritS ’ b ? changes inducedtTJe'
aKn far wpotworu 0n blgb ’ and in a moment in the deep,
also far westward, and m a moment eastward and so forth But
as was said, this cannot fail to appear strlnge to him who knows
?h op?f 0 p?fa g rp OnC + ernmS life H. the Spiritual w °rld; for in That world
Si®? til? > ? aCOS ’ n °! tim ? s ’ but instea <* of them states of the
® tatGS - n exte ™ a l Produce an appearance altogether
living o T ir! l) rp g 7 reSSlollS +T, and ° f moti o n s; this appearance is as
lifp 1 the appe : arance of life itself, namely, that
iPJ I®’ 1 ®’ ai ? d thus ours, when yet it flows in from the Lord,
, t ° tbe ount . aia whence comes the all of life.” —“A. C.” 5605.
of n>P ctnfI eS -f 10 +^ S * th ® spiritual world are made by changes
pfq p th fb o L the , mte J lor f’ so that progressions are nothing
fhp T nrS S + S if °£ state; thus also 1 have been conducted by
the Lord into the heavens, and likewise to the earths in the
universe, and this as to the spirit, while the body remained in
the same place. Thus all the angels move; hence to them there
dls j; a . nc ® s ’ an( * if there are not distances, neither are there
spaces, but instead of them states and their changes.”—“H. & H.”
11 7<U.
The absolute truth of the revelations made in this depart-
ment cannot, of course, except in the case of Swedenborg, be
the ground of much confidence. As to him, we rest in the as-
surance of his reliability, because he has clearly developed
the law which ascertains' the possibility of the fact, and be-
cause he has given so much evidence of truthfulness in other
respects. As to others, we confide in their reports only so far as
they agree with his. As a general fact, however, we deem their
statements of. little value, from the circumstance that we are
convinced their state is one which renders them liable to num-
berless involuntary delusions from sources which Swedenborg
has fully disclosed.
• on 3, e whole it: must, we think, be admitted, that the of the
incredible as it invests the spirit with the power of emerging
from the body, and in that state of possessing a has hitherto
shrouded in darkness the deep arena of the spirit-world. We
awake with amazement to the conviction that what have hitherto


24 MYSTERIES OF CLAIRVOYANCE.
SSi A SSS*«
sfa «5?23
SSr« at N0 e ri t" muffir “ought to view
fn the toregotog exSfcan give the reader any adequate
SSKJk“ it is o/the Philosophy of tte world,audmore
tteTme havehitterto prevented, and will probably
ss am rrsrn|^£e^H?=
tmcMp'S.’ demandswon''life/’ It discoveraheaven and
hell in too close proximity with the human heart in its rubng
loves—to allow the hope of its general rece P^J lU “ d °Jus
ments of the Divine Providence have
changes in the state of the general mind of Christendom,
reign of an over-spreading sensualism mult first be shaken
to Centre, before the plea of a spiritual PhitoaoPhy can Kaiu
a hearing. But it would prove us recreant to the solemn interests
of Truth did we permit ourselves to despair of its final triump -
will eventually come with resistless rebuke to all the falsities
which hive opposed its progress and laden with abundance of
wcasiTie to its humble and hearty recipients. , ,
is literally clear-sightedness; it is a French word
tn e?o7ess me faculty manifested by magnetic somnambulists,
to express ine , things at the most remote distance
fJoSTth? body and hid by millions of opaque barriers from the
from the body, a a somna mbulist at Providence, for in-
sight of P er ®h n ® h tho body an d travel (in spirit) in a few
stance, would lea a fter eyeing all the particulars of Queen
seconds to Englan , dress would relate the exact descrip-
Victoria's householdl and an*£maa re ,
«on audibly, 1 any P® rso “ 0 “““ t f a ordinary feature in the
This prop J-j. pleuze ba a given no theory of explanations, it
“mills I n n d ac a o S onn« ZX & his disciples in this country «•
elsewhere. clairvoyance was evinced by Misa
A very extraordinary case Browellj a very eminent
Parker, who is JL f animal magnetism at Providence; the
physician and P appeared in many of the newspapers,
aZSeneVmnch Kp"e particulars below are turned
by ..° h r e of a mile from my taw.
MuVaTarA =e


in what room, she replied in the third room back from the street.
She was then requested to describe the situation of the furniture
in it, in order to discover whether she had got into the right
place, and whether her clairvoyance might be trusted to at that
time; she described it very exactly,
“I then told her my patient had been sick a long time, and
desired her to examine him and tell what the disease was
T “She said: ‘He looks so bad, I do not like to do it.’ I replied:
A ever mind that; it looks bad to you, because you have not been
accustomed to looking at the interior of a body.’
“As I supposed him to be affected with a diseased liver, and
with indigestion arising from a diseased state of the stomach,
I asked her to look at the stomach to see if that was diseased; she
answered, ‘No.’
*“ls the liver diseased?’ ‘No.*
‘Well, examine the whole intestinal canal, and see if there is
any disease there.’ ‘I do not see any,’ said she.
‘Examine the kidneys.’ ‘Nothing is the matter with them/
Not knowing what other part to call her attention to I re-
quested her to look at every part of him.
“After some little time, she says, ‘His spleen is swelled; it is
enlarged.’
His spleen ! said I; ‘when we speak of a person who is
spleeny, we suppose he has an imaginary complaint. What do
yon mean?’
“She said, ‘The part ‘‘called’’ the spleeen, is enlarged.
“ ‘How do you know it is enlarged ?’
" ‘lt is a great deal larger than yours.’
" ‘Do you see mine?’ ‘Yes.’
“ ‘How large is his spleen?’
“ ‘lt is a great deal longer and thicker than your hand.’
T then asked her to put her hand where the spleen is
situated. She immediately placed her hand over the region
of the spleen.
“I then asked her what the shape of the stomach was; she
replied that it was like a flower in the garden. I was not ac-
quainted with that flower, and do not recollect the name she
gave it.
“I then requested her to recollect all about this, saying I
wished to talk with her about it when she awoke.
“After she came out of the somnambulic state, she was asked
whether she remembered haying examined the sick person. She
remembered it.
" <What part did you tell me was diseased?’ After a little con-
sideration, she replied, ‘I believe I told you the spleen is en-
larged/
" ‘How came you to call it the spleen?’
*“I do not know.’
** ‘DM you ever hear any description of the internal organs, or
see any plates of them?’ ‘No.’
M 'Should you know the plate representing the stomach, if you
were to see it?’
“ *1 think I should if it looked like it.’
u ‘I will go into the library and bring out some plates, to see
■whether you know the internal organs.’ s


“While I was gone into the library, she said to a lady present,
‘Every once in a while I saw fluids pass frgm his stomach into his
bowels.’ . , , .
“On returning with the volume of plates, in order to ascertain
whether she really distinguished the different organs, I showed
her a plate somewhat resembling the stomach, and asked her
if that was what she saw for the stomach? She said, ‘No.’ Turn-
ing to several plates in succession, she declared that neither of
them resembled the stomach.
“Then turning to the true plate, as if accidentally, while throw-
ing open the leaves, intending to pass it by unless she noticed
it, she immediately cried out, ‘That’s it, that’s what I saw for
the stomach.'
“I have then conversed with her in relation to the other viscera,
and she gave a very correct description of them, as she had done
in her sleep. I asked her if she had conversed upon the subject,
or seen any plates of the internal organs. She declared she never
had. . ,
“Seven days after this, the patient was taken more seriously
ill, and died on Saturday, the third day following.
“On Monday a ‘post-mortem’ examination took place; pre-
vious to which I invited all the physicians whom I could in the
city. . .
“Eighteen persons were present, of whom sixteen were phy-
sicians.
“I then stated all the particulars of the examination by. the
somnambulist patient; and requested the physicians to examine
the body to see if they could discover the diseased spleen from
external examination. They, with one voice, declared they
could not. „ ~
"I then opened the body, and to the utter astonishment of the
physicians present, found the spleen so enlarged as to weigh
‘fifty-seven ounces.’ Its usual weight is from ‘four’ to ‘six’
ounces. . , „
“No other disease was perceptible, except a general inflamma-
tion, which no doubt came on about three days before his
death.” ... . . . .
Two very extraordinary cases of clairvoyance were related in
a N.Y. paper some time ago:—
“Animal Magnetism. —We have had our time and times of
laughing at animal magnetism. We shall laugh at it no more.
There is something awfully mysterious in the principle, beyond
the power of man to fathom or explain. Being in Providence on
Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, the 26th, 27th, and 28th of
August an opportunity was afforded us of seeing and taking part
in a series of experiments, by a young blind lady, while under
the magnetic influence, the result of which was not only mar-
vellous in our eyes, but absolutely astounding. The exhibition was
not public, and the parties were all people of the first respecta-
bility, professional and otherwise. Having heard much upon the
. subject and disbelieved all, the experiments were made before
a private circle of ladies and gentlemen, at our own urgent
solicitation. . .
“We have written a narrative of the circumstances, comprising
some fifty or sixty pages of foolscap; and we venture to say,


MYSTERIES OP CLAIRVOYANCE. 27
that nothing hitherto published upon that subject, is so wonder-
ful by far, as the facts of which we were witness —all of which
we saw and part of which we were. We shall publish our narra-
tive, on taking it to Providence for examination, provided we
can obtain permission of the parties—who have hitherto avoided
publications, or public exhibitions.
‘‘One surprising incident we will mention. On Sunday, while
we were in Providence, a small package was received from Mr.
btephen Covill, of Troy, containing, as he wrote to his friend
a note, which he wished Miss B. to read, while under the magnetic
influence, without breaking the seal, if she could. Mr. D. had
been induced to try this experiment, in consequence of having
heard of extraordinary performances of this kind—which, of
course, he doubted. The package, or letter, was evidently com-
posed of several envelopes. The outer one was composed of
thicK blue paper. On Sunday evening Miss 8., who, it must be
ocrne in mind, when awake, is blind, was put into a magnetic
slumber, and the letter given to her with instructions to read
it. She said she would take it to bed with her, and read it
before morning. On Monday morning she gave the reading as
follows: —
“ ‘No other but the eye of Omnipotence can read this, in this
envelopment.—lB37/
“We made a memorandum of this reading, and examined the
package containing, as she said, the sentence. She said, then
on Monday morning, that there was one or two words between
the word ‘envelopment’ and the date, as we understood her
which she could not make out. We examined the seal with the’
closest scrutiny. The seal of Mr. Covill was unbroken, and to
turn the letter, or to read it without opening, with human eves
was impossible. ’.
“After our return to the city, viz.: On Wednesday last we
addressed a letter to Mr. Covill, to ascertain whether the
reading of the blind somnambulist was correct. The following
is his reply:— 6
„ <T , ' __ “Troy, Sept. 1, 1827.
Dear Sir—Yours of yesterday I received by this morning’s
mail and as to your inquiry relative to the package submitted
to Miss B. while under the magnetic influence, I have to say
the package came to hand yesterday. The sentence had been
written by a friend, and sealed by him at my request, and in such
manner as was supposed could not have been read by any
human device, without breaking the seal. We think the seals
have not been broken until returned. The sentence as read by
Miss B. is: “No other than the eye of Omnipotence can read
this,, m this envelopment.—lB37.” And, as written in the
original, on a card, and another card placed on the face of the
writing, and enclosed in a thick blue envelope, was: “No other
than the eye of Omnipotence can read this sentence in this
envelope.—Troy, N. York, August, 1827.”
“ ‘Respectfully yours, &c., STEPHEN COVILL.
“PS.—We have just received a note from Providence, with
permission to publish our own narrative. But, as it i 3 very
long, and equally complex and wonderful, we shall first take
it to Providence, for the examination of those who were pre-


sent on the occasion, our aim being scrupulous exactness. We
also left a note for the blind lady to read, sealed with seven seals.
We have received it this morning, with seals unbroken, with
the answer written on the outside. This answer is correct,
as far as it goes. We were in great haste at the tune of
preparing the note, and having the odd title of a queer old book
in our pocket, printed in small Italic letter, we wrote a part
of the note with a pencil, and stuck on two and a halt lines
of the small Italic printing, with a wafer. The note written,
and printed, as we left it, was in these words:
"The following is the title, equally quaint and amusing, o£ a
book which was published in England, in the time ol Oliver
Cromwell: ‘Eggs of charity layed by the Chickens of the
Covenant, and boiled by the waters of Divine Love. Take ye
£iud 621 t *
“The following is the answer, sent by Miss B - through
an intimate friend: . . .
“ ‘The following is a title, equally amazing (or amusing) and
quaint, of a book published in England in the time of Oliver
Cromwell: —
“ ‘Eggs of Charity-—•* , , .
"Miss B. does not know whether the word is amazing 01
amusing. Something is written after the ‘eggs of charity, which
she cannot make out. , . w .
“Thus much for the present. We make no comments, wua t
we know to be true, we fear not to declare. Facts sustained
by the evidence of our senses, we trust we ever shall have the
boldness to publish. In regard to our narration, it is alike
wonderful and inexplicable. As Paulding’s black witch 111
Koningsmarke says—‘l’ve seen what I’ve seen —1 know what I
JqjOW.* **
Many such facts have been witnessed in this country and
could be attested by the most respectable citizens, who were
eye witnesses of the facts, and are men of veracity, who are
eminent in learning, science, and in piety.
SPIRIT MIRRORS.
Pull instructions how to make one, in which are paid to foe
seen Forms, Objects, Visions, and most Beautiful Scenes of
Worlds unknown to earth mortals. There are hundreds who
have seen visions float over the black-sea face of the peerless
mirror. When wishing to see into the future, gaze steadily
into its depths. The first things seen are clouds which slowly
give way to a vision, and pictures appear as desired. Motnd
a lump of clay a foot square, “slightly convex.” Dry, and bake
it hard, and smooth its surface as perfectly as possible. Then
press pasteboard on it until all is smooth and even. Now make
another, exactly to match it, concave. Between these two
place a sheet of fine plate-glass. Bake till it conforms to the
required shape. Make two alike. Between these two, cemented
one-fourth inch apart, pour black ink till full; seal the apertye
left for that purpose, and you have a very good substitute for
a magnetic mirror. Else take a glass saucer filled half full of
black ink, and you will have as good a mirror as Lane saw so
successfully worked in Egypt. A crystal glass of pure water has


often served a good purpose to the same end; and, in fact, there
are numberless forms of substitutes for the genuine mirror,
some of which are very good., The rules and laws govern-
ing these substitutes are precisely the same as those of genuine
glasses.
RECIPE TO INCREASE THE HUMAN MEMORY.
Dr. Will Bulleyn says, that if snails are broken from their
shells and soaked in white wine with oil and sugar, and a little
a ®p m^e( I on the forehead each night, the memory can be so
strengthened that events, even of small importance occurring
many years back, can be fully remembered. He says, also if
snails pounded with camphor, and a little flour be applied, will
draw thorns or pricks from the flesh; being also good for many
poisoned wounds.
THE NEW ART TO MAKE OLD AND YOUNG PEOPLE
HANDSOME.
Take two drachms of borax, one drachm of Roman alum,
one drachm of camphor, one ounce white sugar candy, and
one pound of ox-gall; mix these altogether and keep stirring
two or three times a day for two weeks until the liquid is clear
and transparent, then strain through filtering paper and bottle'
for use, adding sufficient ottar of roses to give it am elegant
perfume; with a little of this anoint the face, hands, and arms
once or twice a week.
THE MORMON SECRET TO PROLONG LIFE, AS TAUGHT
BY THEIR CELEBRATED PROPHET.
Take dove’s foot, arkangel ivy, red brier, rosebuds, red sage,
celandine, and woodbine, equal parts, all chopped fine and
mixed with white wine and pure honey, a piece of alum, glass
powdered fine, the size of a pea, also a little of the aloes hepatica,
slowly distilled in a limebecke of pure glass or tin; keep
this corked one year, then take two drops night and
morning.
TO FIREPROOF YOUR HANDS.
Equal parts of oil of petroleum, rock-oil, fine lard, mutton tal-
l°w, and quick lime are to be mixed together until forming one
substance. Distil it over burning charcoal, and save the water
; which results. It can be burnt on the hand without any harm
being done. v
MAGIC WRITING—LETTERS THAT WILL COME AND GO AT
COMMAND.
Write-on a mirror with French chalk, wipe it with a hand-
kerchief, and the letters will vanish, but can be called into
view by breathing on them, at a considerable distance of
time.
TO HAVE NATURAL FLOWERS BLOOM FOREVER.
Ctit off the best-formed buds about to open with seissors,
leaving their stalks a quarter of an inch long; cover the cut
with wax. Let the buds dry, wrap up each separately in very
ory Paper, and put away in a box in a dry place. At any time
during the winter you can take them out, clip off the waxed stem
4ind, on dipping them into water, in which has been put a little
salt, or nitre, they will bloom.


TO PIERCE A BOARD WITH A CANDLE.
Put a candle-end in a musket, and an ordinary enarge of
powder will drive it clear through a plank, not too thick, as
quickly as a bullet. MOCK UGHTNING .
To olav a practical joke on someone, prepare a small, dark
room withoufmany wtndows to let in light or air, by bdrnmg
spirits of wine and camphor in a bowl, until they have been
consumed Whoever enters the room with a light will be
saluted by a flash of lightning, without either he or the room
being injured in the faintest degree.
A COLOR WHICH APPEARS AND WILL DISAPPEAR AT
WILL. . ,
Take a glass bottle; put into it some volatile alkali, m which
you have dissolved copper filings to produce a blue .liquw.
Prpqprit the bottle to someone to cork, jesting a Lttle with him,
STS. Se SSf surprise of the company it will he observed
that the color disappears as soon as theGorkisputin lou
easily make it reappear by uncorking the bottle, wmeh does
not seem the least surprising part of the matter.
ANIMAL MAGNETISM.
The origin of Animal Magnetism is coeval fl With the creation
of Eve. The extremely subtle and invisible fluid, which, when,
in contact with the animal brain, i 3 capable of p P e j £or “ l J|
the phenomena of this wonderful science, had existed nnllio
on millions of years anterior to the creation of man, and is
probably coeval with the birth of the trilobite or
creation itself. The sun’s rays must pass through s 1
medium to cause the phenomenon of hght—oO this invisible
fluid continued unknown, though not inactive, untJ some of 1
inherent properties were developed in passing through a suitabl
medium which was found to be the complicate and delicate b.ain
of the highest order in the organized forms of creation.
The smallest insect, the most simple form of vegetation,
nud the more noble formation of matter in man, were all mediums
through wh£h this fluid ever has, and still continues to flow,
nrodulin- all the symmetry, beauty, and phenomena of nature,
which to superficial minds, are scarcely noticeable, because
h ’ „ f L c h frequent and incessant occurrence, and are
c£ea wtth the pSmena of the earth, only the first time
fhP hr?in receives their impression by the force of that mysterious
S,m th^m l£ rh the medium of the senses. A child is in mute
e“Ly a? the first” oundot the spring-rattle. He sees it: the
mysterious fluid pervading all space, instantly impresses on his
brain through the delicate lens of the eye, the form of the
instrument f?om which such strange notes hadJ™ d Ce ®nfanafo
teaDS with joy when he perceives it is made of wood and anaio
gous to other forms of things, long since famihwr to hw srases.
by repeated examination of the impression of smflar objects re-
tained in the vast storeroom of the brain He with p deligbt
the nlav-thing and wonders that an instrument so simple in its
conaKtfon coS hl?e caused him to wonder• when the stnag
music caused by its vibrations were first tiansmitted to n


ear. He continues the manipulations and finds amusement in
the harmony of sounds, until the sympathy of the nervous system,
that accurate tuning key of nature’s wind-harp, softens the
harsli tones of the rattle; when the whole forms a perfect chord
in the brain, which continues to amuse the senses, until mono-
tony fatigue*, the imagination, arid a new and more curious
phenomenon is sought for, probably in the decomposition by
fire of the very toy which once sent forth such strange sounds
to the ear. He scarcely ceases to wonder at the flame issuing
from his lighted torch, when he is called to the window to scan
a still more marvellous phenomenon in the air, “a kite! a
i lte - . a P a kite, buoyed aloft with a simple thread, is now
the object or mute astonishment, followed by loud demonstra-
tions of joy, as the mysterious fluid conveys through the eager
mstenaea eye to the brain, a perfect impression of the object
which first held him mute in astonishment.
The most learned among men are hut children in embryo,
when their researches in science are compared with the vast
and unlimited field which remain unexplored. Innumerable are
the forms imprinted on the brain in the life-time of man Each
form was a phenomenon; each in turn became familiar; the
whole becomes monotonous, and the imagination, aided by the
inventive genius of the brain, seeks among the countless millions
of forms m creation for some new phenomena to feed the insa-
tiate vortex of familiar monotony.
In the eager desire to reach after phenomena, the reasoning
faculties are dormant, and man is capable only of admiring the
wonderful effect on his brain without knowing the cause which
produced it; when with less eagerness and more reason man
could refer to his brain which ever retains the impression re-
ceived from innumerable objects, among which may be discovered
forms sufficiently analagous to reconcile the most wonderful phe-
nomenon to the known and familiar laws of nature continually
in operation around us; so the effects of Animal' Magnetism
continued to be seen, felt and admired in its various modifications,
long before it received a name among the sciences of the earth.
In a subsequent chapter, I will give the “theory” which har-
monizes and reconciles all the phenomena attending this science,
and show the natural causes continually operating to produce
it. _ I will, likewise, divest it of every supernatural attribute
which its votaries and opposers are so zealous in ascribing to
it. Enough for the present chapter will show its origin, its
rise, and developments, under the various wrongly applied
names of charms, sorcery, beguilements, fortune-telling by the
Gipsies, and witchcraft of the ancient and moderns.
The same fluid, which now unperceived by the keenest eye,
is flowing through all organised matter, supporting life, when
in a just equilibrium, and producing the effects called Animal
Magnetism, when forced from its natural channel, was in exist-
ence from the creation, and commenced its unnatural effects
on our race in the Garden of Eden. The beguilement by the
serpent was merely the effect of this mysterious fluid operating
on the brain and nervous system of Eve. The same fluid held
Adam in magnetic sleep when he committed the unholy deed,
for which we, his posterity, are doomed to suffer as penance.


The snake at all time has used the same fluid in subduing the
feathered tribe. The charm attributed to this animal, is the
self-same magnetism which is now the subject of wonder in.
its effects, on the brain of civilised man. The sorcerers o t
India knew the power of this fluid, and used it for the vilest
purposes of deception. Witchcraft in all countries was a branch of.
Animal Magnetism; it was the effect of the magnetic fluid,
called a “volition of the will,” emanating from the witch by the
animal force of the nerves; the “bewitched” was the needle
obeying the will of the magnet, and exhibiting all the phenomena
common to the present science of Animal Magnetism. The point
ing downwards of a crotched stick to indicate a stream of water
flowing through the earth; the rat-catcher’s charm and the
■soothing power possessed by many of curing scalded and burned
flesh are volitions of the will, and modified branches of this
heretofore intricate science.
The Gipsies, as a community, probably knew more of the
astonishing power to be derived from the magnetic fluid than
any collective race of beings on the globe. Their accurate pre-
dictions of future events are now subjects of history, and.
thousands of the most respectable inhabitants of Europe have
testified to the perfect fulfilment of events predicted by this
people. Their origin and habits of life are as curious as their
magnetic phenomena. It is supposed that they came. from.
Hindostan, from the fact that their language resembles m all
its parts Hindostanee, notwithstanding they have been dispersed
and wandering nearly four centuries in various parts of the
earth. Like the witches in our own country, the Gipsies have
been persecuted in civilized Europe. In 1530 we find penal
statutes against them in England; a subsequent Act made it death
for them to continue in the kingdom; and it is recorded, to the
disgrace of England, that thirteen were executed for this offence
alone, but a few years prior to the restoration; this cruel Act
was not repealed until 1783; when the science of Animal Mag-
netism was sufficiently improved to show the injustice and
inhumanity of legislating against the laws which Nature. designed
to be established for some benevolent purposes to mankind. The
Gipsies were expelled from France in the middle of the sixteenth
century and Spain in 1591. Though'expelled by statutes, they
have not been entirely extirpated in any country; they are
still numerous in Asia, and the northern parts of Europe, and
their collective numbers are estimated at nearly a million of
souls Though scattered over the Globe, they retain their similar
and original character and habits; their principal business is
fortune-telling, in which they succeed to an extraordinary degree,
by the aid of the magnetic fluid, which they are so long accus-
tomed to use, that they far surpass the best magnetic somntam-
bulists of this country. , . . . .
Grellman, who wrote the history of the Gipsies, and indeed
all persons who have been much acquainted with the habits and
manners of this interesting race, regard them as a very singular
phenomena; they are not changed by climate, and the sword has
not been able to extirpate them. In all countries they are the
name wandering tribe, living in small huts, and though subject
to the laws of the country in which they reside, they never the- -


MYSTERIES OF MAGNETIC CLAIRVOYANCE. 3$
less have their own government as a community, the head of
Lbich is termed “Queen of the Gipsies.” Many of them attain
very advanced age. Margaret Finch, who died at Beckenham
in Kent Oct. 24th, 1740, lived to the extraordinary age of one
v.undred and nine years. Margaret held the title of queen. After
travelling nearly a century, she settled in Norwood, where her
extraordinary powers in Animal Magnetism (denominated for-
tune-telling” by the superficial philosophers and unlettered
people), attracted, as it does in all countries, numerous visitors
of the most respecftable families in the country.
“From a habit of sitting on the ground, with her chin resting
on her knees, the sinews at length became so contracted that
ske could not assume any other position. After her death, they
were obliged to enclose her in a deep, square box. Her funeral
was attended by two mourning coaches; a sermon was preached
on the occasion, and a great concourse of people attended the
ceremony. Her portrait now adorns the sign-po3t of a hotel in.
Nomood called the Gipsey House. In an adjoining cottage,
resides to this day, the grand-daughter of Queen Margaret; she
inherits the title of queen, and has reached a very advanced
age.” She is the«niece of Queen Bridget, who was buried at
Dulwich, in 17G8. She inherits the knowledge of the magnetic
fluid, and continues to practise with great success. She is unlet-
tered, like all the race of this extraordinary people, and there-
fore her powers are sufficiently systematised to rank in the
sciences, and though denominated “fortune-telling' by some,
and “supernatural revelations” by others, it is, nevertheless, a.
branch and most constituent part of the science of Animal
M gLc*HotiS33l«
A very extraordinary feature in the magnetic power of the
Gipsies seems to have escaped altogether the notice of scientific
men, and Animal Magnetizers in particular. I allude to the great,
difference in the manipulations or process to produce magnetic
somnambulism; it is well known by all who have witnessed
experiments in Animal Magnetism, that the somnambulic sleep
is produced by the volition of the will, as it is termed, from the
magnetizer, and there requires “two persons" to produce a mag-
netic somnambulist. When it is equally well known by all whft
have had the pleasure of witnessing the Gipsy experiments, that
each one within themselves, is both the magnetizer and the
magnetized, without any fluid whatever emanating from a second
person; the volition of each will instantly fbrms its own brain
into a somnambulist, who can not only travel instantly to any part
of the globe, and with an extraordinary power of clairvoyance
tell the situation of things and passing events, but likewise look,
into futurity for hundreds and even thousands of years, and
predict with much accuracy the time, place, and circumstances to
be connected with extraordinary events. The pages of history
are prolific in the fulfilment of such predictions. I will select
one from the thousands on record to confound the most scep-
tical opposer of the science, and carry conviction to the must
stubborn unbelievers, of a fluid which has existed m all times
and in all ages, and is constantly offering to our senses the proof
of its power, when directed by a skilful, magnetic somnamubulist.
The case I would offer is that of the Empress Josephine, tha


consort of Napoleon. Her character stands above the reach,
of suspicion, as regards an extenuation of the extraordinary
prophecy; and its equally extraordinary fulfilment is too well
known by all persons, to require any extracts on my part from
history, to prove it. I will relate the circumstances in Josephine's
own words, and, reader, if you are an unbeliever in Animal
Magnetism, observe well your own emotions, while perusing the
prophecy, you will feel the very hairs rise from your head,
caused by the transmission of the same magnetic fluid which
enabled the sable African when in St. Domingo, to predict for
years in advance, the events connected with the history of
France, equally as important and extraordinary as the fall of the
ancient Jerusalem. Read it; it is from her, who, under the most
trying situations and circumstances, proved the most noble
as she was the most amiable of her sex.
“One day, some time before my first marriage, while taking
my usual walk, I observed a number of negro girls assembled,
■around an old woman, engaged in telling their fortunes. I drew
near to observe their proceedings. T 1
me, uttered a loud exclamation, and a
hand. She appeared to be under the gi
at these absurdities, as I thought them
fortunes. I drew
ibyl, on beholding
y force seized my
igitation. Amused,
ed her to proceed,
saying: ‘So you discover something extraordinary in my destiny?*
•—‘Yes.’—‘ls happiness or misfortune to be my lot?’ ‘Misfortune.
Ah stop! !—and happiness too!’—‘You take care not to commit
yourself, my good dame; your oracles are not the most intel-
ligible.’—‘l am not permitted to render more clear,’ said the
woman, raising her eyes with a mysterious expression towards
heaven. ‘But to the point,’ replied I, for my curiosity began to
get excited; ‘what read you concerning me in futurity?’—‘What
do I see in the future? You will not believe me if i speak.’
’Yes, indeed, I assure you. Come, my good mother, what am
I to fear and hope?’—‘On your own head be ill then: Listen: You
will be married soon; that union will not be happy; you will
become a widow, and then—then you will be “Queen of France'”
Some happy years will be yours; blit you will die in an hospital
amid civil commotion.’
“On concluding these words,” continued Josephine, “the old
woman burst from the crowd, and hurried away as fast as her
3imbs, enfeebled by age, would permit. I forbade the bystanders
to molest or banter the pretended prophetess on this ‘ridiculous
prediction’; and took occasion from the seeming absurdity of the
whole proceeding, to caution the young negresses how they gave
heed to such silly matters. Henceforth, I thought of the affair
only to laugh at it with my relatives. But afterward, when my
husband had perished on the scaffold, in spite of my better judg-
ment, the prediction forcibly recurred to my mind after a lapse
of years; and though I was myself then in prison, the transaction
daily assumed a less improbable character, and I ended by re-
garding the fulfilment as almost a matter of course.”
The event of this extraordinary prophecy is well known. Her
second marriage was to General Napoleon Bonaparte, 9th March.
1796. On the 18th May, 1804, was fulfilled the prophecy of
Queen of France,” and the circumstances attending her death
'Me equally well known. All France had been a “slaughter-


bouse,” and all France was an “hospital” at the time of her
black woman, like Gipsies, was capable within herself
of controlling the magnetic fluid; she was both the magnetizer
and somnambulist; she required no assistance from a second
oerson to put her asleep. She was able by her own will to draw
tfle magnetic fluid from remote space and even from futurity,
. hrough her own nervous system and brain, which thereby re-
ceived an impression of all things past, present and future, which
could readily by the assistance of speech, be made known to the
inquirer, who, for want of a true philosophical reasoning, would
be unable to see the analogous workings of the magnetic fluid
in objects around him, and lost in amazement, would pronounce
the oracle a supernatural phenomenon, and the magnetic som-
nambulist or fortune-teller in concert with some unknown and
mysterious power.
This superiority in the Gipsy and African sorcerers over the
more scientific magnetizers, induced me to pursue with more
zeal my inquiries in Animal Magnetism. I admire simplicity,
and have generally observed that Nature’s most perfect works
are always most simple. I planned my experiments, with a
view to ascertain if the somnambulist could not magnetize her-
self, and my efforts were crowned with the most perfect success.
The process is extremely simple, and everyone who will read
these subsequent chapters, no matter what may be the state of
his or her nervous system, or age, can be a Somnambulist and
Magnetizer within themselves, without the aid of a second per-
son, and perform all the phenomena common to Animal Mag-
netism. - ...
In describing a few of the various forms under which the mag-
netic phenomena have appeared, since the serpent’s conquest
in Eden, until it assumed a name among the sciences, I would
notice the phenomenon called Trance, frequently developed at
protracted meetings, for religious rites in churches, and more
frequently in the forest, under the name of camp meetings. The
trances are too well known to need much description from me in,
this place. I will notice them more fully, when I explain the
causes which produce it. „
It is the effect of the same mysterious fluid; the person affected
by it suddenly falls in a magnetic sleep; they are then mag-
netic somnambulists, and perform all the phenomena peculiar
to Animal Magnetism; their spirit frequently leaves the body,
and, after traversing the confines of earth, returns to its caso
of organized clay, and there, through the organs of speech,
relate to the wondering crowd all the incidents actually occurring
at that moment, perhaps thousands pf miles distant, in some
tavern or convent, secured by walls and doors of cemented -
and iron, impenetrable to sight or animal strength of morlala
in possession of the ordinary functions of life.
Even more they have been known in the short space of an
hour, to travel in spirit to the regions of punishment and reward
for the dead, and, on awaking, have related the cheering ana
heart-rending scenes to thousands of the most respectable wit-
nesses, many of whom are preachers and can testify to th»'
frequent occurrence of such facts. The phenomena known aa~


* s * n trance quite as remarkable as that ex*
oibited in the usual magnetic sleep, and even far exceeds that of
reading a letter through various envelopes of paper, or of tell-'
mg the time by a clock, in a remote or adjoining building or
room.
Another Class of phenomena which belongs to this science is
the ‘ clairvoyance’' exhibited by natural somnambulists. A very
extraordinary case occurred in Springfield, Massachusetts, in
June, 1833, and continued for nearly one year. My readers are
undoubtedly aware that I refer to the case of Miss Jane C Rider
A very scientific description of her case has been published by
Professor L. W. Belden, M.D., her attendant physician. I will
hereafter show the cause of this phenomenon, and for the pre-
sent will merely cite the words of Dr. Belden, to prove tha
"clairvoyance” of Miss Rider.
"On Nov. 10th, it was proposed to ascertain whether she could
read with her eyes closed. She was seated in a corner of the
room, the lights were placed at a distance from her, and so
screened as to leave her in almost entire darkness. In this
situation she read with ease a great number of cards, which were
presented to her, some of which were written with a pencil, and
so obscurely, that in a faint light no trace could be discovered
by common eyes. She told the date of coins, even when the
figures were 'obliterated.' A visitor handed her a letter, with
the request that she would read the motto on the seal, which,
she readily did, although several persons present had been un-
able to decipher it with the aid of a lamp. The whole of this time,
the eyes were, to all appearance perfectly closed.
She fell asleep while I was prescribing for her, and her caap
having now excited considerable interest, she was visited during
that and the following day by probably more than a hundred
people. To this circumstance, undoubtedly, is to be attributed the
length of the paroxysm, for she did not wake till Friday morn-
ing, forty-eight hours after the attack.
"During this time she read a variety of cards, written and
presented to her by different individuals; told the time by
watches, and wrote short sentences.
"For greater security, a second handkerchief was sometimes
placed below the one which she constantly wore over her eyes
but apparently without causing any obstruction to the vision’
•She also repeated with great propriety and distinctness, several
pieces of poetry, some of which she had learned in childhood
but had forgotten, and others which she had merely read several
Tears since, without having committed them to memory. A
colored girl came in and seated herself before her; she was "asked
if she knew that lady; she smiled and returned no answer. Some
one said: ‘ha3 she not?’ Jane laughed heartily, and said, T
should think she was somewhat tanned.’”
The high respectability of Miss Rider, and probity arul un-
doubted science of Dr. Beldon, precludes the possibility of
doubt in the case referred to. The only “error,” which is common
to "all” the preceding cases, was attributing the phenomena to
some special supernatural cause, instead of classing them where
they certainly belong, as a branch of the science of Animal Mag-
netism; which can he clearly demonstrated by the well-known


, ,„ ws which govern the universe. It is left for met
.and analogo which I hope to accomplish so clearly, that
to perform that task, which! nop pergoas be able ftt a
to Tange all the phenomena produced by the magnetic
tiU x i( l Ull f^i?R S iiSti 0 c P ed r a tI few of the various phenomena produced
preducld by certain^“SeSeTwi“d„ ervousTrtSdbUtty. Ed
the fluid, supposed to be transmiue y henomenon received the
lations and volition of wifi. dhis new pn - l ical effects
name of Animal Magnetism, employing
being produced by the W 1^ of tn ai ;”“ gives the magnetic
a fluid, supposed analogous to that whicn gives
property to iron. - _ brQad fie id for philosophical
by^K^^
S S T m“y.
man. The superstitious required Qf itg m ,
scription of a d Philosophical reasoners gradually became
lowers. Scientific and philosophical Qf the leBS
its supporters, and drew a g worship at the
scientific, though more sensi * be phenomenon of which
shrine of this partially' occult Raised on the
would be the foundation of a n Newtonian), whose canopy
Sd a co^^oS: C,^d a wbo N rr?t,! re would elicit
initiated in the manipulations neceosary to p
nomenon. Some of its adyoca to
superior order, and asserted it wrested from his grasp
•the 11 moment 1 * should be perverted to base and unholy
was Antony Mesmer, l 3o ™ a , + r ’ ea tises on the science, and.
publicly the doctrine; wrote I ' al h t^ e ? bP a i S of the magnetic
performed many wonderfulcures Y performed through
fluid, during an extensive travel P e Wonder followed
WSuTa SeTeSded U, approacb to gfgj*
ot "


wSS 11 ?? 1 t J oU^ nds of a » classes in the community who em-
doctrine m its fullest extent, and hailed the dis-
of diseasL th an?tf n renew Ui^ a - S a - pau f cea t 0 remove all manner
or diseases, and to renew and invigorate age. Enthusiasts in the
fj“ se . wei ! e not wanting, who claimed an immediate divine reveia 8 -
faon f or the power, and indeed the very manipulation to produce
among Xt itß or vnfa a r r - y re ! Ult l’ , iaduced the most sober philosophers,
mong its votaries, to believe the whole science of Animal
Magnetism a supernatural phenomenon.
acb bigh Pretensions, in a civilised country, might well he
supposed to create opposition from those fearful of entire per-
version of the established laws and order of society Its advo
cates became enthusiasts; its opponents grew °oud in the* It
inands on the civil authority to suppress it. The King’s govern-
ment instituted an inquiry into its pretensions and merits The
commission was composed of men of exalted character and
ch .°® en . from the Society of Medicine, and the French
Academy of Science. Dr. Franklin, then a Plenipotentiary from
the Lmted States to the French Court, was one of the commis-
sion M. d Eslon, who wrote a treatise entitled, “Observations
sur le Magnetisme,” was a member of the Royal Academy of
wonderM“fgseU™r diSCil,le °' M | Smer ’ wh ° P"»oonced him a
+bSr ol^ hl f geatleman the commission obtained the most of
MesmerPeriments; perhaps because of evasion on the part of
sit ms U v n th« SUltab / e .°PP° rti mities for investigations. Be
178? aud^L C f l? 10 ! 1 r e P° rted against Animal Magnet-
sufficient *flneil™t weight of their characters and decision had
mS sconce "ta SUPPrOSS ' OI “ y *° r a * tae - the *«*"»»
During Mesmer’s experiments in Paris, other portions nr
Europe felt the influence of this mysterious fluid. The science
born s,nd m Gormnny wlierp thp tnanf x
disseminate light, and gain converts to the faith.
nished her share of its champions, and among them was Ma*
audus, whose success in healing the sick and
to Ammai Magnetism, almost equalled that of Mesmel in
ranee. In some respects Mainaudus was superior* his lecture®
eoEtotaed morc philosophical reasoning. andTere therefore
SpToS 5 S“”c!e C ncr rtB from and h p e h?.XSc r al
been witnessed by myself, and others worthy of credit ” After
Siring a sketch of the history of its discovery md various
be devot . es a long chapter to the examination
or proofs on which the science is founded
undisput f d - corr ect principles of the “prob-
p? i i t f Tlo , 0 . f testimony, and applies them, with sound logic to the
° f **l® proofs of Animal Magnetism. He shows that
m nTwh? attGSt l d by - -thousands of respectSe wft-
m among whom are physicians, savants and enlightened
dictetl^n?^ been a l Fai ? t 0 meet ridicule while obeying thf
c . onsc i en ce and fulfilling a duty to humanity; that the
y who have published their opinions, and the yet greater
• V _ |I


MYSTERIES OF MAGNETIC CLAIRVOYANCE.
number who make their observations in silence, and content
themselves with acknowledging their belief when questioned on
the subject have all either seen for themselves or actually pro-
the'phenomenon of which they speak; white among tte
opposers of the science, not one can be found w himself
the subject in the only proper way, by experimenting for himW
with scrupulous attention, in exact accordance with the pi escnoea
The science, under Deleuze, gained converts fr °m the
most learned men in the Empire Mr. Foissac a distmgmshed
member of the medical faculty of Pans, readily embraced the
doctrine, and from being a skilful magnetizer himself,
memoir to the Academy of Medicine, in 1825, inviting
society to make a new examination of Ammal Magnetism. Hte
proposition was, after much discussion, a^°Pf ed > a
lion composed of its members, Bourdois de la Motte Fouquier,
Gueneau de Mussy, Guersent, Itard, Leroux Magendie, Marc
Thillaye, Husson, and Double, were appointed to conduct ths
experiments and report to the Academy.
The commission spent five years with the most scrutinizing
experiments, and finally, in 1831, reported unfavorably to the
science, but acknowedged in the report having seen many ex-
traordinary and “unaccountable” facts, which was sufficient to
show their prejudice and total incapability of judging in a
in which the fundamental principles were above their compre
hension. The respectability of the society which f WPM“tedtt»
commission had some influence m retarding the rapid advances
which the science was making; but truth cannot be hid .and
many intelligent men soon saw the injustice occasioned by the
report and enlisted themselves in favour of Animal Magnetism,
which’is again on a triumphant^ march through all the civilized
limits 1 o/this * work will not admit the details connected
with the rise and progress of this science in Europe, or of giv g
the many thousand well-attested facts which are recorded m ite
favor on the pages of history, neither are they e f s g en J ia J 51 \ p
purpose; for when I treat of its progress m America, I will gve
the minutial of so many well-authenticated facts as shall leave
doubt on the minds of the most sceptical.
Before entering on its rise in this country, I will
manipulations, or mode of magnetizing, as practised by
and Deleuze, with their followers, described by the last-named
commission in their report to the society. rwatmetized
“The person,” says the report, “who was to
was placed in the sitting position, on a ?° aveaie ?t hef£S
a chair. The magnetizer, sitting on a little higher seat before
his face, and at about a foot distant, recollects himself a few
moments during which he holds the thumb of his
SSs in this position until he feels that the same degree of
heat is established between the thumbs of that person and his
own. Then he draws off his hands in turning them outwards, and
places them upon the shoulders for nearly one minute. Afte. -
S heaarrfes them down slowly, by a sort of friction very
light, along the arms, down to the extremities of the fingers h
ftegins again the same motion five or six times; it is what ma s «


netizers call ‘passes.’ Then he passes his hands over the head,,
keeps them there a few moments, brings them down in passing
before the face, at the distance of one or two inches, to the
epigastrium, where he stops again, either in bearing upon that
region, or without touching it with his fingers. And he thus
eomes down slowly along the body, to the feet. These passes,
or motions, are repeated during the greatest part of the course,
and when he wishes to finish it, he carries them even beyond the
extremities of the hands and feet, in shaking his fingers at each
time. Finally, he performs before the face and the chest some
transverse motions, at the distance of three or fou~ inches, in
presenting his two hands, put near one another, and in removing
them abruptly. At other times, he brings near together the
fingers of each hand, and presents them at three or four inches
distant from the head or the stomach, in leaving them in that
position for one or two minutes; then, alternately drawing them
off, and bringing them near those parts, with more or less quick-
ness, he imitates the motion that we naturally execute when we
'wish to get rid of a liquid which wets the extremity of our
fingers.
“These various modes were followed in all our experiments,
without adhering to one rather than to the other —often using but
one, sometimes two; and we never were directed in the choice
that we made of them, by the idea that one mode would produce-
a quicker or better marked effect than another. The commission
will not follow in the enumeration of the facts it has observed;
the order of the times when each of them was produced; we
thought it more convenient, and, above all, more rational, to pre-
■sent them to you, classed according to the degree, more or less
decided, of the magnetical action that it recognized in each of
them."
I will give a single experiment from the many reported
by the commission, to prove the influence of the magnetic
fluid:—
“The commission found among its members a gentleman who
was willing to submit himself to the explosion of the somnam-
hvile;.it was Mr. Ward. Mile. Celine was requested to carefully
examine thp state of health of our colleague; she applied her hand
on his forehead, and the region of the heart—and after three
minutes said that the blood was rushing to the head; that Mr
Marc actually had a pain in the left side of that cavity; that
he often felt some oppression, especially after his meals’; that
he was often troubled with a slight cough, that the lower part
of the chest was filled up with blood; that something troubled the
passage of the food; that the part called the region of the
xiphoid (appendix) had grown narrower; that to cure Mr. Marc
it should be necessary to bleed him in an abundant manner;
a PPIy, on the interior part of the breast, poultices made with
hemlock, and rub it with laudanum; that he should drink lemon-
ade, in which he should dissolve some gum arable; eat little,
and often; finally, he ought not to walk immediately after
eating.
"We longed to hear from Mr. Marc, whether he had really felt
what the somnambule had announced. He said that he had
indeed some oppression when he walked immediately after his.


MYSTERIES OF MAGNETIC CLAIRVOYANCE.
M? SSAS; SiX&SZ
in which somnambulism and_ cla fluid an a therefore &
treating of this science, differs . y +h “known” effect of mag-
bulism, or sleep-walking, by , t j ons >» which excites the
netic fluid directed by
phenomena; while the commo somnambulism, accord-
produced by a •‘“ t y rf i^%ca ? 1 a which occuri in the
i.ng to Deleuze, is an inexplicable c » the organs and
function of the ““voue system, in the play
in the manner of receivi g aqrertaining when the
same author given lucd for ancert,tmmi
patient is a somnambulis , nuestion, ‘Do you sleep?’
your patient speaks, an m b p same author con-
answers, 'Yes’; he in a n^^ve^naffirmative
tinues, “when your somnambulist shall have address
=S E
aii the time he
wishes to reflect on them. in history we observe well-
From the earliest times - «mnparine at various times,
.authenticated accounts of Paf? sao ernatural’ powers of mind or
who seemed to he * em to tafluence their fellow-men in a
"mt y ie"e a tte" * IaWS
of nature. +lllO fopf wo may mention, tlie history
Among the evidences of philosophers of an-
Of the ancient °f. a h cl f ’ er^nCe that we now consider sttpersti-
tiquity bowed with a revere]ace iud,iu touch carried to an
tions; the power of curing diseases J om p r ehension, absolutely
extent that seems, to our compre“™^ led ge com-
miraculous; the power of P nossessed by great orators
municated in dreams; the influence oyg led
and certain religious impost B , h in “ Q the belief of the
thousands of seemingly foUcmer . g capable c f
grossest absurdities that the imag produced by what
inventing; the effects on health pro agency
r;»r»y at " yrt e ri e S of a Ort*
“"However we may endeavour
these unusual, and se ®mmg 7 qnectability of the evidence corn-
force, the multitude and the respectap y o WO nderful stories.
pel us reluctantly to fa C ?sf whatever we may
We cannot refuse to acknowledge the facts,
think of theories an f JfP l^ S ® V er the feelings, thoughts,
Seven thTvit™ option's of his fellow-man-a power that


K 2° t .J be f! i3ted '. and ma y be employed for good purpose at
the truest ZeTdo™to*ito presenfday^ 8 Butyls oX
sophical explanation of these curious facts has been attended
£« a U me?elontlcf 0 7 e di ff o erem SBS
ehects produced upon the human system by external airent<?
gS
th-°t k ihft the llving body were well calculated to cause a belief
c£ < Ih- t ?fl^T r ° US^ system was constantly under the influence
flaid; and numerous curious experiments were made
w thit nde f. H c ° nvmc ? many philosophers that lifJitself was
ut the result of the action of electricity circulating through tha
'f med in the b ™>° £ »r tTi ewrei puraose
tv 7.5 e f f T ty “ d lightnto ß beeif proved
Srvee waT S J t „ m 6 Stranse action o£ metal 3 «P°n the
TJtal r»”'ncinai ri «i nS T t i lat - those wbo considered electricity as the
rne p P o‘we? P by wueh B ™S S ?? 1 “ anlraal magnettam” to
tilraw or attract tSvihi individual appeared to be able to
to LotheT r s „^? a t„ V eSe P dS a e fvTheto’T 01 tbe b ° dy
a sick person to sink into slumber at 4iU. '° r ° cause
PLAN OF MESMRR
1 he celebrated Mesmer, who claimed the discovery of animal
magnetism, always employed a comnlex ann»r»t,i« £ J animal
or rather to collect the magnetic fluid pervading as he
ail space; and to direct a stream of it upon the Datient ,•?
;o cure diseases. In these recent times when it ia’v. r
that all the astonishing effects of animal magnetism
duced by the action of the mind of one individual unrm +kl pr °’
jous fluid of another, or by the actual transfer of
I?om tb Q magnetizer to the person magnetised hv < s - piri^ s
ehect Of the will, it is curioSs to recall the rifle “thod'? 1
Mesmer, who produced the same effects without hSnl
conscious of the mental character of his operations The flfl 1
Jowmg description is an account of his apparatus L* IJL?;
acting as given by the Royal Commissioners appointed by Louis
I. to examine his pretensions in 1784. y OUIS
In the middle of a large room was placed a circular vessel nv.-
Tteb, a few feet in height, furnished with a lid in two mrtc
moving on hinges in a central line. This lid was perfoiltefWm,’
Mes through which were inserted a numb e ? of firm
aiovable rods. Its interior was occupied by bottles filled with
previously magnetized. These were placed over
the L m f ucb a ma mier that the first row had their necks*
converging towards the centre of the vessel, and their bases


turned to the circumference; and the nest set was arranged
nan opposite direction The tub itself contained also a certain
of water filling up the interstices which were left by
this symmetrical arrangement of bottles; and to this a quantity
It iron filings, pounded glass, sulphur,
of other substances, was occasionally added The patients men
«tood round the apparatus, and applied the iron rods to the
affected parts of the body, or encircled themselves wfih a hoop
CTI emended for that purpose. Sometimes they lam nom on.
each other by the thumb and index finger, and formedwhat-
rar,prl a chain. The magnetizer then held an iron ioa,
which he moved to and fro before them for the Impose of
directing at will the course of the magnetic fluid. ihe wnoie
apparatus or water, bottles, and metallic rods, was supposed
tofacilitate the circulation of the and during this time a
person occasionally played on the piafc or harmomcon for
was one of Mesmer’s opinions that the magnetic
esneciallv propagated by sound. Though the apparatus just de-
scribed was used to increase the power of the magnetizer yet the
universal fluid was supposed to be everywhere, and the mag
aetizer himself was thought to possess a certain quantity which
he could communicate and direct, either by means of a rod or
simply by the motion of his outstretched fingers Hmse ges-
tures, performed at a distance, were also added eertam slight
touching on the hypochondria, the epigastric region, orthe limbs.
In order to increase the power of these processes trees water
food, and other objects, were magnetizedforanthebodies
nature are, according to Mesmer, susceptible of
The following particulars aire taken from Mesme s
directions for using animal magnetism.contact
When a healthy person is brought into rmniediate contac
p Rirk nerson in whom one or more tunctions aie uis
ordered, the latter feels, in the morbid part, sensations more or
Tn order to magnetize the patient, you must place yourself
onposite to him, with your back turned towards the north, and
drawyour close against his feet; you must then place
without pressure both your thumbs upon the plexus of nerves in.
?hfeu“gastrium (the pit of the stomach), and stretch your fingera
toward! the hypochondria (the part on each side of the body
where the short ribs are found). It is beneficial, occasiona y
moTe Se fingers on the sides, especially in the region of the
SP Be£re you cease magnetizing, you
magnetic fluid in equilibrium in every part of the body, ims
Saf’be done by presenting the index finger of the right hand
at the summit of the head, on the left side, and then drawing
down ace to the breast, and over the lower eztremdues.
thisi manoeuvre an iron rod may be used instead of the hnger.
Sheu Suents fo™ a chain, in the manner already described
by taking hold of each other’s hands, the power of magnetism ih\
a ”fhe effects produced by such process, says the Baron Bupotet.
we™ not less itrange than the processes themse patienm
experienced many unusual sensations, such as undefinabie pama


44 , MYSTERIES OF MAGNETIC CLAIRVOYANCE.
m the body, particularly in the head and stomach; an increase
™nmo«? reSSi^ n *° f cutaneous Perspiration of the heart, and a
momentary obstniction of breathing. Sometimes a certain exal-
mmd ’ and a lively sense of comfort were experi-
SSLi system, in particular, was often powerfully
affected. Ringing in the ears, vertigo, and sometimes somnolencv
kmd s pP e f y ened. Tfcese effects were varied ac-
cording to the constitution and of the patients but
they increased as the operation proceeded, and terminated in
concisions. When many patients were magnetized at oncei and
one became affected with convulsions, the others soon exhibited
tne same symptoms. The condition was termed a magnetic
enms; it was regarded as an effort of nature to effect a cure,
ana it was the constant aim of Mesmer to produce it. Many verv
curious moral phenomena were also commonly displayed during
the magnetic operation. Some patients burst into immoderate
m o °s +^ U f hter; l other f were dissolved In tears. Some seemed
attracted towards each other by the strongest affection, while
rs displayed mutual antipathy. But the most surprising
circumstance was the prodigious influence that the magnetizer
exercised over his patients. The least sign of his will excited
or calmed the convulsions, and command love or hatred He
7-5 L tm,°i d b9 ?l e i hem . like a magician with his wand, keeping
their souls and bodies m submissive obedience.
-3 . PRINCIPLES OF DELEUZE.
rmveVttSf 8 ,? SClence since the days of Mesmer has
Sd L° f^ 1S P rocesses were altogether unnecessary,
Stashed H neiT ’ °f , metailic wands, is now entirely
i Though convulsions are still produced, in some
m l f gne if er ’ xt is no longer kis desire to produce
for all the benefits, and all the curious mental phenomena,
Oj. magnetism may result without any such consequence
The manual processes of different operators are now ex-
ceedingly various; and it is found that, after an individual
has been placed several times under the influence of magnetism
sll its effects may sometimes be produced by the simple will
of the magnetizer, without any manipulation whatever* Two
doctrines now divide those who practise on the principles of this
science into different sects. The first attributes all the pheno-
mena to the action of the nervous fluid of one individual directed
toy the will, over the nervous system of another* while the
second considers the soul itself as one of the chief agents in pro-
ducing these effects. To avoid confusing the mind of the reader
with unnecessary statements of these differences of mere opinion
it will be best to give the doctrines of the science as now
generally believed, from the work of M. Deleuze, one of the most
active and successful practitioners of animal magnetism omitting
only those of his principles that have been disproved, or’ rendered
iKiubtful by the experience of his brethren. In his chapter of
General Views and Principles, this highly distinguished author
makes the following statements:—
1. Man has the faculty of exercising over his fellow men a
salutary influence in directing towards them by his will the
"ntal principle.
2. The name of Magnetism has been given to this faculty; it is


*> extension of the power which nil living beings have, of acting .
“T W its results; and wo
*t e ?JeTrs“ £ condition o? action .The" is” to ‘receive the will.
a/a
Stween the£ we suppose that a substance emanates from the
between tnem, w« y» the magae tized persons, in a
a This sU bstance, which supports
direction dictated y fl U id. its nature is unknown,
fjf a pvmf’ has* not been demonstrated; but every-
thfagTalef Place i it T existed, and this justides us in ad-
“leM to ouTpower to accomplish our.purpose is as
sary to the effect as the will to do it; for without self-confidenc
the magnetizer will not succeed.* T .. „ a„
7. In order that one individual should act upon
necessary that there should be a moral and
between them; and when this .empathy*
+Vnt the Darties are in communication with eacii omer
that the Pities are of animal magnetism shou d be
Je a£d SslU it is necessary that the magnetizer should be
tnfimiPTiced only by the desire of doing good.
,a Direct communication between persons is not absolutely
T Magnetism or the operation of magnetism, springs from
The will to act, a sign to express that will, and
SdeSce in the success of the alltempt;!ind « nless » e e ® U ™ ,SO
w, also good, the effects, though obvious, will he irregular.
-, r f T fL faculty of magnetizing exists in every one, but not
. SL extent The difference is caused by the moral and.
sg^SSnSSSSSSSrs
jSiwKSTa long time, mora courage
iiT”jrnnfMvrs from the evidence of other observers, that the-
Sr SLfft
S B e e» W °rS'afie ofs Tm elig|oia S in
the actors are themselves unconscious.


b? m ° demte The power is ”«<* increased
the cLenfdeLmtaed b “tte he^r tS ‘° ‘ hr ° W ° fl and dlrect
soJs commSS *° dlstaEces wil “ p^
fwa^Lith 11^0 dispositions at that mometo Person, to
g od health rarely feel its effects; nor are we able to inde'P p-r
f ept tu tri p l, who is sub 3ect to them, and who is not- hut a p
least three-fourths of mankind may be acted upon ’
equal ““ P ° SSeSS the power of magnetizing in an
energy or magnetic fluid is conveyed to
the patient by the magnetizer, is lost by the latter the
sessions be continued too long, or be too frequently repeated he
may become very much exhausted by this loss Tim weakness
sSSW Maras
Part 0t the persoa is not
SS= SriSSSS
decide what motion it is most proper to take.
ingit may be, Mlis r^ a ™e
S” 'This mZT IOBS trom our own affairs ’ the pers “
o f S antaT m aietTsm ineS “° W adopled * lessors
INFLUENCE OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM ON THE BODY
The effects of animal magnetism are very various because the*-
are influenced not only by the constitution actual con dS
faith of the patient, but also by the energy and the mo?s
Physical character of the operator. moral and
Many of these effects are so astonishing that the
this wonderful subject is absolutely alarmed at first hv ti?!
IS 611 “ icat ? d that” e , d em t to ,i exieeS Eta
ginninsr It f fw' w-£ U «, When l be / are attentively examined, be-
ginning at first with those which are of a morp simnip n»tnp 0
and then proceeding to those which are less consistent with our
preconceived notions of the laws of nature; especially when ™
com pa re these effects with the symptoms observed in natural
epTc" •1“ c< f tjY 3B63 ot and to hysteriVcS
f Sha !l be P re P ared to acknowledge that it is
may ref^ e tbem our cred ence, however difficult it
cannnt 6 ,w, eX ?il ai * m a manne r completely satisfactory. We
they are mv<?f»r* rUtll P* welPaut benticated facts simply because
mey are mysterious, for all nature is a mystery.


\ When an individual is placed under
svmotoms most commonly observed in the first instance are
fSSS? Slteht pricking and winking of the eyelid; an in-
creased or sometimes a diminished, rapidity of the pulse; a sea-
Side alteration of tlje temperature of the body; a flushing 01 an
paleness of the cheeks, and a remarkable change of the
countenance; stretching, or a deep yawning comes on, a gurgling
7" tiirmt is often heard; the patient may feel a aesire io>
Sove but finds himself unable to do so; he experiences an m-
Scribable composure, and a sense of calm delight; the breathy
U becomes much affected are
CriiiE T& * tat of ten‘Tder circumSa.fees not to be
SI«pS, P rfhenomena of a more remarkable character appear
Se lvS’idf are spasmodically affected, and close against the will
* tSI He finds it impossible to keep awake, and,
j? t he operation be continued, he gradually sinks into a slumber
less profound. The head falls on the chest or
rtrawn backwards- the eyelids are generally half open, and the
C veball moves slowly in the socket, but gradually becomes fixed;
iXS. rrf ■mucusfall from the lips, the limbs become cold, and
?he respiration audible. If spoken to, the sleeper may attempt
without success; or he may start awake, rub his
-tare round with astonishment, and remember what has passed
„ romomhpr a dream. To disturb any one in this state
i fim wnd ript?r»ribed by Mesmer, are not at all uncommon
° “ta K TSSttSt described d i® n ttcely natural
sleep. Its phenomena were first discovered by the iViarquis u
Puysegur, and have escaped, in a great degree, the observation
n?Mpsmer In order to distinguish it from the natural, has
Seen termed the magnetic sleep, or Somnambulism. It may be
‘reader an idea of the condition of a person
practised upon persons mm g , .’ tre a fter the senses
the time, they have given rise tof^fXgfwe most unwar-
saCT? ’nowpate.to
ma?neS? U afS P m P oSing against the repetition of such in-
joyous and dangerous experiments.


Many incredulous physicians of Paris induced Baron Dunotet
a ser * e ® °* experiments at that celebrated hospital,
the Hotel Dieu of Paris, in the year 1820. In speaking of the
tna!s made to test the insensibility of the patients, he states that
their nostrils and lips were tickled with feathers, smoke was in-
e<* their nostrils, their skin was bruised by pinching
till the blood came, and the feet of one person were placed
m a hot infusion of mustard seed, but no change of countenance
was produced; but on waking, they all experienced the pain
such treatment was likely to occasion. Some of these phy-
sicians learned the art of magnetizing, and carried these cruel-
ties much farther for their own satisfaction. Dr. Roboum who
was then attached to the hospital reports the following facts in
relaion to the case of a man named Starin, whose bed was No. 8
of the yard Sainte Madelaine. M. Recamier (a physician of
high celebrity m Paris) first threatened the patient that he
would burn him with moxa (a slow fire applied to the part) if he
suffered himself to go to sleep. Dr. Roboum then magnetized
him, and forced him to sleep against his will, and M. Recamier ap-
plied the moxa on the front of the right thigh, producing an
eschar nearly an inch and a half long and an inch in breadth.
Starin showed no sign of pain, either by look or cry nor was
his pulse in the least altered until Dr. R. roused him’from the
magnetic sleep.
In another case, reported by the same physician, a female
patient, named Leroy, was magnetized, and while in the mag-
netic sleep, agaric one of the most pungent substances known
to us, was burned immediately under her nose by M Gilbert
M. Recamier then applied moxa over the pit of the stomach
P v°i!+ Ci + § ’ • an of nearly tbe same size, but not the*
slightest sign of feeling was produced until after her sensibility
was restored by the magnetizer, when she suffered intensely
It has been mentioned that, while under the effects of mag-
netism, _ the patient is completely under the control of the
magnetizer, and when cast into the state of slumber and insen- 1
sibility it often happens that the continuance of the operation
produces what is called the somnambulic state. The patient then
appears to be awake to the influence of the magnetizer or anv
other person or things with whom the latter has been chosen
to put him in communication, but is perfectly asleep and in-
sensible to all the rest of this world. When in this condition
the magnetic sleeper, while absolutely insensible to all other
external impressions, is mentally conscious of every act and
thought of the magnetizer. He will hear even at a distance, the
slightest modulation of his voice, though inaudible to those
around. The following case, reported in the same manner with,
tne two former, will give some idea of the phenomena attending
the somnambulic condition:—
Catherine Samson, a young girl of much natural timidity, was
put to sleep in about fifteen minutes. Many persons present en-
deavoured to rouse her, by first individually, and then collectively
screaming suddenly in her ears. They struck violently, with
xneir clenched fists, upon various pieces of furniture, but could
not obtain any symptom of her hearing the loudest noise. On.
another occasion she fell asleep in three minutes. M. Recamier


opened her eyelids, shook her violently, struck the table with all
his might, pinched her repeatedly, squeezed her hand violently,
raised her from her seat and suddenly let her fall. Still no
change was perceptible—nothing which could convey an idea
that the jfetient either saw or felt. When the magnetiser spoke,
however, she heard him distinctly. M. Recamier then alter-
nated his voice with that of the magnetizer, but to his voice she
was insensible.
On the third trial she fell asleep in three minutes. The by-
standers attempted to rouse her by abuse. They called her an
impostor, taxed her with scandalous conduct, and threatened
to kick her out of the room; but even this very philosophical
proceeding produced no effect. In the evening of this same day
she was again magnetized in bed, fell asleep in a few minutes,
and remained in a somnambulic state all night. Those appointed
to watch her observed that she never moved. They pulled and
plucked out her hair by the roots, but could detect no sign of
sensation. More than six years after this, the same Mademoiselle
Samson was magnetized before the second committee of inves-
tigation, some of whom were well acquainted with her, and had
the fullest confidence in her good faith.
In a case reported by M. Bouillet, professor of philosophy at
the college of St. Barbe, a young woman was magnetized by
him, and when somnambulic, was introduced into the presence
of about twenty persons. “This ‘seance,’ ” says he, “was nearly
a repetition of the same boisterous scenes which had before
occurred at the Hotel Dieu; and every possible means was had
recourse to for the purpose of making the patient hear others,
and preventing her hearing me. She was tormented in a
thousand ways without effect, a young man who was present
having provided himself, unknown to me, with a pocket-pistol,
with a view of making a decisive experiment, suddenly and
unexpectedly fired it off close to her ear. Every person present
started, and several ladies, taken by surprise, screamed out
violently; but the somnambulist was not interrupted in quietly
continuing a sentence which at the moment she was addressing
to me. It should be added that the pistol was fired off so close
to her ear, that the bonnet and cap of the poor girl were scorched,
and some of the powder lodged under the contused cuticle,
yet did she remain perfectly insensible, although, on being
awakened, she felt the most acute pain in the neck, and dis-
covered with indignation the state into which, to my deep
regret, she had been thrown, and from which, for upwards of a
fortnight, she suffered severely.”
Important Medical testimony in favor of Mesmerism.
Among other astonishing proofs of the insensibility of the
magnetic somnambulist, the following facts, very rapidly selected
from the mass of evidence, may be preferred on account of the
very high character of the authorities from which they are
derived. M. Husson, president of the Academy of Medicine of
Paris, states that he has seen a bottle containing several ounces
of concentrated ammonia held for five, ten, fifteen or more
minutes, immediately under the nose of the sleeper, without
the slightest effect. Dr. Bertrand saw forty or fifty pins thrust
simultaneously by as many witnesses, into the flesh of a som-


nambulist who was singing, “without” causing the least appre-
ciable alteration in his voice. This horrible cruelty was
committed at the request of the magnetizer! M. Sauvage-de-la-
croix, in the Memoirs de l’Academie des Sciences, gives an
account of a girl at Montpelier, on whom, when somnambulic,
he tried, among other vain attempts to rouse her, putting brandy
and spirits of hartshorn in her mouth, tickling the ball of the
eye with a feather, blowing snuff into the nostrils, and violently
twisting the fingers. She never gave the slightest sign of
sensation.
In the tenth volume of the Bibliotheque de Medicine, there is
an account of a female somnambulist, who was severely whipped
over the bare shoulders without effect, and once had her back
most savagely smeared with honey and was exposed to the
stinging of bees, but she felt nothing till she was awakened,
when, of course, she suffered acute agony. Messrs. Foissac,
Foquier, Guersent and Itard, men of high celebrity, and members
of the inquest established by the Royal Academy, all gave tes-
timony to facts of a similar nature.
But even severe surgical operations have been performed
on patients without their knowledge, while their senses were,
buried in magnetic sleep! A man in the department of Gers, in.
France, had an extremely painful abscess of the thigh, and it
was resolved to spare him the pain of operation, by performing
it while under the effects of magnetism. This was done by Dr.
Laurieu, after the patient had been rendered somnambulic by
the Comte de Brivazac. During the operation the patient re-
mained motionless as a statue. When awakened, M. Roc asked
him whether he would submit to the operation; he replied “I
suppose I must, since it is necessary.” M. Roc then informed
liim that it was over. The astonishment of the patient may be
conceived when he discovered the fact, for he had neither seen
nor felt it; and the last thing he remembered was the act
of M. de Brivazac laying his hand on his forehead to induce
sleep!
All the tests of insensibility that have been mentioned, except
the more surgical operations, have been tried again and again
in this country, and even in this city. The observations of Dr.
Caproii, of Providence, R. 1., have led to so much public discus-
sion, that almost everyone must have some knowledge of them.
Dr. J. K. Mitchell and Dr. Pierce, of Philadelphia, have both
experimented extensively on this subject. The former is said
to have caused teeth to be extracted from patients during the
magnetic sleep, without awakening any consciousness; and the
latter found somnambulists perfectly insensible to the strongest
odors, while their thoughts, their taste, and their muscular power,
seemed to be entirely subjected to the will of the magnetizer.
But the most astounding case of magnetic insensibility that
has been recorded, is that reported by M. Jules Cloquet to the
French, Academy. The high character, deep learning, and great
practical ability of M Cloquet render it impossible to doubt
the truth of any statement to which he would affix his name.
The case was as follows: —
Madame Plantin, a lady of sixty-four years of age, consulted
M. Cloquet on the Bth of April, 1829, for an ulcerated cancer in


the right breast, with which she had been afflicted for several
years, and which was complicated with a considerable enlarge-
ment of the corresponding auxiliary glands. M. Chapelain, her
physician, had been in the habit of magnetizing her, without
any other good effect than producing the magnetic sleep, with its
usual insensibility. He proposed that M. Cloquet should operate
upon her while in this state, which was agreed to.
On the day appointed for the operation, M. Cloquet on his
arrival at half-past ten o’clock in the morning found the patient
dressed and sitting in an arm chair, in the attitude of a person
in a tranquil, natural sleep. She had returned, nearly an hour
previously, from mass, which she was accustomed to attend
at that time. M. Chapelain had thrown her into the magnetic
sleep after her return, and she then spoke with much composure
of the operation she was about to undergo. All the arrangements
being made, she undressed herself, and seated herself in a
chair. M. Chapelain supported her right arm, and the left was
suffered to hang down. M. Pailloux, <§leve interne of the Hospital
St. Louis, was employed to present the instruments and tie
the vessels. The first incision, commencing at the armpit, was
carried round the lower part of the tumor till it met the first.
The enlarged glands were then dissected with precaution, on.
■account of their vicinity to a very large artery, and the tumor
was extirpated. The operation lasted from ten to twelve
minutes, and during the whole time the patient continued convers-
ing tranquilly with the operator, and did not give the slightest
sign of sensibility; no motion of the limbs or of the features; no
change in the respiration of the voice; no alteration even in
the pulse could be perceived; the patient never ceased to be
In that state of automatic “abandon” and passiveness in which
she had been for some minutes before the operation. It was
not even necessary to hold her; they only supported her. A liga-
ture was applied to an artery that had been divided (the most
painful part of all operations), and the wound was dressed. The
first dressings were removed, and the wound cleansed and re-
dressed, on the 14th, without any sign of pain being given.
After this dressing, M. Chapelain awakened her, the magnetic
sleep having continued from an hour before the operation for
two entire days. She was then again put to sleep, hut it is not
stated for how long a time.
Though some persons seem to be incapable of being mag-
netized powerfully, and others yield with difficulty, yet there
are some who fall under this influence almost instantaneously.
M. Dupotet remarks: “A young girl, or rather a child, for she
,2s not twelve years of age, at this moment, attends my demon-
strations, who is so susceptible of the magnetic influence, that
she almost instantly falls asleep, and the approximation of my
fingers towards her causes a short and quick convulsive start,
which seems to pervade her whole frame.”
NECESSARY PRECAUTIONS.
Such is the command of the will of the magnetizer over the
muscles of the magnetic sleeper, that he can determine, in many
cases, what part of the body shall be at rest, and what part
in motion. Sometimes the hand of the patient will follow that


52 MYSTERIES OF MAGNETIC CLAIRVOYANCE.
of the operator in all its movements as the needle will follow
the magnet. „ .. _ . ...
Even the whole person may appear to be attracted m this
manner; and when a magnetizer allows himself to become
alarmed at the consequence of his own acts, this condition of
things may become exceedingly distressing. There is a well-
authenticated story of a French nobleman who magnetized his
favorite daughter in mere sport, before a considerable circle of
observers, neither of them having faith in the process. But, to-
the utter horror of the'father, the laughter of the daughter at
the whole proceeding, which had gradually assumed more and
more the character of fatuity, without his suspecting that the
change was other than a jocose affection, was soon settled into
a complete appearance of idiocy; and when he turned from it
in distress, the daughter rose and followed him about the range
of apartments, as if actuated by his will alone, nor could he
escape the presence of that distorted and convulsed countenance
that he had agitated, but had not presence of mind to allay. This
young lady was seriously in danger of suffering permanently
from the consequences of her father’s want of self-possession
and firmness, for it is extremely injurious to Lose sight of the
original purpose when a crisis is impending, until that crisis
is complete. The magnetizer should never leave his patient
until all signs of undue agitation have subsided, in case where
convulsive symptoms are present.
The following extracts from the report of the commissioners
of the French Academy will give an idea of the extent to which
the motions of the sleeper may be sometimes controlled by
the operator. The gentleman (M. Petit) subjected to this-
experiment was affected with a paralysis of the face from an
3iI)SC6SS
“The patient was in a short time put to sleep; after which,
in order to remove every suspicion of any previous understanding
between him and the operator, the commissioners handed to
M Dupotet a note, written at the moment, wherein they had
specified the parts they wished to be convulsed. Possessed of
this instruction, M. Dupotet first directed his hand towards the
right wrist which immediately became convulsed. He then
stood behind the patient, and directed his finger first towards
the left thigh, then towards the left elbow, and lastly towards
the head Bach of these parts was almost immediately seized
with convulsive movements. M. Dupotet then directed his left
leg against that of the patient, which became so much agitated
that he nearly fell off his seat. He then directed his foot towards
the right elbow of M. Petit, which became violently agitated; he
then stretched his foot towards the left hand and below, and
Violent convulsive movements developed themselves in the upper
limbs. One of the commissioners, M. Marc, with the intention?
of obviating more effectually every possibility of deception,
blindfolded the patient,, and the preceding experiments were
repeated with a slight variation in the result. Messrs. Thillage
and Marc directed their fingers towards different parts of the
body, and provoked some convulsive movements, which were,
however, less promptly developed and more feeble. This occurred
whether his ©yes were blinded, or not, and these convulsive


movements were more marked when the parts operated upon
were submitted to the action of a metallic rod, whether in the
shape of a key or the branch of a pair of spectacles.”
INFLUENCE OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM ON THE
MIND.
Thus far the attention of the reader has been directed to the
physical effects of animal magnetism on the body, but the
effects produced upon the mind, in those persons who are
rendered somnambulic, are often far more wonderful.
It was the celebrated Marquis de Puysegur who first par-
ticularly observed the mental condition that has been termed
magnetic somnambulism. He was a student of Mesmer, and
& most able magnetizer, practising the art solely for the
benefit of the sick, and universally beloved for his benevolence
and amiability. The history of his discovery is as follows: —
While magnetizing his gardener, an ignorant rustic, he ob-
served him fall into a deep and tranquil sleep. It then occurred
to him to address to the sleeper a few questions, which he did,
and the man immediately answered him with intelligence and
clearness. He soon found that he possessed a peculiar power
over the mind of his patient, and that he had but to will a
question and it was answered. Their souls seemed to be in com-
munication as well as their bodies! In speaking of his gardener
while in this condition, he says: “He is no longer, when in a
magnetic state, a peasant who can hardly utter a single sentence; 1
h© is a being to describe whom I cannot find a name. I need not
speak;; I have only to think before him, when he instantly hears
and answers me. Should anybody come into the room, he sees
him if I desire it, and addresses him, and says what I wish
him to say, not indeed exactly as I dictate to him, but as truth
requires. When he wants to add anything more than I deem it
prudent strangers should hear, I stop the flow of his ideas, and
of his conversation, in the middle of a word, and give his
thoughts quite a different turn. I know of no subject more
profound, more lucid, than this peasant in his crisis. I have
several patients approaching his state of lucidity, but none to
equal him.” This patient, like many others since observed, had
the power of perceiving his own internal structure, and dis-
tinguishing what was the disease. He prescribed what treatment
he required, when he would he benefited by being magnetized
again, and when he would he well, if so treated. The Mar-
quis followed his directions, and everything happened as he
predicted.
All the magnetizers who now attempt to treat diseases In.
this manner, prefer the knowledge of the patient when possessed
of this lucidity and second-sight (clairvoyance and prevoyance)
to their own judgment, and the result proves the propriety of
doing so. ‘These patients,” says the Marquis, “during the crisis
possess a supernatural power, by which, on touching a patient
presented to them, as passing their hand even over the clothes,
they feel which is the affected viscus (internal organ), the suffer-
ing part; they point it out, and indicate pretty nearly the
suitable remedies.” One of these sleepers told the Marquis
that he was subject to frequent headaches, a buzzing in his ears,
wMeh was true, though he had complained of it to no one. A


young man who was present at this experiment, but who ridiculed
the pretensions of magnetism, was told that his complaint con-
sisted in pains of the stomach, and o + her disorders in the
abdomen, that had been produced by a disease which he had
suffered from some years before. And when, still doubting, he
applied to be examined by another magnetic somnambulist,
distant some twenty yards from the first, he was told just the
same thing, by which he was utterly confounded.
A well-known physician of high standing at Providence, Rhode
Island, at one time employed a sleeper in his family, to assist
in determining the character of occult diseases in patients who
consulted him at his office. The results were singular and im-
portant. Once she declared the cause of deafness by describing
the internal ear and brain, and at another time pointed out the
cause of an incurable blindness, by describing a red tumor at
the back part of the eye. She knew nothing of anatomy, and
the parts described are entirely out of the reach of natural
vision.
M. Husson describes the condition of the sleeper in this state
as follows: —
“The somnambulist has his eyes closed. He neither sees
with his eyes, nor hears with his ears; yet he sees and hears
better than a waking person. He sees and hears only those
with which he is in relation. He sees only that at which he
looks, and he usually looks to those objects only to which his
attention is directed. He is submissive to the will of the mag-
netizer in all things which cannot injure himself, and in all that
does not oppose his own ideas of justice and truth. He sees,
or rather he has a perception of the interior of his own body
and that of others; but he usually remarks those parts only
which are not in a natural state, and which disturb the harmony
of it. He recalls to his memory things which he had forgotten
in his waking state. He has provisions and presentiments which
may be erroneous in several circumstances and which are limited
in their extent. He expresses himself with surprising faculty.
He is not free from vanity. He becomes more accurate by
degrees, for a certain time is guided with discretion, but if ill-
directed' he goes astray. When returned to his natural condition,
lie entirely loses the recollection pf all the sensations and ideas
he had during his state of somnambulism, so that those two
states are as entirely strangers to one another as if the somnam-
bulist and the waking man were two different persons.”
No obstacle seems to bound the vision of the somnambulist,
and at the will of the magnetizer he can see sometimes from,
the back of the head, and sometimes from the pit of the stomach,
or the tips of the fingers.
M. Rostan, in the “Dictionaire des Sciences, Medicates art,
Magnetisme,” gives an account of an experiment performed by
him in the presence of M. Ferrers. “I took my watch and held
It at the back of the head of the somnambulist at a distance of
three or four inches from the occiput. I asked her if she saw
anything. ‘Certainly,’ said she; ‘I see something shining; it
gives me pain.’ Her countenance was expressive of pain, and
ours bespoke our astonishment. We stared at each other, and M.
Ferrers at last broke silence by observing to me that if she could


see something shine, she could probably see what it was
- - 'What do you see shining?’ ‘O, I don’t know; I cannot tell ’
‘Look well.’ ‘Why, it fatigues me so. Why, it’s a watch.’ Fresh
surprise on our part. ‘But if she can see that it is a watch ’
again said M. Ferrers, ‘she will probably tell us the time Can
you tell me what time it is?’ ‘Oh, no! that is too difficult.’' ‘Pay
attention and look well!’ ‘Well, I will try. I can perhaps tell
the hour, but I can never see the minutes.’ When she had
looked with the utmost attention, she said, ‘lt is ten minutes to
eight,’ which was then the exact time.' M. Ferrers wished to
repeat the experiment himself, which he did, with similar suc-
cess. He altered the direction of the hands on his watch several
times, and when it was presented to her without our having looked
at it, she was right every time.
M. Chardel narrates a case of a magnetic somnambule, who,
while quietly sitting in her chair, saw him go into another room
for a decanter of water. He went to a filtering tank, turned
the cock, but no water came. He split off a piece of wood and
picked the spigot with it, thinking that the passage was ob-
structed, but without success. He then picked the air-hole, but
no water came; at last he filled his decanter with unfiltered
water. The somnambule, on his return, told him all of hi 3
motions, without omitting a single circumstance,* notwith-
standing there were between her and him two walls and a
parlor.
In the “Gazette de Sante” for September, 1829, the editors of
winch are decided opponents of animal magnetism, we have the
following observations and notes of a case, which cannot be
doubted when given on such authority:—
■“There is now in M. Fouquier’s wards a patient in whose
case animal magnetism has developed the most curious and
in some points, incredible phenomena. Without siding with
the lovers of the marvellous, it is incumbent on us to record
individual facts when duly authenticated. Now, the facts which
we are about to relate having been witnessed by a large num-
ber of spectators, we presume we may present them to our
readers as being entitled to their confidence.
‘ Petronille Leclerc, twenty-six years of age, seamstress, entered
ITa Charite to be treated for spasmodic cerebral affection, bor-
dering on epilepsy. She was of an exceedingly nervous tem-
perament, very pale, exhausted by her former sufferings, and
extremely irritable. She had been seized, after a violent fit of
anger, with a turning up of the eyeballs, in which position they
remained fixed and resisted all remedies. The idea occurred to
M. Shire, her medical attendant, of trying magnetism. He made
the first trial on the 29th of August, and subsequently repeated
it many times. The most remarkable circumstances of this
treatment were noted down, and some of them occurred in our
own presence.
The following is an account of them: —
" At the first sitting the somnambule gave several proofs of
lucidity. The gentleman who had magnetized her presented to
her various objects, such as a flask, some sugar and bread, which
*;be discriminated without seeing them, for her eyes were ban-
daged, and, moreover, in order to answer questions put to her,


she generally turned her head on the opposite side, and buried
her face in her pillow. Once, without being questioned, she said
to the same person, who was holding her: lou have a head-
ache/ which was really the fact; but, with view of perplexing
her tbe student told her she had made a mistake. That is
very singular’ said she; ‘then I must have touched somebody
X had? to adache, for I felt It well.' She also distinguished
several persons present hy certain peculiarities in their dress.
One of the most remarkable circumstances is this.
“The magnetizer, on retiring, had promised that he would
return at about half-past five to wake her. He ,
the appointed time, and the somnambule observed to him that
it was not yet half-past five; but he replied that
he had just received obliged him to return to her. Oh, yes, she
said immediately, ‘lt is the letter now m your pocket-book, be-
tween a blue and a yellifw card’—which fact proved to be perfectly
correct A watch was placed at the back of her bead, and, on
being requested to tell the time, she said: ‘Six minutes past four.
It was then seven minutes past four.”
From among a thousand similar examples of lucidity may be
quoted the astonishing powers of Miss Brackett of Rhode Island,
who when in her magnetic somnambulism, could tell many of
the a box closely packed with dried plants, a bird s
nest and various other articles, altogether unknown to be
previously; and who read notes from c °l° nel . Sto ' ie w X l thereon
envelopes and numerous seals, sending them hack with the c m
tents copied on the outside, and the seals still unbroken.
There have been many well-authenticated instances °i
netic somnambulists, who could read a book through a cove
as well as Madame Leclerc could see the letter m students
Docket But there are many still more astonishing facts, that
seem almost as if the soul of the sleeper could leave the body,
and travel to any distance at the will of the magnetizer.
E?om among these cases that of Miss Brackett may be
<*o“n 5 one of the most astonishing and best authenticated
This voung lady was totally blind, and deprived of voice except
Whisper in consequence of a blow on the head from an
iron weight some years before, which for a long time deprived
reason and left her still subject to excruciating nervous
Sains She was placed under magnetic treatment by Dr. Ca,pron,
S? Rhode Island, in May, and it was continued almost
rfLiv till September, when she came under the notice of oui*
historian Coffi Stone, of New York. Her natural sight was
then BO far restored that she could distinguish between ligM
Sd darkne r ss re3 and could see objects like shadows, but could
not distinguish the sex of any person by the dress.
This wonderful somnambule, when in the magnetic sleep, could,
4_ imagination accompany any individual with whom her mag'
netizer placed her in communication to scenes she had never be-
held hundreds of miles from the hounds of her furthest real
travels She would then describe correctly what she saw in P lac
she had never h?en, and even seemed to suffer, while oniber imag-
inary journey, some of the evils that would have attended it ha
she been there in reality. If desired to go into a and exami
its contents, She has been known to complain of suffocation, and,


if taken in her dream to sea, she exhibited signs of sea-sickness f
When thus taken to Washington, she described the capitol, and
the principal objects in and near it.
NEW THEORY OP ANIMAL MAGNETISM,
la searching for materials to form a theory of Animal Mag-
netism, it is only necessary to sweep, with a thought, the
accumulated obstructions from the pathway of time, and look
back on the chaotic mass as it moves in retrospection from behind
the dim nebula to occupy the more conspicuous station assigned
to it in cosmogony. See now the simple forms of matter, all
globular, and how few in number; count them; there are less
than one hundred, but they are all moving to join in various
proportions, and form an infinite number of objects; oxygen
and nitrogen have come together, and now form a new trans-
parent called atmosphere. A new composition of matter is now
to be formed. See moving from a distance two large collections
of very small globules; the smallest collection is oxygen and
extends six hundred and sixty-two miles; the largest collection
is hydrogen, and extends one thousand three hundred and
twenty-five miles; the two collections have now come together,
and formed a pond of transparent water, only one mile in length.
Again, the simple globules are in motion, and now many of them
meet together and form a granite rock; others, collected in
another place, have formed earth. A new substance is now to
b© formed, many kinds of globules are now moving; they are
now together and form iron ore. The simple globules are now
everywhere in motion, and meeting together in different clusters,
from all the inanimate objects composing the universe. A more
beautiful formation is now to take place, the globules are collecting
in the water; they meet from the “trilobite,” a marine animal;
it is alive, and capable of reproducing its kind. The globules are
everywhere again in motion, and, as they come together, form
innumerable kinds of fishes, beasts, and bitds. The globules
are again congregating, and, see, they have formed the most
beautiful figure of all; it is a Man; he is endowed with intellect,
and seems superior to all other forms of life; all the previous
remaining globules have congregated in his formation, and there
seems nothing left. Look again, you will perceive some very
snf&ll globules left; they are mere “molecules” compared with
the other globules, and appear infinite in numbers; they do
not seem to combine with any formed object, and yet they
move everywhere, and pass through everything. All objects
being composed of round globules, must be porous, occasioned
by the impossibility of round globules forming a perfectly solid
mass. It is between these openings or pores that the last re-
maining globular molecules find a free passage through all
objects in the Universe. In the unobstructed passage of these
infinitely small globules, moving in infinite numbers, they
produce such wonderful effects, that we will, for convenience,
name them collectively, magnetic fluid. This fluid sometimes
collects in large masses in the atmosphere, which it displaces to
occupy the space itself; though collected in large masses, it
never coheres together, and being very elastic, it sometimes
starts suddenly to another place, leaving a vacuum where it


comes from. This vacuum being suddenly filled by the elastic
atmosphere rushing together, forms the phenomenon called
“thunder”; the rapid passage of the magnetic fluid through the
atmosphere, produces a vivid light, called “lightning,” by friction
with the globules which form the atmosphere.
Let us now trace the course of the magnetic fluid through the
pores of objects on the earth'. In passing through some objects,
particularly iron, it frequently continues to keep up the stream,
until stopped by a very simple process well known to man,
and the iron through which the stream passes is called the
magnet; large beds of iron ore are found in the earth, having a
stream of this fluid passing through it from South to North; the
Southern part of the bed of ore where the fluid enters, is called
the South Pole, and the Northern end, where the fluid passes
out, is called the North Pole. If you break from the mass a piece
of this ore, it will have a stream passing through it with a South
and North Pole; this is called a natural magnetic fluid (first put
in motion by the atmosphere), will gradually work through the
metal, and in one or two years, form a permanent stream through
the tongs, which all have a North and South Pole, and perform
all the phenomena of the horse-shoe magnet. Draw a natural
magnet lengthwise over a bar of iron or steel, and you start a
stream of the magnetic fluid through it; this bar, poised on a
vertical pivot, forms the compass used by surveyors and
mariners; it receives the fluid at /the South, and discharges it
at the North; hence it must follow, if the South Pole of one
magnet be placed to the North Pole of another magnet, they
will cling together, for the fluid, in passing out of the North
Pole of one, enters the South Pole of the other, and continues an
unbroken stream; that is called attraction in magnets; and hence,
it also follows, that if two North Poles come together, they will
fly off because two streams come together from opposite direc-
tions*’that is called magnetic repulsion. The same fact will be
seen ’if you take two horse-shoe magnets and bring them to-
gether the two North and the two South Poles, which will repel
each other and if one is suspended the other will fall; but .if
you turn one over so as to bring the north of one to the south.
the other thev will adhere by the circular stream of magnetic
fluid running through the whole; hence it follows incontro-
vertibly, that as the magnetic fluid can pass through the poms
of all substances, two magnets must continue to attract each
other, even when other substances are placed between them;
this is found to be invariably true, in all cases tried with the
most dense substances, such as glass, wood, metals, water,
stones, &c., and the magnets always continue to attract the
same as if nothing intervened. There is one exception only to
this general law, Cerin* an animal fat (the globulets of which
are so soft, that they mash together, and close up all the pores y,
when spread on paper and held between two magnets, cuts off
the magnetic stream and renders the magnets as powerless as
♦This wonderful substance, Cerin, is like the “larnin ’ of Teddy
O’Rourke, it must be “spread thin and made to go a great ways,
or else the fabric will explode, as it comes in contact with the dull
brain of a scientific ‘numskull.".


Y°° d - J\L St l Ga ? ° f magnet fluid can be caused to run through
S f inw H rh?t d +h aWI ? g a natural magnet in one direction over
inJ^+f 01 ° W f th , at the stre am can be changed or stopped by draw-
,naiU^ al ma f? et 0Ve J r it in an opposite direction. This
is also true m practice, and even a common spike drawn hard
over a magnet needle from the North to the South Pole will
compass the needle ° f its magneti c properties, and destroy the
fa. l h ®“ a f netiC ?. uid pervades the pores of all substances, and
fri^t« eral i y mactlv ®’ or nearl y so, until put in motion by the
«°L S^ me °. ther globules striking against it. It has a
f* * a ® n ity t° r animal hair, and a still greater for metal; hence
“®® r . 8 *"! whlried 111 the atmosphere, collects the fluid, and
on a metallic plate, communicates the fluid to the
f™’ ™ tbe “ ce il may be conducted by a string to a stop cock,
wbich hydrogen gas may issue and take fire by the fluid-
a lamp ia used for instructive lectures at most colleges in
p.iAr.+^ Untry ' fluid is collected by the same principle in the
machiae - The magnetic fluid pervades all substances,
a^“ a f 6 as as inanimate, and produces singular effects in
. f- small Portion of it conducted from an electric
S I^t<^ W lu produce .drowsiness; a very large portion
7 dlproda co death, by forcing asunder the globules of which
man is composed; the hairs on man are continually collecting
P n rt f°°f of j he fluid from the atmosphere; woollen clothes
also collect it, and communicate it to the system, from whence
it again passes off to the atmosphere. A small portion of the
™ ld m always necessary to support life, by warming the blood
friction as it passes through the pores; sufficient for this
C <? Ue l te £ the carpet and earth b y the feet, which
s™!. the . S . outh p ote an animal magnet; the eye, by con-
tinually straining after objects, causes the fluid to pass off at
the retina, which forms the North Pole (when awake) of an
tSfVJ! J?i ag £® t; chaage and relaxation, ebb and flow, are essea-
things; the nerves, by fatigue which manual labour
ten or twenty hours, lose the power to draw the fluid up,
and the eyes, by fatigue with “looking,” lose the power to throw
off the magnetic fluid, which must now begin to ebb or run
d °^ wards ’ entering in at the eye, which now becomes the
SLlwfp and passes off at the feet, which In turn becomes
Slf U, ?0 L e ?! the ammal magnet; the eye being transparent,
receives the fluid faster than it can pass off at the North Pole
(feet), which surcharges the system and produces the natural
sleep. In sleep there is a relaxation of the nervous system
and, consequently, the whole body is gradually invigorated, untii
the eye gams sufficient strength to open and change the mag-
netle current, receiving the fluid again at the feet (South Pole)
“natural° wSfing from the eye (North Pole) *' this is called
In the waking state man is capable of forcing a more than
natural magnetic stream from the eye; particularly if he desires
to. see or have the object towards which he directs the eye-
tbifi is called ’ Hence man is able to “will” a magnetic
eurrent from his eyes; the magnetic fluid can pass through the
pores of all substances (except cerin) and consequently the cur-


PROCESS USED IN INDIA.
* hv the “will” can be sent to another perßoa’s
eye which (if awake) will likewise be a North Pole, and oiler
rnrrpnt* two currents meeting from opposite direc
Sn« P tSe “ weSt” imS? be turned. Hence, if a strong man
„ _ maenetic current from his eye (North Pole) it must tora.
tl cuient7rom a woman’s eye, which now becomes the
S r i e nnlt n ufe,“ S he e eye, S? SouVoje,
£575
fnrm Sgs or magnetic cords, from one brain to the other
and form strings 05 map« mag netizer be moved by a “sense of
the magnetic somnambulist. ><k l » hence , a ii know-
“A sense of external things is knowie g , dbT the
P °SemSneSer m can force the fluid M -I**£»,JgF£
eerin), ‘Sronahttm'brain of™ third person, in its passage to the
nf th th?magnetic somnambulist; and, consequently, the
third person will be
?S“rthe person in magnetic commnnicatlon could
PEOCeSuSED IN INDIA TO PRODUCE MAGNETIC
SLEEP •
ascertained from my first case that coma might be
X Tjzszsx
mesmerized lying in bed, with his eyes
darkened. This succeeded perfectly. 3 1 exception,
was the routine followed ever after wards witho -
The patient was desired to lie down and compose nim~c.


sleep; his head was brought to one end of the bed and the mes-
merizer seated himself so .as to he able to breathe upon the
head and extend his hands readily to the pit of the
etomach.
We then began making passes from the back of the head down
the pit of the stomach, breathing gently on the head
and eyes also. The fingers were held loosely in the shape of
claws, and carried slowly over the parts at the distance of
an inch from the surface, dwelling longer over the eyes,
nose, mouth, and sides of the neck; and, on reaching the pit
the stomach, the hands were suspended there some
minutes.
Having continued this process for a quarter or half an hour,
Jhe passes may be advantageously ended by pressing both hands
lor some minutes on the pit of the stomach. This done for an hour
daily was the routine which enabled me to perform so many
mesmeric operations, and often on the first day •! treatment,
liie lads varied this routine, however, to suit their convenience.
One preferred to place both hands on the pit of the stomach from
the beginning to the end of the process, breathing on the eyes
and head all the time. Another placed one hand on the pit of
the stomach at the beginning, and made passes slowly over the
lace with the other, changing hands when tired. A third would
make his passes from the stomach upwards to the head; and
they seem to me to succeed all equally well —“provided they
attended to their work.”
A moderate degree of continued attention is indispensable.
Otherwise the passes are mere mechanical movements without
vitality, and the lads knew from experience that if they did not
work “with a will” they were losing their time.
It is better not to test the patient’s condition at first by speaking
to him, but by gently raising his arm; and, if it fall helplessly
down without subsequent movement, or is found cataleptic when
bent, or rigid on attempting to bend it, we may consider the
mesmeric sleep to be established. When the patient is insensible
to the loudest sounds, to pricking of the navel, and pinching of
the nipple, the operation may be performed. But the muscular
irritability cannot be extinguished in some persons; they show
signs of irritation on being pricked, pinched, and burned; still,
if protracted testing does not awake them, the operation may
be confidently performed, as the signs of sensibility are
usually not increased during it, and the case is as sppcessful
for all practical purposes as when the patient lies Ike a corpse.
The more “delicate” European process may be resorted to
when required, and is performed in this manner:
The patient is seated in a comfortable chair for sleeping in.
The mesmerizer seats himself in front with the patient’s knees
between his, and, laying hold of both hands, opposing the thumbs
to each other, he concentrates his attention upon the patient,
and desires him to look steadily at the operator. He having held
his hands till there is an equilibrium of heat estahlfcfliecl, passes
are made slowly from the forehead down to the pit of the
stomach, and from the crown of the head down both sides of the
neck, and along both arms to the fingers. The eye ehows very
-satisfactorily the progress made. When it begins to follow


the mesmerizer’s hand involuntarily, and a peculiar tremor of
the eyelids, or a prolonged heavy wink, is observed, it is very
encouraging, and ought to induce the mesmerizer to increase
his attention. The eye at last closes, but the eye-lashes generally
continue to quiver as if from an instinctive attempt to open the
eyes. This the patient cannot now do, even though he may still
retain his general sensibility and consciousness. The process
being continued, or repeated, at last brings on the mesmeric
coma, which, being tested, the operation is performed.
But this process seems to induce a state of artificial somnam-
bulism in the European much more frequently than in the
Asiatic; and possibly the difference of the routine followed may
partly account for this. Our object was to knock the patient
down as fast as possible, and to keep him from rallying from,
or even feeling, the first impression made on the system; and
this appears to be more effectually done by the more intimate and
continued contact of the two bodies. My patients seemed to escape
the first stimulating effects of Mesmerism (the somnambulistic
stage), and to plunge at once into the coma. But painless opera-
tions may be as satisfactorily performed in somnambulism as
in mesmerism.
In the treatment of chronic diseases suited for Mesmerism,
“coma” is not often required. If it occurs, it is probably because
nature needs it. But we ought to be satisfied with the improve-
ment of the patient, though it be unaccompanied by any striking
phenomena. The system is often recruited, not the less effec-
tually because silently—just as the best digestion is least felt.
For refreshing the nervous system and procuring sleep, mes-
merizing “a longs courants,” as the French call it, will usually
be found sufficient. This consists in steady continuous tractions,
with the points of the spread fingers, from head to foot; the
head may be breathed upon also, and the hand allowed to rest
for a few minutes at the pit of the stomach, “en passant.” Half
an hour or an hour of this will often soothe restlessness, bring
back natural sleep, and invigorate the nervous system.
Local Mesmerizing is often very useful in removing pain (es-
pecially if the system has been previously affected by Mesmer-
ism) and a few minutes of local passes, with or without contact,
combined with -breathing on the part, will sometimes prove the
speediest anodyne for local pains.
The Bemesmerizing Processes. —The means used for dissipating
the mesmeric influence are precisely those employed for rousing
the brain in fainting or natural insensibility. Although volition,
and consciousness are suspended in natural syncope and mes-
meric coma, the involuntary part of the nervous system still
retains sensibility to organic stimulants. Cold air and friction
are the natural stimulants to the nerves of the skin, and are
the most likely means used to restore their sensibility, when
it is diminished. The respiratory nerves of the face and ches*.
are more particularly sensitive to the impression of ccld air
and friction; and these natural agents are the popular and most
successful remedies in restoring persons to their senses wno-
have fainted. This result arises, I presume, from the organic
irritation of the nerves of the skin being propagated to the brain.


thereby arousing it again to activity and re-establishing the in-
terrupted sympathy between the voluntary and involuntary parts
or the nervous system.
The equilibrium of the nervous circulation is equally deranged
m the mesmeric condition. But organic life seems to be exalted
at the expense of the life of volition, and the nerves of the
surface are often preternaturally sensitive to organic stimuli; so
much so, that blowing in the face of a mesmeric sleeper will
often cause a shock that rouses the brain into activity in a
moment, and the person instantaneously recovers Ms senses.
How this happens, I cannot imagine, unless it be by drivfng the
nervous currents back to the surface that had been coßcentrated
upon and had oppressed the brain.
Blowing sharply in the eyes, rubbing the eyelids, and eye-
brows, rapid reverse or transverse passes, sprinkling cold water
on the face and chest, or exposing the surface of the body to
a cold current of air, are the usual methods employed for de-
mesxnerizing the brain; and when locally applied are equally
efficacious in aemesmerizing cataleptic or rigid limbs.
But it sometimes happens that all these means fail to awake
the sleeper, and I know nothing for it but to leave him alone
ana let him sleep it out, which is always done without any bad
consequences that I ever observed.
ihe smallness of the cause, and the greatness of the result,
when we restore a person in a moment to the full possession
«f his senses and intellect by blowing in his eyes or sprinkling
cold water on his face when in the mesmeric coma, are quite
as remarkable in natural fainting, in which the effects from the
same causes are equally striking and instantaneous, although the
two conditions can have nothing in common in their origin.
PSYCHOLOGY PATHETISM.
The following will be sufficient to show in what respects the
Idea of Pathetism comprehends all of Mesmerism, and exceeds
all that can be done by operating through one of the external
senses merely:—
1. Pathetism operated and produced all the results of Mes-
merism without the labour of the will, or its peculiar .processes.
It, bad always been objected to Animal Magnetism, that the
efforts of the will imposed upon the operator were exhausting
to Ms system, and often injurious.
2. Pathetism produces the same and more results, without
the labour of the will, and on persons wide awake, while they
are perfectly conscious of relations and things.
3. It has the vast advantage of producing the same results
{not only on one individual, but on one, or one hundred) at the
same time!
4. Pathetism produces all the phenomena often without requir-*
ing any conditions of the patient; and it is the only theory that
can consistently attempt to do so. In Mesmerism you must (at
first, certainly) gaze at the patient, and take hold of his hands.
In Neurology you must touch your patient, in some form. So, in
hypnotism, you must have the sense of sight, and the patient must


fix his sight upon something. But not so, necessarily, with,
Pathetism; it produces results, and tells how they are produced
when no conditions whatever are required of the patient.
5. Pathetism operates without always requiring any conditions
from the attending spectators! Thus multitudes have been
affected and brought completely under control while there haa
been any amount of noise, mirth, and excitement throughout the
whole audience. In thbusands of instances persons have been
controlled immediately in their muscular emotions and mental
impressions, ia public audiences, when they were overwhelmed
with emotion, and carried almost to frenzy in their excitement.
In those cases there were, there could be, no mesmeric passes,
no “coin,” no “zinc and copper,” nor any other object to gaze at,
no “profound silence,” no electro-reactive conditions required.
6 Pathetism operates on the entire audience at one and the
same time, a thing never attempted dr done by any other theory.
old or
7 It operates not only on persons in the “normal” or walking
state, but it carries them into the higher states of Trance and
Ecstacy, and in these states induces phenomena without address
ing either one of the external senses. ~
8 It dispenses with the unfounded notions m respect to tue
pretended “electrity” of the “Tractors” of Perkins, the “zinc
and “coin.” And when results are produced by usmg
certain substances, as coin, or a piece of charcoal, this theory
shows how it is that they come to pass.
9 The method of Pathetism compelled persons to come out
from public audiences, and place themselves on my plattorm! It
may be an easy thing to experiment on persons after they have
left the audience, and seated themselves near to the operator;
but not so common to experiment upon them, and thus cause
them to leave their seats, even before they had any suspicion of
an influence exerted over them. ,
10 And more! I have, by Pathetism, controlled persons not
onlv “immediately,” even before they had taken their seats in
my puSS le!Sure room, but I -have also Fascinated them at
a distance of a mile, and in that state have drawn them to my
hall’
11 Pathetism is original, causing one somnipathist to per-
form experiments upon another, as for instance, I first entrance
A, then A entrances B, and B entrances C, and so on from one
to fifty.
UNITY.
In the theory of Pathetism, then, we find a principle which
runs through human nature, and one which is sufficient to ac-
count for onb and all of the phenomena which ever were or ever
can be artificially induced in the nervous system, because by
applying this same principle we find that one and all of taes©
diversified results can be produced by addressing the mind
through either of the external senses. After the relation is once
formed, then results may be induced by the will force merely.
PRACTICAL, DIRECTIONS FOR PATHETIZING.
From th© information already given, it is supposed tlie reader


must now either have some idea as to my method, or, at least he
must be prepared, somewhat, to appreciate the rules which
follow. , ,
It is not so easy to give specific directions to be applied gene-
rally, to all men.
PARENTAL.
If, for instance, a parent should inquire how he might best
control the mind of his child, I should wish to see them both
before I could give specific directions; because I must know
not only -the temperament and constitutional tendencies of the
child, but also the aptness, tact, and knowledge possessed by the
parent, which would enable him to adapt what he did to the
best possible advantage in the government of his child. As a
general rule, I should say that the parent who secured the most
confidence and love, would be the most able (other things being
equal) to control his child. And thus with every other person.
Adults are children in miniature, and the one whose mind is the
best constituted for this purpose, who has an aptness for con-
trolling another, will, on the whole, succeeed the best.
TREATMENT OF DISEASE.
Remember! Thai these Rules apply to the Treatment of
Disease, the breaking up of bad habits (such as the use of
tobacco, or opium, &c.), or to the production of any and every
imaginable degree or form of Nervous or Mental phenomena.
WHAT IS COMPREHENDED IN THESE RULES.
That these Rules include all and singular, that has passed
under the names of Animal “Magnetism,” or by whatever other
term an influence over the nervous system may have been
signified, whether old or new. Terms have been used for con-
cealing this fact! Hence, if you understand the theory here
explained, you never need to be at a loss to account for any
experiment that you see performed on any human being.
INTELLIGENCE.
That, in many cases, it is not necessary that the operator
should be either intelligent, or learned in Mental Philosophy.
SELF-INDUCTION.
That whatever may be the remote cause which makes an im-
pression upon the sphere or nervous system of the patient
(whether by suggestion or otherwise), the results are, in all
cases, secondarily self-induced. That is, they are brought about
by the patient’s own mind, operating on the Nutritive Fluid of
his own system.
DIVERSITY OF MEANS.
That, as the results we now speak of are always in some sense
self-induced, so they may be brought on by as many different
ways as there are methods and objects for addressing either of
the external senses.
AN IDEA.
That, after an idea has once possessed the minds of certain
persons, of any given state, that same idea may bring on that
state, either in whole or in part. And hence it is, that persons


often sink into a state of coma, or a peculiar nervous condition,
without any visible means. And, if they are made to imagine
that that state is brought on by the “spirits” who have departed
this life, it is all the same. This law of human mind explains
how it is that results are often produced by talismans, or by
visible substances that are said to have been The
mind of the patient must be directed to the subject: he must
have some previous knowledge that a result of the kind has
been produced; or, that it now, may be. Thus instructed, the
mind may be impressed by holding different substances in the
hand.
CHILDREN.
That children and the aged are not apt to be very susceptible.
ANTIPATHY.
That there should be no antipathy, natural or incidental, be-
tween the operator and his patient.
ONE OR MORE AT A TIME.
That you may operate on one or fifty at the same time. All
that is necessary is, that there should be perfect , agreement
between the operator and the patient, in relation to the ooject
of the sitting, time, place, and attending circumstances.
The patient may recline, stand up, or be seated, so that his
position may be perfectly easy.
INCREASE OF POWER.
And that if you impress one person in a company where there
are others to witness what you do, this increases your power,
as others will be likely to be sympathetically affected, whether
you desire it or not.
HOW TO FORM THE RELATION.
All that has been said enters into, or may enter into, that
influence by which you gain control over the mind of your patient.
But the specific directions for forming the relation, upon which
all your power depends, have respect to each of the External
Senses, which are the avenues through which you gain access to
the human mind. You may address yourself to either, and
produce results when the relation is once established. But the
best way for forming it is to begin wth: —
HEARING.
The of hearing. You peremptorily assume the power
to accomplish the result, without the possibility of failure. You
are active, positive and simply require your patient to be passive,
negative. This assumption is made by addresses to the sense of
hearing.
SIGHT.
The sense of sight. This is of less importance, at first, than
hearing, let, if you secure it so much the better. If the patient
fix his sight by your direction, then you have that avenue In
his mind also.
FEELING.
The sense of feeling. As this sense is located especially in


the hands, you direct the patieat to put hi* g hands togettier.
clasp them and let them remain passive mtelaP-
may also be reached through the sense of th e
or both of
affected with disease,
vnn ooerate on one at a time, stand by the side, place your
mft ham? on the top of the head, and make the . p^ SS t I S
nf the face with the other, or, stand behind the patient,
and with both hands, make the passes over the head, shou t ers,
and down the arms. TH e TIM E.
If the patient be at all susceptible, all these Rules followed
~ hppnmes a question of time; simply, as to now long
before you can get control of his nervous system. From one to
twenty minutes will determine.
POWER.
You should remember that you can exert in most cases more
rSertatas££* theßelaS you address
Or el youclole h h®s a eyTs, a“d then say to him, “Now, you cannot open
your eyes!” He tries and cannot.
IS THE RELATION ESTABLISHED?
This process fw
tion, or Relation, becomes fi y . . executes,
your patient, and this done, rcm f ur Love, so that
in his own nervous systeim the dictates r y or do wit hin
whatever you will and conuoaM That
!fi&S“ur OP W Tto’ Sn while he is und« the^
jSS SSi Men.
tal, or Spiritual state. trance bv merely speaking
In this W.f'SßfietoW"* him to tove
to him, rouse him out of it, ... real or imaginary, past,
conceptions of p . erc ®P t l^ n 4u may cause him to dream; you may
pi*esent, or absent. Thru, 3° l i m y habits of life; and thus,
change his appetites, disposi , himself by his own deter-
minations forme'dTiUhis o"fn SSTw>T under Ihe spell, provided
you tell him to do so.
THE SITTING.
The Slt relt Sh You reteisc him by the tam ot'assJclaSonfthe
for this purpose. The sense o the*hand* or the sense of
°gently ‘ back M?" portion ot the
head.


TO BE REMEMBERED.
. Tiie patient should always be made acquainted with your de-
sign, to produce any result, beforehand, before and during the
sitting. He should become passive, and settle his mind on the
lesult. His sight and hearing should be fixed or suspended so
that he may sink, without interruption, or resistance, into a state
of reverie.
The Relation once formed, the patient is completely controlled
by your suggestions, as you suggest, or tell him what he can
00, what h© cannot do, what h© shall feel or hear, or see; and
as sure as your spheres assimilate, so surely will you see nim
doing exactly what you have dictated or commanded to be done
Bear in mind that no two patients are precisely alike, and hence
the difference in your influence over different persons. Some
of you may carry up into a high state of trance, while others
can merely be impressed through their senses by what you «av
to them.
DEGREES.
As there are states which may be superinduced by Pathetism
and, as the good you may be able to do your patient will depend
more or less, upon the depth or height of the state, so to speak’
it may be well to consider each a little more in detail:
EXTERNAL.
The Sensuous state is that in which all the results are brought
about by addresses made to the external senses. And these are
threefold, and have respect to what the patient Hears Sees or
Feels. ’ ’
INTERNAL.
The second is a higher state, and extends more into the Sym-
pathetic, and this, also, is developed in three ascending 'de-
grees:—
In the first degree, the patient’s external senses are closed up
suspended.
In the second his mind is at oneness with the mind of the
operator, so that his emotions, volitions, and actions correspond
with those with whom he is in communication.
The third degree, is that state in which the somnipath becomes
lucid, and has an acute sympathetic perception of whatever is
forced upon his attention by the mere will of the operator.
SPIRITUAL.
And higher still is the next degree, which is called spiritual,
because in this state the patient hears, sees, and feels independ-
ently of his own external senses, and independently of any force
exerted upon him by the operator, or from the external world.
And this, also, may be said to be threefold, comprehending all
that went before.
The patient has knowledge (according to the degree in which
his wisdom, faculties, are developed) of the external world.
He has knowledge of the internal world. Whatever is com-
prehended in Physiology, Phrenology, the physical Organic, and
Moral Laws of the universe.
And also of the spiritual world, or the world of causes, the


spheres above, the Laws of Association, Progression, and De-
velopment, the Final Destiny of the Race. In each of these
states, various shades of difference may be observed, all depend-
ing on the degree in which the patieut’s capacities are de-
veloped. But it should be remembered, that one will succeed'
the other in the process of time. The laws of progression are
very rapid Hence the necessity of patience and perseverance in
the use of the means before described, under the encouraging as-
surance that there are but few, if any, cases where they can be
conscientiously used in vain.
CAUTIONS.
There is really no need of any difficulty with your patient, at
any time. Nevertheless, for the want of attention to some of
the preceding rules, you may possibly, in some unlooked-for emer-
gency, find yourself unable to determine what should be done,
and you will remember it, perhaps, if put down here under the
head of cautions. ... ,
Never become, yourself, excited while your patient is under
your influence, in a deep state of trance.
If your patient becomes-convulsed, do not be alarmed. Re-
lieve him in the manner I have directed.
If you find it impossible to rouse your patient from a deep
state of trance, let him sleep it away himself. .
Do not suffer disagreeable persons to approach one who is
in a state of trance. , .
If your patient should relapse into an unconscious state after
having been once entranced, you should forbid it! Do some-
thing to prevent it, while he is in the trance, and him,
“I will prevent it: you will not, cannot fall into it again.
HOW TO BE A
SPIRIT MEDIUM
RULES TO BE OBSERVED WHEN FORMING
SPIRITUAL CIRCLES.
The spirit circle is the assembling together of a given number
of persons for the purpose of seeking communion with the
spirits who have passed away from earth into the higher world
of souls. The chief advantage of such an assembly is the mutual
impartation and reception of the combined magnetisms of the
assemblage. These in combination form a force stronger than
that of an isolated subject: first enabling spirits to commune with
great power; next developing the latent gifts of mediumship in
such members of the circle as are thus endowed; and, finally,
promoting that harmonious and social spirit of fraternal inter-
course which is one of the ©special aims of the spirits mission.
The first conditions to be observed relate to the persons who
compose the circle. These should be, as far as possible, of


opposite temperaments,, as positive anfl negative in disposition,
whether male or female; also of moral characters, pure minds,
ahd not marked by repulsive points of either physical or mental
condition. The physical temperaments should contrast with
each other, but no person suffering from decidedly chronic
disease, or o’f a very debilitated physique, should be present at
any circle unless it is formed expressly for healing purposes. I
would recommend the number of the circle never to be less
than three, nor more than twelve.
The use growing out of the association of differing tempera-
ments is to form a battery on the principles of electricity or
galvanism, composed of positive and negative elements, the
sum of which should be unequal. No person of a very strongly
positive temperament or disposition should be present, as any
magnetic spheres emanating from the circle will overpower that
of the spirits, who must always be positive to the circle in order
to produce phenomena. It is not desirable to have more than two
already well-developed mediums in a circle, mediums always
. absorbing the magnetism of the rest of the party; hence, when
’there are too many present, the force, being divided, cannot
operate successfully with any.
Of Temperature—Never let the apartment he overheated, or
even close. As an unusual amount of magnetism is liberated at
a circle, the room is always warmer than ordinary, and should
be very well ventilated. Avoid strong light, which, by producing
excessive motion in the atmosphere, disturbs the manifestations.
A very subdued light is the most favorable for any manifesta-
tions of a magnetic character, especially for spiritual mag-
netism.
Of the Positions to be Observed. —If the circle is one which
meets another periodically, and is composed of the same persons,
let them occupy the same seats (unless changed under spiritual
direction), and sit (as the most favorable of all positions) round
a table, their hands laid on it, with palms downwards. It is be-
lieved that the wood, when charged, becomes a conductor,
without the necessity of touching or holding hands. I should
always suggest the propriety of employing a table as a conductor,
especially as all tables in household use are more or less mag-
netically charged already. If flowers and fruit are in the room,
see that they are just freshly gathered, otherwise remove them;
also avoid sitting in a room with many minerals, metals, or
glasses; these all injuriously affect sensitives, of whom me-
diums are the type.
. I recommend the seance to be opened either with prayer or
music, vocal or instrumental; after which, subdued, quiet, and
harmonizing conversation is better than wearisome silence; but
let the conversation be always directed toward the purpose of
the gathering, and never sink into discussion, or rise to emphasis;
let it be gentle, quiet, and spiritual, until phenomena begin to
be manifest. Always have a slate, or pen, pencil, or paper on
the table, so as not to be. obliged to rise to procure them. Es-
pecially avoid all entering or quitting the room, moving about,
irrelevant conversation or disturbances within or without the
circle room, after the seance has been once commenced.
The spirits are far more punctual to seasons, faithful to


promise, and periodical in action, than mortals. Endeavor,
then, to fix your circle at a convenient hour when you will be
least interrupted, and do not fail in your appointments. Do not
admit unpunctual late comers; nor, if possible, suffer the air of
a room to be disturbed in any way after the sitting commences.
Nothing but necessity, indisposition, or impressions (to be here-
after described) should warrant the least disturbance of the sit-
ting, which should never exceed two hours, unless an extension
of time be solicited of the spirits. Let the seance always extend
to one hour, evdn if no results are obtained; it sometimes requires
all that time for spirits to form their battery of the materials
furnished. Let it be also remembered that all circles are ex-
perimental; hence no one should be discouraged if phenomena
are not produced after the first few sittings. Stay with the
same circle for six sittings: if no phenomena are then produced
(provided all the above conditions are observed), you may be
sure you are rightly assimilated to each other; you do not form
the requisite combinations, or neutralize each other. In that
case, break up, and let that circle of members meet with other
persons; that is, change one, two, or three persons of your
circle for others, and so on till you succeed.
A well-developed test-medium may sit without injury for any
person, of any description of character or temperament, but a
circle sitting for mutual development should never admit per-
sons addicted to bad habits, criminals, sensualists, strongly posi-
tive persons of any kind, whether rude, sceptical, violent tem-
pered, or dogmatical. An humble, candid, inquiring spirit, unpre-
judiced, and receptive of truth, is the only frame of mind in
which to sit for phenomena, the delicate magnetism of which
is shaped, tempered, and made or marred as much by mental as
physical conditions. When once any of the circle can commu-
nicate freely and conclusively with the spirits, the spirits can
and will take charge of and regulate the future movements of
the circle.
Of Impressions.—lmpressions are the voices of spirits speak-
ing to .our spirits, or else the monitions of the spirit within us,
and should always be respected and followed out, unless (which
is very rare) suggestive of actual wrong in act or word. At the
opening of the circle, one or more of the members are often
impressed to. change seats with others; one or more impressed
with the desire to withdraw, or a strong feeling of repulsion to
some member of the circle, makes it painful to remain there.
Let any or all of these impressions be faithfully regarded, and,
at commencing, pledge to each other the promise that no offence
shall be taken by following out impressions.
If a strong impression to write, speak, sing, dance, or gesticu-
late, possess any mind present, follow it out faithfully. It has a
meaning, if you cannot at first realise it. Never feel hurt in
your own person, nor ridicule your neighbours, for any failures
to express, or at first discover the meaning of the spirits im-
pressing you. . >
Spirit-control is often deficient, and at first almost always im-
perfect. But, by often yielding to it, your organism becomes
more flexible, and the spirit more experienced, and practice
in control is absolutely necessary for spirits as well as mortals. If


:
■ "li.‘ aaclift'e, Printer, 44 Campbell Street, Sydney,
dark and evil-disposed manifest to you, never drive them away,
but always strive to elevate them, and treat them as you
would mortals under similar circumstances. Do not always at-
tribute falsehoods to lying spirits or deceiving mediums. Many
mistakes occur in the communion of which you cannot always be
aware.
Strive in truth, but rebuke error gently; and do not always
attribute it to design, but rather to mistake in so difficult and
experimental a stage of the communion as mortals at present
enjoy the spirits.
Unless strictly charged by spirits to do otherwise, do not con-
tinue to hold sittings with the same parties for more than a
twelvemonth. After that time, if not before, fresh elements of
magnetism are absolutely essential. Some of the original circle
should withdraw and others take their place.
All persons are subject to spirit influence and spirit guidance
and control, but not all can so externalize this power as to use
it consciously, or be what is significantly called a medium; and
finally, let it be remembered, that except in the case of trance-
speakers no medium can ever hope successfully to exercise his
or her gift in a large or promiscuous assembly; while trance-
speakers, no less than mediums for any other gift, can never be
influenced by spirits far beyond their own normal capacity in the
matter, of the intelligence rendered; the magnetism of the
spirit and the spirit-circle being but a. quickening fire, which
inspires the brain, stimulates the faculties, and, like a hot-house
process on plants, forces in abnormal prominence dormant or
latent powers of mind, but creates nothing. Even in the case of
merely automatic speakers, writers, tapping, tipping, and other
forms of test mediums, the intelligence or idea of the spirit is
always measurably shaped by the capacity idiosyncrasies of the
medium. All spirit power is thus limited to expression by or-
ganism through which it works; and spirits may control, inspire,
and influence the human mind, but do not change or re-create it.


Lee’s 3000 Priceless Recipes.
A unique collection of tried formulas and simple methods.
A book of recipes and nothing but recipes. A handy and
handsome little industrial encyclopaedia. Seven leading de-
partments each thoroughly indexed. Recipes for the Drue-
gist the Chemist Toilet Articles, the Household, the Farm
and the Dairy, all Irades and Professions. 368 Pages
new edition—as complete as it is excellent
MY PRICE, 2/- POSTED. ‘
BYRONS DON JUAN.
Price, 2/- Post Free.
THE ART OF BOXING. By ned donnelly.
A thorough manual of Sparring and Self-Defence, lllus-
trated with 40 Engravings. Post free, 1/6.
" WOKK " HANDBOOKS.
i “ SEFU 1 L T J? + H N | ? AI - 1 VOLUMES— A Series of Practi-
nnL M n anUa S Edited by leading experts. Illustrated with
posted° US
Incubators
Sf»‘es W a Beekeepers’ ''S'clr^e 3 ' 1 """ 8 ROIMS
tSSTSSm** A °“
Bookbinding Mounting and Framing Pic-
Bootmaking and Mending tures S c
Building Model Boats Photoeranhic rhpmistru
C, Ca S t?n°e ellinB and P ' aSter Photofraphy Simplified
casting Pianos
Conjuring Apparatus Pumps and Hydraulic name
Cycle Repairing and Adjusting Rustic Carpentry
nw™fmn C Jobbing Sewing Machines
Dynamo and Electric Motor Smiths’ Work
Building "Soldering, Brazing and
Electric Accumulators Welding s
“Electric Bells and Telephones Tailoring
Lighting Taxidermy
“Miniature Electric Light Terra-Cotta Work
E! ec tro°p I a t i n'g r V Batteri6S a " d Sig "’
Engraving Metals Tinplate Work
r c n c lt iL re * Repa l- rms Toy Making >
Class Writing, Embossing, Upholstery
onrl ETncnm lA# nul. r
Gramophones a"S Phonographs Vi S U monts 0 S,H " Bed
Handyman’s 1,000 Practical Window Blinds
R ® cei j? ts > Tl ?® Wireless Telegraphy
HnuMn o^ o ? ’c" _ ! Wood Finishing
H and* S ' sns ’ T| ckets | “Workshop Hints for Munition
and Posters | Workers
' * New Volumes.
SIR ROBERT BEAK, Sydney s Cheapest Book Store, 67-69 Market Street.


USEFUL BOOKS FOR EVERYBODY.
HOW TO STRENGTHEN THE MEMORY, OR, L
AND SCfENTIFIC METHODS OF NEVER FORCETTINC, by
M. L. Holbrook, M.D. Synopsis The Best Foundation for a
Good Memory; Memory and Nutrition; Unconscious Memory, Sug-
gestions, Associations, Links and Chains; Methodical Association,
Memory of Name: Memory of Forms and Faces; Memory °f Places
and Its Culture; Musical Memory; Memory for Facts and Events,
Men ory for Figures and Date; How to Learn a New Language,
Lawyers’ Memories; Suggestions for Clergymen and fakers;
Mastering the Contents of a Book; Art of Forgetting, etc., etc.
Price, Is. 3d. post free.
THE LIGHTNING CALCULATOR, READY RECKONER,
AND MENTAL ARITHMETIC.—A Book of Rapid Processes, Useful
Tables, Mental Rules, and Wages Table, for Clerks, Book-keepers,
Accountants, Teachers, Mechanics, Trades-people, etc. Price,
Is. 3d. post free.
SPEECHES AND TOASTS How to Make and Prepare them.
Being a Handbook of Social Speechmaking for every occasion, with
a list of Toasts and Sentiments, Directions for the Arrangements
of Local Parliaments, Temperance Addresses and Rules ot Social
Precedence. Is. 6d. post free.
THE LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN’S MODEL LETTER
WRITER. —A Complete Guide to Correspondence on all Subjects
with Household and Commercial Forms. Containing a complete
Collection of Business Letters; Letters of Introduction; Letters ot
Application for Employment; Letters of Recommendation; Social
Letters; Congratulation and Condolence; Letters of Love and
Courtship, Etc., Etc.—Price, Is. 6d. post free.
THE ETIQUETTE OF MODERN SOCIETY.—A Guide to
Good Manners in every possible situation—Balls, Conversation,
Correspondence, Courtship, Dancing, Dinner Parties, Dress Driv-
ing Funeral, Introductions, Marriage, Mourning, Presents, Riding,
Travelling Visiting, Walking, etc. Is. 6d. post free.
THE BALL-ROOM GUIDE; or, How to Dance.— Containing
all the Newest Fashionable Dances. Revised and edited by to -
ward Scott, author of “Dancing As It Should Be, etc. Is. dd.
post free.
EVERY MAN HIS OWN CARPENTER.—A description of the
Timber, Tools, and Simple Processes used in Building and Wood-
working for the help and guidance of all Amateur Artisans and
Mechanics. With numerous Diagrams, etc. Is. 6d. post tree.
SIR ROBERT BEAR, Publisher anti Importer, 67-69 Market-st,., Sydney
