

The Tooraweenah District
sas c!as *
JL
■ ‘
3
7~
Va
-d-
-- d-cr
cr-
C~


.
■*
iitell#' -•■
• .'-a-omJSli
'k-Jam
-. . ,,-gis5^r
Bp .
. ‘ .%««■ v
r -♦ -
Ur’agon Falls, near Tooraweenah.


:==»


This attitude is more justifiable than it looks as there has never been a
drought but what this district has carried a large number of agistment stock,
both sheep and large stock, in addition to its normal carrying capacity. In
the year 1915, between the Ist January and the 30th June, there were 43,370
sheep and 4,795 large stock taken on agistment on the different holdings
hereabout, and this number has been exceeded in the present drought,
especially if you count the stock which the landholders have bought at
drought prices, in excess of their usual flocks.
BEAUTY AND UTILITY,
THE STORY THE PHOTOS TELL,
Some evidence of the beauty of the landscape and of its fertility is pro-
vided by the photos dispersed through this article. And they do not repre-
sent any picked spots or conditions. Practically the whole of the country to
the west of the mountains would furnish similar pictures if subjected to the
same treatment, and large areas would be treated so after railway communi-
cation had been established.
The bare fact that, here*, at a distance of 27 miles from a rail way station
with one of the worst stretches of road in the State intervening, there are
single owners growing 2000 and 3000 acres of wheat, is evidence enough of
itself of the productive capacity of the district to justify the investigation of
those responsible for railway extension in New South Wales.


THE CAPACITY OF THE LAND.
THE USEFUL KURRAJONG.
The whole of the line from here to Mendooran would traverse country
equal in productive capacity and superior in drought resisting qualities to any
in the State, and I make this statement without fear of successful contra-
diction. There are hundreds of thousands of acres of rich, loamy soil,
interspersed with richer alluvial flats, capable of growing any crops suitable
to these regions and carrying at all times an always available drought re-
serve of fodder on the thousands of kurra jong trees, which in places are only
a few yards apart. These trees exert no injurious effect on plant life, and
grass or herbage will grow just as abundantly at their very roots as else-
where.
In the present drought these beautiful trees, which are a positive orna-
ment to the landscape, in addition to their utility, have been responsible for
the salvage of a vast number of sheep and cattle which otherwise must have
died. This would have been a loss not only to their owners but also to the
Slate.
Had there been railway facilities for getting stock here many more
could have been successfully carried through on the reserve of kurrajong yet
available.
THE MOUNTAINS.
GOOD FOR GRAZING.
The mountains themselves, which furnish some beautiful scenery, carry






large quantities of kurrajong and are all utilised for grazing purposes—in
some cases carrying over a sheep to the acre at normal times. Often in
drought 3 and 4 sheep to the acre are fed on the kurrajong. They are
situated some 6 or 8 miles to the East and North-east of the township, and
contribute vastly more, in increased fertility, to the cultivateable area to he
effected by the construction of the Tooraweenah Line than they detract from
it in area.
TOWARDS THE PILLIGA SCRUB .
GOOD WHEAT LANDS.
If the line were continued from here out towards the Pilliga Scrub it
would open up a vast area of wheat and grazing land, and would be much
more profitable than the continuation from Coonabarabran, besides being
of a much better gradient and easier to construct.
OLD TRIAL SURVEY.
THROUGH SPLENDID COUNTRY.
The old trial survey of the Mudgee-Coonamble proposal, which runs some
two or three miles to the West of the town, comes through the valuable pro-
perty of Bearbong, owned by Mr. Anderson, who grows in the vicinity of 50
acres of lucerne, from which he used to secure numerous and heavy cuts of
hay until he decided to use the area for grazing, owing to the high cost of
haulage, would appear to be the best route.
This line would include verv little of the hilly or mountainous country


within a tract of land twelve miles on either side of it. Basing my calculations
on a large experience of this country, I have no hesitation in saying that there
would be 90 per cent., oral the very least 80 per cent., of it capable of wheat
production by the ordinary methods of cultivation.
GREAT WHEAT AREAS.
Assuming that the tract of country to be affected by the line
would commence twelve miles this side of Mendooran, and that it would
extend twelve miles beyond the terminus, there would be an area of about
550,000 acres within 12 miles of the line, of which 480,000 acres would be
suitable for agriculture. But there would also be a large area outside this
pale which would be benefited by this construction, and 50 per cent, or more
of it would also be suitable for wheat.
THE STRONG CASE.
FOR THE RAILWAY.
With these facts in view it should not be hard to convince the authorities
that the construction of this line is more warranted than is, for instance, that
from Craboon to Coolah, where the total area to be effected only extends five
or six miles, and in places not that, on either side of it, and where even the
area of lucerne land concerned, the strongest point in favor of that con-
struction, is no more than that existing here, where there is an additional
500,000 or 600,000 acres of wheat and grazing land to furnish freight.
The wheat from the cultivateable area here, in one or two seasons,


== = -■ ~ M


would probably amount to more than the total output of the mines which are,
perhaps, a secondary justification for the Coolah construction.
THE MOUNTAINS NO HINDRANCE.
THEIR SCENIC VALUE.
The mountains, as I have already pointed out, will interfere very little
with the area to be affected from an agricultural standpoint, but they can
offer scenery which will bear comparison with much of what is raved about
in the Blue Mountains, and, with railway facilities, stand a good chance of
becoming the summer resort of the West.
A GLORIOUS OUTLOOK.
A TOURISTS’ PARADISE.
AND REST PLACE.
There is no more inspiring sight than to stand on the summit of some of
the higher points, Exmouth, the Warrumbungle Spire, or Mount Naaman,
which are over 4,000 feet above sea level, and look out over the vast area of
plain extending far out to the West, where they form a straight and unbroken
line against the horizon; or to gaze, on the other hand, over an interminable
jumbled mass of mountain tops with deep, cool, inviting valleys down in be-
tween, where little sparkling streams glisten in the sun overhung by huge
apple and kurrajong trees.
This is no fictitious picture—it really exists, and many a sunburned
Westerner would be greatly benefited by a spell of exploration here in the


Gathering the Reward of Toil.
This was taken in the pioneering days when the nearest rail to here
was Mudgee—llo miles.


View of “Everleigh.”


summer, if facilities were offered him and the fad of the existence of the
resort became known.
AND GOOD FOR SHEEP.
In dwelling on this picture 1 do not wish to lose sight of the fact that,
among even the roughest and wildest of the mountains there are sheep de-
pastured, and some of the mountain properties carry their sheep to the acre,
year in and year out, thus beating a lot of the plain country at ordinary
times, and placing it clean out of competition in time of drought.
THE MINERAL POSSIBILITIES.
OF THE MOUNTAINS.
A few other points that should contribute to the favorable consideration
of this matter by the Powers That Be are the mineral possibilities of the
mountains, where some very fair samples of opal have been obtained; the
comparatively high rainfall of the route —27 inches—and the high state of
development which has already been attained, ensuring an early return of
revenue.
FREIGHT ASSURED IN ADVANCE.
This latter, indeed, is a very weighty argument, as the freight is assured
ahead of the construction, whereas, in most cases, it takes years of develop-
ment afterwards for the affected area to be brought into a suitable state to
respond to the facilities offered by the rail.
A. W. YEO, Hon. Secretary,
Tooraweenah Railway League


p "wm
■Pr ■ . ; ; ;v
jjjjk +
■‘ •: , ; J '
&/J&, fc ;o lv -
jg£&*. ‘V*-
"'■ - •* *4 »‘~ i iyP *•
,. *r^
Uargon Falls, Tooraweenah.




PIT 1 Guardian
