

tij'7 ®
t / d)
ROBERT KYFFIN THOMAS
BORN AUGUST 19, 1851.
DIED JUNE 13, 1910.






SIR ROBERT KYFFIN THOMAS.


The Late Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas.
[From The Register.
Deep and widespread regret will be
caused by the announcement of the
death of Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, se-
nior proprietor of The Register and its
associated journals. When Sir Robert
returned at the beginning of the year
from his visit to London, where he at-
tended the Imperial Press Conference
on behalf of this State, not even his
most intimate friends suspected the pre-
sence of the deadly malady which has
so swiftly brought an eminently useful
career to its lamented ending. Com-
paiatively recently the new Knight
was gratefully acknowledging the
numerous congratulations which were
publicly and privately showered
upon him on his elevation to titular dis-
tinction, and the cordial wishes ex-
pressed that he might be long spared to
continue his useful services to the com-
munity. The sad sequel illustrates once
more that significant mystery of mor-
tality which so often is realized in the
loss to society of valuable lives in the
zenith of success. In all his rela-
tions —domestic, business, and public—
Robert Kyffin Thomas was a gentle-
man in the best sense of the word —true,
unassuming, considerate, and honour-
able. His affability, geniality, cour-
tesy, and chivalry won him hosts
oc firm friends. As an employer
he was regarded as a father by young
pien, and a comrade and faithful coun-
June 14, 1910.]
seller by their elders; and his contribu-
tions to citizenship were based on broad
sympathies, vigorous comrnonsense, and
profound patriotism.
In a special manner Sir Robert
Thomas was identified with the Aus-
tralian press. He belonged to the
third generation of the pro-
prietors of The Register, whose first
issue in London prefaced the founding
of the province of South Australia.
His family annals a>e uniquely connec-
ted with the pioneer newspaper of this
State. The progress of The Register
reflects the progress of South Australia,
and necessarily it is the only journal
which contains in its full records
a complete history of a State.
Father and grandfather had been
founders and proprietors of The Regis-
ter, and the son and grandson spent his
whole life in the atmosphere of the
office. For a generation he carried the
responsibilities of proprietorship, and
always strove to maintain the best tra-
ditions of journalism. A newspaper may
answer to many joumah'stie tests—their
number is constantly multiplying under
the stress of competition, and with the
growth of intercommunication —but
however pungent and smart may be its
articles or complete or thrilling its
news, or however popular it may seem,
it will utterly fail to discharge the pub-
lic trust if it shall be wanting in that


almost indefinable quality generally des-
cribed as tone —a compound of good
taste, high aim, fairplay, chivalry, and
magnanimity. Probably the loftiest tri-
bute which may be justly paid to the
memory of Robert TTyffln Thomas is
that —although not actively associated
with the purely literary work of the
paper—he identified his personality with
the character which he recognised the
community had a right to expect The
Register should sustain. Thus his
fellow-workers deeply mourn the loss of
a colleague whose example was a liv-
ing inspiration.
It is not remarkable that as an old
journalist and a newspaper conductor
Sir Robert Thomas should have mani-
fested a keen interest in public
aft airs. Those who knew him intima-
tely, however, were pleased that he con-
quered his natural diffidence, and ac-
cepting the responsibilities of influen-
tial citizenship surrendered himself
cheerfully to the discharge of
it-; duties. He entered into the work
of the Chamber of Commerce with en-
thusiasm, and held the office of Pre-
sident with credit to himself and hon-
our to the institution. Of his many ser-
vices to patriotic, scientific, and other
societies and civic movements it is
unnecessary to speak here in detail.
Always his generous sympathies found
full expression in philanthropic enter-
prises. The confidence felt in his ripe
experience, mature judgment, and fine
tact was indicated by his appointment
during the Imperial Press Conference
as Chairman of the Committee of Over-
sea Delegates, a position he filled with
commendable zeal and distinction.
Only his more intimate friends learned
with what pains he had unostenta-
tiously endeavoured among men of ac-
tion and leaders of thought in the old
country to sow the seed of a kindly in-
terest in the welfare of his native State.
By members of the mystic craft
his recent elevation to the Deputy-
Grand Mastership was thoroughly
popular, because he reflected in
his actions the noble principles
of the Order. If the stability of a
State rests upon the character of its
leading citizens, South Australia
may indeed face the future with cour-
age while among her native sons can be
numbered men of whom Robert Kyffin
Thomas was a fitting representative.
2


A BIOGRAPHICAL OUTLINE.
[From The Register.
Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas died at his
residence, Ardington, Brougham place,
North Adelaide, on Monday morning,
in his fifty-ninth year. When Sir Robert
returned to Adelaide early this year from
a tour of the world he was apparently rein-
vigorated. Later he developed an ailment
which somewhat puzzled the medical
men who were consulted, and it made
such rapid progress that a lew
weeks ago the ordinary routine of
his life had to be suspended com-
pletely. Sir Robert bore up courageously
throughout a particularly trying ill-
ness. Excessive weakness eventually over-
took him, and the end came peacefully.
The news of his death will shock
all sections of the community. Many
who were not acquainted with his personal
charms respected him for the honourable
reputation he bore in a position of great
influence. South Australia cannot afford
to lose such men, and the mutability
of human life is jarring to the senses
on an occasion like the present. Sir
Robert was called away when he was only
just entering into the fullness of a fine
career. He gave to his country a
self-denying measure of good citizenship,
and his death will be the occasion of wide-
spread mourning. There is no doubt that
Sir Robert’s health was undermined by
his strenuous efforts in the work
of the great Imperial Press Con-
ference in London last year. He
was elected Chairman of all the overseas
delegations at that memorable gathering, and
an historian has recorded that “he dis-
charged his duty with great acceptability.”
The late King Edward recognised his merit
by bestowing a knighthood upon him—a
compliment that was received with uni-
versal favour in South Australia. One of
the leading London dailies drew approving
June 14, 1910.]
attention to the rare event of a non-official
colonist receiving such a decoration, and the
honor was also distinctive from the fact
that Sir Robert Thomas's knighthood was
the last created by “The Great Peace-
maker.”
—The Register and Heredity.—
The history of The Register and its asso-
ciated journals is so well known that it
seems almost superfluous to dwell upon the
ancestry of the late Sir Robert Thomas.
He represented the third generation
of the founder of the South Aus-
tralian press. He was a son of the
late Mr. William Kyffin Thomas, and
a grandson of the late Mr. Robert
Thomas, the London law stationer
of Fleet street w r ho launched The
Register on the other side of the world
in June, 1836, and who probably was
the first of his line to break away from the
Welsh yeomanry to whom his fathers be-
longed for many generations in Mont-
gomeryshire, and to embark upon a busi-
ness career. On his last trip to Great Bri-
tain Sir Robert visited the beautiful Welsh
county where his ancestors had been land-
holders, and had long borne an honourable
name. Amongst other places seen was
Rhantregwnwyn, near Llandysilio, the
birthplace of his grandfather. In
a biographical sketch of the de-
ceased, the author of “A History of Ade-
laide and Vicinity” remarked: —“One of the
most pleasant features in the event-
ful history of The Register consists in
the maintenance of the hereditary principle
in the proprietary. The character of a news-
paper is necessarily greatly influenced by
those associated with it. Indeed, it may be
said to reflect -the personality and intel-
lectuality of its conductors, and The Regis-
ter owes no small share of the high tone
which it has always maintained to the pre


sence in its management during the greater
part of its career of representatives of a
family of sterling worth and great and tried
ability.” Sir Robert, indeed, has leit an
inspiring record behind him in that respect;
and, in accordance with a family tradition,
maintained for generations, the papers
issued from this office will still continue to
bear the name of a member of the family
represented in the proprietary.
■ —Early Days.—■
Robert Kyffin Thomas was born at Nails-
worth on August 19, 1851. His father (the
late Mr. William Kyffin Thomas) had a
farm holding there, and used to ride
to and from The Register Office
on horseback. The family left Nails-
worth in about 1855, and subsequently
occupied a fine family residence in Wyatt
street, off Grenfell street, which was then
a residential quarter of the city. Sir
Robert received his education at the Ade-
laide Educational Institution, cf which Mr.
J. L. Young was the head master. At the
age of 18 years he entered the service cf
The Register and its associated journals,
and spent the first few months in the
mechanical department, in order to become
acquainted with the details of that impor-
tant branch of newspaper production. He
next applied himself to gaining a knowledge
of the literary department, and eventual y
devoted himself Avholly to reporting work.
In due course he took a seat in the Parlia-
mentary Gallery, became Chief of the Re-
porting Staff, and had charge of Hansard
duties until 1882, when the general manage-
ment began to claim his attention, and he
was followed as Chief of the Reporting Staff
by Mr. W. J. Sowden.
—Proprietary Associations.—
Responsibility fell to Sir Robert some-
what early in life. The years 1877-8 were
sorrowful periods for those associated with
The Register. Death came upon the
proprietary triumvirate with an exacting
completeness. The first to go was Mr. E.
W. Andrews, ay ho passed away early in 1877.
In May of the folloAAnng year Mr. John
HoAA'ard Clark succumbed to a pulmonary
complaint, and on July 4, 1878. Mr. Wil-
liam Kyffin Thomas died at the age of 56.
In the previous year Sir Robert had been
taken into the proprietary as representing
the third generation of the Thomas family
concerned in directing the destinies of The
Register. From 1878 until 1890 Sir Robert
was associated with Mr. J. Harvey
Finlayson and the late Mr. Charles Day
in the proprietary. The latter retired in
1890, and the Finlayson-Thomas partner-
ship continued for nine years, when Mr.
W. J. Sowden (the present Editor of The
Register) and Mr. Evan Kyffin Thomas
(brother of the deceased) joined the firm.
It continued so for another nine years,
Mr. Finlayson having retired a couple of
years ago, Mr. W. J. Sowden and Mr. E.
K. Thomas now remain as the surviving
partners. For nearly a quarter of a
century Sir Robert exercised a close per-
sonal direction of the business of The
Register, and had the satisfaction of
seeing it enter upon a period of prosperity
unexampled in its long history.
—As an Employer.—
The news of Sir Robert’s death was re-
ceived in all departments of The Register
Office with genuine grief, and the separa-
tion will be felt almost as keenly among
his employes as in the home circle. Pro-
bably no more just employer ever lived
than Robert Kyffin Thomas, and the esprit
de corps of an establishment could never
be disturbed under such happy auspices.
The active personal contact that he
had with all departments made him
fully sensible of the trials and difficulties of
newspaper production, and added to the
natural sympathy thus created were all
the instincts of a gentleman. His memory
will ever be regarded with affection.
—Outside Interests.—
Almost unlimited demands were made
upon Sir Robert as a patriotic citizen, and
he always chose wisely the directions in
which his energies should be placed. He
never accepted a position on any committee
or executive for mere ornamental purposes,
but insisted on playing a practical part in
4


any movement with which he became asso-
ciated. He was a member of the general
committee of the Adelaide Chamber of
Commerce and President in 1906-7; a mem-
ber of the Council of the Royal Geographi-
cal Society, South Australian branch, and
President in 1900-3; a member of the coun-
cil of the Zoological and Acclimatization
Society; President of the Adelaide Glee
Club; a Vice-President of the Adelaide Or-
pheus Society; a Vice-President of the Uni-
versity Society of Commerce; Treasurer of
the Old Colonists’ Association; an ex-Presi-
dent of the Master Printers’ Asso-
ciation; a Trustee of the Wyatt
Benevolent Institution; and a mem-
ber of the committee of the Queen’s
Home. He took an active part in the rais-
ing and equipment cf the South Australian
Bushmen’s Corps, which, as the result of
public subscriptions, was sent to the South
African war. Sir Robert was also a mem-
ber of the committee of the Patriotic Fund,
which distributed relief to victims of the
war. He was prominently connected with the
movement that resulted in the erection of a
statue and a monument to Col. Light in
Victoria and Light squares respectively, and
interested himself in similar efforts to per-
petuate the memory of Capt. Sturt.
—The War Memorial and Art Gallery.—
The deceased’s name was closely associ-
ated with the patriotic movement that gave
to Adelaide the magnificent war memorial
outside the gates of Government House.
When he was in England in 1902 he w r as
asked by the committee of the Patriotic
Fund in Adelaide to make enquiries re-
garding the best means of obtaining a
memorial to the South Australian soldiers
who had fallen in South Africa. The Agent-
General of the day (Mr. H. A. Grainger),
whose advice he sought, placed him in
communication with Capt. Adrian Jones, a
sculptor and painter in -water colours, who
is noted for his talent as a delineator of
horses and soldiers. Capt. Jones put his
ideas for a memorial into the form of a
sketch, which was sent to the committee
in Adelaide, and immediately proceeded
with the preparation of a small clay model.
This was submitted for the approval of the
Agent-General, Sir Edwin Smith. Mr, J.
Harvey Finlayson, Mr. A. W. Ware, and
Sir Robert Thomas, to whom Mr. Briton
Riviere and Mr. Hamo Thornycroft—two
distinguished members of the Royal
Academy— at the suggestion of Lord Tenny-
son, gave their invaluable advice. The re-
sult was that the model was accepted, and
Capt. Jones immediately proceeded with the
preparation of the full-size clay model. Sir
Robert was also fortunate during the same
visit to London in obtaining two notable
presentations to the National Art Gallery
in Adelaide. Mr. Carmichael Thomas (the
managing director of The Graphic and The
Daily Graphic) kindly allowed him to choose
a number of pictures from The Graphic
Gallery, which contains a valuable collec-
tion of works of art. Mr. Grainger, Mr.
Finlayson, and Sir Robert made a selection,
and 17 pictures were sent to the. Agent-
General to be forwarded to Adelaide,
where they are now on view. Mr. Frank
Lloyd (principal proprietor of The Daily
Chronicle) offered the visitor a number of
line drawings, which have proved valuable
to art students who wished to perfect
themselves in the art of newspaper illu-
strations.
• —Freemasonry.—
Sir Robert Thomas had been a staunch
Freemason for many years. He was initi-
ated in Lodge St. Alban, of which he was
Worshipful Master for the year 1897-8 —the
first Master who had been initiated in the
lodge. Ten years later he assisted in the
installation of his brother, Mr. Evan
Kyffin Thomas, to the same position.
He always maintained great interest in
Lodge St. Alban, and as a Past Master as T
sisted in the ceremonies. When he re-
turned from England this year he was
asked to allow himself to be nominated as
Deputy Grand Master of the Grand Lodge
of South Australia, and his acceptance was
received with obvious satisfaction through-
out the craft. At the half-yearly commu-
nication, held recently, he was unanimously
elected to the position.


—lmperial Press Conference. —
Sir Robert paid three visits to the old
world —in 1884, 1902, and 1909. The last
trip was by far the most important, be-
cause its objective was the first Imperial
Press Conference, as previously mentioned,
which the deceased attended as the repre-
sentative of South Australia. He was the
only delegate to solely represent a State.
A complete record of the conference appears
in Thomas H. Hardman’s “A Parliament of
the Press,” to which Lord Rosebery wrote
a preface. Under the heading “Some of
the Helpers” the author remarked: —“The
name of Mr. Kyfiin Tnomas, of the Ade-
laide Register, calls for special mention in
any reference to those to whom acknow-
ledgments are due. Mr. Kyfiin Thomas
was selected by the Australian and New
Zealand delegates as their Chairman when
they reached Canada. On his arrival in
London he was chosen as Chairman of the
whole body of oversea delegates. He
has endeared himself to all his brother
delegates bv his modesty and self-efface-
ment, while his unfailing tact has im-
mensely contributed to the smooth work-
ing of the conference.” Referring to the
knighthood bestowed on the deceased. The
London Standard remarked that its crea-
tion Avas a distinct compliment to
the press of the overseas dominions. Other
English newspapers referred to the honour
as a fitting reAvard for Sir Robert’s efforts
to strengthen Imperial relations, and ac-
knoA\ r ledged his success as an organizer.
—A Personal Tribute. —
“The Australian mail brought the last
of many letters in his genial, breezy style,
and on the nest day came the cable neAVs
of his death. Robert Kyfiin Thomas will
oe missed by all who ever met him, but to
those who came together for the Imperial
Press Conference a few short months ago,
and are once more scattered throughout
the Empire’s great cities, his passing leaves
a, void which will not be filled.
“Tactful, firm, broad minded, he always
gauged the wishes of his colleagues, and
throughout the three arduous weeks of
the conference in which we worked so
closely together, I had many an opportu-
nity of appreciating the real worth of his
endearing personality.
“When, a month or two ago, the great
King who has gone conferred upon Sir
Robert the last knighthood of his reign,
his friends at home and overseas all re-
joiced with him in the honour so worthily
deserved.
“Now he has crossed the bar, and we
who knew him have lost a true and trusty
friend. May the earth of the land he loved
rest lightly on him!
“HARRY E. BRlTTAlN.”—Secretary
for the oversea Delegatee to the Press
Conference.
—The Family-
Sir Robert was married in 1876 to
Amelia, daughter of the late Mr. Robert
George BoAven, of Adelaide. Lady Thomas
survives, besides three sons and four
daughters—Reginald, Geoffry, and Owen,
Mrs. Leonard Hack, and Misses Millicent,
Nora, and Kathleen Thomas. Sir Robert
had one surviving brother —Mr. Evan
Kyfiin . Thomas—and six sisters—Mrs.
George Bilks, Mrs. William Neill, Mrs.
Charles Birks, Mrs. J. Edwin Thomas,
Mrs. G. B. Mallam, who for some years has
lived in Berkshire, England, and Miss Mar-
garet Thomas.
6


EXPRESSIONS OF SYMPATHY.
Within a short time of the intimation of
Sir Robert Thomas’s death having become
public, the Mayor of Adelaide (Mr. L.
Cohen) caused the Town Hall bell to be
tolled, and flags were half-masted on many
staffs in the capital. Soon afterwards
letters and telegrams began to reach
The Register Office from many di-
rections, and numerous others were sent
direct to the family. Among the earliest
messages were communications from Go-
vernment House, His Honor the Chief Jus-
tice (who is also Grand Master of the South
Australian Constitution of Freemasons), the
Premier (Hon. J. Verran), Rp. Foster, Mr.
Coombe. M.P., and, among others, gentle-
men prominently connected with journalism
in the other States. In the remainder the
Masonic fraternity and the literary and
commercial communities were particularly
well represented.
From His Honor the Chief Justice
(Sir Samuel Way, Bart.): —In com-
mon with all my fellow-colonists
I was filled with sorrow this morning
when, in less than an hour after it hap-
pened, I received the news of the death of
Sir Robert Thomas. I had visited him on
Saturday afternoon, and was struck, as 1
had been on previous occasions, with the
fortitude and calmness with which he was
bearing his illness. Still I did not
realize that the end was so near,
and could not help clinging to
the hope, faint as it was, that had
been held out by one of the medical men
in attendance. My acquaintance with Sir
Robert began when he was reporting for
The Register during the last few years of
my career at the Bar. I have always
bracketed him with Mr. J. H. Finlayson
as one of the best reporters to whom I
was indebted. The acquaintance thus
formed ripened into a friendship which be-
came closer as the years went on. When
he identified himself with the Masonic
craft, I did not fail to recognise the de-
velopment of his character, and the in-
creased area over which his interests in
affairs, both private and political, exten-
ded. One feature, which was very marked
in his character, was his patriotic love of
South Australia, and his pride at being
descended from one of its founders. Fie
was particularly anxious that the diary
of his grandmother, which is the most
vivacious record we possess of the infant
settlement, should be handed down to suc-
ceeding generations. This document is
naturally prized as an heirloom by the
family; but it was his intention to place
an exact copy of it in the Public Library,
an intention which I hope has been or will
be carried out. Another feature of his
character the thoroughness with which
everything he undertook was accomplished.
This, of course, was marked in the general
management of the great murnals with
which he and his father and grandfather
were so long connected, and also in his un-
stinted service to the many movements
with which he associated himself. If I may
single out an example, it would be his
chairmanship of the Women's Work Exhi-
bition, of which I constantly received ap-
preciative and admiring testimony from
Lady Way. I did not wonder that he was
selected by his brother journalists as
Chairman of the overseas delegation to the
Press Conference, because, in addition to
his administrative ability, there was a
transparent sincerity of character, and un-
mistakable sympathy which won the confi-
dence and the affection of all who were
associated with him. I do not remember
the news of the bestowal of a knighthood
being received with more widespread plea-
sure than was Sir Robert’s at the begin


ning of this year. He was the worthy re-
presentative of three generations of jour-
nalists —a somewhat rare incident —and
beloved as widely as he was known. Fur-
ther, it was felt that his effective, though
unobtrusive patriotism had found its most
appropriate recognition and reward. Not
long afterward there came to him what
was an equally welcome mark of confidence
aiid affection—his unanimous election to
the Deputy Grand Mastership of the Free-
masons of South Australia. It is pathetic
to recall that in acknowledging his elec-
tion he expressed his intention of making
an extensive visitation to the country as
well as the town lodges during his term
of office. Alas! these intentions were not
to be fulfilled. It appeared likely that his
opportunities to serve his fellow-colonists
would be still further extended, and that
he had many happy years of useful ser-
vice to the public before him. But those
expectations have been disappointed, and
his family and friends are filled with sorrow
at the unexpected termination of a career
of so much accomplishment and promise.
The May number of The Nineteenth Cen-
tury and After, which was delivered by
this morning’s mail, recalls to us Ruskin’s
epitaph to his father. With the alteration
of a word, it is singularly appropriate to
Sir Robert:—“He was an entirely honest
journalist, and his memory is to all who
keep it dear and helpful.” Those of us
who remain can but be encouraged by the
remembrance of his blameless life, of his
Patriotism, and of his unselfish devotion
to the good of others. We shall always
recall the name of Sir Robert Thomas as a
knight—“ Sans peur et sans reproche.”
From the Prime Minister of Australia
(Rp. Fisher):—l regret to hear of the death
of Sir Robert Thomas. The community
has lost a man of ability and a useful citi-
zen.
From the Premier (Hon. J. Yerran): —I
seize the first moment—while the bells are
tolling—to express to the proprietors of
The Register my deep sympathy and regret
at the death of Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas.
He was a man whom we all highly regarded,
and his death is a public loss.
From the Chief Secretary (Hon. F. S.
Wallis)Allow me to express my very
deep regret at the untimely death of my
old friend and one-time employer Sir
Robert Kyffin Thomas, and to assure you.
as his late co-partners in The Register pro-
prietary, of my sincere sympathy with you
in the loss you have sustained. I had,
for a time as an officer of The Register
Chapel, and also as an officer of the Typo-
graphical Society, more than the ordinary
employe’s opportunities of holding com-
munication with Sir Robert, and from the
first I was strongly impressed with hist keen
sense of honour, his fair-mindedness, and
his at all times gentlemanly demeanour.
Sir Robert was, indeed, a man whom to
know was to respect—l might almost say,
to love.
LONDON, June 14.
The Times, The London Daily Chronicle,
and other London newspapers contain this
morning appreciative notices, of the career
and work of the late Sir Robert Thomas.
Many old Adelaide residents, including
the Agent-General for South Australia
(Hon. A. A. Kirkpatrick), the London
Manager of the Bank of Adelaide (Mr.
Percy Arnold), bankers and leading com-
mercial men have forwarded expressions of
regret at his death and sympathy with the
family' in their bereavement.
WORK AT THE IMPERIAL PRESS
CONFERENCE.
Dr. Cunningham (the Editor of The
Melbourne Argus) telegraphed on Monday:
—lt is not too much to say that the sad
news of the death of Sir Robert Thomas
will be heard with deep regret by journal-
ists through the Empire, as well as by the
foremost public men of Great Britain who
met him last year. Sir Robert’s unique
8


position in connection with the Imperial
Press Conference, and the great work he
did as President of the delegates, make this
certain. He and I began the trip to-
gether, and we were closely associated, not
only during the tour through Canada and
during the conference proceedings in Mng-
land and Scotland, but for some weeks
after the formal work had concluded, when
duties arising out of the mission had 1o
be performed; and for the whole of
that time I had peculiarly favourable op-
portunities for noting the manner in -which
he discharged the obligations of his office.
Those who have known him for a lifetime
must have discerned the pure quality of
reserve, which was his most striking cha-
racteristic, and will understand that it
might not be easy for such a man to adapt
himself to new and rapidly changing condi-
tions —to adjust his conduct and manner to
the necessities arising out of meeting com-
parative strangers day after day. He had
none of the fulsomeness of familiarity, yet
it was his very quality of self-effacement
which—contradictory though it may seem
to say so—really made an instant appeal to
the goodwill of every one he met. He wore
the dignity of his office with perfect
naturalness; he showed that his power to
control was stronger because it was never
forced; and, above all he proved that his
admirable commonsense, his savoir faire,
and his calm reflective mind gave him pre-
cisely the qualifications required for lead-
ing along the untrodden Imperial path the
journalists from all over the Empire who
had made him their leader. The whole
body accepted him on trust, and there was
but one opinion of him when we separated
—that he was the ideal man for the post.
When the Australian and New Zealanl
delegates, who travelled in the steamship
Marama to Vancouver, met for the first
time to arrange the details of the journey,
Mr. George Fenwick (managing director of
The Otago Daily Times) moved that Sir
Robert should be our Chairman, and I had
Hie honour and oleasure of seconding the
nomination. There was.a good deal of work,
to be done to prepare for the journey
through Canada, and Sir Robert and the
hon. secretary (Hon. J. W. Kirwan, of
Kalgoorlie) arranged everything with
great satisfaction to the party. From the
moment we landed in Canada he assumed,
without really appearing to do so, the con-
trol of the party. He was our spokesman
at all the official receptions. It was to him
that our hosts in every town first looked in
delivering their welcome; and, though he
did not have the peculiar qualities which
enable a man in strange company to in-
stantly jump into the hearts of newly made
friends, his very modesty carried him there
very quickly. In nearly every town in our
three weeks’ journey'through the Dominion
speeches had to be made at luncheons or
dinners; and it was Sir Robert’s rule to give
all the delegates opportunities for speaking.
He might, by virtue of his position, as well
as by reason of his ability, well have taken
upon himself the duty of responding; but
he refrained, excepting in cases when his
colleagues insisted upon him doing so. I
recall, however, with great pleasure his
admirable utterances at the first luncheon
given to as at Yictoi’ia, British Columbia;
at the great dinner at the National Club
in Toronto; and on the occasion of the
State dinner at Government House, Ot-
tawa, where, in the presence of the leading
public men of the Dominion, he responded
to the toast cf “The visitors,” which was
proposed by the Governor-General (Earl
Grey),
Inasmuch as we had only organized our-
selves for the Canadian trip, and seeing that
on our arrival in London we should be
merged into the larger body of Australian
delegates wffio had travelled by other routes,
it was necessary for us to formally disband
before reaching England. This we did on
our last day on the Atlantic. During the
voyage from Quebec, however, we had the
pleasure of the company of most of the
delegates for Canada, and they had
opportunities for seeing how fortu-
nate we were in our Chairman —
an experience which determined their
action at a later stage. On arriving
ill London, just one year and a fortnight
9


ago, the members of the Committee of
British Journalists, in whose hands the ar-
rangements for the conference had been
placed, asked each section to elect a Chair-
man. The Australians met in due course;
and, so impressed were our colleagues who
had reached London by other routes than
via Canada with our views of Sir Robert’s
qualifications for the position, that his elec-
tion passed as a matter of course. The
Hon. Dr. Hackett, of Perth, moved and
the Hon. C. E. Davies, of Hobart, seconded
the motion. In the meantime the Cana-
dian, South African, New Zealand, and
Indian delegations had met, and had each
appointed a Chairman. It then became
necessary for the combined delegates to
have a preliminary meeting; and there was
a tacit understanding that, Canada being
the senior Dominion, a Canadian should be
appointed President of the whole body. Sir
Robert promptly proposed Mr. James
Brierley, of The Montreal Herald, and that
gentleman took the chair. This, it was
understood, settled the question of leader-
ship. On the following day, however,
when we sembled for our first formal
meeting w n the British Committee, we
Australian- cere surprised and delighted to
bear Mr. Bi -erley say that the decision of
the previous meeting was only for that day.
He and his Canadian colleagues had given
some consideration to the question of who
should be President, and they had come to
the conclusion that neither geography nor
seniority should be taken into account—
that the only thing that was important
was to select the best man. On that point
they had no doubt that there was no one
else so well qualified as Mr. Kyfhn Thomas,
of Australia. Mr. Brierley thereupon pro-
posed his election, and this was promptly
agreed to.
The delegates made the wisest choice.
Sir Robert entered upon his duties imme-
diately. He was the official intermediary
between the delegates and the British Com-
mittee, and at all the open meetings of the
conference he sat on the dais beside the
Chairman for the day, and practically
directed the proceedings. The Chairman
of the conference was feither a member of
.the Ministry or Mr. Balfour. The first
meeting was presided over by Lord Crewe
.(Secretary of State for the Colonies), and
when he had concluded his inaugural ad-
dress it fell to Sir Robert to make the offi-
cial response for the delegates. This he
did in felicitous terms, at the same time
offering some shrewd and practical views
on the question of improved cable commu-
nication. At subsequent meetings he ar-
ranged the order of speakers, and, with
the Chairmen of the separate de-
legations, so provided for responses
at dinners and luncheons as to give every
part of the Empire due recognition. It
was only occasionally that he would speak
when no programme had been prepared and
a reply on behalf of the delegates had to
be made unexpectedly; yet whenever we
heard him we were delighted, and felt a
reflected honour in being represented by
so worthy a man. It was, however, in his
relations with the delegates that Sir Robert
showed to most advantage. It will be
obvious to every one who pauses to think
of the matter that if 60 men are brought
together from the ends of the earth —men
who did not know one another, and were
asked to join in common action —some diffi-
culty would be found in co-ordinating their
efforts. I do not mean difficulties arising
out of personal differences, for, happily,
there was no sign of unpleasantness from
beginning to end; but differences of point
of view—differences of opinion on public
issues. One delegate might reasonably con-
sider that a question affecting his' country
was of overwhelming importance, and
should receive first attention. Another
delegate might have an equally strong
opinion regarding a matter in which he
was deeply interested. The chief duty
of the President was to harmonize con-
flicting views, and to bring the delegates
into sympathy with each other, to the end
that the main object common to all might
be achieved. It was in doing this that Sir
Robert was at his best. You could see
that knotty problems would make him serf-
10


ous, but you neyer saw him perturbed.
His self-control was admirable. Where
firmness was required it was felt. Where
misapprehensions were entertained they
were removed. Where special aims were
sought, Which were not incompatible with
the interests of the whole delegation, they
were helped. Never once did a feeling of
injustice arise in a man’s mind; and ever
after Sir Robert had spoken we realized
that he was Chairman of us all in the full-
est sense; and so, as one by one the dele-
gates left London to return home, it was
to Sir Robert that they last turned to
say farewell. They felt in their hearts the
compliment that his glance would forbid
them to utter; but they were united in
the hope that in due course they might
feel themselves honoured by seeing royal
recognition conferred on the man whom
they had learned to respect. The recogni-
tion came, and now every one connected
Avith the great conference will be sad-
dened beyond expression by the news of
the knight’s untimely death.
GOVERNMENT RECOGNITION.
The Chief Secretary (Hon F. S. Wallis)
said last night:—“lt was with very deep
regret that I heard this morning of the
death of Sir Robert Thomas. My acquaint-
ance with him extended over about 33
years, during the first 11 of which I was
an employe of his, and as such and at one
time as also the official head of the com-
panionship, I was brought into close con-
tact with him. In whatever capacity—
whether as one of the employes or a chapel
officer, as an official of the Typographical
Society, or latterly as a public man—it fell
to my lot to have converse with him I
always considered myself privileged to be
in the company of a gentleman in the
truest sense of the word. I know that I
can speak for many who were at one
time my fellow-members of the composing
staff when I say that there was something
of the feeling of affection mingled with
the respect with which he was. regarded
by us all, and I have every reason to be-
lieve that I am fully justified in saying
the same for the employes since my time.”
MUNICIPAL REFERENCES.
When the Adelaide City Council as-
sembled on Monday the Mayor (Mr. L.
Cohen) remarked: —“Evidences of deejo sor-
row were manifested on Monday last when
the sad news was conveyed to us that one
of our prominent and public-spirited citi-
zens, Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, had passed
away. I am proud of the knowledge that I
had the privilege of a personal friendship of
the late gentleman. He was a man so
justly esteemed and respected that to know
him, and, above all, to possess his friend-
ship, were indeed an honour. The death of
Sir Robert Thomas is a loss to the whole
community. His association with the Aus-
tralian press, notably with The Register
and its associated journals, and the very
able and impartial manner ii which he
carried out the arduous duties ; Chairman
of the committee of oversea dele . tes during
the Imperial Press Conference i position
which he filled with such commendable zeal
and distinction —are acknowledged in all
quarters. For many years past he was
prominently connected with every patriotic
and scientific movement which related to
the advancement and progress of our State,
and to-day South Australia mourns the loss
of a great citizen, who, by his eloquent,
genial, and yet unostentatious efforts, has
left a record behind him which it is hoped
may possibly serve to assuage the grief of
his sorrowing widow and family.”
Ald. Bonython moved —“That a letter of
condolence be sent to the widow and family
of the late Sir Robert Thomas, expressing
on behalf of this council regret at his
death, and sympathy with the relatives in
their very sad bereavement.” Sir Robert
was a high-minded and admirable citizen,
who was ever ready to do anything with-
in his power to advance the interests of the
city near to which he was born, and of
which he was so justly proud. To him,
with others,, special credit was due that
Victoria square was adorned with a sta-
11


tue of Col. Light. But Sir Robert was
not merely a good citizen in this restricted
sense. His interests and his activities
made him in the widest sense a citizen
of the Commonwealth. They appreciated
his life’s work. It was a good record,
vuth which his family had every reason
to be satisfied, and it would not have failed
in its purpose if it proved an inspiration
to others to emulate an example so ex-
cellent in every way. Sir Robert Thomas
was in the council chamber on the occasion
of the farewell to Sir George Reid. He
then looked in the best of health. He
had now left them, and created a blank in
their citizenship which they all deplored,
and which it would be difficult to fill, be-
cause the many good qualities of the de-
ceased gentleman endeared him to every-
body who knew him, and made his death
a public loss.
Aid. Simpson seconded the motion. He
was sure the whole council would echo
the Mayor’s panegyric. Every one who
came in contact with the deceased gentle-
man had feelings of friendship and regard
for him. He had that rare and gracious
gift of making friends with all he became
acquainted with. It would be hard to
estimate the loss that Sir Robert’s death
meant to the community as a whole.
The motion was carried.
At a meeting of the Hindmarsh Council
on Monday evening the Mayor (Mr. W. H.
H. Dring) referred with deep regret to the
announcement of the death of Sir Robert
Kyffin Thomas. Aid. J. D. Brown moved
that a letter of condolence should be sent
to the relatives. He had not known Sir
Robert personally, but he knew the high
reputation of the newspapers with which
he was connected, and it behoved members
of the council, as representatives of Hind-
marsh, to pay a tribute to the memory of
a gentleman who had had such an honoured
standing in the community. Cr. W. Wood,
in supporting, said Sir Robert Thomas had
been held in the highest respect. An em-
ploye of the deceased knight had told him
in conversation a few days ago that he
never worked for a better man, and he
had worked for a good number. The me*
tion was carried.
The Mayor of Thebarton (Hon. A. W.
Styles, M.L.C.), at the meeting of the
council on Monday evening, referred with
regret to the fact that one of the leading
lights in the State, in the person of Sir
Robert Kyffin Thomas, had passed away.
This was a time when all things of a por-
tentous character, politics and otherwise,
were forgotten. Sir Robert was “one of
Nature’s gentlemen” in this State, and a
gentleman who conducted his work in such
a way that, whether they agreed or dis-
agreed, they could not withhold the
honesty of purpose which was always his
principle. Or. Branstrom, in moving that
a letter of condolence be sent to the family
of the deceased gentleman, said Sir Robert
Thomas was always willing to help them,
even though he might be politically op-
posed to them.
BRITISH PRESS EULOGIUMS.
Highly appreciative refences to the late
Sir Robert were made in the English,
Scotch, and Irish press, notices having been
given in the following publications:
—The Daily Graphic, The Glasgow Times,
The Daily Telegraph, which remarked
that “his genial presence- and helpful
counsel will be remembered by all who
took part in that memorable gathering”
(referring to the Imperial Press Con-
ference. The Standard of Empire.—ln
this paper a feeling tribute is paid to the
memory of Sir Robert by Mr. Harry E.
Brittain, who acted as Secretary for the
oversea delegates to the conference.
The Belfast News Letter, The York-
shire Post, The Irish Times, The Morning
Post, The Daily News, The Evening Stan-
dard, and St. James’ Gazette, which
stated that “from its very first inception
12


Fhe Register has ever been a strong up-
holder of the Imperial tie, and no family
in Australia has done in this respect more
than the Thomas family (formerly of Mont-
gomeryshire), through the succeeding gene-
rations.” The Daily Chronicle, which
said that “Sir Robert’s kindly and genial
disposition, combined with excellent judg-
ment, was manifest to all who took part in
the Imperial Press Conference, and it was
in connection with this work that the
honour of knighthood was conferred upon
him. During his illness the Governor and
Adjutant called at his house, and pre-
sented him with the order in his bed-
room, this being the last knighthood con-
ferred by King Edward. The announce-
ment was made in a special Gazette by the
Government.”
The Daily Mirror, The Sheffield Daily
Telegraph, which quoted the remark by a
special correspondent of The Times that
"he had endeared himself to all his brother
delegates by his modesty and self-efface-
ment, while his unfailing tact had im-
mensely contributed to the smooth work-
ing of the conference. The Times, The Pall
Mall Gazette, The Daily Express, The Bri-
tish Australasian, The Aberdeen Daily
Journal, The British and Colonial Printer
and Stationer, The Liverpool Echo, The
Yorkshire Telegraph The British Weekly,
The Christian World, The Star, The Lei-
cester Daily Post, The Westminster Ga-
zette, from whose record the following is
taken: —-
The Register, of which Sir Robert Kyffin
Thomas was the senior proprietor, is
unique among the daily journals of the
Empire in one respect. It is the only one
that moved 12,000 miles and survived. Its
first number was printed and .published at
this end of the earth in London. Its se-
cond appeared in Adelaide at the other
end. South Australia was settled under
the auspices of an association founded to
give effect to the principles of a novel
scheme of colonization devised by Edward
Gibbon Wakefield. The first number of
The Register, issued in London on behalf
of this association, gave intending emi-
grants information about South Aus-
tralia.
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN PRESS.
In lamenting the death of Sir Robert
the Australian press was unanimous in its
appreciation of his life’s work as a journa-
list and as a citizen.
[The Advertiser.]
Few citizens of Adelaide were better
known or more highly respected than Sir
Robert Thomas, and a sense of personal
loss will be felt by a very large circle of
friends when they read of his death, which
occurred on Monday morning at half-past
7 at his residence, “Ardington,” Brougham
place, North Adelaide. Sir Robert, who
recently made a tour of the world, re-
turned to Adelaide early this year.
He was then apparently in impi’oved
health as a result of his holiday, but some
weeks later he developed an ailment which
baffled all the medical men who were con-
sulted. The complaint, which was of an
internal nature, developed so rapidly that
some weeks ago his ordinary routine cf
work in the office had to be suspended,
and for the last fortnight he had been
hovering between life and death. He bore
up through his trying illness with charac-
teristic fortitude, but gradually sunk until
the end came peacefully.
Sir Robert had an hereditary connec-
tion with the State which dated right
back to its establishment, for his grand-
father founded the first newspaper in
South Australia, and printed the earliest
Government Gazette, Indeed, he arrived
before the province was proclaimed by
Governor Hindmarsh. The family have
always held an honourable position, and
they rank among the most useful of the
pioneers of settlement and progress. Sir
Robert was born at Nails worth, and
throughout his active life he had always
been identified with the city, with whose
growth and development few people were
13


better acquainted than he. He had a genial
nature, which made him -always welcome
and popular in whatever society he entered.
When at the end of last January he re-
ceived the honour of knighthood the chorus
of congratulation wag general and sincere.
The distinction was conferred as a special
recognition of Sir Robert’s work in con-
nection with the recent Press Conference
in London, in connection with which he
was appointed Chairman of the oversea
delegation from Australia, New Zealand,
and Canada; but his fellow citizens saw
in it also a reward for the services ren-
dered by him to his native land in many
capacities. His 1 knighthood was the last
conferred by King Edward.
When he returned from England this
year he was asked to allow himself to be
nominated as Deputy Grand Master of the
Grand Lodge of South Australia, and his
acceptance was received with satisfaction
throughout the Craft. At the Half-yearly
Communication held recently, he was
unanimously elected to the position. He
entered into all his private and public
engagements Avith a hearty thoroughness,
and aaus never unmlling to do the share
of work which fell to his lot. He had a
complete knoAvledge of nervspaper Avork,
and few men knew more of the history of
Adelaide or of South Australia than he.
The bells at the Adelaide Town Hall
were tolled, and the flags Avere half-masted
on the ToAvn Hall, The Advertiser Office,
and a number of other prominent buildings
immediately the sad news became known
that Sir Robert had passed arvay.
[The Daily Herald, June 14, 1910.]
The announcement of the death of Sir
Robert Kyffin Thomas Avill be received
Avith deep sorroAV by the people of South
Australia, and many in the other States
and abroad. He passed arvay at his resi-
dence, “Ardington,” Brougham place, North
Adelaide, at 8 o’clock yesterday morning,
at the age of 59. The sad event will cause
surprise to those rvho were unarvare that
for some time Sir Robert had been lying
seriously ill. Early this year he returned
from a tour of the world, and seemed in
robust health, but to the anxiety of a large
circle of friends he became afflicted with
an illness that puzzled his medical advi-
sers. A few weeks ago, after courageously
fighting the malady which had quickly de-
veloped, he A**as forced to cease the
struggle and resign himself to the inevi-
table. He grew exceedingly weak, and
passed peacefully away.
By the direction of the Mayor the Town
Hall bells were tolled, and the flag hoisted
at half-mast. Other flags in the city were
also half-masted.
Sir Robert’s death is a severe loss to the
community, for he achieved much in the
interests of the State, and died when his
influence for good Avas growing steadily
stronger. His friends bore witness to his
great personal charm, and the people at
large knew him for a man of high honour
and one of Adelaide’s most reputable citi-
zens. The management of The Daily
Herald, at the inception of this paper,
Avere made aware of his abounding gene-
rosity. The machine broke down when the
first issue was about to be printed, and it
seemed as if the publication of the paper
would have to be postponed. Sir Robert
Thomas was telephoned to late at night,
and without hesitation he expressed his
Avillingness to print the issue at The
Register Office. A man Avho so willingly
came to the help of a rival enterprise de-
served the reputation which he enjoyed
of being one of Nature’s gentlemen. Since
he Avas -kind and considerate to his em-
ployes, tolerant of his few opponents, and
unflinchingly loyal to his friends, his
name Avill live long in the memory of this
generation.
[Adelaide Church Guardian.]
The death of Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas
has removed from our midst an Australian
gentleman of the highest type. His ster-
ling qualities of mind and heart gathered
to him Avarm friendship and profound
esteem from all- sections of the community.
The public services he has rendered Avith
14


characteristic self-abnegation will long be
recalled. The application of high prin-
ciple in the conduct of a great daily paper
has been of great service to South Aus-
tralia.-
[The Critic.]
By the death of Sir Robert Kyffin
Thomas on Monday, Adelaide has lost a
notable citizen, and South Australia a use-
ful and esteemed colonist. The Thomas
family and South Australia have been so
closely associated since the day that Go-
vernor Hindmarsh read the proclamation
at Holdfast Bay that the history of the
State may be said to be the history of
the family. Sir Robert maintained the
best traditions of that family, and was a
worthy successor of sturdy pioneer grand-
parents and of a father and mother who
were nation-builders in the best sense of
the term. Entering his father’s employ
at an early age, he set to work to learn
the details of a business the destiny of
which he helped to guide for over 30 years.
Sir Robert was a loveable man, towards
whom those who were associated with him
were distinctly drawn by a fraternal
feeling, while his gentlemanly—almost
courtly—bearing towards strangers or,
casual visitors caused him to be regarded
with affectionate esteem wherever he
moved. He was always “approachable,”
and his sense of justice was such that
the most humble employe never hesitated
to make the senior proprietor his sole
arbitrator in any dispute or personal dif-
ference. The late Sir Robert Thomas en-
joyed the affectionate love of all his
employes, and that, after all, is the
greatest public tribute that can be paid
to any employer.
It is not the privilege of the press or
public to draw aside the veil of private
life, but The Critic would like to pay
homage to the memory of one who was an
ideal husband and father, and whose
home was a centre from which radiated
love and goodwill. The deepest sympathy
will be felt for the sorrowing home circle.
Born in 1851, Sir Robert entered his
father’s office at the age of 18, and dur-
ing his 40 years of service he was a pro-
prietor for three-fourths of the period.
Early last year he went to London as a
delegate to the Press Conference, in con-
nection with which he was Chairman cf
the Colonial delegates. He was honoured
by His Majesty with knighthood early
this year, and it only seems the other
day that citizens generally were showering
their congratulations upon their distin-
guished fellow-colonist.
The sudden death of Sir Robert Thomas,
just at a time when, from an outside view-
point. it might be regarded that he was
about to enter into full enjoyment of the
eventide of a strenuous life, is a matter of
great public regret. The Critic mourn-
fully joins in the tributes of respect to
a good man—a man whom his fellows
loved for his fine manly qualities, and re-
spected as a “white” man—and respect-
fully offers its condolence to his sorrowing
family.
[The Sydney Morning Herald,
June 14, 1910.]
In the death of Sir Robert - Kyffin
Thomas the Australian press has suffered
the loss of a notable figure, and the Com-
monwealth a good citizen. In his native
State of South Australia he was well
known and esteemed as the holder at dif-
ferent times of important public offices,
and also as the senior proprietor of The
Adelaide Register—one of the oldest of
Australian dailies —and other important
journals, and in this latter capacity he
gave generous proof of his devotion to high
journalistic ideals. The personality of the
deceased gentleman received, however, a
much wider introduction to notice at the
Imperial Press Conference which sat in
London last year. By general consent of
his fellow delegates he was one of the most
able and useful, as he was one of the best
liked, men at that remarkable gathering;
and the estimate of him was definitely
15


registered in his election to the Chairman-
ship of the entire oversea dominions sec-
tion. A knighthood conferred on this
occasion was the well-deserved official
recognition. Sir Robert was a consistent
upholder of the doctrine of Empire soli-
darity, and in the ways that were open to
him influenced thought and opinion along
Imperial lines. He will be missed as a man
who in his lifetime played an important
part in the life of his State in a very un-
obtrusive way, and leaves behind him a
very full record of good citizenship.
[Alex Cowan’s & Son’s Journal.]
In its last issue Cowan’s congratulated
Sir Robert Thomas on the mark of favour
bestowed upon him by King Edwaard,
whose death the nation mourns. In this
issue we have to offer our condolences to
the family of the deceased Knight.
Strange, apparantly, are the dealings of
Providence. To-day seemingly in the
enjoyment of perfect health, carrying on
the duties of life in home and business
and public circles, the next day stricken
down; the past activity becomes only
a memory, and the present fraught with
anxiety, a fight with Nature for supremacy
ending in defeat, and a farewell to all
whom we have loved and worked
with. The name of Thomas will ever be
associated with the history of South Aus-
tralia. Sir Robert’s forbears were men
of stout hearts who loved their adopted
country for all they knew, and ever sought
its advancement in the path of righteous-
ness. True patriots they, not seeking
their own but others’ welfare, helping
to build up a nation of true and stal-
wart men and women. And Sir Robert
none the less followed in their foot-
steps. He nobly and truly played his
part, in the public and private life of the
State. Beloved of his family, he also en-
deared himself to his employes. Honoured
by his Sovereign, his fellow-citizens, ad-
mired and esteemed him whilst his
brethren of the Typograhical craft
delighted to meet with him. For
many years Sir Robert had been
President of the South Australian
Printers’ Association, only declining re-
election because of his projected visit to
the Old World. He had held the position
with credit to himself and benefit to the
trade. It was but a few weeks before
he was called away that he had greatly
entertained the members of the Associa-
tion by a chatty and deeply interesting
account of his journey from Australia to
the Motherland. No more than a passing
reference need be made here to the many
public institutions of all kinds with
which he was actively associated. We
mourn for him as a brother in the social
life of the city, as a worker in its public
activities, and as a friend of all that
needed help or assistance. The very large
attendance at the funeral was a noble
testimony to the place the deceased
Knight held in the hearts of his fellow
citizens.
“To live in the hearts of those we leave
behind is not to die.
[The Australasian Christian Common-
wealth.]
“South Australia mourns the loss
of a noble son, and most sincerely do we
lament with those whose grief is more in-
timate and individual, but cannot be more
profound than our own. The late Sir
Robert Thomas was a great man—of great
nature 'and fine instincts. He was one of
Nature’s rarest types of manhood. He
matured slowly but grandly, and certainly
no public citizen could enjoy a larger share
of respect from the community or of con-
fidence from his friends than fell to Sir
Robert’s experience. He prized “honour
bright” more than all things. We shall
miss his noble presence in large spaces of
our life. His sanity and considerateness,
his moderation and magnanimity, his
greatness of character and graciousness of
manners made him a royal soul. His seat
will be empty and he will be missed,”
16


South Australia (says The Southern Bap-
tist) mourns a citizen of fine type in the
death of Sir Robert Thomas. In several
directions he served the country well, but
he will be chiefly remembered as senior pro-
prietor of The Register and its associated
journals. No great Australian daily has
consistently maintained a higher standard
of journalistic honour than The Register.
Much of its excellence is due, we believe,
to the fact that it was founded by public-
spirited Christian men, who sought to be im-
partial and just in conducting it. The late
Sir Robert did not allow it to deteriorate
in his hands from the worthy traditions of
its founders. As an employer, his relations
to his staff and workmen were cordial to a
degree. All classes of the community sin-
cerely mourn ins death.
[The United Empire, London, July, 1910.]
The Fellows of the Royal Colonial Insti-
tute have sustained a severe loss in the
death of Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, senior
proprietor of The Adelaide Register, The
Observer, The Evening Journal, and other
newspapers. Although Sir Robert had
been in ill health for some weeks the news
of his death was unexpected, and there-
fore all the greater shock in this country,
where he had a host of friends. It seems
only the other day that he was in London
at the Imperial Press Conference as Chair-
man of the overseas delegates, when he
did such excellent work. As noted at the
time in our journal, the distinction con-
ferred upon him was a source of general
satisfaction both in Australia and the
mother country. Sir Robert was largely
responsible for the Commonwealth Club,
on the lines of the well-known Canadian
clubs. Associated with him in his news-
paper undertakings were his brother (Mr.
Evan Kyffin Thomas), and Mr. AY. J.
Sowden (Editor of The Register).
S.A. EMPLOYERS’ FEDERATION
At a meeting of the executive of the
South Australian Employers’ Federation on
Tuesday the Acting President (Mr. J. A.
Harper) made sympathetic references in
respect to the great loss sustained by the
State in the death of Sir Robert Thomas,
and mentioned that the meeting of the exe-
cutive, originally convened for June 14, had
been postponed for a week, as a mark of
sympathy and respect to the family and re-
latives. He moved that a letter of sym-
pathy be forwarded to Lady Thomas. This
was seconded by Mr. J. (i art rail, and car-
ried.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN TYPO-
GRAPHICAL SOCIETY.
At the meeting of the South Australian
Typographical Society on Saturday evening
the President (Mr. F. W. Birrell) made
feeling reference to the death of the
late Sir Robert Thomas. For many
years, he said, he had been an employe of
Sir Robert, and he never wished to work
for a fairer or more just employer, and
lie regretted very much that circumstan-
ces compelled him to sever his long con-
nection with The Register Office. The
board unanimously decided that a letter of
condolence should be sent to Lady
Thomas.—The Register, 28/6/1910.
A TRIBUTE FROM THE COMMON-
WEALTH CLUB.
A meeting of the Commonwealth Club
w r as held at Bricknell’s cafe on June 17.
The President (Sir John Gordon) occupied
the chair.
Sir John Gordon said that since the last
meeting of the club they had had to mourn
the death of Sir Robert Thomas, one of the
most esteemed members, and one of the
founders of the club. He was a man whom
Australia could ill spare. He had the high-
est and best qualities of citizenship, and if
he had lived would undoubtedly have gone
far in the public service of Australia. Al-
though Sir Robert was conspicuously mo
dest, it was not the modesty of timidity,
but of a man who scorned to push himself
17


forward. However, he had had the cour-
age and the ability to undertake any task
that his country might call upon him to un-
dertake. Those of them who had been
privileged to enter the inner circle of his
friendships would grieve deeply over his
loss. His warm sympathy, well-stored
mind, void'? tolerance, genial humour, and
the courtesy he never failed to exhibit made
him a delightful friend and companion. He
would never forget the pleasant days he had
spent with Sir Robert, or ever cease to
mourn his loss while life w r as spared to him,
because men at his own time of life did not
make many new friends, and valued these
they had hitherto been fortunate enough
to make. He moved—“ That this club re-
cords in its proceedings its sense of the
great loss sustained by Australia in the
death of Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, and
the personal grief of the members of the
club at his decease, and, further, that a
letter be sent conveying to Lady Thomas
and her family the respectful sympathy of
members in their bereavement.”
Mr. W. B. Wilkinson (Vice-President)
said it Avas Avith deepest regret that he
seconded the motion. The loss sustained
by the State and the Commonwealth
through the death of Sir Robert Thomas
was irreparable, and by the Commonwealth
Club in particular the loss Avould be felt
very keenly. When the movement for the
establishment of the club was first brought
before his notice he naturally asked who
Avas going to be connected with it, and
Avhen he Avas told that Sir Robert Thomas
Avas taking an active interest in its affairs,
he did not hesitate for one moment to
throAV in his lot. Upon discussing the
matter with the late knight he
found that he had experience in
Canada with a similar institution, and it
was .to a great extent due to the efforts of
Sir Robert that Mr. Skipper’s ideas for
the establishment of the Commonwealth
Club were brought to such a successful con-
summation. He had knoAvn the deceased
intimately for over 30 years, having been
closely associated Avith him in the Avork of
the South Australian Branch of the Royal
Geographical Society, the Queen’s Home,
the Masonic order, and other associations,
and he always felt that Sir Robert was a
very fine type of an Australian gentleman.
He knew that every member of the club
would feel the greatest sympathy with
what the President had said.
Mr. S. H. Skipper (secretary) said it was
a mournful fact that the first member on
the roll of the Commonwealth Club should
be the first to leave through death. They
had lost in Sir Robert Thomas a man who
would have given them great assistance in
the future. When he conceived the idea
of forming the club it was to Sir Robert
that he first went for advice and assis-
tance, and he found him not only
sympathetic but so full of information on
the way similar clubs Avere conducted in
Canada that he felt that, Avith his active
co-operation and support, the success of the
club AA r as assured. Sir Robert busied him-
self in every way possible to arouse en-
thusiasm among his wide circle of friends,
and it was his motion, seconded by Mr.
Wilkinson, at the preliminary meeting
that gave the institution its genesis. Sir
Robert’s nati\ T e modesty prevented him
from taking an office in the club, and his
unfortunate illness kept him from attend-
ing any of the meetings to see the success
that had croAvned his original efforts. Sir
Robert had intended to give the members
an address at an early period, and they
had also lost that by his death.
The motion was carried by members
rising at their places.
ADELAIDE BENEVOLENT AND
STRANGERS’ FRIEND SOCIETY.
Mr. James Gartrell (President) and Mr.
F. B. H. Vincent (Secretary) have sent the
folloAAdng. letter to Lady Thomas:—“On be-
half of ourselves, and acting upon instruc-
tions received from the committee of the
Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers’ Friend
Society, AA r e Avish to convey to you our very
sincere sympathy in the sad bereavement
you and your family have experienced by
18


the lamented death of your deservedly
honoured and much-respected husband, Sir
R. Kyffin Thomas. Although Sir Robert
was not a member of our committee, yet
indirectly, in his own good way, he was
always willing to render valuable assis-
tance to us. We in common with all those
who were privileged to know him much re-
gret the irreparable loss you have sus-
tained.” At the annual meeting of the Ade-
laide branch of St. John Ambulance Asso-
ciation on Wednesday it was decided, on
the motion of Mr. C. H. Goode, seconded
by Mr. J. P. Roberts, to send a letter of
condolence to Lady Thomas and family in
the death of Sir Robert Thomas, who
was a Vice-President of the association
At Wednesday’s meeting of the Port Ade-
laide City Council the Mayor (Mr. W. T.
Rofe) reported the death of Sir
Robert Thomas. He was sure that the
council sympathized with the relatives,
and also with the proprietors of the
esteemed journal in the loss of the senior
partner. Cr. Ellis moved that a letter of
condolence be sent to the relatives, and
this was agreed to.
THE ADELAIDE GLEE CLUB
Tribute Avas paid in an affecting public
manner in the Town Hall on Thursday
June 23, to the death of the late Sir Robert
Thomas. The occasion Avas a concert by
the Adelaide Glee Club, of Avhich Sir
Robert had been President. The evening’s
programme contained a sable-framed photo-
graph under the words “In memoriam.
Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, late President
of the Adelaide Glee Club. Died June 13,
1910.” While the croAvded audience re-
mained standing the choir of male singers
hymned the chorale “Forgive, blest
shade.” The late Sir Robert Thomas had
interested himself deeply in musical mat-
ters. He was a Vice-President also of
the Adelaide Orpheus Society, and at the
reunion of that organization in the Town
Hall to-night its members intend to some-
what similarly honour the memory of the
departed.
THE ADELAIDE CHAMBER OF COM-
MERCE.
At the meeting of the general committee
of the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce on
Friday the President (Mr. E. W. van
Senden) referred to the loss sustained by
the chamber through the death of Sit
Robert Thomas —one of its most valued
members, who had devoted a great deal oi
time to the business of the chamber, hav-
ing acted as President, and was also a
member of the general committee for a
great many years. His interest in the
welfare of the chamber was very deep, and
he had at no time spared his best efforts
for the furtherance of its objects. It was
resolved to convey to Lady Thomas and
the members of the family the deep sym-
pathy of the members of the chamber in
their great loss. At a meeting of the com-
mittee of the Blind and Deaf and Dumb
Institution on Friday the President (Sir
Edwin Smith) alluded to the death of Sir
Robert Thomas, and stated that although
Sir Robert Avas not a member of the com-
mittee he had ahvays shoAvn great interest
in the Avork in connection with the institu-
tion. It AA'as unanimously resolved, on the
proposition of Mr. J. H. Champness,
seconded by Mr. J. H. Gurr, to fonvard a
letter of condolence to Lady Thomas.
LODGE OF SORROW.
—ln Memory of Sir Robert Thomas.—
The beautiful and impressive Masonic
service knoAvn as the Lodge of SorroAV was
given in Lodge St. Alban, in the Free-
masons’ Hall, Flinders street, on Thursday
June 30, in memory of the late R.W. Bro.
ther Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas, Deputy
Grand Master and Past Master of the
lodge. The Grand Master (Sir Samuel
Way, Bart.) and a large number of Grand
Officers were present, and there Avas a re-
presentative and influential attendance of
brethren of sister lodges. The presiding
Master (Brother A. W. Piper, 1.P.M.) de-
livered an impressive address appropriate
19


to the occasion. The Grand Lecturer
(V.W. Brother Rev. Canon F. Slaney
Poole, M.A.) gave a panegyric oration, in.
the course of which he expressed the strong
affection which had subsisted between
members of the craft and the late Sir
Robert Thomas. They would miss in their
assemblies his commanding and stately pre-
sence, his wise and weighty words, and
his genial influence; and there would be for
long an inspiration and a call to his
brethren who were left behind. Sir Robert
had worn “the white flower of a blame-
less life,” and had sought to fulfil the
high ideals which their ancient and honour-
able craft set before them; and one of his
most pleasing characteristics, in an age
marked by a prevalence of self-assertion,
was his modesty. The varied offices which
from time to time he filled, and the
honours conferred upon him, came to him
without solicitation; and the crowning
honour of knighthood was a culmination
to a career which showed throughout a
steady growth, developing an increasing
usefulness day by day. Members of Lodge
St. Alban would not willingly forget the
grace and dignity with which, as its
Worshipful Master, he had presided over
its proceedings. At the last communica-
tion of Grand Lodge he was chosen as
Deputy Grand Master, and the whole craft
had looked forward with pleasant anticipa-
tion to the employment of his varied
talents, his nobility of mind, and his cour-
tesy of manner, in the fulfilment of the
duties of that high and important office.
The Grand Master moved —“That
brethren of the Lodge St. Alban and re-
presentatives of the Grand Lodge and othc,.
lodges assembled mourn the loss of their
distinguished and universally respected
brother, the R.W. Brother Sir Robert
Kyffin Thomas, D.G.M., and express their
profound sorrow with Lady Thomas and
the members of her family in their deep
sorrow.” He mentioned that he had re-
ceived a letter from the Grand Master of
Tasmania, who was a very old friend of
Sir Robert, and who had journeyed with
him recently, expressing in terms of affec-
tion his deep sorrow at the bereavement
which had been sustained. He had also
received a letter from the Pro Grand Mas-
ter of Victoria, in which allusion was made
to the fine character of the late Deputy
Grand Master. Sir Samuel Way men-
tioned that Masonry had numerically pro-
gressed during the past two or three years,
and, what was still more important, it had
been marked by greater earnestness and
devotion. Those features were due to the
dignity, devotion, and self-sacrifice of Sir
Robert’s predecessor, Brother Grundy. Yet
every necessity which those conditions had
imposed had been met in the appointment
of the late Sir Robert Thomas.
The Senior Warden (Rev. E. Salisbury
Jose, M.A.) seconded the motion, Avhich
was carried unanimously.
20


THE FUNERAL.
The funeral took place on Tuesday after-
noon of the late Sir Robert Kyffin Thomas,
senior proprietor of The Register and its
associated journals. It was one of the most
largely attended in recent years, and was
a marked expression of the high personal
regard of his friends and the appreciation
of his public services. The passing of such
a distinguished citizen had a depressing
effect on the city, and flags were flown at
halfmast, for Sir Robert had a friend in
almost every business man. A score of cabs
conveyed a large number of employes from
The Register Office to the residence of the
deceased proprietor—Ardington, Brougham
place, North Adelaide. Every worker in
the establishment desired to signify bis
devotion to a beloved master; and
only the few who remained behind whom
duty reluctantly compelled to stay within
the oclsed building.
At the home the pallbearers were heads
of various departments—-Messrs. C. J. Ste-
vens (Associate Editor), C. P. Aloody
(Chief Reporter), W. G. White, C. H.
Franklin, and F. Alonk (newsroom), H.
Barnes (machinery department), A. E.
Birrell (publishing department), J. B.
Anderson (stereo department), ,G- N. Bed-
nail (jobbing office), and E. H. Lock (re-
presenting the commercial branch). Nume-
rous and beautiful wreaths had been sent
from public and private sources. The
floral emblems covered the silver-mounted
polished oak coffin and filled a carriage.
From Brougham place the long cortege
wound its way around the beautiful civic
gardens to Christ Church, in Jeffcott
street, where a brief, impressive service
was conducted by the rector (Rev. G. H.
Jose, ALA.) and Canon Slaney Poole, ALA.
The chief mourners within the church were
the sons (Alessrs. Reginald, Geoffry, and
Owen Thomas), and the daughters (Mrs.
Leonard Hack and Misses Alillicent and
Kathleen Thomas), the one surviving
brother (Air. Evan Kyffin Thomas), Miss
AJargaret Thomas (sister), Airs. Geoffry
Thomas, and Aliss Finlayson. Lady Way
was also present.
The cortege reassembled to the muffled
tolling of the bell, and proceeded to Noith
Hoad Cemetery. The route taken was via
O'Connell street, and the business people
of that thoroughfare manifested their es-
teem for the late knight by closing their
doors and half-masting flags. The proces-
sion gathered dimensions in its progress,
and when it reached the cemetery it was
over a mile in length, for it embraced more
than 100 vehicles. At the graveside the
Rev. G. H. Jose and Canon Poole again
officiated.
The crowd which assembled within the
cemetery—flower clothed, green-mantled,
and tinged with the setting sun—was tho-
roughly representative of the manifold,
though unostentatious, activities of Sir
Robert Thomas. Besides the mourners
already mentioned those who occupied the
leading carriages were Air. Leonard Hack,
Dr. D. T. Harbison, Alessrs. Charles Birks,
W. J. Sowden, E. W. Bullock, William
Neill, J. Edwin Thomas, E. B. Grundy,
K.C., AHncent L., Nelson, and Haddon
Bowen, Napier Birks, Harold and Roy Bul-
lock, Kenneth, Bruce, and Roy Neill, and
Ernest and Arthur Thomas.
There were present also the Chief Justice
(Sir Samuel Way), Air. Justice Gordon, the
Chief Secretary (Hon. F. S. Wallis,
M.L.C., representing the Government), the
Mayor of Adelaide (Air. Lewis Cohen), Aid.
Simpson and Bonython, Crs. Pullen, Craw 7 -
ford, and Forwood, Sr. Vardon, the Hons.
Sir John Downer, K.C., J. Lewis, J. H.
Howe, and T. Bruce, AI.L.C.’s, the Hon.
R. Butler and Air. Ponder, M.P.’s, Messrs.
T. Gill, 1.5.0. (Under Treasurer),, T. Duf


field (Secretary to the Commissioner of
Crown Lands), Peter Whitington (Audit
Commissioner), W. Strawbridge (Surveyor-
General), Mr. W. H. Raymond (Commis-
sioner of Police), Mr. A. Buchanan (Mas-
ter of the Supreme Court), Sir Langdon
Bonython, Sir Edwin Smith, Aid. Glover
(Grand Secretary) and officers of the
Grand Lodge of Freemasons, officers
of the Leopold Lodge, Lodge of
Faith, St. Andrew’s Lodge, and Com-
mercial Lodge, Messrs. W. B. Wilkinson
(President) and T. S. Reed (Secretary) and
members of the Council of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, Mr. G. H. Prosser (Vice-
President, in the absence of the President,
Mr. E. W. van Senden) and Mr. J. A.
Riley (Secretary), and members of the Ade-
laide Chamber of Commerce, Mr. G. F. Cle-
land (President) and members of the
Council of the Chamber of Manufactures,
Mr. W. B. Carr (President of the Adelaide
Stock Exchange), Messrs. C. J. Stevens
(President) and R. Cockburn (Secretary)
of the Institute of Journalists. H. B. Hor-
ton (representing the Port Adelaide branch
of The Register),. S. H. Skipper (Secretary
cf the Old Colonists’ Association), G. F
Hussey (President) and members of the Mas-
ter Printers’ Association, W. C. Melbourne
(Secretary) and members of the Typogra-
phical Society, Dr. Barlow (Vice-Chancel-
lor) and Mr. C. R. Hodge (Registrar of
the University of Adelaide), Messrs. Lay-
bourne Smith (Registrar of the School of
Mines), S. J. Jacobs (Chairman of Tatter-
sail’s Club), A. Mackie (Secretary of the
Commercial Travellers’ Club), A. E. 11.
Evans (Secretary) and members of the com-
mittee of the Queen’s Home, F. E. Meleng
(Secretary of the Institutes’ Association),
A. C. Minchin (Director) and members of
the council of the Zoological Gardens, re-
presentatives of the South Australian News
Agents’ Association, representatives of the
staffs of The Advertiser and Daily Herald,
Messrs. T. H. Atkinson (Chairman of the
Destitute Board), C. H. Goode (President
of the Y.M.C.A.), Simpson Newland (Pre-
sident of the Australian Railways and Ter-
ritory League), Harvey Finiayson (repre-
senting Mr. J. Harvey Finiayson, a formet 1
proprietor of The Register), F. J. Fisher
(son of the late Mr. Joseph Fisher, a
former proprietor of The Register), and
also representatives of churches, philan-
thropic institutions, commercial houses,
sporting organizations, and musical socie-
ties.
Lady Thomas and the proprietors of The
Register received messages of sympathy
from all parts of Australia and England.
Mr. Commissioner Russell telegraphed
from Angaston:—“My sincere sympathy is
offered to the family of Sir Robert Thomas
and the proprietors of The Register, in con-
nection with the sad death of our old friend
Sir Robert.”
At the Exhibition Building on Tues-
day evening the Premier (Hon. J. Verran)
said he was sure he expresed the feelings
of all present when he voiced their deep
and sincere sympathy with Lady Thomas
and her family in their sad loss. They all
admired the late Sir Robert Thomas for
his honesty and the integrity of his man-
hood. He had been kind and affectionate,
ever willing to give advice and counsel to
his fellows, and had helped to make this
country much better for having lived in it.
At his wish, the assemblage received in
silence his motion of appreciation.
The Speaker of the House of Assembly
(Sir Jenkin Coles) wrote expressing on be-
half of hon. members deep regret on the
death of a friend whom they sincerely es-
teemed, and extending to the bereaved rela-
tives and the proprietors of The Register
their sincere sympathy in their great
sorrow.
The Leader of the Opposition (Hon. A.
H. Peake) telegraphed from Mount Ham-
bier:—“Deeply regret death of Sir Robert
Thomas, and appreciate his great service
to the State.”
Letters of condolence were also received
from the Agent-General in London (Hon.
A.'A. Kirkpatrick); Air. Percy Arnold
(Alanager in London of the Bank of Ade-
laide) ; the London office of The Register;
Dr. Hackett (Proprietor of The Western
22


Australian); the Railways Commissioner
(Mr. A. B. Moncrieff); the University
Society of Commerce; the Lodge of Friend-
ship; the President and Secretary of the
Adelaide Hebrew Congregation; the Board
of Directors of the A.N.A. in South Austra-
lia; Messrs. J. Fairfax Conigrave, of Perth (a
journalist co-worker with the late Sir
Robert Thomas); W. Moxon Cook (for-
merly sporting editor of The Register); J.
J. Virgo (of the Sydney Y.M.C.A., and for-
merly of the Adelaide institution); R. J.
Rose (editor of the Kadina and Wallaroo
Times); and R. M. Osborne (proprietor
of several country and suburban news-
papers) .
Among the wreaths were those from Mr.
L. C. Mackinnon (a proprietor and gene-
ral manager of The Melbourne Argus),
Dr. E. S. Cunningham (editor of The
Argus), the staff of the London office of
The Register, the departments of The Reg-
ister Office). Mrs. and Miss Haddon, of
Melbourne, Hon. J. W. Kirwan, M.L.C.,
(Kalgoorlie), Mr. E. W. Hocking (Kalgoor-
lie Miner, Western Australia), Sir Lang-
don Bonython and the literary, publishing,
and commercial departments of The Adver-
tiser, the board of management and staff
of The Daily Herald, M.W. the Grand
Master and Grand Lodge of Freemasons,
the Eastern Extension Telegraph Com-
pany (Australia and England), Reu-
ter’s Telegram Company, His Honor
the Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Horn-
burg, the Adelaide Orpheus Society, the
Adelaide Glee Club, the Children’s Sun-
beams Society, and the North Adelaide
Cricket and Football Clubs.
Mr. King O’Malley (Federal Minister for
Home Affairs), who was formerly a member
of the State Legislature, stated on his ar-
rival in Adelaide on Tuesday morning:—“l
am very sorry to hear of the death of Sir
Robert Thomas. He was always very kind
and friendly to me, although we were op-
posed in politics, and was always the same
even-tempered gentleman whenever you
met him. He was easy to approach in his
office. Whether on business or otherwise
he would make time for you. That is how
I always found him. I had thought of call-
ing to see him during my visit, and you can
imagine what a shock I received when I
learned the news of his death.”
W, K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Adelaide.
23




'ifl
71 \ * * quit fsJnp*'^f r *on
i#*V, *4*7*


