

THE WAR
No. 1 Leaflet. Issued by the Militant Propagandists
R Great Speech
Returned Soldier Speaks
in Parliament
Mr. William Slater, M.L.A., is a returned soldier,
elected to represent the constituency of Dundas
whilst he was serving with the A.I.F. abroad.
Speaking in Parliament on August 6, 1918, he
made an important speech on the war.
[Extract from “ Hansard,” 6/8/18, page 457]
Mr. Slater said:—l do not think it a
very inspiring thought that the troops
should read in the British papers, as we
have read to-night, that Lord Rother-
mere says that there is a likelihood of
the war lasting another three years. I
think the attitude of the Australian Labor
Party is in keeping with the Labor
orgahisations, not merely of the Allied
countries, but of the Central Powers
also. It must be remembered that
the same forces that the Labor and
Socialist parties have to face in Australia
have to be faced also by the Socialist and
Labor parties in the whole world. The
honorable member for Lowan told us that
the Social Democrats 'of Germany have
supported the German war party. I ven-
ture to say that the Social Democratic
party in Germany has not supported the
war class, but has supported the general
desires of the working classes in all coun-
tries for a hastening of the struggle.
Mr. Prendergast: There was an illus-
tration of that in the papers. We
are told that one of the candidates of the
Military party was heckled.


BURDEN ON THE WORKERS.
Mr. Slater: The great burdens of
the war are falling on the working classes
of the world. Those classes provide at
least 95 per cent, of the soldiers actually
engaged in the zones of battle. Look at
the abnormal economic conditions that
prevail in every belligerent country
to-day. Are the capitalist classes suffering
from these conditions to anything like the
extent the working classes are suffering?
We know that they are not. In England
the ration system has been adopted. Meat
is rationed. This has been the case since
February of this year. The maximum
amount of meat one can obtain per week
is 20 ounces, this ration is exclusive
of fish, poultry, and game, and from these
extras the wealthy classes are able to
supplement their supplies. Is it not a
fact that the working classes all over the
world to-day. particularly those of the
warring nations, instead of having an-
tagonistic ideals, have ideals in common?
We of the Labor Socialist movement
know full well that the charge cannot be
laid against our party in any country that
we were instrumental in bringing about
the war. The working classes in no coun-
try of the world had any say in regard to
the entry of the nation into the con-
flict. Much is said to-day about making
the world safe for Democracy, about pre-
serving the rights of Democracy, and so
on. Strangely enough, the people who are
talking about the rights of the people are
the very persons whose lives have been
devoted to the thwarting of democratic
legislation.
DEMOCRATIC LEGISLATION.
What democratic legislation can be
hoped for from such men as Lord Robert
Cecil, or Mr. Lansing, of America,
or some of the capitalistic politicians of
our own country? There is a feeling
amongst most of the belligerent countries
that an International Conference of work-
ing-class representatives should be held,
and that some agreement should be come
to all over the world on the great issues
of war and peace. When I was in the
Old Country, in August last year, I hoped
that the resolution carried at a big and
representative conference of the Labor
Party, urging the holding of an Inter-
national Labor Conference, would have
been realised, and £Kat representatives of
the working classes in Europe would have
met at Stockholm, and debated the vital
questions of war and peace, and possibly
have arrived at some conclusion. Unfor-
tunately, as we know, the capitalistic
Governments of the Old World were
practically, to a Government, hostile to
the idea of an International Conference.
They were afraid of working-class repre-
sentatives meeting in a neutral country,
and possibly determining upon matters of
policy that they were afraid to determine
upon themselves. It is an extraordinary
thing that, whilst no obstacle was placed
in the way of a meeting of cardinals of a
great church from each of the belligerent
countries in Rome, and whilst the Govern-
ments of the Old World winked their eyes
at certain International Conferences of
capitalistic organisations, the moment
the organised forces of Labor demanded
that an International Conference be held,
the Government was afraid to grant pass-
ports, and refused to sanction the holding
of that conference.
Mr. D. Smith (Bendigo West): What
was the attitude of the British Seamen’s
Union in regard to the transport of dele-
gates ?
THE LABOR UNIONS ARE DAILY
BECOMING MORE PACIFIST.
Mr. Slater: That union is led by Mr.
Havelock Wilson, who is regarded by
British Labor as one of the most
reactionary men in the movement.
Sneering reference has been made to
Mr. Ramsay Macdonald and Mr. Philip
Snowden, but no men at the recent con-
ference at Nottingham received a heartier
reception than they did. The Labor
movement is daily becoming more pacifist,
and the attitude of the party to those
men who have adopted a consistent atti-
tude in that direction during the war has
been of a more conciliatory nature. I
am confident that both Mr. Ramsay
Macdonald and Mr. Philip Snowden are
destined to play a large part in the
British Labor movement. Look at" the
opportunities which have been lost of
bringing about an end of the war by
negotiation. I would like to quote from
the “Nation.” I assume it is a respect-


able organ, because it reposes in the
library of this House. It is certainly
not a Socialist or a Labor paper. In
its issue of May 11 it states: —
“It may be useful to catalogue the
lost opportunities of ‘peace by negotia-
tion’ or of negotiations that might have
led to peace. They are much as fol-
lows: (1) Autumn and winter of 1916.
Germany’s offer of entry into a League
of Nations and a Peace Conference.
Countered by the knock-out blow inter-
view. (2) President Wilson’s appeal for
a statement of aims. Answered by the
ambiguous Note.”
Honorable members have mentioned how
President Wilson, because of his state-
ment about peace without victory, was
reviled by many public men in this and
other countries, who are adopting a very
different attitude now.
“(3) The joint appeal in the opening
months of 1917 of the Pope’s Circular
Note, the Russian plea for a peace of
no annexations, the Socialists’ invita-
tion to Stockholm and the Austrian
intervention. All rejected: Stockholm
by Mr. Lloyd George, the Pope’s and
Russia’s appeals ‘sub silentio,’ the Aus-
trian effort by France and Italy, with
Mr. George’s final assent. (4) The
advance of German Liberalism through
the Reichstag resolutions and the
obscure tenders to M. Briand. Generally
discouraged and finally giving place to
the German reaction. (5) The Czernin-
Hertling answer to the four Wilson
propositions. Rejected in the Ver-
sailles manifesto.”
Honorable members will remember that
some time before the Reichstag resolution
the Allies met in conference, and deter-
mined on an economic policy that did a,
very great deal of harm to our cause
among the Central Powers. Mr. Hughes’
speeches at that Conference were trans-
lated into the German language and cir-
culated among the Germans in the
trenches. The very literature that the
German junker and jingo element wanted
was supplied in those resolutions. What
attitude could have been more favorable
to them than one which meant that Ger-
many’s access to the raw materials of the
world was to be closed, and that an
economic barrier was to be raised against
her before the war was over? The Ger-
man militarists could appeal to the work-
ing classes, and say, “Look at the high
ideals of the Allies, and compare with
them the resolutions which they have
just carried in Paris—resolutions which
mean the strangulation of our economic
advancement, cutting us off from the
trade of the world when the war is over,
and denying us access to the raw material
which it will be necessary for us, not
only to develop, but to maintain our in-
dustrial life.” It is not only among the
Labor or the Socialist classes of the
world that the desire for peace is deeply
rooted. Might I remind the House that
overtures have been already made, and,
unfortunately, made in secret, in order
to secure peace by negotiation. The fol-
lowing appears in an article published in
the “Nation” on May 4: —
“The Foreign Affairs Committee has
succeeded after a struggle in obtaining
the documents about these peace over-
tures, and some comments upon them
in the French press, which the ‘Man-
chester Guardian’ reports, tells us a
little about the transaction.”
I might say that, because of the action
of the Paris reporter of the “Manchester
Guardian” in supplying this information,
he was deported from Paris. The article
goes on to say:—
“The documents are said to show
that the Emperor Karl was unques-
tionably sincere in his wish to
negotiate, and further that he acted
without consulting Germany. He is
alleged to have obtained from M. Poin-
caire and M. Ribot a promise that
neither his letters, nor the fact of the
negotiations, should be divulged, and
this promise M. Clemenceau has
strangely chosen to ignore. The first
fact of importance which is estab-
lished is that the negotiations which
concerned the whole Alliance were
handled only by France, Great
Britain, and Italy. These three Powers
ignored the other Allies, and at no
state of the negotiations consulted
America, which has just come in, or
Russia, which had just set up her Pro-
visional Government, or Belgium,
whose fate was peculiarly involved, or
the minor Eastern Allies. Russia was
still at this time a loyal and effective


factor in the Alliance, and on America
we reckoned to bear the economic
burden of the future.
“The exchange of views lasted, we
are told, a ‘considerable time,’ and a
second letter, which has not been pub-
lished, was received from the Austrian
Emperor. Later in the year, in August,
1917, after the conversations had been
broken off, Austria renewed them
through Count Revertera and Major
Armand, in Switzerland; and once
again, after M. Clemenceau had suc-
ceeded M. Painleve, made a final at-
tempt before this year’s offensive
began to reach a basis of peace. There
were other attempts to which the
French official statements referred, ,in
London and Rome, not to mention the
meeting between General Smuts and
Count Mensdorff. Firfally, there were
German proposals in August of last
year, which M. Briand wished to carry
further. Of these. latter proposals the
French Cabinet as a whole and Presi-
dent Wilson were also kept in
ignorance.”
PEACE WILL COME BY
NEGOTIATION.
The Labor Party in Victoria, and, in-
deed, of Australia, by the adoption of the
resolutions of the Conference at Perth,
is acting- in accordance with the attitude-
of the party in England, France and even
in Germany itself. There is no need to dis-
cuss the military aspect of the war just
now. In the end peace will come by
negotiation, but then it will only be
reached after millions of lives have been
sacrificed, and untold wealth has been
spent in the prosecution of this fratricidal
struggle.
Pass This Leaflet On.
Paper is costly. Printing is expensive. Funds are limited. Therefore do not
waste this leaflet. PASS IT ON.
Militant Propagandists of the Labor Partv
WHAT THEY ARE.
They are known generally as the Militants.
HOW CONSTITUTED.
Every man and woman, a financial member either of the
Trades Union, is eligible for membership.
WHAT THE MILITANTS DO. j
Discuss economic, political, industrial and social questioi
coming to a clear understanding of working-class problems.
WHERE THEY MEET. *
At the Reading Room of the Trades Hall.
WHEN.
Every Saturday evening at 8 o’clock.
FEES.
There is no fee, providing (as stated) you are a financial member of either the
Labor Party or a Trades Union. A voluntary collection is taken up at the meetings
to defray current expenses.
If interested, you are invited to attend the meetings.
LEAFLETEERING.
The Militants have decided to begin a Leafleteering Campaign. Those willing
to assist, financially or in distribution, are invited to communicate with the Sec-
retary.
FURTHER SUPPLIES OF ABOVE LEAFLET.
Can be had from the Secretary. Trades Unions and A.L.P. Branches supplied
at cost price
MAY FRANCIS, Secretary,
1 Coward Street, Footscray-
Issued 9/9/18.
