





ALL
THE EDISON & SWAN UNITED ELECffRIC LIGHT CO. LTD.
- =
THE ALL BRITISH LAMP:
Royal Ediswan" Drawn Wire (Tungston) Filament
MADE
By BRITISH LABOUR
In GREAT BRITAIN
With BRITISH CAPITAL
KINDS OF ELECTRICAL GOODS KEPT
IN STOCK
SYDNEY OFFICE
EDISWAN "
TELEPHONE : CITY 6879.
EVERYTHING
58 CLARENCE STREET
ELECTRICAL.
>-AV/ " : ' 7 '
m




'
-jjljk.
--■• i Ihh^jgg-is,
|w
Hk
■
ik
Ik ■
lk\. ,A|KM H
jk Wj
ftRs*X\
ft . : '" ■. f ,
,^8
■Hk -,^'
W,e -
*Mw. *
■.,..- - .
. 4 %.*
-»•- •' •''& Jm Wm I
+* .-' \4
? •> >tSTWI HHh I B
I ' "
■ >V *>5&* "||~ ,j
V?v
ML jHk.
HHHk /^-
vi- ' ' '
ISNKHI
ALBERT 1., KING OF BELGIUM.
THE QUEEN OF BELGIUM.


The Story of Belgium
From Prosperity to Desolation;
Murder, Rapine and Ruin
A Description of the Wonderful Ancient Towns and Cities of Belgium, and the Destruction
wrought in them by the German troops. Also an account of the Barbarities, Murders, Mutilations
and other atrocities of which the German Officers and Men have been proved to be guilty.
25 ILLUSTRATIONS
By the Author of "The Rise of Germany's Military Despotism,"
"What Caused the War," etc.
Published under the Patronage of the Belgian Consul
The net proceeds from this Book will be Donated to the Belgian Relief Fund
TURNER & SONS, PUBLISHERS, SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE
(Copyright. All Rights Reserved, 1915)


INTRODUCTION
It is obvious that in a work of the character of "The Story of
Belgium," which deals with contemporary actions and with a war
which is still in progress, no finality can be reached. But there
are two distinct phases with which the people of Australia should
be acquainted; the first is the wonderful antiquity and archaeologi-
cal value of the many towns, buildings, and works of art which
have been damaged, if not entirely destroyed, by the German
troops; and, second, the actual facts regarding the murders, tortur-
ings, outraging, and plundering of the people of Belgium which
these modern Huns have perpetrated throughout the entire length
and breadth of the country they have occupied.
Regarding these latter crimes, the information to hand is still
incomplete, simply because the outrages may be, and probably are,
still continuing; but sufficient is known to absolutely condemn
many German Commanders, a yet larger number of German officers
and an immense number of German rank and file, and place them
m a class ranking with barbarians and savages, and beyond the
pale of civilisation. The terrible treatment to which the unfortu-
nate Belgians have been subjected has not been the actions of a
ew turbulent soldiers who have got out of hand during the carnage
inseparable from battle, or when entering a town after a fierce
attack and resistance. It is necessary to seek far deeper and
beyond this miserable excuse to account for the systematic burn-
ings, outrages, and murders which have taken place. The destruc-
tion of the beautiful towns of Dinant and Louvain were the result
of orders issued by German Generals, faithfully obeyed by German
tr oops, and were not occasioned by any of them overstepping the
ordinary rules of sobriety and order which should prevail in an
army under proper control. In every instance of the sack and
pillaging of towns, of their destruction by fire, together with the
massacre of the inhabitants, the torturings which have taken place
the violations of women and young girls, and all the other atroci-
aes laid to the charge of the German soldiers, it is only fair to say
they have been done under the direct orders of their officers, who
also must have received their orders from a yet higher source
No one can charge German soldiers with insubordination; if any-
thing, they have been, and are, too obedient. And it is because
of this very obedience that the charges of committing these atroci-
ties, wantonly and wilfully, must be made against the governing
powers of Germany. The crimes committed against Belgium must
remain the eternal disgrace of Germany, and will pass down the
vista of years as the worst blot upon her escutcheon, and which
no aftermath of repentance, based upon a higher interpretation of
the true ethics of humanitarism, can ever entirely wipe away. It
is possible that some time in the future Germany will be able to
look back upon this period in her history as having been a time of
madness, when she was not responsible for her actions. But the
reckoning her people must eventually have with their rulers will
assuredly be a long and a bitter one. Every man in the German
army, as well as every member of the great bureaucracy by which
she is governed, from the Kaiser down to the humblest of his
Ministers, must bear his share in the general burden. Thrones will
undoubtedly rock when this setting of the house in order takes
p ace, but in the process Germany will find her own soul, and issue
forth like gold which has been through the furnace.
Regarding the descriptions we give of the classic and beautiful
towns, buildings, monuments, and other works of noble art in
_e gium, we have to acknowledge our grateful indebtedness to
■ 6 Holland's "The Belgians at Home," and to the London
Times History of the War," from both of which books we have
freely borrowed. Other sources of information have been the daily
and weekly press, from which many of the illustrations have been
taken. Several of these were first published in "The Sphere'"'
(London), and, though they have appeared elsewhere, we thank-
fully acknowledge our own indebtedness to their place of birth.
C. E. BUTTON TURNER,


THE BELGIAN FLAG.
M. Emile Cammaerts.
Red for the blood of soldiers,
Black, yellow, and red —
Black for the tears of mothers,
Black, yellow, and red —
And yellow for the light and flame
Of the fields where the blood is shed!
To the glorious flag, my children,
Hark! the call your country gives,
To the flag in serried order!
He who dies for Belgium lives!
Red for the purple of heroes,
Black, yellow, and red-
Black for the veils of widows,
Black, yellow, and red —
And yellow for the shining crown
Of the victors who have bled!
To the flag, the flag, my children,
Hearken to your country's cry!
Never has it shone so splendid,
Never has it flown so high!
Red for the flames in fury,
Black, yellow, and red —
Black for the mourning ashes,
Black, yellow, and red —
And yellow of gold as we proudly hail
The spirits of the dead!
"To the flag, my sons! " Your country
With her blessing "Forward" cries!
Has it shrunken? No, when smallest,
Larger, statelier, it flies!
Is it tattered? No, 'tis stoutest
When destruction it defies!
Note. —The colours of the Belgian Flag are Black, Yellow, and Red
"BRAVO BELGIUM" From Punch


LAWS OF WAR VIOLATED BY THE GERMANS.
that world : 'tribunal 08 ***» FmM Contexte in 1907, and her delegates signed the conventions agreed to by
Among the solemn declarations of the Hague Conference to which Germany gave her adherence are the following:—
The territory of neutral Powers is inviolable.
neutral Power. 18 """' 8 "" < ' orbidcl<! ° to raove tro0 P s " r envoys, whether of munitions of war or of supplies across the territory of a
by the necMs'ities'of'war." f ° rbidd<,n to destr0 5 r or seiM property, unless such destruction or seizure be imperatively demanded
-The attack or bombardment, by any means whatever, of undefended towns, villages, dwellings, or buildings is forbidden
worship, ait" T ible »"»»»*« dedi » ated P° bb «
provided they are not being used at the time for military purposes. p aces "Pore the sick and wounded are collected,
'' The giving over t0 P illa ge of a town or place, even when taken by assault, is forbidden
for which' it "cannot """lecUvely^esponsible! I "'' °" P ° PUlati °" °° bf aCts ° f ipd - d »^
40 pnblie WOTSh!p ' charity ' *» 4 *
and art, *"»'». "™* »* • <* •—»
orders of AIl 3 we" eor i me" commiUed^a-ainst' 'n""' t- nd ha v i,ee ,'l broken b y her armies, under the express
Germany S from r thrCTi : m t e oof 0 of "tav^broS^^of 1 witt w h°m, however, Germany is at war. This fact does not protect
French territory, which reason is Wanting inVr Belgium. * """" ° f h " «•'« «


THE STORY OF BELGIUM
"A small Nation rightly struggling to be free"
The history of the world supplies frequent stories of
ruthless outrages committed upon small nations unable by
reason of their natural weakness to protect themselves,
but it is probable there never was quite so wanton an in-
vasion, or more brutal treatment of an inoffensive people,
than that of which Germany has been guilty towards the
inhabitants of Belgium. In 110 sense could Germany be
regarded as in danger from this source. The French
Government had given every assurance that it would not
advance its army through any portion of Belgian terri-
tory. Belgium had declared her intention to remain
strictly neutral, and to defend her frontier against any
foreign troops endeavouring to force an entrance. Great
Britain had written in no doubtful terms that she was
prepared to uphold the right of Belgium to remain
neutral, and to adhere strictly to her obligation to defend
that country from invasion. And Germany was left in
110 manner of doubt regarding the fact that England
would treat any attack on Belgium as a "casus belli."
Yet despite every diplomatic communication from Sir
Edward Grey (the British Minister for Foreign Affairs),
despite all warnings from other sources, Germany per-
sisted in her mad enterprise, and Belgium was invaded,
her fortifications destroyed, her army met and defeated,
and almost the entire country occupied by German troops.
Belgium is a small country with about 7,500,000 inhabi-
tants. Fate has placed her in a position of grave danger,
being neighbour to several large countries, Whose earth-


hunger has in the past led them to eye her fertile plains
with almost irrepressible longings. Her early history
shows how dearly independence was prized, and upon
how many occasions her people have been compelled to
defend themselves against invading hordes. The worst
of these was when Spain, at the zenith of her power,
claimed the entire country, together with Holland and the
Netherlands. That period has supplied the historian with
a story of gallant devotion, self-sacrifice, and patriotism
Avhich will live long in the annals of the countries thus
invaded. Belgium was made the victim of the ferocious
soldiery, to whose tender mercies the people were handed,
and it was specially made known that any excess might
with impunity be committed. The infamous Duke of
Alva was the governor placed over the country by Spain,
and when he retired he was able to boast that he had
signed upwards of 17,000 death warrants of men, women,
and children. Among the nobles of the country who
fell victims to this implacable wretch were the patriots
Lain oral, Count Egmont, and Phillip de Montmorency,
Count Hoorn. Belgium has never forgotten these heroes,
and in Brussels statues and a fountain have been erected
to commemorate their deaths. These stand in front of
the Maison du Roi, from a window of which the Duke
of Alva witnessed the executions. And all these massa-
cres of the people were quite irrespective of the enormous
numbers who died oil the blood-stained battlefields, where
indiscriminate slaughter of the losers was the immediate
and certain corollary of being beaten; nor do they include
the numbers butchered in the towns which were besieged,
and fell into the hands of the Spanish soldiery. Rapine
the most ruthless, murder under the most outrageous
conditions, violations of women without pity, were the
constant occupations of this brutal army. And the leaders
not only condoned these offences, but ordered them. In
what degree they were different to the treatment now
being meted out by Germany upon the descendants of
these people history may discover, but from present
sources of information there has been but little to choose.
Certainly Spain never laid claim to the possession of so
much culture as does Germany, nor can their relative
values in education, science, and the arts be compared
other than favourably to Germany. It might have been
anticipated that the possession of these aids to the higher
life Avould have inspired the German army to show mercy
and forbearance when dealing with a stricken nation.
Roth Spain and Germany, however, appear to have been
inspired by the vain hope to not only conquer but subdue,
and to attain this purpose 110 method has been too cruel
or too remorseless even for a cultured nation to attempt.


Phillip of Spain and his advisers never understood the
Belgic race, and it is certain that Kaiser William of
Germany has repeated their mistakes. Indeed, had he
not done so, it is something more than probable he would
never have embarked 011 his present enterprise. As it
is, the people of Belgium are once more called upon to
struggle for their cherished freedom against unnumbered
odds, and to repel the invading hosts of a merciless
enemy, no less cruel and ferocious than that of Spain.
At other periods of her history Belgium has been the
scene of the bloodiest battles, and the most hard-fought
struggles of past centuries. The great battles which the
Duke of Marlborough fought in the 17th century took
place on Belgian soil, and in defence of her freedom.
Malplaquet, Ramilies, Blenheim, Oudenarde, all testify to
the ferocity of the armies engaged, and to the sanguinary
nature of the bitter contest. And in later years Belgium
was to be again the centre of the struggle this country
had with the great Napoleon, and be the witness of his
final overthrow at Waterloo. For these reasons it has
been known as the cockpit of Europe, and history is thus
but repeating its already twice-told tale. The time is
now rapidly approaching when the final settlement with
the invader must be made, when the soil of Belgium will
be again drenched with blood (let us hope, of the in-
vader), and the countryside once more handed back tc
its rightful owners. That this will entail terrible suffer-
ings upon all engaged in the work is certain, though the
result is no less assured. The great Powers of Europe
are fully determined that Germany's attempted exploita-
tion of Belgium shall not succeed, but that her brutal
armies shall be driven back and the culprits punished as
far as possible for their ruthlessness. When that most
desirable object has been achieved, Germany will be in
110 position to again trouble the peace of Europe, and
the world may look forward to a long era of quiet, with
armaments reduced by every nation.
THE ART OF BELGIUM.
That patriotism should occupy so prominent a place
in Belgian attributes need occasion no surprise, when the
sacrifices made in the past are considered. But there are
other phases in the national character equally noticeable
and no less praiseworthy. It would be impossible to find
in the whole of Europe a people who have done more
for Art, for the erection of noble fanes, cathedrals, and
churches, and for their interior decoration, than the
Belgians. From border to border of the country the


tra\ eiier is regaled with the sight of the most impressive
of structures, including Town Halls whose massive gran-
deur compels admiration, Cloth Halls dating from the
earliest period, each of them triumphs of architectural
ait, cathedrals and churches of lofty design and magnifi-
cent workmanship, while the interior decorations have
everywhere drawn forth the admiration of past and
present ages. During every period of her struggles for
freedom Belgium has never ceased to give birth to illus-
tlions painters and sculptors, to great artists and world-
-11 now ncd architects. fi o-day the entire country lies
stricken before the modern Huns; but the genius of her
people refuses to be enslaved, and we know she will rise
again, with all her honours increased rather than
diminished by reason of her sacrifices and her sufferings.
In the world of trade and commerce Belgium has
again made an indelible mark. The specimens of lace
which come from such centres of the industry as Brussels
and INI alines arc in never-ceasing demand, and will prob-
ably continue so long as women and men love beautiful
things. The carpet and tapestry industries employ
immense numbers of hands, and are known the whole
world over for beauty of design and skilful workmanship.
Mining is another of the industries in which Belgium
takes an active share. There are coal and iron mines,
and these have led to the manufacture of both steel and
iron in large enough quantities to permit of an ever-
increasing export trade, as well as supplying all the
requirements of the home manufactures.
In agriculture Belgium shows some splendid results
of the ai tof closer cultivation. It is essentially a country
of small owners, no less than 4/ per cent, of the soil being
owned by those whose holdings do not exceed a hundred
acres. The ambition of every peasant is to become a
tiller of soil owned by himself, and the conditions are
such that but few suffer the pangs of disappointment.
With so self-contained a nation, one so little dependent
upon other countries for the means of life and of living
comfortably, Belgium has always been quietly prosperous
and unassumingly happy. Her home life has not unfre-
quently been the special admiration of that army of
visitors which is annually attracted to her shores. Her
only ambition has apparently been to be left alone, and
foi hei people to work out their own destinies without
interference from foreign sources. In this the nation has
largely benefited by the guarantee of independence which
England has given, and to which the principal countries
of Europe have also set their hands.
The reasons for this treaty may now be briefly given.
The French Republic of 1790 had annexed Belgium, and


L
- ML.' I
! K:>aPaKR M SMWW-
. v f nlHB^
■ "■;;;: £*
4 _■• '^IHBHp
, mR ' w , | x v , ,,,, lWlJ< .,, »
I *. 1 > 'i£M V,'" '' A,* 8 v a 1 vP*P4M' i * I — V f "V" ' ' p 11 § L t | U ; '' V'"\ : :> 1 -:' ' * K^isadit£?S i
o'v A Jr 5# i i <.'■t B# rv ' 8M|0B| *& ■>•** >« t ' |j ,u- v •ijWt si. ■",»•< * .'■' \ wsllilllSw
1
• S11 IMSMspi 1 Bill Swl MM
MM In M '' ■ jr? J | |n|| . i MB
i . . - ■ ■ -. ——-
BURNING OF THE GREAT CLOTH HALL, YPRES


set up within its borders an independent republic with
which the people were not entirely in sympathy, and to
which consequently only a half-hearted support could be
given. With the defeat of France by the then Allies,
Belgium was handed over to Austria, and at the Congress
of Vienna it was decided that the country should be
summarily united to Holland, and placed under the rule
of William 1., King of the Netherlands. But this did
not please the liberty-loving people of Belgium, who saw
themselves occupying a secondary position, with all their
public offices in the hands of Dutch officials.' A revolution
speedily took place, wherein the yoke was cast off, and
Belgium was once more free. This was followed by the
appointment of a Provisional Government, which de-
manded that the country should be governed by a king
of the people's own choosing. Under the favourable
auspices of Great Britain and France an election was
held, and Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, an uncle of
Queen Victoria, was elected, and made his triumphal
entry into Brussels on July 19, 1831. His first act was
an endeavour to consolidate the independence of the
country by having its liberty guaranteed by the great
Powers. In 1839 a treaty was signed, to which Great
Britain, Austria, France, Russia, and Prussia set their
hands. In this it was decreed, under Article VII.: "Bel-
gram, within the limits specified in Articles 1., TL, and
IV., shall form an independent and perpetually neutral
State. Tt shall he bound to observe such neutrality to-
wards all other States."
With such a treaty as this to guarantee its independ-
ence, it is evident that Belgium could not, even if it
would agree to assist the passage of German troops
through its territories. Yet it was because of this refusal
that Germany invaded the land, put its people to the
sword, and committed other atrocities which will live so
long as German "kultur" dares to claim a place among
the civilised nations of the world.
Leopold T. had a long and prosperous reign, and was
succeeded by his son, Leopold 11. He died on December
17, 1909, and, not leaving any male issue, his nephew, the
present King Albert, came to the throne. He was married
to Elizabeth, Duchess of Bavaria, in 1900, and has issue
as follows:—S.A.R. Leopold, Duke de Brabant (the
Crown Prince), aged 14; S.A.R. Prince Charles Theodore
de Belgique, Conrte de Flanders; and S.A.R, Madame de
Princesse Marie Jose de Belgique.
One of Belgium's main difficulties has always been to
keep herself free from any European entanglements, and
not permit the precious independence of the country
becoming impaired. The year 1870, when France and


Prussia were at war, was a period of great stress and
danger. At that time, however, both France and Prussia
assured Great Britain that the treaty of 1839 would be
binding upon them. Despite this, Belgium was compelled
to keep her little army fully mobilised, and ready at a
moment's notice to defend her borders from either foe.
But the treaty stood intact, and neither of the contending
armies attempted to take advantage of Belgian neutrality.
Great Britain also adopted a watchful attitude, and
both countries knew that she was prepared to uphold
the Belgian treaty, probably against either foe. In this
way Britain proved that her signature to the treaty was
no idle observance, but that she was prepared to uphold
it, if necessary by force of arms.
Directly the present trouble between Austria and Rus-
sia entered upon its acute stage, Britain addressed both
France and Germany, demanding to know if, in the event
of a European war, they were prepared to again recog-
nise the treaty of 1839, and guarantee not to interfere
with the independence of Belgium. (See White Book
No, 114.)
To this France replied (No. 125) :
"French Government are resolved to respect the neutrality of
Belgium, and it would only be in the event of some other Power
violating that neutrality that France might find herself under the
necessity, in order to assure defence of her own-security, to act
otherwise."
Germany never gave a definite reply in writing, but
made the stereotyped statement through the Ambassador
that "the Emperor and the Chancellor must be consulted
before any reply could be given." (No. 122.)
Meantime Belgium declared: "Belgium expects and
desires that other Powers will observe and uphold her
neutrality, which she intends to maintain to the utmost
of her power." (No. 128.)
On August 3, Sir F. Villiers informed Sir Edward
Grey: "French Government have offered through their
military attache the support of five French army corps
to the Belgian Government. Following reply has been
received to-day:—
"We are sincerely grateful to the French Government for offer-
ing eventual support. In the actual circumstances, however, we
(Belgium) do not propose to appeal to the guarantee of the Powers.
Belgian Government will decide later on the action which they
may think it necessary to take." (No. 151.)
But on August 4 Belgium found herself obliged to
depart from this attitude and make a special appeal to
our King as follows :
"Remembering the numerous proofs of your Majesty's friend-
ship and that of your predecessor, and the friendly attitude of
England in 1870, and the proof of friendship you have just given


lis again, I make a supreme appeal to the diplomatic intervention
of your Majesty's Government to safeguard the integrity ff
Belgium." J
In communicating this appeal to Sir E. Goschen in
Berlin, Sir Edward Grey went on to say:—
Govpf 18 Majesty ' s overnmeD t are also informed that the German
Government has delivered to the Belgian Government a note
proposing friendly neutrality entailing free passage through Bel-
Fntegrily : maintain the dependence and
3 F °V kmgdom and lts possessions at the conclusion of
peace, threatening m case of refusal to treat Belgium as an enemy.
S . requested Wlthin tw elve hours. We also under-
stand that Belgium has categorically refused this as a flagrant
bomidTo t ° f nationS - HiS M^'est^s Government are
manv i a f ** Vi ° lati ° n ° f a to wllich Ger-
many is a party m common with ourselves, and must request an
assurance that the demand made upon Belgium will not be pro-
You should a ? d f that 116r neutralit 7 will be respected by Germany,
should ask for an immediate reply." (No. 153.)
On the same date that this appeal was sent forward
the Germany Embassy in London made this important
s a ement to Sir Edward Grey, and was requested to do
so by the German Foreign Secretary in Berlin :
the BruTp diSPel any mistrust that ma Y subsist on the part of
the British Government with regard to our intentions, by repeating
most positively formal assnrariPA -fßof /v • n
conflict with Belgium aZlnTnm AT °* " med
T , , . Germany will, under no pretence whatever
by fact aT territory Sincerity »i this declaration i s borne on I
7 fact that we solemnly pledged onr word to Holland strictly to
respect her neutrality. It is obvious that we could not profitably
annex Belgran territory without making at the same time terri-
tonal acquisitions at the expense cf Holland." (No. 157.)
And on the same date the matter was brought to a
head by the following despatch from Sir Edward Grey
to Sir E. Goschen, the British Ambassador at Berlin :
''Me hear that Germany has addressed note to Belgian Minister
or oreign Affairs stating that German Government will be com-
pelled to carry out, if necessary by force of arms, the measures
considered indispensable. We are also informed that Belgian
territory has been violated at Gemmenich. In these circumstances
and m view of the fact that Germany declined to give the same'
assurance respecting Belgium as Prance gave last week in reply
to our request made simultaneously at Berlin and Paris, we must
repeat that request, and ask that a satisfactory reply to it and to
my telegram of this morning (see No. 153) be received here at
- o clock to-night. If not, you are instructed to ask for your
passports, and to say that His Majesty's Government feel bound
to take all steps m their power to uphold the neutrality of Belgium
and the observance of a treaty to which Germany is as much a
party as ourselves." (No. 159.)
What followed is now a matter of history. Germany
refused to withdraw any portion of her demands upon
>elgium; Sir E. Goschen, our Ambassador, demanded his
passports and left Berlin, and Germany, proceeded to
reach France by the most wanton invasion of a friendly
nation.


That Germany admits her wrongdoing the following
will abundantly prove. Speaking in the Reichstag, the
Imperial Chancellor said:—
"We are now in a state of necessity, and necessity knows no
law. We were compelled to override the just protest of the
Luxemburg and Belgian Governments. The wrong —I speak openly
—that we are committing we will endeavour to make good as soon
as our military goal has been reached. Anybody who is threatened
as we are threatened, and is lighting for his highest possessions,
can have only one thought—how he is to hack his way through."
Special attention may be called to Dispatch No. 157,
from the German Foreign Secretary to Prince Lichnow-
sky, the German Ambassador in London, with instructions
to present it at once to the British Government. It
contains a clear promise and assurance on the part of
Germany that, "even in the case of armed conflict with
Belgium, Germany will, under no pretence whatever,
annex Belgian territory." It is well to remember this
most distinct statement, made under no pressure from any
of the countries interested, and most flagrantly violated
now, when the first hurried campaign is coming to a close.
If any special action could be mentioned to show the
utter unreliableness of German promises, this may be
cited. . Germany has annexed Belgium, is even now ad-
ministering its affairs, is fining the people for not obeying
German mandates, has appointed a Governor, and for-
mally stated that in future Belgium is to be regarded as
German territory. Could duplicity, and lying disregard
of its own solemn promises, go further ? Germany stands
convicted, in this instance (which, however, is only one
of many), of being the champion freebooter and brigand
of Europe.
BELGIUM'S CRIME.
It is quite evident that when the German Government
committed this terribly wanton outrage against the un-
offending country of Belgium she had no quarrel with
her or even the semblance of a quarrel. What indeed
had Belgium done? Had she sent an ultimatum to Ger-
many, or challenged her or prepared to make war upon
her? Had she, as Hon. Lloyd George asks, "inflicted
any wrong upon Germany which the Kaiser was bound
to redress?" She did not come into the quarrel in any
way; her name was never mentioned in the despatches
until the question of her neutrality arose. Then Belgium
sprang into the foremost rank of nations whose very
existence depended upon certain answers from the bel-
ligerent nations. From the first it was evident Germany
had decided that Belgium was either to be a passive
nonentity, with no right even to the possession of her
own soil, or she was to be a victim, and an example of


§1 - si : ,S44»«ls¥-S
' fs§; ''gills/--*' ISs' II'If 1
8ft «!K:.lte-» : i ■ - « ; /iilSlilWailiS
;•-',»*■ ' Jf I fl J®* 1
<IIIgs r! >- r - ■ : s ; s ;: :■■■ S;g;gssg;g;is
"■- : ;:!*ggfS:;|g; ; g II Ilillll iff!
■•■;uC IIV' -;»^^V-, :: ' ' " : °'''''" ' ' ■'■Ilgfg'S
'FifM;.'■ -V-Isl:--'' . ' ■-,,* ■ ''• •), \, }%*?$$#( } ' >/■
German prowess and German invincibility. Belgium bad
committed no crime to warrant invasion or the outrages
which were to mark the passage of German troops
tin ough her towns and villages. Her only crime
Belgian Woman and Family. Once occupying a comfortable Home, now
compelled to beg for food.
was that she had trusted to the word of
a Prussian King. To-day the evidences of
that trust lie ready to the hand and offen-
sively glaring to the eye. The whole country
is overrun with German troops, towns lie
in unsightly ruin, churches and houses are
mere heaps of debris, their valuable contents
either pillaged for the enemy's enrichment or
utterly destroyed, while the miserable popula-
tion of what was a few months back one of the
most prosperous of countries are scattered on
foreign soil or lying dead among the ruins of
their once happy homes. This is the direct
work of "cultured" Germany, the country
which was to bring an advanced civilisation to
the world, whose professors led the way in
teaching and discovering truths in science and
religion, and whose arguments in the so-called
"higher criticism" were designed to help
humanity cast oft' the trammels of Christianity.
But the sheer brutality of her teachings, especi-
ally in the region of making war upon her
fellow-men, proves conclusively what a blind
guide she would be, and condemns her to ex-
tinction as the safest course for humanity in
its own protection to follow.


THE OUTRAGING OP BELGIUM.
That the Kaiser is officially responsible for the many
acts of atrocity, pillaging, burning, slaying, violating,
maiming, and torturing is now beyond any shadow of
doubt, and indeed has been admitted by those most
directly concerned. All the German army text books
directly advocate the methods adopted, and it may be
therefore pleaded, by officers and men alike, that they
have but put into actual reality those orders received and
covered by instructions from those above them in
authority. That these were in direct contravention of
the conclusions arrived at by the Hague Convention (to
which Germany agreed no less than ourselves) appears
not to have weighed one iota with them. No law, whether
international or simply humanitarian, and dictated by the
ordinary sentiments that usually weigh with men, even
when they are soldiers, appears to have influenced the
Germans in their treatment of either the Belgians or the
French. Civilians, Civic Guards, and regular soldiery
have been systematically subjected to the utmost bar-
barity, the laws which govern warfare between civilised
countries have been openly ignored, and the efforts of
the enemy directed towards the creation of a reign of
terror affecting the ...entire- countryside, irrespective of
whether the sufferers were belligerents or not.
A handbook issued to German officers contains the
following:—
"A war conducted with energy cannot be directed merely
against the combatants of the enemy State and the positions they
occupy, but it will, and must in like manner, seek to destroy the
total intellectual and material resources of the latter. Humani-
tarian claims, such as the protection of men and their goods, can
only be taken into consideration in so far as the nature and object
of the war permit." And following this me instructions to speci-
ally guard against "being animated by humanitarian notions,"
that certain severities are indispensable to war, and that true
humanity very often lies in a ruthless application of them. The
necessary aim of war gives the belligerent the right, and imposes
upon him, according to circumstances, the duty not to let slip the
important, it may be the decisive, advantages to be gained by such
means." And the Berlin Post published an article supporting the
"thorough" treatment of civilians in hostile countries, concluding
with these words: "Our duty is to treat prisoners and the civil
population of the enemy country in such a way that our adversary
will experience all the weight and all the horrors of the war that
he has provoked."
lii further support of this method of crushing and even
torturing the enemy, the following wireless message from
the Kaiser to his troops may be quoted
'' The only means of preventing surprise attacks from the civil
population has been to interfere with unrelenting severity, and to
create examples which, by their frightfulness, would be a warning


to the whole country. The increased war contribution levied on
the province of Liege has also had an excellent effect."
An official circular distributed among the German
troops prior to their departure for France, via neutral
Belgium, contained the following:—-
"Remember the blood which flowed in 1870, and annihilate your
hereditary foe, France, who has now driven forward the Russian
Colossus to annihilate us. No quarter! Kill them all, these
barbarians, these accursed, so that in a new day the peace of
Europe may be solidly established."
How thoroughly this work was begun in Belgium, and
continued wherever the opportunity offered in France,
may now be shown. But one fact must always be remem-
bered to Germany's eternal discredit. No declaration of
wai was evei made against Belgium. AVithout warning,
in a single night, the German troops poured across her
unprotected frontiers, and the work of creating the reign
of terror was entered upon. And so far as we noiv know,
110 declaration of war has ever been made against Bel-
gium, nor has Germany even troubled to justify the treat-
ment meted out to the unfortunate people, beyond the
bare statement that a passage for her troops through the
country was necessary. And German statesmen were
aware of the supreme injustice of the act being com
mitted, yet, to the shame of all parties in the Beichstag.
not one word of protest against the Government's high-
handed action has been heard. Of what avail is it to
blame the British Government for declaring war, when
Germany, by the voice of its own Chancellor, calmly
admits it has done wrong ? The offer to indemnify
Belgium for the breach of faith may be taken for what
it is worth, as coming from a nation which, wantonly
and without notice, breaks its most solemn engagements
and treaties. And the very terms of that treaty rendered
it out of the question for Belgium to acquiesce in her own
dishonour. Belgium's neutrality towards all countries
was the most distinct clause in the treaty. To give
Germany permission to move troops through her terri-
tories (which was desired) was to abandon this neutral
attitude, and place the nation in opposition to France,
with which country she would henceforth be at war.
To do this Belgium would have had to make a holocaust
sacrifice of her friends, and especially of those who had
stood beside her during past years of great national peril,
and who had more than once shed the blood of their
people in her defence. Only a mind distorted like that
of Germany could anticipate acceptance of such infamy.
Belgian honour still stands unstained, but that of Ger-
many has been dragged in the mire. The task of the
Allies is now to demand the supremacy of treaties above
all expediency; that engagements solemnly entered into


flft : f: :l1-;tl£, .11;:
®8ill SB if { -i31iiII®Biilit ; . s8|m1I®M ■
il®81?lilll!liiSi il'IIWW^Iilliair:
■IMWgMWBMMMWMi
' S®88®~ «Si#® ; 8H:!8® A ' '®''®fi!8f ®y®8®S®' :v ;$§?&>■ ;
—I
*-=■•"„. >|Vf •*«!*. J v.'",
ws m:f % m mm
: * fe-^'^
if«8a»is«®^
-8»;»■ 88| §®8 {|B; lllli. !;®u|j§®881881®
81 Is®# A l\ £ 8ill & rfiIS? ®8i,;lSB: : SIf ®J
P-" P MPifcMllllfc ? fp'I
PP«*y :iip¥if«^^^^
LOU VAIN
Burning of the Great Library


shall be observed, whatever the cost in blood and treasure
may be; and that punishment, equal to the offence, shall
be allotted to any country which dares to ignore these
obvious duties.
It had doubtless been the hope of Germany that the
Belgian people would tamely acquiesce in their own
slavery, and that the continued occupation of the country
by highly "kultured" Germany would be regarded as
somewhat of an honour. The exact reverse of this is the
case. To-day Belgium looks like a derelict nation rather
than one with any life in the national veins. Her people
are scattered over Europe and the world. Holland has
found homes or temporary resting-places for nearly a
million men, women, and children; England and France
have opened wide their doors to as many as can enter;
while the brave Belgian men have flocked to their army,
and are clamouring to be led against the invaders and
desecraters of their homes. Nowhere is there any sign
of accepting either annexation or even the mildest
of suzerainty by Germany. Belgium will be free, and
accept nothing less than full freedom and liberty to live
her own life and develop on her own lines. The courage
of the people remains unbroken; their determination to
be free is still their great national asset. Their sufferings
have been and still are terrible; but Belgium "has found
its own soul,*' and rises above the depths to wdiich it has
been cast. Friend and foe alike stand amazed at her
marvellous courage and patience under the unmerited
blow. But the future belongs to her, and she will surely
rise again, retaining the love and respect of the nations,
and indeed of the world.
THE FIRST ADVANCE.
While negotiations were still continuing, Germany
showed her hand by seizing the lines of railway in
Luxemburg, thereby breaking the Treaty of London,
ratified in 1867. On Saturday, August 1, in the secret
hours of the night, a lightly-equipped German force stole
into Luxemburg territory by the bridges of Wasserbillig
and Remich, and took forcible possession of the capital.
When the citizens awoke 011 that fatal Sunday, August 2,
they found German troopers at every point of vantage
throughout the city, the railway station and the Adolf
bridge guarded, and all right of way denied. These were
followed by heavily armed and loaded trains crowded
with soldiers, while the people were warned to remain
indoors and to offer no interference to any action the
German troops might command. That 110 blood was shed


011 this occasion was due to the moderation shown by the
people of Luxemburg, and to their obedience to the orders
of their Government, rather than to any particular good
behaviour 011 the part of the German soldiers, who were
simply not given the opportunity to display their thor-
oughness. Strong protests, however, were made by
Luxemburg officials, and by the Grand Duchess, but to
these 110 heed w r as paid, beyond the presentation of a
loaded revolver at the head of General Vandyck, who was
ordered to return to his home, while the motor-car of the
Duchess was placed in charge of a German soldier and
driven back to the Palace. These high-handed actions
were mild in comparison with what v r as about to take
place in Belgium.
On August 3, while negotiations were still continuing
between Germany and all the other countries interested
in this tremendous struggle, a treacherous advance was
made into Belgium. No declaration of war preceded this
unexpected step; there had been no hurrying of Belgian
troops to protect the frontier; no mobilisation orders had
been given out. It was a veritable "bolt from the blue,"
as a German official recently declared, and the most
astonished country of all was the little country most
concerned. France had evidently anticipated that some
such action would be taken, and had previously offered
Belgium the protection of five French army corps, which,
however, Belgium refused. Sir Edward Grey also sus-
pected Germany's intentions; hence his anxiety to obtain
guarantees, or at least assurances, that no such movement
was in contemplation. But Germany kept her evil inten-
tion a profound secret until the hour struck when an
advance was to be made, and then, without notice, in the
dead of night as in the case of Luxemburg, the troops
were hurled across the border, and the great invasion
was begun.
So sudden and unexpected was this blow that Belgium
was not even aware of it in the capital until the enemy
was well upon its way towards the objective, Liege.
Even in London the grim fact was not known. On the
following day—viz., August 4—a British Cabinet meeting-
was held, where it was pointed out that no necessity had
as yet arisen for any hasty decision (likely to cause
division among Ministers). The fact that the Belgian
border had already been crossed was certainly neither
known nor even guessed at. Yet even while the British
Ministry were settling among themselves what their action
might be if Belgium was invaded, the treacherous deed
had been committed, and German legions were on Belgian
soil.
And it was at this critical and stupendous moment


that the marvellous bravery and distinctive heroism of
the Belgian troops becomes most apparent. It was evident
they could not know who was with them and who against
them. There had been no time to communicate with
London, yet the enemy was advancing, might even then
be at their gates. What Britain might decide was still
on the knees of the gods. The only certain ally was
France, and over her was spread the shadow of 1870.
Defeat might, almost certainly would, mean annihilation;
at the least and best annexation. It was true the word
of Germany was pledged not to annex, but to compensate
if the passage of her troops was allowed. And could not
the solemn word of that great, strong, and hitherto in-
vulnerable and all-conquering country be taken?. Such
thoughts as these must have come to the Belgian Govern-
ment, and through them to the army and to the people,
and have been sufficient to make them at least think twice
before daring to throw themselves in Germany's way.
What hope could they have from France, even though
French troops might arrive in time to stop the first
impetuous dash of the invading army? All was too much
m the clouds, too vague, to give to the frantic little
country any hope that all would be well.
But though these thoughts might, and doubtless did,
come to the Belgian Government, to its gallant King,
and to the troops whom he led, there was 110 hesitation.
Bravely, with heads erect, colours flying, and drums of
defiance beating, they advanced to meet their foe. It
mattered not to them that this same enemy was the
champion fighter of Europe—had defeated other foes ten
times as numerous and better equipped than themselves.
They only knew their beloved country was in danger,
that a foe had invaded their land, and was already imper-
tinently demanding submission. Honour does not count
the cost of action, and even though death might be their
lot, the brave army went forward, prepared to die rather
than tamely submit.
The first Belgian town to be invaded was Limberg,
and so unexpected had been the German advance that
they found the railway intact, carriages and locomotives
lying ready to their hand. Straight on they pushed to
Verviers, where a weak Belgian force was easily disposed
of by the German cavalry, and the town occupied. Here
the military authority in command of the German troops
issued his first orders to free Belgians, commanding them
to refrain from reprisals on pain of death, appointing a
German Governor, and announcing the annexation of the
town and district. On the same day German troops
entered Belgium at Dalhem, Franconchamps, and Stave-
lot.


So far the country had been taken by surprise and no
blood had been shed, but this was too good to last. When
the advance to Liege began, the Germans met their first
great surprise. They found the plucky Belgians were
not afraid of them, but had prepared for resistance by
blowing up the bridges across the Meuse and the Trois
Ponts tunnels. Next they were delayed by the very
unexpected defence of the small town of Vise, which it
was necessary to capture before reaching the great for-
tress of Liege. By one means and another the advance
was postponed, and in the meantime the scattered Belgian
iactories, most of them being devoted to the manufacture
army had time to gather together, and prepare the citadel
of Liege for the threatened onslaught.
LIEGE.
This city is the centre of the coal-mining district of
hast Belgium, and possesses a large number of important
factories, most of them being devoted to the manufacture
of arms, weapons, and munitions of war. There were
more than 180 of these, besides zinc foundries, engine
factories, and cycle works. Most of these were world-
famous, the zinc works of Vieille-Montagne being the
largest in existence.
The town is pleasantly laid out, and the surrounding
landscape beautiful. There is a fine park on the Plateau
de Cointe, and several new bridges and streets, including
the handsome and spacious boulevards.
Before the bombardment the general aspect of the
city was that of a place of parks and pleasure gardens,
fine churches and spacious buildings. A grand view of
the city and environs could be obtained from the Citadel,
an ancient and disused fort close to the north side of
the town, which was built on the site of still older forti-
fications by the Prince Bishop Maximilian Henry of
Bavaria after the famous siege of Liege in 1649. No
doubt he thought that he was making the city impreg-
nable for ever; but three centuries had not passed before
the newer fortresses, whose construction relegated the
Citadel to the level of an antique curiosity, had them-
selves fallen utterly before the power of modern guns.
The position of the Citadel, however, still remains com-
manding, and the view therefrom includes the entire
city, of which all the centre from north to south looks
like a cluster of islands between the canals and winding
rivers, as well as the thickly-wooded background of the
Ardennes Mountains on the right, and on the left the
hills near Maestricht in Holland and the broad plains
of Limberg, whence the German armies crossed the bor-
der in three streams at the beginning of the great war.
Between this distant historic landscape and the near
view of Liege, rising from her ashes, the valleys of the
Meuse, the Ourthe, and the Vesdre diverge, thickly
dotted with populous Walloon villages.


if
■3«i$
—MR , . K®.
HlllS If^WlfeS^
w*:fiiii»ii« iw^Mi
wilfilSifwf i
IliKl 8 !!."! ..!"^BLJW^IIBK
WSS^ m Mt§- 'W?:J - .
its ■: -
One of. the finest buildings in the town was that of the University,
founded in 1817 as the central seat of learning for the Walloon race.
Another was the Palais de Justice, with its picturesque courts and
vaulted pillars, blending late Gothic and Renaissance styles. There
was also a Town Hall, which, though it only dated from early
in the eighteenth century, was much admired for its beauty, and
The Cloisters, Palais de Justice, Liege. Now used as stables for German horses
more especially for its valu-
able pictures and tapestries,
which were of great age and
rarity.
Of churches there were
many, and all famous. There
was the Church of St.
Jacques, with its ancient
stained glass windows, the
western facade nearly 700
years old, while parts of the
Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, also containing beauti-
ful stained glass and statues,
dated back to 960, 1280, and
1528. The Church of St.
Jean belonged to the 12th,
14th, and 18th centuriese,
that, of St. Croix to the 10th,
12th, and 14th, St. Martin to
the 16th, St. Antoine, with its 1
wood carvings and frescoes, 1
to the 13th, and St. Barthe-
lemy to the 11th and 12th. :
with its two towers, well-'
known chimes, and famous'


bronze font of 12th century work. Tn addition there was
the domed Church of St. Andrew, used as the Exchange,
and the Baroque fountains in the Place due Marche.
Instead of an obedient vassal the Kaiser found in
Belgium a most resolute antagonist; and, when the storm
broke, General von Emmich's three Army Corps, tra-
velling lightly equipped for speed, discovered that it was
not so much an attack on France through Belgium as a
serious invasion of Belgium itself which lay before them,
while the taking of even the little town of Vise had
caused so much bloodshed and provoked so much bitter
enmity as augured ill for future progress.
The town is surrounded with forts and field fortifica-
tions, which the Belgians defended against a German
army of unknown strength, probably upwards of 120,000
men. These were all highly-trained soldiers, assisted by
guns of immense size and power. At first the German
commander thought to take the positions by a fierce
onslaught against the weak Belgian forces, but the brave
resistance they made quickly taught him the impossibility
of this mode of attack. It was not, however, until many
thousands of the best German troops had been wantonly
sacrificed that he discovered the mistake being made, and
compelled him to proceed by the more regular process
of siege with the big guns as they arrived upon the scene.
The bombardment of Liege commenced in the early
morning—a dull and hot morning—of August 5, the ad-
vance of the artillery having been covered—as is always
the case in a German movement by masses of cavalry,
and it was continued without cessation until the Bth.
The Germans attacked along a very wide front stretching
to the north to the smoking ruins of Vise, close to the
Dutch frontier, and on the south a considerable distance
below Liege; but the artilllery employed was not heavy
enough. The big siege guns had not arrived, and the
forts had the best of the preliminary duel.
Then the amazing thing happened. It was as though
the German Generals, knowing nothing of war, had just
read in some book how Napoleon won victories by the
sudden, unexpected use of solid masses of men, and had
said to themselves, "Good! No one will expect the
sudden application of masses of men in a case like this;
so we will apply them." The result almost moved the
busy Belgians in the trenches to pity. The slaughter
was terrible, and the Germans received that day their
first lesson of the quality of the Belgian troops opposed
to them.
On the 6th the siege opened in real earnest, the Ger-
mans having received the first instalment of their heavy
guns, which were already in position. One shell com-


I — —-—-— — —— -j
•. M
- r mm
j p. ». A •;&
I « ?K#'iw#?*7i * •
I 1 -~i | fill '#*1
. w; <v -U i0. ,&&'«■ WW: »• "7 ?«#<«.«
, , f .Milyjy* s? filiMJ mi Pair.flfeflP
' T' jt 4 •; s |.||jiila JWIIT. s e ss f jpg-Ug
' -•-- wmtmm
| j
, t * • ;
:-i-
pletely wrecked the yoof of the Cathedral, and -the University, which
appears to have been mistaken for Government House, as they
made of it a special target, was destroyed. Under this rain of
exploding shells the town was forced to surrender, but the forts
still held out.. The actual bombardment of the town occupied
only seven hours, with an interval of one hour; but many people
BRIDGE AT LIEGE
Blown up by Belgians to impede the German Advance
were killed and wounded,
and the general effect was so
terrible that further resist-
ance would have been use-
less folly on the part of the
unprotected town, since it
could do nothing now to aid
the doomed forts. It was
then that the town and beau-
tiful buildings of Liege suf-
fered their irreparable dam-
age, most of which it will be
impossible to repair. The
ancient and valuable bridge
known as the Pont des
Arches, the town's pride,
built to replace one dating
from the 11th century and
occupying the same site, was
utterly smashed, its broken
pillars blocking the river in
its bed. The Pont de Frag-
nee, with its rare sculpture
of tritons and mermaids, as
well as others, were similarly
destroyed. The University


ouildings, with a very ancient college, library, and ante-
diluvian museum of animals found in the caves of the
district, were all burned, and an immense number of
private houses were also shelled and smashed into masses
of broken masonry. On one occasion, some shots being
fired from a house, the German soldiers turned machine
guns oil the street, destroying many houses and killing
the inmates, while other houses were set on fire.
When the town surrendered, the invaders marched in,
singing patriotic songs. Unfortunately some of the in-
habitants had taken part in the fighting, and in retaliation
tiie Germans shot every one, man, woman, and child, who
fell into their hands. "There appears 110 doubt," says
the London Times, "that this was done, and done by
order." As a matter of fact, the murder of these people
was tacitly admitted by the German authorities. A semi-
official statement, issued in Berlin 011 Aug. 9, ran: "Ac-
cording to news received here about the operations
around Liege, the civilian population took part in the
struggle, and German troops and doctors were fired upon
from ambush. ... If this is proved by further facts,
our adversaries are themselves responsible if the war is
extended with inexorable strength to the guilty popula-
tion. The German troops are only accustomed to fight
against the armed power of 0 hostile State, and cannot
be blamed if in self-defence they do not give quarter."
This very partial excuse for what is 011 the face of it
inexcusable does not admit the real reasons for the
massacre of unoffending and innocent women and child-
ren. The truth is that the German soldiers were angered
at the brave resistance they had met with, after being
informed that Belgium would offer 110 resistance. They
were already infuriated by their own failure to bring up
their heavy artillery and ammunition in time to make
short work of the Liege forts. They were further enraged
by the vigorous resistance of the Belgian troops, and the
fact that patriotic Belgian civilians took part in the
fighting caused their fury to boil over. So they sought
to terrify the Belgian natiou by massacre; and Liege's
blood-drenched ashes bore the first signature of the new
German war-spirit—an evil spirit for which, as the evi-
dence shows, not merely the German soldiery were to
blame, nor even their comrades in the field, but also the
coldly brutal centre of military power in Berlin."
That the Belgians should have held up 120,000 of the
best German troops for two whole days of fierce fighting
was a splendid feat of arms, which gladdened the hearts
of the Allies as an omen of ultimate victory. The losses
of the German troops had been tremendous, especially
011 the first and second days, when they attempted to


storm the Belgian forts in massed columns. 4 'lt was death
in haystacks," said one of them afterwards, trying to
describe the effect of the combined field-gun, machine-gun,
and rifle fire upon the masses of men. Another eye-
witness stated that the average height of the ridges of
German dead was one and a half yards. As the day wore
on the battle became more fierce, for the simple reason
that the successive waves of Germans jammed each other
on, until before one of the forts a great host of men suc-
ceeded in gaining a footing on the near slopes, where the
great guns could not be depressed to reach them. For
a brief space they seemed to think that they were on the
threshold of victory, and rushed forward, only to discover
-what surely their officers should have known all along
that the machine-guns were waiting for them. Further
back their comrades had been killed; here they were
massacred. Thus ended that day's fighting, with all the
honours to the brave Belgian army.
That they could not ultimately succeed against the
hosts Germany would inevitably bring up was a foregone
conclusion. But all that General Leman, the brave
Commander of the Belgian troops, anticipated to do was
done. This was to delay the Germans in their advance,
and thus give time to the French armies to mobilise and
come to his assistance. Also there was the British army
daily and even hourly expected; so everything was to 1
gained by continuing the unequal fight, even thoug
defeat might ultimately have to be endured.
Ihe fall of the town of Liege confined the Belgia
resistance to the forts, and here again they put up
splendid struggle. Almost the last action of Generi
Leman before retiring to the forts he intended holdin
so long as life was spared to him, was to send away tl
soldiers who had assisted in the field defences, and wh
had no place in the forts themselves. These were abi
to letilc without loss, and rejoin the Belgian main arm}
when they were reviewed by the King, who congratu
lated them upon the magnificent defence they had assist®
in undei their valiant General. This done, General Leinsj
himself retired into the largest fort, prepared to di
rather than surrender.
And now the grim ordeal of the unequal battle hai
to be faced. Within the forts-stood the remnants 1 of th
brave troops who had yard by yard and foot by foe]
contested every inch of the ground with the counties,
hosts of Germans hurled against them, regardless of th
cost to their own superior numbers. Such guns as th
world had never before seen, for size and power, wer
directed against the forts and their heroic occupants
every discharge carrying with it the most awful devas


tation, death, and ruin. Yet still the brave garrisons
held out, forcing admiration even from their foes.
It was, however, evident that defeat was but a matter
of time, as the heavy guns of the Germans were already
smashing each of the forts in turn, and the Belgians had
absolutely no gun which could reply to these heavy dis-
charges.
It is impossible in these few pages to tell the entire
story of the siege of Liege, nor how each of the gallant
garrisons in the now separated forts held out until 110 fort
remained. From Aug. 7, when General Leman retired into
one of them, until Aug. 13, they held out, offering the
overwhelming forces of Germany the most heroic resist-
ance. Day and night the terrific bombardment continued,
but 110 surrender of even the weakest of them was made.
There had been most gallant sorties from the beleagured
garrisons, which had covered the Belgian troops with
glory, but effected nothing but a temporary respite. But
when that fatal August 13 dawned, it was evident that
the end had come. Not satisfied with the heavy artillery
already in position before the forts, the Germans had
sent to Krupps for the weightiest they had, and which
had been hitherto kept back for other forts, such as those
of Paris or Nancy. The first discharge from one of
these guns was sufficient to absolutely shatter the fort it
struck, and within two hours of the opening shot the last
of the forts was silenced, while only smoking ruins re-
mained to mark the place where once they stood. When
at last, ten days after the first assault had been made, the
forts finally surrendered, there remained little but smok-
ing heaps of bloodstained ruins to hand over. Well
might the German Commander salute the Belgian General
and refuse to take from him his sword. The folio wing-
is an account of the interview which took place 011 this
historic occasion:—"Extending his hand the German
Commander said, ' General, you have gallantly and nobly
held your forts.' General Leman replied, 'I thank you.
Our troops have lived up to their reputation.' Then,
unbuckling his sword, General Leman tendered it to
General von Emmen. 'No,' replied the German Com-
mander, with a bow, 'keep your sword. To have crossed
swords with you has been an honour,' and the fire in
General Leman's eye was dimmed with a tear."
The main point to remember at this period is the
magnificent fight the Belgian army put up against the
enormous numbers of Germans who fought against them,
and the untold value of the delay which their heroism
won for the Allies. The official programme of the German
army was thoroughly upset, and when victory is finally
won it will be seen what an important part this delay


Ifffpb |
■ J. . j-; : >§: "■■■.;■ /. 8-88
S ; 8:I8hwSi8 ■
liiftiiitt ■■ i im .. *
i •* i /■■'',* - ■ vs*.; - i -
II®: i®s®®S3tSI iimPraHjSii
: 11 SilSSiiffBSiSBIBi®:;?!!!
sammmltMmsHatu wwKijBHHBBMto
WBSiBniBlgllMKSMWBIftW; «f> K SS «'*» ■'..? (3SBST t
I (f M ISSB*)®li*ilSS*El|lS ' r » ; ««w»f ■ * mmMmeMmimmmmmse
siaii^r^fwaiiw
JllllSir
IfiliiBliliWI
Stii®ill^^® , W;.IIIIPi^R'W®^fii- ; 1E,8
Q33fiiJilBS8P8?|
aas^^i^Msatattci
wmgm : ; ::
— — _____
Sacrilege at Aerschot "St. Sulpice" German Soldiers use
the Church as Stables


ook in assisting the Allies to mobilise their armies and
trepare to meet those of Germany, which, events now
•rove, had been ready for many months before.
NAMUR.
After tlie fall of Liege the German army advanced
ipon Namur, taking with them the enormous siege guns,
diich had already proved so useful.
Though the defences of this fortress were similar to
hose of Liege, yet its fall was far more sudden, and
carcely detained the Germans more that a couple of
lays. This was due to the fact that Liege had taught
hem a great lesson, which they were not slow to profit
>y. Instead of attacking with dense lines of infantry, the
leavy siege guns were at once placed in position, and
ilmost with every discharge a fort fell into ruin, accom-
>anied by clouds of smoke, dust, and fire, amidst which
lie brave soldiers fell dead rather than surrender their
rust. ( *
BRUSSELS.
After the fall of Liege and Namur there came a brief
(pell, during which the Germans occupied the capital
•ity, Brussels, without molestation. This was in a measure
lecessary for two reasons; first, Brussels was an unforti-
ied town, and, in the second, the treasures she held in
the way of buildings, churches, and ancient monuments
made it almost sacrilege to endanger it to the terrors of
bombardment. So her Burgomaster was instructed to
deliver the keys of the city when called upon for them,
and the archives and seat of government were transferred
to Antwerp.
On Thursday, August 20, the Germans marched with
all the panoply of war into Brussels, and at once occupied
every strategic point. Proclamations as to the demeanour
of the population was issued both by the Belgian Burgo-
master and the German Commander, and an indemnity
of eight million pounds was demanded to save the city
from sack.
THE FALL OF ANTWERP.
The story of this siege and the final triumph of the
German troops is but that of Liege and Namur over again.
The enormous heavy guns of the Germans rendered
defence impossible, crashing buildings throughout the
entire city carrying devastation and death to all within
reach of the falling walls. But though the city and forts
surrounding it might fall before the terrific onslaught,
the brave Belgian army would not surrender. Despite
their terrible losses, they managed to retreat into the
country, where fresh positions were oemrpied, and a bold


front shown to the ever-advancing foe. Everywhere they
were cheered, and led by their King in person. It is the
prond boast of King Albert that he has never been forced
to leave the soil of Belgium, and he still remains upon it,
sharing every hardship with his brave soldiers, and sus-
taining them by his presence and example. To-day he
is the National Hero, and receives the unswerving loyalty
and support of every true-hearted Belgian soldier and
civilian.
With the occupation of Antwerp the first phase of the
war came to an end. Bravely and gallantly the army had
kept the foe at bay, had disputed every inch of the ground,
and only retreated when overwhelming numbers were
arrayed against them. They had succeeded in delaying
the German armies in a way and for a length of time
hitherto considered impossible for such few troops to have
accomplished, and had thereby given the required time
to French armies to mobilise, and for Great Britain to
land her forces and upset the deep-laid schemes of Ger-
many, to whom time was evidently more than honour or
solemnly-pledged words. The war was now to assume a
new aspect. In place of the fighting of comparatively
small forces along limited fronts in Belgium, there was
to be direct conflict between the big armies of France,
backed by the English, against the forces of Germany
while the Russians upon the Eastern frontiers were tc ( '
deliver mighty blows, and carry the war yet further upon' 1
its devastating way.
!C
What the end is to be no man can yet foretell, though
it may not be difficult to surmise. That the eventual
triumph of the Allies is certain may be forecasted,
the exact method of success is not yet in sight. It ho
impossible for might to triumph over right. German}*
has set every human, and almost every Divine, law at
defiance, and attempted, as has so often been attempted t
before, to do wrong that right (in her own eyes) mayi
come. In pursuit of her own selfish and aggrandising
ways, she has sacrificed the greatest asset any eountryi
can possess—honour, and the integrity of the pledged 1 '
word. It is evident that no treaty can be made with a
Government which places no value upon its signature.
If the world of commerce can find no place for a business
firm which dishonours its cheques, even less can the l '
political world have dealings with a country which wil' (
fully breaks its own solemnly-pledged agreements,
treats as "scraps of paper" the treaties which bear its'*
signature. At this moment Germany occupies the position
of being the most dishonourable country in the world. '


From the Kaiser down to the least of his ministers
j ( e reputation thus won must be borne, and history will
rnianently record the unenviable part each of them took
this new road to ruin, along which their country has
en led.
gl Thus far we have told the story of Germany's dis-
lalnour in the political and diplomatic world. Let us
gbw tell something of the dishonour she has won with her
hoops—members of that vaunted army which was to be
nje pioneer of German '' kultur,'' and win for her a place
at the sun. One word only in their defence can be uttered
ed-they have been trained in the ways of outrage and
ayime. Such German military books as we have had
ngjcess to philosophically argue in favour of the very
ryimes which now stand against their names, and which
ec jill remain blots upon their country's escutcheon so long
a ; the world shall endure.
"e. Upon no light evidences are these charges made,
ssgerman officers stand convicted from their own utter-
heices, from admissions openly made without shame or
il/en excuse, and upon proclamations emanating from the
I( jghost authorities in the land. The following are two
proclamations which speak for themselves: —
Extract from proclamation addressed to the municipal autho-
ties of the town of Liege, August 22, 1914:
"Inhabitants of the town of Andenne, after asserting their
peaceful intentions, treacherously attacked our troops. With my
approval, the. Colonel-General has caused the whole of the town
to be reduced to ashes, and about one hundred persons to be shot.
I bring this fact to the notice of the town of Liege in order
that the inhabitants of Liege inay realise the fate in store for
them if they conduct themselves in like manner.
(Signed) "VON BUELOW,
"General Commanding."
Letter from Lieutenant-General von Nieber to the Burgomaster
of Wavre: —
"Ou the 22nd August, 1914, General von Buelow, commanding
the Second Army, imposed upon the town of Wavre a levy of
3,000,000 francs, pajmble by September, as an indemnity for out-
rageous conduct contrary to international law and the usages of
war in the form of attacks on the German troops. [This charge
was afterwards conclusively disproved.] The General Command-
ing the Second Army has just ordered the Colonel-General of the
district occupied by the Second Army to enforce payment of this
levy without delay as punishment for its conduct. I order you
to hand over to the bearer this sum, say, 2,000,000 francs, in gold.
I require, moreover, that you hand to the bearer a letter duly
sealed with the seal of the town, promising that the balance,
say, 1,000,000 francs, will be paid without fail on or before the
Ist September. I remind the town that it cannot reckon in any
case on an extension of time, since the civil population of the
town has put itself outside the pale of international law by firing
on German soldiers. The town of Wavre will be reduced to ashes


and destroyed in case the payment is not made by the appointed
time. Special regard will be liad to no one; the innocent will
suffer with the guilty.''
The above shed a lurid light upon German methods,
and render all attempts at denial absolutely abortive.
Not without reason have these soldiers been called the
modern Huns —indeed, it is jrobable their conduct has
been infinitely worse than any perpetrated by their pre-
decessors, who had less education and culture to guide
them in their treatment of an inoffensive country and
people. Let us now tell the story of a few of the atrocities
committed.
AERSCHOT.
This city lies a few miles to the north of Louvain, on
the line from Antwerp to Maastricht and Aix-la-Chapelle.
It possessed a fine Gothic church of St. Sulplice, chiefly
remarkable for its magnificent carved rood-loft and choir
stalls —15th century work of the highest, richest order.
It was the church the Germans chose as a stable for their
horses —this carved woodwork that the troopers of the
advance movement destroyed in wanton insolence.
"Horrible deeds were committed in Aerschot," says a
writer in the London Daily Chronicle. "On August 19
this town was deliberately burnt. M. Tielemans, the
Burgomaster, his son, a lad of 16, his brother-in-law, an
ten other leading citizens were seized and shot dead. T1
German allegation is that the Burgomaster's son shot an
killed a German officer. This, however, is denied emphat
cally by Madame Tielemans." Her statement is i
follows: —-
"About 4 o'clock in the afternoon my husband wi
distributing some cigars to the soldiers, standing outsid
our door. I was with him. Seeing that the General an
his aides-de-camp were watching us from the balcony,
advised him to come in. At this moment, looking toward
the Grand Place, where more than 2,000 soldiers wen
encamped, I saw distinctly two puffs of smoke. Firm
followed. The Germans were firing towards the hous(
and breaking into them. My husband, my children, th
servants, and myself had just time to rush to the staii
leading to the cellars. The Germans were even firin
in the halls of the houses. After a few minutes of grea
anxiety, one of the General's aide-de-camps came dow
saying, ' The General is dead. Where is the Burgomaster
My husband said to me, 'This will be serious for me
As he was stepping forward I said to the aide-de-cam]
'You may see, sir, that my husband did not fire.' 'Neve
mind,' he answered; 'he is responsible.' My husban


was taken away. My son, who was at my side, led us to
T) another cellar. The same aide-de-camp then came back
and took him away from me, kicking him along. The
poor boy could scarcely walk. During the morning,
while entering the town, the Germans had fired into the
windows of the houses. A ballet had entered the room
where my son was and had wounded him in the leg.
wi After they had taken my son and my husband from me,
sic the Germans led me through the whole house, levelling
an their revolvers at my head. I was made to look at the
y, dead body of their General; then they threw me, with
ire my daughter, out of the house, without a coat or any-
rei thing on. They left us on the Grand Place. We were
•in surrounded by a line of soldiers, and had to see our dear
is< town burn before our eyes. There, in the sinister light
t]] of the fire, I saw for the last time, towards one o'clock
aii in the morning, father and son, bound together, followed
■in by my brother-in-law. They were being brought to their
, oi death." ! *! *'
wi Bearing in mind the disorderly drinking bouts, of
5r which the subsequent state of Aerschot, littered with
empty bottles, bore such convincing testimony, it seems
nr at least more probable that the General was struck by
V( a stray bullet recklessly fired in the direction of the
ail Burgomaster's house by one of the German soldiers, than
that he should have been deliberately murdered by the
boy. No one, apparently, claimed to have seen the shot
fired, and no weapon was found in the house. No inquiry
was held. It was simply decided to make an example of
as a lesson to the Belgians.
M. Orts, who, on behalf of the Belgian Commission,
paid a personal visit to Aerschot after the flame of war
had passed over it, says the German panic on August 19
originated in disorder caused by drunken German soldiers.
His report on the condition of Aerschot is a most moving
document. We quote the following passages:—
"As for the cause of the calamity which befell this
defenceless town, it originated, according to the German
military authorities, in the murder of an officer by a
civilian, whom they name, and who was immediately shot.
This fact remains, however, to be proved, as it has not
been possible to find anyone m Aerschot who admits the
culpability of Tieleman's son. It is enough to bear in
mind at present that, by the invaders' own admission,
Aerschot's destruction has been the result of a deliberate
decision. In the eyes of the German Commander, the
massacre of an indeterminate number of innocent people,
the transportation of several hundred others, the savage
treatment inflicted on old men, women, and children, the
ruin of so many families, the burning and sacking of a


town of 8,000 souls, constitute justifiable reprisals for the
act of a single individual."
APPEARANCE OF THE TOWN.
"The church presents a lamentable aspect. Its three
doors, as well as that of the sacristy, have been more or
less consumed. The door of the nave and side door on
the right, both of massive oak, seem to have been forced
in by a battering-ram after the flames had weakened
them.
"In the interior, the altars, confessionals, harmoniums,
and candelabra are broken, the collection-boxes are forced
open, the wooden Gothic statues which decorated the
columns of the nave have been torn down; others have
been partially destroyed by fire.
"Towards Gelrode, on the outskirts of the town, in
a field a hundred yards to the left of the road, the Ger-
mans shot Burgomaster Tielemans, his son, his brother,
and a whole group of their fellow-citizens.
"After some searching I found at the foot of a bank
the spot where fell these innocent victims of German
fury. Black clots of blood still marked on the stubble
the place occupied by each of them under the fire of the
executioners. These bloodstains are two yards distant
from each other, which confirms the testimony of the
witnesses, according to which, at the last moment, the
executioners took from the ranks two out of every three \|
men; chance, in default of any sort of inquiry, pointing
out those who had to die. rr
"A few steps further from there, the newly-turned ii
earth and a humble wooden cross, raised secretly by ti
friendly hands, mark the spot where the bodies of 27 tl
victims rest. The pit, partially filled, seemed to wait for o
more dead." o
M. Orts also testifies to the following:—
"I believe that I may affirm even now that the total r
ruin which has overtaken this laborious and peaceful
population is much more due to an organised pillage than s
to fire, which spared certain quarters of the town. v
"During three weeks the soldiers gradually plundered j
almost all the houses, destroying everywhere the objects
which failed to satisfy their greed, while the officers kept
for themselves the houses of the wealthy. All the valu-
ables which the owner had not the time to put in safetv— ■
plate, family jewels, and money—have disappeared, and
the people declare that the fires had often no other object
than to hide the traces of some particularly important
theft. Full waggon-loads of booty left Aerschot in the '
direction of the Meuse."


i Still writing of his personal invertigations at Aerschot,
3 M. Oris says:—"l entered several houses, chosen hap-
hazard, and I went through their various landings.
Through the windows and the broken doors I glanced
[into a number of other dwellings. Everywhere the furni-
- tare is overturned, torn, and soiled in the vilest manner;
the wallpaper hangs in strips from the walls; the doors
of cellars are broken open; all locks have been forced
open; all cupboards and drawers emptied; linen and the
most incongruous objects scattered on the floors, together
with an incredible number of empty bottles.
"In the houses of the well-to-do the pictures have been
slashed, the works of art broken. I entered the house
which was said to have been occupied by officers, which
the solicitude of one of them seemed to have saved from
the general ruin. On reaching the threshold a smell of
spilt wine drew our attention to hundreds of empty and
broken bottles, which filled the hall, the staircase, and
even the yard opening on the garden. The rooms were
in indescribable disorder. I walked on a bed of torn
clothes, of pieces of AVOOI torn from open mattresses;
everywhere open chests, and in every room, by the bed,
still more empty bottles. The drawing-room was full of
them; dozens of wine glasses covered the table and side-
board, by which stood tattered armchairs and sofas;
whilst in a corner a piano, with stained keyboard, seemed
to have been smashed by boots. All showed that the place
had been, during many days and nights, the scene of the
vilest debauches and drinking bouts."
VILLAGES WIPED OUT.
From numerous testimonies the Commissioners are
able to state that in many country places around Aer-
schot, Diest, Malines, and Louvain, the disaster is still
greater than in Aerschot. AVhole villages have been
wiped out. In the ditches along the roads the dead bodies
of peasants —women and children, murdered by Germans
—are left unburied. Many corpses have been thrown into
wells, contaminating the water.
Wounded, without any discrimination of age or sex,
have been abandoned, without any attempt being made
to relieve their sufferings.
A great part of the male population were comman-
deered in the whole region. Most of them were compelled
to dig trenches and to build defensive works against our
troops, in defiance of the laws of warfare. Others fre-
quently were forced to walk in front of the German troops
during the fights. A great number of them have not
come back.


"A priest showed us the lower part of a sacred vessel
robbed from the church of Hofstadt. The upper part, in
silver, had been stolen; the lower part, copper-gilt, was
found on the road. The precious stones which had
adorned it had been taken from their settings.
"It is only at the end of the German occupation that
it will be possible to make a full list in every borough and
town of the German atrocities."
ALOST
This small town was at one time the capital city of
Keizer-Vlanderen, the realm of the Counts of Flanders
from the 11th century onwards. Little remained of its
ancient glories except the evidence of the elaborate and
handsome Town Hall, with a very high and crocheted
belfry of the 15th century. The Church of St. Martin,
unfinished, could give but a poor idea of the great fane
that should have stood upon the site; but it contained,
besides some 15th century mural paintings, one great
treasure —a picture painted by Rubens about 1625 for the
Guild of Alost Brewers. The subject is Christ appointing
St. Roch the guardian of the plague-stricken, and the
painter has made the most of the dramatic contrast be-
tween the lepers and other sufferers, and the radiant
glory of the celestial figures. Yet all these works of art
have been senselessly 7 destroyed, and the entire towijc
burnt. There was absolutelv no reason for the act, whiclt
1,
remains wanton and simply destructive.
A Belgian force advancing westward drove out of,
Alost the German troops who had entered the undefended
and peaceful town. No molestation had been offeree—
them while they were there, but in departing they set
fire to the town in several places, and to-day only a fev
blank and staring walls remain to testify 7 that once upoi|.
a time a town stood there.
DINANT.
Dinant is one of the most quaintly beautiful of Bel-
gian cities, and was the favourite of holiday-lovers
hailing from Brussels and other parts of the country.
It is built on the banks of the River Meuse, and towers
up the adjoining hills, often to great heights. In Roman
times it was known as Arche. The reasons for the change
of name have been variously given, the principal being
the possession of a very tine statue of Diana, from whicl
Dinant eventually 7 evolved.
One of the finest of its many beautiful churches was
that of Notre Dame, built, like so many T others in this
country 7 of churches, in the 13th century. It was regarded


•<>< ——
s bring particularly interesting as one of the best specimens of Early
wifothic architecture, with a few traces at the Transition Period discernible,
iclt has been described as one of the purest blooms in the garden of Early
lot hie. The font dates at least as far back as the 12th century, while
behind the high altar is a much more ancient one dedicated to Perpetuo,
/ho was Bishop of Tongres in the 6th century.
Ec
Dinant after Bombardment Remains of the Famous Church and Bridge
Other fine buildings were the Jardin
de Montfat, probably a corruption of
Montfort, which contains a grotto, or
cavern, believed in the middle ages to
have been the home of a sybil or pro-
phetic sprite, who received visitors
from far and wide desirous of consult-
ing regarding the future. The Hotel dc
Ville, though of more recent years, con-
tained some very fine pictures by that
"mad genius," Anton Joseph Wiertz,
who was a native of the town. But
German cannon have played havoc with
these treasures, as in other places, and
Dinant has almost ceased to exist as a
habitable city.
"By shell-fire and the incendiarism
provided by their special celluloid
bombs and discs of compressed chemi-
cals, the Germans destroyed Dinant in
a few hours. The excuse was the fami-
liar one—that shots had been fired at
the German troops by non-combatant
inhabitants." Be this as it may, the
following facts are vouched for by M.
Arthur Terwagne, brother of the M.P.


for Antwerp:— 44 On August 15 a tremendous battle was
fought in the streets of the town between the French and
the Germans, while the guns thundered away at each
other from both sides of the Meuse. The town suffered
very little during this battle, only a few houses afterwards
bearing signs of the bombardment, which lasted 13 hours.
During the following days the French retired on to the
left bank of the Meuse, where they remained up to the
day on which the order for a general retreat was given.
"In the night of August 21 a German armoured motor-
car entered Dinant by the Rue Saint Jacques, and, with-
out the slightest provocation, began to fire on the houses
in the street. A woman sleeping in her bed was killed,
and her child, which was at her side, was mortally
wounded. Startled by the noise of the firing, a man and
his wife opened the door of their house. They were
immediately done to death by Uhlans. An employee of
the gasworks, who was returning from his work, was
killed on his doorstep. The assassins—for one cannot
call them soldiers —set fire to several houses before they
bravely withdrew.
"But these savage acts were only the prelude to the
fate which the horde of brigands were reserving for the
unhappy town of Dinant. On the following day large
masses of troops arrived, and were guilty of the most
abominable atrocities which have ever been record
The Germans forced open the doors of the houses a
murdered everyone they found within. There was Vic
Poncelot, done to death in the presence of his wife a
his six children; there were the members of the staff
the firm of Capelle, murdered in cold blood. In ev(
house a fresh crime was committed, while the women wi
driven from their beds and taken, half-naked, to a moil
tery, where they were kept for three days with han
any food, half-dead with hunger and fear.
4 4 Some workmen of Leffe hid in a drain near the lai
cotton mill, the manager of which, M. Himmer, u
killed. There were about sixty of them, and when 1
Germans discovered their hiding-place they shot them <
although not one of them was armed. In the Fauboij
Saint Pierre a number of men hid in the cellars of t
brewery owned by the brothers Nicaise, old men of oi
70 and their nephew, Jules Monin. The modern b
barians had pity on none. All of them fell under
German bullets; they were about forty in number.
4 4 Over 200 men and lads—old men of 75 and boys
12 and 14—fathers and sons together, were driven or
the Place d'Amies. In order that the work might
carried out more quickly, a machine-gun was brought
It was here that Xavier Wasseige, the manager of 1


Banqlie de la Meuse, was killed, together with his two
sons; and here, too, died Caniille Eisette and his littlu
boy, aged 12.
"The fate of the male inhabitants having thus been
settled, the Germans set to work methodically on the
destruction of the town, using bombs to set fire to the
houses. Soon nothing but a heap of ashes remained.
The district of Saint Medart, between the station and the
bridge, has been wiped out. Coming from the bridge to
Pouvignes, the first house that is left standing is the
Hotel du Nord. The splendid Post Office buildings are
a heap of ruins. The bridge is destroyed, the Germans
having built a pontoon bridge a little higher up the river.
The church has lost its celebrated tower, and all the
houses of the Rue Sax, near the Meuse, have been de-
stroyed. In the Rue Grande, the Grand Place and the
Place Saint Nicholas, it is the same, and it is said that
many families who had hidden in the cellars died in the
flames. But for one or two houses in the Place de la
Meuse, the Laurent restaurant and a few houses standing
beside it, the barracks and the communal school, in which
the German garrison is lodged, the whole town of Dinant
has been destroyed.
"That is what the bandits of the great Empire which
wished to rule Europe have done to one of the most
picturesque towns of Belgium. The monster who presided
over these abominable atrocities was Lieutenant-Colonel
Beeger."
LINSMEAU.
The report of the Belgian Commission of Inquiry con-
tains the following:—
"German cavalry occupying the village of Linsmeau
were attacked by some Belgian infantry and two gen-
darmes. A German * officer was killed by our troops
during the fight, and subsequently buried at the request
of the Belgian officer in command. No one of the civilian
population took part in the fighting at Linsmeau. Never-
theless, the village was invaded at dusk on August 10
by a strong force of German cavalry, artillery, and
machine-guns. In spite of the formal assurances given
by the Burgomaster of Linsmeau that none of the peasants
had taken part in the previous fight, two farms and six
outlying houses were destroyed by gunfire and burnt.
"All the male inhabitants were then compelled to
come forward and hand over whatever arms they pos-
sessed. No recently-discharged firearms were found.
Nevertheless the invaders divided these peasants into
three groups. Those in one group were bound and eleven
of them placed in a ditch, where they were afterwards


found dead, their skulls fractured by the butts of German
rifles.
"The official report of the Burgomaster is as fol-
lows- —The first inhabitant they saw when entering the
town was a young man, whom they immediately shot,
under the pretext that he was a spy. Soon afterwards
a neighbour suffered a similar fate. In another house
they murdered the husband and wife, and, setting the
house on fire, threw the two bodies into the flames.
"The brutes continued their exploits, burned ten
farms, and killed two more people. In other houses they
destroyed everything they could lay hands upon, and
took all the provisions. They then gathered together
what remained of the male population, and made them
take the oath over the body of a killed officer. The
German officers compelled our poor compatriots to lie
down on the ground, and to kneel down, making them
repeat this several times. Those who were not agile
enough to obey, the soldiers pricked with their bayonets.
One of our men who tried to escape from this veritable
Calvary was struck by two bullets, and has just died.
The inhabitants were kept prisoners during a good part
of the night. In the morning they were made to pass
in front of the quick-firing guns, saying that in an instant
they would be blown to pieces. They aimed at them wit:
revolvers and fired, blowing off the ears of several peoplt
"The whole time this ignoble scene was being enact©
an officer repeated continually in French, 'They must al
be hung; it is the law.' At last they released these uii
fortunate people, with the exception of about a dozen
They harnessed the latter to the mitrailleuses. Soni
people, not being able to follow, were fastened by th
feet, their heads knocking against the ground. Thi
frightful treatment resulted in eight deaths, and the fat
of ten other people is unknown. In a neighbourini
village the Germans murdered three men, notwithstand
ing that the people gave them all they wanted."
LOUVAIN.
The town of Louvain has for many years been th
glory and pride of every Belgian. Its great antiquit;
has made it of special interest to historians and anti
quarians the whole world over, while the wonderfu
specimens of Gothic architecture, and the varied collet
tions of rare paintings, works of art, and ancient mam
scripts have annually attracted an ever-increasing numbe
of visitors and others anxious to inspect its beautifu
treasures. To-day Louvain lies prostrate in the dust, it
Gothic buildings only masses of ruin, and their wonderfu


■ i
. ,/^-v
JmSur
%
contents burnt and destroyed. Tn addition to this its citizens have
been massacred, mutilated, and ill-treated, their homes defiled, and
those that have been left, after the devastators have worked their
will, are now wanderers, broken and destitute, in other lands.
The Town Hall is one of the most extraordinary productions of
the human genius ever created. Its towering walls speak of the
pride of the wealthy town which in the middle of the 15th century
entrusted the design of its official centre to Matthew de Layens.
Its statues speak of the citizens' active religious faith. All the
Bible,'' says Camille Lemonnier, '' files past; you may follow from
niche to niche the principal episodes of the Old Testament, and the
naif sculptor, to make his story the better understood, has given the
characters the aspect of men and women of his own time. The
riot of carving which covers every inch of the walls, the steep roof
and lofty fretted pinnacles, the elaborate windows, speak of the
full and many-sided life of hard-working, wealthy and comfortable
people, while here and there breaks out a lively humour.
The great, University was one of the finest of the city's many
splendid buildings. Dating from the middle centuries, it was long
the centre of learning, its reputation in this respect being so high
that no one could hold any public appointment in the Austrian
Netherlands who did not possess a Louvain degree. In latei
years its chief attraction was the possession of one of the
largest and most richly endowed libraries. There were over 150,000
Malines Cathedral Window Destroyed by German Shell


volumes, both ancient and modern, and
some of the rarest and finest manu-
scripts in the world. This splendid col-
lection has all been entirely destroyed,
the building itself lying now a heap of
ruins. Among the wonderful ornamen-
tation which adorned this University
was some splendid wood-carving dating
from the year 1500, and a huge sculp-
tured group by Geerts, typifying the
Flood.
Another fine building was the Late
Gothic Hotel de Ville, which, though
not actually destroyed, has yet suffered
from both fire and bombardment. The
architect was Matthew de Layens, who
began the building in 1447, though it
was not finished until 1463, and thus
occupied 15 years in the building. It
has been described as "a mass, of tur-
rets, pinnacles, statues, dormers, cano-
pies, tracery, and quaint and delicate
ornamentation." There are three lofty
storeys, each containing ten pointed
windows, while six slender and elegant
octagonal turrets crowned by open spires rise from tbe corners, giving
a marvellous dignity and richness to the splendid structure. The vari-
ety shown in the carvings upon the facades is one of the building's
greatest charms. The brackets bearing the statues in the nich-s were
recently restored by Willem Goyers and others, and are decorated with
reliefs depicting scenes from Old and New Testament history. There
are no less than 280 niches for statues, most of which represent
LOU VAIN. The Old Church of St. Pierre before its Destruction


prominent citizens in the history of Louvain. Among these are Quen-
t i n Matsys Pope Arian VI., Erasmus, Justus Lipsius (one of the most
noted professors in the early years of the 17th century), Stuerbout,
Matthew de Layens (the architect of the buildings), Pope Martin V.,
Elsevir (the printer), and others.
Opposite the Hotel de Ville stood the quaint and spireless church oi
St.Pierre, now a heap of unrecognisable ruins. Its exterior was a mass oi
LOUVAIN. The Church ot St. Pierre as the Germans left it. The Hotel de Ville on right of
picture has been left standing but has suffered from both fire and bombardment.
crocketed pinnacles, each of them the
work of a noted artist, and bearing the
unmistakable sign of love, thought, and
ingenuity. But the interior was the
special delight of every artist and visi-
tor. Besides some splendid specimens
of stained glass, wonderfully rich and
mellow, there was the noted triptych of
Jan van der Baeren, dating from 1594,
the subject of which was the ''Martyr-
dom of St. Dorothea." In the south
aisle stood a large Byzantine crucifix,
upon which the figure of Christ was dis-
played wearing an ancient red velvet
robe, reaching to the feet, and em-
broidered with stars and tongues of
gold. It was evidently very ancient,
probably dating from the 11th or 12th
century, and was especially noted for
the legend attached to it, to the effect
that a thief once broke into the church,
intending sacrilege, but was seized by
the figure and held until the authorities
discovered him. There are also many
of the pictures of the famous artist


LOUVAIN
Showing one section of the City where many houses have fallen
Dierick Bouts, notably "The Last Supper" and "T1
Martyrdom of St. Erasmus." All these world-famoii
works of art have now vanished under the heavy destru
tive hands of the modern Huns, and a mass of ruins
all that is left of what has been the joy and delight c
thousands of visitors and art lovers. Other chnrchi
which have shared a similar fate are Ste. Gertrude's, S
Michael's, and the Dominican Church of Notre Damt
Each of these was built in the middle centuries, and al
were splendid examples of early Gothic design. Tli
chief charm of Ste. Gertrude's was the famous and intej
esting choir stalls of rich oak and elaborate carving. Tli
date of this work was 1540, and the artist Matthew d
Waeyer. Many of the carvings depicted scenes in th
history of religion, and were of deep interest to th
antiquarian.
Probably, however, the finest and most unique churcl
was that of the ancient Abbaye de Pare, which wa
founded in 1129. It contained some good wood carving
by Piet.er Jos Yergagen, and many beautiful pictures b;
such well-known artists as Duplessis, Ernest Quellin, ant
Coxie. This church has shared the fate of all the others
and is now nothing but a heap of ashes.
The official report of the burning and destruction o
Louvain is as follows:—•
"The Germans entered Louvain on August 19, aftei
having burnt down the villages through which they has
passed. At nightfall on August 26 some German troops


repulsed by Belgian soldiers,
entered Louvain panic-
stricken. Several witnesses
affirm that the German garri-
son which occupied Louvain
vas erroneously t informed
that the enemy were entering
the town.
"Men of the garrison im-
mediately marched to the
st;it ion, shooting haphazard
the while, and there met the
(icrman troops who had been
repulsed by the Belgians, the
latter having just ceased the
pursuit. Everything tends to
prove that the German regi-
ments fired on one another.
"At once the Germans be-
gan bombarding the town,
pretending that civilians had
fired on the troops, a sugges-
tion which is contradicted by
all the witnesses, and could
scarcely have been possible,
because the inhabitants of
Louvain had had to give up their arms to the municipal authorities several
days before. The destruction was s not accidental, nor the result of shell fire.
It was systematically and deliberately carried out by German soldiers pro-
vided with special appliances for the purpose. Evidence given before the
Belgian Commission makes the fact particularly clear that a specially con-
LOUVAIN
Ruins of the Vestibule of the Library


structed fire bomb was served out to the soldiers for the
purpose of firing the town. First, however, there was a
heavy bombardment, which lasted until 10 o clock at
night. After which the town was fired.
The soldiers worked at the incendiarism methodically.
They began at the heart of the city and worked down
to the outskirts, taking street by street, and house by
house. They went into the houses, churches, and shops,
gathered the goods or furniture together, and when they
saw that all was well alight, passed on to the next build-
ing. There was 110 opposition from the inhabitants, who
had either been driven away or were too terrified even
to protest. The firing of houses went on for 36 hours
or more. The district most thoroughly wiped out was
that in which were situated the University, the Library,
and the Church of St. Pierre.
"The greater part of the town of Louvain was thus
a prey to the flames, particularly the quarters of the
upper town, comprising the modern buildings, the ancient
Cathedral of St. Pierre, the University buildings, togethf
with the University library, its manuscripts and colle
tions, and the Municipal Theatre,
"The corpses of many civilians encumbered the street
and squares. On the road from Tirlemont to Lou\ a
alone a witness counted more than fifty. On the doo
steps of houses could be seen carbonised bodies of inhab
tants, who, hiding in their cellars, were driven out b
the fire, tried to escape, and fell into the flames.
"The suburbs of Louvain suffered the same fate. M
can affirm that the houses in all the districts betwee
Louvain and Malines, and most of the suburbs of Lou\a.
itself, have been practically destroyed."
On August 28 a crowd of 6,000 to 8,000 persons —mei
women, and children of every age and condition —wa
conducted under the escort of a detachment of the 162n
Regiment of German Infantry to the riding-school of tl
town, where they spent the whole night. The place c


confinement was so small in propor-
tion to the number of the occupants
that all had to remain standing, and
so great were their sufferings that in
the course of this tragic night several
women lost their reason and children
of tender years died in their mothers'
arms.
A communique from the German
Great General Staff, the text of
which is published in the Cologne
Gazette of August 29, declares that
the "chastisement" inflicted upon
Lonvain was justified by the fact
that a battalion of Landwehr, which
had been left unsupported in the
town in order to guard the communi-
cations, had been attacked by the
civil population, which was under the
impression that the main German
army had definitely retired. The
same journal has published a narra-
tive purporting to come from a per-
son who was a witness of the occur-
rence. The Commission has estab-
lished that this statement must be
considered false. Tt is, in fact, ascertained that the people of Louvain,
who, moreover, had been disarmed by the Communal Authority, did not
provoke the Germans by any act of hostility.
Another excuse was that the son of the Burgomaster had fired on
the Chief of Staff of the General Commanding Louvain, and this had
LOUVAIN
Sanctuary of the Cathedral now utterly wrecked


been a signal for the civic guard of Louvain to tire at the
soldiers, fifty Germans being killed or wounded. This,
however, was as false as the preceding.
ARSON AND PILLAGE.
Before the Germans entered Louvain the Burgomaster
had had a poster pasted all over the town, urging the
population to keep calm. The people were terrorised.
Many had left the town. Those who remained were
resolved to follow the Burgomaster's advice, and to
observe a calm and dignified attitude towards the enemy s
army.
The Germans entered the town on Wednesday, August
19, at about 2 o'clock in the afternoon. They sent the
Dean of Louvain on in front of them. As soon as they
arrived, the Germans exacted, in the rudest way, huge
requisitions of food, amounting to more than £4,000.
Numerous troops made a triumphant entry about half-
past 2. The shouts of the soldiers and military bands were
loudest when they met wounded or dying Belgian soldiers
brought from Bautersen and from the other villages where
fighting had taken place.
The German soldiers preferred to establish their quar-
ters in private houses, while barracks and public buildings
which had been offered to them remained empty. The
broke into deserted houses, shattering the doors wit
hatchets, and then sacked a few of them.
On August 20 Mr. Van der Kelen, Senatos, and M:
Collins, Burgomaster, were detained as hostages. A grea
number of placards were posted about the town, foi
bidding, amongst other things, the citizens to go out afte
8 o'clock in the evening, ordering them, under penalty «
death, to bring to the Town Hall all the arms, ammunitioi
and petrol. They were also obliged, in certain streets c
the town, to leave their doors open and their window
lighted throughout the night.
The German authorities, represented by Commandc
Manteuffel, insisted on the payment of a war indemnit
of £4,000. After some parleying it was reduced to £l2O,
CASH AND HOSTAGES.
On the following days more requisitions were leviec
Mgr. Ladeuze, head of the University; Mr. de BruyJ
Vice-President of the Tribunal; Mr. Van den Eynd
notary and Provincial Councillor; and several othe
prominent citizens were taken as hostages. Tl
German authorities entered the private banks and seize'
the cash in hand. They found £l2 at the Banque de 1
Dyle, and £4BO at the Banque Populaire.


he During the whole of the time the German soldiery had
dt committed numerous outrages 011 women and young girls
in the town of Louvain and in the surrounding villages.
Sharp firing took place simultaneously at different
. ei parts of the town, especially at the Porte de Bruxelles,
f 0 Porte de Tirlemont, in the Rue Leopold, Rue Marie
Therese, and in the Rue des Joyeuses Entrees. The Ger-
, ( man troops were firing in all directions in the deserted
i oi streets. It was a real panic, during which the officers had
5 ( lost all control over their men.
OA! Soon afterwards fires burst out from all parts, par-
ticularly at the Halles Universitaires, which contained the
library and the archives of the University; in the Church
qi of St. Peter's, at the Place du Peuple, in the Rue de la
Station, Boulevard de Tirlemont, and Chausse de Tirle-
mont.
On the orders of their officers, the German soldiers
iec broke into the houses and set fire to them, with the help
iyj of fuses. They shot at the inhabitants who tried to
idf escape from their houses. Many people who sought re-
he fuge in the cellars were burnt alive. Others were shot as
rh they tried to escape from the burning houses. A great
zb number of inhabitants who had succeeded in getting out
; 1 of their houses through their back gardens were led to the
Place de la Station, where they saw about ten dead
civilians lying about. They were then brutally separated
from their wives and children, and stripped of all they
had succeeded in carrying away.
On Thursday, August 27, at 8 o 'clock, order was given
to all the inhabitants to leave Louvain; the town was
going to be bombarded. Old men, women, children, sick
people, lunatics from the asylum, priests, nuns, were
brutally driven like cattle about the roads. These people
were driven in different directions by brutal soldiers,
forced to kneel and to lift their arms each time they met
German soldiers and officers. They were left without
food during the day, without shelter during the night.
Many died on the way. Others, among whom were
women, children, and priests, who were unable to follow,
were shot dead. More than ten thousand of them were
driven as far as Tirlemont, fifteen miles from Louvain.
Their sufferings are beyond description. The next day-
many others were driven further on, from Tirlemont to
Saint Trond and Hasselt.
To quote only one instance of the brutalities to which
they were subjected. A group of thirteen priests, among
whom were the Cure of Saint Joseph, Mr. Noel, Professor
of the University, the Rector of the Scheut Monastery,
were stopped on their way in the village of Lovenjoul.
They were insulted in every posssible way, shut up in


a pig-sty from which the pigs had been driven out in
their presence by the Germans. Some of them were then
forced to strip themselves naked. They were all
searched, and all valuables which they possessed were
stolen from them. They were also brutalised and beaten.
The soldiers were, in fact, so eager to start looting that
they were seen entering the houses before the inhabitants
had really time to leave them.
The looting began on August 27, and lasted eight
days. By groups of six or eight the soldiers broke into
the houses through the doors or the windows, entered
the cellars, drank the wine, ransacked the furniture,
breaking the safes, stealing all money, pictures, works of
art, silver, linen, clothes, wines and provisions.
A great part of the booty, packed on military carts,
was then sent to Germany by train. The burning and
the looting did not stop until Wednesday, Sept. 2. On
this day four more fires were lighted by the German
soldiers —one in the Rue Leopold and three in the Rue
Marie Therese.
The old "Halles," the Cloth Hall of Louvain, a noble
building in the severer form of Gothic, was totally de-
stroyed. True, this antique structure had not survive
in its pristine form and beauty. Towards the close o
the 17th century an upper storey was added, and th
interior had been much altered in order to adapt it t|
the purposes of a University. But there remained, unt:
the Germans came, the wonderful Romanesque arches an
pillars in the great hall, or Salle des Pas-Perdus, an
much else of architectural and artistic beauty. Th
pillars alone were left standing. The laboratories, tli
museum, the workshops, all the equipment of this sea
of learning, were destroyed.
Without counting the Halles Universitaires, and th
Palais de Justice, 894 houses were burnt within the limit
of the town of Louvain, and about 500 within those o
the suburb of Kessel-Loo. The suburb of Herent, and th
village of Corbcck-Loo, were practically entirely de
stroyed. On August 25, while they were setting fire t
houses, the Germans wrecked the fire engines and fir
escapes; they shot the people who from the roofs wer
trying to stop the flames.
Looting is nearly always followed by fires, whic!
seem often to be prompted solely by the desire to hid


the traces of the iooting. The houses
are frequently set on fire by fuses;
at other times they are sprayed over
with petrol or naphtha. Sometimes,
in order to hasten the action of fire,
the German soldiers use a kind of in-
flammable tablet, of which the Com-
mission possesses some samples. Ac-
cording to the analysis which has
been made of them, these tablets
contain ritro cellulose gelatine.
Thus far the Commission's report
carries the story. There might, how-
ever, still be some doubt as to whe-
ther the senseless destruction of the
priceless manuscripts had actually
taken place. Unhappily, a Professor
of the University, standing in his
garden, saw floating past him
charred fragments which he was
able to identify. The following par-
ticulars come from eye-witnesses
of the terrible scenes. The first of
these is from a gentleman attached
to the weil-known newspaper, Nieuwe ftotterdamsche Gourant, published
in Rotterdam (Holland). "There was no time," he wrote, "for exhaus-
tive inquiry. Old men, sick people, women were shot. In
the meantime part of the town was shelled by artillery. Many build-
ings were set on fire by shells. On others, petrol was poured and a match
LOUVAIN
General view alter Bombardment


applied. The German officer advised me to go away, as,
several houses being still intact, more firing was expected.
"Under a strong escort, two groups of men and
women arrived, each a hundred strong. They were host-
ages. They were stood in rows by the Station, and every
time a soldier was shot in the town ten of these pitiful
citizens were slaughtered. Tears and pleadings were in
vain. The gowd suffered with the bad.
"At night the scene was terrible, burning buildings
shedding a liurid glow over the town, which was running
with tears of blood.
"This was no time for sleep. The sight of the terrible
awfulness dro)ve away all thoughts and desire for rest.
Towards dawin the soldiers took possession of all build-
ings which haid not been destroyed. With the rising of
the sun I wailked on to the boulevards and saw them
strewn with lbodies, many of them being of old people
and priests."
A Dutch refugee gives the following:—
"Several soldiers were billeted on us, and just as we
were sitting down to the midday meal on August 25th,
the alarm was sounded and the soldiers dashed out.
"Immediattely firing started, and, knowing the terrible
consequences of civilians appearing in the streets at
such times, w j e sought refuge in the cellar. Next morn-
ing we attempted to reach the railway station, but wen
arrested.
"My wife Avas taken from me, and the Mayor, thf
Principal of the University, and I, Avith other men, Avert
taken to a goods shed and our hands bound. I saw 30(
men and boys marched to the corner of the Boulevarc
van Tienen, and every one massacred. The heads of thf
Police were shot. We were then marched toAvardi
lierent, and on the Avay the soldiers thought the enem;
Avas approaching, and ordered us to kneel down. The;
then took cover behind us. Only after many such hard
ships Avere AVC permitted to return to Louvain and escap
by train."
Another Dutch refugee said:—
"All was dark, till suddenly, through the Avindows,!
saAV the lurid gloAv of the neighbouring burning houses
I heard the agonised cry of people tortured by tin
flames. Six priests moved among us, giving absolution
Next morning the priests Avere shot—why, I knoAV not
We Avere compelled to Avalk Avith our hands in the air
for fear of arms being concealed."
A later report gives the following:—
"Before the Germans entered the toAvn, the Civic
Guard had been disarmed, and all Aveapons in the posses-
sion of the population had to be given up. Even to;


guns and toy pistols, precious collections of old weapons,
hows and arrows, and other antique arms useless for any
kind of modern warfare, had to be surrendered, and all
these things—sometimes of great personal value to the
owner—have since been destroyed by the Germans. The
value of one single private collection has been estimated
at £IOOO. From the pulpits the priests urged the people
to keep calm, as that was the only way to prevent harm
being done to them. A few days after the entry of
the German troops, the military authority agreed to cease
<1 nattering their men in private houses in return for a
payment of 100,000 francs (£4,000) a day. On some houses
between 40 and 50 men had been billeted. After the first
payment of the voluntary contribution the soldiers en-
camped in the open or in the public buildings. The
beautiful rooms in the Town Hall, where the civil mar-
riages take place, were used as a stable for cavalry'
horses. At first everything the soldiers bought was paid
for in cash or promissory notes, but later this was altered.
Soldiers came and asked for change, and when this was
handed to them they tendered in return for the hard
cash a piece of paper—a kind of receipt. On Sunday,
23rd, I and some other influential people in the town
were roused from our beds. We were informed that an
order had been given that 250 mattresses, 200 lbs. of
coffee, 250 loaves of bread, and 500 eggs must be on the
market-place within an hour. On turning out, Ave found
the Burgomaster standing on the market-place, and
croAvds of citizens, half naked or in their night clothes,
carrying everything they could lay their hands on to
the market, that no harm might befall their Burgomaster.
After this had been done the German officer in command
told us that his orders had been misinterpreted, and that
he only wanted the mattresses. On Tuesday, the 25th,
many troops left the toAvn. We had a feAV soldiers in
our house. At six o'clock, Avhen everything Avas ready
for dinner, alarm signals sounded, and the soldiers
rushed through the streets, shots Avhistled through the
air, cries and groans arose on all sides; but Ave did not
dare to leave our house, and took refuge in the cellar,
Avhere Ave stayed through long and terrible hours. Our
shelter Avas lighted up by the reflection of the burning
houses. The firing continued unceasingly, and Ave feared
at any moment our houses Avould be burnt over our
heads. At break of day T craAvled from the cellar to the
street door, and saAV nothing but a raging sea of fire.
At nine o'clock the shooting diminished, and we resolved
to make a dash for the station. Abandoning our home
and all our goods except Avhat we could carry, and taking
all the money we had, we rushed out. What we saw on


our way to the station is hardly describable —everything
was burning, the streets were covered with bodies shot
dead and half-burnt. Everywhere proclamations had
been posted, summoning every man to assist in quenching
the flames, and the women and children to stay in-
side the houses. The station was crowded with fugitives,
and I was just trying to show an officer my legitimation
papers when the soldiers separated me from my wife and
children. All protests were useless, and a group of us
were marched off to a big shed in the goods yard, from
whence we could see the finest buildings in the city, the
most beautiful historical monuments, being burnt down.
Shortly afterwards German soldiers drove before them
300 men and lads to the corner of the Boulevard van
Tienen and the Maria Theresa street, opposite the Cafe
Vernialen. There they were shot. The sight filled us
with horror. The Burgomaster, two magistrates, the
Rector of the University, and all public officials had been
shot already. With our hands bound behind our backs,
we were then marched off by the soldiers, still without
having seen our wives and children. We went through
the Juste de Litsh street, along the Diester Boulevard,
across the Vaart, and up the hill. From the Mont Csesar
we had a full view of the burning town, St. Peters' in
flames, while the troops incessantly sent shot after shot
into the unfortunate town. We came through the village (
of Herent —one single heap of ruins, where another troop t
of prisoners, including half a dozen priests, joined us. (
Suddenly, about ten o'clock, evidently as the result of (
some false alarm, w r e were ordered to kneel down, and
the soldiers stood behind us with their rifles ready to {
fire, using us as a shield. But, fortunately for us, nothing,
happened. j
"After a delay of half-an-hour our march was con-[
tinued. No conversation was allowed, and the soldiers
continually maltreated us. One soldier struck me all his,
might with the heavy butt-end of his rifle. I could hardly t
walk any further, but I had to. We were choked with,
thirst, but the Germans wasted their drinking water with-
out offering us a drop. At seven o'clock we arrived at (
Camperhout, en route for Malines. We saw many
burnt bodies —men, women, and children. Frightened toj
death and half-starved, we were locked up in the churchy
and there, later, joined by another troop of prisoners (
from the surrounding villages. At ten o 'clock the church |
was lighted up by burning houses. Again shots whistled
through the air, followed by cries and groans. At fivo
o'clock next morning all the priests were taken out by the :
soldiers and shot, together with eight Belgian
six cyclists, and two gamekeepers. Then the officer told.


us wc could go back to Louvain. This wo did, but only
'lo be recaptured by other soldiers, who brought us back
ilo ('ainperhout. From there we were marched to Malines,
not by the high road, but along the river. Some of the
party fell into the water, but all were rescued. After
' tliirt y-six hours of ceaseless excitement and danger we
f *
'arrived at Malines, where we were able to buy some
food, and from there I escap.ed to Holland. I still do not
■know where my wife and children are."
5 Sir Claude Phillips, the well-known art critic and
'litterateur, describes the conduct of the Germans as "an
act of hideous, wanton violence, a crime for which pos-
- 1 rity will refuse to find words of pardon or excuse."
In the course of his article, Sir Claude says:—"The
chief treasures of the church of Saint Pierre de Louvain
were two famous paintings by Dierick (or Thierry)
1 Bouts, who is as closely identified with the now destroyed
'University city of Belgium as are the Van Eycks with
! Ghent and Bruges, and Roger van der Weyden with
'Tournay and Brussels. The earlier of these paintings is,
rather was, the remarkable triptych with the martyr-
dom of St. Erasmus in the central panel, and the figures
of St. Jerome and St. Bernard in the wings. This was
scon at the Bruges retrospective exhibition of 1904. But
the masterpiece of Dierick Bouts, and certainly
one of the finest examples of Flemish fifteenth century
art, was the polyptych painted by him for the altar of
the Holy Sacrament in the collegiate church of Saint
Pierre. The central panel of this work, whereupon was
represented the Last Supper, was, until a few days ago,
the chief adornment of that church and of the ancient
city. And in committing this act of hideous, wanton
violence, this crime, for which posterity will refuse to
find words of pardon or excuse, the Prussian commander
has also been guilty of an act of incredible ignorance, of
boundless stupidity. For, strange to say, the splendid
wings which once completed this famous altar-piece, and
would, if a reconstruction could have been effected, have
caused Bout's polyptych to stand forth one of the most
important works of Flemish art in existence —these wings
are in Germany. In the Alte Pinakothek are preserved
the 'Gathering of the Manna' and the 'Meeting of Abra-
ham and Melchizedek.' In the Kaiser Friedrich Museum
of Berlin are to be found 'The Prophet Elijah in the
Desert' and the 'Feast of the Passover.' It would obvi-
ously have been better to steal this 'Last Supper,' this
central jewel of the doomed city's pictorial adornment,
to confide it either to Munich or to Berlin, than thus to
blot it out for ever. It would have been cruel, iniquitous,
to despoil heroic Belgium; it is infamous, and, above all,


it is stupid, to teiar out the'heart of a masterpiece, to
rob the world, ancfl in punishing Belgium, to punish Ger-
many, to punish Europe. Napoleon, the ruthless plun-
derer of museums and churches, was mild and humane
in comparison. lif he stole, whether under forcibly im-
posed treaty, or fey sheer brute force, the accepted mas-
terpieces of paimting and sculpture belonging to the
States which he overcame, he stole with a certain rever-
ence ; much as tine belieA r er steals the most sacred trea-
sures from the teimple, or the most precious relics of the
Passion and the saints from the church or the tomb.
Bobber though lue was, he worshipped in awe-struck de-
light the masterpieces which he tore from the nations,
and his trinmphamt fellow-countrymen, during the brief
period of his supremacy, worshipped with him. The
Louvre, under hiis protection, became the central temple
of sacred and profane art; and when, in 1814 and 1815,
it was compelledl to disgorge the world's treasures, they
were returned, aifter a dire- struggle, it is true, yet intact.
We know, moreover, that when the youthful Genera!
Bonaparte, after a campaign of dazzling brilliancy, en-
tered Milan as a conqueror, lus first thought was for the
protection of Leonardo da Vinci's 'Last Supper.' "
It is impossible to find any excuse for the destruc-
tion of this beautiful city and its priceless treasures.
Even if the excuses which German officers have made
had been found to possess any foundation there would
still be no sufficient reason given for so senseless and
stupid an action. Nothing, perhaps, speaks more loudly
regarding the spirit which animated the German troops
than this wanton firing of an unfortified and peaceful
town. If the wonderful art treasures had been simply
looted, removed to garnish German museums, or even to
be added to private collections, the German army would
possibly have been spared a portion of the vituperation
now being hurled against it. But their action was simply
that of apes in a treasure house.


The officer in charge of the Ger-
mun troops in Louvain, and under
whose orders the town was de-
bt roved, was Major von Manteuffel.
After the destruction of Louvain
about one hundred unfortunate
people were found in cellars in the
suburb of Blauput. There were
al >out fifty men, with their wives and
children, whose houses had been
burnt or shelled to the ground. The
party was marched to the Place de
la Station, where the men were sep-
arated from the women. Seven of
the men were then led out in front
of the women, and shot before their
eyes. Then the party was reformed
and taken to the Porte de Tirlemont,
where the sexes were again sep-
arated, and seven men again led out
and shot before the women. This
performance was repeated until all
the men had been shot in batches.
A young woman, who was on the
point of giving birth to a child, was
killed by a deliberate shot in the
Interior 1 of Barcy Church wrecked by the Germans. One of the
many Churches situated in the Country districts of Belgium
which have been utterly destroyed. In many cases the priests
and other officials attached to the Church have been shot forth-
with or sent to work in Germany.


stomach. The hospitals and lunatic asylums were com-
pulsorily emptied of their inmates, and the aged, the in-
firm, the dangerously ill, and women who had just been
confined, together with their infants, were thrust out into
the highways.
At St. Trond the soldiers smashed the knees of young
women, whom they then compelled to advance on their
knees at the point of the bayonet. At the same place
an old man of over 80 was forced to run under a con-
tinuous shower of blovrs until he dropped, when he was
killed by a rifle shot. At Chaumont-Gistoux, near
Namur, a woman was shot in the presence of her husband
and children. The soldiers, among whom was an officer,
then attempted to violate the two daughters, and on the
latter resisting they were bound to heaps of straw and
burnt alive. At Velme, near St. Trond, an old woman
of over 70 was forced to run at a horse's tail. Elsewhere
in the neighbourhood all the men were locked in the
church, while the women were compelled to strip and to
parade in the nude in front of the troops. Women were
violated in front of their husbands, and the soldiers
spared neither young girls nor aged women.
All the above are the sworn testimony of reliable eye-
witnesses, including a member of Parliament, respected
public officials, and several notaries.
In 0110 Belgian village the priest who accompani
the Red Cross nurses saw a six-months-old baby carri
on the point of a bayonet by a German soldier. Anotl
baby of seven weeks was snatched from its father's ar
and dashed to the ground.
Yet another baby, whose mother resisted the effo
of some drunken Uhlans to seize the child, had its pc
little hands slashed off by a sword.
A refugee at Antwerp told a harrowing tale of h(
his dearest friend was done to death by Germans. 1
hapless youth of twenty was tied to a tree by a party
German officers, who told him he would be shot inui
diately. Soldiers were lined up with rifles, apparent
ready to shoot, and the boy waited calmly with clos
eyes, but no shots rang out. He then opened his eyi
and the brutes laughed at him. They had lowered tht
rifles, and were sitting round the tree, preparing to ma
a hearty meal. There they sat, surrounding the bout
youth, throwing at him morsels of food from time
time, and taunting him with offers of champagne, whi
they were drinking freely.
After more than an hour of such fiendish torture, t:
boy was shot, and his body burnt by piles of straiv whi
they stacked against the tree.


Mdlle. Auslin, a Belgian refugee now in London,
states that at Aerschot she saw a man shot dead because
lie resisted the violation of his wife. His two little
children, hiding their faces in their mother's skirts in
terror, were dragged away and murdered.
At Haine St. Pierre, in the Mons district, the Mayor,
who caused the arms of the inhabitants to be deposited
at his own house, was shot like a dog, and his body
propped up against a wall for 48 hours as a warning
to the town. Men were billeted in all the houses, and,
although in the better houses the officers behaved with
some restraint, in the peasants' cottages unbridled licence
was the rule. Women were violated, indescribable scenes
of filth and debauchery took place, while all the posses-
siong of the unfortunates were wilfully wasted and de-
stroyed.
The official report of the Commission of Enquiry in-
stituted by Belgium is as follows:
"The German army entered the town of Louvain on
Wednesday, 19th of August, after having burnt down
the villages through which it passed. As soon as they
had entered the town the Germans requisitioned food
and lodging for their troops. They went to all the banks
of the town, and took possession of the cash in hand.
German soldiers burst open the doors of houses which
had been abandoned by their inhabitants, pillaged them,
and committed other excessses.
"The German authorities took as hostages the Mayor
of the city, Senator Van der Kelen, the Vice-Rector of
the Catholic University, and the Senior Priest of the city,
besides certain Magistrates and Aldermen. All the
weapons possessed by the inhabitants, even fencing
swords, had already been given up to the Municipal
authorities, and placed by them in the Church of St.
Pierre. In a neighbouring village, Corbeck-Loo, on Wed-
nesday, 19th August, a young woman, aged 22, whose
husband was with the army, and some of her relations,
were surprised by a band of German soldiers. The per-
sons who were with her were locked up in a deserted
house, while she herself was dragged into another cot-
tage, where she was outraged by five soldiers succes-
sively.
"In the same village on Thursday, 20th August, Ger-
man soldiers fetched from their house a young girl, about
16 years old, and her parents. They conducted them to
a small deserted country house, and while some of them
held back the father and mother, others entered the
house, and, finding the cellar open, forced the girl to
drink. They then brought her on to the lawn in front
of the house, and violated her successively. Finally they


stabbed her in the breast with their bayonets. When
this young girl had been abandoned by them after these
abominable deeds, she was brought back to her parents'
house, and the following day, in view of the gravity of
her condition, she received Extreme Unction from the
parish priest, and was taken to the hospital at Louvain,
as her life was despaired of. On the 24th and 25th of
August, Belgian troops made a sortie from the entrenched
camp of Antwerp, and attacked the German army before
Malines. The Germans were thrown back on Louvain and
Yilforde. On entering the villages which had been occu-
pied by the enemy, the Belgian army found them devas-
tated. The Germans, as they retired, had pillaged and
burnt the villages, taking with them the male inhabitants,
whom they forced to march in front of them. Belgian
soldiers entered Hofstade, on 25th August, found the
body of an old woman who had been killed by bayonet
thrusts. She still held in her hand the needle with which
she was sewing when she was killed. A woman and her
15 or 16 year old son lay 011 the ground, pierced by
bayonets. A man had been hanged. At Sempst, a neigh-
bouring village, were found the bodies of two men, par-
tially carbonised. One of them had his legs cut off at
the knees; the other had the arms and legs cut off. A
workman, whose burnt body had been seen by several
witnesses, had been struck several times wnth bayonets,
and then, while still alive, the Germans had jpoured petro-
leum over him, and thrown him into a house tto which they
set fire. A woman who came out of her hoiuse was killed
in the same way. A witness, whose evidemce has been
taken by a reliable British subject, declare® that he saw
on the 26th August, not far from Malines, diuring the last
Belgian attack, an old man tied by the armis to one of
the rafters in the ceiling of his farm. The btody was com-
pletely carbonised; but the head, arms, and feet were un-
burnt. Further .011, a child of about 15 was tied up, the
hands behind the back, and the body wars completely
torn open with bayonet wounds. Numeroius corpses of
peasants lay on the ground in positions of supplication,
their arms lifted and their hands clasped. The Belgian
Consul in Uganda, who is now a volunteer im the Belgian
army, reports that wherever the German® passed the
country had been devastated. The few inhiabitants who
remain in the villages tell of the atrocities (committed by
the enemy. Thus, at Wackerzeel, seven Gcrimans are said
to have successively violated a woman, and then to have
killed her. In the same village they stripiped a young
boy to the waist, threatened him with deatth, holding a
revolver to his chest, pricked him with lamces, and then
chased him into a field and shot at him, without, how


ever, hitting him. Everywhere there is ruin and deso-
lation. At Buecken many inhabitants were killed, in-
cluding the priest, who was over eighty years old.
"Between Impde and Wolverthem two wounded Bel-
gian soldiers lay near a house which was on fire. The
Germans threw these two unfortunate men into the
flames. At nightfall 011 the 26th August, the German
troops, repulsed by our soldiers, entered Louvain panic-
struck. Several witnesses affirm that the German garri-
son which occupied Louvain was erroneously informed
that the enemy were entering the town. Men of the gar-
rison immediately marched to the station, shooting hap-
hazard the while, and there met the German troops who
had been repulsed by the Belgians, the latter having just
ceased the pursuit. Everything tends to prove that the
German regiments fired on one another. At once the
Germans began bombarding the town, pretending that
civilians had fired on the troops, a suggestion which is
contradicted by all the witnesses, and could scarcely have
been possible, because the inhabitants of Louvain had had
to give up their arms to the Municipal Authorities several
days before. The bombardment lasted till about 10
o'clock at night. The Germans then set fire to the town.
Wherever the fire had not spread the German soldiers
entered the houses and threw fire-grenades, with which
some of them seem to be provided. The greater part of
the town of Louvain was thus a prey to the flames, par-
ticularly the quarters of the upper town, comprising the
modern buildings, the ancient. Cathedral of St. Pierre, the
University Buildings, together with the University
Library, its manuscripts and collections, and the Munici-
pal Theatre. The Commission considers it its duty to in-
sist, in the midst of all these horrors, on the crime com-
mitted against civilisation by the deliberate destruction
of an academic library, which was one of the treasures of
Europe. The corpses of many civilians encumbered the
streets and squares. On the road from Tirlemont to
Louvain alone a witness counted more than fifty. On the
doorsteps of houses could be seen carbonised bodies of
inhabitants, who, hiding in their cellars, were driven out
by the fire, tried to escape and fell into the flames. The
suburbs of Louvain suffered the same fate. We can
affirm that the houses in all the districts between Louvain
and Malines, and most of the suburbs of Louvain itself,
have practically been destroyed. On Wednesday morn-
ing, 26th August, the Germans brought to the Station
Squares of Louvain a group of more than 75 persons,
including several prominent citizens of the town, amongst
whom were Father Coloboet and another Spanish priest,
and also an American priest. The men were brutally


separated from their wives and children, and after having
been subjected to the most abominable treatment b> the
Germans, who several times threatened to shoot them,
they were forced to march to the village of Campenhout
in front of the German troops. They were shut up in
the village church, where they passed the night. About
4 o'clock the next morning a German officer told them
they had better go to confession, as they would be shot
in half an hour. About half-past 4 they were liberated.
Shortly afterwards they were again arrested by a Ger-
man brigade, which forced them to march befoi e them
in the direction of Malines. In reply to a question of
one of the prisoners, a German officer said they were
going to give them a taste of the Belgian quickfirers be-
fore Antwerp. They were at last released on the Thurs-
day afternoon at the gates of Malines."
It appears from other witnesses that several thousand
male inhabitants of Louvain, who had escaped the shoot-
ing and the fire, were sent to Germany for a purpose
which is still unknown to us. The fire at Louvain burnt
for several days. An eye-witness who left Louvain on
30th August gave the following description of the town
at that time: —
"Leaving Weert St. Georges," he says, "I only saw
burnt-down villages and half-crazy peasantts, who, on
meeting anyone, held up their hands as a sugn of sub-
mission. Before every house, even those burnt down,
hung a white flag, and the burnt rags of theem could be
seen among the ruins. At Weert St. Georges fl questioned
the inhabitants on the causes of the Germaan reprisals,
and they affirmed most positively that no> inhabitant
had fired a shot, that in any case the; arms had
been previously collected, but that the Germams had taken
vengeance on the population because a Bellgian soldier
belonging to the Gendarmerie had killed an HJhlan. The
population still remaining in Louvain have ttaken refuge
in the suburb of Heverle, where they arre extremely
crowded. They have been cleared out of tthe town by
the troops and the fire. The fire started a llittle beyond
the American College, and the town is entirelly destroyed,
except for the Town Hall and the Station, furthermore,
the fire was still burning to-day, and the (Germans, far
from taking any steps to stop it, seemed to feed it with
straw, an instance of which 1 observed in tlhe street ad-
joining the Town Hall. The Cathedral andl the Theatre
are destroyed and have fallen in, as also thee Library, in
short, the town has the appearance of an amcient ruined
city, in the midst of which only a few drumken soldiers
move about, carrying bottles of wine and lliquors, while


the officers themselves, seated in armchairs round the
tables, drink like their men.
In the streets the swollen bodies of dead horses rot
in the sun, and the smell of fire and putrefaction pervades
the whole place."
The Commission is able to draw the following con-
clusions fi om the facts which have so far been brought
to its notice: In this war the occupation of any place
is systematically accompanied and followed, sometimes
even preceded, by acts of violence towards the civil popu-
lation, which acts are contrary both to the usages of
war and to the most elementary principles of humanity.
The German procedure is everywhere the same. They
advance along a road, shooting inoffensive passers-by
particularly bicyclists—as well as peasants working in the
fields. In the towns and villages where they stop they
begin by requisitioning food and drink, which they con-
sume till intoxicated.
Sometimes from the interior of deserted houses they
let off their rifles at random, and declare that it was the
inhabitants who fired. Then the scenes of fire, murder,
and especially pillage, begin, accompanied by acts of
deliberate cruelty, without respect to sex or age. Even
when they pretend to know the actual person guilty of
the acts they allege, they do not content themselves with
executing him summarily, but they seize the opportunity
to decimate the population, pillage the houses, and then
set them on fire.
After a preliminary attack and massacre they shut
up the men in the church, then order the women to return
to their homes and to leave their doors open all night.
11 om several places the male population has been sent
to Germany, there to be forced, it appears, to work at
the harvest, as in the old days of slavery. There are
many cases of the inhabitants being forced to act as
guides, and to dig trenches and entrenchments for the
Germans. Numerous witnesses assert that during their
marches, and even when attacking, the Germans place
civilians, men and women, in their front ranks, in order
to prevent our soldiers firing. The evidence of Belgian
officei s and soldiers shows that German detachments do
not hesitate to display either the white flag or the Red
Cross flag, in order to approach our troops with impunity.
On the other hand, they fire on our ambulances and mal-
treat the ambulance men. They maltreat and even kill
the wounded. The clergy seem to be particularly chosen
as subjects for their brutality. Finally we have in our
possession expanding bullets which had been abandoned
by the enemy at Werchter, and we possess doctors' certi-


ficat.es showing that wounds must have been inflicted by
bullets of this kind.
The documents and evidence on which these conclu-
sions rest will be published in due course.
Signed by : The President—Cooreman.
The Members of the Commission- —
Count Goblet d'Alviella,
Byckmans,
Strauss,
Van Cutsem.
The Secretaries —
Chevalier Ernst de Bunswyck,
Orts.
MALINES
Malines, or as it was called in early days Mechlinia,
is distant about 15 miles by road from Brussels, on the
road to Antwerp, and is the junction for a great meeting
of railway lines, —those of Eiegc, Ecouvain, Ostend,
Brussels to Antwerp, and Malin.es to St.. Nicholas. This
made its capture by the Germans off particular im-
portance, and may perhaps account for thie very strenuous
efforts put forth to occupy it with as litttle delay as pos-
sible. It is one of the most ancient citiess in Europe, and
contained relics from the early ages off much inherent
value to antiquarians. It is built upom the river Dyle,
the various branches of which are spamned by no less
than thirty-five bridges. It is one of the: 1 most interesting
of Belgian towns by reason of its many aancient buildings,
churches, and a Cathedral dating frorni the thirteenth
century.
St. Rumbold, after whom this Catthedral has been
named, was martyred in the year 77. r 5, and has been
credited with miraculous powers of hiealing, including
giving sight to the blind, relieving meen of evil spirits,
and raising from the dead. The Cathediral was commenc-
ed in 1366, but remained unfinished umtil the fifteenth
century, though various efforts were frcequently made to
complete the design. It is a most massrve structure, with
a tower intended to be the highest in thee world, but which
is only 324 ft. instead of 550 ft., being, however, still un


finished. The base of this mass of masonry is evidently
intended to carry a great weight, but practically only
two stages have been completed, and the spire has yet to
be added. In this tower were the world-famous set of
bells whose chimes could be heard, in happier days, for
an immense number of miles, greater, it is believed, than
those of any other similar bells. Special attention had
been given to these chimes, Malines being the ecclesias-
tical capital of Belgium.
The interior of the Cathedral contained many most
beautiful specimens of wood-carving and other decora-
tions, evidently the work of mediaeval artists. Chief
among them was the great altar-piece by Van Dyck, one
of the finest works of this master. The subject is the
Crucifixion, "a dead Saviour being depicted between two
thieves, who are still in agony. St. Mary Magdalene is
at the foot of the cross, her facial experession betokening
passionate grief."
The Church of St. Jean is another structure of Late
Gothic design, and possessing a Well-proportioned tower
unusually picturesque. Within, in the apse, is the large
Renaissance altar-piece, with pictures by Rubens, the sub-
jects of which are "The Adoration of the Magi," "The
Beheading of John the Baptist," and "St. John the Evan-
gelist in the Cauldron of Boiling Oil." There are also
the two noted pictures, "The Baptism of Christ" and
"St. John on the Island of Patmos writing the Apocal-
ypse."
Other churches are those of "Ste. Catherine," and the
really fine "Church of Notre Dame," built in the early
part of the 16th century, and bearing a striking resem-
blance to the great Cathedral.
The ancient Cloth Hall was begun in 1320, and was a
noted specimen of Early Gothic art. Much of the original
structure remains, though there have been necessary re-
pairs and alterations during recent years. The Hotel de
Ville, another fine building, also dates from the 13th
century, though it was entirely remodelled in 1715. The
municipal archives were kept in a Gothic building of
1374, Schepenen Huis. All these wonderful relics from
early days have now been reduced to bare walls with
ruined interiors.
Another most interesting building in ancient Malines
is the Palais de Justice, or Gerechtshof, formerly the
palace of Margaret of Austria, and which from 1609 was
the seat of the Great Couuncil for 150 years. The facade
is stated to be the earliest example of the Renaissance in
Belgium, and dated from 1517 to 1526. This beautiful
building bears the marks of German "Kultur," in the
shape of broken-down walls, smashed roof, and a wrecked


interior. Its replacement is a practical impossibility, and
the whole world is the poorer by its destruction.
In the Rue Haute stands—or rather stood —the Porte
de Bruxelles, the sole survivor of the twelve ancient gates.
But in every quarter of Malines there were some of the
most ancient and interesting buildings that have survived
the centuries, and would, doubtless, have continued to
exist and give pleasure and joy to many but for the inter-
vention of the modern Huns.
Rubens was to be seen at his noblest in the Church
of Notre Dame, which the Guild of the old Fishmongers
chose for their gift of a picture by this great artist, choos-
ing, as an appropriate subject, "The Miraculous Draught
of Fishes." The year this picture was painted was 1618,
Rubens being then at his best. "Never, perhaps, did the
brush of Rubens achieve a finer work than the head of
the figure of Christ, who, standing at the edge of the boat,
watched His disciples haul ashore their teeming nets. The
wings showed equally germane subjects —Tobias and the
angel, St. Peter finding the coin in the fish's mouth, and
four fishermen saints."
Malines is, of course, the home and centre of the great
lace industry known to every woman as "Mechlin," from
the ancient name of the town. This beautiful and inter-
esting work is carried on in factories, and in nearly every
private house, and appears to be the principal occupation
of every one of the female inhabitants fromi early child-
hood till old age places its final impediment and enforces
idlement. It is a most fascinating work, and much money
can be earned by those who devote to it both industry
and skill. In most of the houses of the coumtryside can
be seen young girls sitting beside the oldeir women, all
with heads bent down over pillow and bobbins, tracing
the intricate patterns with wonderful skill, while the air
resounds with the gay singing of youthful vfoices reciting
the old "Song of the Lacemakers of the Bruges Country,"
or an old-world ditty with a refrain in wlhich all gaily
join. Happiness, peace, and the quiet joy off life are con-
spicuous throughout Belgium, but especially is it notice-
able in the Malines district, where the work in which the
people are chiefly employed lends itself to the constant
association of the young together with the odd, under the
most pleasant of home conditions. To-cday all these
happy homes have disappeared, while the people, both
young and old, male and female, have been iforced to flee,
and are scattered about, never perhaps to imeet again.
Malines, a treasure-house of ancient memories, of
works of art, and of peaceful dignity, was am undefended
or open town; yet it was several times bomlbarded by the
German troops. The first occasion was ora August 27,


when, as a result, the Town Hall was reduced to ruins,
the roof of the Cathedral of St. Rumbold, or as occasion-
ally it is called, St. Rornbaut, was broken up; large holes
were knocked in the walls on one side, and the stained
glass was all shattered.
The population almost immediately deserted the town;
the shops were barricaded, and upon the entire city fell
almost the silence of death. A second bombardment was
nevertheless thought necessary by the German comman-
ders, and this time damage more serious was ruthlessly
achieved. The Church of Notre Dame suffered, the roof
being entirely destroyed.
And yet again the Germans returned to the attack.
On Sept. 2 the city was bombarded for two hours. Nearly
100 shrapnel shells exploded in the town, whole streets
being wrecked; while St. Rumbold sustained fearful and
irreparable damage. It was at first reported to be in
ruins, though that, as far as the exterior was concerned,
Avas an over-statement. What had been left of the roof
and windows after previous bombardments AY as IIOAV
completely destroyed; and the beautiful and famous
tOAver was especially aimed at and utterly wrecked. The
magnificent gateway beneath it Avas turned into a heap
of ruins, the carillon of bells lying broken and half buried
AA'here they had been hurled by the exploding shells.
Malines Cathedral. The Famous Carved Pulpit which
has been almost destroyed.


Yet still the Germans had not finished with Malines.
On Sept. 26 a detachment of German troops was surprised
on its march from Brussels to Termonde through Alost.
Attacked by the Belgians in front and on the flank, the
detachment fell back in disorder upon Assche, leaving
many wounded and much ammunition in the hands of the
victors. In revenge for this (for no other motive can be
assigned for the deed), the Germans on the following
morning shelled Malines with long-distance guns. It was
a Sunday, and such few people as had remained in the
town, or had crept back, were returning from their
church, when a shell suddenly fell in the middle of a
group, killing several. The remainder fled to a cafe, but
had scarcely entered when another shell exploded inside
the building, and more were wounded. The rain of shells
continued, falling at the rate of one a minute. They fell
in the place dc la Gare and the neighbourhood, and the
fires which were thereby caused quickly spread. In this
way the railway station and the barracks were soon burn-
ing together with the factory of a cabinetmaker, the house
of the Little Sisters of the Poor, the National Stamp
Factory, and many private houses. Malines was now
practically destroyed, scarcely a house of any note being
left standing, while all the ancient and noble buildings
have suffered irreparable damage. It is, of coiurse, im-
possible to accurately state the full extent of the; damage
sustained in the interior of the churches, Cathedr;al, Hotel
de Ville, and other public buildings, until the Hums have
been driven out and the town is once more in tine posses-
sion of its rightful owners. But it is known that the
noble altar-piece by Van Dyck has been destroyed, while
the ancient Cathedral has suffered such damage,, both to
its exterior and the beautiful carvings, seulptmre, and
other works of art within, as makes its restoration impos-
sible.
.TERMONDE.
We come now to one of the most appalling off all the
crimes of vandalism committed by the apostles off culture
in Belgium. Among all the ancient cities of Belgium the
town of Termonde had a charm peculiarly its own. Ter-
monde, or Dendermonde, lay in the low countiry about
half-way between Ghent and Malines, on the right bank
of the Scheldt, and both banks of the Dendre. Around
it ran fortifications, which had been formidable in their
day, but were now useless under modern conditions of


warfare. Louis XIV. had at-
tempted to capture the place
in 1667, but the inhabitants
opened the sluices, as the
modern Belgian has proved
himself not afraid to do, and
the Grand Monarque's army
was flooded out. It took our
own Marlborough ten days'
bombardment in a dry season
to reduce the gallant little
city. The central beauty of
Termonde was its Grand
Place, with its exquisite and
severe Town Hall and belfry
on one side, and 011 another
the ancient building that was
once the Cloth Hall, and
Avas later adapted to make
the town's museum. The
Grand Place Avas small, but
it Avas strikingly beautiful.
Of the ToAvn Hall, Camille
Lemonnier says: "Certainly
it has nothing of the impos-
ing solemnity of the Belfry
of Bruges; but, such as it is, with the symmetry of its proportions, the balance
of its lines, and the delicious silhouette that it throws into the air, it makes a
good appearance among the other stone ancients of the country.'' The streets
were smiling and comfortable, giving every evidence of ease and peace; and 011
one of the cosy-looking houses the curious might discern a tablet which
The Railway Bridge> Termonde. All that is left of it


recorded the birthplace of a young Belgian, Polydore de
Keyser, who afterwards became Lord Mayor of London,
and was knighted by Queen Victoria.
The central beauty of Termonde was its Grand Place,
with its exquisite and severe Town Hall and belfry on one
side, and on another the ancient building that was once
the Clock Hall, and was later adapted to make the town's
museum. The Grand Place of Termonde was small, but
it was strikingly beautiful.
The Gothic Church of Notre Dame, massive and some-
what gloomy on the exterior, possessed some rare treas-
ures within. The first of these was the superb Romanesque
font dating from the 12th century, and surrounding it the
severe and beautiful oak and brass-railed doors, dated
1635. But the great glory of the church consisted in its
three magnificent pictures, "The Assumption of the Vir-
gin," one of the finest works of that fine painter, De
Crayer, who was at one time held to be the only serious
rival of Rubens, and a "Crucifixion" and an "Adoration
of the Shepherds" by Van Dyck. The painting of the
"Crucifixion" is one of the best of the master's sacred
pictures. At the foot of the cross are the figures of St.
Francis of Assisi, the Virgin, and St. Ma ry Magdalene,
and the whole picture is a masterpieces, not only of
emotional painting, but of silvery and exiquisite colour-
ing."
There was a garrison of 3,000 soldiers in Termonde, but
it did not seem that there would be immiediate need of
their services in defending the town. Suddenly news was
brought in by scouts that large numbers of Germans were
swooping down rapidly upon it, and would arrive within
an hour.
It was evidently impossible for these few troops to
hold an open and unfortified town against such forces a?
the Germans were sending, their heavy giuns alone being
sufficient to make resistance an act of follw.
Nevertheless the brave Belgians did resist to their
utmost, though the heavy guns took terriblle toll of them.
They were, however, only one to six, ancd the Germans
quickly took possession of the town. Mamy of the garri-
son managed to escape, but numbers werre found after-
wards, mutilated beyond recognition, amomg the ashes of
the city.
Directly they entered a demand was made for the
payment of an indemnity of £40,000; otherwise the town


fc • PtISIIl
would be burnt. But it was found impossible to raise such a sum in the short
time given.
Without further notice the German Commander gave his orders for the
destruction of the town, no buildings to be spared. The Churches and beau-
tiful Town Hall were reduced to ruins. Nor were the lives of the unfortunate
Termonde after Bombardment
inhabitants treated with any
greater respect. Houses were
fired with the knowledge that
people were within. Indeed,
when they ventured out of
their blazing homes the in-
vaders caught them, tortur-
ing, murdering, or violating
them, according to their will.
Heavy guns were trained
on to the most important and
beautiful buildings, notably
churches and hospitals. Bru-
tal Uhlans broke into houses
not 011 fire, and pillaged
everything they could lay
tiieir hands upon, treating
tne inhabitants shamefully.
One woman, who was feed-
ing her baby at her breast,
was shot, and fell to the
floor with her baby still
in her arms. At ano-


ther house an old man shot his granddaughter, a
pretty girl of 16, after having witnessed in the street
below the violation of girls even younger than that by
the soldiery. Unfortunately this act was seen, and quickly
punished. Soldiers entered the house, and the old mas,
was caught up and kicked through the low window into
the street. At a signal from their comrades he was kicked
and thrown back again. This went on for some time, till
their human football was a mass of broken pulp. Ulti-
mately he was thrown, still breathing and moaning feebly,
into his house, which was at once fired and reduced to
ashes, along with his body and that of his little grand-
daughter.
Out of 1,400 houses, 1,100 were burnt to the ground.
Many of the bolder people of Termonde ran the gauntlet
of the invaders and escaped, for towards evening nearly
all the soldiers were drunk with pillaged wine, and they
did not interfere with the fleeing townsfolk, except now
and again to outrage a girl or woman, and playfully flick
a piece off an ear or nose with a random bullet. So many
people were able to escape, with their lives alone, for their
property was either looted or burned. Several notables
were murdered in cold blood, and over 200 civilians were
sent to Germany, and their fate is still unknown.
Within a few hours from the German entry into Ter-
monde the doomed town was a mass of smcoking ruins.
For hours flames lit up the sky for miles arouind, and the
horizon was blue with clouds of fine ashes fromi the ruins.
By the evening of Sunday, Sept. 6, not a diouse stood
whole; the whole place was practically a smouldering
ruin. As if this were not enough, the Germtans, having
later evacuated the position, returned some days after-
wards and again bombarded the town. Tlnis time the
Town Hall shared the common fate. The faimous peal of
bells in the belfry were brought down; the Anterior was
gutted, and its paintings and other art treasmres utterly
destroyed. Field guns were trained on thie tower of
Notre Dame, and the church was seriously inijured.
A fortnight later the remains of this once-tfamous and
beautiful city were visited, in company withli a Belgian
staff officer and others, by Mr. J. H. Whitehliouse, M.P.,
who has thus recorded what he saw:—
Termonde a few weeks ago was a beautiiful city of
16,000 inhabitants; a city in which the dignity of its
buildings harmonised with the natural beauty of its situa-
tion; a city which contained some buildings off surpassing
interest. I found it utterly destroyed. T weant through
street after street, square after square, and T found that
every house was entirely destroyed, with all iits contents.
It was not the result of a bombardment. It was syste


matic destruction. In each house a separate bomb had
been placed, which had blown up the interior and had set
fire to the contents. Not a shred of furniture or of any-
thing else remained.
"This sight continued in street after street throughout
what had been a considerable town. It had an indescrib-
able influence upon the observer, which no printed
description or even pictorial record could give. Thi-
influence was increased by the utter silence of the cit}
broken only by the sound of the guns. Of the populativ
I thought not a soul remained. I was wrong; for, as we
turned into a square, where the wreck of what had been
one of the most beautiful of Gothic churches met my eyes,
a blind woman and her daughter groped among the ruins.
They were the sole living creatures in the whole of the
town. Shops, factories, churches, the houses of the
wealthy, all were similarly destroyed. One qualification
only have Ito make of this statement. Two, or perhaps
three, houses bore a German command in chalk that they
were not to be burnt. These remained standing, but de-
serted, amidst the ruins on either side. Where a destroyed
house had obviously contained articles of value, looting
had taken place. In the ruins of what had been a jewel-
ler's shop the remains of the safe were visible amidst the
cinders. The part around the lock had been blown off
and the contents obviously rifled. I inquired what had
become of the population. It was a question to which no
direct reply could be given. They had fled in all direc-
tions. Some had reached Antwerp, but a great number
were wandering about the country, panic-stricken and
starving. Many were already dead.
"I had other opportunities of seeing that what had
happened at Termonde was similar to what had hap-
pened in other parts of Belgium under the military
occupation of Germany; and I have given this record of
the condition of Termonde because it is typical of so many
other parts of Belgium. The result is that conditions
have been set up for the civilian population throughout
the occupied territory of unexampled misery. Compara-
tively only a few refugees have reached England. The
others remain wandering about Belgium, flocking into
other towns and villages, or flying to points a little way
across the Dutch frontier.
"The whole life of the nation has been arrested. The
food supplies which would ordinarily reach the civilian
population are being taken by the German troops for their
own support. The peasants and poor are without the
necessaries of life, and the conditions of starvation grow
more acute every day. Even where, as in some cases
happens, there is a supply of wheat available, the peasants


are not allowed to use their windmills, owing to the Ger-
man fear that they will send signals to the Belgian army.
We are therefore face to face with a fact which has rarely,
if ever, occurred in the history of the world —an entire
nation in a state of famine, and that within a day s jour-
ney of our own shores.
"The completeness of the destruction in each indi-
vidual case was explained to me later by the Belgian
Ministers, who described to me the numerous appliances
which the German soldiers carried for destroying pro-
perty. Not only were hand-bombs of various sizes and
descriptions carried, but each soldier "was supplied with
a quantity of small black discs, little bigger than a six-
penny-piece. I saw these discs, which had been taken
from German soldiers on the field of battle. These were
described to me as being composed of compressed benzine.
When lighted they burn brilliantly for a few minutes,
and are sufficient to start whatever fire is necessary after
the explosion of the bomb."
The burning of Termonde has been described as "The
revengeful act of disappointed blackmailers." The re-
sponsible author for the outrage was Major Sommerfeld.
ORSMAEL AND NEERHESPEN.
On August .10, 11, and 12, according to evidence
accepted by the Commission, the following incidents
occurred:—'An old man had his arm slicced in three
longitudinal cuts. He was then hanged head (downwards
and burned alive. Young girls were raped and little
children outraged at Orsmael, where several inhabitants
suffered mutilation too horrible to describe. A Belgian
soldier belonging to a battalion of cyclist caraliiiniers, who
had been wounded and made prisoner, was hamged, whilst
another, who was tending his comrade, was bound to a
telegraph pole on the St. Trond road and shoit.'
TIRLEMONT.
The Times newspaper on August 23rd comtained the
following:—"The so-called German 'culture' of the past
44 years has been suddenly swept away, and the wanton
and ruthless savagery of the German hordes will live in
the minds of future generations and embitter tlhe relations
of the peoples. Ten days ago Tirlemont wass a pleasant
Flemish town. To-day it is a heap of smoking ruins. The
Belgian army made a vigorous fight in the emvirons, but
all accounts agree that there was absolutely mo necessity
for the bombardment of the place. The inwaders were
apparently bent on battle practice, and at Tirllemont they
had it with a vengeance. As the terrified peeople rushed
from their homes, leaving everything behind! but what


they stood up in, they were made game of by the German cavalry. Fathers
escaping with their families, and trying their best to shield them, were shot
down before the eyes of their beloved ones; mothers carrying babies were
belaboured with lance and sword. Coming from Tirlemont, I saw one little
flaxen-haired girl of 11 staggering blindly forward, her eye and cheek laid
open by a lance thrust. A poor peasant woman, with one of the kindliest faces
TIRLEMONT
I have ever seen, told me,
with tears on her cheeks,
that in her presence her hus-
band had been killed by a
troop of German cavalry;
two of her children, both
under nine years of age,
had been trampled to death
by their horses, and two
others were lost. As to their
fate, she, of course, believed
the worst. This is not an
isolated instance of what is
daily taking place in the area
occupied by the German sol-
diery, but, I regret to say, it
is only one of the hundreds
which have been substan-
tiated beyond all doubt."
Another account says:—
"Tirlemont, was the scene of
a specially vigorous attack.
Powerful German guns
shelled the place with great
effect, and then the German
cavalry suddenly charged.
Their advance was so rapid


and so unexpected that numbers of peaceful villagers,
women and children, were unable to escape. Hurrying
across the fields as quickly as they could, it was impos-
sible to get away from the German cavalry, who followed
them, shooting and stabbing men and women alike, riding
down children, sweeping over the place in a mad, reck-
less charge."
The London Daily Telegraph of August 29th tells the
following, which is vouched lor by those concerned. Hie
first was told by the mother herself.
"It happened near Leau. A squadron of about 500
Uhlans marched through the town, and alleging that
somebody had shot at them, went round to all the houses
searching for firearms, smelling the rifles in order to see
if they had been recently fired. At the house in which
this woman lived there could be no question of a rifle
having been fired, as there was not a firearm of any de-
scription in the place.
"The family circle consisted of a grandfather, the
father, mother, a girl of 17 or 18, and a young boy, who,
upon seeing the approach of the Germans, fled and hid
himself. The soldiers came in, and, without any question-
ing, fired at and killed the father. They were going to
shoot the grandfather, when the mother and daughter fell
on their knees and begged the soldiers to spare the life
of the old man. The officer, or under-officer, <of the party
then said, 'Yes, we won't trouble about the old people,'
and, touching the cheek of the young girl with his finger,
lie added, with a significant laugh, 'Pretty youtth is better.'
He thereupon violated the girl before her motlher's eyes.
VISE.
Vise was an attractive town of nearly 41,000 inhabi-
tants, typical in the cheery pride and gaiiety of the
Walloon portion of Belgium. There was a qpiaint Town
Hall, and in the church was a famous reliquary, the silver
Chasse cle St. Hadelin, of which the fine reliefl work pro-
claimed it to date from the early part of the 112 th century.
It was practically the first town where the Geirman troops
committed any excesses, and put into grim the
instructions contained in their military books, as shown
on another page. On the first entry, howeveir, there was
only simple occupation to record; no excessess were com-
mitted, and the enemy left the town almost ais quietly as
they had entered it. They left behind them a small garri-
son, and it was from these men that the grreat trouble
came and the town destroyed. A few days aftter the occu-
pation a force left Vise for Liege, and, according to a
Belgian eye-witness, the trouble materialised! when they
attempted to seize the bridge for the purpose of crossing.
The Belgians had destroyed about fifty yards> of it in the


centre, and when the first party of Prussian cavalry arrived to take posses-
sion, they were most annihilated by a hot fire which was opened upon them
by infantry hidden among piers of the broken bridge. At the same time, shots
were fired from houses near the bank; and it was then that German troops,
coming up in support of the ambushed cavalry, commenced an indiscriminate
THE CHURCH AT VISE
Now entirely destroyed many of the walls having fallen down
massacre of the inhabitants, al-
though they had no proof that
the shots from the houses were
not fired by Belgian soldiers.
When the Belgians had re-
tired, and all resistance in the
town was over, the remaining
inhabitants were rounded up
like sheep in the centre of their
shattered town and surrounded
by the troops, whose comman-
der addressed the sullen crowd
in French, explaining that Ger-
many "was not at war with
Belgium," but that they must
submit to German military law,
and that any attack would be
immediately punished by death.
At that moment a pistol-shot
rang out, and the officer fell
wounded; whereupon a group
of eight persons, from whose
midst the shot had come, were
seized and executed, al-
though it was known to all
that only one shot had been
77


fired. The Germans accused the people who were in the
town of firing these shots, but this was denied, and 110
one could be found with a weapon of any kind.
Not satisfied with this, the German soldiers proceeded
to deal out the same treatment to all the villages round
about. The little picturesque town of Argenteau, beau-
tifully situated 011 the Meuse, and crowned with ancient
and modern chateaux, shared the same fate. And all
about this district, wherever the German troops could
reach, lay burnt-out farms and smouldering villages.
Streets were burned at Huy. Louveigne and Bar-le-Duc
were totally destroyed. Verviers was largely burned.
Soiron was sacked. Before the Germans could capture
Liege they had tried to suppress the people by instituting
their reign of terror, doubtless hoping that Avhen this was
known Liege would surrender.
This was notably the case in the communes or hamlets
of Sempst, Weerde, Elewyt, Holstade, AVespelaer, AVilsele,
Bueken, Eppeghem, Wackerzeele, Rotselaer, Werchter,
Thildonck, Boormeerbeek, Houthem, Tremeloo. In this
last place only the church and the presbytery were left
standing.
This was the small beginning of the reign of "fright-
fulness" which subsequently became the admitted rule
of German work in Belgium, increasing in ferocity as the
invaders' prospects became more gloomy, and culminating
in the senseless acts of vandalism so numenous and so
terrible that the account of them makes (to> Germany's
everlasting shame) a record which will surviv 7 e long aftei
the awful effects of the war have passed away.
On the commencement of these barbarities Germany
entered a justification which deserves some motice. The
civilian population had been reinforced by tthe entry of
a few companies of the Garde Civique, and iit lias to be
admitted these men were not members of tthe regular
army. But they were a portion of the defence; forces with
which Belgium entered the fray, and were armed and
uniformed so as to distinguish them from civilians. The
position of the Garde Civique was at the tinne certainly
anomalous. They were a civilian guard, andl used more
as policemen than as soldiers. When, therefore, Belgium
allowed them to enter the fray, they took ai risk which
Germany was not slow to avail herself of. £>he claimed
that these men were not soldiers, and therefore must be
civilians. When they fought against the Geirman troops
the orders were to treat them as civilians, andl shoot them
at sight, without the honours of warfare whicch would be
extended to the regular soldiery. But Belgiium regarded
them as martyrs, and certainly they should haave received
from Germany full recognition as. men in ainns against


them fully authorised to act. Germany, however, declared
that when such men shot at her regular troops, and
opposed them either in town or on the country roads, they
would be treated as civilians and not as regular soldiers.
"We give this defence which Germany made for what
it is worth, and as her own justification for an act which
the whole of the civilised world has declared to be abso-
lutely unjustifiable. Even though the slaughter which
took place in Vise might possess some inherent justifica-
tion (which we do not admit), it is yet certain there were
numberless outrages to come which no reason or logic can
defend. Warfare made upon non-combatants, men,
women, and children, is utterly undefendable; and when
it is the action of a so-called civilised nation, there is only
one word which can adequately describe it, and that is
"murder." It matters but little what the initial cause
for attack was, whether the German troops were really
in the danger from unarmed or even armed civilians
which now they assert, whether the people did shoot at
German soldiers as they marched through the towns or
took their way across country in continuation of the war.
No such as the arguments put forward can
justify the raping of women, torturing and murdering of
women and children, or the shooting without trial of men
whose only crime was in defending their homes against
the invader. Of all these crimes German soldiers have
been found guilty, and their only plea apparently is that
it was necessary in self-defence. Such a plea is useless,
and will never absolve them in the eyes of any, even bar-
barous, nations.
There are yet darker crimes to be charged against
the German troops than those now given, but though
these have been proved up to the hilt, we do not desire
to refer to them more directly. They are of such a
nature that no home-respecting man or woman would
wish them included in a work such as this, destined, we
trust, to be circulated in the home. Already the most
severe indictment to which ever a so-called Christian
nation was subjected has been made against the German
army, from the highest to the lowest, officers and men.
"War is always terrible, and invariably calls forth the
worst that is in the nature of the combatants. But the
German soldiers have gone beyond this stage, and intro-
duced a species of callous brutality and savagery which
belongs to a far distant period in the world's history, and
which Christian nations have determinedly swept away
as unworthy of their civilisation, even in its lowest
grades.
The Deification of brute force, which is the particular
attribute of a military despotism such as Germany has
been made the victim of, has thrown the entire country
back a century or more in the scale of civilisation, and


has also led the way to those greater evils which neces-
sarily follow in the wake of war. Humanity has long-
recognised that all wars lead to the reversal of Nature's
supreme law of the survival of the fittest, and substitutes
a flat contradiction of its truths by enforcing the sur-
vival of the unfit, those whose age, infirmity, or want of
manliness and patriotism keep them in a safe environ-
ment where they can have as companions other non-com-
batants such as women and girls. Unfortunately, Ger-
many is not the only sufferer in this, as other
countries have also had to give their best and bravest
to protect and defend the liberties which were in
jeopardy, such as the rights of small nations, and the
inviolability of the pledged word. Thus, the more highly
civilised nations engaged in their defence in this titanic
struggle have been dragged down to Germany's level, and
forced to endure similar losses, even though they may
refuse to imitate her low examples.
Proof of Germany's retrogression under the domina-
tion of her military despotism may be found by compar-
ing the conduct of her troops in 1870 with those of to-
day now engaged in war. Doubtless the armies under
Count von Moltke might have been charged with " tho-
roughness" in their treatment of the French people, but
no girl could be found to bewail the loss of that purity
and honour the protection of which was her birthright
in the country to which she belonged. No prisoners were
tortured or children mutilated, nor was murder resorted
to as a fine art in the work of terrorising the population.
In no way could the finger of scorn be pointed at the
German troops, either officers or men. They won for
their country a fine reputation—as military martinets
indeed—but also as being the possessors of marvellous
powers of organisation, the highest military strategy, and
indomitable courage.
A reformed Germany, endowed with a truer freedom,
and liberated from the brutalising and soul-destroying
military despotism of to-day, may be able to soar aloft,
with wings outstretched to her place in the sun. But
absolute and sweeping reform of her present methods
and modes of government must precede such flight; for
then, and then only, can she attain to that higher and
nobler place which 110 victories of the sword could pos-
sibly win.
If the enormity of her crimes against humanity be the
measure of her grief, then, indeed, must Germany one
day shed tears of blood, and such heart-outpourings of
repentance that only the hand of God can assuage. For
the present she must be left to bear such punishment as
can justly be inflicted by an outraged world, bearing in
mind that severity is, in this case, the truest mercy, if
only as a deterrent to other nations likely to emulate her
unholy deeds.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Snelling Printinj Works, 130 Sussex Street, -:Sydney


•'' • • V ■ . .' * , " - - --
HONEST VALUE EVERY TIME. TRY US!
u" " i" »i i j*11 11 i '' .. . .
UINN, (STORIS) 582-584 George St., City
Near Crystal Palace


'%
1508 01692735
