

LIFE, AMOURS,
OF THAT MOST
Kxstorimi^
George Barrington,
FROM HIS BIRTH,
Conviction at the Old-Bailey,
POR ROBBING HENRY HARE TOWNSEND, ESQ-
Embellished with an Elegant Frontispiece, which csntains a striking
Likeness of Barrington,
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY W. MASON,
21, CLERKENWEIL GREEN-


/7?rt/rfK'/752.
'/one "/ lan


LIFE
George Barrington,
THE attention of the public was for several years fixed, in a
particular manner, oh George Barrington ; the principal events
of whose life form the subject of the following pages; ami,
indeed, since the days of Jonathan Wild, no man, of the de-
scription of those whose names generally grace the Newgate
to have deserved public notice so much as he does.
He certainly possessed talents which, had they been properly
directed and prudently conducted, on his first setting out in
life, might have enabled him to make a distinguished figure
either in the line of literature or of business; but having,
early in life, made one false step, and that followed by a series
of base actions, we see him advance progressively in the career
of guilt and disgrace, until ail sensibility of the difference be-
tween right and wrong, honor and shame, was obliterated in
his mind, and all sense of moral obligation had totally perished
in hisbreasl; becoming thus not only inferior to a man without
feeling or affections, but worse than a beast of the forest without
reason.
The person so well known in this capital by the name of
George Barrington, and so unfortunately distinguished in it as
a pickpocket, was horn about the year 1155, at a village
called Maynooth, in the county of Kildare in Ireland. His
father, Henry Waldron, was a working silversmith-; and his
mother, whose maiden name was Naish, exercised the trade of
a mantua-maker, and occasionally practised midwifery in the
neighbourhood in which she lived; where her character, as
well as that of her i'Kjsband, stood high for integrity and
industry. But, though their honesty was unimpeached, and
their industry as well as their temperance exemplary, they
were never able to extricate themselves from the slate of
abject poverty in which they, were sunk, in consequence of a
law-suit, imprudently commenced and unskilfully conducted,
against a powerful and wealthy relation, whom they unsuccess-
fully sued for a sum of money, to which they conceived
themselves to be legally entitled. The indigence of their circum-
stances did not allow them to improve, by a liberal education,
the excellent talent which their son George derived from
nature, and which themselves discovered in him at a very early
age. They, however, contrived to have him taught to read
and write, and he was, by a neighbouring surgeon, instructed


in common arithmetic, the elements of geography, an d the
genera! principles of grammar.
When he entered on the sixteenth year of his age, he was
noticed and patronized by Dr. C. of Leixlip, in the county of
Dublin, a dignitary in the church of Ireland, of an ancient and
illustrious family, and ample fortune. Through the interest of
this respectable clergyman, young Waldron was placed at a free
grammar-school in the Irish capital, where his patron propos-
ed he should fit himself fur the university, a theatre on which
he hoped, from the genius discovered by him at an early period
of his life, he might, in time, make such a figure as to rival tho
oldest and ablest actors; and, in order to enable him to make
an appearance equal to the young gentlemen with whom he
,fwas now to associate, the Doctor supplied him very liberally
« with money, and every other necessary, to render his situation
ia the school not only comfortable, but also respectable.
This ill-fated youth enjoyed, however, but for a short time
the benefits that he derived from the kindness of his patron;
for the violence of his passions, which equalled, at least, the
extent of his talents, precipitated him into an action, by which
ha lost Dr. C.’s favour for ever, and which, in its con-
sequences, finally proved his ruin. When he had been about
half a year at the grammar-school, he unluckily got into a
dispute with a lad, much older, and larger, and stronger, than
himself; the dispute degenerated into a quarrel, and some
blows ensued, in which young Waldron suffered considerably;
but, in order to be revenged, he stabbed his antagonist with a
penknife; and, had he not been seasonably prevented, would
have, in all probability, murdered him. The wounds which he
gave did not prove so dangerous as to render the circumstances
of the quarrel, which occasioned them, a subject of legal
investigation. The discipline of the school, (flogging,) however,
was inflicted with proper severity en the perpetrator of so
atrocious an offence, which irritated the unrelenting and
vindictive temper of the young man to such a degree, that he
determined at once to run away from school, from his family,
and from his friends ; thus abandoning the fair prospect that he
had before him, and blasting all the hopes that had been so
fondly, though vainly, formed of the great things that might
be affected by bis genius, when matured by time, and improved
by study.
His plan of escape was no sooner framed than it was carried
into execution ; but, previous to his departure, he found means
to steal ten or twelve guineas from Mr. F. the master of
the school, and a gold repeating watch from Mrs, Gcuids-
horough, the master’s sister. W'ith this booty, a few shirts,
and two or three pair of stockings, he silently hut safely
effected bis retreat from the school house, in the middle of a
still night, in the month of May, 1171; and pursuing the great
northern road all that night and ail the next day, he late in thq
evening arrived at the town of Drogheda, without ipteruptiou.


•without accident, and, in a great measure, without halting,
rest, or fbod.
He there happened to meet, at an obscure inn at which be put
tip, a set of strolling players; and with these he, without
ceremony or loss of lime, formed an intimacy, that continued
some years, with mutual advantage to the parties concerned
in it. John Price, the manager of this strolling company, was a
native of the town of Poole, in Dorsetshire; hewasofagood
family, of an agreeable figure, lively in conversation, conciliat-
ing in his manners, and had been tolerably well educated.
Having lived some time in London, where he was clerk to one
Potter, a pettifogging attorney, he was intimately acquainted
with the town, and all the arts of fraud or violence that ate
practised in it, by the lower and most unprincipled classes, to
procure money : for, entering too deeply or too unwarily into
some practices of such a nature, he was prosecu ed; and,
having been convicted at the Old Bailey, he was at this time an
involuntary exile in Ireland, until the expiration of ihe term
for which he was sentenced to be transported. This man
became quickly the confidant, and, from the confidant, the
counsellor, the tutor, the sovereign director, as it were, of the
fugitive Waldron, who communicated to him, without any
reserve, all the circumstances of his life and story. By his
advice, this unhappy youth renounced his paternal name,
assumed that of Barrington, entered into the company, and in
the course of four days became so absolutely and formally a
strolling sou of Thespis, that he performed the part of Jaffier,
in “ Venice Preserved,” with some applause, to a crouded
audience, in a barn in the suburbs of Drogheda.
Though the reception he met with on his debut was very
flattering to a mind like his, Price prudently determined, that it
would not be proper for him to appear in public so near the
scene of his late depredation in the capital. It was I herd re
resolved on by them, that the whole company should, without
delay, move to the northward, and, if possible, gel lo the dis-
tance of sixty or eighty miles from Dublin, before they halted
for any length of time. In order to enable so numerous a
body lo move with all their baggage, it was necessary to use
money ; and, in doing this, Barrington’s assistance was . dis-
pensably necessary. He was accordingly applied to. a d he
acquiesced with a good grace, giving Price Mrs. G mids-
borough’s gold repeater, which was disposed of for the general
benefit of the strollers.
This act of well timed liberality rendered him popular
among his new associates, who deservedly considered him as a
valuable acquisition lo their company. He had a sneaking eye,
an expressive countenance, a tolerable theatrical figure, a very
pompous enunciation, and a most retentive memory vVilh
these advantages, they observed, and, perhaps, not without
some reason, that he might make some day a first-rate figure


on the beards of Drury-Lane or Covent Garden. But, however
this may be, as soon as the necessary funds were procured, al!
these children of Thespis set put for Londonderry, w hich was
the place at which they designed first to play. Travelling but
slowly, they were a considerable time en their journey to that
city, and during the course of it, the penetrating eyes of the
experienced actresses discovered that Barrington had made a
tender impression on the heart of Miss Egerton, the young lady
who played the part of Belvidera when he acted that of Jaffier
at Drogheda. This poor girl was the daughter of an opulent
tradesman at Coventry. She was young and beautiful, sweet-
tempered and accomplished, but friendless ; and, though inured
to misfortune, destitute of the experience which is generally
acquired in a series of sinister events. At the age of sixteen
she was debauched by a lieutenant of marines, with whom she
fled from her father’s house to Dublin, where, in less than
three months, he abandoned her, leaving her a prey to infamy,
poverty, and disease.
Having been thus deceived in the simplicity of innocence, by
the cunning and falsehood of one of the vilest and most pro-
fligate of human beings, she had no resource left, and was
reduced to the most extreme want, when, failing in accidentally
with Price, he proposed her to join his company; which*,
situated as she was, she readily agreed to do, and had been
with him about a week when she saw Barrington, of whom sho
became so suddenly enamoured.
The symptoms of her affection for him were so obvious,
that, inexperienced as he was then in matters of gallantry or
intrigue, he perceived her passion, was sensible of her merit,,
and returned her love with perfect sincerity. Being of’an age
at which love makes almost every one a rhymer, though not a
poet, he addressed her in several copies of verses, all of them
short, and many of them pretty; as, for instance, the following,
lines, written a little before her death ;
Place me where endless winter reigns.
Where genial gales ne’er bless the plains j.
Beneath those cold inclement skies,
"Where morbid vapours ever rise:
Place me beneath, the burning zone,
Where nothing human e’er was known ,
Still Kgerton’s enchanting tongue.
Her looks, and smites, shail be my song;.
Whether o'er banning sands I go,
Or mountains topi with trackless snow,.
Or where the fam’d Pactolus strays,
And all its fabled wealth displays ;
She will alone my thoughts engage,
And ever shall, from age to age.
A connection of this kind was necessarily attended with »
considerable increase of expense; and the consequence of an
increased expenditure was, that, on the arrival of the strollers,
at Londonderry, Barrington’s whole stock of money wasnearfy
exhausted. Thus disagreeably circumstanced, he applied fos


advice to his friend Price; who did not hesitate to suggest to
him, how easily a young man, of his appearance and address,
might find means to introduce himself into some of the public
places to which the merchants tmd chapmen of thatcommercial
city generally resorted ; and that he there might, without any
great difficulty, find opportunities of picking their pockets,
unnoticed, and of escaping undetected, more especially at
that particular time, when the fair being boiden, a favourable-
juncture offered itself of executing a plan of such a nature
with safely and facility. The idea pleased our adventurer, and
the plan formed oh it was carried into execution by him and
his trusty confidant, John Price, the very next day, with great
success;: at least, such it appeared to them at that lime, their
acquisitions having amounted, on the close of the evening, la
about forty guineas in cash, and above one hundred and fifty
pounds, Irish currency, in bank-notes; which however they
prudently determined not, on any account, to circulate in that
part of the kingdom in which they were obtained. This pre-
caution became peculiarly necessary ; for,, several gentlemen
having been robbed, the town took the alarm, which was the
greater, or at least made the more noise, fr»m the rarity of
such events in that part of the kingdom, where picking of
pockets is said to be very little practised or known ; but, what-
ever the alarm was, or whatever noise it made, neither
Barrington, nor his accomplice were suspected.. They,, however,
resolved to leave Derry, as soon as they could with any
appearance of propriety depart; so that having played a few
nights with more applause than profit, they and their associates
of Ihe sock and buskin removed from Londonderry to Bally-
shannon, in the county of Donnegal, and never more returned
into that part of the kingdom ; where George Barrington may
be considered as having commenced the business of a regular
and professed pickpocket, in the summer of the year 1771,
being then in the sixteenth year of his age.
After travelling about a fortnight, Barrington, with the
strollers whom he accompanied, arrived at Ballyshannon, which
is said to he one of the pleasantest, cheapest, most plentiful, and
most polite country towns in Ireland. Here he, and the com-
pany to which he belonged, spent the autumn and wilder of the
year 1771; playing generally on Tuesdays and Saturdays, and
picking pockets with John Price every day in the week,
whenever opportunity offered : a business which, though attend-
ed with some danger and certain infamy, he found more
lucrative and more entertaining than that of the theatre;
where his fame and his proficiency were by no means equal to
the expectalions he had raised, or to lbs hopes that had been
formed of him on his first appearance at Drogheda. During
the latter part of the year he was attacked by a fever, which
was so violent that his life was for some time despaired of; he
however recovered, though slowly, and the period of his con-
valescence was so long, that the company resolved to leave


him behind, and proceed to other quarters. His favorite.
Miss Eger tun, who attended him during his illness with unremitt-
ing assiduity, resolved to slay with him and share his fate,
whatever it might be; and Price had the spirit to pass the
bank-notes at his own risque, and the generosity to leave his
accomplice seventy guineas on his departure, which was at this
time, after a long and expensive illness, a very seasonable
supply.
On the return of the spring, in the year 1772, his health was
perfectly re established, and he wrote some very pretty lines,
addressed to Hygeia, the goddess who presides over health.
Hygeia ! tlion whose eyes display
Tlietustre of meridian flay ;
Auspicious goddess ! siill impart
Thy vital influence to my heart:
For, ah ! shoutd’st thou withdraw thy aid.
The bloom of all the spring would fade ;
Music in vain its joys inspire,
And discord string the Poet’s lyre;
Fortune, unmark’d, would smile ; and Fame
Unheard, diffuse the fav’rite name ;
Friendship no cordial drop could yield,
Ror Freedom me from anguish shield :
Fv’n Love itself would rule in vain,
And all be gloom, and grief, and pain !
From Ballyshannon, on his recovery, he moved to the
southward with his faithful Miss Egerton, whom he had the
misfortune of losing for ever, in crossing the river Boyne, in
which she was drowned, through the ignorance, or more culpa-
ble negligence, of a ferryman ; thus closing, in the eighteenth
year of her age, a life of woe in a watery tomb!
He was for some time inconsolable for the loss which he had
just sustained; but, being neither of an age nor of a temper
propitious to the continuation of sorrowful sensations, he
hastened to Limerick, where he hoped to meet Price, his old
accomplice. On his arrival in that city, he learned that the
person after whom he enquired had set out for Cork ten days
before, and thither our adventurer followed him ; and there he
found him, within less than an hour after he entered the town-
gates. On their meeting, it was agreed on by them never to
think again of the stage; a resolution which was the more
easily executed, as the company, to which they belonged
originally, was now broken up and dispersed. It was besides
settled between them, that Price should pass for Barrington’s
servant; and that Barrington should act the part of a young
gentleman of large fortune, and of a noble family, who was not
yet quite of age, but, until he should attain that period,
travelled for his amusement. In pursuance of this hopeful
scheme, horses were'purchased, and the master and man were
in every respect properly equipped to act their several parts.
During the summer and autumn of the year 1772, they attend-
ed, in these characters, all the races in the southern counties
of Ireland, where they were uncommonly successful, not only


in obtaining large sums of money by picking pockets, but by
escaping detection, or even suspicion. When the winter set
in, they withdrew, w’ith a booty of near one thousand pounds,
to Cork, where,they designed to take up their head-quarters
until the beginning of the next spring; and here it was that
Barrington first affected to lead the life of a man of lion Ton ,
of a young fellow of fashion ; that is to say, to run the usual
career of amour, intrigue, and debauchery, of gaming, drinking,
and fighting; indispensable requisites in the character of a man
of the Ton in Ireland : in short, to gratify all the suggestions of
vanity, profligacy, and whim. But, amidst all this dissipation,
neither he nor his trusty valet neglected any opportunity that
offered of plundering with security; and they were sometimes,
though not always, successful. It was however at length the
fate of Price to be delected in the very act of picking the pocket
of the Right Hon. H K .towards the conclusion of
that winter ; and for this offence he was taken into custody
immediately, tried in the course of a few days, convicted, and
sentenced to be transported to America for seven years.
Barrington did not remain in Cork, to be an idle and useless
spectator of these proceedings. On the first news of the
apprehension of his servant, he, without hesitation or loss of
time, packed up the most valuable part of his property, took
horse, and made the best of his way to Dublin; taking leave
abruptly of the great commercial capital of the province of
Munster. On his arrival in Dublin, he lived rather in a private
and retired manner, only lurking, in the darkest evenings, about
the play-houses, where he occasionally picked up a few guineas,
or a watch, &c. But he was soon weary of the sameness, and
disgusted with the obscurity, of a life of retirement, such as
that he led in the Irish capital ; so that, when the spring came
on, he went to the races, which usually are at that season of
the year in the comities to the southward of Dublin. It was
however his misfortune, at one of the races in the county of
Carlow, to be seen picking the pocket of Lord B , near
whom he happened ter stand. The stolen property was found
in his possession, and restored immediately to ihe owner of it;
who, being content with its restitution, and on seeing the
discipline of the course inflicted on the pilferer, declined all
prosecution of him ; and thus, through the ill-judged and ill-
timed lenity of this nobleman, did Barrington escape that
punishment in Ireland which awaited him in this country. As
soon as he escaped from the race-ground at Carlow, he took
horse, and immediately set off for Dublin, where he arrived
time enough that evening to dispose of all his useless property,
and to make all the necessary arrangements previous to his
departure from Ireland, being resolutely bent on a journey to
London. Two days after, he embarked on board Ihe Dorset
yacht, which was then on Ihe point of sailing, with the Duke of
Leinster, for Parkgate; and, before the expiration of the week,
Ire found himself on English ground.


The summer of the year 1773 may he considered as the era
ol his arrival in England, he being about eighleen years of age,
and in the third year of his infamous profession of a common
pickpocket.
There were at this time three persons who bad, like Bar-
rington, taken their passage to England with Sir Alexander
Schomberg, who then commanded the Dorset yacht; and the
acquaintance which ouradventurerformed with them, in conse-
quence of this accidental meeting,contributed considerably to Use
long series of success with which he carried on his depredations
in this country. Of these persons Captain H——n was the
the most distinguished, and the most immediately, though the
most innocently, conducive to the fortunate execution of the
pickpocket’s projects.
This young gentleman was descended from one of the most
ancient, most illustrious, and most noble families in the British
empire: he served in the army, and possessed a fortune equal
to his rank and birth. He was of an amiable character;
generous, open, polite, benevolent, and accomplished ; perfectly
well bred, and better acquainted with books than men of his
age, rank, and profession, generally are; but, unfortunate-
ly for himself, entirely ignorant of the gross ways of the world,
of the artifices of designing men, and the various stratagems ml
intriguing women. Thus inexperienced and unsuspecting, he
became an easy dupe to the deep-laid schemes of the infamous
adventurers, with whom it was sometimes his ill fate to become
acquainted.
It did not require so much sagacity and penetration as Bar-
rington at that time certainly possessed to see dearly into we
character of Mr. H n, ami to predict the good consequen-
ces that might follow an intimacy with a young man of his
rank, disposition, and family. Actuated by a sense of the
utility of such a connection, he employed all those arts that
flattery and insinuation, of which he had been long a perfect
master, to ingratiate himself with this gentleman; and in this
design he succeeded to the utmost extent of his w ishes. Young
Mr. H u was captivated by his easy address and engage-
sng manners, so that, before they had been three days together,
that unsuspecting youth reposed unlimited confidence in him ;
and, with the indiscretion or impetuosity usually characteristic
of his time of life, reckoned him among the number of his
fastest and most valuable friends. In order to confirm these
sentiments of confidence and friendship, which were so
imprudently conceived or so hastily adopted, Barrington
formed an artful tale, which he told as his own story; the
purport of which .was, that his father was a man of a family
noble in Ireland, and illustrious in England, to which country
he himself now came to study law, in one of the inns of court;
more, how ever, to avoid the ill-natured severity of a hf.rsh
unrelenting step-mother, which rendered his paternal mansion
in a great measure intolerable to him, than from a»j' we-


dileciion for the profession in which he intended to apply him-
self i hut the exercise of which, the ample fortune that he was
heir to would render unnecessary.
This story took as well as could be desired by the inventor of
it; and it was settled between him and his new friend, that he
should, on his arrival in town, enter himself of the Middle
Temple, where Mr. H n had some relations and a numerous
acquaintance, to whom, he said, he should be happy to intro-
duce a gentleman so eminently distinguished by his talents and
his accomplishments, as well as by his fortune and birth, as
Mr. Barrington was. Such were the handsome terms in which
he expressed himself to this professed pilferer, and so great were
the prepossessions in his favour I
It was also farther agreed on between them, that they should
travel together to London, and they accordingly the next day
took a post-chaise at Parkgate; and continuing their journey
by easy stages through Chester, Namptwich, and Coventry,
where (hey stopl two or three days, they arrived by the end of
the week, at the Bath coffee-house, in Piccadilly, which, on the
recommendation of Mr. H—— u, who had been several
limes before in the metropolis, was fixed upon as their head-
quarters.
As to the other two persons who came over with them in
the yacht, and of whom there will he ample occasion to speak
at large in the sequel of these memoirs, they travelled more
humbly, hut more expeditiously and more frugally, than Mr.
E n and Barrington; for, ou the third day after their
departure from the place at which they landed from Ireland,
they arrived at the Golden-Cross, at Charing-Cross, with the
Chester stage-coach, at a very moderate expense.
Though Barrington, on his leaving Dublin, made a very
genteel appearance for a traveller or a Country gentleman,
yet it was indispensably necessary to expend a considerable sum,
in order to enable him to appear in a manner suited to the
character which be had assumed in such a capita! as London ;
for having represented himself as a young man of family and
fortune, he must, to he consistent, dress and live like one of
rank and fashion. Of this he was perfectly sensible; and he
spared no expense to procure all the various articles which are
held forth as essential in the composition of a genteel well-
dressed man. In conversation, however, he artfully spoke of
objects of this nature with great indifference or contempt,
affectedly holding forth the superior excellence of an enlarged
and cultivated understanding; probably because such language
flattered his vanity, fondly imagining that he was drawing his
own character and exciting the admiration of his hearers, who,
as is generally the case, were ready enough to approve of his
opinion on this head.
Bnt, however this may be, the expensive mannerin which ha
lived with Mr. H —-—n, and those to whose acquaintance
that gentleman introduced him, all of them gay, sprightly


young fellows, who had money at command, in less than a
month reduced the funds, which Barrington had brought wiih
him, to about twenty guineas; which seemed to afford him a
very inconsiderable resource. He therefore resolutely deter-
mined to procure a supply of money by some means or other.
One evening, while he was deliberating with himself on the
choice of experiments to recruit his finances, he was interrupt-
ed in his meditations on the subject by the arrival of Mr.
H n and a party of his friends, who proposed to him to
accompany them to Hanelagh. Their proposal was, without
much hesitation, acceded to by Barrington ; and they, without
farther loss of time, ordered coaches to set them down at that
celebrated place of amusement.
This being the first time of his visiting it, everything he saw
about it was new to him, but the mortifying reflection of the
poverty upon which he so closely verged, at this time,
banished all those pleasing sensations which novelty, splen-
dor, music, and gay company, usually excited in unembar-
rassed minds. Nothing that he heard, or that he beheld, was
capable of taking him off from the thoughts of his present
situation. Walking about in this serious mood, of which the
melancholy was heightened by the gay scenes that surrounded
him, he chanced to espy the two companions of his voyage in the
Dorset yacht, to whom he only made a slight bow of recog-
nition ; and. in less than a quarter of an hour afterwards, he
saw the Duke of Leinster engaged deeply in conversation
with two ladies, and a Knight of the Bath, who it afterwards
turned out was Sir W D ——; and near these he placed
himself, quitting, for a short time, the company to which he
belonged.
While he was thus stationed, an opportunity, which he con-
sidered a fair one, offered itself of making a good booty ; and
he availed himself of it. He picked the Duke’s pocket of
above eighty pounds. Sir W ’s of five and thirty guineas,
one of the ladies of her watch; with all which he got off
undiscovered, and joined Mr. H n, and his party, as if
nothing had happened out of the ordinary and common course
of things in such places as Raneiagh.
Though it may be reasonably presumed that Barrington,
after so many years practice, and so long experience in the
infamous calling which he exercised, performed his part of this
business with much dexterity and skill; yet it was not done
with such a degree of privacy and art as to elude the observa-
tion of one of the persons who came with him, in the Dorset,
from Ireland to Parkgate. This man, who was an adept him-
self, took a convenient .opportunity, in the course of the
evening, of letting him know that he was a witness of his con-
duct; and that, unless terms were made with him, and share of
the spoil given to him, he determined to communicate his
knowledge of the transaction to the persons who had been
robbed of their properly. The language which he held wa*


yery authoritative, and his manner was 100 commanding and
decisive to be resisted; so that Barrington, yielding to the
necessity of the case, consented to what was asked of him, and,
under pretence of sudden indisposition, he returned with his new
associate to town; and there, at the Golden-Cross Inn, at Charing-
Cross, the booty acquired at Ranelagh was fairly, though not
equally divided; the new intruder contenting himself with taking
the hdy’s watch, chain,&c. which were of gold, and a ten pound
bank note; leaving ail the rest of the money and bank paper
with him who had originally taken it.
But, in order to cement the connection which these two
were now on the point of forming, Mr. James (for by that
feigned name this new accomplice is to be henceforth called)
insisted upon Barrington’s supping with him; and, while the
supper was preparing, be related to him the outlines of his
story; which, though not immediately connected with the
subject of these memoirs, it may not be improper to repeat in
this place, and which was to the following purport.
He said that his real name was William S r, and that he
was born in the county of Norfolk, where his father possessed,
an estate of about three hundred pounds a year. This estate,
and the mansion of it, were situated in the neighbourhood of a
nobleman of great influence in parliament, and of a considera-
ble weight in the cabinet. The heir of his family and young
S r were nearly of the same age, and for some time were
school-fellows. These circumstances produced an intimacy
between them; and in the progress of it he, who was now a
common thief, had made considerable advances in the favor
and esteem of the young nobleman, who, when hewas sent upon
his travels, solicited him to accompany him. The father and
friends of S r, thinking that the patronage of a minister of
slate might contribute much more to his promotion than the
utmost diligence that they could use in pursuit of it, consented
to the request; and, accordingly, he went abroad with the
young Lord H——, who, on their way home, after sis years
absence, was attacked by a fever, which, in less than ten days,
put a period to his life. This unfortunate event was soon after
followed by one still more fdal. The nobleman, on whom aN
his hopes depended, was removed from office, and deprived of
all his employments. But a piece of intelligence, which he
received on his arrival in England, was worse, and rendered his
situation more calamitous than all the former crosses and
disappointments of his life. This was, that his father’s affairs
were, through extravagance and ill-management, so embroiled,
that, when the debts due by him were discharged, there was
scarcely a sufficiency left to maintain him. All thesedistressino-
circumstances were considerably aggravated by the conduct
which the nobleman, who was in honor bound to patronize
him, held towards him on this melancholy and unforeseen
reverse of fortune. This thorough paced courtier refused to
see him, denied most of the promises that he bad made to him,


and left him, in solitude and in the most extreme indigence, to
curse his folly, and to repent of his credulity.
This unbecoming treatment at first overwhelmed him with
affliction and despair. These, however, in a little time subsided,
and made way for the active sentiments of indignation and
resentment; and, abandoning his native country for ever, he
came to London, with what little property he had left, literally,
as he expresses it, to seek his fortune. For this purpose, he
unhappily had recourse to the gaming-table, at which, in less
than a week, he was completely ruined. The transition from
the dice-box to the road is frequent enough, and by no means
unnatural. Plundered by sharpers at hazard in Leicester-fields,
he resolved to recruit his finances on Finchley-common and
Hounslow-heafh. In short, he went upon the highway, and
robbed for some time with tolerable success aud without
meeting any disagreeable accident, until attempting, in com-
pany wi!h anolher person on Englefield green, he was shot
through the body, and narrowly escaped falling into the
hands of the officers of justice. In this instance, however,
he was more fortunate that his ill fated accomplice, who was
taken, and soon after executed on Kenninglon-common.
g r was a | o ng time confined to his room in consequence
of the wound he received; and, during the period of his con-
valescence, he made many serious reflections on his conduct.,
Sentiments of penitence and remorse seemed to be awakened in
him. In short, he determined, in case Providence ever should
restore him to health, to employ his life entirely in making
some atonement for his former dissolute conduct. With this
laudable resolution, he, on his recovery, returned to town from
W yrardsbnry, in Buckinghamshire-, where, during his illness,
he resided at the house of a relation.
Having received a liberal education, being master of two or
th ree modern languages, and not unacquainted with the world,
he did not doubt of being able to procure some employment in
so vast a capital as London, whereby he might he enabled to
support himself honestly. But his hopes on this head, however
sanguine, were grievously disappointed; for, with all the
exertions he could make, the want of character, of friends to
recommend him, or of acquaintance to refer to, always prevent-
ed him from succeeding in any one of the many and repeated
applications that lie made to get a place of any kind, by which
he might earn his bread honestly. He endeavored to be
tutor in a private family, to be an usher to a school, to be
writer for a newspaper, to be translator for a bookseller, to be
interpreter for foreign sea-captains, to be clerk at a coal-wharf,
waittr at a tavern, or porter at an inn ; but all to no purpose.
He endeavoured to be even a recruiting corporal for the East-
lodla Company; but without success. He tried every line, and
every line failed him: he knocked at every door, and every
door was shut against him. Much lime was spent by him, irt
tows attempting to get employment; and, what was worse, all


hk money was spent too. Whatever he bad of any value was
pawned ; and, at last, be was forced to sell the very clothes ho
wore, in order to procure bread to eat. But still, though half
famished, and half naked, though rambling in the brick-fields
by day, and sleeping under a hedge, or in the ashes of a glass-
house by night, he persevered in his resolution of living upright-
ly, without ever entertaining a thought of returning to his
former evil courses. This life he led, and in this temper he
continued for above a week, when a inethodist put it into his
head to reason about God and Providence, and the physical
order of the universe and the moral world. While he was
meditating on this subject, in doubt, and, fear, and uncertainty,
he was accosted by one Wheeler, a sharper, (since executed at
York fur robbery), whom he had known at one of those houses
in the neighbourhood of Coveut-Garden, to which men of such
a description usually resorted at that time, and where he him-
self, while in the praclice of robbing on the highway, generally
spent his evenings. This man, though a professed cheat ai.tl
thief, was nut destitute of feeling or generosity: such vulues
as these show themselves iu persons of his s'lirp : and he was
struck with astonishment and compassion at.seeiug, iu such a
wretched, plight, a matt whom he had known some tune before
make a genteel figure. However, without debating much
on the matter, he shook him by the hand, look him home to
dinner with him, relieved iiis most pressing distresses by a
seasonable supply of clothes, and a little money, and engaged
him to return to him the next day, when, he said, that some-
thing more should be done.
S raid not fail to attend the appointment, penetrated
with a deep sense of gratitude for the kindness sho.m,
and the favours conferred on him by his old acquaintance! and
he was punctually, by the fixed hour, at Wheeler's apartments
in Duke s:reel, Westminster, where he again dined. After
dinner was over, his friendly host, without ceremony or pre*
face, told him, that he had a proposal to make, which,
if accepted, would turn out of great and certain advantage to
both parties. The proposal was, to dress himself completely as
a clergyman, with a gown, scaif, band, &c. ail which he,
Wheeler, would provide for him, with whatever else should be
necessary !o enable him to go into polite company. Thatf,
being a remarkable good figure, used to the world, conversant
in foreign languages, and master of an elegant address, he
should, dressed iu the manner proposed, goto court on the
King’s birth day, which would he iu the course of the week,
and there endeavour to get at the purses, pocket books, or
watches, of some of the company ; which he might, on (hat
day, iu that place, appearing as he would, effectually do with
security and ease.
The proposal startled, but did not displease, S r. The
scheme seemed plausible enough. Friendship invited, and want
urged him ou; so that he agreed to do whot Wheeler propos-


ed, and to commence pickpocket in form at St. James’s, the
next public day. Every thing being got ready for the purpose,
he repaired thither in the character of a dignitary of the
church, on the fourth of June, and was so bold, so adroit, or
so successful, in the exercise of his new profession, that he retired
in the evening to Wheeler’s, in Westminster, with money,
watches, jewels, pocket-books, and their contents, &c. to the
amount of upwards of four hundred pounds.
This extraordinary success, and the apparent security with
which the business he entered upon might be transacted, gave
him a relish for his new profession, and made him eager for
plunder. Jnd as for his scruples, if he still retained any, Mr.
Wheeler’s arguments, the pleasures of the town, and the sight
of his share of the booty, effectually quelled them. During the
remainder of that summer, and the whole of the ensuing
autumn, he visited Tunbridge, Buxton, Weymouth, Bright-
helrnstone, and some other bathing or walering places, always
in the exercise of his newly-adopted calling, and still successful,
being hitherto neither delected nor even suspected; so that he
returned to London, in the beginning of the winter, with near
five hundred pounds, which he had remaining, after living in a
very elegant and expensive style the preceding season.
On his arrival in town, he laid aside the garb and appearance
of a parson ; and appeared in the uniform of an officer of the
army. Dressed in regimentals, he frequented the play-houses,
the opera, and other polite places of public amusement ; and
continued to pick pockets without detection, until he fell in, at
Covent-Garden play-house, with Monsieur Francois, then
secretary to the French embassy at the Court of London.
This gentleman caught him in the very fact of picking his
pocket, in the lobby of that theatre; and he was immediately
given in charge to a constable, who took him int© a'peighbour-
ing public-house, preparatory to his taking hint to the watch-
house, it being then at 100 unseasonable an hour to take him
before a magistrate. Having a considerable sum of money
about him, he found means, with a very small part of it, to
bribe his keeper, who suffered him, for twenty guineas, to
escape. Immediately, on recovering his liberty, he set out
for France, with all the money he could command ; and,
having rambled about that kingdom for two years, he went into
Spain, where he remained some time, and thence he sailed to
Cork, in Ireland. In that kingdom he remained but a few
months! for, four years having elapsed since his detection
by the French secretary, and no proceedings being carried on
against him during his absence, he determined to return to
London, in perfect confidence of safety. Monsieur Francois
having long before left England, and retired into bis own
country ; and the whole transaction, which occasioned the pre-
cipitate flight of the pickpocket, having been, in all probability,
long since totally forgotten.


Such were the outlines of Mr. James's variegated story,
which Barrington heard with no small degree of pleasure.
Nor was it without good reason that he heard the narrative of
S r, now known by the name of James, his new acquaint-
ance, with a good degree of satisfaction ; for, being himself
entirely ignorant of the town, he was sensible that the
acquaintance of a man, who had so perfect a knowledge of it
as James possessed, could not but be extremely useful to him
iu the Hue of life which he pursued ; as without some such con-
nexion it would he difficult for him to dispose, with any safely,
of such articles of value as might fa!! in his way in the course
of his predatory excursions. So true it is, that, without
receivers of stolen goads, the depredations of thieves must be,
in a great measure, confined to cash, aud, consequently, be
inconsiderable.
Barrington therefore proposed to him, that they should
enter into a kind of partnership, and carry on the business of
picking pockets as a joint concern ; a proposal to which James
affected to scruple agreeing, as inconsistent with the tenderness
of his conscience. His conscience, however, was soon made
easy, by his friend’s jocularly reminding him of Captain
Rolando’s observations to Gil Bias, that all men are desirous to
appropriate to themselves their neighbour’s property. Sove-
reigns seize on the territories of neighbouring princes, whenever
they think doing so suits their purposes, without scruple or
remorse; people of fashion run iu debt and never pay their
creditors; bankers and brokers are seldom restrained by con-
science, in the interest they take, or the charges which they
make; merchants, and traders of all kinds, are not more
scrupulous in the profits which they exact of their unwary
Customers; and, as for lawyers of every denomination, their
boundless rapacity is proverbial. The mode then of appro-
priating the property to one’s self, and not the act of doing so,
is the sole difference, between the most noted pickpocket and
the most powerful prince, or the most opulent merchant. Such
was the argument of this crafty adventurer, who persuaded
James to accede to the terms which he proposed, of carrying
on business together, notwithstanding the delicacy of his con-
science; so that, the preliminaries being thus settled, it was
agreed upon, that they should meet the next day at the Crown
and Anchor Tavern, in the Strand ; and there, after they had
dined, finally settle the definitive articles of the treaty, and
also, the plan of their future operations Matters being left in
this state, the meeting broke up, and Barrington returned by
midnight to his lodgings at the Bath Coffee-house, where,
luckily enough, neither Captain H——n nor any of his party
happened yet to have arfived*frora Rare'agh.
The next morning, at breakfast, he informed bis friend Air.
H n, that, on his return last night, he chanced to meet a
very worthy relation of his, Sir Fitzwilliam Barrington, who
engaged him to dipe with him that day, so that it" would he


out of bis power to make one of the party that were to spend
the day at the Thatched house Tavern; but that, however, he
would endeavour to join them early in the evening, and stay to
supper with them, if they were bent upon keeping it up to a
late hour.
Barrington dressed, called a coach, and drove to the Crown
and Anchor Tavern, where he found Mr. James, who had been
for some time waiting. Dinner being dispatched, and
the servants withdrawn, these worthy gentlemen entered on the
business. And here it was agreed upon between them, that
whatever either of them acquired should be equally divided ;
and that, on the sale of waicbes, jewels, or any other arlicles
that they might have to dispose of, they should be both
present. Thus no suspicion of fraud could be entertained;
and thus Barrington got what he greatly wanted, an intro-
duction to a receiver of stolen goods. It was farther settled
by them, that while Mr. H n remained in town, they
should take care not to be seen publicly together, and that Mr.
James should resume his long-neglected character of clergyman.
These and other weighty points being adjusted to the satisfac-
tion of the parties, it was determined, that they should meet
regularly on Tuesdays and Fridays, to settle with each other ;
but never to meet twice at the same house. Having then
adjourned to the next Tuesday, and fixed on the Devi! Tavern,
at Temple bar, our adventurers separated, Barrington going to
the Thatched-house Tavern. There he arrived about eight in
the evening and found his friend, Mr. H u, and a large
party of his acquaintance, rather far gone in liquor. Most of
them knew him personally, and considering him in the light in
which he was represented to them by Captain H n, as a
young man of condition, they were delighted w ith his company.
And, indeed, the fact is, that at that period of his life, when his
character in this country was unsullied and unsuspected, the
engaging urbanity of his manners, the politeness of his address,
and the genteel style of his conversation, rendered his company
acceptable whereever he was introduced.
His presence pleased the company, who were a good deal
heated by wine; and who, when- in their soberest moments,
were more distinguished for spirit and generosity than for
prudence or discretion. A man of his temper and sagacity did
not neglect to avail himself of the advantages which their
intoxication presented; and he accordingly plundered those of
them without any scruple, but not before the reckoning was
called for and the bill discharged. This done, he and his
friend Mr. H n withdrew, and returned home to their
lodging in Piccadilly, uo one entertaining any suspicion of the
honour of Mr. Barrington, or of the depredations comlhitted
by him that night.
The booty taken by him on this occasion was great; but, as
the spoil consisted more of watches, and other trinkets, than of
cash, he was obliged to have recourse to bis accomplice Mr.


James to turn it into specie. He, therefore, early the next
morning, called upon that profligate adventurer, who introduc-
ed him to a man, by whose means the stolen articles were
quickly disposed of, for what appeared to be an equitable
price; and the money arising from the sale of them was,
according to agreement, equally divided.
A minute detail < f the mean artifices or hase exploits of a
professed pickpocket, can afford very little instruction or
entertainment to a libera! nr enlightened mind, it w ill, there-
fore, on this head, be sufficient to observe, that as Barrington
advanced in years, he continued the exercise of his scandalous
profession, and improved in the practice of it, but he, at the
same lime, advanced in reputation; for he continued to
cultivate his mind, cad that with a degree of assiduity unex-
ampled in one of his calling. He was remarkable for retaining
very faithfully w hat he collected with great ease. One practice
he ever had, which was easily observed. If any thought, or
image, presented itself to his mind, that he could use or improve,
he did not suffer it to be lost; but, amidst the jollity of a
tavern, or in the warmth of an interesting conversation, he very
diligently committed it to paper. This quality, among other
social and amiable qualities, which he possessed, at that
time, in an eminent degree, rendered him a kind of popular
character.
in the course of his depredations he, in the summer of the
year 1775, visited the watering places; and, among the rest, he
went to Brighton, which at that time, though frequented by
very genteel company, was far from having arrived at the
celebrity which it has since acquired. However, he here
became acquainted, and intimate with the late Duke of
Ancasler, Lord Ferrers, and Thomas Lord Lyltleton, with
several others of the connexions of these noble persons; who
all considered him as a man of genius and ability, (which he
was,) and as a gentleman of fortune, and noble family,
(which he as Certainly was not.)
But, however this may be, from Brighlhclmstone he made an
excursion to Chichester, in company with Lord L and Sir
Alexander Leith, who lived at that time in the county of
Sussex, While he resided in that city, he was shown the
curiosities of the cathedral, in themselves certainly insignificant
and uninteresting enough. Among them was pointed out to
him a family-vault, for the interment of the Dukes of Rich-
mond, which was erected some years before, by the iate Duke,
and inscribed:
“ Domus ultima.”
On this the following epigram is said to have been written by
him, which being not destitute of merit, in that agreeable
species of composition, is here given.
Did he, who thns inscrib’d Ibis wnlfj
Not read, or not btUeve, St. Raul f


Who says, “ There is, where-e’er it stands,
k ‘ Another house, not made with hands
Or, shah we gather, from these words,
'That house is not a house of Lords?
On his return to London, in the beginning of the winter of
the year 1175, his way of life, and the nature of his pursuits,
naturally connected him wiih the gay and the dissolute, the
thoughtless and the licentious. He affected all the airs of a
young fellow of fashion, and all the extravagances of a profess-
ed man of pleasure. He divided his time between the pursuit
of fashionable amusements and the infamous occupation of
picking pockets. But these two objects did not entirely occupy
bis time or his attention. The seasons of plundering and of
dissipation were succeeded by intervals of retirement and study.
In these, whicb sometimes lasted for several weeks, he shut
himself up, and devoted himself to the study of the best writers
in the English language, the only one with which he was
acquainted ; and he had, in an eminent degree, this peculiarity,
that, when he was the maa of the world, the sprightly wit, the
agreeable companion, be had not entirely lost sight of books
and literature. In these moments of leisure and reflection
he composed an ode to Light, not, indeed, regular in its con-
struction, nor of an artificial texture ; but certainly not void
of merit, and indicative of no small degree of genius.
In the course of this wilder he happened accidentally to fail
in with one Lowe, a very singular and extraordinary character,
with whom he formed an intimate connexion; employing him
in the Bsefu! capacity of a receiver of stolen goods, which he
had frequent occasions to dispose of. This Lowe had been
originally a livery-servant, but afterwards kept a public-house,
in which be scraped up some money; he then commenced
usurer, and, by ihat vile business, acquired a small fortune,
and assumed the character of a gentleman, die afterwards
took a genteel house in the neighbourhood of Bloomsbury-
square, where be resided to the time of his death. He
was, for one whose mind was entirely uncultivated, a man
of uncommon address. He. in general, passed for a very
charitable and benevolent character, having performed many
acts of beneficence through motives of policy or ostentation;
and he was a subscriber to most of the’ public charities, in or
about town, in order to give the world a high opinion of his
exemplary virtues and generous feelings. By arts of this kind,
be found means to get himself appointed to the station of
treasurer, or chief conductor, of a new hospital, for the recep-
tion of blind patidnts, at Kentish-town ; in which capacity, it is
said, that he got into the possession ol upwards of five Ihousand
pounds. But, having been suspected of setting fire to that
building, be was apprehended at Liverpool, in the year 1779 ;
and to avoid the punishment due to the enormity of his offence,
he poisoned himself, and lies buried in a cross-road it) the
neighbourhood of Prescot, in Lancashire.


This connexion with Lowe rendered that with Mr. James, in
a great measure, unnecessary; and Barrington was the more
willing to break wilh him, as some recent and unpleasant
altercations had taken place between them : the truth is, that
James, though engaged in a most disgraceful course of life,
possessed learning and abilities, and was not entirely destitute
of a sense of honor, or of a regard to moral obligation. But
Barrington, who had at all times the very highest opinion of his:
own merit, used to treat him wilh unbecoming freedom 5
and, on some occasions, with indecent insolence. In short,
though he had great merit, he had also many great failings, if
considered as a social companion ; and the entire dissolution of
his connexion with the subject ot these memoirs was ultimately
beneficial to James; for, at this time, he (Janies) lived in a
monastery in Westphalia, to which he some years ago retired,
in an enviable stale of peace and penitence, respected for his
talents, and loved for his amiable manners,by which he was dis-
tinguished in an eminent degree. To him (he editor ot these
memoirs is indebted, for the power of communicating the
minute memorials of the life of George Barrington to the
public; and to his conversation he isindehied for the knowledge
of the story of that singular and extraordinary adventurer.
Barrington, on his forming a connexion with Lowe, advanced
wilh new audacity in the exercise of his practices as a pick-
pocket. His reputation for genius and literature supported
him in the opinion of his acquaintance, and their good opinion
of him considerably facilitated the success of his depredations ;
for, by their countenance and introduction, he got access to the
company of young men of affluence, whose unguarded and
unsuspected character offered to him an ample field to plunder
wilh impunity. The boldness, the indecency, and the licenti-
ousness of his behaviour, on some occasions, drew on him the
censure of some of the most respectable of his friends. How-
ever, his failings were readily pardoned and overlooked ; for, it
is well known, that much will be forgiven to a man in his youth,
who has the appearance of birth and fortune.
This connexion wilh Lowe was but a short time previous to
that evening of the month of January, which is observed as the
anniversary of the Queen’s birth-day ; and it was resolved on
between them, that, habited as a clergyman, he should repair to
court, and there endeavour, not only to pick the pockets of
some of the company, but, what was a much holder and
more novel attempt, to cut off the diamond orders of some of
the Knights of the Garter, Bath, and Thistle, who, on such
days, usually wear the collars of their respective orders. In
this enterprise he succeeded beyond their most sanguine
expectations; for he found means to take the diamond order
of Lord C , wilh which he got away from St. James’s
perfectly unsuspected.
This valuable acquisition, by the assistance and agency of
Lowe, he disposed of for eight hundred pounds to one Lur-


shat), a Dutchman, who usually made a trip from Haerlem to
England, once a year, for the express purpose of purchasing
jewels that had been fraudulently or feloniously obtained, and
for which he gave what the sharpers, or thieves, with whom he
dealt, considered an equitable price ; at least, much more than
the London receivers were inclined to give.
In the course of the winter of the year ITTS, Prince Orlow,
a Russian nobleman of the first rank and consequence, visited
.England. The splendor in which he lived, and the high favor
in which he stood at the court of Russia, were frequently
noticed in the public prints ; and particularly his possessing a
gold snuff-box, set with brilliants, which was presented to
him by the Empress, and was generally valued at the
enormous sum of thirty thousand pounds. This precious
trinket excited, in an extraordinary manner, the attention of
Barrington, and he determined to exert himself in order to get
it into his possession. For (his, a favorable opportunity pre-
sented itself one night at Covent-garden play-house; and this
experienced pick-pocket did not neglect to avail himself of it.
He contrived to be near the prince, and found means to convey
the treasure from his excellency’s waistcoat- pocket, in which,
according to the Russian custom, it was usually carried, into
his own.
This operation was not, however, performed in such a man-
ner as to escape instant detection, for the prince fell (he
attack, and having reason to entertain some suspicion of
Barrington, he immediately seized him by the collar. Such an
action, in a public theatre, naturally occasioned some bustle as
well as surprise; and, during the confusion that ensued, he
slipped the box info the nobleman’s hand, who was, doubtless,
glad to have recovered it with so much facility, The thief
was however secured, and committed to Tothill fields bride-
well, for examination on the following day at Bow-street.
At the time appointed be was brought before Sir John
Fielding, and examined, not only on the offence for which he
was taken into custody, but also relative to his family, bis pro-
fession, and his connexions. On this occasion he represented
himself as a native of Ireland, where his family, he said, were
affluent and respectable ; that he was educated in the medical
line; and that he came to London, to improve himself in the
knowledge of it: all these cii’cumslances he represented with
becoming modesty, and with many tears, neither absolutely
denying the crime with which he was charged at the play-house,
nor formally avowing his guilt; so that, after all, the prince
declining to proceed against him, and no prosecutor appearing,
he was dismissed, after receiving a proper reprimand from the
magistrate.
An accident of such a nature as this was could not remain
long a secret in such a place as London ; an account of it was
soon circulated, and Barrington, now held up to view in the
most disgraceful light of an impostor, (even from his own


account of himself at Bow-street, where he passed for a
surgeon,) was forsaken by the greatest part of those who, until
then, countenanced him, and delighted in his company.
There were, however, some few who still respected his
talents, and who, while they contemplated in him the sprightly
wit and the agreeable companion. Were contented to forget the
pickpocket, or, at least, were inclined to believe him innocent
of the offences with which he was so publicly charged. But
even of these he lost, in a little time, their countenance and
support, in consequence of an act of indiscretion, not immedi-
ately connected with the habits of depredation, in which he
was by this lime irrevocably confirmed by a long course of
successful practice.
In his pursuits as a pickpocket, he, as has been already
mentioned, visited all the genteel places of resort, and, among
the rest, he occasionally attended at both Houses of Parliament,
where he is said to have acquired considerable sums. Some
weeks aftar his ignominious affair at Covent-garden, he west
down to the House of Peers, where an appeal of an interesting
nature was, on that day, to be heard and determined. As
public curiosiiy was a good deal excited by this case, a great
number of people attended to hear the event of the decision of
it. Among these there was one Mr, G , who knew our
.adventurer. This gentleman immediately informed Mr.
Quarme, the deputy gentleman-usher of the black-rod, that
the person who bad been so lalely.detected in the act of picking
the pocket of Prince Orlow, was then in the lobby of the House,
probably for the purpose *f renewing his depredations. On
■this information being communicated to the deputy black-rod,
Barrington was sought after, and turned out by the officers,
who informed him of the cause of their conduct towards him,
and of the name of their informant against him.
This disagreeable incident filled him with inexpressible rage
and indignation, particularly against Mr. G ; and he, with
great indiscretion, vowed in public to revenge it. Intelligence
of the resolution, and of the menaces which dictated it, being
conveyed to Mr. G , he made application to a magistrate,
who granted a warrant to take the pickpocket into custody,
and to bind him over to keep the peace. In consequence of
this warrant he was taken up, and, for want of proper
sureties, committed to his former apartments in Tothill-fields
Bridewell, where he remained for a considerable time confined,
from his inability to procure the bail that was required.
During his imprisonment the whole of his story was industrious-
ly circulated, probably not without some aggravation ; so that,
on his procuring his enlargement, his character was completely
blasted. The entry to all decent company was now absolutely
shut against him ; and he was set down as a professed impostor
and a common pickpocket.
From this time forward, he was obliged to descend to all the
mean practices and arts of a common and professed pilferer.


But, even in the humble line of infamous depredation, in which
he was thus reduced to move, he was, in less than three months,
discovered ; and having been detected in the fact of stealing a
silver watch, of inconsiderable value, from a woman of low
condition, at Drury-laue playhouse, he was indicted; and,
having been tried at the Old-bailey, he was there convicted,
and sentenced to bard labour, on the river Thames, for the
terra of three years.
In consequence of this sentence, he was, early in the year
1777, removed From Newgate to Woolwich, where he was put
on board one of the hulks. In this receptacle of wretchedness
and vice, he found himself exposed to such complicated misery
as he bad never before known, and to such fatal diseases as he
had never before felt. He was fatigued with hard labour, and
harassed with all the evils of indigence, confinement, and
obloquy ; yel he bore up against all the weight of woe, under
which he laboured, with a degree of patience, resignation, and
•unstancy, worthy of a better cause than that in which he
suffered. Fortune at length declared in his favor, and freedom
became the rccompence of his exemplary conduct during the
period of his captivity ; for, on the recommendation of Messrs.
Erskine and Dunoan Campbell, the superintendants or gover-
nors of the convicts, a pardon was granted to him ; and, after
somewhat less than a twslvemonlh’s severe sufferings on the
Thames, he was set at large.
It may well be supposed, that his residence in the neighbour-
hood of Woolwich, or the conversation of the unhappy
criminals with whom he was obliged to associate during his
captivity there, did not contribute to reform his morals or to
establish his character for integrity, The fact is, that, as soon
as he procured his liberty, he returned to London, and reverted
with increased industry to the practice of the crimes for which
he bad been so recently punished. But he was, by this time,
too much noted by the town to be allowed to proceed long,
with impunity, in the infamous career which he had chosen
to run. in less than half a year after his enlargement from
the hulks he was again detected, by the vigilance of one
Payne, at that time a very active peace-officer in the city, in
the fact of picking pockets in St. Sepulchre’s church, during
the time of the celebration of divine service before the
Humane Society ; and, having been convicted of this offence at
the Old bailey, he was a second time sentenced to hard
labour on the Thames, and that for the terra of five years.
Upon his trial, on this occasion, it was that he appeared to
have first distinguished himself as a public speaker. He
endeavoured, with much art, but without any success, to work,
upon the feelings of the court and jury; but the proofs against
him were so clear, that he was found guilty; and, pursuant to
his sentence, he was removed once more to the hulks at Wool-
wich, about the middle of the year 1773.


When he was this second time put on board one of those
prison-ships, he cither found his sufferings more intolerable, o t
his situation to be more desperate, than they appeared to him
on his first confinement; a circumstance which is said to have
made him engage in a variety of schemes to effect an escape,
all which plans the vigilance of his keepers rendered abortive.
The repeated disappointments experienced by him, in these
efforts to gain his liberty, affected his spirits to such a degree,
that he determined upon suicide; and, in consequence of this
impious resolution, he stabbed himself with a penknife. The
wound, though deep and dangerous, didnot prove mortal; and,
medical assistance being called in, a cure was effected. It was
however, effected very slowly, and the wound, having been
given in the breast, seemed, in its effects, after near two yeans
continuance, to bring on a consumption, and there seemed to
be no other prospect before him but that of a lingering and a
miserable death.
While he remained in this deplorable situation, H happened,
fortunately for him, that Sir M L —-—, a gentleman of
rank and consequence, happened to visit the hulks, and to
enquire into the state of the convicts. This gentleman, who
was of the most benevolent character, and possessed of the most
feeling heart, was led by curiosity to converse with Barrington;
and his emaciated and squalid appearance so moved him with
compassion, that he applied for a remission of the remaining
part of his sentence ; which was granted, on condition of hist
immediately leaving England on his enlargement, and never
more returning to it; and, in order to enable him to fulfil his
promise, a sum of money was given to him to defray the ex-
pense of his journey to Ireland, bis native country.
On his obtaining his freedom, he returned to London; where,
however, he bad the prudent precaution of staying no longer
than he conceived to be absolutely necessary to procure such a
sufficiency of money or valuables as might enable him to appear
at Dublin in the character of a gentleman. By an extraordinary
piece of good fortune, he was enabled, by a booty of near a
hundred pounds, in cash, bank-notes, and watches, which he got
in the course of the week after his arrival from Woolwich, to
effect this; which was no sooner completed, than he took a
place in the Chester stage-coach, and, in less than six days
afterward arrived safely in the Irish capita!; from which ha
had been now so many years absent that he considered himself
as totally forgotten in it.
But his hopes of living iong in Dublin, entirely unknown and
unsuspected, soon turned out to he one of those imaginary
prospects, with which he was frequently accustomed to amuso
himself. He happened to fall in with several persons who
recollected his person in London, and who were well acquaint-
ed with his story; and he was, by this time, in every point of
view, so striking or so notoriousa character, that to be knowa
and to be suspected was one and the same thing.


Continuing his vicious practices, in his own country, with a
degree of industry and audacity not inferior to what he had
exercised on this side of the water, ho was, in the course of a
little time, taken into custody, by the officers of the Irish
police, for picking the pocket of a nobleman ofagold watch,
together with some money, at one of the play-houses, and he
was committed to the New Goal, to take his trial for that
offence.
The prosecution not being managed on this occasion with
much vigour, or perhaps, the evidence not being sufficiently
clear to establish the guilt of the prisoner, he was acquitted,
and discharged, after having been seriously admonished by the
judge before whom he was tried. In the course of his trial, he
addressed the court and jury in a very animated manner ;
adverting, with great art, to what he called the unaccountable
force of the prejudices that were so unjustly entertained against
him in the sister-country, even after he bad been discharged,
ns a reformed character, from a place which the legislature
formally and expressly declares to have been appointed for the
express purpose of operating the reformation of young
offenders, and rendering them useful and respectable members
of the commonwealth. “ Gentlemen, (added he, in conclusion,)
I solemnly declare that 1 am not guilty of the charge now
brought against me; nor does lire evidence produced apply to
me. Tims, supported by conscious innocence, 1 wait for your
verdict, without any painful apprehension, as knowing that, to
men of your liberality of sentiment, lam notan object of those
prejudices that operated so fatally against me in another place ;
and that yourdecree will he the result of feeling hearts, directed
by enlightened understandings.”
But, though acquitted on this occasion in Dublin, he quickly
determined to ieave Ireland, of which Ihe capital seemed to
him to be a theatre of action too circumscribed for him to
move in. He accordingly removed to the northern parts of
that kingdom, through which he look Ins way to Edinburgh,
■where ho concluded that, he might, for some time at least,
commit iris depredations with greater safety and facility than
he could do either in London or Dublin,
Butin his pinion on this head he soon learned, by experience,
that he was grossly deceived, for he was quickly observed in the
capita! of r colland, where the police is more exact and more
severe than in roost' other parts of the British dominions.
Being oh-ser.cd, he was suspected; but, having received some
intimation of the suspicions that were entertained of him, he
thought it prudent to depart from Edinburgh, where his
gleanings were comparatively small.
The smallness, however, of his acquisitions in Scotland was
amply compensated for by the extraordinary success of his
depredations at Chesler Fair, which he visited oa his return to
England through Carlisle; for, it is said, that, in the course of
his expedition to that linen-fair, he contrived to get into his


possession to the amount of six hundred pounds in cash and
bank-notes, with which he got dear oft', returning once more
to London, to which he seems to hare been attracted by a kind
of unaccountable fatality.
On his arrival here,he lived in a genteel but retired manner,
in the neighbourhood of Soho square. It was about this time,
that, leaning against a post, and viewing the lire, in Greek-
street, a slack of chimneys fell and fractured his skull, of
which accident, however, he got completely cured, being
reserved, we fear, as the proverb goes, unless he at last feels
the necessity of reformation, for a more shameful end. Be
continued to observe a quiet and decent way of life while the
spoils of Chester Fair afforded him the means. But the pro-
duce of these spoils being nearly exhausted in the course of
some months, he returned to his old courses, notwithstanding
the additional danger which attended his public appearance u>
resume them, from the terms in which he was liberated from
his confinement on-board the hulks; which were, bn condition
of his leaving this kingdom, and never more returning to it.
However, unlerrified by the danger, he again frequented the
Theatres, the Opera house, and the Pantheon, for some little
time, with tolerable success: but he became now too notorious
to be long secure; and, being recognized, he was closely
watched and well-nigh detected at the latter of these places; at
least, such strong suspicions were entertained by the magistrate
of his conduct on the occasion, that he was taken into custody,
and committed to Newgate.
The evidence against him, however, w as far from being clear
enough to convict him of the offence with which he was then
charged ; so that, of course, he got rid of the consequences
without much difficulty or risk ; he was, however, detained
at the instance of Mr. Duncan Campbell, the superintendent of
the convicts, for having returned to England, in violation of
the condition on which his Majesty was pleased to grant him a
remission of the punishment, which he was sentenced to under-
go on board the bulks at Woolwich ; and the consequence of
the detainer was, that he was ordered to serve out in Newgate
the unexpired part of the time that he was originally to have
served ou the river Thames. When the period of his captivity
in this prison expired, he was, as a matter of course, set at
liberty ; and he no sooner obtained his liberty than lie returned
to his former practices. He, however, was now morocautious 5
and, being connected with some very adroit accomplices, he
was not so easily detected as he used to be on former occasions.
He was, nevertheless, strongly suspected. Hence it came to
pass, that he lived in a state of perpetual alarm, was exposed to
frequent interruptions, and was several times taken into
custody, but as repeatedly discharged, for want of proof to
bring the guilt home to him.
In this manner he lived a considerable lime, in the society of
the most profligate aud abandoned characters of this >a,l and


corrupt town, when he was seen to pick the pocket of Mr. te
Mesurier, at Drury lane play-house; and for that offence ha
TPas immediately apprehended. Charge of him was given !o
one Blandy, a constable, who, either through negligence or
corruption, suffered him to make his escape. The proceedings
against him were, however, carried on to an outlawry, and
various methods were ineffectually taken, for near two years, to
have him apprehended.
While the lawyers were outlawing him, and the constables
endeavouring to take him, he was travelling in various dis-
guises, and in various characters, through the northern counties
of this kingdom. He visited, the great towns, in those parts,
as a quack doctor or as a clergyman; sometimes be went
with an EG table, and sometimes he pretended to he a rider to
» manufacturing house at Birmingham or Manchester; and,
travelling on horseback, with a decent appearance and a grave
deportment, the account which he thought proper to give of
himself was credited, without any difficulty, by those who
thought proper to question him.
It, however, sometimes happened that he was known by
gentlemen whom he met, particularly once in Lincolnshire, hut
iio one offered lo molest or interrupt him, until he arrived at
Newcastle upon Tyne, where, on being recognized, he was sus-
pected of picking pockets, and, on enquiry, he was found to be
outlawed; on which he was removed, by a writ of habeas
corpus, to London,, and imprisoned in Newgate, where he
arrived poor, emaciated, and dejected.
The companions of his life, as a distinguished character in his
line, however, on learning his circumstances, made a subscrip-
tion for him, by which they collected near a hundred guineas
for ins use ; and, by this seasonable supply, he was enabled to
employ counsel, and to take measures to have the outlawry
reversed. This being done, he was tried for the original offence,
that of stealing Mr. le Mesurier’s purse; hut, through the absence
of the Rev. Mr. Adeane, a material witness for the prosecution,
he was acquitted and discharged.
On his getting his liberty he went into Ireland, in*company
with a young man of the name of Hubert, well known in town
for his fraud on his Royal Highness the Duke of York. With
this accomplice he endeavoured to carry on his depredations in
Dublin, where it was never his fortune to remain for any length
of time undetected; for, on this occasion, Hubert was taken in
the fact of picking a gentleman’s pocket, and handing the pro-
perty to Barrington, who with great difficulty made his escape
to England, where he rambled about for some lime, previous
to his arrival in the capital; and he had not been long in
London, or the neighbourhood of it, when he was taken into
custody for picking the pocket of Mr. Henry Hare Townsend.
As for Hubert, he was tried and convicted at Dublin, and
sentenced to be transported for seven years, hut contrived to
make his escane from the prison in which he was confined.


On Wednesday morning, September 15, 1790, Barrington
was arraigned for stealing, on the Ist of September, a gold
watch, chain, and seals, and a metal key, the property of
Henry Hare Townsend, Esq.
When he was asked, as usual, by the clerk of the arraigns,
whether he was guilty or not guilty of the felony with which
he stood charged, he addressed Mr. Recorder (the only Judge
on the bench) as follows :
“ My Lord,
“ It is with great concern that I interrupt the business of the
court for a single moment, hut I am under the necessity of
stating to your lordship, that, when I was taken into custody
ou suspicion of this felony, every article about ray person was
taken from me; and although the gentleman, who is my
accuser, did nut attempt to say any money was lost, ray money
was also taken from me; and, although I have made application
that this money may be restored, it is, however, still detained;
by which detention, my Lord, 1 have been hindered from tak-
ing those proper measures for my defence, and from obtaining
that legal assistance, which my unfortunate situation peculiarly
requires.”
Mr. Recorder. Mr. Barrington, It is impossible for me to
decide, previous to your trial, what is your property; byt,
when your prosecutor appears, every thing which has been
taken from you, and which is not necessary to be identified on
your trial, shall be restored to you.
George Law, the constable, produced the articles above
mentioned, as. also a silk purse, with twenty guineas, which
were taken from Mr. Barrington, at the time he was taken into
custody.
Mr. Recorder. Mr. Barrington, I shall order your money to
be returned to you.
On Friday Barrington was put to the bar, and the indictment
was read as before.
Henry Hare Townsend, Esq, sworn.
On the Ist of September I was at Enfield Marsh, on account
of the races; I believe it was near two o’clock, that is the
time that is fixed for the horses to start; 1 was on foot; I
went ou the ground in a phaeton ; I got out of the phaeton,
and was walking about;; I did not miss my watch till 1 was
spoke to by a Mr. Blades; I missed it from my waistcoat
pocket; I had a new pair of leather breeches on, and was
afraid the seals would dirt them ; it was a gold watch and
chain, and metal key; I felt my watch in my pocket after!
came on the ground ; I think it must have been a quarter of au
hour or twenty minutes before I missed it. 1 recovered my
watch again, but 1 do not recollect who produced it to me ; the
watch was given to Lady Lake, and she look it home with her;
and, when we took Mr. Barrington before the justice, t scut
for the watch, and the watch was given to me by a ser.au!.


John TVnlducU sworn.
1 am coachman to Mr. Townsend. I knew nothing of the
matter till I helped to take the prisoner to the booth ; I had
one hand on his collar, and the other hold of his right hand,
which was open. He could have nothing at all in his right
hand. I was left in care of him. I put him at the hack of the
booth, and there was a carpet nailed at the back of that. I
saw the watch drop between Barrington and the carpel, it
apparently fell on the left side of him behind him, I saw it as it
jingled down before it reached the ground.
Mary Danhy.
I was in the next booth to that in which the prisoner was
brought in ; I was but a very little way off him, there was no
body between him and me, nothing hut the partition ; 1 was
next the partition, the prisoner was sideways to me when he
dropped the watch on his side; he dropped tire watch from his
hand; 1 told him of it at the time; 1 cannot recollect which
hand ; his hand was by his side at the time 1 saw it drop and I
mentioned it to him at the lime.
Prisoner's Defence.
•• May it please yonr Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the
Jury, to favor me with your attention for a little lime; the
situation of every person who has the misfortune to stand here
is extremely distressing and aukward ; mine is so in a peculiar
degiee: if lam totally silent, it may be considered, perhaps, as
a proof of guilt; and if 1 presume to offer those arguments
which present themselves to my mind in my defence, they may
not perhaps be favored with that attention which they might
deserve; yet J by no means distrust the candor and benevolence
of the Jury, and, therefore 1 will beg leave to proceed to state
the circumstances of the case, as they occur to me, not doubt-
ing hut they will meet with some degree of credit, notwith-
standing the unhappy situation lam in. Gentlemen, I was mi
the race ground at Enfield, observing the race on the day
that the indictment mentions, where I found myself surrounded
by .Mr. Townsend and number of others; Mr. Townsend said,
“ Your name is Barrington, and you have taken my watch !” I
told him he was right as to my name, but he accused me unjust-
ly ; however, I would go any where with him ; I was removed
from thence to a stand, from whence the races were viewed ; it
consisted of two booths, and they were separate from each
wilh only a railing elbow high ; and it is a great misfortune to
me, Gentlemen of the Jury, that you were not able to observe
the situation of those booths: for, if you had, you would have
found it nearly impossible that some circumstances which have
come from the witnesses could have been true, 1 was close to
the railing that separated the two booths, and some person said
Here is a watch 1” This watch Mr. Townsend claimed) and


said it was his. I was removed from thence to the Angel at
Edmonton, where the examination look place; and lam very
sorry to he under the necessity of observing, that a very
material difference has taken place in the depositions delivered
that day before the magistrate in various respects. A w itness,
the coachman, positively declared that he did not see this watch
in ray hand, that he did not see me take it from ray pocket,
that he did not see it drop from my person, but that he saw it
on the ground, and he might have gone so far as to say he saw
it fall ; 1 took the liberty of asking him one question, whether
he had seen the watch in my hand, and if he had seen it fall
from me ? He declared he did not. 1 then asked him, whether
he could lake upon himself to swear, from the situation he
stood in at the adjoining booth, that this watch might not have
dropped from some other person; he declared he could not
observe any such thing. Gentlemen, with respect to the evi-
dence of Kendrick, he made the same declaration then. Mr.
Townsend has brought me here, under the charge of having
committed felony; he has told you, Gentlemen of the Jury,
that he lost his watch out of his pocket, and that pocket was a
waistcoat pocket; that he was in a very extraordinary situa-
tion; that he was on the race-ground, where certainly the
greatest decorum is not always observed; and he was also in a
situation which exposed him more to the pressure he complain-
ed of, than any other person; for, instead of his horse being
in possession of his jockey or groom, he attended it himself;
and 1 must beg leave to observe, Gentlemen of the Jury, that
it is a custom, where people bet money at races, to wish to see
the horse immediately after the heat is over, so that the
pressure which Mr. Townsend had, or what he thought he had
from me, could not appear very extraordinary ; and I am under
the necessity of saying, his fancy has rather been improved on
the occasion. With respect. Gentlemen, to the last witness
that has appeared, I will not say any thing on the occasion ;
that will res! entirely with you. It was a circumstance, how-
ever, of a most extraordinary nature, that this person should
never come forward till the present moment; and, whether the
contradictions and strange accounts she has given of herself are
such as to entitle her to any credit, particularly in a situation
where the life and liberty of another person are at slake, is not
for me to observe upon. Gentlemen of the Jury, it may, per.
haps, be expected by many persons, in this place, that I should
say a great deal about prepossession and newspaper reports ;
and, if I had the ability to do it, perhaps I should not be blamed ;
for he who has been the unhappy object of much defamation,
has surely a right to deprecate its baneful effects: where much
pains have been taken to defame, some pains maybe surely
allowed to abate that defamation. Gentlemen, that it has been
the hard lot of some unhappy persons to have been convicted
of crimes they really did not commit, less through evidence
than ill nalured rr.om-t >.- ittvnMta,!. ..... i I—a-—ut i-


there are many respectable persons, now in court, fully con,,
vinced of the truth of that observation Such limes, it is to
be hoped, are passed ; I dread not such a conviction in my own
person ; I am weil convinced of the noble nature of a British
Court of Justice ; the dignified and benign principles of its.
Judges, and the liberal and candid spirit of its Jurors.
“ Gentlemen, life is the gift of Grid ; and liberty its greatest
blessing : the power of disposing of both, or either, is the
greatest man can enjoy. It is also adventitious that, great as,
t hat power is, it cannot be better placed than in the hands of an
English Jury ; for they will not exercise it like tyrants, who
delight in blood, but like generous and brave men, who choose
to spare rather than to destroy 3 and who, not forgetting they
are men themselves, lean, when they can, to the side of com-
passion. It may be thought. Gentlemen of the Jury, that lam
applying to your passions; and, if 1 had the power to do it, I
would not fail to employ it: the passions animate the heart;
and to the passions we owe our dearest and finest feelings; and
when it is considered, the mighty power you now possess,
whatever leads to a cautious and tender discharge of it must be
thought of great consequence : as long as the passions conduct
us on the side of benevolence, they are our best, our safest, and
our most friendly guides. Gentlemen of the Jury, Mr Town,
send has deposed that he lost his watch, but hew, I trust, is by
no means clear ; I trust, Gentlemen, you will consider the great,
the almost impossibility, that having had the watch in my
possession for so long a time, time sufficient to have concealed
it in a variety of places, to have conveyed it to town, it should
still be in ray possession. You have heard from Mr. Town,
send, that there was an interval of at least half an hour between
the time of losing the watch and my being taken into custody :
there is something. Gentlemen, impossible in the circumstance y
and, on the other hand, it has sometimes happened, that
remorse, a generous remorse, has struck the minds of persons
in such a manner as to have induced them to surrender them-
selves into (he hands of juslite rather than an innocent person
should suffer. It is not therefore, I suppose, improbable, that
if Mr. Townsend lost his watch by an act of felony, the person
who has the watch in his possession, feeling for the situation,
of an unhappy man, might be induced to place that watch on
the ground. But it is by no means certain how Mr. Townsend
lost his watch, whether by an act of felony, or whether by
accident; it might have fallen info the hands of some other
person, and that person, feeling for my unhappy situation,
might have been induced to restore it. I humbly hope, that
the circumstances of the case are such as may induce a
scrupulous jury to make a favorable decision; and I am very
well convinced that you will not be led by any other circum-
stances than those of the present case; either from reports of
former misfortunes,'or by the fear of my falling into similar
ones. lam now just thirty-five years of age, (shall he so nest


month) i it is nearly half the life of man ; it is not worth while
being impatient to provide for the other half, so far as to do
any thing unworthy. Gentlemen, in the course of my life 1
have suffered much distress, 1 have felt something of the
vicissitudes of fortune, and now, from observation, I am con-
vinced, upon the whole, there is no jqy but what arises from
the practice of virtue, and consists in the felicity of a tranquil
mind and a benevolent heart; sources of consolation which the
most prosperous circumstances do not always furnish, and
which may be felt under the most indigent, it will be ray study.
Gentlemen, to possess them : nor will the heaviest affliction of
poverty, pain, or disgrace, cause me to part with resolutions
founded on deepest reflection, and which will end but with life.
I will perish on the pavement before I will deviate from them.
For my own part, whatever your verdict may be, 1 trust I shall
be enabled to meet it with a firmness of mind ; he, indeed, baa
little to fear from death, whose fame is tarnished, and who has
endured the ceaseless abuse of unfeeling minds; when Heaven
accepts contrition, it receives into favor when it pardons; but
man, more cruel than his Maker, pursues his offending brother
with unrelenting severity, and marks a deviation from rectitude
with a never-dying infamy, and with unceasing suspicion and
.reproach, which seem to exclude him from the pale of virtue.
Gentlemen of the Jury, the thought of death may appal the
rich and prosperous, but, on the other hand, the unfortunate
cannot have much to fear from it; yet the tenderness of nature
cannot be quite subdued by the utmost degree of human resolu-
tion, and ! cannot be insensible to the woes which must be felt
by an affectionate companion and an infant offspring; and
there is besides a principle in human nature, stronger even than
the fear of death, and which can hardly fail to operate some
time or other in life ; I mean, the desire of good fame, tinder
that laudable influence, Gentlemen, if 1 am acquitted, 1 will
?uickly retire into some distant land, where my name and mis-
ortunes will be alike unknown; where harmless manners shall
shield me from the imputation of guilt, and where prejudice
will not be liable to misrepresentation ; and I do now assure
you. Gentlemen of the Jury, that 1 feel a cheering hope, even
at this awful moment, that the rest of my life will be so con-
ducted as to make me as much an object of esteem and
applause, as I am now the unhappy object of censure and sus-
picion.”
After the verdict of guilty was pronounced, the Lord Chief
Baron thus addressed the prisoner;
“ Mr. Barrington, hitherto I have conducted myself towards
you as if I had never seen you before ; but now, when nothing
which I can say can prejudice the jury, I must say that you
have been treated with much more favor than you deserve.
This ought to have been a capital indictment, and it ought to
have reached your life; and public justice very much calls for
such a sacrifices for, if there was a man in the world that


abused and prostituted great talents to the most unworthy ami
shameful purposes, you are that man ; and you have done it
against all warning, against the example of your own ease, and
of a thousand other eases that have occurred ; and 1 am afraid,
that now, as the punishment does not reach your life, 1 cannot
entertain the least hope that you will in any manner reform ;
but that the end of it will be, that you must be a shameful
spectacle at your latter end. ’
Mr. Barrington bowed and retired.
On Wednesday the 22nd of September, IT9O, the Recorder
pronounced the sentence of the Court upon him, which was,
that he be transported for the term of seven years, to such
parts beyond the seas as his Majesty in Council should be
pleased to direct.
After his sentence was passed, Barrington addressed the
Court in a sort of valedictory speech, conceived in nearly the
folio wing terras:
“ My Lord,
“ I have a great deal to say in extenuation of the crime for
which I now stand convicted at this bar; but, upon considera-
tion, I will not arrest the attention of the honorable Court too
long. Among the extraordinary vicissitudes incident to human
nature, it is the peculiar and unfortunate lot of some devoted
persons to have their best wishes, and most earnest endeavours,
to deserve the good opinion of the most respectable part of
society, entirely frustrated. Whatever they can say, or what-
ever they may do, every word and its meaning, every action
and its motive, is represented in an unfavourable light, and ist
deslorted from the real intention of the speaker or the actor.
“ That this has been my unhappy fate, does not seem to
stand in need of any confirmation.
“ Every effort to deserve well of mankind, that my heart
bore witness to its rectitude, has been by such measures as
those, and consequently has been rendered abortive. Many of
the circumstances of my life, I can, w itbout any violation of
truth,declare to have, therefore, happened absolutely in spite
of myself.
“ The world, my Lord, has given me credit for abilities,,
indeed much greater than I possess, and, therefore, much
greater than I deserved; but 1 have never found any kind hand
to foster these abilities.
“ I might ask, where was the generous and powerful hand
that was ever stretched forth to rescue George Barrington from
infamy? In an age like this, which, in several respects, is so
justly famed for liberal, sentiments, it was roy severe lot, that
no noble minded gentleman stepped forward and said to me,
Barrington, you are possessed of talents which may be useful to
society. I feel for your situation ; and, as long as you act the
part of a good citizen, I will be your protector : you will then
have time and opportunity to rescue yourself from the obloquy
of your former conduct.


“ Alas, my lord, George Barrington had never the supreme
SAicity of having such comfort administered to his wounded
spirit. As matters have unfortunately turned out, the die is
cast; and, as it is, 1 bend, resigned to ray fate, without one
murmur or complaint.”
After having spoke in this manner, with more elegance, per-
haps, than reason or truth, he bowed respectfully to the court,
the jury, and the auditory, and withdrew from the public scene,
at least, in Europe, probably for ever, in the thirty-fifth year of
his age. He was shortly afterwards transported to Botany Bay,
where he was appointed superintendent of the convicts, by
Governor Phillips
In conclusion the following anecdote of our hero, which
may be depended on, appeared in all the newspapers of that
period.—An alarm was one night raised in the box lobby of
Covent-garder Theatre, that he was in the house. The news
spread from box to box like electricity. One gentleman had
lost a snufi'-box,another his watch, one lady her purse, another
her smelling bottle; in fact, every body had lost, or said they
had lost, something. Behind Mrs. J s, the sister of the late
Earl ofC , sal a gentleman in black, who with much polite-
ness communicated to herthis mostdreadfu! intelligence. “ The
•villain,” said she, w hipping a splendid pair of brilliant ear rings
out ofher ears and pulling them carefully into her pocket-
book, “shan’t have my ear-rings, 1 promise.” When the play
was over, Mrs. J s adjourned to the rout of my Lady
D . Upon entering the drawing room she flew up to her
“dear, dear friend,” and, after embracing her with transport,
told her ladyship what an escape she had had of that “ horrid
villain Barrington,” felicitating herself that only fur her amaz-
ing ingenuity and cleverness she must most certainly have lost
her drops. As she could now with perfect safety hang out her
gems, she thrust her hand into her pocket ; but, after a poke
or two-, she changed color and started—“ tie ho them,” said
she, in agony. “Impossible,” said her sympathetic friend,
“impossible!” Alas! it was too true : after the most scrutin-
ous rummage, they were not to be found. Upon diligent
inquiry, it appeared that the very gentleman in black, who had
so politely cautioned Mrs. J——s against Barrington, was
Barrington himself. As soon as the lady had deposited her
brilliants in her pocket, that able artist skilfully extracted them.
FINIS.
W, MASON, Printer, si, Clerkenwel! Green;


