

THE
CONFESSIONS
OF A SINGER
BY
FANNY LYNDHURST
BRUCE & DAVIES, Print, 430, 434 Bourke St., Melbourne




To the Memory of My Mother.




THE CONFESSIONS OF A
SINGER.
By
FANNY LYNDHURST.
Melbourne :
BRUCE & DAVIES, 430-43 \ Bourse Street,
mdccccvi.


PRELIMINARY.
This booklet was intended, in the first instance, as a
Christmas or New Year’s gift to my pupils and friends, in lieu
of the conventional pupils’ concert. But the number of copies
it was eventually found advisable to have printed being greatly
in excess of the number of individuals whom I can presume to
reckon upon as “ friends,” even when all the pupils I have at
present, or have ever had in times past, are added to the list,
I decided to forward a certain number of copies to those under
whose notice I particularly wish my booklet to come, whether
they be friends or otherwise, and to offer the remainder for
sale at a price which will not, I think, be considered prohibitive
by those ■ ' e friends I have not yet had the felicity of com-
ing in personal contact with, and whose names and addresses
I therefore do not know. For it is truly said, “we never know
our luck,” and I may have the good fortune to possess more
friends than I am aware of, and I sometimes console myself
with the thought that although the material reward, which
is the endorsement of a well-trained faculty for business
affairs, has not been mine to any great extent, yet theftieed of
unanimous and openly-expressed appreciation, which is the
proof of artistic qualities and musical talent, has been be-
stowed upon me in no small measure. I feel deeply and sin-
cerely grateful to all friends, known and unknown, whose kindli-
ness and sympathy haVf meant so much to me, and even though
I cannot, with Solomon, consider “ open rebuke ” (a few speci-
mens of which I have met with in some quarters), as better
than “ secret love,” yet I will try to look upon the former as a
promise of, if not an evidence of, the latter, and so, as is fit-
ting at this season of the year, remember all my friends and
forgive all my enemies.
F. L.,
Christmas, 1905.


PREFACE
TO PART I.
As this book is prepared chiefly as a New Year’s gift to
my friends and pupils, I have adopted a more personal tone
than I should have done if addressing myself solely to the
general public.
This year has for me been darkened by the loss of one
whom I could not expect to keep ever beside me throughout
life’s journey, yet because of our mutual love, I could have
wished to have been privileged for a few years longer to
devote my best energies to her to whose memory I dedicate
these pages, thus by some means, however small, striving to
atone for her disappointment in my gifts or opportunities
being rather more for singing than for writing.
I might perhaps have attained my object as well by
means of fiction, but I meet so many people in real life whose
characters and personalities are so much more interesting
than any which I could create by means of my own imagina-
tion, that I prefer to speak of the most notable of these, to
give myself the pleasure of contemplating their characters and
telling others some of their good deeds.
Certainly I might have disguised my feelings and experi-
ences, and referred to these real persons by means of fic-
titious names, but as I feel that an open acknowledgment is
due to those whom I think very highly of, and speak of accord-
ingly, and that it is only fair to give a chance of replying, if
not explaining, to those of whom I may be tempted to think
or speak somewhat less highly, it seemed to me that my first
entree into print ought to be made with matter of the most


honest, sincere and genuine a nature as possible. For this
book is the work of one who ever strives after good motives;
who looks only for tolerance and guidance from those above
her in knowledge and worldly position; comradeship and fair
play from her confreres in art, and her fellow-workers gene-
rally speaking; and opportunities of aiding, enlightening, or
cheering as far as is within her power any whose weakness of
position and knowledge may be pronounced enough to claim
her sympathy or be even greater than her own.
My quotations from my favourite authors are in these
pages somewhat numerous; but under some circumstances
we need all the support which is to be found in good litera-
ture, and as the extracts which I give have been of invaluable
service to myself I pass them on to younger fellow workers,
who may not happen to have the books I quote from. In
other cases they will explain to those of greater erudition and
experience than myself just the shade of meaning which I
see in the utterances of famous authors. It may also inte-
rest some to know the source from which I have derived most
support intellectually and morally speaking.
Richmond,
December, 1905.


Confessions of a Singer
Small Beginnings
“ Perhaps some weary heart to mine is echoing."
This little book is written to express the feelings and
help on the interests as much as is within my power of those
who, like myself, find that the way of singers is hard. Also,
with a view to following out my policy of candour and sin-
cerity, which has, I believe, been the reason of a certain
amount of worldly loss to myself, through the plainness of
my speech having affronted certain individuals of power and
influence in the Melbourne musical world. Therefore, I beg
to present in this booklet to any whose feelings I may have
hurt “ a hair of the dog which bit them ”; for I intend in these
pages to offer a more unreserved communication as to my
motives, aspirations and sentiments than I have ever before
made to even my dearest friends. But time speeds onward,
and
I sometimes feel the thread of life is slender,
And soon with me the labour will be wrought
Then grows my heart to other hearts more tender
The time is short.
Although in all human probability there are many years
of life yet remaining to me, also to the majority of my
friends, acquaintances and fellow-workers, yet life is at best
an uncertain possession, and I would not be parted from any
by the Great Shadow ere I had done all in my power to com-
fort, help or guide, or had in some way expressed my grati-
tude for the comfort, help and guidance which I have received
from others.


It is not that I consider my experiences of more interest
and importance to the community than that of dozens of
others similarly placed. Indeed, there are many singers and
musicians among us, who would by a clear statement of theii
experiences as professionals, and their consequent opinion of
the musical outlook for Melbourne, confer a greater boon
upon those who read their report of matters musical, than
my little hook can possibly aspire to do. And if it were a
general custom to speak out sincerely and frankly on musical
business matters, instead of practising so much “ make be-
lieve,” as is the case with many singers, some sort of con-
sensus of opinion would be arrived at, and those contem-
plating the musical profession as a means of livelihood would
not have to go such a round-about way in order to discover
the true position of musical affairs in Melbourne, and the
most important facts of the case, where professional singers
and musicians are concerned.
But it would seem that our local musicians are either
too busy or too reserved to follow such a course as I have
indicated, and some might not agree with me in considering
it desirable, if they have interests at stake which would be
injured by too much injudicious sincerity. But the gospel
according to Carlyle is the one by which I would guide my
own course, and this writer says, “ Hollowness, insincerity
has to cease; sincerity of some sort has to begin.
A HEARTY VOTE OF THANKS.
Being just at this period of my life emphatically a free
lance, and so curiously placed that I might indulge in the
boldest speech about anyone in particular or the community
in general without it being possible for me to greatly fear the
consequences, I resolved to take the opportunity of this in-
terval, as it were, in the programme of my life, “ to thank
those who have so kindly assisted,” just as the minister or
chairman at a church or charity concert thanks us singers on
the occasion of each display of disinterested devotion, which
is such a marked characteristic of public singers. _ For it is
just eleven years since I came out as a singer, and in another
eleven years (or rather less) I shall have reached the age at
which the writer of an etiquette book advises lady vocalists
to retire from singing before audiences. Certainly in giving
this advice he addressed only amateurs, but I sing so much
for nothing in connection with charitable causes, that it
seems as if ray professional standing must become much
more pronounced before I reach the age of forty, so that I


shall have the courage to keep on beyond the time specified
for amateurs to leave off delighting their circle of friends with
exhibitions of their vocal powers. But I believe our climate
is more favourable to the preservation of the voice than is
that of England, in which the book I speak of was written, so
I hope that I may be able in the matter of vocal preservation
to imitate that lady vocalist whom we as a community are
so proud of, although for very substantial reasons I cannot
hope to obey the injunctions of the conductor of one of our
principal musical societies, and imitate the style and richness
of apparel with which that lady expresses her refinement of
character and exquisite taste, and enhances the natural
charms of her person and voice. But in ordinary cases, such
as those of lady amateurs, who have never had much train-
ing in their early years, and whose more mature energies
have been exclusively devoted to domestic or business life, it
would be perhaps advisable to gracefully retire from the arena
in favour of their daughters and other younger women, who
may otherwise be kept in the background too long; but even
so, a very much later period than the one mentioned by the
English writer on etiquette would seem quite early enough in
most cases, and some mothers persevere in public and social
activities, not so much for the pleasure of exercising their
own talents, or to gratify a love of society, as to forward the
interests of their daughters, and to give the latter a better
start in life than might otherwise be possible.
Now that I have commenced to be personal (for I am
sure everyone who reads these pages will instantly recognise
in the above description of a Melbourne vocalist our distin-
guished artiste, Mrs Palmer) I may as well continue in the
same strain for awhile, and mention by name those to whom
I feel myself, as a vocalist, most indebted, and will place
their names according to the dates at which I came into
closest contact with them, rather than in the order that they
would take if arranged in accordance with their professional
or business position.
Mr. Charles B. Winn was my first teacher of singing, and
with him I studied Behnke’s exercises and a good class of
simple ballads for eighteen months, then I took lessons of an
elocutionist who was making a great stir in a small way just
at that time, and at his gatherings I met Herr Bernhard
Wendlandt, whom I desire now especially to thank for the
generous and disinterested help which he gave me in my
studies all through the year 1893 and a part of 1894. With-
out his aid just at that time I might have given up the idea
of ever being a public singer, for my parents opposed my
wishes in that direction, and although gratified when I gave


promise of being ultimately successful, they were timid about
my entering upon what looked to them a rather formidable
enterprise. Therefore it was a great boon to me when Herr
Wendlandt opened the way for me to proceed with my vocal
studies, and he took much pains to teach me the pronuncia-
tion of the original words of Italian operatic airs, which after-
wards made Madame Simonsen’s duties as my instructress
much lighter for her than they might otherwise have been
(for I had not at that time made the thorough study of
Italian which has since been such a source of delight to me
under the instruction of the talented Signor Fiocchi). Herr
Wendlandt also introduced me to a good class of songs and
ballads, some of which I consider at this present time the
most valuable numbers in my repertoire. Therefore I shall
always be grateful to Herr Bernhard Wendlandt, as also to
his genial spouse, at whose Salon at the city chambers where
they then lived I first met many leading lights of the artistic
world. I am also of course very much indebted for what
Madame Simonsen did, as my voice certainly developed
greatly under her tuition in the two years during which I took
lessons from her, and which was terminated in 1896 by her
death, and she is now beyond the reach of my poor thanks.
Mr. D. Rhayader Davies also has from a very early stage
of my artistic development been one of my most valued per-
sonal friends, as well as being one of those chiefly instrumen-
tal in preserving my name from utter oblivion. He has
organised some very important concerts, notably those in
celebration of the Diamond Tubilee in 1897, and several inte-
resting cantatas, in which I have had the honour to take
part; but he has lately found the exigencies of his business
life of such a nature as to deprive us of his services as an en-
trepreneur, and he now, I believe, devotes his energies to
commercial pursuits. I would advise all others with success-
ful businesses, for their own happiness, to go and do like-
wise.
Apropos of Mr. Davies, I think I made rather a fool of
myself over those Federation Campaigns of 1898 and 1899,
though Mr. Davies’s sex saved the situation for himself; but
women are not expected to be such ardent politicians as men,
although they may, like Charlotte Corday, sacrifice them-
selves with everlasting honour upon the altar of patriotism;
but as the Persian proverb hath it
Fooled thou must be, though wisest of the wise,
Then be the fool of virtue, not of vice.
and the leaders of the Federation movement being such ex-
emplary characters, I suppose I ought to feel glad that I did


for a time devote myself to their cause.
The campaigns at least furnished me with a good oppor-
tunity of gaining experience in using my voice in some of the
largest halls in and around Melbourne, and the meetings
themselves were extremely interesting to one who had never
before had the privilege of being present at a political meet-
ing, as was my case up till then. Some said the singing en-
livened the meetings, but I thought the meetings were suffi-
ciently lively apart from the singing, especially for some of
the speakers, who had to cope with such a number of inter-
jections.
But perhaps the individual to whom of all others I
should be most grateful, if only for what he has probably
suffered for my sake, is Mr. George Peake, who took me as
a raw recruit in the matter of oratorio and singing with pro-
fessional orchestra, and placed me in a position to gain the
very experience which I most needed. He also introduced
me to the School of Bach on the one hand and Chopin on
the other, in the matter of pianoforte music, and aided by
elementary studies in theory, which I afterwards followed up
with the late Mr. Thomas Guenett, whose memory I shall ever
cherish with warm affection.
Another who like Mr. Guenett has also early fallen in
the strife (by reason of the storm and stress of our Austra-
lian city life, with its many temptations and small facilities
and encouragement to honourable ambition by which manly
energies might be absorbed and ennobled) is one whom I
should also remember gratefully as having done all within his
power to forward my interests—that is, my late dearly beloved
eldest brother, W. Hider Smith, one of the brightest, kindest
and most sorely tried and tempted of men.
The Battle of our life is brief,
The alarm, the struggle, the relief—
Then sleep we side by side.
Then among others who, though not so intimately con-
cerned and connected with my oast life as those I have men-
tioned, are Mr. George Stirling (who, in addition to
being a brilliant organist and good theoretical musician,
is also a leading member of commercial circles), to
whom I owe much early encouragement, and to whom
is due an acknowledgment of his generosity in securing
to me for eighteen months as large a salary for
singing once each Sunday at a local church as I afterwards
received in the city for attending two services each week;
and which is twice as much as that which some churches
appear to think necessary to bind a singer to three attend-
ances at church and choir practice.


Apropos of church choirs (though not of Mr. Stirling), I
have observed that the choir is considered by many pious
people as the most God-forsaken part of the church. This,
we presume, is why the minister of a certain city church
regularly prays with and for the members of the choir in the
ante-room before the commencement of each service. But
it seemed to me that he never touched on the right points in
his petitions, and that a short ejaculation, such as that of
Touchstone’s after the song in the fifth act of “ As You Like
It,” would have been more appropriate even than a long
prayer, much as we may have needed the latter as indivi-
duals.
I would also thank Dr. Strong, and the other Australian
Church authorities, for their invariable courtesy and many
kindnesses during the period of five years which I spent as
chorister at that church, and which I look upon as one of the
most pleasant and improving periods of my past life; not
alone because I had the privilege of listening to the eminent
preacher’s silvery eloquence and crystal logic, and because
his discourses gave me an insight into literature both ancient
and modern that I should otherwise not have been able to
so easily obtain, but because of the benefit which my musical
culture, and the forwarding of my education and interests as
a vocalist gained from being associated with such organists
and choirmasters as Mr. G. B. Fentum, Mr. Chas. W. Kerry
and the late Mr. W. E. Nott.
Then I should like to express my gratitude to Mr. West-
more G. Stephens and Mr. Westmore W. Stephens for their
unfailing kindness and the interest which they have shown
in my welfare, as also has the well-known amateur tenor, Mr.
Frank Holt.
And I owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. George C. Allan,
and everyone connected with the firm of Allan and Co., for
their never failing courtesy, and in some cases for the
warmth of sympathy and friendliness which I have met with
there.
The other two musical firms which I have had any dealings
with—viz., Glen’s and Sutton’s —have also been most obliging
and kind on the few occasions on which I have come into
contact with them, but Allan’s has been my firm for music,
etc., for such a number of years, and I have been a tenant
there for so long, that I can speak more emphatically about
that firm than about others.
Then there are the Ballarat people, who are always so
kind to me, especially those of the Liedertafel and churches,
and the residents of South Melbourne and Albert Park, who
have treated me in such a manner as to make me feel that


there is a better understanding between them and myself
than is the case with other districts, excepting of course my
own native suburb of Richmond, to which I am attached by
the warmest and strongest ties ever formed by memories,
family affections, and associations. The country districts
and more outlying suburbs, especially Canterbury and Box
Hill, always receive me, in common with other singers, most
cordially; but with regard to Albert Park and South Mel-
bourne I have a curious feeling that there is some mystic con-
nection between us, foreordained from the beginning, and it
always gives me an especial feeling of happiness to sing in
that district, which includes also Port Melbourne, with its
jolly, free and easy Seamen’s Institute, which exists for so
good an object.
Some of our greatest Melbourne musicians, too, live at
Albert Park. Mr. Henry John King, one of the best com-
posers we have here, and whose anthems should be more fre-
quently heard in our churches. It would be a great gain to
the community if they were used to the utter displacement
of many which are used so much in some city churches.
Mr. Fred Clutsam is also an Albert Park resident, and
we Melbourne people all owe him a debt of gratitude for pro-
viding us with another musical society for the production of
high-class choral and orchestral works.
Then I have a still more intimate feeling about some
dear friends in that part who, though not professors of music,
do all in their power as upholders of the art, in forwarding
the interests of those who show aspirations after the best,
by encouraging and cheering them with their friendship and
kindness, but I refrain from mentioning names, as it may
give offence to those who do not pose as public or profes-
sional characters.
There is but to add that the encouragement which my
literary attempts met with at last year’s South Melbourne
Competitions, combined with the smaller degree of approval
from those who sit in judgment, which a similar attempt met
with at Prahran this year, emboldened me to write this
book.
Last, but not least, in this category of helpers I must
mention the musical critics on the staffs of the principal daily
and weekly papers. In common with most public singers, I
stand in considerable awe of these gentlemen, for are they
not great and powerful as a consuming fire?—or “a refiner’s
fire,” would perhaps be the more correct comparison; but we
are fortunate in Melbourne in having men of such honour and
sincerity that they use their power for good ends, and their


writings thus supply one of the most important agencies in
the forwarding of the best interests of the art. Although
the longest-established representative of the literary branch
of music in Melbourne is not a friend or even an acquaintance
of my own, I have the privilege of worshipping from afar,
and of reading his critiques in the morning papers, which
critiques are often in themselves a means of higher musical
education.
I do not think that there is anything invidious about my
making a list and publishing the names of my best friends;
each local songster and songstress is at liberty to do the
same, and indicate the individuals who are the most eminent
members of his or her group of helpers; for no singer rises
to popularity or notoriety, to say nothing of fame, without
the aid and guidance of many friendly hands.
It is not that I have made a fortune, and am now about
to tell others how to go and do likewise; for if I had become
rich I would not consider myself a good representative of the
class to which, musically speaking, I belong, for what singer
who has come out in Melbourne during the last dozen years
has made a fortune in this city? It is therefore rather that
I have sometimes made mistakes, and would prevent others
from doing likewise, by informing them of the obstacles and
pitfalls which I have found most dangerous.
There is a certain hymn in which we are promised that
We shall know each other better
When the mists have roiled away.
and I believe that a question is raised among the specula-
tively-inclined religious, as to whether we shall recognise our
friends when we meet them in the spirit land; but it seems
to me that our time might be better occupied in trying to
understand and sympathise with the spirits of our friends
while still confined to this earthly tabernacle, and our ingenu-
ity more suitably used in endeavouring to roll away some of
the mists ourselves by means of the sunshine of a friendly
and helpful disposition, than useless conjectures about mat-
ters which are beyond our ken.
In England it is the custom to hold conferences on musi-
cal affairs, just as here there are large religious and denomi-
national gatherings for the discussion of questions which ap-
pertain to the government and management of that particu-
lar religious body under whose auspices the conference is
held. These religious conferences in Melbourne being the
cause of such large and enthusiastic gatherings have set
me thinking and wondering why there are not similar gather-
ings held on account of music in our city, for we are not, as
a community, considered any more fanatically religious than


we are reckoned musical to the pitch of insanity; so it must
be a want of organisation and too great a prevalence of
cliques among musicians which causes the dulness and cold-
ness of our musical life (which certainly at times seems to
be rather in need of resuscitation), and not any deficiency
of enthusiasm in individuals, or because of the smallness of
the number of those whose life-work is the energetic support
of the musical art, in one branch or another by all the means
within their power; for in proportion to the population it
seems to me that thoroughly well-equipped musicians and
highly-cultivated singers are very numerous indeed. Some
might say it is owing to a lack of disinterestedness and good
comradeship among those earning their livelihood by music,
which causes the lives of many members of the profession to
be so isolated, but I would be the last to endorse this opinion,
for singers and musicians whom I meet at concerts generally
exhibit very friendly and amiable dispositions.
Is it then that Melbourne people prefer theology and the
preaching of it, to music and the performance of it? Appar-
ently talk is more popular than music, and many people think
there is no music like the sound of their own voices. We have
it on record that talk once spoilt a Melbourne concert as effec-
tually as care killed a cat; and it is my humble opinion that
whatever harm loquaciousness and “ freedom of speech ” may
cause, Browning’s lines might with regard to the members
of our own community, be paraphrased as follows:
I had wealth and ease,
Beauty, youth ;
Since my lover gave me talk
I gave these.
I would not, however, on any account disparage pleasant
and interesting conversation, which I look upon as the life-
blood of social intercourse, but we singers occasionally meet
with ingenious persons who show a desire to talk us out of
all we possess, including our hearts, and to give nothing but
aggravation and annoyance in return, though some indeed
seem to be ready to promise anything, even to marry us, if
we will only sing in aid of some church or charitable object
without asking a fee of them. I trust the poetical reader will
accept this explanation and extenuation of my crime in alter-
ing the Browning text.
But I promise to refrain as much as possible from quota-
tions, lest the beauty of the borrowed phrases eclipse that of
my own ideas; and it is only at church anniversaries and
Pleasant Sunday Afternoons, where I have the felicity of
being associated with eminent local divines, that I can be


content to be so put in the shade, and feel that honour may
be combined with humility.
Speaking of ideas brings me back to the subject which
the title page of this book promises a discourse upon.
In 1894, when I just set out on my adventures as a pub-
lic singer, being sent to Mr. W. J. Turner, armed with a letter
of introduction from Madame Simonsen, from whom I was
then taking lessons, Mr. Turner, after hearing me sing,
asked me “what my ideas were.” This was something of a
poser for me, as when I had entered into his presence I had
not thought ideas were so necessary to a singer as I have
since found them to be, for they then appeared to me to
belong rather to the province of the author, the preacher, or
the journalist. The only definite idea, which my mind at first
contained about the profession which I desired to embrace,
being embodied in the conviction that a few appearances at
the Exhibition concerts would justify my choice of a vocation
in the eyes of my friends, some of whom were impatient to
see an early result of the training, which otherwise must al-
ways appear in the light of a fantastic waste of time and
money. Therefore I was glad of the five appearances at the
series of Exhibition Concerts, which inaugurated my
troublous series of experiences (for I will not presume to call
it a career) as a contralto vocalist.
But although my experience has not been all that could
be desired, to follow my present vocation was the only line of
action for me to pursue, and on looking back I do not feel
the slightest resentment or bitterness at any part of the
ordeal which I have come through, for what is done for love
is its own reward, and I have had the fulness of a twofold
love to sustain me—viz., the love of music and the love of
my country- —our own dear, sunny Australia.
To carry my retrospect still further back into the
shadowy past, I first became seriously interested in good
music at the time of the Melbourne International Exhibition
of 1888, when the strains of the Centennial Orchestra, under
the conductorship of Mr. F. H. Cowen, awoke within me the
dormant love of music, which had till then been lulled into
a comatose state by the unmusicianly hymn-tunes used in
the smaller religious causes, and the usual style of piano-
forte “ pieces ” taught at private schools by the lower-grade
teachers. Stephen Heller’s “Tarentelle in Ab ” and Weber’s
“ Invitation to the Waltz ” being the sublimest heights to
which my aspirations had hitherto been tempted to wing
their flight.
Now the Melbourne Exhibition became a paradise of
sweet sounds to which I repaired at every opportunity, each


day watching for the advertised programmes in the daily
papers, for the names of favourite symphonies and overtures,
as well as eagerly devouring every word of the critiques next
morning. I kept the programmes of these concerts for years
afterwards as mementoes of the most pleasant occasions of
my life. Would that I had them now, that I might accurately
state the names and composers of those works which most
fascinated me, my regret at their loss not being because I
would like to use them “ as corroborative details intended to
give an air of truth to an otherwise bald and unconvincing
narrative” (to quote Poo-Bah, of “Mikado” fame), but as
a matter of interest to other enthusiasts who, like myself,
may remember the awakening of their first love of music on
hearing a good orchestra; for orchestral music was my first
love, and all other branches of the art, including vocal music,
from oratorio down to ballads, were in comparison with
orchestral music rather an acquired taste than otherwise,
though at the present stage of my artistic development, vocal
music by reason of years of cultivation has a hold upon my
affections none the 'less strong than that which orchestral
music spontaneously gained, It was just as this period, too,
that I heard Cowen’s “ Ruth,” Handel’s “ Messiah,” and
Haydn’s “ Creation ” for the first time, but they did not ap-
peal to me in the same irresistible manner as did the purely
instrumental works, which acted in such a powerful way upon
my imagination as to be really the motive force which opened
the portals of music’s glorious though mysterious and
shadowy dreamland to my soul, where, ever since, I have wan-
dered on what has sometimes seemed an aimless pilgrimage,
but I have been at all times cheered by the hope of finding
other and better comprehended revelations than that first
great beacon light, which drew me off the track of common-
place life, and by the light of which I found the one marked
out for me even though it may sometimes appear to be lead-
ing me into an impenetrable forest or dreary wilderness, yet
there is always a golden thread for the guidance of talent
which we shall discern clearly enough if we search diligently,
and by this golden thread left by genius, we of talent may
find our way, even if the path along which we tread be over-
grown with weeds and almost obliterated.
To return to my reminiscences. The spirit of music so
possessed me after I had once heard Cowen’s orchestra, that
it was intolerable to me to be at the Exhibition Building at
the time of an orchestral performance with companions who
were too indifferent to music to go into the Concert Hall; and
at other times it was a great disappointment to be debarred
from entering there on account of our late arrival and the full


ness of the hall, owing to an exceptionally attractive pro-
gramme. How wistfully, under these circumstances, did I
listen for the strains of the orchestra, as wandering discon-
solately about the building, pretending to look at exhibits,
we would now and then come within earshot of a few bars of
a well-loved symphony or familiar overture.
Dear musical reader, is it not also the case with you that
the themes and strains of some great musical works have a
twofold beauty for you, that of their intrinsic worth, and
that of the golden mist of memories which surrounds them,
especially if, when j'ou first heard them, your enjoyment was
enhanced by the frequent companionship and genuine sym-
pathy of one who has since found the resolution of earth’s
many discords in the music of the realms above?
It was just at this time, too, that I searched out and
learned by heart all the poetry in praise of music, and all the
information about musicians and the works they had com-
posed, or the instruments on which they played, which was
contained in my then very limited library; and professional
musicians, especially the members of Cowen’s Orchestra,
were to me objects of the most reverential hero worship; and
this in spite of the warnings as to my eventual disenchant-
ment, uttered by my elderly relatives, who possessed all the
puritanical prejudices of the old school against those whose
vocation is the public performance of music, musicians being
condemned in the same category with actors and actresses,
whom we all knew, were, up to the end of the last century,
considered by religious people to be going straight to the
devil.
But musicians, nevertheless continued to hold in my esti-
mation the position of idealised human beings, and as it was
not until some years later that I came into much actual con-
tact with these erstwhile-glamour-surrounded individuals, the
contrast between the ideal and the real was not as painful as
some cynical people might be disposed to imagine; yet, in all
honesty, I must state that I have been forced to find rather
lower pedestals for some of my local musical heroes than I
would have willingly been persuaded to think necessary.
In those early days I did not think much about the musi-
cal critics, although I read with avidity and the most implicit
belief everything which the “ Age ” and “ Argus ” said about
the con >rts which I attended, and these criticisms formed
the germs of my more advanced musical education, which had
its earliest beginning just at that time, but the opinions ex-
pressed in the daily papers were unconnected, in my mind,
with any idea of the personality? of the musical writers, being
simply, to me, the ideas of the “Age” and “Argus” (perhaps


I should sometimes say the “ Argus ” and “ Age,” but my
musical ear has adopted the sequence used by the paper boy
who wakes the echoes of our street at seven o’clock every
morning—he also wakes me—but that is neither here nor
there). Being at the time of the Centennial Orchestra’s exist-
ence in my early teens, my mind was not sufficiently develop-
ed to take in the idea of the personality of a musical critic,
and even at a later stage its admission into my consciousness
had something about it of the nature of a surgical operation,
but once being there it stayed, and I have been giving the
subject a great amount of earnest and respectful attention
“ ever since then.”
But the musical critic being the one thing in the world
which I am afraid of (excepting perhaps the landlord of my
teaching room, of whom I stand in the greatest awe), I re-
frain from expressing myself as fully on that subject, as is
my habits upon most topics, only for my own consolation I
recollect that when a child, owing to the consciousness in my
infant mind of natural depravity and original sin, I was
afraid of ministers of the gospel and policemen. This dread,
I have (by force of reason, and the conscientious endeavour
to reach an elevated plane of life and conduct) managed to
overcome; so there is hope that in a period of higher artistic
development the musical critic may also lose some of his
terrors, and become less of a bogie to me than has hitherto
been the case, so that I may happily prove the truth of the
statement of an eminent Melbourne musician (under whom I
studied for a couple of years), who informed me that the
singer passes through an ordeal of three stages with regard
to the critic—or he might have more correctly said, singer
and critic pass through a mutual ordeal—the three stages of
it being as follows:
First Stage: The critic endures the singer.
Second Stage: The critic tolerates the singer with some
degree of respect.
Third Stage: The critic thinks very highly of the singer.
This is evidently a metamorphosis of the lines of Pope
concerning vice. Pope’s lines are as follow:
Vice is a monster of so frightful mien
As to be hated needs but to be seen ;
But seen too oft, familiar with ' t face
We first endure, then pity, then nbrace.
If the last line of Pope’s verse is to be the critic’s motto
or rule of action with regard to singers, may we suggest that
one of our local composers write a sonata with three move-
ments, each movement to be descriptive of one of the three


stages which appertain to the critic with regard to a singer,
the last movement, in accordance with the understood wishes
of critic and singer alike, to be very short, and taken Presto.
CONCERNING THE MUSICAL OUTLOOK
OF MELBOURNE.
The state of music in Melbourne is such, and there is so
little scope for the higher grades of talent and cultivation
among us that the more highly gifted thoroughly trained in-
strumentalists and vocalists who have been before the public
for several years, are no better off as regards fees and oppor-
tunities for taking part in good concerts, than are the youth-
ful tyros of whom there is a shoal turned out each year as
prize-winners at Competitions.
The said Competitions are very good things for several
reasons—they are helpful to teachers, in the same way as
musical examinations are in giving an impetus to the
studious energy of the pupil; they are also in one way,
superior to the examinations for the equipment of public
performers, because of the opportunities they afford the com-
petitor of appearing before a large audience, though it is
probable that many students find the ordeal of appearing
before an examining board quite as trying as the appearance
on a platform in a large hall filled with less discriminating
people, among whom the judge is not so clearly seen as are
the examiners, who, being the only occupants of the room,
stand out in bold relief. But after the competition, what
then? Where is all this talent for performing music in public
to find a profitable scope or market? for it is generally young
people who hope to make their gifts a means of livelihood
who are the most earnest participators in Musical and Elocu-
tionary Competitions, although at examinations the more
wealthy members of the community may present themselves
in order to test the soundness of their musical knowledge.
It is true there is plenty of room at the top, but in Mel-
bourne there is no “ top ” to speak of as regards concerts—
it is all one dead level of ballad singing for the singers, and
of accompanying the said ballads for many of the pianists.
And then again, to make monotony more monotonous, such
a few ballads really hit the popular taste, the list of such
as do being still more limited by the prevalence of “ Lantern
Concerts,” for which we must choose songs during which
appropriate lantern slides may be thrown upon a large
sheet, beside which the singer meekly takes his or her place


in a pitch dark hall or church, in order to explain in the
words of an often very commonplace ballad what the pic-
tures are supposed to represent. At these illustrated con-
certs the singer’s attitude, both psychical and material, is one
of the utmost self-effacement, for on entering a hall darkened
for the purpose of showing lantern slides, the entry of the
singer may be better described as a “ disappearance ” rather
than as an appearance before an audience.
Not but what it may very properly be considered a boon
to some of us to sing in the dark, and also very appropriate
these hard times, when fees are so rare and small as to be
almost at the vanishing point. Indeed, I begin to wonder,
when I get one, if I ought not in the interest of the com-
munity to send it to the Museum, as a specimen of an object
which will soon become extinct in our midst.
It would therefore be very trying to be expected to al-
ways be prepared to add to the impressiveness of our singing
by an appearance of greater prosperity than is ours, by
means of rich and fashionable apparel. Very common and
dowdy dressing is of course out of place on a public platform,
as it seems to express rather a disrespect for the audience
on the part of the singers, which disrespect audiences are not
slow to resent and to return with interest to the singer, but
to be a living lie is not altogether in good taste for anyone
professing high principles and integrity, whether public per-
former or otherwise, and in Melbourne the more intelligent
people who take an interest in music must fully understand
that so little being spent on music in proportion to what
is laid out on other commodities, it is useless to expect
singers to be so sumptuously and effectively attired as is the
custom in countries of older civilisations and settlements,
where to be a well-known and highly-appreciated singer
means to be in receipt of a good income, but this is not al-
ways so in Australia. It is a pity that we queens of song are
so often forced to appear in robes and crowns of a seedy and
second-best appearance, but it is more queenly of us to
do so than to sacrifice our honesty to gay costumes and head-
gear.
None of the treatises on the ethics, etiquette and general
state of the musical profession and circumstances of singers
and musicians in settled and old-established countries like
that of England, or even America, apply to this community,
except in one or two rare instances, when they may be made
to do so by stretching a point. The book of this kind which
I have derived most good from is one by Henry Fisher, Mus.
Doc., called “The Musical Profession,” and is the result of
much painstaking effort on the part of the writer to gain a


clear idea of the prevailing views of his countrymen with
regard to musical matters, an effort which might with great
advantage to all concerned be imitated in Australia. But
even in this book, advice is given which Melbourne musicians
could not follow without finding themselves hampered by
unnecessary difficulties. For instance he does not believe in
advertisements of any kind being inserted in newspapers by
teachers of singing and music, and quotes a doctor, who in
a code of Medical Ethics, says that it is “ derogatory to the
profession to solicit practice by advertisement, card or cir-
cular, or therewith to notify change of residence or address.”
This may be all very well for doctors, although some of the
members of the medical profession might find it necessary to
advertise under certain circumstances, particularly the
female members of the profession, who might have to suffer
serious loss by being misrepresented as having given up their
profession for marriage, or whose colleagues have taken the
opportunity of a series of bereavements among her relations
in order to circulate the false report that she has left a com-
munity in which she still remains, and where she has still to
endeavour to make a livelihood, for that is just the state of
the case with a lady singer whom I know, who finds that the
only way to combat the disadvantageous circumstances
which I have described is to insert an advertisement in the
daily papers, for though constantly appearing before audi-
ences in Melbourne and suburbs with as great success as that
of other vocalists, having, in point of fact, rarely passed
through a week since making her debut nearly a dozen years
ago, without appearing at some concert, and often appearing
three and four times a week, she is just as constantly plied
with questions as to whether she has given up her vocation,
whether she has been singing anywhere lately, and other
equally irritating questions and remarks from people who are
presumably either very designing or of very vacant and un-
observant minds and habits; yet the musical people of Mel-
bourne being divided into such small and close sets and sec-
tions, it is quite possible for some individuals not to have
heard of a singer who has not sung much for any members of
their particular coterie.
In Melbourne there is the public which undoubtedly ap-
preciates good music, especially good singing, and there are
many well qualified musicians and singers who are willing to
cater for that public, but by reason of some strange and in-
comprehensible disjointedness in the order of things, these two
sections of the community are not brought face to face to
their mutual advantage frequently enough to cause that
warm glow in the musical life of our community, which would


cause the seeds of genius (which no one can disbelieve the
presence of) to germinate, grow, and bring forth fruit. It
may seem to some that it is the middle man who acts as a
bar and obstacle to progress, and that the middle man in this
case is the concert manager. But this is not really so, and
it is my impression that concert managers have many more
sins and shortcomings laid to their charge than they are
really guilty of. They are, it is true, not always thoroughly
disinterested in their motives, but being hard-headed and
discriminating, and in the case of our Melbourne men,
thorough musicians, it is probable that they would be glad to
give performances of classical works, both high standard and
novel, if they could depend upon the support of the public.
But the fact is that, the public which appreciates high-class
music in Melbourne ajfe'too small and unstable to give much
continuous support to musical enterprise. It thus comes
about that the singers and other solo-performers who strive
after a high grade of cultivation in the hope of finding room
at the “ top,” find that Melbourne musical life is—as I said be-
fore—singularly deficient in scope for solo work of a high
grade, the larger societies which perform works, which pro-
vide any opportunities for soloists, being run on the debu-
tante plan for the sake of cheapness, and because even the
singers who have been longest before the public, and have
even attained to a certain degree of popularity as ballad
singers, are in reality (unless their early training has com-
prised experience in singing solos with orchestral accompani-
ment and concerted music, or unless they have kept up their
theoretical studies), very little better equipped for oratorio
than the youngest beginner; for a study of harmony and a
long course of ear-training is absolutely necessary for singing
the works of the great masters, with any ease to oneself or
satisfaction to the audience, which is quick to perceive any
restlessness, uncertainty or discomfort on the part of a
singer, and to form a lower estimate of that singer in conse-
quence, even though the vocalist’s natural gifts may be all
that could be desired, and the expectations of our well-qualified
fellow-workers in the good cause of high-class music are of
an even more exacting nature than that of the public.
To be a successful singer is to hold a position of great
honour and a certain amount of power; to be an unsuccessful
one is to appear in a position of the utmost weakness, because
of its exposure to the sneers and contumely of the ill-disposed.
But even fairly successful singers have much to contend
with in the way of underhand ridicule, and the assumed con-
tempt of those who, for some occult reasons of their own,


wish to hinder the progress and prevent the success of certain
singers.
The musical profession has been very truly said to be
the one which of all others is the easiest to enter, but the
hardest to get on in, and it is undoubtedly the one in which
failure must ever cause the bitterest humiliation and keenest
mortification, for being in most of its branches an essentially
public profession, the individual who tries to make one of these
branches of music a means of livelihood in a manner calls
the whole community to witness his efforts to effect something
which will add to the delectation or artistic advancement of
the general public; then if he does not accomplish what he
attempts, the whole community is also aware of his failure
and sees his discomfiture.
But why should any properly qualified singer ever fail,
even in the limited and disadvantageous sphere which the
city life of this new country affords? And in reference to
singers, why should we ever hear those cruel words, “ the sur-
vival of the fittest,” with their ominous and sinister sugges-
tion of an undermeaning that even the “ fit ” may be thrust
aside for some one “ fitter,” and their long days and nights
of study go for nothing. Probably the case would be more
correctly put if it were at once plainly stated that artistic
merit of genuine quality may possibly be systematically placed
on one side by concert managers in order to cater for the
crude and capricious taste of a public, which rushes and
swarms to support the more doubtful quality of merit, which
by some accidental circumstance or by well-organised “ boom-
ing ” becomes invested with an exaggerated, fantastic and
extrinsic value. Therefore, owing to the complexities and
subtleties of the musical taste of the public, and the rivalries
of the profession, native talent may at times be left to decay
in utter oblivion.
But I do not think that this is often the case, for surely
no singer or musican of merit need be an utter failure in a
civilised, not to say, cultured community; for even if little
money is earned by their profession, the training which has
made them good singers, and the suffering and discipline
which they have undergone in their years of probation, have
caused them to attain to an elevation of character and mental
and even physical culture, which makes them of the greatest
value and credit to the community, whether their engage-
ments and public appearances be few or many.
It is ridiculous for singers of the same class of voice (such
as sopranos, contraltos, tenors, baritones and basses) to be


jealous of each other, for each voice has its distinctive and
characteristic charm, just as each attractive human counten-
ance has, and each will draw towards it just that tide of sym-
pathy and degree of comprehension and support which belong
to it, whether the voice be heard in oratorio, opera, or, as is
more likely to be the case in Melbourne, in ballads.
The menace to the existence of native musical enterprise
does not lie in the probability of genuine merit (such as that
of singers and musicians of highly-cultivated gifts and pro-
perly-directed talents) ever being neglected, whether such be
Australian natives or otherwise, for “ solid qualities and the
honest cultivation of them ” must ever result in “ solid suc-
cess,” as Russell Lowell says; but possessors of talent are
very likely to have their talents obscured and their cultivation
hindered by having around them too many Job’s comforters,
who will press in the thorns of adverse criticism and other
much less honest forms of discouragement and annoyance,
until, instead of having to bear the transient pain of a pin
prick or two, we find festering wounds which take long to
heal and ever after leave a scar. It therefore needs great
courage and perseverance to succeed and continue to be a suc-
cess in public singing and other forms of practical music or
to be able to progress beyond a certain point. The callous
may not be conscious of such draw-backs as I have indicated,
and may be quite incredulous of their existence, except in the
imagination of the over-sensitive, but the callous do not as a
rule know much about the artistic character or artistic work
at all; such character and work being generally accompanied
by an acutely sensitive organism, and this sensitiveness of
temperament and excitability of imagination is taken advan-
tage of by those who either from jealousy or some more prac-
tical motive consider it to their interest to discourage the
artist who would seem to be on a fair way to success.
One derogatory remark, which is a great favourite with
the thoughtless (who feel uneasy at the opportunities they
imagine singers have for personal display) is to speak of an
exceptionally beautiful voice as “ only a gift ”; as if the light
which shines out of heaven upon our souls lit up only one
facet in the case of the talented, plunging the rest of the
talented person’s psychical nature into impenetrable gloom;
and as if those favoured of heaven with such a glorious gift as
a musical voice undoubtedly is, were to be the more dis-
paraged on that account by the sons of earth. It is true we
have seen those who consider the possession of a good voice
to give them a license of behaviour which made their artistic
triumphs of less credit to the community than they might other-
wise have been, because there was a suspicion of questionable


methods used in forwarding the designs by which their brief
and meteor-like progress was brought about. We can only
pity those who have not the strength to carry their gifts along
a steady course, to a perhaps far distant, but honourable
consummation. To borrow a simile of Professor Peterson’s,
which he uses to illustrate musical climax (and which is but
one of many beautiful illustrations which adorn the pages
of our Professor’s useful and instructive handbooks), I would
say that a talent should be looked upon by its possessor as
rather of the nature of the speck of white paint in a picture,
which enhances the beauty and impressiveness of the picture,
and is but the crowning point of the ingenious harmonies of
colour in the picture, without which harmonies and beauties of
colour the speck of white would be meaningless. So with
talent, which, if not the coping-stone to soundness of charac-
ter and the harmony of our general activities and motives of
our daily lives, which work up to intense expression by means
of whatever talent we possess, our gifts of song are of little
worth in aiding the progress and elevation of the community,
even when such gifts are most highly cultivated.
With regard to the derogatory remarks which are made
about singer’s names, whether because of their commonness
or their ugliness, or with regard to a singer’s action in taking
a false name, I would state that, my name being Smith, I
followed the example of the tradespeople who, for business
purposes, added to our accounts the name of the street we
lieve in, so as to distinguish us from the other Smiths, so when
I found I had to make singing part of my trade, I took the
name of the street altogether, in order to distinguish me from
others who might be engaged in the same occupation as my-
self, that we might not clash too much or steal each others’
business connection. The devout organist of a city church
thought my action in doing so was highly reprehensible, and
told me I had “ no right to change the name God had given
me,” but it seems to me that there was such a remarkable
absence of the Divine inventiveness, and the infinitude of the
Almighty displayed in the naming of the inhabitants of this
planet that it surely must have been done by some other
agency.
I would fain mention individually all who have been of
assistance to me at any time, either by their sympathy, or
by their services in supplying items for programmes, which I
have arranged for different charitable objects throughout this
year, and those immediately preceding, but partly from fear
of giving offence and partly because the list would be such a
very long one, I refrain, and hope that all my friends will
understand, and remember that underneath all our expressed


thoughts and feelings there is a yet deeper feeling of gratitude
and appreciation which can never be adequately expressed,
and of which my readiness to return their kindness may be
found more eloquent than words. But I would make an excep-
tion with regard to the Rev. Pearce Carey and Mr. Arthur
Morgan, the minister and organist respectively of the Collins-
street Baptist Church, who although both being exceedingly
busy men, have generously sacrificed a portion of their valu-
able time at my request on one or two occasions, in support
of worthy causes, and have also been kind enough to show
an interest in my temporal welfare which was not as highly
appreciated as under some circumstances might have been
the case.
It is also due to the residents of Heathcote that I mention
the very pleasant visit to their lovely little town in June, and
I again thank the kind friends there for the generous hospi-
tality and cordial reception which made the concerts in that
district such a means of happiness and revival to those whose
spirits were drooping, both among the audience and among
the visiting performers; and for the opportunity given to ex-
press our sympathy for those enduring other kinds of suffer-
ing in the local hospital, where my young violinist friend, Miss
Scarcebrook, and I had the pleasure of performing Mascagni’s
“ Ave Maria ” in conjunction, on that beautiful Autumn Sunday
afternoon. I also gratefully remember the kind friends at
Bridgewater (which is also in the Bendigo district), and
Lancefield, whose warm-hearted friendliness did much to atone
for the inclemency of the weather which I experienced in
that part.


PART II.
INTRODUCTORY.
As the second part of this little book is to be of a more
formal and technical character than the first part (which,
though longer, is rather in the nature of an informal intro-
duction to the second part), I would prefer to here discuss
the matter of the individual style and mannerisms of the
singer, as I do not consider this subject as of such a techni-
cal kind as those of the registers of the voice, breathing and
other mechanical matters connected with singing.
Male singers would seem to have the advantage over their
sister vocalists in the matter of appearing upon public plat-
forms. For one thing, their thoughts are more directed to-
wards public life by those who have charge of their training
in their earliest years than is the case with girls ; and men are
generally so placed in ordinary life as to have their natural
strength and courage (both moral and physical) greatly en-
hanced and developed by their daily experiences. Therefore
it is easier and more comfortable for a man to go before an
audience than for a woman, all else, such as vocal gifts and
cultivation, personal attractiveness, etc., being equal. Added
to this, the fashions and customs in male attire for various
occasions are very simple, and seem to be almost as unalter-
able as the laws of the Medes and Persians; so that a man
need not find the same difficulties, or be placed in the same
sort of predicament between two fires—i.e., that of unduly
taxing a small income or of appearing in an out-of-date or
soiled and shabby costume, as is often the case with the
female singer, who is wholly dependent upon her vocal gifts
for an income. But as I intend to show presently, it is a folly
to solely rety on such gifts for an income in Melbourne, for if
we did we should have to be content with the same simple and
unvaried raiment and diet as that with which John the Baptist
was clothed and fed when he appeared as “ a voice crying
in the wilderness.”
But with all her disadvantages a woman with a voice can
by persevering in public singing, attain to a style which if
not an impressive and showy one, is at least inoffensive to


good taste; and it is by experience alone that undesirable
mannerisms can be eliminated, and real ease of feeling and
bearing, and genuine self-possession can be acquired.
This experience in my own case was for some consider-
able time made rather an uncomfortable, not to say painful,
one for myself, for being naturally of a diffident and retiring
nature, my style has always been a quiet, unpretentious one,
and this at the beginning of my public musical life gave
people the excuse to worry me a good deal, and so relentless
were some of my detractors that I cannot but think that in
some cases at least my defects of style and manner were
exaggerated in a somewhat spiteful way, at least by my
acquaintances and treacherous friends of the fair sex (for, of
course, men are above such paltriness), because they envied
me my self-possession, or rather my apparent self-possession;
for it should be remembered that some have the faculty of
hiding their nervous qualms, just as they would endure any
any other form of martyrdom without making a sign, which
courage and self-control, if better understood, would surely
excite sympathy rather than detraction. Some of my self-
constituted critics said I looked “ droopy,” others that I had
such a terribly sad expression as if I must have some great
hidden sorrow; one or two more practically-minded persons
expressed a longing for some means of shaking me up out of
what was publicly branded in a daily paper as my “ tame and
lifeless style ”; another said I should cultivate a quiet and
dignified manner on the platform ; and yet another remarked
that I had an awkward way of appearing on the platform. In
self-defence I might add that these derogatory remarks as to
my style were often magnanimously accompanied by compli-
ments to my voice, or perhaps I should not have had the
audacity to persevere amidst such a storm of disapproval, and
so thick a shower of moral brickbats, but even brilliant com-
pliments as to one’s voice do not always take away the sting
of disparaging expressions about one’s manner and style,
for a singer always has a suspicion that those who say so
much about the voice are extolling it at the expense of their
admiration for any other attribute of the singer, and are giv-
ing us to understand that they consider the voice “ only a
gift,” which the gifted person is considered rather unworthy
of.
Ah, well! perhaps they are right, but anyway, I must do
my best to rectify the mistake Providence has made, and en-
deavour to live up to my privileges.
To continue to recount my experiences in endeavouring
to acquire the “ good style,” which I was told on all hands
that I stood in such dire need of, finding that my way of going


on to the platform and my apparent tranquility when I got
there were so heartily objected to, I now tried another style,
and determined to take my position on the platform as quickly
as possible, so that people might not have time to notice just
how I did it, and I took to singing with the full power of my
voice in all passages not distinctly marked “ piano.” This
line of action seemed to startle people more than my former
restrained and passive style had hitherto depressed them,
and my critics and musical authorities now had as much to
say about my voice sounding too loud for certain halls as
they had before said about my aggravating quietude of style.
So I am now striving after the manner of singing which will
make all my tones as soft and tender as those of a cooing
dove, but will have nothing in them at all depressing or over-
sorrowful, which will cause my voice at all times to penetrate
to the farthest limits of the largest building without being in
the slightest degree startling by reason of its intensity and
power; in addition to this, it is “my object all sublime, which
I shall achieve in time ” (if I live long enough) to attain to a
style on the platform which will combine the beseeching ten-
derness of the ardent lover with the dignity of an Archbishop;
which to the liveliness of a ballet girl will add the reserve and
statuesque parity of the vestal virgin, or the hauteur of a
typical Duchess. The singer who can manage all this de-
serves to become yet there may be many mute in-
glorious Admirable Crichtons in our midst in the persons of
musical amateurs and unofficial critics, of whom the musical
world is neither worthy nor aware. But until they make
themselves known, and give us a few more hints, I fear that
many of us will have to be content, and to ask the public to
be satisfied with our own natural style, which at least has the
merit of being genuine and unaffected. For my part Ino more
think of assuming a manner on ascending the steps of a plat-
form than I would stop at the door of a friend’s drawing-room
to cogitate as to what artificial role I should appear in before
her guests. Good-will towards others and respect for our-
selves are the best guides in both places.
Sometimes I fear that my own style will always have
something of stiffness in it, except under very favourable cir-
cumstances, owing to the nervous self-consciousness which
always takes possession of me on going before an audience,
and which years of experience as a public singer have not
only failed in removing, but have left undiminished in the
slightest degree ; for every concert is as “ a new beginning ”
of terrors for me, and at every appearance on my part, be-
fore an audience “is the worry made new,” just as if I had
never before sung in public. Yet I feel that if I lost this


tremor I would lose a great part of whatever faculty I may
possess for pleasing and touching my hearers by means of
my singing, and my rendering of songs might grow hard and
unsympathetic if each song were not used as a means of
recalling all the most impressive incidents and psychical ex-
periences of my past life, to which the words of that particu-
lar song can be made in my own mind to have reference to,
and the song is thus made the vehicle of expression for my
deepest and strongest emotions. It is therefore not so much
fear of the audience as the state of mind required in myself
for the true rendering of a song being not always the one in
which I feel inclined to face a perhaps unsympathetic audi-
ence, which is more often the cause of my sufferings than any-
thing in the nature of timidity or shrinking from criticism.
For if a pathetic song is not sung with truth and depth of
pathos, it is only a dull, tedious performance, and a light
frivolous song gaily sung would be more acceptable. The
latter indeed are often liked better by superficial people than
the most beautiful pathetic song, even when sung by a good
singer, who renders it with suitable expression, and the con-
tralto vocalist may at times be templed to envy the flexible
soprano the large stock of brilliantly florid but (as regards
the deeper emotions) inexpressive solos, with which the reper-
toire of the soprano maybe furnished.
Miss Francis Ridley Havergal once said that “ a great
deal of living had to go to a very little writing,” and the same
may be said of expressive singing. A great deal of feeling,
and even suffering, must precede the true rendering of a song
which the composer himself has put any meaning into. That
is why we should be very careful in our choice of songs, only
taking those into our repertoire which can be made as much
the expression of our own thoughts and feelings, as if the
words were written by ourselves. There are a great many
vocalists among us, but not many have gone down into the
depths and brought up the pearl of genuine expressiveness in
song; there is a certain coldness and artificiality in most of
the singing we hear, which tells us that the singers have not
suffered in order to be beautiful in their singing, but are
singers because it is the custom to sing if a person’s voice
is not too unbearable to the listeners.
It certainly is one of the most prevailing fashions in Mel-
bourne—that of singing. If intellectual culture were more
the rage with us, there would be as much bad verse writing
and poor attempts at novels as there is now bad song singing
and poor attempts at choir work and concerted music, but
this rage for literature would in time produce in our midst
an Australian Elizabeth Browning, George Sand, Madame de


Stael, or George Eliot. So our rage for singing may in time
produce some great singer who will be able to find all her
requisite training in her native land, and who will be able to
stay at home and enrich with her talents and energy the
musical life of her native land. Such as this when she
appears (for I can speak more confidently in the feminine
gender, as men as naturally roamers) will be more of a credit
to the community than the one who, utterly uncultivated and
with a voice and nothing more, leaves our shores to find her
best training and her highest successes and everything for
her equipment as a cultured professional in some other land,
and comes back to us for a brief period just to show us the
difference which European polish makes to a rough Australian
native, ft should make us rather weep than rejoice, to think
how little has been effected in the matter of musical culture in
our own land, when so much time, energy and money are
wasted each year on objects much less worthy, and it is very
poor-spirited of us to be forever hankering after the things of
the old country, when we have so many undeveloped resources
and funds of beauty going to waste upon our own shores, and
so many fountains of pure and living water flowing in vain,
which are in danger of running dry or disappearing into the
earth by reason of the neglect and disparagement which they
suffer, because they are near at hand, and are therefore
thought less of than those which gain a certain prestige or
mirage because of their being at so great a distance as to be
unattainable.
Emerson truly says, “ Nature never rhymes her children,”
and though it is usual to refer to young ladies with nice voices
as budding Melbas or second Ada Crossleys, yet it is my firm
belief that there never will really be another Melba or Ada
Crossley. Not that my admiration (though very great) for
these two highly-gifted country-women of mine is of such an
extravagant nature that I consider they have exhausted the
means, and removed all possibility of any other Australian
natives adding lustre to their names and taking a distin-
guished place in the artistic world, but such as desire and
hope for similar honours and distinctions as those which are
lavished upon Melba and Crossley will not gain them by
closely following in the steps of these two, over the identi-
cal fields which they have so closely reaped. To try to do so
is to be merely a gleaner, or, at best, but as the one who
gathers up the fragments after a feast, and in this case, I
fear, no miracle would be worked in order to make the frag-
ments fill many baskets.
That phase of Australian life which produced Melba and
Crossley, and which formed such a good flying off point for


those two song-birds, no longer exists, and just the same per-
sonal attributes of the individuals, combined with the identi-
cal outward conditions are not likely to appear again either
in Australia or anywhere else, therefore the experience of no
two persons can be exactly alike. Though both of these
singers have all the qualities of pioneers, yet outward cir-
cumstances had something to do with their start in life.
Melba was unhappy in her married life, and although not
being much encouraged here as a singer, it would seem she
had private means sufficient to enable her to go to Europe,
and to persevere for years in spite of the want of belief in
her of those around. What a grand thing is belief in one’s self!
I cannot of course say how much or how little the appreciation
of Australian audiences had to do with her decision to take
up singing as her object in life, but I should think with both
her and Ada Crossley, the applause of Australians to the ex-
tent which they received it must have caused them to reflect
as to their possibilities of pleasing more critical audiences
after having obtained greater cultivation for themselves.
Since Melba’s girlhood in this city, and even since Ada
Crossley first said good-bye to Melbourne, local audiences
have become much more critical; they have also grown tired
of encouraging by getting up benefits for incipient singers on
the plea of their being budding Melbas and second Ada
Crossleys, who will go to Europe and either shed rays of glory
upon us from afar, or will come back to their former home and
enrich our native musical life; for in many cases these young
singers who leave our shores with such a flourish (or perhaps
do not really leave our shores, but disappear into the wilds of
the Australian bush with their booty) are never again heard
of.
It appears to me that the musical life of Melbourne es-
pecially as regards singers, admits of being divided into four
separate periods; the first one being that of the early digging
days, and the time immediately following, when our city was
beautified by its many splendid public buildings, and when
the Liedertafels and Philharmonic Societies probably reigned
supreme as the only public exponents of good music apart
from the Italian Opera, which, I believe, flourished at that
time. At the beginning of this period (which I consider to
extend to the time of the International Exhibition of 1888)
singers who had fairly good voices would be able to earn
large fees merely by singing a few ballads in a sympathetic
manner, for a concert of any kind would make a welcome
break in the monotony of the hard and toilsome lives of the
diggers and early settlers, and concerts would be sure to be
well attended by people with whom money was plentiful.


Singers would, therefore, be generously treated, and liberally
rewarded, just as was the case in Western Australia but
a short time ago.
The second period was one of much luxury and gaiety,
being an apparently very prosperous and wealthy one —viz.,
that of the Land Boom, from about 1888 to 1892, as near as I
can judge (for not having been personally concerned in that
brilliant and perilously fragile bubble, I do not feel prepared
to give an accurate statement as to its duration). This was
of course our period of great progress and enterprise with re-
gard to music and everything else; such a number of people
could then afford the best of everything, and would have it,
that the highest class of music was for a time most enthusias-
tically supported in our midst; in fact, it was surprising to see
how many, one evening in ißqo, thought it the proper thing
to sit out a long excerpt from Wagner’s “ Lohengrin, 1 ’ sung in
the German language, by one of our Liedertafels as opera
camera; when it would be well nigh impossible to get even
the most enthusiastic members of that Liedertafel to do such
a thing now even as a penance; and the feat was only pos-
sible at a time when the tidal wave of musical culture which
brought us Cowen and left some of us high and dry had not
yet receded. It was, I suppose, just at this period that the
musical bodies paid such enormous fees to artists; which large
fees, or rather the memory of them, added somewhat to the
general disjointness of things musical by over-weighting the
desirability of certain classes of opportunities in the eyes of
young aspirants.
The third period was that after the bursting of the Land.
Boom, when the musical public dejectedly and sadly (and in
some cases perhaps gladly—at any rate, we fear not very un-
willingly) relinquishing their dreams and futile efforts in con-
nection with higher musical culture, turned for solace to bal-
lad concerts. It was then that the late Mr. W. J. Turner
stepped in, and made hay while the sun shone. But the
singers and musicians of the Land Boom period having set
the pace, those who came out at the time immediately fol-
lowing that apparently prosperous period, thought it incum-
bent upon them to keep up a similar appearance and style
of living, and finding they could not do so out of the musical
profession itself in its collapsed state, either gave it up for
more common-place but also more remunerative, occupations,
or left the country. Some, alas! resorted to questionable
means, and attained to a certain reputation and success, the
effect of which was rather to sully and cast a slur upon the
fair fame of our community than to be any credit to it.


The fourth and last period is that one which is still with
us, and from which we look forward into the future with high
hope and aspiration, but not without fear and trembling. It
is the period which will demand greater natural gifts, greater
depth of culture, and greater nobility of character in those
who would persevere than has ever been the case in Mel-
bourne heretofore, for the inspired lines of the Federal enthu-
siast are true to-day, “to the making of a nation are we
come.”
If there were more money and leisure among the general
run of professional singers and musicians, we might enjoy more
social life amongst ourselves, and the Parisian Salon, which
gave such a glow to the literary life of France, might by Aus-
tralians be imitated with great advantage in the cause of
music; for in Melbourne, of all other places, where there are
so few good concerts, yet such a large number of highly-
trained musicians and singers who can never gain suitable
public scope for their gifts, social life of an intensely musical
kind would be very possible, and the Musical Salon, if not a
necessity, a very welcome field for, and fosterer of, musical
talent.
We who remain here cannot hope to make very large in-
comes, and it would seem almost impossible for those who
are singers and nothing else to make what the Labour Party
calls “ a living wage,” as so many of the most prominent Mel-
bourne concerts are worked on the debutante plan, and very
little money is paid during the year as fees to local soloists.
Therefore, there is nothing for it but the somewhat unroman-
tic, though very useful and important, occupation of teach-
ing. And the most advantageous pedestal on which our occu-
pation can rest is a tripod formed of Singing (or some in-
strument used for solo work, such as the violin), Pianoforte
and Harmony. For the teacher in any department of music
will find a knowledge of, and some facility in, pianoforte
playing an almost indispensable adjunct, even if it be not his
principal subject.
It is all very well for singers of established European
reputations to speak—as Melba did—to the disparagement
of teachers of singing, who also teach other branches of
music, but we cannot all aspire to be operatic stars, yet we do
not for this reason despair of attaining to something in music,
or of helping others to do the same. And the practice of
vocal exercises must of necessity occupy a comparatively
short space in each musical student’s day, for the throat soon
grows weary, and singing is also a tax on the general physical
strength, so other subjects, if judiciously combined with the
regular practice of singing, will be beneficial rather than


otherwise to either professional or amateur, and the nearest
subject to singing is certainly the study of the pianoforte
playing, for all singers should at least be able to play their
own accompaniments, and if their ability to do this be the
result of a conscientious and thorough study of music in
early youth, the singer may often be of great service to his
or her fellow-artists in the case of the failure to appear or
hopeless inefficiency on the part of the accompanist at a
concert. For we do sometimes meet with inefficient accom-
panists at concerts ; the organisers of the concerts often being
utterly unmusical people seem to think any sort of a player
will do to accompany the singer when no pianoforte solo work
is expected, when in reality it needs a far more efficient, sym-
pathetic, and tasteful pianist to supply accompaniments to
good vocal solos in a satisfactory manner than is necessary
to perform a brilliant pianoforte selection. Those who can
sing themselves understand better than any what is required
in the matter of accompanying the voice; therefore one who
can sing, so far from being debarred from the important
branch of music, which is represented in pianoforte litera-
ture, has in his singing, and the studies which he has pursued
to learn vocal art, the best introduction he could have to a
thorough study of pianoforte music, for as Schumann truly
says : “ There is but one steo from vocal to instrumental music,
but many steps from instrumental to vocal music.”
If the student has sufficient time for a thorough study of
Harmony, in addition to singing (of the violin, flute, or other
instrument) and pianoforte, it will be much to his advantage,
and will greatly enhance his appreciation of, and pleasure in,
performing the works of the great masters. It also, being
properly accompanied by ear-training, makes his intonation
more reliable, and his reading of music absolutely unerring,
when followed up to any extent.
There is a certain youthful and fascinating Secretary of
a suburban mission, whose feelings towards the lady singers
who oblige him with their services at his regular Pleasant Sun-
day Afternoons, would appear to undergo a change from time
to time, judging by the varying manner in which he addresses
the envelopes which enclose his missives to them, for in the
case of one singer I know (whom we will, for convenience, call
“ Miss Euphemia Brown ”) the envelope is sometimes ad-
dressed ;
Miss Euphemia Brown,
Vocalist,


The next will reach her with the brief, but comprehensive,
“etc.” appended to the word “vocalist,” and will read:
Miss Euphemia Brown,
Soprano Vocalist, etc.
This, we presume, is when he has heard of her playing a few
accompaniments rather well, or perhaps (as may be necessary
in Melbourne, where efficient domestic help seems to be a
luxury quite unobtainable by the middle class) cooking a
dinner to perfection, or making a brilliant debut in the wash-
house. Then after some one has been extolling the quality
of the lad}'’s voice to him, the legend on the Mission Secre-
tary’s envelope will read:
Miss Euphemia Brown,
Soprano Vocalist.
This must surely be when he has witnessed her scaling to the
dizzy heights of Eb in alt. The accompaniste of this same
Mission went one better, and wrote:
Miss Euphemia Brown,
Vocalist, etc.
putting the word “ vocalist ” in very heavy and distinct in-
verted commas, as if it were rather a joke for Miss Brown to
be called a vocalist at all, or at least was only so by courtesy.
I give this little story in order to point a moral, for of all
things which we may appear to be in the eyes of others, it
is the main thing for those gifted with voices to be “ Vocalists,
etc.” I cannot recall the name of the poet who said:
Beneath the surface stream, shallow and light,
Of what we say we are,
Beneath the stream, as light,
Of what we think we are,
Flows on for aye the constant current strong
Of what we are indeed.
but it is one of the truest statements ever made. It is in vain
for singers in Melbourne to insist on the quality of their
voices, and try to impress people with the idea that they pos-
sess the highest soprano or tenor voice, or the deepest con-
tralto or bass in the whole community, for if the work is not
'here for them to do, what does it matter what sort of a
voice they possess? And vocalists like other people can only
hope to be useful in their day and generation by means of
the opportunities which come in their way. And it is also
a folly to execrate the ones who sing a great deal for chari-
table causes free of charge as if they were price spoilers,
and the ruin of the profession, locally speaking, for if we did


not use our gifts in some way it would soon be highly appro-
priate to enclose the word “ vocalist ” in inverted commas as
being a sort of derisive quotation, and if we have no chance
of prominent engagements at concerts, such as those of the
principal musical bodies, it is just as well for us to make up
our minds to do all the good we can in a less splendid sphere
of labour, and to console ourselves with Emerson’s idea that
“ Life is for itself and not for a spectacle.” The same writer
also goes on to say, “ I much prefer that it should be of a
lower strain, so it be genuine and equal, than that it should be
glittering and unsteady. I wish it to be sound and sweet, and
not to need diet and bleeding.” But nearly the whole of this
essay of my favourite writer’s applies to singers, so I will
leave the reader to look it up for himself or herself. It is the
one on “ Self-Reliance ” from which I have quoted, and it is
my favourite essay of a favourite author, for surely of all
qualifications necessary to a singer, tha.t of self-reliance is the
most indispensable, although we are none the less grateful
for the generous forwarding of our interests from time to time,
yet on occasions of greatest trial, we usually are obliged to
stand alone, for “ in the mistv morning of life’s great conflict ”
it is not always easy to see even those would-be helpers who
are close at hand, or to distinguish friends from enemies, yet
we may hope that “ at evening time it shall be light.”
ON THE ART OF TEACHING SINGING
I have met good vocalists who do not make a large enough
income to be considered as members of the musical profes-
sion, because they have not sufficient confidence in their own
knowledge of that art which they practice themselves to the
delight of all who hear them, as to feel confident to teach it.
I can fully sympathise with such, for I have been through a
similar period of self-distrust myself, but having overcome
my fears and deficiencies bv dint of study and observation,
and experience gained by seeking out especially difficult cases
and giving them free tuition in order to see how much could be
done by training in cases where nature had done little to
forward the interests of vocalism, I now feel that I can speak
with some authority on the art of teaching people how to
sing. I found in myself, to begin with, a very difficult subject
as regards vocal cultivation, and those who have had many
difficulties to overcome can the better point out a way to
others by which they may avoid or overcome similar ■diffi-
culties.


In the first place, though some may not believe it, I found
singing a great tax on my physical strength. But this is not
necessarily a proof of delicacy of constitution, for everyone
who has not used their voice in a systematic way in singing
(that is by taking a deep breath before every phrase, and sus-
taining each note its true length) feels the same faintness, on
commencing vocal exercises, that one not used to playing a
mouth-organ would experience after playing, or blowing into,
that instrument. (I suppose it is the same with other wind
instruments, but the mouth organ is the only one of this
family of musical instruments which I have tried to play, so it
is the only one which I can honestly speak of in my illustration.)
The reason for this feeling of faintness is obvious when one
considers that in order to have plenty of breath to use in blow-
ing out, a good stock of breath must first of all be taken in,
otherwise we will be using up all the tidal air and commencing
to draw upon the supplemental air in our lungs, and a feeling
of exhaustion naturally results. But I leave the reader to
learn further particulars with regard to the physiology of res-
piration from Huxley’s book, “ The Elements of Physiology,”
which treats of the matter in a very lucid and interesting man-
ner, and I will only speak of those parts of the human system
which are directly concerned in the action of the lungs for the
purpose of taking in the greatest amount of breath to be given
out again in the form of vocal tones.
The subject of breathing is the most important one to
which the student of vocalism has to attend, and this attention
must be given at the earliest stage of his training. It is, in-
deed, the foundation of good singing, for everything else de-
pends upon it. Nothing beautiful in the way of phrasing can
be accomplished without first having attained to some pro-
ficiency in the art of breath management; no steadiness of
tone, not even an effective staccato passage, nor a good por-
tamento, nor grace note, nor messa di voce, or expression of
any emotion can be given effectively and impressively, unless
we feel absolutely sure of ourselves in the matter of breath.
Breathing is a department of vocal study which needs to be
practised apart from the use of the voice, and for this purpose
I always use Norris Croker’s breathing exercises, which he
gives in his treatise called “A Handbook for Singers,” a book
which should certainly be placed in the hands of all who
study singing. I have for some time found it a most useful
and helpful book, both as an aid to my own studies, and in
guiding those of others; his breathing exercises and his ex-
planations concerning the practising of them being the finest
and most explicit which I have ever had the good fortune to
discover in any treatise on singing.


Of course the study of breathing, as well as being ener-
getically pursued as a thing apart, must also be practically
dealt with at the time of using the voice, and this is where the
aid of a teacher is most necessary, for untutored singers are
not aware of their deliciencies as regards breathing, or of the
many ridiculous little tricks and mannerisms which result from
this ignorance, and which the well-informed find rather enter-
taining when not of too painful a character, such as is that of
false intonation. For instance, I have seen people throw their
heads back and elevate their chins every time they take a
breath. One lady I saw do this to such an extent one day in
my teaching room that I wondered how her hat managed to
remain upon her head. Now this movement may be a very
good one for developing the muscles of the neck and throat,
and is included for that purpose in some systems of gymnas-
tics ; also in an exaggerated form it is a favourite trick with
contortionists, but singers are not supposed to be contortion-
ists, however well the term may be thought to suit some who
appear on concert platforms, and the movement I have just
described has no place in any good system of breath manage-
ment.
But perhaps the worst fault of all in the matter of breath-
ing is to move the shoulders, for to see the shoulders rise
during inspiration and fall during expiration is conclusive
proof that the breath is being taken altogether wrongly, that
is, in the clavicular mode. The only parts of a singer’s ana-
tomy which should move for vocal purposes are the diaphragm
and the lower ribs. The diaphragm is a large flat muscle
situated at the waist, and forming the floor of the chest,
cavity. This muscle moves downward when a deep
breath is taken, and at the same time the lower ribs move
outwards, so the cavity of the chest is enlarged by deepening
and widening, but not by heightening it by means of raising
the shoulders.
The next great fault to guard against is a gasping
noise in taking breath; this is often the result of another
fault, viz., that of breathing through the mouth instead of
taking in breath through the nose, which is the more correct
method. Noisy breath is also a sign of imperfectly practised
breathing exercises, and shows that the singer, though per-
haps taking a breath sufficiently deep, is not satisfied that
enough breath is being taken in unless it can be heard enter-
ing the lungs; but if it be sufficiently impressed upon the stu-
dent that a deep breath and the holding of the breath the re-
quisite time for use through a long phrase of music is entirely
a matter of muscular control in the region of the lower ribs,
the fault of noisy breathing ought to quickly disappear.


When the matter of inspiration has been fully and con-
scientiously studied, and the exercises in connection there-
with thoroughly practised, the student must be careful to
remember that only half his work with regard to breath-
management is accomplished. For what is the use of being
able to take in a great quantity of breath, if we have not the
strength to hold it to use in our singing? It would be as
useless as to pour water into a sieve, and expect the water to
be there for use for even a few seconds afterwards. No, the
greater amount of breath which the singer manages to acquire
the faculty of taking in, the greater must be his pains in prac-
tising those exercises which deal with the outgoing of the
breath, that he may be able to execute such beautiful orna-
ments as the messa di voce, commonly called “ the swell,”
which, especially in the diminuendo part, is impossible to a
singer who has not good control of his faculty of expiration in
the matter of breath-management. All the faults of singers
(except those which are the result of colds, illness, vocal wear,
or a want of control of or a deficiency in the emotions) are
primarily due to want of breath management. Therefore,
when one has said all there is to say about breath, very little
remains to talk about in the matter of vocal cultivation, for
even the attack of notes depends upon one’s ability to hold the
breath for a second or two before singing the first note of a
phrase, and the scoop is a lazy method of overcoming the
tendency of the breath to escape between the notes of a phrase
by keeping the vocal chords placed ready for tone formation,
to block the way and so prevent the breath from escaping by
means of keeping the vocal chords close together instead of
controlling the breath by the action of the muscles about the
waist and lower part of the chest.
To turn to the subject of exercises to be sung, I find
Abt’s Tutor the most useful and comprehensive, but in the
case of those beginners who find the many sustained notes
too trying just as first, I resort to Behnke’s and Pearce’s
“Voice Training Exercises,” which are easier and of less
range than Abt’s. Madame Marchesi’s is a good tutor for
Sopranos, and Parkinson’s for Tenors and Sopranos, too: but
the exercises in both these last-mentioned tutors are all of
such a high pitch and range that one would need to transpose
them for use in the training of lower voices, and this is hardly
worth while when there are so many excellent tutors (notably
Abt’s) published with slightly varying exercises for all voices.
The only objection I have to his Baritone tutor is that he has
omitted from it the excellent series of exercises on the Chro-
matic Scale, which he has included in all the books for the
other voices, and baritones and basses, being usually the most


liable to go out of tune by reason of their vocal chords being
thicker and more difficult to control the action of than are those
which pertain to other classes of voices, are consequently more
in need of studies of a chromatic nature. Therefore, I often
hnd it advisable to use the Contralto edition for baritones and
basses rather than the one which Abt has especially provided
for those voices.
Speaking of tenor and baritone pupils, I would say that in
the dim and misty past, when I experienced the want of confi-
dence in my teaching powers which I have before mentioned,
I thought myself even then competent to teach contraltos, being
of that voice myself, and I even thought I might in time be
able to instruct sopranos; but owing to my parents, and espe-
cially my mother, being of the Old School (and a very good
school, too, I should say en passant), my reverence for man-
hood was really enormous, and it was some time before I
could bring myself to believe that I could teach anything to
one of the Lords of Creation.
But although my respect for the other sex has not dimin-
ished with my increase of interest in and knowledge of their
voices, constant study and observation have removed the hesi-
tation I once felt about taking male pupils, for although I
cannot give such a clear demonstration of the tone-colour
peculiar to the two registers of a man’s voice, I can do all else
that a masculine teacher could do in the way of cultivating a
tenor, baritone or bass voice, and a masculine teacher cannot
illustrate the tone-colours in the three registers of a female
voice, yet no gentleman teacher refuses to take ladies as
pupils, so things are about even.
The subject of the registers of the voice is a most impor-
tant one, and a matter to be conquered at as early a stage as
possible in the training of a pupil, especially in the case of
contraltos, who of all others have most trouble with the
“ break ” between the “ chest ” and “ medium ” registers.
Sopranos and contraltos should in all cases change the regis-
ter of the voice from “ chest ” to “ medium ” at E flat on first
line of treble clef. But this statement will give very little
information to the uninitiated, who do not know what the term
“register” means when applied to vocalism. To make the
matter clearer to these, I would say the chest register is that
portion of the female voice which sounds most masculine in
the singing voice of a contralto. It is the voice in which
school children invariably try to sing all the way up the scale
to the highest point to which their efforts will take them, and
this crude form of childish vocalism, if not checked, may have
dire results as regards the child’s voice, and at best may leave
faults which a skilful teacher of singing may find it hard work


to eradicate in the more mature years of the one who has been
allowed to bawl and shout to her heart’s content all through
her school daj's.
The “ medium ” register in a woman’s voice is the one which
the properly-trained female voice goes into of its own accord
on reaching E flat on the first line of treble clef, and is the
tone-colour which any normal and unperverted voice would
assume, even without having much training; but a voice which
has been forced to take chest notes up to F or G, with the
notion of gaining greater power thereby, is very difficult to
train in the way it should go, and if not taken in time by a
properly-qualified teacher, has for ever after a decided gap
between the two registers, the notes which have been wrongly
produced, when at last they are taken properly, being always
very much weaker than the other part of the voice which has
not been so abused; and it would be impossible to keep on
singing at all in the wrong manner—that is, taking the chest
notes up too high—for any length of time, owing to the strain
on the throat which the unnatural method of production
causes.
Then after the proper use of the chest and medium regis-
ters is acquired there is yet another register in the female
voice—viz., the head register. There is not quite the difficulty
over this that there often is about the change from the
'* chest ” into the “ medium.” The change in the register
should usually take place at about C in the third space of treble
clef, and a lighter and more ringing tone must be cultivated
by the singer than is obtainable in the “ medium ” register or
in the “ chest ” notes, the characteristic of the medium regis-
ter being richness and fulness, and of the “chest” register
firmness and strength, lending itself to dramatic and powerful
expression of deep and sorrowful emotion. The high register
is more for the expression of ecstasy and bright, joyful
feeling.
This is the reason why many pupils consider sopranos
more cheerful, and perhaps more frivolous, than contraltos,
who are generally set down as being very serious, thoughtful,
and even melancholy, and the songs allotted to those two dif-
ferent voices would serve to increase this perhaps erroneous
impression.
What greater contrast could there be, for instance, than
that which exists between the soprano song “II Bacio,” by
Arditi, and that beautiful though melancholy song of Gounod’s,
“ Easter Eve ” (for this song is invariably sung by contraltos,
though it is published in different keys!. Then, again, com-
pare Gounod’s “Jewel Song,” from “Faust,” with Haydn’s


■“ Spirit Song,” and the contrast will be seen to be very
marked.
Concerning the register of the male voice there are really
only two main ones—the open and closed—and these corre-
spond to the “ medium ” and head notes in a woman’s voice,
the medium in the case of the man being also identical with
the chest notes of a woman. Tenors usually have more diffi-
culty about the matter of registers than have baritones or
basses. All a female teacher can do is to tell the pupil to let
his voice come more gently and easily when he reaches the
upper notes, to be careful not to shout, or to give too “ open ”
a character to the notes above B in the first space above the
bass clef.
The middle part of every voice should be trained before
the extreme limits of the compass are taken in hand, so that
the throat may become accustomed to the effort of producing
notes at all, before it has the greater strain of reaching high
notes, or has to relax the chords unduly to produce low ones.
With Sopranos, attention must first be confined to the octave
from middle C to C in the third space of the treble clef.
With basses it is sufficient to sing the same notes an octave
lower just at first; and with baritones the exercises need not
exceed a third higher than the basses in elementary exercises.
Tenors are similar to sopranos in the matter of having to take
their higher notes very softly at first, lest the quality of their
notes be injured through the light, delicate texture of the
vocal chords being subject to the double strain of an unaccus-
tomed position for the production of a high note, and hy the
pressure of air forced by the breath through the chords in
order to make the tone a loud one. The range for elementary
Tenor exercises should therefore be from middle C to about
E in the fourth space of treble clef, or at the highest G in
the first space above.
With regard to other vocal studies, after the pupil has
thoroughly mastered the contents of Abt’s, or if, not having
mastered it, has grown so weary of it that a change of books
is advisable, Bordogni’s Exercises are decidedly the best for
Sopranos, Mezzos, and Contraltos, Panseron’s for Tenors, and
Concone’s for Bass. The exercises of Righini’s would be suit-
able also for the baritone voice.
For sopranos who have conquered the difficulties of Abt’s
Tutor, I can recommend nothing better than Panseron’s
“ Etudes Speciales,” which form a good preliminary to and
preparation for the brilliant and florid operatic airs to be
found in the “ Soprano Album ” (Royal Edition), which is a


collection of Soprano airs from the Italian operas. These airs,
with the many beautiful soprano solos contained in the ora-
torios, may be said to be the best exercises which an ad-
vanced soprano pupil can have, for the great composers have
ever favoured the soprano beyond the contralto in the matter
of solos, the number and brilliancy of the airs which they
lavish upon the soprano, to the neglect and sometimes utter
exclusion of the contralto, being truly wonderful.
A well-known church organist of this city said he thought
Haydn’s wife must have been a contralto, and that was why
he had such an objection to contraltos as to exclude them
from the solo work of “ The Creation,” only allowing them to
come in at the end with two or three “Amens.” Needless to
say the organist referred to is a bachelor. But even he may
not object to a contralto coming in with the “ Amens ” at the
end.
Of exercises with Italian words, those of Vaccai’s are
rather more advantageous than those of Madame Marches!,
the latter being of a more elementary character.
All singers should study Italian. They would find it ad-
vantageous in many ways, and to sing Italian words, if only
as vocal exercises, enhances the beauty of any voice. Then
a study of this language opens up such a world of beauty to
the student of singing. It is possible, of course, to gain an
idea of the pronunciation of a language without making a
thorough study of that tongue, but it would seem more honest
of a singing teacher to learn a language and to provide facil-
ties for the pupils to study it, if the teacher wishes the said
pupils to sing airs with Italian words. The worst of it is, if a
singing pupil urges his or her pupils to take extra trouble over
the study of the art, such as that required for the learning of
even a clear and limpid language like Italian, the pupils are
apt to get the impression that the teacher considers them so
extraordinarily gifted as to arouse hopes of the pupils being
future operatic stars, and when the teacher disillusionises
them, as in the case of one lady teacher I know, by telling
them she neither expects them to become stars nor hopes to
be one herself, they are apt to feel offended or disappointed.
Anyway, most of them under the circumstances referred to
made this announcement a flying-off point both from Italian
and from singing. Therefore, I dare not advise any teacher
of singing to walk his or her brood of pupils off to even the
best Italian teacher in the city, even if the Italian Professor
makes a reduction on a quantity. Bargains may sometimes
be dear in the long run.


THE CLASSIFICATION OF VOICES.
This matter seems to present a great deal of difficulty to
some teachers, and by others it is apparently taken as a light
matter, and they classify a voice in the same irresponsible
manner as they would name a pet cat or dog. This would
not matter so much if they did not proceed to train the voice
with exercises which are in accordance with their mistake.
But their line of action reminds me of rather a funny thing I
saw in the bush: It was the framework of a small church, and
on the front, nailed to the upright beams of the framework,
was a board bearing the inscription, “ This stone was laid by
Mrs. Pebbles.” Whether the good people who put the wooden
tablet there thought the inscription would have the same
petrifying effect upon the board as it was calculated to have
upon beholders, or whether they thought the name of the lady
who placed the board there would by some strange affinity
turn the make-shift foundation stone into a real one, I cannot
say, but their ideas must be something similar to those of
some teachers of singing who dub every female voice as
soprano because their own voice is of that quality and range,
or contralto or mezzo if they themselves are unable to reach
high notes, and then proceed to either unduly limit or to strain
the voice of the pupil. Such proceedings would appeal to my
sense of humour as forcibly as did the so-called foundation-
stone, only that I feel too sorry for the pupils who suffer this
treatment to be able to give way to mirth. The fact is that
it is often very difficult to judge of the true range and quality
of a beginner’s voice, as, owing to the nervousness of those
who are not accustomed to hearing their own voices, their
voices take on quite a different tone-colour to that which is
natural to them; neither are they able to take notes as high
or low at first as afterwards they acquire the ability to
sound. Therefore, it is often necessary to wait for a few
weeks before deciding as to the quality of a pupil’s voice, and
to be very chary of exercises exceeding the limit of the
octave, from middle C to C in the third space.
For my own part, I have adopted Norris Croker’s system
of voice classification with such implicit belief that it would
be simply plagiarism to pretend to give one of my own. But
all must recognise the two great divisions of voices—i.e.,
“light” and “heavy”—the chief difficulty with inexperienced
teachers being with pupils who have heavy voices of a very
extended compass, or those with light voices of a very limited
compass. In male voices, those which have the attributes of
power and richness in addition to a high range are called


" tenori robusti ” (robust tenors) or “ dramatic tenors ” ; those
which have the high range and a light carrying quality are
called “ tenori leggier ” (light tenors) or “ lyric tenors.”
Male voices which have richness and power, but are de-
ficient in high notes, are classed as baritones, when the voice
is not of the thick, heavy quality which pertains to basses.
For voice classification is really more a matter of quality than
of compass; and voices are often classified in a make-shift
manner because their quality and compass do not always
correspond—i.e., the voice is sometimes in excess of the
range prescribed by tradition to that class which its quality
marks it out as belonging to ; or, on the other hand, it may be
deficient of notes (either high or low) which preclude its pos-
sessor from singing music especially written for that class of
voice. So we sometimes have to listen to Mezzos or Con-
traltos of exceptional range attempting solos intended only
for sopranos; and at other times light voices will sing arias
which require a full, rich voice to give due effect to, because
the said light voice finds these an easier range than the solos
which are especially written for light voices, and which usually
presuppose a very extended compass. In a case like this the
art songs come to the rescue, for they are written entirely
without florid work (which usually includes very high notes),
but are for the most part suited to light voices of limited
range.
Many of the modern songs, such as those of Willeby and
D’Hardelot, are suitable to this style of voice, which is, after
all, the most prevalent, the combination of quality and range
which forms the voice of a high standard of value being some-
what rare.
PHRASING.
This very important subject does not receive the attention
from students which it merits, a noticeable feature in the
singing of many of the competitors at a recent suburban com-
petition being the slovenly manner in which they separated
the words of a sentence, which to give the true sense should
have been taken in one breath, and in other instances ran
words together which to make their meaning clear should have
been separated. For instance, in St. Quentin’s song, “Be-
yond” (which is a very good exercise in phrasing), the fol-
lowing words appear:—
“ There is slumber, for the weary and the worn, beyond
the day.”


Most of the singers took a breath after the word “ weary,"
which made it seem as if there were slumber for the
“ weary ” and for another class of people who were “ worn
beyond the day,” which we presume means sometimes like
“ altered beyond recognition.” But correctly phrased, the
words mean “ There is slumber beyond the day, for the weary
and the worn,” and the meaning can be made quite as clear
by making “ for the weary and the worn ” a kind of paren-
thetical or subordinate sentence, and certainly it should be
taken all in one breath. There are many sentences in songs
similar to the one I have just mentioned, and if the student
of singing would recall some of his studies of grammar and
analysis learned at school under the head of “ English,” it
would greatly help him in his phrasing of songs.
It is a very erroneous idea to consider general education
as a thing apart from musical education, for whatever tends
towards refinement and culture and sound mental training in
the intellectual pursuits of the singer is also helpful to him
in a very direct manner in connection with singing, and in
nothing is poetical refinement and high mental power and in-
telligence shown than in the phrasing of the words of a song.
But Phrasing is such a great and comprehensive subject
that it needs a volume all to itself, for it does not only mean
good taste in arrangement of words and taking breath, but
it includes all the little nuances, the subtle points, and ex-
pressive accentuations, and introduction of forte and piano,
crescendo and diminuendo, which go to make up the light and
shade or true beauty, and colouring of a piece of music.
To study for a time under a good elocutionist is very
benehcial to the student of singing, for the qualities required
in good song-phrasing are identical with those necessary in
the intelligent reading of a literary composition. And just as
there are contrasting styles in literature, so there are in musi-
cal compositions. In one the breath may be taken frequently,
being of an agitated, restless nature; another demands much
control of the breath, because of broad sweeps of eloquence
and long, flowing phrases. Note the contrast of style, for
instance, between Thomas Carlyle’s prose and that of Samuel
Johnson’s, as shown in the two following extracts, and if it
be remembered that they have their parallels in musical
composition, the value of a study of different methods of
phrasing will be at once apparent. In Carlyle’s “ French Revo-
lution ” occurs the following sentence:—“ Such is Paris; the
heart of a France like to it. Preternatural suspicion, doubt,
disquietude, nameless anticipation, from shore to shore: and


those black-browed Marseillese marching, dusty, unwearied,
through the midst of it; not doubtful they.”
It would not be perplexing to know where to take breath
in the above, for it so abounds in stops, but in the following
sentence of Johnson’s more difficulty would be experienced: —
“ After the exercises which the health of the body requires,
and which have themselves a natural tendency to actuate and
invigorate the mind, the most eligible amusement of a rational
being seems to be that interchange of thoughts which is prac-
tised in free and easy converstion; where suspicion is banished
by experience, and emulation by benevolence; where every
man speaks with no other restraint than unwillingness to
offend, and hears with no other disposition than desire to be
pleased.”
I give the whole paragraph, because it is remarkable for
not having one full stop throughout, and requiring much judg-
ment as to the length of time allowed to natural pauses when
not even a comma occurs.
The equivalent of these two styles of literature may be
seen in music by a comparison of the two songs—“ There’s
a Land,” by Allitsen, and “ Sabbath Morning at Sea,” by
Elgar (in “ Sea Pictures ”), the former calling for a forcible
staccato style, the latter requiring a soft tone of voice, and
great control of the breath, having long phrases, which can-
not be broken up without completely ruining the effect of the
song.
An organist, in whose choir I had the honour to be for
some time, attempted the difficult feat of phrasing the hymns
according to very strict rules, but I fear the congregation
was quite oblivious of his efforts, and continued to take breath
at the end of every line, as of yore, whether it broke into a
phrase or not, while the attempt of the organist to bring about
a revolution in the phrasing of church hymns only made choir
practice more troublesome, which every chorister knows is
quite unnecessary.
There are other branches of musical phrasing; besides that
which concerns vocalism. The subject of phrasing in instru-
mental music is dealt with very fully in a recently-published
“ Practical Guide to the Art of Phrasing,” by Dr. Hugo Rieman
and Dr. Carl Fuchs.
Banister gives a very concise and comprehensive definition
of “ Phrasing ” in his book on “ Music,” with the quotation of
which I will close these remarks on this inexhaustible sub-
ject :
“ The due indication of the Rhythmical divisions, in per-
formance is termed Phrasing, and is of great importance,


though much neglected. The giving the proper stress to the
accented notes, without any jerking or clock-like monotony, is
one element in such indication. And the dividing of the Phrases
is indicated, partly, by the raising of the hand in Pianoforte
playing, by the ‘ bowing ’ in stringed instrument playing, and
should regulate the breath-taking in singing.”
I would only add that in the vocalism of a perfect singer
the breath is under such thorough control that the stops for
the purpose of taking breath seem only as pauses, such as
those which a good elocutionist makes in obedience to punc-
tuations, and for the purpose of giving more effect to the
words in the literary composition which he reads or recites.
This is one of the chief reasons why the inspiration of breath
in singing should be quite inaudible.
ON THE SELECTION OF SONGS.
The repertoire of a singer is, or should be, the expression
of that singer’s individuality, and each song be made so em-
phatically the true expression of the singer to whose reper-
toire it belongs that its inclusion in that singer’s list of fre-
quently-used songs is tantamount to an endorsement of its
genuineness of sentiment and full and true expression of emo-
tion.
It is my custom to revise my list of songs at the begin-
ning of each year, dropping out those which for various
reasons I can no longer sing with truth and fervour, and
adopting new ones which seem promising as the genuine ex-
pression of my personality and individual temperament.
It is difficult to add new songs to one’s repertoire, for
much courage is required to sing a new song in public for the
first time, and with many songs it is impossible to judge of
their faculty of appealing to the general public until they have
been tried on a large audience. For even if a song be the ex-
pression of our own feelings, if something in the music or
poetry (perhaps some obscurity in the matter of melody and
rhythm) causes a bar between the singer and the audience,
preventing the song from being a direct appeal to the hearts
of our listeners, then is the song useless as a public item,
however much solace we may find in singing it to ourselves
or to our circle of intimate friends.
Therefore a great amount of careful observation and ex-
periment is necessary in the choice of songs.


Art songs are not of much practical use to public singers,
for beautiful as are the melodies, and rich and varied as are
the harmonies to which the great composers have set their
national poetry, the songs of the greater classical composers
are, as a rule, lacking in climax, and this deficiency is felt by
the average audience more than poverty of harmony and
monotony of melody. It is the climax which is the making of
such songs as Sullivan’s “ Lost Chord ” and Cowen’s “ Better
Land ” —songs which, though set to sacred words, are certain
to be well received by a large popular assemblage on either
a Sunday or a week day; and a singer who has made these
two songs her own need not be afraid of repeating them (as
occasion offers) again and again, for a beautiful song is like
a picture which appeals to the heart, and which one is never
weary of looking at; so the song ever presents on each repeti-
tion new shades of meaning and a never-failing source of
comfort and sweetness.
In that well-known and much-sung aria, " O Rest in the
Lord,” how few catch the idea of the deep, broad ocean of
repose, which I think was the idea intended to be conveyed
by the Composer of “ A Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage ”;
rest as deep and secure as that with which the waves of the
sea “ sway themselves in rest.” Rest which is less presump-
tuous than fret and worry, because of the depth of the sea
of time over which we pass, underneath the limitless, infinite
firmament above-us. Rest in the Lord God, who sees the end
from the beginning, and without whom we can do nothing.
Many vocalists think that they have to sing this air in a
lachrymose tone of voice, as if to say, “ Things have come to
a pretty pass now, and are just about as bad as they can be,
there is, forsooth, nothing to do now but rest in the Lord.”
Others adopt a stern, commanding tone for this piece, and
the expression with which they sing the words “ Rest in the
Lord ” reminds me of the way in which our next-door neigh-
bour calls out “ Lie down, Carlo,” to his dog, in what should
be the silent midnight watches. Others, again, put such an
expression of desperation into the word “ patiently ” that we
cannot help suspecting an absence in themselves of the virtue
which they so earnestly enjoin upon others, and that they
are trying to give us some slight idea of the trials by which
their patience has been tested; but while deeply sympathising
with them, we do not any the more readily endorse their ren-
dering of the words, and would like to hear more resignation
expressed, for a resigned attitude of mind argues the presence
of faith and hope; then with love, the greatest of all, added,
such a balm is formed for our wounded spirits that we cannot


do otherwise than rest in the Lord, knowing that all will be
well, that the music of our lives, although perhaps set in minor
keys, and containing many complicated discords with long-
delayed resolutions, will end perchance with a “ Tierce di
Picardie,” and then we shall rest in the C major of this life,
as Browning so quaintly puts it in his poem “ The Abbe
Vogler,” which all singers and musicians should read.
Sacred songs which I find always give pleasure alike to
listener and singer are: “ Light in Darkness,” by Cowen, who
has also arranged it as a very beautiful quartette; “ Tears,”
and “ The Gift of Rest,” by the same Composer; “ The
Gleaner’s Slumber Song,” by Walthew, which always conveys
to me a depth of pathetic meaning, especially in the last verse,
because of its association in my mind with dear, aged rela-
tives now passed away.
“ Like as the Hart Desireth,” by Allitsen, is a noble song,
written more in the style of an air from an oratorio than in
the ordinary ballad manner; and those two fine songs of
Gounod’s, “ There is a Green Hill ” and “ O Divine Redeemer,”
never fail to make a deep impression an any audience at all
imbued with religious sentiment. Barnard’s “ Shepherd of the
Fold ” is also a useful sacred song, but of a lighter character
than the others I have mentioned previously. Lee’s “He Wipes
the Tear From Every Eye ” is ever-green, and likely to remain
a favourite because of its intrinsic merit, which lies in the
simple beauty of the music and the comforting truth of the
words.
“ This Work-a-day W'orld,” by Adams, and “ A Dream of
Paradise,” by Gray, are perhaps not too threadbare to be
classed among acceptable songs, but they should be placed in
the same category as “ The Hoty City ” and “ The Valley by
the Sea,” being rather more prized by those whose love of
melody is greater than their appreciation of harmony. I can-
not say that I admire Adams’ songs myself, although they
have often served my purpose very well by pleasing an audi-
ence upon which a composition of a higher grade would have
made little or no impression. Yet I feel that there is a slain
on my artistic conscience after singing a ballad in which the
harmony is not altogether correct, to the neglect of those
which I know bear the stamp of true musicianship. For this
reason I prefer to sing Gerald Lane’s “ Tatters ” to Adams’
“ Idle Words,” for the former is a splendidly-written little
song, the harmony and modulations being conscientiously
worked out; while in the latter there is a trading upon the
supposed ignorance of harmonic rules on the part of the per-
former and listener. “ Idle Words ”is nevertheless a taking


and effective song as far as it goes, and a contralto finds good
scope for the use of chest notes and long phrasing at the end
of the song. The climax is also well worked up.
Semi-Sacred.
Of songs which can hardly be classed as distinctly secular
■or purely sacred, but are suitable for all times and seasons,
Blumenthal’s “ Sunshine and Rain,” and Teresa del Riego’s
“O Dry Those Tears,” and Cowen’s “Promise of Life,” are
good specimens ; Gerald Lane’s “ Life’s Lullaby ” has also this
semi-sacred character, but I cannot say this latter song ap-
peals to me. It is a decidedly tame composition, and its effect
upon an audience might be rather more soothing than even
its composer intended; yet it may on occasion be found useful
for variety’s sake, and the words, melody, and accompani-
ment are all three easy to remember without the copy.
Secular.
Two fine old songs which bear innumerable repetition are
Tosti’s “ Good Bye ” and “ Kathleen Mavourneen,” by Crouch.
“ There’s a Land,” by Allitsen, is a splendid song of an im-
pressive character, but owing to its words being more suited
to patriotic celebrations than to regular musical functions, it
is not sung as often as its musical merit warrants. “Out On
the Rocks,” by Sainton Dolby, is a song so much affected by
beginners, owing to its easy compass, that it has become
almost the undisputed possession of very young singers.
“ Th'e Land of Yesterday,” by Mascheroni, is somewhat
gloomy in sentiment, and the many stops and delays in the
melody, where the piano part is arranged to fill in the gap
make the singer of this song more dependent on the abilities
of the accompanist than is on all occasions desirable. The
same drawbacks of over-mournfulness and too much depen-
dence upon the accompaniment for the effect appertain to
Millard’s picturesque ballad, “ When the Tide Comes In.”
“ Home, Dearie, Home,” by Molloy, is a beautiful little ballad,
and contains much sweetness and truth of sentiment, both in
words and music; it is very simple in style, and needs ex-
tremely sympathetic delivery to cause it to be fully appre-
ciated.
“The Old Countree,” by Pinsuti, is a good melodious
song, but is rather long and doleful, and for this reason is
calculated to have the reverse of an exhilarating effect upon
the audience.


“ Asthore,” by Trotere, and “ Douglas Gordon,” by Law-
rence Kellie, are useful ballads for concerts of a national cha-
racter, Irish or Scotch as the case may be. “ The Masquerade”,
by Watson, is a dainty little song of a humorous cast; and
“ Daddy ” and “ The Gift,” by Behrend, are sweet and pathetic,
although somewhat hackneyed.
For encores one can hardly go wrong at any ballad con-
cert with Glover’s “ I May or May Not,” Wakefield’s “ No, Sir,”
“ Woman’s Way,” by Roeckel, and the American song, with
echo effect, “ The Cows Are In the Corn ”; or should some-
thing more dignified be required, Ellen Wright’s “ Violets,”
Laurence Richardson’s “ Home Love,” and Constance Maud’s
“ Life Lesson ” may be found suitable. The last-mentioned
song is also suitable for Sacred Concerts of a popular nature
and Pleasant Sunday Afternoons. Other singable and ex-
pressive songs are “ All Soul’s Day,” by Lassen, and
“ Husheen,” by Alicia Needham.
Love Songs.
In the matter of love songs, I quite agree with Miss
Crossley, who says that “ love songs of the tawdry variety
are not worth singing.” Neither they are, any more than love-
making of the tawdry variety is worth having. For everyone,
I am sure, will endorse my opinion that there is no means of
hiding a lack of sincerity in either the one or the other. The
! .c is felt, however cunningly matters may be arranged for
its concealment. Owing to feeling and expression being some-
what interdependent, in most cases, and the expression of a
sentiment often having a sort of reflex action upon the feel-
ings, however little connection there may be between the real
sentiments of some people and those which they give utter-
ance to, we who have charge of one branch of the training-
of the young (and of those presumably in a state of develop-
ment, though of maturer years) should be careful as to what
songs we give our most impressionable pupils, for if they
conscientiously try to enter into the meaning of very sad and
hopeless love songs they may in time find their spirits droop-
ing for the want of a little wholesome levity. In saying this
I speak from experience, as it fell to my lot to come across a
great number of these mournful compositions at the begin-
ning of my course of training. They were very much in vogue
at the time, and whenever I heard one which sounded at all
tuneful and suitable to my compass of voice, I would forthwith
buy the song and strive to make that song the expression of
my innermost sentiments. Having a good imagination, I con-
jured up just the sort of being at whose feet I would cast the


treasures of my heart and soul and fresh young life. This
person, as far as I can remember, was a combination of the
best points of the hero of Miss Weatherly’s juvenile novel,
“ The Wide, Wide World,” and a selection of qualities from
Lytton’s “ Ernest Maltravers,” with a dash of the Black Prince
thrown in, just to give him a good upstanding military bear-
ing. Having thus carved my idol, I proceeded to worship by
cherishing a hopeless affection by means of such songs as
“ Forever and Forever,” " Good Bye,” “ Out On the Rocks,”
“ Helene,” and others of a similar nature, though not of as
sterling musicianship and poesy. “ Forever and Forever ” my
relations seem to have found particularly alarming. My dear
old father, on hearing me sing this song with great expression,
immediately conceiving grave doubts as to my present heart-
wholeness and future welfare. But he need not have worried
himself, for
“ To have greatly dreamed precludes low ends,”
and I have yet to learn the meaning of the term “ heart-
break.”
■ On the other hand, anyone who is really suffering from
the pangs of blighted affection may perhaps save himself from
suicide by an open expression of his feelings by means of a
song dealing with the most painful aspects of his mournful
case. His performance might possibly have a less beneficial
effect upon his hearers than upon himself. It might, in fact,
even drive some of his audience to the verge of that abyss from
which his vocal efforts save himself, but “ the greatest good
to the greatest numbers ” should be our motto, and those who
sing seem to be more numerous than those who want to listen.
Anyway, there is surely no harm in allowing any suffering
vocalist to save himself from committing a rash act by doing
the next best thing. Better even that he “ blow his brains
out on the flute,” as Browning forcibly expresses it, than that
he blow them out with a revolver, although the latter course
would be the more likely to secure him a line in the morning
papers.
One of the daintiest love-ditties I know is Meyer-Hel-
mund’s “ Old World Serenade.” Another good one, though
rather hackneyed, is “ Call Me Back,” by Denza; and for
honest straightforwardness Abt’s “ Embarrassment ” cannot
be equalled. It is a song lam rather chary of singing myself
for fear of giving alarm to timid single friends of the other
sex.
Among songs for Baritones and Tenors, the subject of
love is the most usual of all. Even the military songs have a
dash of love in them, the pathos of the soldier’s departure for


the war deriving its chief support from the fact that he leaves
a sweetheart to mourn his absence. But I am at present deal-
ing mainly with contraltos’ songs, as those which I have had
the most personal experience of, and will give a list of avail-
able and taking songs for sopranos and male voices later on.
New Songs.
Hitherto I have discussed songs of standard merit and
established reputation. With regard to new songs choice is,
as I before remarked, somewhat hard to make, and there are
very few songs among the hundreds which have been pub-
lished during the last few years which it would be advisable
for a singer to place upon a programme, if the object of that
singer be, as we presume is the case with most vocalists, the
pleasing of the audience, and the retaining of or adding to
the reputation of the singer.
The best songs published during the last dozen years are
undoubtedly the short songs by Willeby and Nevin, especially
“ Summer Rain,” by the former, and “ The Rosary,” by the
latter; but I would caution singers against bracketing these
two together, as their melodies are very similar, their open-
ing bars being identical in their intervals, and though this fact
may not be immediately perceived by the audience, an im-
pression of dulness and monotony is left in consequence of
this similarity of melody, when the songs are sung in succes-
sion, by reason of the lack of variety and contrast between
the two numbers.
This similarity of melody between songs with different
words has been remarked between the two Scotch songs,
“ Scots Wh’ae Wi’ Wallace Bled ” and “ The Land o’ the Leal,”
my rendering of the latter song falling rather flat at the
Thistle Club on one occasion after a spirited rendering by Mr.
John Sutherland of the former grand old Scotch Military song,
the two melodies being the same only for the addition of a
few passing notes in “ Scots Wh’ae,” which are omitted in
“ The Land o’ the Leal ”; yet these two numbers often appear
in succession in programmes of Scotch Concerts without the
likeness which causes the dull effect of the song which has
the ill luck to come second being perceived by the audience.
It is said “Wit sees the similarity of objects, judgment sees
the difference.” Have our porridge-eating friends then more
judgment than wit?
Elgar’s series of five Sea Pictures is a beautiful song-
cycle, from which numbers may with advantage be selected
for concert use by the Contralto or Mezzo-soprano vocalist,


but it would need an extraordinary range of voice, ■ as well as
great physical endurance, to sing the whole cycle through at
one concert, taking all the highest optional notes. The last
song of the series (“The Swimmer”) ought to be sung by
Australian singers far more than it is, if only for patriotic
motives, as the words are by our own poet, Adam Lindsay
Gordon.
I cannot give anything like an exhaustive list of new
songs, or even of old; each singer must choose his or her own.
All the above-mentioned are what I have proved beyond doubt
to be genuinely useful songs for singing in public, and
are, of course, for the most part, those more suited to my
own class of voice (which is contralto) than to any other.
Soprano Songs.
Of Soprano songs, those most sung with good effect at
concerts are “ The Moorish Maid ” and “ At My Window,” by
Parker. “ The Beating of My Own Heart,” by Macfarren, is
sung with great success by some singers who possess more
than average dramatic power. “ Butterflies,” by Corbett,
“ Spring,” by Tosti, and “ Spring is Here,” by Cotsford Dick,
are also good songs. Of waltz songs there are many, and all
are acceptable to the average ballad concert audience, if only
because of the well-marked rhythm of the waltz time. The
most threadbare of this class is undoubtedly “II Bacio,” or
“ The Dream of Home,” by Arditi. It is not as good a song
of its kind as Gounod’s Waltz Song from “ Romeo and Juliet,”
the latter being less sung because of its greater difficulty.
Tenor Songs.
With regard to Tenor Songs, those most effective in that
voice are Blumenthal’s “ Evening Song,” Clay’s “ I’ll Sing Thee
Songs of Araby,” Denza’s “ A May Morning,” and Balfe’s
“ Good-night, Beloved.” There is also much scope in oratorios
for the tenor voice, and many very beautiful excerpts may be
made from the Italian Operas, “ Spirito Gentil ” and “ Salve
Dimora ” being notable instances.
Baritone Songs.
Baritone Songs of great beauty are also very numerous,
“The Gladiator,” by J. H. Adams; “The Mighty Deep,” by


Jude; “Once,” by Hervey; “The Bugler,” by Pinsuti; “I’m
Off To Philadelphia,” by Haynes ; “Galilee,” by Joseph Adams ;
“ What Might Have Been,” by Walton; “ To-night,” by Zardo,
being some of the best of those which seem to belong dis-
tinctly to the deeper quality of male voices ; and “ Within This
Holy Temple,” by Mozart, being one of the classics, should
be studied by all basses and baritones. “ I Fear No Foe,” by
Pinsuti, is a grand old song, and the same composer’s “ Be-
douin Love Song ” is very impressive; the “ Bandolero,” by
Stuart, is also ever acceptable. Arditi’s “ Let Me Love Thee ”
is one of the best baritone songs ever written; and “ The
Courier of Moscow,” by Rodney, and “ Manuelita,” by
are both very good songs, either for tenore robusto or
voices of light baritone quality. “In Sheltered Vale,” by
D’Alquen, is generally sung by those of a deeper quality of
voice, the low ending on F being essential to the effect of the
song. “ The Sailor’s Grave,” by Sullivan, is effective both for
Tenors and Baritones; and “The Deathless Army,” by Tro-
tere, is undoubtedly a favourite with baritones. Another
baritone song which has stood the test of time is Pinsuti’s
“ Queen of the Earth.” Owing to the deep truth of the words
of this song, and the beauty and suitability of its music, it
seems to me more interesting each time I hear it. Last, but
not least, among bass and baritone songs which may be
classed as “ Sacred,” Gounod’s “ Nazareth,” Parker’s “ Jerusa-
lem,” and Rodney’s “ Calvary ” are of the most enduring fame.
Two very good baritone songs are “My Steed and I ” and
“ Homeward Bound,” by Mr. Horace Gleeson, of this city.
Obbligato Songs.
An obbligato, if properly played, be it either for flute,
violin, ’cello, or other suitable instrument, is a great improve-
ment to the song for which the composer has written such
obbligato; and some songs are entirely dependent upon the
obbligato for their effect. It would be absurd, for instance,
to sing Braga’s “ Serenata ” without having the accompani-
ment of the flute or violin, the principal burden of the melody
resting upon the instrumentalist. The same is true of “ Alla
Stella Confidente,” by Robandi, and of most of the best settings
of the “ Ave Maria.” Of songs which are more effective with
obbligato than without, I would in addition to those already
mentioned suggest the following:—“ An Old Love Dream,” St.
Quentin; “ Bid Me To Love,” Barnard; “An Old World Sere-
nade,” Meyer-Helmund; “Dream Voices,” Piccolomini;
“ Easter Eve,” Gounod ; “ I Will Give You Rest,” J. Adams ;


“Galilee,” J. Adams; “God’s Slumberland,” Gray; “ODry
Those Tears,” Teresa del Riego; and “Fiddle and I,” Good-
eve. All the foregoing have beautiful obbligatos for violin,
and some for other instruments, such as flute, harp, or ’cello
as well. There are, of course, many other songs which have
effective obbligatos besides those which I have mentioned,
but I have again and again proved the worth and beauty of
the foregoing.
Songs with Italian Words.
For songs with Italian words, the student will find that
the Royal Edition (Boosey’s) will meet all requirements in the
matter of Italian arias, “ Songs from the Operas ” being per-
haps within the range of more voices than those in the So-
prano, Contralto, Tenor and Baritone Albums. The “ Albums ”
containing the Airs in the original keys, just as they appear
in the operas from which the selections are made, and the
collection called “ Songs from the Operas,” in two volumes—
No. I. for Mezzo and Contralto, No. 11. for Tenor and Bari-
tone —being many of the same airs transposed into lower
keys.
Contraltos will find Madame Patey’s “ Classical Song
Book ” a very useful and inexpensive collection of Airs with
Italian words, phrased according to the method adopted by
the great contralto herself.
The “ Aden Albums,” for Sopranos and Alto in Peter’s
Edition (Numbers 73.4 a and 735), are splendid collections of
Airs from Operas and Oratorios with Italian and German
words, but the English translations are not in all cases given.
SONGS BY THE GREAT TONE POETS.
Many of Tosti’s songs are set to pretty little poems in
the Italian language, notably “ Vorrei ” and “La Serenata ”
His “ Twenty Melodies,” with Italian and English words, are
also very dainty compositions.
Concerning art songs, I have previously stated that it is
difficult in Melbourne at present to find an audience which
really cares to listen to the vocal solos composed by the great
masters, but these gems of art are a never-failing source of
interest to the musician; and many of them are so melodious
as to have become popular even with the uncultivated.


Bach has written many beautiful Sacred Songs, notably
“My Heart Ever Faithful,” for Soprano voice. There is a
very good collection of twenty of his songs in Novello’s
Edition.
Handel’s songs from the oratorios have twelve solos for
each voice (Soprano, Alto, Tenor, and Bass), selected from
the different oratorios, and phrased by Randegger according
to the best traditions.
Haydn’s Canzonets are many of them very interesting,
and available for Concert use, notably “ My Mother Bids Me
Bind My Hair,” for Soprano, and the “ Spirit’s Song,” for Con-
tralto. There is a collection of ten of Haydn’s Canzonets in
Novello’s Edition, but all in high keys. The setting of “ The
Spirit’s Song,” to be found in Madame Sainton Dolby’s Tutor,
is, therefore, better for contraltos.
Beethoven has written some beautiful art songs, the one
called in the Royal Edition “ Nature’s Adoration ” being ex-
ceptionally fine; it is suitable for the baritone or bass voice.
And “ Adelaide ” (with which the name of our veteran tenor,
Mr. Armes Beaumont, has been for so long pleasurably asso-
ciated) is another glorious composition. “ New Love, New
Life,” is also of deep interest, if only for the sake of the words,
which are by “ Goethe,” and which in themselves supply a
noble soul-picture of character sketch in such words as are
translated into “ that deep truth in face and feature.”
Mozart’s best songs are to be found in his operas, notably
“ Don Giovanni,” the “ Magic Flute,” and “ Figaro.”
Mendelssohn. —“ The First Violet ” and “On Wings of
Song I’ll Take Thee,” are the most familiar, and some of his
duets, such as “ I Would That the Love,” and “ O Wert Thou
In the Cauld Blast,” are much sung at concerts.
Schumann was a prolific song writer, and for the most
part a very melodious one, “ Devotion ” and “ Humility ” being
the most notable in this respect. He has also written some
charming song-cycles, such as “ Woman’s Love and Life ” and
“ The Poet’s Love.” “ The Holiday on the Rhine ” has a popular
style about it. “The Ring,” too, is an easy melody to re-
member. The Air of “ Moonlight ”is very sweet and smooth ;
it is in a high key in all editions. “Beauteous Cradle,” for
Mezzo or Tenor, is a very attractive song. “ Memories ”
and “The Far-off Land” are also beneficial for the student
to learn.
Rubinstein has written some lovely songs, of which “ The
Mariner,” “0 Fair, and Sweet and Holy,” “The Tear,” “A
Dream,” are some of the most attractive and easy to learn. I


prefer Augener’s Edition of hjs songs, as they are in lower
keys than those in Boosey’s “ Royal Edition.”
Dvorak’s songs are not generally of a sufficiently melo-
dious character to be used as concert items, but the first of
his " Sixteen Songs ” in Novello’s Edition has a very smoothly-
flowing melody. It is for tenor or soprano.
Grieg is a prolific song writer, “Solveig’s Song” and
“ The Princess ” having found much acceptance alike with
singers and audiences.
Lassen’s song, “ With Thy Blue Eyes,” is a favourite tenor
or soprano song.
Taubert’s songs, of which there is a collection of eleven
in Litolff’s Edition (No. 1230) are very charming songs for
the low voice.
Meyer-Helmund has turned out shoals of songs, many of
which are useful and attractive concert items, and his work is
always of such a highly artistic quality as to cause him to be
considered as one of the classics, although one of the most
modern additions to that mighty and honourable brotherhood.
Elgar’s “Sea-Pictures” I have already mentioned. This
Cycle contains songs which have a fascination for me, which
increases with each repetition of the song. What an ex-
quisitely beautiful little song is “In Haven”! Its simplicity
and purity of style and absence of chromatic chords leaving
the same impression on the mind as one has after beholding
a beautiful statue representing arcadian or child life. His
song, “Pansies,” too, is a beautiful composition, but contain-
ing rather more complicated work in the accompaniment than
is the case with “ In Haven.”
Chopin has also written songs. There is a collection of
sixteen in Peter’s Edition (No. 1925 b), with German words
only, but in them I find so little trace of that genius for melody
which forms the charm of the Chopin Nocturnes and Waltzes
that I have never felt tempted to seek English translations in
order to use the songs in public.
’ Adolf Jensen’s songs are many of them very expressive
and tenderly beautiful, notably “ O Stay Thou Golden Hour ”
(No. 32 in Stanley Lucas’ Edition).
Brahams is said to be “ the greatest of modern song
writers,” but I must confess to a denseness on the score of
Brahams, and though I possess two volumes of his songs, it
would be only affectation on my part to say that they have
given me as much pleasure as some of Nevin’s, Willeby’s and
Allitsen’s, to say nothing of Elgar’s and Eaton Faning’s beau-
tiful vocal compositions. The copies of Brahams’ songs I have


are in Peters’ Edition (Nos. 146 a and 146 b). All the songs
are in keys too high for my voice, and I have never felt suffi-
ciently attracted by any one of them to consider transposition
worth while. I am very sorry of course that I cannot rise to
a higher level of appreciation of this great composer’s works,
and perhaps their beauties will dawn upon me in time if I per-
severe in a study of them.
Tschaikowsky has written songs. I heard one some time
ago, called “Why So Pale are the Roses.” It sounded pretty,
but the young lady who sang it was so extremely nervous that
one could not judge very accurately of the merits of either
song or singer. It is a very trying position to be on a pro-
gramme as a performer of high-class music, in a community
where such music has not yet gained a hrm hold upon public
favour, and when one’s cultivation is not of the highest we
are apt to appear as the one described by the poet as being
“ among fools a judge and among judges a fool.” But this
is by the way. I have not yet become possessed of a copy of
Tschaikowsky’s songs, as I know they would be of little prac-
tical use to me, and I have a sufficiently large stock of useless
song books as it is. Tschaikowsky’s “ Pathetic Symphony” is
one of the most beautiful compositions ever written, as we all
know, and musical people of Melbourne feel greatly indebted
to Herr Slapoffski for the very fine performances which his
orchestra gave of it in our city; but orchestral composers are
not always the best writers of vocal music; they do not seem
to realise how much the intensity of expression in the voice
has to do with the effect, and think that the small range of
a voice as compared with an instrument, is a great detriment
and diminishes the expressive powers of a vocalist. This idea
is given utterance to very emphatically by Rubenstein in a
conversational book called “ Music and Its Masters ” (Auge-
ner’s Edition, No. 9x93). He here says that he is opposed,
to the views of the present day, which advocates vocal music
as the highest expression in music, “ because the human
voice sets a limit to melody, which the instrument does not,
and of which the emotion of the human soul, be it joy or sor-
row, does not admit ” ; he then goes on to say that “ tbe tragic
in no opera sounds or can sound, as it is heard in the second
movement of Beethoven’s D Minor Trio, or in the Adagios of
his F major, E minor, F minor, and other string quartettes,
or in the Prelude in E flat minor of Bach’s “ Wohltemperirte
Clavier,” or in the E minor Prelude of Chopin,” etc., but
while I quite agree with the ideas expressed as to the depth
of expression contained in the music mentioned (especially


of the Eb minor Prelude of Bach), it seems to me that vocal
music speaks much more directly to the heart of cultured and
ignorant alike than does instrumental music, the latter seems
to presuppose a certain amount of talent in the listener, which
is not the case with a song which is an emotional and heart-
felt rendering of a simple poem, calculated to be understood
by all.
To conclude my remarks on writers of high-class songs, I
would say that Frances Ali.itsen’s collection of Six Songs are
also calculated to afford great pleasure to the student, and
some useful items for the public singer, “ Thy Presence ” and
“ Come Not When I am Dead ” being available for contralto
and baritone voices.
Richard Walthew’s collection of Twelve Songs contains a
very beautiful setting of Tennyson’s “Break, Break, Break.”
Hamish MacCunn has also written some very fine songs
suitable for high voices.
Gounod. The omission of Gounod’s name from an earlier
position of this list is not any evidence of a lack of apprecia-
tion on my part for that composer, who has been truly called
“ the greatest French composer,” but his name is identified
so much with high-class songs which are frequently heard at
Ballad Concerts and at the Musical Festivals of Churches that
he seems to occupy a position with regard to vocal solos some-
thing similar to that of Sullivan, Cowen, and Blumenthal. His
opera “Faust” contains many beautiful solos for Soprano,
Tenor and Baritone voices, and one, (“ When All Was Young ”)
for Mezzo or Contralto. His oratorio solos are not usually of
the kind which can with advantage be used as excerpts, “ Mors
et Vita,” which is, to my mind, his most beautiful sacred work,
containing mostly quartette work, especially for contralto
voice, for which there is no distinct solo at all.
I do not pretend that the above list at all approaches com-
pleteness. I have merely discussed those songs and com-
posers which I feel competent to speak of because of my per-
sonal experiences having brought me into touch with their
nature and attributes. Each individual student and singer has
special predilections, and I can only hope that I may be of
some small assistance to those whose tastes somewhat coin-
cide with my own, if only by endorsing their opinions by my
expression of the warm sympathy which I feel for all who have
a genuine love of music.
When one has a rather extensive repertoire they are apt
to suffer sometimes from the embarrassment of riches, and
because they have so very much they may find they can enjoy


so very little because they know not where to begin. As
Browning says:
Not that, amassing flowers,
Youth sighed “ Which roses make ours,
Which lily leave and then as best recall ? "
Not that, admiring stars,
It yearned “ Nor Jove, nor Mars;
Mine be some figured flame which blends,
Trascends them all! "
And it is just this desire to have all, which leaves us with
little or nothing. So that it is necessary to find some plan
and system of selection in our studies. I hit on what I
thought for a time rather a good method; after I had left
off studying under the guidance of teachers, and had no
special set work and no distinct object in view to give zest to
my musical life and activities. This plan was to classify my
music according to the keys of the works, and each day play
only music in a certain key. In this way I hoped to get some
idea of most of the music I possessed by the end of a month,
for I had made out a list for each day of the month after the
following manner:
Day of the month—lst. Key of Music C.
Day of the Month—2nd. Key of Music A minor,
and so on. I also elaborated the plan somewhat, and de-
cided to get at my books by the same method, and arranged
to read on the first day of the month only the authors whose
names commenced with the letter A, and on the second those
whose names commenced with B, and follow on the same man-
ner to the end of the alphabet, which (with the omission of
Sundays) would about end the month also, and I went still
further, thinking the plan might help me in my study of the
Bible, I thought of also reading on the first day of the month
those Books of the Bible which commenced with A, and on the
second those commencing with B, and so on, so my list for
the first day appeared as follows (omitting preliminary
studies): —
MUSIC.
Bach.—Fifteen small preludes. Nos. 1., 11., and XL Inven-
tions—Two and Three Part. No. I. Preludes and
Fugues No I. (in both vols.).
Beethoven, No. 3. —Symphony I. Menuetto. Sonata, No. 21.
Sonata, No. 16. Adagio grazioso.
Mendelssohn.—Lieder ohne Worte, Nos. 34, 48 and 45. Wed-
ding March.
Schubert.—Klavier Compositions, 29 to end. “ Momens Musi-
cals ” (page 100 in Peters’ Edition). Songs, “Sea Calm,"


Vol. I. page 88 (Royal Edition). “Restless Love,” Vol.
11., page 58.
Gavottes (Novello, Ewer and Co.’s Pianoforte Albums, Vol.
4). Calkins (page 118). Macfarren’s (page 126).
Weber.—Variations on “ Vien qua Donna Bella.”
Chopin.—Mazurkas, Nos. 44 and 34.
Rubenstein’s Songs.—“ Modern Greek Songs ” (Augener Edi-
tion, page 155). “Fare Thee Well.”
Mozart.—Klavierstuck, page 17 (Peters’ Edition, No. 6). So-
natas, Rondo (page 150, Peters’ Edition).
Taubert.—Songs, “ Awake, 0 My Heart,” “ The Kiss and the
Song,” “ To the Moon.”
Songs from the Operas (Royal Edition, Vol. I.). —“Non so piu
cosa,” “ Com ’e bello,” “ Se v’e nel mondo,” “ Porgi amor,”
Contralto Album or Patey’s Classical Song Book. —“ Che
Faro.”
Ballad.—“ When the Tide Comes In,” Millard.
Grieg.—Vol. IT, “The Old Song.”
Sacred Songs JRoyal Edition). —“ O Thou Who Driest the
Mourner’s Tear.”
Wagner.—“ Tannhauser March.”
Rossini.—“ LTtaliana in Algeria” (Overture).
Schumann.—Jugend, Album, “Reapers’ Song.”
Elgar.—“ In Haven,” “ Sabbath Morning at Sea.”
Tosti.—“ La Serenata.”
Mendelssohn.—“ O Rest in the Lord.”
LITERATURE.
Authors. —Addison, A’Kempis, St. Augustine, Emerson’s Es-
says on “ Art ” (this was included because I like to read
something of Emerson’s every day).
SCRIPTURE.
The books of “ Amos ” and “ Acts.”
The reader will see that this was a pretty extensive list,
and will understand that I grew somewhat weary of the key
of C before the end of the day, and craved for a few black
notes. Also I found myself in for playing several pieces not
very interesting to advanced students, such as those in the
Jugend Album of Schumann and other elementary work. I
therefore determined to revise the lists, and bring them more
within bounds, for some of them have the germs of very inte-
resting daily programmes for the student who is endowed


with abundant leisure, which I regret to say is not my case
just at present. Pauer has made some very interesting re-
marks on the characteristic of the different keys. He dis-
cusses the question very fully in his little book, “ The Beauti-
ful in Music,” and one gets a very clear idea of the charac-
teristics of the different keys in giving up a whole day to the
study of music in one key only. I give the above list as a
sample; the other lists are not all as long as that in C, but some
are longer. For instance, I found there was not much music
in my collection in the key of F sharp major, and that most
of that in C sharp minor was so difficult as to require the
whole day, and many days following for each separate piece,
but I found Bach’s Preludes and Fugues in the “Wohltem-
perirte Clavier ” a great aid and support in this system, as his
work is arranged on just this plan which I tried to adopt.
My religious friends will understand that I was rather in
difficulties as to my Scripture reading on the tenth day when
I found myself confronted with such a formidable array of
books as Joshua, Judges, Job, Joel, Jonah, John, James and
Jude! I have since procured a Scripture reading list which is
not of my own invention, but which I do not adhere to as
closely and conscientiously as I should. If some ingenious
person would invent an equally complete and comprehensive
practising list for students of music they would be conferring
as great a boon upon the musical community as the compiler
of the reading list has bestowed upon the religious world.
Perhaps something of the kind may be evolved in time.
I may state that in my lists I was forced to omit Haydn’s
Sonatas, and those of other prolific writers, and the operas
and oratorios, and leave them until I could think out some
other system for the study of them which should be indepen-
dent of the plan for the study of the main part of my collec-
tion.
SCHUBERT’S SONGS.
I have left the consideration of Schubert’s songs until the
last, because they are of such stupendous merit, as well as
so numerous, as to need a far more lengthy dissertation upon
them than is required by any other class of song. Yet, as I
said before, Art Songs, of which school Schubert’s songs are
the foundation and the chief representatives, are not accept-
able to the unthinking and uncultured multitude, and the
vocalist, even after an enthusiastic and thorough course of
study of these songs, finds very little practical scope for them
in the matter of the public performance of them before an


audience to whom the singer could make them quite welcome,
even with the aid of great gifts and cultivation on the part
of the singer. Yet these songs are of all others the most
sublime, and are a never-failing source of pleasure to the
musician.
Of Schubert’s songs I find the Royal Edition the best,
because it contains both the German and English words, and
the translation of the original German text into English is more
singable and easier to phrase than is the case with some other
editions, though most of those in Augener’s Edition are well
arranged too. Many of the songs of Schubert should be sung
with German words, notably in the ones whose words are by
Germany’s great poet, Goethe (he having supplied the words
of sixty of Schubert’s songs), and several others have words
by Heine, another eminent German poet.
Having made a series of notes on each song in the first
volume of Schubert’s Songs in the Royal Edition, I append
them in the hope that they may be of use to some student
or teacher in giving an indication of the range, and consequent
suitability of the songs to certain voices.
1. “ The Erl King.” —This beautiful and descriptive
song should be sung in German, the words being by Goethe.
It is more suitable for bass or baritone than other voices. The
accompaniment, as is the case with the majority of Schubert’s
songs, being a great feature of the work, and a very impor-
tant factor in the effect of the song. The compass of this is
from A below the stave to E in the fourth space.
2. “ The Warrior’s Presentiment.” — Begins in C minor,
then modulates into C major, and back again into the minor
mode, in which it ends, the changes of key being closely con-
nected with the different shades of sentiment in the words.
Compass, A on the second line below the stave to F on the
fifth line.
3. “ Serenade.” —This song is melodious enough to be con-
sidered “ popular,” and it is one of the most familiar airs to
those who have studied music at all, being used as an instru-
mental solo, as in arrangements for flute, violin, or piano, as
well as in its original form as a vocal solo for tenor voice. Its
compass is middle C to E in fourth space.
It is this air which Schubert wrote in the tavern, on the
back of a bill of fare, amidst “ the loud dissonance of beery
roysterers, the squalling of children, and all the sights and
sounds characteristic of the beer-cellar. Here, amid all the
confusion and the riot was born the divine melody of the


‘ Serenade ’ —a song which embodies the most delicate dream
of passion and tenderness that the heart of man ever con-
ceived.” I refer the reader to the splendid and glowing
biography of Schubert contained in the book by R. Farquhar-
son Sharp, entitled “ Makers of Music,” for a full account of
Schubert’s methods and life work.
4. “ My Resting Place.”- —This is another which may with
advantage be used as a concert selection, provided of course
the nature of the programme as a whole is somewhat elevated-
in character. It is a very useful contralto song, but needs a
good range of voice, its compass being G sharp in third space
below to Ein fourth space. In the phrasing of the words “ for
ever, for ever more,” I make an alteration, which prevents the
accent falling upon “ for ” in the repetition of the words, by
making the hrst syllable of “ ever ” come on the first beat of
the bar each time the word occurs.
The student may adopt this plan or adhere to the printed
method, according to taste, either being correct; but I have a
great objection myself to placing an accent upon words which
in speech are of quite secondary importance.
5. “ Wandering.” —This is a very pretty, bright, rhythmical
little song, being from the Cycle called “ The Lovely Maid of
the Mill.” Compass of one octave from Eon first line to E
in fourth space.
6. “ Whither.”— Bright and tuneful. Compass, middle C
to E in fourth space.
7. “ Acknowledgment to the Brook.”- —Has a murmuring
accompaniment in imitation of the brook. Compass, Eon first
line to F on fifth line.
8. “After Work.” —Key, G minor. Depicts the depression
of the mill-hand who had not courage to tell his love to the
miller’s lovely maid. Compass, B, in second space below to F
on fifth line.
9. “ The Inquirer.” —A very delicate and expressive com-
position. In its restlessness of melody it illustrates the un-
certain state of the lover’s mind regarding the feelings of his
loved one towards himself. The enharmonic modulation from E
to A at the last verse is a very smooth and beautiful one. This
song is suited to the Mezzo voice, its compass being D in first
space below to Eon fourth space. The range indeed would
cause it to be considered a contralto song, but the tessitura
is somewhat high throughout the song, so "that a tenor could
also sing it with ease.
10. “Impatience.”— Has a lovely smooth melody, which is
more expressive of the yearning love which the words also
depict than of the impatience which gives the song its title.


This is decidedly a tenor song, the range being middle C to
F on fifth line.
11. “Morning Greeting.” — Has just the fresh debonair
qualities which suit the words. Mezzos or contraltos could
sing it, but the words make the song more suitable for the
male voice. The compass is Eon first line to Don fourth line.
12. “ Mine.”— ls illustrative of the joy of the lover in know-
ing she is his, he having evidently put his fate to the test “ to
win or lose it all,” and has, fortunately, come off the victor,
and he hears nothing but the one word, “ Mine,” in the whir-
ring of the mill wheel, which the accompaniment is'a very
good illustration of. This song is suitable for Mezzo or
Tenors. Compass D in first space below to F sharp on fifth
line.
13. “ The Green Ribbon.” —This is a little story of how she
begs a green ribbon which he is wearing, and how he gladly
gives it to her if she will promise to wear it in her hair; and he
says “ he then will know where hope doth dwell, who loves him
well, and green shall be always dear to him.” Compass, one
octave from Eb on first line to Eb in fourth space.
14. “ Jealousy.— ls a very expressive song, portraying the
painful feelings of the lover on seeing the object of his affec-
tions watching a huntsman going down the road; so the
brook is instructed to read the young lady a lecture on pru-
dence. The two chords at the end are very effective, and em-
phasise the words “ tell her,” which appear three times at the
close of the song. Compass, middle CtoF on fifth line.
15. “ The Hateful Colour.” —The lover is evidently in a
very uncomfortable state of mind at this stage of his love
affair, for in this quaint song which expresses both in melody
and modulation great restlessness of feeling, he gives utter-
ance to desire to do certain things which would show his men-
tal state to be bordering on insanity, and all because a certain
lady raised her window at the sound of the huntsman’s horn.
The lines—
And though she looks not forth for me
On her I humbly gaze.
show that in spite of all his sufferings he still loves her, that
no faithlessness on her part can change his feelings towards
her. The name of the song is accounted for by the last lines
of the song, for it appears she still wears the green ribbon
which she begged from him, even when she is arousing his
jealousy by looking out of her window at the huntsman. One
would think her wearing of the ribbon ought to reassure her
miller-lover, rather than make him hate the colour of the said
ribbon. The compass of this song is C sharp first line below


to F natural on fifth line, being for a tenor, as most love songs
are, and all of the Song Cycle of which this number forms
part are for the tenor voice.
id. “Withered Flowers.” —The tune is rather dirge-like
to suit the words, but the accompaniment is very varied and
interesting. It is altogether a beautiful composition, and
would make a charming number apart from the cycle, though
it is most effective in its original position, as expressive of the
most hopeless stage of the poor miller’s love story, his only
comfort being now a few withered flowers which she gave
him, and which he hopes to have buried with him. Compass,
D in first space below to E in fourth space.
17. “ The Miller and the Stream.”— This is the last num-
ber of the Cycle, and it is a very fitting ending. There are
seven other numbers in this Cycle which are given in the
second volume of the Royal Edition, and Augener’s Edition
of Schubert’s songs (No. 8900 of the edition). This latter
collection is a very well-arranged one, being edited by Pauer,
who has adopted a very clear method of classifying the songs,
but the songs are generally in higher keys than those in
Boosey’s collection, the latter being within the compass of
the medium voice—i.e., the mezzo voice in women or tenore
baritone in men.
But many of the numbers which are omitted from the
Cycle as it appears in the first volume of Boosey’s Edition are
very beautiful songs, and the reason for their not being in-
cluded must have been because of their being so much more
effective in the high keys in which they appear in Augener’s
Edition than they would be if transposed into lower keys that
they were unsuitable for an edition in which the songs are
arranged more in accordance with the requirements of the
medium voice. The Royal Edition (Boosey’s) is therefore
more suitable for teaching purposes and for the student of a
medium compass of voice, while Augener’s is for the use of
those who are competent to perform the songs in public, more
particularly for accomplished soprano and tenor vocalists.
There is another collection of Schubert’s Songs in Peters’ Edi-
tion (No. 709 c) for contralto and bass, but this has the draw-
back of an absence of any but German words. The transla-
tions may, however, be taken from other editions, and written
under those songs which we may wish to sing in English.
The Cycle, “The Lovely Miller Maid,” was written by
Schubert in 1823, when the composer was but twenty-six:
years of age.
16. “The Carrier Pigeon.” —To resume my remarks on


Schubert’s songs as found in the Royal Edition, Vol. I. The
one immediately following the close of the Cycle is “ The Car-
rier Pigeon.” This is a very attractive song, and could be
sung with advantage by either contralto, mezzo, or baritone
voice, its compass being Db in first space below to Eb in
fourth space on the stave.
17. “Sea Calm.” —This melody is remarkable in that it
contains the interval of the augmented mid, usually pro-
hibited, but as the two notes 1 -d which form
the interval, both appear in the chord which accompanies the
first note, the interval quite loses the uncomfortable effect it
might otherwise have, and the chord in which the two notes
appear is made the means of a very beautiful modulation from
E major to A minor. This song, though one of the shortest
in length, is one of the greatest in merit, for it is one of the
most beautiful harmonic studies in the whole collection, being
a practical demonstration of the beauty of the chord of the
Diminished Seventh. The song is a veritable "Sea Picture,”
suitable for contralto, baritone or bass. Compass, B in
second space below to D on fourth line.
“ The Alpine Hunter.” —This song is a decided contrast
to the last mentioned, being of the nature of a hunting scene,
very blithesome and vigorous. It seems to take us into the
mountains on a clear, bright winter’s day. It is suitable for
the baritone voice. Compass, middle C to F sharp on fifth
line.
“ The Shepherd’s Lament.” —The music and words are well
suited to each other, but I cannot say there is as much satis-
faction to be found, personally speaking, in this song, as in
many of the others. The student of harmony will, however,
find in it many interesting modulations. It is a tenor song.
Compass, middle C to F fiat on the fifth line.
“ The Wild Rose.” —This is a song suited for the younger
folk. It is very pretty and simple, both in words and music.
Compass, one octave from E on the first line to E in the fourth
space. The tessitura is high, so that it is not suitable for
contraltos, although the compass may lead one to think so.
“ The Wanderer.” —This is one of the most perfect ex-
pressions of the melancholy feeling engendered by homeless-
ness or home-sickness ever composed. It is rather more
suited to the female voice than to the female voice; it is effec-
tive for either high tenors or deep baritones and basses.
Compass in this edition, G share in third space below (optional
note at end E in fourth space below) to E in fourth space in
stave, but it may also be had in Eb a semitone lower.


“ Praise of Tears.” —This has a lovely smooth melody,
and English words, which are easy to sing to the music. It
is a contralto song. Compass, less than an octave, being
from E on first line to D on fourth line.
“ Good-night,” —This is the first of ten songs, which are
selected from the Song Cycle, “A Winter Journey.” The
Cycle contains twenty-four numbers. None of those given in
this volume are very suitable for separate items apart from
the Cycle. No. sof the Cycle, “ The Linden Tree,” has a very
beautiful accompaniment.
18. “Faith in Spring.” —This undoubtedly beautiful air,
which is more sung than many of Schubert’s songs, seems to
me to have a very melancholy sound about it, rather hop-
less and dirge-like, as for departed summer rather than ex-
pressive of hopes of a new joy to be found in Spring. It is
suitable for the contralto voice, its compass being from B in
second space below to C sharp in third space.
ig. “ The Huntsman’s Evening Song” is apparently to ex-
press his feelings when wearied in the chase. The air has no
swing about it. The frequent stops, where the run in the ac-
companiment is heard, rather spoil the rhythm. Compass, D
sharp in first space below to D natural on fourth line.
20. “ The Fishermaiden ” is a melodious song for con-
tralto. Compass, A on second line below to Eb in fourth
space.
21. “Hark! Hark! the Lark!” —One of the most popular
of Schubert’s songs. It suits a high, clear soprano voice,
needing a light, blithesome style of singing, rather than any
great richness of voice. Compass, from E flat on first line to
F on fifth line.
22. “Who is Sylvia?” —A very beautiful setting of the
Shakesperian text. It has a great charm, owing to its fresh
and tuneful vocal part, and firm, rich accompaniment. It is
rather more suited to the mezzo soprano voice than any other
needing fulness of voice, and being of too high a range for
contralto. Compass, from Eon first line to F sharp on fifth
line.
23. “The Young Nun.” —This is such a sublime composi-
tion that one hesitates to speak of it, for fear of not doing it
justice. It is as if we came before a beautiful, grandly solemn
statue or picture, and hushed silence and awe-struck stillness
were more eloquent than words. Still, as Emerson says,
those who set out to write, must, if needful, be able to report
even the Holy Ghost, so when one is a teacher of singing one
must be able to explain in words the most subtle and mys-
terious beauties of any composition which is to be made the
possession of a pupil. One great musical writer speaks of this


song as having “ epitomised in its devotional spirit the whole
sentiment of the service of the Mass ”; and his words do not
at all exaggerate the depth of religious sentiment expressed
in this wonderful song. The chords on the “ Alleluias ” are
so arranged as to have the richness and fulness of organ
music. There is a great scope for variety of expression and
dramatic power in this song, and a singer might study it for
a life-time without exhausting all its possibilities of fire and
pathos. It is rather more suited for the contralto voice than
any other, although a powerful and dramatic soprano might
sing it with advantage. Compass in this edition from D in
first space below to Eb in fourth space.
24. “Ave Maria.” —This is a smooth, sweet melody, with
a very rich arpeggio accompaniment, and requires a flute-like
soprano voice to give it proper effect. Compass, one octave
from Eb on first line to Eb in fourth space.
25 . “ Peace. ”•—The tune has a certain evenness about it,
which is in accordance with the subject of the work, but which
in other hands than Schubert’s might grow monotonous. It
is a very useful little song for the mezzo voice. Compass,
from middle C to E in the fourth space.
26. “ The Secret.” —An easy love-song for medium voice,
not a very interesting melody. Compass, from Bin second
space below to D on fourth line.
27. “The First Loss.”—ln a minor key, as the words
seem to require, A very interesting little piece for Soprano
or Tenor. Compass, from middle CtoF on fifth line.
28. “Norman’s Song.” —A very long composition, begin-
ning in C minor, and ending in C major. Words by Sir Walter
Scott. Perhaps some stout-hearted tenore robusto may some
day be found to tackle it for the sake of the writer of the
words and the composer of the song, rather than for any
variety of treatment of the sentiments expressed in the words.
Compass, from D in first space below to G in first space above.
29. “ Lay of the Imprisoned Huntsman.” —The words of
this song are also by Scott, but this is a more interesting
song than the former. The music depicts the hunter’s yearn-
ing restlessness and longing to be free. Would need a heavy
baritone or bass voice to do it justice. Compass, one octave
from D in first space below to D on fourth line.
30. “Laughing and Weeping.”—A very lively, bright little
song for mezzo or soprano. Compass, from Eb on first line to
Gb in first space above.
31. “ The Greybeard’s Song.” —Has some very rich, expres-
sive music in the accompaniment. Compass, from Bin second
space below to D sharp on fourth line.


32. “The Quail Cry.” —Rather an unsatisfactory song to
sing, having a restless high-pitched melody. It is supposed
to be descriptive or imitative, and would probably be more inte-
resting to those who live in parts where the quail cry is fre-
quently heard. Compass from D sharp in first space below to
F sharp on fifth line.
33. “Longing to Roam.”— Rather a monotonous song,
both as regards melody and accompaniment. It might do for
an exercise on the high register of a soprano or tenor. Com-
pass, E on first line to A on first line above.
34. “ Hymn to the Almighty.” —Another stupendous sac-
red work, a fit companion picture to “ The Young Nun.” What
a very powerful voice would be needed to be heard above the
roar of the tempest so truthfully portrayed in the accompani-
ment. The beauty and richness of the music is altogether
beyond description, but the grandeur of the theme is empha-
sised in every way possible by the music both of the vocal
part and the accompaniment. It is also a good study in con-
trasts of light and shade. Compass, from middle CtoA on
first line above.
33. “ Alinde.” —Very long, and melody much the same
throughout, but rather bright and pretty. Compass, from C
sharp on first line below (optional note A on second line below)
to F sharp on fifth line.
36. “On the Lake.”—A pretty Barcarolle for soprano or
tenor. Compass, from Din first place below to Fon fifth line.
37. “Cradle Song.”— A lovely melodious lullaby for the
soprano voice. Suits a light, sweet soprano to perfection.
Compass, from E on first line to F on fifth line.
38. “The Sunset Glow.”—A composition of a religious
character. Would suit a baritone of high range or a tenore
robusto. It has a rich beauty suggestive of the hues of sun-
set. Compass, from Eon first line to Fon fifth line.
39. “ The Floral Letter.” —A very dainty composition,
with a suggestion of hidden depths of feeling. Especially is
this true of the music of the accompaniment. Compass, from
F in first space to Eb on fourth space.
40. “ The Spectre-Dance.” —Here again the interval of
the augmented second, usually tabooed by melodists, appears
in the second bar between Eb and F sharp, but here, as else-
where, the two notes belong to the same chord, and the first
three notes of the bar may be regarded as the chord of the
diminished seventh taken as an arpeggio. The same beautiful
chord occurs again in the next bar, the diminished seventh
here being formed by the notes B natural to Ab, and the iden-
tical strain is repeated for the remainder of the verse. The
melody has a weird sound about it which well brings out the


eeriness of the ideas expressed by the words. It is a song
for contralto or bass voice, its compass being from G in third
space below the stave to £ in fourth space.
42. “Departure.” —A good baritone song, its main draw-
back being its undue length. Compass from Bb in second
space below the stave to F on the fifth line.
43. '“A Dream of Spring.” —A bright, pleasing melody,
easily learnt by ear. A semi-humorous song suitable for light
baritone or mezzo voice. Compass from Din first space below
to E in fourth space.
44. “In the Wood.” —A pretty little song for Mezzo
Soprano. Compass, from C sharp on first line below to Gin
first space above.
45. “Adieu.” —This, the last song in the book, is a fit-
ting close of my annotations of Schubert. Many composers
have expressed in song the sadness of parting, but none have
eclipsed Schubert’s beautiful melancholy song, with its rays of
hopefulness and faith in the happiness of an after life. In this
key (Eb) the song is suitable for a mezzo or tenor voice.
Schubert wrote in all six hundred songs, so those I have
mentioned are but a sample, and a slight indication of the
mine of wealth which his works afford to the vocalist.
Of these songs Crowest, in his book, “The Great Tone
Poets,” says as follows:—“Many may know him by other
music, but the world at large knows him only by those in-
spiring melodies which enkindle all the emotions appertain-
ing to human nature—love and hatred, joy and sorrow, hope
and despair, consolation, resignation and the like. Those six
hundred songs form a unique and precious bequest to music,
and complete the last, and not least, of the stately and strong
columns on which the vast edifice of modern musical art rests
—the symphonies and sonatas of Beethoven, the operas of
Mozart, the oratorios of Handel, the chamber music of Haydn,
and the songs of Schubert.”
Before I close this section of my book I would say that
in Volume 11. of Boosey’s Royal Edition tfaCy cles, " The
Lovely Maid of the Mill ” and " The Winter Journej' ” are to be
found. Also the beautiful weird song, “Death and the
Maiden,” but if I commence commenting on yet another
volume, those under whose notice my book is brought may
be tempted to accuse me of padding, so I leave the annotation
of the remainder of the six hundred songs to some other en-
thusiast, who will be the musical counterpart in energy and
force of character of the Mrs. Buntine, whom we read of
in the “Age” of Saturday, November 25th (in “Memories of
Early Days ”), as having had something to do with the open-
ing up of the material resources of the country. Let us hope


that those early pioneers may be as the forerunners of
pioneers in art and literature, whose mental and moral en-
durance will be quite as great as that of the physical strength
and courage of their forerunners in other departments, and
who will be instrumental in founding and developing the
potentialities of all that is elevated and grand in this our
native land, the home of “ a nation great whose dawn is
done.”
THE STUDY OF PIANOFORTE & HARMONY
Concerning Pianoforte and Harmony, although they are
subjects which I teach without feeling any diminution in my
honesty or self-respect, I cannot here speak much. The one is
so largely a matter of practice and the other has been ably
treated in elaborate works by such a number of distinguished
authors that it would be superfluous and perhaps impertinent
for me to attempt to write anything in the nature of a treatise
upon musical theory.
Therefore I will content myself with recommending the
books which have most helped me.
Stainer’s Primer is the best for beginners; Richter’s is
also a very simple work, but I do not hold with his ideas
about Chromatic Chords being suspensions. I prefer the point
of view which Macpherson and Prout take of these beautiful
combinations, for most of the great amount of pleasure which
I have found in the study of Harmony has been derived from
exercises upon Chromatic Chords, when not regarded as sus-
pensions.
The harmonising of melodies is ably treated by Macpher-
son in “ Practical Harmony,” and there is a little book on the
subject by Banister which is also of the greatest value to
students. I found the best way to study Macpherson’s book
was to do it with the aid of his Appendix, first gaining a know-
ledge of the main work and then answering the questions
which he gives on each chapter; and after answering the
questions in the Appendix it is advisable to work the exer-
cises in the main part of the treatise, and then those in the
Appendix. In this manner a clear and thorough knowledge
of each chord is gained.
Ear-training is a very important branch of musical theory
which is not given nearly as much attention to as it deserves,
but I refer the reader to Professor Peterson’s remarks on the
folly of this neglect, and the “ weaving of rones of sand ”
which the said neglect entails. The books of Shinn, Jadas-
son, and Sawyer are the best on this subject.


For gaining a really solid and thorough knowledge of
Harmony, there are no books to equal those of Ebenezer
Prout. Having had the good fortune to study under Mr. Thos.
Guenett, who was himself a pupil of this eminent theorist, I
can speak in the warmest terms of the clear and concise ex-
planations of the most complicated matters in musical theory
which is a great feature alike of Prout’s work and of the late
Mr. Guenett’s method of imparting the tenets of his illustrious
master.
Prout’s books are, of course, quite beyond the scope of
the average beginner, but this difficulty may be surmounted
by using Professor Peterson’s admirable “ Introduction to the
Study of Theory,” which forms a methodical preparation for
the works of Prout.
With regard to Pianoforte Music, the studies and exer-
cises of Schmidt, Challieu, Kohler, and Plaidy I have found
most useful; while Bach’s music is for all stages of musical
development. Pauer’s book, “ The Pianoforte,” is a splendid
guide for teacher and pupil alike. Jean Kleczynski’s book,
“ How to Play Chopin,” is a great aid in the interpretation of
the Polish composer’s works. It is well for each teacher to
form a list of teaching pieces suitable for all stages of ad-
vancement, more as a nucleus for a varied and ever-changing
repertoire of teaching pieces than for a fixed list to obviate all
further efforts and research. But there are some works which
never go out of date, and have to be taught to each pupil.
These are the works of the great masters —such as Bach,
Beethoven, Mozart, Handel, Haydn, Schumann, Chopin, Schu-
bert, and others too numerous to mention.
Of the order in which the works of Bach should be
studied Pauer speaks as follows:—“ I would advise all
students to begin with the six small preludes, and afterwards
to take the inventions for two parts. When the mechanical
difficulties of these delicious little duets have been conquered,
the fifteen symphonies for three parts may be attempted.
The six French suites should come next, and after these the
six duet sonatas for clavecin and violin, or those for clavecin
and flute may be taken. Next I should recommend the six
great English suites, and the charming partitas, the Italian
Concerto, the different toccatas. Only after such prepara-
tions should the student begin the forty-eight preludes and
fugues called “ The Wohltemperirte Clavecin.” But great en-
joyment can also be derived from playing the organ works in
the form of a duet for two performers on one instrument.”
Dr. Riemann’s Analysis of Bach’s Preludes and Fugues is
also a valuable book for the pianist who has studied counter-
point. Schumann says, “ The well-tempered pianoforte ”


i.e., “The Wohltemperirte Clavecin” above mentioned) —
“ should be your daily bread. You will then certainly become
an able musician.”
The Bosworth edition of Beethoven’s Sonatas is a very
clear and useful one for students, the Sonatas being arranged
in the order of their degrees of difficulty. Elterlein’s book on
the aspect of Beethoven’s sonatas is a very charm-
ing work, adding greatly to one’s comprehension of and plea-
sure in the study of Beethoven’s Sonatas. Harding’s “ Analy-
sis of Form ” is an incomparable work, being the analysis of
each one of the Sonatas.
“ The Pianist’s Handbook,” by Professor Peterson, and
Mr. Alfred Johnstone’s works on “ How to Strike the Keys of
the Pianoforte,” and “ The Art of Expression in Pianoforte
Playing,” are very valuable aids to pianoforte students.
But in spite of the wide held of study and research which
these two branches of music open up, I can hardly be ex-
pected to have as much to say of them as of singing, for this
last mentioned art is now a part of myself, and it is
bound up with all the most impressive experiences (whether
of joy or sorrow) in my past life, so that it is to me much more
than a superficial accomplishment; it is my chief vehicle of ex-
pression, my means of getting in touch with my kind, and of
expressing my sympathy with kindred spirits; and whatever
private activities we may engage in that which brings us at all
before the general public seems to impose a heavier respon-
sibility upon us than any other duties which may fall to our
lot, however conscientious we may be in our private lives.
1 conclude this section with the words of the great German
theorist, Marx, “ That which I hear enters into my existence
from without, aw-akens and enriches my mind; but that w'hich
I sing is the effluence of my own life, the exertion of my own
power to refresh and elevate myself, as well as others.”
ON FILTHY LUCRE.
For the benefit of those who consider the monetary side
the most important aspect of the singer’s occupation, and be-
cause I am anxious to get some information on a point which
I cannot myself decide—viz., whether my status as a public
singer is that of a professional or an amateur, I publish the
following table of fees which I have received during eleven
years. I cannot then have it upon my conscience that I have
misled anyone as to the profitableness of my occupation, and
they will gather that I must have had some other motive than
either avarice or vanity, for it is certainly not much “ honour
and glory ” to sing year after year in suburban halls, or even
in the city when the programme is not of a high-class nature.


Year.
Number of
Concerts sung at
gratuitously.
For a Fee
of One
Guinea.
For a Fee of over
a Guinea.
For which I
received 10/6 as
expenses.
Total.
1894 ■■
IO
3 (for W. G.
13
Turner)
1895 ..
15
I
1
(in Country)
I
18
1896 ..
l6
2
I
19
>897 ..
(in Country)
39
7
2
48
1898 ..
60
18
6
10
94
(including 2 in
Country)
1899 ..
62
16
3
8
89
(all in Country)
1900 , .
27
12
2
6
47
1901
20
II
9
3
43
(including 4 at
Ballarat
Exhibition
and 3 others
outside of
Melbourne)
1902 . .
38
II
3
(two in Country)
8
60
1903 ••
29
4
3
(two in Country)
5
41
1904 ..
45
7
7
59
Total
361
90
31
49
521
I sometimes wonder why I did sing so much for nothing, but
think it must have been my religious up-bringing, and the
plausible ways of those who organised the concerts.
I do not regret having worked for any good cause, and I
do not think I have ever been deliberately imposed upon by
unprincipled concert organisers, who pretended the concert
for which they solicited gratuitous services was for some good
charitable object, when it was really to enrich themselves, for
I have generally been personally acquainted with those who
gave the concerts at which I sang gratuitously. However,
the past cannot be recalled, but if the information contained
in the following list is of any use to my fellow workers, or fur-
nishes any explanation or satisfaction to the friendly and in-
quisitive who may feel the least curiosity about my past life
and prospects for the future, they are welcome to it.
My list covers a decade reckoned from 1894 to 1904, both
years inclusive, and is as follows:


As the present year is not at an end at the time I write, I
must hold over the statistics concerning it until some future
occasion, but the number of concerts sung at has already
mounted up to thirty-four, twenty-eight of which have been
charity concerts.
The above list means to me that not a week has passed
during the last ten years without my having had to do penance
for the possession of a voice, by singing either for nothing or
next to nothing before an audience which knew little and cared
less both about the difficulties of Melbourne singers and about
the progress of high-class music in our midst. If any of my
sister or brother vocalists feel affronted at my publishing this
list as being a fair sample or epitome of the experiences of
Melbourne singers, they are quite at liberty to consider it
exceptional rather than typical. But without being unduly
conceited, I have good reason to know that my voice is all
that can be desired, and that my vocal powers have not de-
clined with the advance of my own civilisation, whatever
poetry may do in nations, according to Macaulay. The rather
sudden falling off in the number of concerts in 1903 being, in
my case, caused by the death of my father early in that year,
which, of course, obliged me to lead for a time a more retired
life than is customary with the generous and gifted friends of
churches and charities, and my father’s death having been but
the beginning of a series of family bereavements, the last
three years can hardly be reckoned in with any period which
is to be taken as a fair sample of the possibilities of progress
for singers in Melbourne at present. But I believe profitable
engagements to be so few and far between in our city that
they would all need to go to one singer to enable that singer
to live by vocalism alone, and why should they go to one indi-
vidual more than another when all have equal rights, by virtue
of gifts and cultivation? But sometimes the less gifted and
cultivated get more engagements and enjoy more worldly
prosperity of all kinds than those who possess talent of a very
high order, for the amount of worldly wisdom a person pos-
sesses seems to be in inverse ratio to the musical quality of
the voice; and crows have evidently more clearly defined
ideas as to getting a living than have nightingales.
The clink of mone}q too, covers a multitude of sins in the
nature of false intonation of voice and poverty of vocal
quality. Therefore we who possess little of this world’s goods
feel all the more sure of our talents, when we see that they
give genuine pleasure, but it is very distressing at times to


see how little connection there is between platform success
and a decent income, or even between years of study and ear-
nest cultivation and a satisfactory teaching connection, when
there is anything at all disadvantageous in the inevitable cir-
cumstances of our lives, such as in my case for instance,
living in an obscure and unsuitable neighbourhood, which I
cannot very easily leave until our old family residence is sold
for a price far above that which those contrary estate agents,
with their bearing down policy, choose to place upon the home
of my childhood, whose especial value to me the sympathetic
reader will easily understand.
For the benefit of others I would say that the year 1898,
which appears on my list as the one during which I sang most
frequently, was the year during which my headquarters were
at a prominent house in Wellington Parade, East Melbourne,
which my eldest brother rented for a time for my sake, thus
exhibiting the business policy which made his own commercial
life so successful. Whatever one may say about the paucity
of fees and the folly of singing for nothing, a singer must
ever be considered more or less successful according to the
nlumber of opportunities which are offered the individual
singer of using his or her gifts. I say “ offered ” advisedly,
for I do not consider a vocalist who has to beg for every
opportunity as being a success at all—rather the reverse; but
if one is solicited continually year after year to sing, even
for charity, it argues the possession of qualities which go to
the making of a successful vocalist, if not a world-renowned
singer, for in spite of the indifference of the general run of
the people, the Latin proverb, “ Vox populi, vox Dei ” applies
more to singing than to any other class of work, for unless the
singer touches the hearts of the people, he or she does not
gain popular applause, and to touch the hearts of an audi-
ence is a singer’s function, of which the' popular applause is
the endorsement, and the proof that the singer is endowed
with a great amount of poetical sentiment, and the power to
express it.
Speaking of fees reminds me that I did not include my
good friends, the Wesley Church authorities, in my list of
those to whom my thanks are due, but I feel none the less
grateful to them; for, indeed, the Methodist Churches, gene-
rally speaking, have always shown such an amount of kindli-
ness and cordiality towards me, that I cannot but look upon
the members of that denomination as among my oldest
friends and most generous supporters.
But the appreciation of and consideration for singers dis-
played by the managers of the Central Methodist Church are
of a quality quite unique, seeing that they, like other Churches,


would find no difficulty in providing programmes of items by
vocalists willing to appear gratuitously. Yet this Church never
claims that sort of help from singers except at its weekly
Pleasant Sunday Afternoons, at which both professionals and
amateurs appear; and at all other concerts and public meet-
ings they secure the services of singers whose livelihood is
earned by music, and these singers are remunerated, not very
largely perhaps, in all cases; but, in consideration of the low
financial condition of affairs musical in Melbourne just now,
the Wesley Church scale of fees is fairly commendable. In
addition to this, their thoughtfulness extends to the providing
of an excellent accompanist and a good piano, which is kept
in perfect order. These two last-mentioned advantages are
not always to be found at entertainments organised by reli-
gious and charitable bodies, the instrument in one very large
suburban hall, in which a great number of charitable concerts
and entertainments in aid of Churches are held, being in such
a deplorable state as to endanger the reputation of any singer,
violinist, or other musical solist who may have to undergo the
painful experience of performing to its accompaniment, be-
cause the said piano makes the voice or instrument with
which it is heard sound completely out of tune. It would
need a very large fee to compensate the public performer for
the unpleasant experience of either playing upon this instru-
ment, or of trying to sing or play a solo with an accompani-
ment supplied by its means, even by a first-rate pianist. And
I think those who claim the gratuitous services of singers
and other musical performers might at least emulate the
authorities of the Lonsdale-street and other Methodist Mis-
sions, and try to make the circumstances under which we
appear as favourable as possible, and so enhance the pleasure
alike of audience and soloist.
THE ENCORE.
Concerning the “ encore,” although this is a delicate
matter for anyone to discuss who has to afterwards personally
appear in public, yet I feel that my book would not be com-
plete unless I stated my own ideas and described my own
reelings about this matter; and if I have the ill-luck to so
direly offend all who read this as to deprive myself of any
open demonstrations of appreciation from those whom I in
future appear before, perhaps Heaven will grant me a halo —
such as that depicted in the representations of the martyrs of
ancient times—and so compensate me for the earthly distinc-
tion and encouragement which I have lost.


I have often wondered why it should be so usual at a
Ballad Concert for a singer who responds to an encore to
always give a song of a semi-humorous nature, and the con-
clusion I have at last, after much cogitation, come to, is that
the audience is so overwhelmed with the talents of the singer
who can give an encore that they would stand in painful awe
of that singer unless he or she condescended to unbend a
little by singing a less worthy song than those on the
programme; or another theory in my mind is that a singer
who is able to exercise such a power over the audience feels
that he has gained the right to chaff the audience a little;
or then, again, it might be to reward those who were probably
the most noisy in their applause—i.e., the lads, and those
called in theatres “ the Gods.”
Some singers appear as much depressed about not re-
ceiving an encore to their song as if the somewhat brief period
during which the applause lasted were an emphatic sign of
public disapproval, or, at least, want of interest. The state-
ment was made in a daily paper that vocalists eagerly seized
on the slightest chance to give an encore number, because
they hoped by that means to secure “a line in the morning
paper.” But some of us have given up all hope of gaining so
great a distinction as that, whatever we may do, and are, as
far as newspapers are concerned, obliged to content ourselves
with the idea that we may in this way at least resemble “ the
noble silent men ” (spoken of by Carlyle) “ scattered here and
there, each in his department; silently thinking, silently
working; whom no morning newspaper makes mention of.
Thev are the salt of the earth.” If this be so, then are we
comforted.
The encore is not such a genuine expression of the esti-
mation in which the public holds a singer as the uninitiated
may imagine, for however little the audience in general may
desire a repetition of a certain singer’s performance, if about
half-a-dozen of that singer’s friends are determined to keep
on clapping and stamping until the singer reappears, of course
the proceedings are interrupted, and things can only go ahead
again after the singer has been put in the rather humiliating
position of forcing herself or himself upon the main part of the
audience at the behest of a few personal friends. And some-
times the small minority who call us out again is not com-
posed of friends at all, but a so-called encore is merely a
trick on the part of a few silly lads, with presumably big
hands and feet, which they are anxious to prove the size of
by making as much noise bv clapping and stamping as all the
rest of the audience together could make, or at least more
than the audience cares to make after the performance of


some singers, lest they should have to endure a repetition of
the dose. But the lads I have spoken of are such hardy citi-
zens that they are prepared for anything, even the conse-
quences of the noise they make, which should by rights result
in their going outside the door into the open air, rather than
in the singer’s coming out on to the platform again to sing,
which latter result of the foolish strategy of these rowdies
may be annoying alike to singer and audience, not from any-
thing undesirable about the singer’s performance (which may
or may not be excellent), but because when a programme is
sufficiently long to begin with, encores except in very especial
cases are to be avoided, as it may deprive the audience of the
pleasure of listening to those performers who are placed in
the latter part of the programme, and the best and most ac-
ceptable kind of an encore is the re-engagement or renewed
requests for a singer’s services at subsequent concerts, which
might possibly not be the result to a vocalist who too readily
accepts recalls on an occasion on which that one singer had
been heard so frequently as to pall upon the taste of the
audience.
But sometimes the “ encore ” is used by organisers of
small entertainments as a means of eking out the materials
of a meagre programme, and the manager and a few able
coadjutors clap most industriously after every item, and im-
plore each performer to go back and give an encore, without
waiting until they have had a chance to test the genuineness
of the applause. This, too, puts a singer in a somewhat
undignified position, but the matter not being in the singer’s
hands he or she is not to blame.
Then again, an audience of benevolent and kindly-dis-
posed people will often try to recall singers, especially the
very young ones, in order to give them a little encouragement.
And yet another false form of encore is when some particular
friend of the concert organiser’s is billed in a more conspicuous
way than anyone else who takes part in the programme, when
the audience, although not as much impressed with the merit
of the " star ” as they are with some of the so-called lesser
lights, feel it incumbent upon them to recall the one mar ed
out so conspicuously as the chief attraction to the entertain-
ment.
An encore bestows no honour or distinction whatever
upon a singer unless it be the genuine and spontaneous ex-
pression of an extraordinary degree of admiration and enthu-
siasm on the part of the whole of the audience for that singer’s
performance. Any other use of this custom makes it cumber-
some and troublesome alike to audience and singer, for in
some circles the custom so prevails that in addition to the


programme numbers the singer has to invariably be provided
with encores, although to be called upon to sing the latter
will not be tantamount to .an expression of greater approval
on the part of the audience, but will be merely done at the
behest of the secretary or manager of the entertainment, who,
getting the singer’s services as a rule gratis, is desirous of
flattering the vanity of the singer by arranging that they shall
be called back to sing again.
However, if all the other performers are encored, I sup-
pose any individual singer might be excused for feeling rather
slighted at being left out of the good things which are being
distributed so lavishly; yet, when an audience commences
encoring at the beginning of a programme, and keeps it up
with the greatest regularity after every song all through a
concert, the only way they can possibly express extraordinary
appreciation is to either doubly encore the singer who excels
the others or to receive that singer in profound and awe-struck
silence, which might perhaps be expressive of more respect
and sympathy than much of the applause is any indication of.
Yet, of course, no singer despises applause any more
than he or she objects to any other form of appreciation; it
is only when it degenerates into the form of mockery that it
really arouses a public performer’s ire.
But public applause is not everything, and we may some-
times avoid some certain means of gaining the applause of
the multitude in order to attain to something more elevated in
character and life and artistic ability, and so have the ap-
plause of our own consciences and the approval of the highest
and noblest of our contemporaries, if not that of succeeding
generations, for, to again quote Schumann, “ The applause of
an artist should be dearer to you than that of the masses.”
Also, the following words of Liszt (from the preface to Schu-
mann’s book, “ Music and Musicians ”) apply here: “ I per-
ceived that it is less dangerous for an artist, who truly de-
serves that name, to displease the public than to be led by its
caprices. Every artist is exposed to the latter danger unless
he firmly resolves to carry out his serious convictions consis-
tently, and only to perform such works as he considers best,
whether people like them or not.”
But how very hard it is to live according to such resolu-
tions as these, especially when one’s field of labour is chiefly
in the nature of suburban charity concerts and Pleasant Sun-
day Afternoons! Yet, even at these, paltry ballads may be
eschewed for songs of sterling merit and suitable selections
from the operas and oratorios.
In closing this little book, and in wishing the reader a
Happy New Year, I would explain that I have written as I


have partly because it seemed to me to be the custom with
some people to treat singers as if they were people who had
thrown domestic worth and family affection to the winds,
merely for the honour and glory of appearing on a public plat-
form, and that whatever their merits were they would, if
ordinarily successful, meet with a reward and admiration
quite out of proportion to their moral deserving; whereas
singers should in reality be considered as genial hosts and
hostesses in a public capacity, entertaining on a larger scale
and at greater personal inconvenience than many private per-
sons who receive a return of the most delicate respect and
consideration for their efforts. My own public entertaining
has been done principally for those who are not too heavily
burdened with this world’s wealth; but my work has not been
done the less willingly on that account, for I have ever been
supported by the ideas expressed in the following lines of
Longfellow:—
Still let it ever be thy pride
To linger by the lab’rer's side
With words of sympathy and song.
To cheer the dreary march along
Of the great array of the poor.
O’er desert sand or dangerous moor
Nor to thyself the task shall be
Without reward ; for thou shalt learn
The wisdom early to discern
True beauty in utility.
My words concerning those whom I have mentioned by
name, or of those I am about to mention, I trust will not give
offence, though my pen may do them as little justice as the
camera of the ordinary amateur photgrapher does those who
are rash enough to become sitters to him; yet, as I have never
heard of the most villainous amateur photographer having
become defendant in a libel action on account of his pictorial
atrocities, perhaps my literary sketches may also escape cen-
sure as being equally well meant.
Before I lay down my pen I would like to express my
deep gratitude to the unselfish and sympathetic friends who
have acted as my accompanists (both on violin and piano) in
times past. To those who have supplied violin obbligatos I
am particularly grateful, as they have taken especial pains on
my behalf, and I can only wish for them such a bright future
that all thoughts of their work for me may be quite forgotten
in the brilliancy of their public activities, and in their helpful-
ness to singers of world-wide fame in the same capacity in
which they have assisted me. The violinists whom I feel thus
indebted to are Miss Nina Schlotel, Miss Guenett, Miss
Maggie Fenelon, Miss Fanny Scarcebrook, Miss Flattely, Miss


M. Lloyd, Miss Nellie Mills, Mr. V. Zelman, Mr. Reuben
Morgan, Mr. Brett Ripper (of Bendigo), Mr. Arthur Cot.ie,
Mr. Levy, Mr. Isbister, and last, but not least, Mr. Henry
Curtis. The amateur orchestras (under the conductorship of
Mr. Henry Garbett and Mr. Arthur Cottle respectively) are
also very obliging in the matter of accompaniments. In this
connection I would also gratefully acknowledge the services
of Herr Schieblich and his orchestra at one of my pupils’
concerts.
The Pianists to whom I feel most indebted 1- for their
beautifully-played' accompaniments are Mrs. Pauli Carter,
Miss Mcßurney, Mrs. Dunlop, Miss Florence Ruby, Miss
Nathalie Dawson, Miss L. Prout, Miss M. Gatherer, Miss L.
Hansen, Miss L. Higgs, Miss M. Griffiths, Miss L, Donovan,
Miss Z. Dabb, Miss L. Terrill, Miss M. Hunter, and the late
Miss E. Goodenough, Mr. Geo. Peake, Mr. Shanks, Mr. G. B.
Fentum, Mr. W. Hunter, Mr. Charles W. Kerry, Mr. Harold
Elvins, Mr. Arthur Morgan, Mr. Sumner Martin, Mr. F.
Morgan, Mr. Chas. Lawrence, Mr. Lampard, Mr. A. W. Briggs
and Miss Bernice Cowley, Mr. George Herbert, Mr. E. H.
Nicholas, Mr. J. W. Boustead (these last four being musicians
of Ballarat), Madame Summerhayes, Miss Anthones, Miss
Renshaw, Miss V. Lush, Miss M. Gregory, Miss Agnew, Miss
Balfour, Miss Whitehead, Miss Amy Wise, Miss M. Fison, Miss
Jean Smith, Miss L. Cross, Miss Mary Anderson, Sister Emily
Wesley Church accompanist),, Messrs. Mansley Greer, H.
Gleeson, C. Cornell, Oakley, W. H. Heathcote, C. Nicholson,
W. R. Bennetts (Junr.), E. J. Watkin, J. B. Ellerker, Burnley
Evans, T. Y. Day, R. Foster, Lawrence Richardson (Ballarat),
H. V. Pascoe (the wonderful blind organist of Warrnambool),
and many others whose names do not occur to me just now,
but to whom I feel none the less indebted t- when I do recall.
In conjunction with several of the above-mentioned ladies-
and gentlemen I have had the joy of contributing to many
funds for the repairing of broken limbs, and have assisted
many poor widows with large families to start in small busi-
nesses, have sung in aid of hospitals, have helped to diminish
church debts not a few, and have helped choirs to buy their
music and bands to procure new uniforms, to say nothing of
assisting at benefits to singers, and launching young musi-
cians upon artistic careers. These objects, with the addition
of a few professional engagements and purely musical func-
tions, have absorbed the whole of my energies as a public
singer during the last eleven years; in short, I have lived
principally at the beck and call of “ the poor, the maimed, the
lame, and the blind ”; and feel very thankful to have been of
service to any who have needed my help, and to have had


through my voice the power to be to some extent “ a minis-
tering spirit ”; and as such can be content and patient in the
absence of material reward.
“ Sow thou thy seed though the great world go by.
Though fashion smile, and power pay not heed,
Dwell in thy strength, and thy simplicity,
Sow thou thy seed.”
The remarks of a charming old lady are quoted by a
writer on “ Taste in the Choice of Songs " in an old number
of the “ Girl’s Own Paper,” and I reproduce them as being
appropriate here:—“ My dear child, there are three talents
which are especially heavenly-minded, for their art is chiefly
shown in the success with which you efface yourself to con-
tribute to the comfort or glory of others: The perfect house-
mistress, for in the best-ordered homes all seems to go as if
on silver wheels, in an order and comfort which spring from
the quiet wisdom and self-devotion of the ruler of the house-
hold. The perfect peace-maker—for her heavenly work is
best done when she moves others to the love and forgiveness
of the Christian life, so that her own part is unperceived; and
last, the perfect accompanist—for she shows off the talents
of others to the utmost, conceals faults, brightens beauties,
manages to sustain their courage, helps them over difficulties,
keeps a look-out for crises and stumbles, and the wild careers
over wrong notes and into wrong time which do happen oc-
casionally (even in this civilised country, and in this nine-
teenth century), and lands them triumphantly at the end so
perfectly that no one, except one or two quiet standers-by,
who see more of the game, wo.uld suspect the large part the
humble accompanist had played for her friend’s success. So
the hidden value of a true accompanist has kindled many a
dead song into living beauty.”
There are certain words and expressions in the above
quotation which do not apply to the brilliant array of violinists
and pianists before-mentioned in the preceding paragraph, for
I do not consider the accompanist’s position at all a subor-
dinate or “ humble ” one, and must apologise to my brilliant
coadjutors for placing them in the same category as such
inconspicuous members of the community as housekeepers and
peace-makers, although they may not object to appearing in
the latter character, especially at this season of the year,
which is the celebration of the birth of the great Peace-
maker.
Herr Benno Scherek was the accompanist par excellence,
but he is, alas! no longer amongst us, and I only once had
the pleasure of singing to his accompaniment.


I would like here to acknowledge the never-failing kindli-
ness of the veteran music teacher and ’cello player of Mel-
bourne, Mr. A. Montague, who for the last forty years has
followed his vocation in Melbourne, principally at Allan’s
Music Warehouse. I narrowly missed the great advantage of
studying under him in the years which are past, but his gene-
rous friendship in giving helpful advice and encouragement
has been none the less in evidence because I was not a pupil
of his own.
Now, in this book I trust I have fully answered the queries
of those who are anxious to know “ how I find things,” for I
have so frequently been questioned on this point that it seems
almost a necessity to write out a formal reply.
To make the matter still plainer, I would say that as I
think it probable that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were
plied with similar queries through the bars of the fur-
nace in ancient Babylon, I will carry the _ expression of my
sense of the similarity of their case to mine a little further,
and would say that things have been made very warm for me
occasionally—in fact, red-hot at times—but, like the three
Scriptural sufferers, I have been sustained by a power apart
from myself, and I, too, can say with all reverence, “ Our Gcd
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace,” and if our efforts are properly directed, and our
energies used conscientiously, the fires of trial and sorrow
which we pass through will burn our bonds and leave us free
and uninjured—
For what is freedom but the unfettered use
Of all the powers that God for use has given.
The reader will have gathered from this little book that
singing in public is not always a profitable occupation, looked
at from a commercial point of view, and that many who
have never appeared before an audience make larger incomes
by means of teaching music and singing than those who, feel-
ing a sense of stewardship concerning their voices, are some-
what hindered in their studies and occupations as teachers.
There is also an impression (in many cases very erroneous)
that those who appear to advantage in public do not possess
the amount of solid knowledge that quiet and retired plodders
who do nothing but teach are endowed with.
Therefore, as I said at the beginning of my book, the
way of singers, like that of transgressors, is hard, although
the characters and intentions of the said singers may be in
every way immaculate and exemplary; but vocalists are a
much misunderstood class, especially in new communities,
where no one seems to know quite how to take them, and


«ven at concerts, where they might reasonably expect to go
in comfort and enjoyment, some singers called by courtesy
"professional” find that if they sit in the front seats people seem
to be wondering how they have managed to buy the tickets,
fees being at their present low ebb; and if they take a humble,
retiring place in the back seats, they are apt to be sneered at
as lowering their status as “ professionals,” so some of us in
desperation are inclined to taboo attendance at concerts or
which we are not billed, and so forfeit a good deal of the
enjoyment which should rightfully fall to our share. But, I
think, people who know just how unsatisfactory a professional
singer’s position is in Melbourne might excuse us from the
scrutiny which we have to suifer at the hands of the more
ignorant. “We suffer fools gladly,” but the eccentricities of
wise men are sometimes harder to bear; yet I suppose we
ought to feel grateful for any sort of regard or notice “ these
times.”
In new countries, it seems to me, much work must be
done “ at a venture,” and without any expectation of fee or
reward, though it is true in all places that brave men and
women must give their lives away, as Carlyle says ; yet energy
and courage are generally considered indispensable charac-
teristics of pioneers, and here in Australia there is so much
to be done to give our art a firmly-established position, and to
make a start on the road which leads to something in the
nature of a national art. It is easier to talk than to do—far
•easier to talk of writing music than to really accomplish any-
thing worthy in the nature of musical art—but we may yet
hope that a race of Australian composers may appear who
will set the undoubtedly beautiful verses of our Austrchan
poets to music, and who will hear as deep a meaning and as
sweet a music in the breezes as they whisper in wattle boughs
and among the leaves of the gum, the peppermint, and the
messmate trees, and the murmuring ripple of our creeks and
forest streamlets as any that the poets of the old land have
heard in that -which sounds among their native oaks, elms,
pines, or beeches, and in the murmur of the brooks, and
rivers of the land where they, in contradistinction to ourselves,
“ love with a love far brought from out the storied Past.”
But the remainder of Tennyson’s poem from which I have just
quoted applies to us, especially the words:—
A slow developed streneth awaits
Completion in a painful school.
Meanwhile those who are living beautiful, consistent
lives, and whose hearts beat in tune with the “ music of sym


pathy,” as a dear friend of mine expresses it, are contributing
the grandest strains of our national music, which ascends to
heaven in one glorious volume of harmony, for the music of
the spheres is not, we imagine, to be compared with the rich
sweetness and noble beauty of human worth; and the triumph
over difficulties, and the earnest endeavour to surmount all
obstacles which impede our progress towards that which is
truest and best, can only have their equivalent in music which
surpasses any yet heard upon earth.
Where there is so much to be done, and each individual,,
at best, can only accomplish the little he was intended by
Heaven to do, by means of the utmost concentration of
energy and thought, musicians may well be excused for a
want of comprehension of and sympathy with the ideas em-
bodied in Orangeism, Fenianism, Anarchism, or any other
“ ism ” except vocalism and pianism ; and if all we demand in
the matter of a white Australia be that a man s moral cha-
racter have more white than black about it, ere we receive
him as a friend and brother.
I look upon it as no part of a singer’s function to meddle
with political discussions and religious controversies, and for
those who follow the broad, cosmopolitan vocation of the
artist, it may be as well to turn a deaf ear to the acerbity of
nervous religionists, who think it necessary to fight tooth and
nail for their peculiar shades of religious belief, for fear of
too powerful a rising of the opposition party, and perhaps
Galileo’s example (who in the sixteenth century is said to
have done a little trimming in order to escape the undesirable
consequences of former freedom of speech), might be with
advantage imitated by us should we ever come within coo-ee
of martyrdom for the sake of religious dogmas; and so we
may live to fight another day, or if not to fight then to sing, a
far better mode of employing one’s time, believe me; and I
cannot but think that the minstrel boy, in that lovely old Irish
song, would have been better occupied playing his harp for
the delectation of his countrymen on the shores of his native
land than in going to the war “ with his harp slung behind
him,” the beautiful masses and settings of the “ Ave Maria ”
of the Romish Church being a proof that a musician would
find no lack of appreciation among the natives of the Emerald
Isle.
Not but what I have the greatest admiration for military
heroes, and for William of Orange as much as for any other,
but I admire William more for what he did in England than
for his prowess in Ireland, which one may hear just a little
too much of in July; and we Australians ought not as a nation


to split ourselves into parties on any questions which belong
more properly to the hoary-headed potentates of effete civili-
sations. As Lowell so grandly expressed it in his poem, “ The
Present Crisis,” which is as a trumpet call to all workers of
modern times in all countries —
New occasions teach new duties ; time makes ancient good uncouth,
They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth ;
Lo, before us gleam her camp fires ; we ourselves must pilgrims be,
Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate winter sea,
Nor attempt the Future’s portal with the Past’s blood-rusted key.
FINIS.


