

THE AUSTRALIAN SETTLER,
THE AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD.
THE AUTHOR OV
“ THE WAY THE LORD HATH LED ME,” “ DRESS, WOMAN'S SNARE, ”
“ONLY IN THE LORD,” ETC.
LONDON:
MORGAN AND CHASE, 3, AMEN CORNER,
PATERNOSTER ROW.


ry>
niE3ir,n, London.


THE AUSTRALIAN SETTLER,
THE AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD.
My first recollections of my nephew John, or Johnnie, as
we called him, my sister’s fifth child, are of a dear,
innocent, baby-faced, curly-pated little fellow, with the
prettiest large blue eyes, and the sweetest smile, whom,
when I first went to reside with his parents, at the age
of twenty, I used each day, after dinner, to amuse, by
leading round the room on the rows of chairs- placed
against the wall, thus aiding the courtship he chose to
maintain with his own shadow. He used to trot after
me from room to room, like “ a little doggie,” as I used
to call him. Dear little happy boy ! he was doubly
loved by me, from having been, a year and a-half before,
the darling nursling of my beloved departed sister
Catharine. Beside this, he was in himself a most en-
gaging child —gay and bounding, yet very sensitive,
and shy with strangers; and often have I been ready


to weep myself when, on dreaded dinner-party days,
instead of his usual happy, joyous entrance, poor little
Johnnie was set down by his nurse at the drawing-room
door, and before one could fly to his relief, some stranger
would seize upon him, and after many a vain attempt
to “ be good,” and notwithstanding every soothing effort,
and cheering words of fond encouragement, all would
be in vain ; the terrible cry of fear and distress would
burst forth, and the dear child must be exiled in a species
of disgrace, for being “ naughty,” as these innocent shy-
fits are generally stigmatized, in the nursery precincts, if
nowhere else. Whatever variety of opinions may exist,
as to whether a baby’s shyness may or may not have its
origin in the sin of our nature, yet, ere long, too sure
proofs arose that my pretty little favourite did indeed
inherit the evil of our first parents. I think the worst
symptom of this fact, in which I remember Johnnie to
have been implicated, and one much akin to the first
transgression, occurred on a long-expected coronation-
day, when he and his brother, nearly a year older than
himself, were found regaling themselves with raspberries
in an alley outside the garden wall, which had for its
only defence the title of “ The Forbidden Walk.” How
ineffectual a barrier, alas ! has this ever been, from the
era of Eden even to the present day ! And so it proved
to these poor children, when, instead of the little kind
of paradise their fancy had been painting for so many
days—of gazing after an ascending balloon, with the
addition of a gay drive, they were condemned to suffer
a shameful castigation, and to pass a certain number
of the bright hours of a summer’s day in bed.


And thus it is that Christian parents, while praying
for the converting grace of God on behalf of their poor
children, and while seeking to set before them the doc-
trine of the cross, in all its ineffable attractiveness, are
yet constrained, by “ the Spirit of power, of love, and
of a sound mind,” to imitate the dealings of God with
themselves, and to use the law as a schoolmaster to
bring their little ones to Christ, not only by command-
ing, but by inflicting punishment for the breach of their
commands. It is very possible that the stings of con-
science, perceptible in some of dear John’s letters from
Australia, may have been barbed by the associations
imprinted on his mind by this and many other proofs
of his mother’s wise discipline, in ever uniting, in the
days of his childhood, salutary correction with the fact
of broken commandments. Oh, who but God Himself
can interpose, with the soft radiance of Divine com-
passion, declaring unto mankind, that in his glorious
sovereignty alone is infinite justice compatible with
infinite love. My dear sister could only allow herself a
gradual exhibition of forgiveness to her Johnnie and
her Willie; could only descend in the course of some
days from her compelled distance of manner ; while, on
the contrary, the very moment the infinite love of the
Father, in the gift of his dear Son, is apprehended by
the soul, the full beams of the Sun of Righteousness
break forth on the heart, lately so stony and dead, fill-
ing it with a portion of God’s own peace, in the con-
sciousness of being received, once and for ever, into his
paternal heart, and though so lately afar off, “ being
now brought nigh by the blood of Jesus.”


My sister taught her little ones their earliest lessons,
hut dear Johnnie soon became my pupil, like the rest of
them; yet, if truth must he told, his mind, though
quick, was more erratic than studious, especially when
Taffy’s evolutions in the fields provoked the wandering
of those large bright blue eyes. Little did I anticipate,
while pretty curly-headed Johnnie climbed on the table
to point out to me the largest island in the world, and
the various portions of the globe depicting the immense
expanse of ocean, and while we and the rest of the young
group talked of the world’s wonders, and the antipodes,
that this same laughing little fellow was destined to tra-
verse so many thousand miles of those wild lands, and
cross that vast extent of waters. The dear little boy
became, too, in his lawful turn, a frequent companion
in my enjoyable rides, bestriding, though not without
difficulty, the pretty bay pony’s back, and Johnnie and
I ambled together very pleasantly and independently
through the then quiet rural lanes around Woolton,
Gateacre, and Childwall —that Childwall where, some
thirty years after, the same dear Johnnie entreated his
bones might be laid after all his wanderings, that he
might fancy himself still nestling, as in infancy, near
his loved long-departed mother; while at the same time
he had then attained the infinitely sweeter hope that his
redeemed spirit was quickly, and for ever, to be reunited
to hers, in Jesus’ visible presence. I must not say that
Johnnie and I were always without perplexities in these
perambulations, for Johnnie’s whip was somewhat prone
to fall, and, much to the distress of his dear, affection-
ate manly heart, his aunty had to dismount from her


grey mare, and then regain her saddle as best she might.
However, these little adventures did not much affect our
pleasure. Johnnie’s remarkable skill in after years, in
riding the wildest horse through districts abounding in
precipices, was acquired, and practised, Avhen rather
older than at the period of his early rides with me.
There was a celebrated pony, much larger than Taffy,
which the two boys rode together, without saddle, over
low hedges, wide ditches, and every intervening obstacle,
without the shadow of fear; in fact, the whole of John-
nie’s early amusements were of a nature to fit him for
the life of strenuous exertion he was destined to en-
counter in the days of his manhood.
And now Johnnie had commenced his school days,
and no longer was known as “ Johnnie,” but as the no
less favourite “ Jack Tar”—a name given him, I suppose,
from his sailor-like character —gay, careless, kind and
simple-hearted, always ready to amuse and make sport
for the little ones, whether to join his equally kind
brother in harnessing the donkey to the children’s
carriage, and thus rattling the youngsters through the
garden and lanes, or swinging his baby brother.
When the years of Jack’s school life were at an end,
his father wished him to prepare for a mercantile life —
a kind of occupation, I need scarcely say, quite opposed
to his nature and habits, which were entirely rural and
intensely active, though singularly combined with
method and order. If at any time a loophole for escape
from his father’s office presented itself a few hours
before the usual time of freedom, his delight was to
mount his horse and scamper back to his country home,


five miles from Liverpool, frequently bringing specimens
of rare birds in his hat, wherewith to store his favourite
aviary at Hearn House, whither we had removed. On
one occasion, when his dear mother and I met him, a
strong wind blew off his beaver, which was lightly
perched on his redundant curls, and a little bag of birds
fell at our feet. Greatly was he delighted when the late
Lord Derby, having heard of his young neighbour’s
ornithological pursuits, kindly invited him to see his
splendid collection.
An ardent desire to go out to Australia had long
possessed John’s mind, and with this view, his first aim
was to inure himself to great activity and actual manual
labour. In order to accustom himself to early rising, he
persuaded the old gardener to call him at four o’clock
each morning, by pulling a string which John had
drawn into his room through the window, and fastened
to his foot. These early hours he passed either in rustic
employments or in replenishing his dear mother’s larder
by his great skill in shooting ; yet, fully as he was occu-
pied in his sporting or country pursuits, I do not think
he was often absent from the room in which his mother
read the Word of God to the assembled family and
servants; for although most decidedly unconverted, as
is evident from all I have said, yet I do not remember
ever perceiving the slightest irreverence for holy things,
or for true Christians; and I recollect the pleasure his
mother felt when, in remembrance of his sister Harriet’s
dying injunction, he put into her hand a pretty liberal
donation for the poor in the neighbourhood, over whom
she, in the midst of her multiplied cares and occupations,


most diligently watched, both in regard to their tem-
poral and spiritual wants.
As I have said, John was always occupied when at
home, whether on rainy days or fair; and in winter
evenings he was diligent in manufacturing nets for the
fruit trees, or wherewith to confine his large family of
canaries, to which the pit in the greenhouse was allotted,
and supplied with nests. The only place in which poor
dear John’s hands hung down was his father’s office ;
and his anxious wish to emigrate to Australia could no
longer be suppressed. His father, always indulgent,
had made every inquiry for a suitable farm in England,
but without even the hope of success, with the very
moderate capital he would now be enabled to spare him ;
and at last his mother, after a conflict which tore her
inmost soul, was strengthened by the Lord to submit,
and to give her consent to a proposal which she had
heard at first with unmingled horror, most of all from
the dread of abandoning his untried youth to contact
with the well-known vice and wickedness of Sydney,
where he would first land, together with his permanent
removal from opportunities of hearing the word of God
preached, and from the advantages of Christian influence
and example. Deeply as I felt with and for my beloved
sister, I sought to persuade her to yield to her son’s
earnest entreaties. It was most evident that he was
eminently fitted for a life of enterprise and resolution,
persevering toil and ingenuity, while he would be as
surely wretched and unsuccessful as a merchant, to
which mode of life all his tastes and habits were op-
posed ; and however deeply afflicting it must be to a


Christian mother to part with her unconverted child for
an indefinite period, it partakes almost of the nature of
rebellion against our great and gracious God when
parents determinately oppose the native tendency of
their children’s dispositions, by which they frequently
draw upon themselves most bitter sorrow. As regards
converted young people, of course, the case is different.
The Lord, who gave up all for them, requires and will
enable them to subjugate their wills to their parents’
wishes. At the same time I felt the truest, most tender
sympathy with my sister’s almost heart-broken feelings
(she who had already been bereaved of six dear children),
as she watched her boy’s eager preparations for sailing,
and for commencing the life of an Australian settler, his
father having arranged for the purchase of land several
miles from Sydney.
Among his multiplied and well-chosen purchases, his
grateful mother found a substantially bound copy of the
Word of God, more suited to him now than the one
bound in scarlet morocco, the gift to him in childhood.
I often think of the prayers and tears of love which
were showered upon that sacred volume while she
packed it in his trunk. Two or three months before
John sailed, it was ordered for me by Him who fixes
the bounds of even our temporary habitation, that
I was to place myself in the hands of the cele-
brated spinal doctress, in Westmoreland; and the last
time I saw dear John before his embarkation, was when
he had driven his mother and me to meet the mail on
the North Road; for she insisted on accompanying me
to Milnthorpe, and remaining with me for the first week.


Except for a quarter of an hour after his return from
Australia, eleven years after my beloved sister had
entered her eternal rest, this was the last time I looked
upon dear John there, on the road, as we bade each
other farewell, on the mail driving up. Yes, there he
stood —a picture of blooming, vigorous, beautiful youth,
full of elasticity, and buoyancy, and bright health, and
high hopes, if earthly hopes can ever be called high ; for
most truly
“ They build too low who build beneath the sties.”
And what was all this, however graceful and lovely to
look upon, but the useless “ crackling of thorns under
a pot” F how unworthy of note compared with the per-
fect peace which his young widow describes as being
portrayed on his dying countenance twenty-two years
afterwards, when he had been shown, by the experience
of his own heart, the unfathomable depth of the fall, and
that nought can reach that profundity but the surpass-
ing and equally infinite height of the grace of God, re-
vealed in the sacrifice of his dear Son—crucified through
weakness; Jehovah, choosing to make Himself weak in
the assumption of humanity, that He might be put to
death for our sins, and raised again for our justification.
I think it veil, in order in some measure to eluci-
date the state of dear John’s soul, and to prove the con-
victions of sin which were in mercy granted to him
while residing in Australia, to make here a few extracts
from some letters I received from him after his dear
mother’s departure.


Amusing as the narrative of his fearless and varied
adventures as an Australian settler might be, it is not
my intention to relate them, as my only design, in pub-
lishing these little memorials, is to subsei've God’s glory
in testifying to the fulfilment of the prayers the Holy
Ghost had suggested on behalf of these young people,
and which all the devices of Satan, the natural evil of
their hearts, and the example of the world, that lieth in
the wicked one, were unable to frustrate.
I need scarcely say that my beloved sister, to the last
days of her life, wrote very often and very fully to her
distant boy, to which precious correspondence he so fre-
quently and so fondly alludes in his letters to me. She
was also in constant search for interesting and in-
structive books to send out to him, instructive most of
all on spiritual subjects, as in Australia he acquired a
love for reading which he had never shown in the midst
of his large home circle in England.
“ St. Clair, s th August, 1845.
“ Mav I ask you occasionally to bestow a few minutes in writing
to us. You know not what good your letters may do us; and much
are we here in need of spiritual assistance. I trust Ido not ask too
much.”
“ St. Clair, 16 th April , 1846.
“ Many, many thanks for your letter, which reminds me so much
of what my poor dear mother’s used to be. Though, my dear aunt,
I am far, very far, from what that dear parent would have wished
me, still I trust I have a feeling heart; and sincerely do I hope that
the day is not far distant when her prayers, yours, my dear sisters’,
and my own, may be heard on my behalf, and that yet I may be-
come what she wished me to be —a true Christian in soul and
actions.”


After narrating that, in the course of the last sixteen
months he had travelled, on horseback, a distance of
“200 miles, he writes as follows :
“ Locliinyar, near Maitland, 10 th April, 1848.
“ I have been this evening (when, for a wonder, I was alone)
reading over a number of my poor sainted mother’s letters. How I
do rejoice that I treasured them all, and have them now to turn to,
and be reminded of her—of all her kindness and goodness to us all, and
of her good advice, kind warnings, and exemplary character. She tells
me in one letter that she ‘ feels persuaded the next time we meet will
be at the judgment seat of Christ.’ May God grant that our meeting
may be a happy one. It is a difficult and dangerous path we have
to travel in this wicked world, particularly in this most heathen
quarter of it. Write to me if not too much trouble; I prize your
letters much, and find much real good in them. Many, many
thanks for all your kindness to me.”
“ Perryman’s Inn, Cunningham’s Gap,
“June 18 th, 1852.
“ Very many thanks, my dear aunt, for your nice, long, kind,
and good letters. I have received two. Thank your dear friend,
Miss T., very much for her kind and good letters. I have left them
all with Alfred, at Weranga, a few days ago. I hope to preserve
them long, and read them again, often. We have sustained a heavy
loss by the wreck of the vessel on board of which all my luggage,
furniture, and papers, went to the bottom of the sea a heavy loss,
indeed, inasmuch as all my poor motner’s good letters have gone
also. How I blame myself for having sent them thus, and for not
having read them far oftener than I did. These are not the only
opportunities my conscience upbraids me with having neglected. I
wish much I could say they were. >
“I am going on my way to the metropolis ; on reaching which
I shall have compassed, in three months, 1500 miles by land, and
600 by water. No rest for the wicked ! I do hope and pray, my


dear aunt, that your and Miss Thornton’s prayers for Alfred and
me may be heard and answered; but at times lam fearfully cold
and reserved on these subjects. I know the reason why; I ought
to strive against it more. Adieu, my dear aunt. Believe me, your
most affectionate nephew, J, C.”
“ Lochinvar, Maitland, Bth April, 1851.
“ Mt dear Aunt, —Many, many thanks for your very kind
letter of October last. It does convey so vividly the remembrance
of you and old Hearn House, and all its dear inhabitants, to me !
How many now of those dear ones are numbered with the dead,
and blessed ; and how few of us are left! Really, I dread to touch
upon religious subjects, from, perhaps, a wrongly-nurtured feeling
of reserve, partly caused by an absurd anxiety, lest hypocrisy and
insincerity may be mingled with what I would convey to you, in
order that you may form an opinion of me. This is a wicked
world, and this is a wicked part of it, and your nephew is as great
a sinner as any in it. Oh that he could really turn, and have those
prayers answered in him which his dear mother and aunt have so
often fervently offered up in his behalf! but ‘when he would do
good, evil is present with him.’ I have prayed often, and, I trust,
fervently, for repentance and forgiveness of sins, and for the as-
sistance of the Holy Spirit to guide me in my pilgrimage, as well
as for grace and strength to assist me in continuance of supplica-
tion, until I do receive what I ask for, and light to enable me to
ask aright; but as yet ‘ I ask and receive not,’ because, I fear, I
ask amiss. My eyes are blinded, so that I cannot yet see as I
ought to do the love which the Father bore us in sending his only
begotten Son to die for our sins, nor the love which caused that Son
to lay down his life for those sins. ‘ Ask, and you shall have; seek,
and you shall find,’ is certainly apparently simple enough, but to
put this in practice is by no means easy. You say our sins are
forgiven , for Christ’s name sake, provided we only believe. ‘ What
do you wait for ? ’ you ask. If I have not fully believed this, I
have tried my best to do so, and asked for assistance in so doing,
and am at last almost sometimes led to believe that the Almighty


has shut up his bowels of compassion from such an unworthy
sinner. Poor C P ! though I never saw him, I have often
thought of him. Our advantages, compared with his, have been
great, and I fully feel the responsibility in the balance against
us, and myself in particular; as I ought, instead of the contrary, to
be an instructor to Alfred, and set him an example. But though
I have endeavoured to accept the love of God into my heart, still I
have nob experienced that relief of which you speak. Oh ! that I
could do so, and that your surmises (or occasional ones) were true
—that we are both Christians, but that we will not own it. God
grant it may yet be so !
“ You ask us to tell you ‘if we do ever so feebly hope we are
save d—if we ever so feebly pray to the Lord to help and guide ns.’
I can answer only for myself, ‘ No* to the first question ; as to the
latter, I certainly do. So far, my poor dear mother’s, as well as
my good dear aunt’s, and her affectionate friend’s prayers have
been answered. That you shall one day see my dear mother wel-
come us both into heaven, God in his infinite mercy grant! Now,
my dear aunt, that I have written this letter, I have ten thousand
scruples about despatching it. You will form an opinion, from its
contents, that your unworthy sinner of a nephew is in the narrow
path, or on the way to it, winch leadeth unto life ; instead of this,
as he knows but too well, he is still in the broad road to destruc-
tion. The whole of my letter is but a tissue of insincerity, though
I have tried my best, according to your desire, to send you my
thoughts and feelings precisely as they are. God ever bless yon,
and answer your prayers. Give my most affectionate regards to
your friend, and believe me, my dear aunt,
“Your attached nephew, J. C.”
“Wcranga, Nov. 12Ih, 1853.
“My dear Aunt, —Your long, good, and kind letter, com-
menced to me, and finished to poor Alfred, when through some un-
accountable mistake you heard of my death instead of his, reached
me a short time since. Yery many thanks for it, and all the good
advice it contains. When writing to you of my losses by ship-


wreck, after paying poor Alfred a visit at this place, little did I
think that I was to see so little more of him on earth. His loss
was a sad and heavy blow. No mortal can conceive how much
that poor lad’s death affected me, and I do hope, and trust, and
pray that it may prove an endless benefit to me.
“ Would that I could become a true Christian in heart and
soul. This, however, I have said and hoped, and I do think
prayed for, for years; still I am a long way from having my
prayers answered, and am almost prompted at times to think that
lam not destined to be one of the called and sanctified. I am a
fearful waverer. Grood night, my dear aunt. Pray often for
“ Your very affectionate nephew,
“J. C.”
On the eve of his return to his native land, he wrote
to me :
“ I have now had eighteen years of bush-life, and on looking
back thereon, I must confess that I cannot do so with satisfaction.
Wasted time and opportunities, in ‘ serving the creature rather
than the Creator,’ fill up a great measure of the space. Oh, that
time could be recalled! how much better and far differently we
think we could spend it, provided we had the opportunity of doing
so over again. Instead of doing this, you will say, ‘ Commence now
and strive to amend.’
“ Your very affectionate nephew,
“J. C.”
After nineteen years’ toil and unceasing' energy in
Australia, attended at times by severe losses, disappoint-
ments, and hardships, had severely tried dear John’s
constitution, and after having suffered from a severe
attack of inflammation on the lungs, he was urged to
give himself rest, and seek his native air for the purpose
of recruiting his health ; but before this design could be
put into execution, great exertions were requisite as


regarded the disposition of his property; thus he was
in delicate health when he undertook his homeward
voyage, though able to take his daily walks on deck.
A fellow-passenger, in speaking of him, tells me,
“ though quiet and rather grave in deportment, he was
the favourite of all on hoard the ship, ’ adding that his
gentlemanly and considerate bearing won for him the
regard of all.” And his beloved young widow, who,
with her two dear babes, now survives him, and who
has communicated to me the most interesting passages
of this little memoir, speaks of the deep gratitude she
feels to her heavenly Father for having ordered that on
this voyage she was to meet him, who, during their
brief union on earth, proved himself the most tender and
devoted of husbands.
Shortly after landing in England, John was married
to this lady, who with her mother had quitted Australia
for England, and to whom he had become much attached.
It was hoped by some, and his medical advisers strength-
ened this delusion, that by the unremitting, watchful
attention of his wife, rest, and a winter’s residence in a
milder climate, his health would become re-established.
But the members of his own family, who had been so
early familiarized with the symptoms of consumption,
were not so easily cheated into hope, and read death
stamped on his countenance from the moment he landed.
However, his sojourn in Madeira appeared to have bene-
ficial results in subduing the most alarming of his symp-
toms. During great part of the period in which they
remained there, John was able to attend a place ot
worship, frequently received the Lord’s Supper, and


studied Ids Bible constantly, humbly recognizing the
love of God in thus chastening him by the loss of
health, and frequently repeating the assurance to his
Lizzie, “ Whatever God sends is for the best.” Nor did
he ever suffer the slightest murmur to escape his lips at
being compelled to forego his former active pursuits.
Their voyage from Madeira was most trying to both, as
his poor wife gave birth to a son on board the vessel, as
he wrote to me, “In the midst of as much confusion
and discomfort as could well be imagined from the fact,
of a heavy sea running at the time, and there being
fifty passengers on board over and above the full com-
plement she was able to find berths for. But,” he
adds, “thanks be to God, in His bountiful goodness, all
things have gone on most favourably; and although I
was wearied out by the time I reached Southampton,
from nursing, watching, and want of sleep, having never
been able to take my clothes off for nine days, yet I
think my own health has not suffered. In my dear
wife I have the greatest treasure, such a one as my
dear mother would have chosen for me. May we,
through the assistance of the Holy Spirit, be enabled to
train up our child in the way he should go !”
At the period of the return of my nephew and his
wife to England, when they took a house for the summer
near Weybridge, I was in London, watching the daily-
increasing, lingering anguish of my dying friend, Felicia.
For one short quarter of an hour I met again this dear
long-absent one and his affectionate young wife, I saw
in him the same finely-chiselled features, but what a blight
had fallen on them ! The well-known hollow voice of


consumption struck to my heart, with the certainty of
impending death. I asked him if his mother’s prayers
were answered and mine. He said he hoped they would
he, more than hitherto, now that he had a dear little
wife to help him on his way.
This one sight of dear John, after an absence of
twenty years, appeared to me, when past, as scarcely
real. Still one conviction rested on my mind, that his
days were numbered, but that he was trying to believe
that life was before him. His marriage, the birth of his
child, his return to England, all doubtless spoke to him
of life : yet he was dying.
On one lovely summer’s morning, while still, as usual,
watching my friend in her accumulated woes, John’s
sister, who was on a visit to him and Lizzie, brought
a profusion of loveliest roses, the produce of their
garden. When my niece placed them in my hands, it
seemed as if I read a scroll under these radiant flowers,
inscribed with lamentation, and mourning, and woe. I
believe that few dread death less than I do, for those
who are in Christ Jesus; but I felt that I knew nothing
of John’s inner life ; I bad known nothing since his
letters from Australia had told me he was indeed con-
vinced of sin, but without a sense of finished redemption
through the all-cleansing blood of Jesus.
During this summer, John, accompanied by his elder
brother, visited the homes and haunts of his infancy,
and gay-hearted boyhood; his favourite fields and aviary.
Now his parents were both departed, brothers and sisters
scattered, and home all broken up. Childwall, too, he
visited, the rustic graveyard and the graves.


It was then perhaps, feeling the contrast of his weak-
ened frame with the vigour of his youth when last he
had visited this spot, that, uncheered by his Lizzie’s
smile, he felt impressed with the probability of approach-
ing death, and formed the wish that his bones might be
laid close to his beloved mother’s.
In the autumn John and his wife repaired to Pau.
From thence he wrote to me of the birth of his little
girl, and telling me that his cough was much increased
by the cold winds of that place. He expressed much
sympathy with my dear friend’s sufferings, and gratitude
for a message she had sent him, most of all for her dying
prayers ; adding that the thought of her agonies made
him blush to think that a paltry cough could ever be
capable of troubling or irritating him. After a short
tour through the Pyrenees, as failing strength would
not permit a return to England, Biarritz was resorted to
for the summer months; poor Lizzie being buoyed up
with the hope that sea air might a little revive him. In
speaking of her husband’s state of mind at this period,
she tells me that Ryle’s “ Home Truths” and Bogatzky’s
“ Golden Treasury” were very acceptable to him, but
that his Bible was his principal stay and all-sufficient
source of comfort. He always had it placed close to
his bed at night, and during his afternoon’s slumber it
still lay clasped in his emaciated hand. He committed
portions of it to memory, that he might be comforted by
them in the many wakeful hours of night, during which,
in addition to his other trials, neuralgia much distressed
him. As a last hope, a return to Madeira was recom-
mended by the physician, and they now repaired to


Bordeaux for the purpose of meeting a vessel bound for
Madeira, which was to call for this distressed little family
en route. On arriving at the hotel, dear John had to be
carried to the apartments of the first floor, as he could
not ascend the stairs. All the preparations for the
voyage were hastened on hy Lizzie in the energy o
despair, rather than of hope. But her compassionate
Lord suffered her not thus to add to her affliction y
embarking on this voyage, which would have been so
terrible to herself and her dying husband. Ihe ship
was detained by contrary winds in the channel. blear
John was not confined to bed; he daily arose and
dressed with the aid of his Lizzie, being able to continue
his habits of early rising to the last. His eldest brother,
the “Willie” of early days, was sent for, as John, who
knew the near approach of death, felt how great a help
and comfort his brother would be to Lizzie when he
should be taken. ...
It was another proof of the heavenly I ather s pitying
care for her, who was soon to be so deeply bereaved,
that William should have just landed in England from
the United States in time to see his brother, and to take
charge of the poor stricken one and her babes one not
a year and a-half old, the other four months. Ihe
meeting between the brothers was truly distressing,
for William had not been prepared for so great a change.
The day before his arrival, John thought he could
scarcely live till night. While lying quietly on the couch
in the sitting-room, when his wife had, as she was wont,
been praying by his side and reading many comforting
passages of Scripture, he said, “ What a dreadful thing


it must be, Lizzie, for a man to have a mouth like mine,
and not to be prepared for eternity !” He added, “ I
have a great wish to receive the Lord’s Supper ; I sup-
pose the clergyman cannot come to-day ; but to-morrow.”
He then repeated, “ To-morrow !” as if he hardly thought
he should see that “ to-morrow.” Lizzie immediately
wrote to the English clergyman, but he being absent,
she applied to the British chaplain, w~ho called without
delay. They felt that the reception of these memorials
of their Redeemer’s dying love was comforting and
refreshing, the realization of that love strengthening
them for the solemn scene which was so closely to follow.
This day, however, did not prove, as John had expected,
his last on earth, for he rallied, and endeavoured to cheer
his poor broken-hearted wife by saying, “You don’t
know, my dear little lassie, but that I may be preserved
to you for some time yet.” She was wonderfully sup-
ported, and was enabled to maintain a degree of cheer-
fulness so essential to his comfort. She felt that for
the fleeting hours in which he was preserved to her,
it was dear consolation to be by bis side ; but at that
time, her youngest babe was thought to be dying, and
often did she go, at night, barefooted, lest she should
disturb them, to discover which of the two beloved ones
—her husband or her baby—was most likely to live till
morning.
John was still able to walk through the two adjoining
rooms, leaning on Lizzie’s shoulder, and with the aid of
a stick. He made every arrangement for those dearest
to him, and spoke frequently of his wishes concerning
them, saying, “ God would take care of them.” One


night he repeated the 65th chapter of Isaiah, and after-
wards spoke with indignation of the Jews having crucified
the Saviour, and of their daring to treat Him with such
indignities. He spoke with great love of his Redeemer.
His wife having just heard of the murder of a friend in
India, along with that of her husband and child, she
exclaimed, lt How blessed to be all thus taken together.
“ Oh, yes, Lizzie,” he answered, “ if they were all ready.”
He told her he never thought he should have feared
death so little, for that as a boy he had a great dread of
it. He thanked God for sending him this long illness,
instead of cutting him off without warning in some one
of the many great dangers he had passed through in
Australia. John had the deepest sense of his sinfulness
and vileness; and, in the earlier stages of his illness,
seemed to fear that the promises could not be for one
who knew himself so great a sinner. But the Lord
did indeed “ open the young man’s eyes that he might
see” the unbounded vastness of God’s pardoning love
and grace to the true believer. In the days wherein he
wrote the letters from Australia, which I have partly
inserted, ho had indeed conviction of sin forced upon his
conscience ; but when God- had in mercy revealed his
Son in him, He who u was exalted to be a Prince and a
Saviour,” gave him both repentance and remission of
sins, as the blessed gifts He received for men when He
led captivity captive. Oh, what a contrast is this godly
“ repentance not to be repented of ” —the accompaniment
of the peace of God which passeth all understanding
to the fictitious penitence or penance which human
nature would substitute, and can of itself perform with-


out the work of the Holy Ghost; a will-repentance fit
companion for will-worship.
Hear John loved to hold his Lizzie’s hands in his,
and to have her constantly seated beside him ; he used
to smile upon her with his own most sweet smile, when
she bathed his temples, or gave him cooling beverages
to refresh his burning mouth. The day before his de-
parture they again received the Lord’s Supper, This
was the only day in which he was confined to bed.
After having partaken of the bread and wine, and shaken
hands with the clergyman, he grasped his wife’s hand
tightly, with his eyes closed, apparently in fervent
prayer. Who but God can tell the deep intensity of the
saved sinner’s last prayers, last thoughts, before entering
the eternal world ? The sense of utter nothingness
wrought in the soul by the Holy Ghost, and of the
ineffable righteousness of Jesus all his righteousness
put upon us, and made ours everlastingly —the perfect
union of the renewed soul with the manhood of the
Lord Jesus —who can attempt to dilate upon such a
subject ? We can only adore in silence the love which
has dived so deep to take up vile, hateful, selfish human
nature, and has transformed it even into the likeness
of the Holy One of God, John’s physician thought
this night would be the last. His wife and brother
sat up with him. Though his breathing was oppressed,
he saw the morning’s dawn —the last dawn of the last
Lord’s-day. He had watched the sun setting the
previous evening with fixed gaze. Dear John especially
prayed a fortnight before, that the Lord would guide
him through the valley of the shadow of death, and


now lie told Lizzie lie had been comforted in an espe-
cial manner by a beautiful vision, in answer to that
prayer. He was in a pretty little valley with rocks at
the end—a pretty sunny little valley! he then saw a
cloud from which a cherubic host came forth ; and then
he beheld his Saviour walking down the valley to meet
him.
On the last evening, the evening of the Lord's day,
dear John opened his arms, as he often did, for Lizzie
to come to his dying embrace. He said he knew how
deeply she would feel his loss. That she had been a
good‘and faithful wife to him, a blessed treasure, a
Greater treasure than he could have thought he should
ever have been permitted to possess. She told him that
he had been everything that was good and tender to her;
and that she had felt, when kneeling before God at their
marriage, that the union would be for ever. He said
she had gone through it at the time as if she felt that.
She told him she scarcely knew how to resign him, it
was so bitter, and yet she saw his happiness in the
prospect of his change was so great, that she felt she
could almost say, “ Thy will be done.” He said he was
glad she could say so, and that he felt he could commend
her and his children to God’s gracious care, who would
be sure to preserve them. Lizzie asked him if the vision
he had spoken of became clearer. He said, “ Hot clearer,
but more comforting.” All this conversation was carried
on in a whisper, while Lizzie bent down her head to
listen, and his arms were around her neck, “ To-night,”
he said, “ to-night I have another vision. I see myself
clothed in the wedding garment of Christ’s righteous-


ness. Do you not see it?” he continued. “It is a
spotless white robe, and this also is in answer to another
prayer.” He loved to repeat the 23rd Psalm, especially
the verse, “ Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with
me; thy rod and thy staff comfort me.” At one moment
he seemed as if dying away with these words upon his
lips. Once he said, “ Hold thou up my goings in thy
ways, that my footsteps slip not.” “ Lizzie,” he said,
“do not sit up to-night. It prevents you from sleeping
and it prevents me from sleeping, and I shall sleep to-
night.” He called his brother, shook hands with him,
and said, “ Good night, Billy, my dear lad, good night.”
He then clasped his wife to his bosom, and said, “My
dear little treasure! Good night, Lizzie. Farewell.
Go to bed, there’s a good child. You are wearing your-
self out; and go to sleep to please Jack” Here was a
difficult task for one who had never disobeyed her
husband, and therefore would certainly not do so now,
and yet how she longed to catch his every look ! She
had been praying constantly for him; she prayed that
her dear one’s end might be a peaceful one, and God
heard and answered her cry. In the morning she had
brought in each of the little ones for their father to kiss
for the last time, and they were now fast asleep in their
little cots. Dear John watched to see his Lizzie do as
he had begged her, and she lay down on a little bed
near his. He then watched to see her close her eyes,
which she dreaded doing, for she had not rested fox-
several nights, and she feared being overtaken with
sleep. But, however painful, she would not disobey her


husband’s last request. He was then satisfied, and
(turned on his right side as Lizzie herself had turned
him) he peacefully closed his eyes, and without another
movement, not even so much as a sigh, for his brother
was watching by his bedside, he slept like an infant into
his eternal rest. O death, where indeed is thy sting to
a sinner saved by the precious blood of Jesus ?
A few words will suffice to tell of the short and noise-
less career of Alfred, the younger brother, to whom John
frequently alludes in the letters inserted in the foregoing
narrative. He was my sister’s tenth child, and even in
infancy caused less trouble and annoyance to others than
most children, from his extremely contented and inde-
pendent disposition, and patient endurance of pain.
Without quick abilities, he had the very useful gift of
amusing and occupying himself, certainly not without
doing occasional mischief, but this same mischief was
always transacted with such characteristic industry and
noiselessness, that whether it were the quiet clipping
with scissors, a part of his mother’s work, when seated
as an almost baby on his little stool at the sofa; or at
thirteen years old, imprisoning all his brothers and
sisters in the poultry yard for hours, by locking the
door and carrying off the key into the fields in a fit of
forgetfulness; still Alfred’s mischief was always so free
from intended evil, and he bore reproof with such un-
ruffled good temper, that it was a most difficult thing to
be seriously angry with him. When about thirteen or
fourteen years of age, Alfred was sent to Rugby under
the protection of a kind and talented cousin, high in Dr.
Arnold’s favour; but, notwithstanding this auspicious


circumstance, lie made but little progress; for, though
remarkably blameless and obedient in conduct, and
having previously attended a good preparatory school, it
was evident that classic lore was not suited to his
character of mind, and, as there was no opening for this
dear, gentle, and easily satisfied boy at home, his loving
mother again bowed her head submissive to the will of
God, evidenced by the pressure of circumstances and
the persuasions of her husband and of Alfred himself,
together with the urgent request of his brother John,
that he might be sent out to him in Australia.
It was, indeed, a stem trial to my beloved sister’s
heart, when, on the last Christmas-day she was on
earth, the news came that the wind for outward-bound
ships had become favourable, and that therefore the
parting hour was come. Yes, it was indeed a pang, but
it was the last great one this purified soul had to
endure; for in the ensuing September, before tidings of
Alfred’s arrival at Sydney had reached us, she had
entered into her rest, never to be disturbed by this
life’s storms again—storms she had so long and meekly
borne.
I have spoken of Alfred’s peaceful temperament.
He always seemed, as far as human eye could judge,
mercifully free from natural temptation. He never
seemed to care for the society of other boys, except
that of his own brothers ; and in one instance showed a
marked dislike, I might almost say horror, at the
advances to companionship made to him by a gentle-
man’s son in the neighbourhood, who, though clever
and amusing, was wild and unprincipled ; and, being


about his own age, might have proved injurious to
many boys.
That Alfred should have been delighted with a
ministry so interesting even to the natural mind, and so
powerful as that of Dr, M‘N was not surprising;
but he showed his love of the truth for a considerable
length of time before he left England, by turning his
sometimes solitary steps to W to listen to the plain,
clear, gospel-preaching of Mr. B , whose conduct
and character strictly accorded with his exhortations.
It was pleasant to find an allusion to this true servant of
the Lord, as well as to Dr. M £ lSr , in a letter I have
by me, as the observation from a boy so undemonstrative
as Alfred speaks volumes. He writes, “I sometimes
wish I had never left England, although I like this
country well; but certainly the people in it, both of high
and low degree, are a very bad set; and I really do not
see how it can ever be expected they should be other-
wise, as I grieve to say there is scarcely any religion at
all in the bush —indeed we do not, perhaps, see a
clergyman once in twelve months. I often sigh for
Mr. B or Dr. M‘N . You can little think, my
dear aunt, how much we have to make us forget God;
and, I may say, nothing whatever to remind us of Him ;
and, indeed, we need all your kind prayers and accept-
able letters. We are told that the prayers of the
righteous avail much ; surely the prayers of our poor
dear mother have been heard, and 1 believe will most
assuredly be answered.” Alfred’s letters to his sisters
were equally loving and simple, showing a strong feeling
of regret for past opportunities not made the most of.


All the tenor of his thoughts seemed gradually turning
more heavenward. He instructed some of the natives
every Sunday, though he himself never named this ; it
was communicated to us through a remarkable chain of
circumstances, that a lady—a governess —had found a
poor native reading his Bible at a great distance from
Weranga—Alfred’s sheep-farm —the man having tra-
velled onward through the bush. This lady named in
the letter, which was copied and forwarded to us by a
relative, that this was the only one of the natives she had
found able to read; and, on being questioned, he said
that “ good Massa C teach.” This same female
traveller —the first white woman who had penetrated so
far in this direction —saw Alfred afterwards, and ex-
pressed herself amazed to find a gentlemanly and inte-
resting young man, evidently contented and happy in so
wild and desolate a district, occupying a comfortable
house, built by himself, having everything around him
neat and orderly, and employing his leisure in teaching
the natives. Dear John often said that Alfred had been
a bright example to him, and he wished he had been
more like him. Alfred tells me in one of his letters that
he had lived in a hut for two years, which period he had
occupied in providing for the comfortable housing of his
oxen, and the safe folding of his flocks; that this hut
was in future to be his kitchen, and he was just prepar-
ing to build himself a house ; the first place, if he lived
to finish it, he adds' that he could call a home since he
left England. He did live to finish this far-away un-
home-like solitary home. But in less than two years
after the date of that letter, he had no longer to sigh for


Christian teachers; for I fully believe this dear, unas-
suming, unmurmuring youth was received as a true be-
liever and follower of the Lamb into the immediate pre-
sence of his Lord, mingling with the spirits of just men
made perfect. How infinitely wiser than all the theology
of the schools could have made him! And with that
blessed Saviour he has found again his mother, his sis-
ters, and brothers that he loved so well, and from whom
he had been so long separated. When John first heard
that his brother was ill, he was at Sydney, six hundred
miles from the dear youth’s newly-built home at We-
ranga. Alfred was attacked by his first seizure while
reading in his sitting-room, when, on endeavouring to
raise his hand to turn over the leaf, he found his arm
was perfectly powerless. He tried to rise from his seat,
but fell on the floor, where he was seen by one of the
men at work near the window, who rushed in and placed
him on his bed ; there he lay for some time helpless and
nearly speechless, but would not let a medical man be
sent for, until the expiration of a week, when Dr. B—.—
travelled a distance of eighty miles to see him.
Alfred had then much improved, but one side was
totally paralyzed. The friends of my nephews, residing’
at Drayton, finding that Alfred ought to be near medical
aid, most kindly combined, in John’s absence, to find a
carriage and relays of horses to convey him to Drayton.
He, however, was then better, and laughed at the idea
of its being requisite for him to be near Dr. B ,as
he was able to walk a little. He was soon afterwards
conveyed to Canchooga, the residence of Mr. R , who
had formerly been my nephew’s nearest neighbour, and
AIJAHTciIIA'HOYHAWIM -1/ : ••


who treated Alfred with a brother’s kindness. It was
here John found him on his arrival from Sydney, crippled
indeed, but his brother does not appear to have had a
thought of his danger. He, however, entreated Alfred
to go with him to Sydney, that he might have the best
advice, and John hastened to Weranga to make pre-
parations, but before he could return in exceeding haste,
the dear fellow had been stricken with apoplexy, and his
body committed to the earth —a quiet retired spot on
the bank of a creek running in front of Canchooga; a
large pool is there, which is fenced round, and the grave
is within the fence. John speaks of Alfred as the best
and most affectionate of brothers, that he was beloved
and respected by all, and that the poor natives were
heart-broken to lose him; even the Chinamen loved
and deplored him.
These are short and simple annals, indeed, of this
dear boy, who, I really never remember to have willingly
disobeyed or given offence to his parents or to me, and
I can scarcely describe the peaceful satisfaction with
which I read and re-read the words of simple faith with
which he closed the letter I have partly transcribed :
“ Surely the prayers of our dear mother on our behalf
have been heard, and I believe will most assuredly be
answered.”
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
SR ./yj l fR 21
