

■ J*. ■v i Vr\ r’, mf
fM KKi*
flf «* ’M ”** a5? -ilil
S7a


It was near Tripoli that Yorke
Villers and his cousin Roy met
the Australian Major Todd and
heard his story of the ring,
worth a fortune, that lay buried
somewhere near Jerusalem.
They joined forces, but found
that they were being shadowed
by rivals who had enlisted the
aid of the Bedouins —shadowed
until the last dramatic moment
among the rocks below a
monastery in the Judean moun-
tains.
2/-
net








. ,'- ■■ ; -. ;
At his feet the prostrate body of a man in the dress
of a monk (page 85)


THE TREASURE
OF THE PASS
GURNEY SLADE
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO, AND PARIS


THOMAS NELSON AND SONS LTD
Parkside Works Edinburgh 9
3 Henrietta Street London WCa
31a Flinders Street Melbourne Cl
J Parker’s Buildings Burg Street Cape Town
Thomas Nelson and Sons (Canada) Ltd
91-93 Wellington Street West Toronto I
Thomas Nelson and Sons
19 East 47th Street New York 17
SocUhH d’Editions Nelson
aj rue Henri Barbusse Paris V*


fa f\o^7s
CONTENTS
I. The Major's Quest 5
11. Rezzay's Hotel 13 *
111. The Secret of the Ravine .... 21
IV. The Test of the Clue 26
V. The Peep-hole 33
VI. Riders in the Valley 40
VII. Trapped 47
VIII. The Fight in the Cave 55
IX. A Nocturnal Visitor 65
X. An Eventful Night 73
XI. Explanations 87




THE TREASURE OF
THE PASS
CHAPTER I
THE MAJOR’S QUEST
On a bright October afternoon the S.S. Khan Yunis
drew in to the Levant coast and dropped anchor about
half a mile from the little port of A 1 Mina, hard by
the ancient town of Tripoli. Immediately a swarm
of native boats surrounded her, and presently a steward
came aft to the group of English-speaking travellers
who were standing by the rail looking at the snow-clad
mountains of Lebanon, and handed a cablegram to
Colonel Villers. That grey-haired soldier's brows went
up a little as he tore it open and scanned the contents.
Yorke, his eighteen-year-old son, looked at him rather
anxiously.
“ No bad news, I hope, father ? " he said.
“No, not bad exactly, Yorke ; but I'm afraid it
will mean my returning home at once. My personal
attendance is wanted at the War Office on a certain
matter which only I can clear up.”
“ Blow ! ” Yorke exclaimed whole-heartedly. “ And
what about Roy and me? ”
Colonel Villers pulled his moustache and looked
meditatively at his son and nephew. They were of a
type to inspire confidence. Yorke, who had just left
Eton, stood six feet in his socks, had rowed in the


College eight, and gave promise of a magnificent man-
hood. His cousin Roy, Canadian bom, the son of
Colonel Villers's sister, who had married an Alberta
rancher, lacked an inch of Yorke’s height, but nothing
of his chest measurement, and there was much friendly
rivalry between the two in matters of sport. Roy
was due for McGill University and Yorke for Oxford,
and they were putting in a few months touring the
Mediterranean with the colonel as guide and tutor.
They had shipped on the Khan Yunis at Port Said,
intending to land at Tripoli and take a few days' trip
through the Lebanons before working their way down
overland through Damascus and Jerusalem. And now
had come this upsetting telegram.
“ Say, Uncle Herbert, don't dandle us home with
you," begged Roy. “We can't do any good at the
War Office, you know."
“ I quite realize that, Roy. The thing is, what
mischief will you get up to if I leave you to do the
trip alone ? " The colonel shook his head at them,
and turned to a sun-tanned, hook-nosed man, an
Australian, with whom they had fraternized a good
deal on the voyage up. “ Here, Major Todd, you
are going up to the Lebanons, I believe. How would
you like to burden yourself with the company of
these two large infants ? "
“ Nothing I would like better," replied the Aus-
tralian readily. “ But I won't take it on, though.
It wouldn't be fair on them.” His tone was serious,
and the colonel looked at him quickly.
“ I don’t quite understand, major.”
“ Well, in a nutshell, it’s this, colonel: my trip up
there " —he pointed to the mountains—“ isn’t going
to be a joy ride. Between ourselves, I've had two
tough men on my tracks ever since I left Sydney, and
for all I know they may be among that lot there,"
and he nodded to the gang of native third-class pas-


sengers clustered forward. “ Disguised, of course,"
he added.
Yorke and Roy exchanged glances. There was
evidently adventure in the air, and it smelt good to
them.
“ It looks as if we must go, now that Major Todd
has told us this," said Yorke guilefully. "We couldn't
possibly let him go up there on his own, father."
" Of what use is the Empire if an Australian can't
depend on an Englishman and a Canadian in time of
trouble ? " Roy chipped in hopefully. ** It's a case
of duty calling, Uncle Herbert."
Both the elder men smiled, and Major Todd said,
" If you have time, and would like to come below,
I will tell you the story "
"I must confess to a lively curiosity," admitted
the colonel, and they followed the Australian down
to the little smoke-scented saloon, and seated them-
selves on the faded plush seats round one of the
tables. Major Todd drew out his cigar-case, and offered
the colonel a weed. Then, taking one himself, he bit
off the end, lit it with a patent lighter, and beat away
the cloud of smoke with his hand.
“ I'm telling you this in confidence," he said quietly,
leaning his elbows on the table, “ and " —he looked at
each face in turn—“ I know I can rely on you. I'll
start from the beginning and make the story as short
as possible. During the war I was, as you know, in
the Australian cavalry, and during the last year of
hostilities I had a batman of the name of Jarvice,
whose one aim and object, after seeing to my comfort,
was to get something for nothmg. Well, one day
early in the spring of 1918 it fell to my regiment to
take part in a raid on Es Salt, behind the enemy lines.
My squadron happened to be the first to ascend a
breakneck path up the mountains of Moab. We had
our scouts out ahead of us, and half-way up the


track I came across the body of an officer and two
men whom they had shot. I did not stop, but just
turned to make a remark to Jarvice, and as I did so
I saw him stoop and take something from the officer's
hand. War is war, and I made no comment; but
towards the end of the day I noticed that Jarvice
was wearing a diamond ring of very antique design,
and I told him that a ring like that was better in
a trooper's pocket than on a trooper's finger. He
agreed, and took it off and put it in his pocket-book,
and I never saw it again."
Major Todd paused, flicked the ash from his cigar,
and resumed :
" Some months after the Armistice my regiment
was camped on the beach at Tripoli yonder, and with
two or three brother officers I got leave for a few
days to ride up into the Lebanons and view the famous
cedars. We took our batmen with us, and stayed at
a hotel in the little mountain village of Buderi. Near
that village there is a great gorge abounding in preci-
pices, and, to cut the story short, down one of those
precipices fell my batman Jarvice on the morning of
the last day of our stay. Yes, cognac was the cause
of it. Two of us went over the cliff on ropes, and we
found him lying on a rocky ridge close to a small
cave. He was quite dead, and there and then we held
a hasty consultation as to the best thing to do. We
could think of nothing better than burying him in
the cave. The natives would not have thanked us
for bringing him to the top, for ground is at a premium
in the Lebanons, where every inch is jealously culti-
vated ; and even if we had succeeded in purchasing a
burial site, the odds were that they would have dragged
him out again after we had gone. So, having first
relieved him of his identity disc and few personal
belongings, we carried him into the cave, and sealed
the entrance with a big stone. It was only when we


were half-way down to the coast again that I dis-
covered that I had left the pocket-book on the ledge
outside the cave. It was not worth going back for,
we thought, and we went on to Tripoli, made our report
at headquarters, and in due course went on board the
transport for Australia. I won’t bore you with an
account of my doings in my native country. Suffice
to say that I am a sheep-farmer, and that the part
of the country in which my station is situated suffered
heavily from lack of rain. Things went from bad to
worse with me, and early this year I was glad to get a
few hundred pounds for what remained of my stock.
That did not worry me very much, for the war had
taught me philosophy, but when my only sister fell
ill and had to undergo several expensive operations
without the wherewithal to meet the bills, I began to
look round for something remunerative. And then
I saw an advertisement in one of the papers offering
ten thousand pounds reward for the recovery of a ring
that was believed to have been taken from the body
of a dead Austrian officer in the Pass of Jisr Ed Damieh
in Moab on the occasion of Allenby's second raid into
the mountains. The description of the ring tallied
exactly with the one I had seen Jarvice slip into his
pocket-book, and then it came to me suddenly that
we had left that pocket-book lying on a ledge four
hundred feet down the Buderi gorge. When we had
buried Jarvice I had not given a thought to the con-
tents of his pocket-book. Every soldier had one, and
they were very much alike—a few photographs and
letters, and perhaps a pound or two in Egyptian notes.
But in Sydney, reading that ad., I felt my heart give
a little bound. On a ledge in the Buderi gorge lay
in all probability ten thousand pounds waiting for me
to pick up, for none of the villagers go in for cliff
climbing as a hobby, and even if one had happened
to go down to the ledge and found the ring, I should


most probably be able to trace it and buy it back for
a couple of hundred pounds. That was about its value
in the ordinary way, I should imagine."
" Yes,” agreed the colonel, “ about that, I think."
The three looked at him in surprise, so assured was
his tone.
“ I happen to know a little about that ring," he
explained, with a smile. "A friend of mine is ac-
quainted with the family who are advertising for it.
It is the Austrian family of Valias. The present head
of the family, who has married an American heiress
recently, was brother of the officer from whom the ring
was taken. It is in the nature of an heirloom, having
been given to one of the Valias family by Louis XIV.
The amount of the reward was fixed by the American
side of the family, which may account for its magni-
tude."
"Well, I'm glad to know that," said Major Todd.
" The advertisement simply gave the solicitor's ad-
dress. Well, to go on with the yarn. I decided to
come to Tripoli and try my luck. But a week before
I sailed, two men called on me at my hotel in Sydney—
two men, one of extremely unprepossessing appearance
—who gave their names as Messrs. Ike Jacobs and
George Steele. They introduced themselves as friends
of my late batman, and could I tell them exactly how
it was he came by his death. It struck me at once
that they were on the same game as myself, and I
was rather short with them. I said that he had fallen
down a precipice somewhere north of Damascus,
and that as far as I knew he had been buried where
he fell. But as bad luck would have it, my trunk
labelled P. & O. Port Said was standing in the middle
of the room, and resting on it were some pamphlets
on Syria and Lebanon which I had had from a tourist
agency. I saw suspicion in their eyes as they looked
at the trunk. They did not stay long, for they could


sec that I intended to give nothing away. But they
travelled to Port Said on the same steamer with me,
and they got off at Port Said, and it's my belief that
they have travelled up here on the Khan Yunis.
Steele has the look of a man who is acquainted with
the East, and I should say he is no stranger to the
art of disguising."
“ And what exactly do you imagine their idea to
be ? ” asked the colonel.
“ I should say that they mean me to do the work,
and when I’ve got the ring they will try swooping down
and relieving me of it. . . . That is when the trouble
will start," the Australian added quietly. "So you
see, I'm no fit company for your two boys at present,
colonel."
Colonel Villers pulled his moustache as he remarked,
“ I can’t agree with you on that point, major. I think
you’d better take them as a bodyguard."
" Nothing else to be done, father," Yorke agreed.
4 A clear call to duty," added Roy, beaming with
satisfaction. “ Yorke and I will hold off Ike and
George while Major Todd lifts the ring and collars the
reward."
"Now look here," said the Australian, and it was
evident that he was moved, " I can see you’ve made
up your minds to come up and give me a hand, so I
won't argue. But what I insist on is that if we get
the ring you must take equal shares in the reward."
Both boys made a gesture of dissent, and the colonel
said, " Please don’t make that a condition, major.
Yorke and Roy are both children of very wealthy
parents, and in three years’ time both will have more
money than they can possibly need. But with you,
as you have just told us, things are quite different!
Primarily, you came out here to help your sister,
who is ill. Is that not so ? "
The Australian nodded. " That's right, colonel.


If it were not for her, the ring could stay for ever on
that Buderi ledge as far as I am concerned. I can
always make a living in Australia.”
" Exactly. You are here to help a sister in distress.
Surely you will let a young Englishman and a young
Canadian extend their aid also to a lady in distress
without dwelling too insistently upon the subject of
remuneration ? ”
“ Since you put it that way, colonel, I can say no
more. I accept your offer gratefully. I couldn't
wish for better company, I’m sure.” And Major Todd
shook hands warmly with all three
Colonel Villers rose.
f ‘ Now you two boys,” he said, with mock sternness,
“ come along to my cabin. I must be catching the next
boat back to Port Said, and I shall have to give you
plenty of money and advice before I leave. ... By
the way, major, how do you intend getting up to
Buderi ? By car ? ”
” If we can get one, which I very much doubt,”
was the reply. “ I expect we shall have to rely on
the native horseflesh. I suppose you boys ride ? ”
" Yorke has hunted with the Pytchley, and Roy, I
believe, has some reputation in his native Alberta
as a rider of really bad animals. I don't think you
will need to tie either of them on, major. . . . Come
along, boys, and get your marching orders.”


CHAPTER II
rezzay’s hotel
Major Todd's prognostication proved correct, Tripoli's
three cars were unavailable the next day for a trip into
the mountains, and it was on horseback that they left
their rather dubious hotel in the main street and
struck through the olive-clad plain to the foothills of
the ranges. They had hired the steeds from a baggy-
trousered Lebanonese at the rate of ten shillings a day
each, and both sides were well satisfied with the
bargain. They were sturdy, sure-footed little animals,
used to heavy burdens, and that, as Yorke remarked,
was just as well.
By midday they were clear of the plain and were
riding up the lower slopes, where presently they halted
to partake of ham and eggs and coffee at a stone
caravanserai. Far away on the horizon they could
see the smoke of the steamer which was taking Colonel
Villers back to Port Said.
“ Good old pater," said Yorke appreciatively. "No
fuss, no anything with him when he left. Just
handed us the money and said, * Keep your end up,
boys.' "
" I wouldn't change him for any other uncle in
the world,” said Roy; " he’s such a thoroughgoing
sportsman." He gazed keenly at the white road
winding snake-like through the green of the olive


plantations. “ Can't see anything of Ike and George,
major. Perhaps they've decided that the game isn't
good enough.”
Major Todd shook his head.
I wish I could think so, Roy, but I have a very
strong presentiment that we shall fall foul of them
sooner or later. Well, if you've finished, shall we get
on ? He signalled to a Lebanonese, who removed
the nosebags from the horses and led them out from
the shade of an olive tree. They mounted and set
off again.
The road was a good one, cut in countless zigzags
through the terraced lands of the mountain peasantry.
The air was heavy with the scent of ilex, and castles
and cloisters of grey stone perched on seemingly
inaccessible crags lent an air of crusader-like romanti-
cism to the scene. Passing through the zone of dwarf
hard-leaved oaks, they came presently to the loftier
region of the pines, and later to the levels where the
cypress and cedar grew in profusion. Here great
waterfalls came tumbling down the rocky clefts, and
the air became chill as the sun sank below the peaks.
Occasionally they passed a loose-trousered mountaineer
driving an ass laden with a precious freight of olive
oil, and now and again they would see women, balancing
heavy jars of water on their heads, ascending and
descending precipitous paths to unseen villages and
wells. But as they approached the region of the
snows, these passers-by became more rare.
“ Whew ! ” said Roy, as a sudden bend in the road
brought them to the side of a great gorge. ” Some
hole 1 Don’t think I’d care to wander about there on
a dark night unless I knew the country pretty well.
Gee ! if it doesn’t remind me of the Rockies I "
“ That's the Buderi gorge,” said the major. “ This
road follows it for miles now.”
Scenting rest and food, the horses increased their
(2,983)


pace voluntarily, and in another half an hour the
riders saw lights twinkling ahead.
“ Buderi,” announced the major; “and that other
patch across the ravine is Rasharbi. They're only
three hundred yards apart, but if you want to get
from one to the other you've got to go four miles round
the end of the gorge. If this was America they'd
have a rope bridge across, but life up here has changed
very little in the last thousand years, I should say.''
The horses now broke into a trot, and in a short
time they entered the main street of Buderi. It was
composed of small square, flat-roofed houses, and from
the upper windows of one or two were suspended sign-
boards, which jutted out over the roadway. Beneath
one of these, bearing the insignia “ Rezzay's Hotel/'
they halted.
“ I wonder if the old chap's still there ?'' murmured
the Australian, and he cried out, “ Rezzay I Hi,
Rezzay 1 "
In response to the hail, the blinds of one of the
windows were drawn aside, and a face peered out at
them.
“ Rezzay, sure enough," the major told the boys,
and then he shouted again, “ Hi, Rezzay, come down
and open the door. Here are three guests for you I "
The blinds were replaced. They heard footsteps
on the stairs, and then a short, thickset man appeared
as the door was flung open.
“ You remember me, Rezzay ? " said Major Todd,
riding forward so that the light fell on his face.
The proprietor peered at him keenly, and then his
somewhat surly features relaxed a little. “ The major,"
he said. “ Yes, the Major Todd."
“ That's right, Rezzay. Now can you put my two
friends and me up to-night ? We've ridden from
Tripoli."
The proprietor smiled a little wryly.
(2.988) 3


“Yes, my house is not so packed that I can’t find
room for three. As a matter of fact, I have had no
guests since the army left the plain. If you will wait
a moment I will show you the way to the stable.”
He re-entered the house and came out again bearing
a hurricane lamp and a huge rusty key. Preceding
them, he walked some twenty yards down the street,
halted at a tumbledown shed, and opened the door.
“ Same old place,” said the Australian, dismounting,
and leading in his horse. “ This is where we put our
nags last time we came here. Dark as pitch, and
cleaned out once a year. My horse was cooped up
here for three days once, and when he got out, he
bolted with one of the village lads on his back. Re-
member that, Rezzay ? ”
“ They talk of it in the village still,” replied the
proprietor, emptying some fodder from a sack into
three of the bins. “ One of the Australians jumped
on another horse and rode twelve miles bareback in
pursuit.”
Unsaddling, they rubbed down the horses, saw that
they had plenty of food for the night, and returned
on foot to the hotel, where Rezzay showed them their
rooms. An hour later, summoned by a bell, they
entered the primitive dining-room of the establish-
ment, and sat down to a meal of mountain-goat,
potatoes, bread and cheese, and coffee. When they
had finished, a slatternly domestic appeared, cleared
away the debris, put more charcoal in the brazier,
and left them to themselves.
“ Sporting old card, Rezzay,” said Yorke, warming
his hands over the glowing embers, and gazing round
at the weapons and trophies of the chase which
ornamented the walls. “ Jove, do look at that old
flintlock, though. It must have come out of the
Ark.”
“ I think there's a yarn about that gun.” Major


Todd bit the end off a cigar, and lit it at the fire.
“ I can't remember exactly what it was, but I think
some one got shot. . . . Ah, here's Rezzay. I say,
Rezzay, what’s the yam about that old gun ? ”
“It stopped a feud,” the proprietor replied. He
looked at them inquiringly. “ Would you wish to
hear the story, or would you rather smoke and look
at the peaks through the windows ? ”
For answer they drew a stool near to the brazier,
and begged him to sit down and go ahead.
“You may have noticed that little village on
the opposite side of the ravine,” Rezzay began,
when he had lit the cigar which the major offered
him.
“ Rasharbi,” the Australian nodded. “ Yes, I
pointed that out to my friends.”
“ Well, when my grandfather was a young man,
there was a feud between Rasharbi and Buderi. But
if the men wished to shoot each other, they had to
go down the road to a spot where the ravine narrowed
sufficiently for them to shoot across it; and for dagger-
fights, they had to go still farther, to the place where
the two roads meet. You know that spot, Mai'oL
Todd?” J
“ Yes, I know it.” The major turned to the boys.
“ This ravine is shaped like a hairpin,” he explained,,
“ with the road running practically round the edge ,
so when the men of the villages wanted to trade or
fight, they had to go round to the narrow end of the
hairpin to do it.”
“As a rule the young men preferred to lie in ambush
in places where their guns would carry across the
ravine,” Rezzay went on. ” But one day my grand-
father journeyed down to Damascus and returned
with this English gun that you see on the wall. It
cost him very much money, but that he did not grudge,
for he was a far-seeing man. He brought it up here


at nightfall, and at dawn the next morning he opened
his bedroom window and shot a man standing in the
street of Rasharbi."
“ H m," said Roy. “ Bit of the Wild West touch
about your grandad, Mr. Rezzay. And what hap-
pened then ? "
“ Rasharbi was as a village of the dead that day.
Not a man, woman, or child dared stir out of doors,
and that evening there came a deputation from
Rasharbi, asking that the feud should stop for ever.
A gun had come into the mountains that would carry
across the ravine between the two villages, and they
could not contend against that. They offered many goats
and many sacks of potatoes to the men of Buderi."
“ And of which your Wild West grandpa had his
full cut, I'll bet," Roy commented.
“ Life is hard in the mountains, gentlemen, and I
have heard that my grandfather did very well out of
the offerings. There is friendship between the villages
now, and marriages are frequent."
“ You speak English very well," Yorke remarked.
Rezzay looked pleased at the compliment.
“ I have been a policeman in New York," he told
them. “ I did very well in the way of money there.
But the mountains called me, and I came back.
There are no mountains in New York."
“ There's the Singer building, though," said Roy.
“ I should think that was pretty nearly as high as this
Lebanon range."
Rezzay smiled indulgently. “It was not only the
call of the mountains that brought me back; it was
what you call social position. In America I was
merely a policeman among thousands of policemen.
Here I am the grandson of the man that stopped the
feud. You understand ? "
They told him that they understood, and Rezzay
asked them what they would like for breakfast.


“ It’s not a question much of what we'd like, unless
Buderi has changed a lot since I was last here,” said
the major. “ What we're going to get is mountain
goat, potatoes, and coffee, isn’t it ? ”
“ I must admit that you are right, sir. The asking
is a formality.”
“ Well, we'll go through with the formality. Yorke,
what would you like for breakfast ? ”
" Why, since you ask me, major, there’s nothing
I so much fancy as a little mountain goat, well cooked,
with potatoes and coffee.”
“ And you, Roy ? ”
“ Goat,” was the prompt reply; “ a slice of brisk
mountain goat, with coffee and potatoes to follow.”
"As for me, Rezzay, I’ll have plain goat avec
pomme de terre et cafe. You speak French ?”
“No, but it does not matter.” Rezzay entered
gravely into the jest. “ I presume you would like
your coffee and potatoes served with the goat ? Thank
you. At eight o’clock, then. Good-night, gentlemen.
If you should want anything, just call ‘ Rezzay 1 '
There are no bells in my house.”
When their host had gone, the three sat chatting
until Major Todd had finished his cigar, and then they
went to their rooms. Yorke and Roy were sharing
a fairly roomy apartment at the back of the house,
and the major had a single room overlooking the road.
Pleasantly tired after their long day, the boys were
soon in bed and asleep. They were awakened at six
in the morning by the major, who tapped at their
door, and entered dressed in his pyjamas. He was
carrying a lighted candle, for the dawn had not yet
broken, and this he set down on the chest of drawers.
The boys rubbed their sleepy eyes, raised themselves
on their elbows, and stared at him.
“ Don’t tell me the mountain goat’s ready yet,
major,” said Roy. “ Why, we can’t see to eat it.”


“ No, it's only six,” replied the Australian. ** All
the same I want you to get up. My two Sydney
friends are on my trail. They passed through the
village last night.”
Both boys leapt out of bed and began to dress
rapidly, the while they asked eager questions.
" Yes,” said the major, “ they passed through at
twelve last night on horseback. I heard the noise of
hoofs and I went to the window. I heard Jacobs
make a remark to his friend, and I recognized his
voice at once. I slipped on a few things and went
out through the window after them. They did not
stop in Buderi, but went on round the hairpin bend,
and I did not follow them any farther. They were
most probably making for Rasharbi. I’ve been
thinking the matter over since, and it seems to me that
Rasharbi would be an ideal place from their point of
view for watching our operations, and so I suggest
that we wake Rezzay, get him to find us some rope,
and have a shot at finding that pocket-book at once,
before Ike and George have a chance of levelling
field-glasses or rifles at us. Are you agreed ? ”
“ Rather .”
“ Then I’ll leave you to wash and dress while I go
and break the news to Rezzay. The man's a philo-
sopher, I’m glad to say. Otherwise he might cut up
a bit rough at having to supply three hundred feet of
rope at a few minutes’ notice on such a chilly autumn
morning.”


CHAPTER 111
THE SECRET OF THE RAVINE
An hour later, laden with three hundred feet of rope,
knotted at every yard, which Rezzay had been induced
to borrow from a friend’s outhouse, the three left the
hotel, crossed the street, dived through an open space
between two cottages, and, crossing a strip of culti-
vated ground, gained the jumble of rocks and boulders
which fringed the edge of the ravine.
Seen thus in the grey light of the dawn it presented
an awe-inspiring spectacle, and even the hardy moun-
taineers of the Lebanon had made no attempt to
wring sustenance from such a barren spot. Girt about
with the great peaks, it looked like a veritable vent-
hole of the Inferno. Here and there a small cedar
fought valiantly for life on a rocky ledge, and stunted
pines and bushes made dark patches against the life-
less grey of the rocks a full thousand feet down the
precipitous sides ; but of animal life there was no sign.
There was no temptation for even the most famished
mountain goat to visit the Buderi gorge.
The major led the way down a steep track to a flat
rock strewn with boulders. “It was from here that
Jarvice fell,” he said, “ and if he hadn’t landed on
that ledge, he would have gone the full two thousand
feet before bringing up.”
The boys crawled to the edge and looked over.


“ Some place,” said Roy. “ I didn't know they
could do anything like this outside of the American
continent.” He drew back, and gazed up at Rasharbi,
perched on the edge of the opposite cliff. “ I wonder
if Ike and George have got their field-glasses on us.”
” Possibly. Well, we won't waste time.” The
major looped one end of the rope round a big smooth
boulder and made it fast. “Now what I want you
boys to do is to see that neither the rope nor the
boulder slips. Better sit on it, I think. That's right.”
He flung the other end of the rope out into the ravine,
and then, taking off his coat and shoes, he lowered
himself over the edge. When only his head was visible,
he nodded to the boys and smiled. “If anything
happens, rope slips or anything like that, and I don't
come up again, I shouldn't hang about this district,
boys. It isn't too healthy. Thanks very much for
your help. Ta-ta ! ” He disappeared.
“ I like Major Todd,” said Yorke thoughtfully.
“ Proper white man,” Roy agreed. “ I wish we
could do more. But he told us to sit on the rock, so
the only thing to do is to obey orders.”
But it was an anxious period of waiting that ensued,
and when half an hour had passed without any sign
from below, they had difficulty in concealing their
alarm; but at last the major's head appeared above
the edge, and both vented their feelings in a shout of
joy-
“ Hard work that,” said the Australian, heaving
himself on to the flat rock and wiping his dripping
forehead. ” Good thing I've had plenty of gymnasium
practice.”
“ Did you get the book ? ” asked Yorke eagerly.
“ I did, but the ring wasn't in it.”
The boys’ faces fell.
“ Well, if that isn't the hardest cheese 1 ” cried Roy.
The Australian shrugged his shoulders. “ A man


gets harder knocks than that in the course of his life.”
He pulled a rusty, weather-worn leather pocket-book
from the front of his shirt. “ Here it is. I thought
I might as well bring it up, though I could see at a
glance that the ring wasn't in it.” He sat down on
the boulder, and the boys peered over his shoulder
as he opened the pocket-book. He drew out first
two flattened, musty cigarettes and an old leave pass
for Tripoli bearing his own signature, and laid them
on the rock. Next came a small sheaf of photographs—
snapshots taken with a variety of cameras, depicting
various scenes on the march and in Jerusalem, Damas-
cus, Cairo, Port Said, and Tripoli. The major glanced
quickly through them and laid them down. Then he
turned to the other side of the wallet. This contained
money—a little over ten pounds in faded Egyptian
notes —and a couple of letters bearing the heading of
the Australian General Hospital at Port Said, addressed
to Jarvice, and evidently written by a regimental
friend. “ Nothing much there,” said the major,
scanning them, and then he pulled out the flap of
leather which guarded the spare pocket, and pulled
out a scrap of paper. “ Another old leave pass, I
expect,” he said, unfolding it. And then he leant
forward suddenly as his eye fell on the heading.
” Hullo, what’s this ? ”
The sheet was a small one torn from a writing-pad,
and the script was in indelible pencil by an uneducated
hand. “ Stuff buried,” was the elegant title, and
beneath it was the following :
Two swords, one gold hilt, and revolver—Tar el Dum
—two yards from cookhouse.
Posh uniform, two pairs hoots, Red Cross bag—side
of big olive, Homs.
Five Turk watches and diamond ring—ten yards E
of Golden Gate.


Roy sprang to his feet and clapped the major on
the back, “ He’s planted it,” he cried. " Ten yards
east of the Golden Gate. That's Jerusalem, isn't it ?
Then all we've got to do is to go down there and dig
it out.”
“ East of the Golden Gate,” murmured Major Todd
in puzzled fashion. “Now what on earth possessed
him to choose such a spot ? ” He rose and looked
absently at Rasharbi. Then suddenly his expression
changed. “ Boys,” he said swiftly, “ we’ve been for-
getting ourselves. There’s a window open in that
long building up there in Rasharbi, and if I can trust
my eyes, there’s some one standing at that window
watching us through field -glasses. That’s the Rasharbi
hotel, and ten to one the person watching us is
Jacobs or Steele. If so, he must have noticed us
looking pleased about something, and he’ll put two
and two together. It seems to me the best thing we
can do is to go and get breakfast, and then get down
to the coast as quickly as possible. If our luck is in
we may be able to get a boat right away and so shake
those two bloodhounds off our tracks.”
Roy scowled up at the window. “If they cling to
us too long they may get something more than a
diamond for their pains, eh, Yorke ? ”
Yorke knitted his brows. " I must say I'm getting
a bit fed up with them,” he agreed. “If I get a chance
I shall certainly request them to turn their glasses in
other directions than ours.”
The major nodded. " But let's get this diamond
safely in the bank first,” he said, and they coiled up
the rope and hurried back to the hotel.
Breakfast was awaiting them, and Major Todd gave
directions for the horses to be brought round in a
quarter of an hour's time.
” I suppose the boat would be better than going
overland,” said Yorke, as they ate.


" Decidedly," replied the major. “If we used the
railway, we'd have to go to Beyrout, and then dawdle
round Damascus. And from there we’d either have
to cut back to Haifa and get on the coast line, or else
get out of the train at Amman and pad it through the
Jordan valley. I doubt whether the Hedjaz line would
be fit to travel on, anyway. Colonel Lawrence cut
it pretty well to pieces during the war. No, our best
way will be to get down to Jaffa by boat, and then get
the train or hire a car to take us to Jerusalem." He
drained his second cup of coffee. “ Hi, Rezzay 1 " he
shouted. “ Hurry up with that bill."


CHAPTER IV
THE TEST OF THE CLUE
Six days later a Ford car left the outskirts of Jaffa
and sped through the famous orange groves of the
coastal plain. Yorke, sitting in front with the driver,
looked back and smiled contentedly at his friends.
“At last," he said. They had been unfortunate at
Tripoli, and had had to wait four days for a boat; and
to add to their uneasiness, the major had caught a
fleeting glimpse of Ike Jacobs one day in the market-
place.
I’m glad to be out of Jaffa," Roy remarked. “It
looks picturesque from the sea, I'll admit, but that’s
about all one can say for it."
"It’s had a chequered history," said the major.
" It was at one time the port of Judea, and was fortified
by Simon in the Maccabee wars. Strabo and Josephus
both mention it as a piratical nest."
" It’s that now," Roy grunted, for he had been
overcharged for some picture post-cards.
The driver now put on a spurt, and very soon they
had left behind them the region of oranges, pome-
granates, olives, and figs, and were passing over the
low foothills of the Judean range. As the car climbed
the long winding road to the heights, the major pointed
out landmarks of the recent campaign to the boys.
" On the day the army entered the hills, this road


was a sight,” he told them. “ British, Australians,
and Indians all mixed up, shells dropping all over the
place, and aeroplanes banging overhead. See there,
those stumps of olive trees. They were cut down by
the troops that day for firewood to boil their billies
on the march. We had to stop them at that, or very
soon there wouldn’t have been an olive left in the
whole of Palestine,”
Every terraced hill crowned with ruined cloister or
castle seemed to hold some war memory for the major,
and he kept the boys keenly interested until the long
line of crenellated walls of Jerusalem appeared ahead,
when he sank back and relapsed into silence, leaving
them to form their own impressions of the most
famous city in the world.
The car negotiated two sharp bends, and then ran
along a good road beneath the massive west wall.
They passed the Jaffa Gate, and then, running more
slowly by reason of the camels, donkeys, and pedes-
trians, came at last to their hotel, which was situated
near the north-west comer of the ancient city. Giving
their luggage into the care of a porter, they entered the
lounge and interviewed the reception-clerk, a grey-
haired Syrian, who shook his head at their request for
three separate rooms.
“ I have one large, airy one, gentlemen,” he said,
rubbing his hands deprecatively. “It is furnished
with three beds. Perhaps ”
“ Show us this room,” said the major, and they
followed the clerk upstairs.
As he had said, the room was a spacious one, and
clean enough to satisfy the requirements of all but the
most exacting travellers. So they had their luggage
brought up, and set themselves to remove the stains
of the journey. After which, summoned by the gong,
they joined the cosmopolitan crowd in the dining-
room.


“ Appointments fairly good," said the major, un-
folding his napkin. “ Company fairly mediocre.”
“ It's two up on Rezzay's, anyway,” said Roy.
That was quite the prize hotel of the whole Near
East, I should say.”
“ Do you know the city well, major ? ” Yorke asked,
as they settled down to their soup.
Fairly well. I was camped at Bethlehem for some
time, and that is only four miles away. But having a
squadron of wild Australians to look after, I was not
able to devote as much time as I should have liked to
studying the holy places. However, I think I can find
my way to the Golden Gate; and if you like, we will
take a turn round that way this afternoon to spy out
the land.”
They set out immediately after lunch, and walking
down David Street, passed close to the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre, and then plunged into the network
of narrow twelfth-century lanes to the west of the
Dome of the Rock. There the major lost his bearings
slightly, and suddenly they found themselves in an
alley adjoining the mighty walls of the Haram, in the
midst of a company of Jews and Jewesses of all ages,
who, their arms stretched out against the massive
stones, were crying and lamenting in most piteous
fashion. The boys stopped in astonishment, and
looked at their guide for explanation of this strange
scene.
“ We have evidently stumbled upon the Wailing
Place of the Jews,” said the major. “ I have heard
of it, but I’ve never seen it before. They come here
once a week, I believe, to bewail the lost glory of
Israel and to pray for its revival. Those great stones
they are clutching are fragments of the outer wall of
the Temple.”
They stood for a few minutes in silence, watching
the mourners, their thoughts back in olden days, the


days before Israel was led captive to Babylon, and
the great Temple of Jerusalem was the wonder of the
world. Then, still in silence, the major led the way
up a flight of steps and into a wide, sombre-looking
enclosure. Here were situated the Mosque of Aksa
and the beautiful Dome of the Rock, commonly known
as the Mosque of Omar, the latter a poem in turquoise
which absorbed the boys’ attention at once.
“ And that is really magnificent,” Yorke exclaimed.
“You are in agreement with all the architects and
poets who ever lived since the mosque was built,” said
the major, smiling. “ When we have done what we
set out to do, we must spend a week or so exploring
the city. Every stick and stone is of historical interest.
Jerusalem is a palimpsest, or, rather, a carapace. The
records of countless ages and races lie hidden beneath
its dust. Scratch here, and you find Rome ; dig there,
and you unearth Babylon or Egypt or Assyria. Well,
shall we go and survey the scene of our operations ? ”
They walked past the withered cypresses, little
mirhabs, and slender arches which Uttered the enclosure,
and, mounting the walls close to the Golden Gate,
which they found blocked with Saracen stone-work,
peeped out through one of the ancient Turkish loop-
holes. Beneath lay the dried-up bed of the Kidron,
the giant tombs of Absalom and Jehoshaphat, and the
grey, sad-looking Mount of OUves with the Bethany
road winding at its foot. For a moment the BibUcal
associations of the famous scene caused them to forget
the business in hand, and they were only brought
back to the present by the whining of an importunate
beggar, who had followed them on to the ramparts,
and was stretching out a filthy, ragged hand for back-
sheesh. Receiving a smaU silver coin from each, he
called down the blessings of Allah upon their heads,
and, squatting down on the bare stones, rocked him-
self to and fro, muttering in Arabic the while.


Returning to his contemplation of the landscape,
the major frowned a little. " I simply cannot under-
stand Jarvice choosing such a spot,” he told the boys.
“ Why on earth should he put himself to the trouble
of walking all the way round the walls of Jerusalem
to the Golden Gate to bury a diamond ring ? He hated
walking too. But he couldn't have got his horse
round here very well.”
" All the same, it was down plain enough on that
scrap of paper,” said Yorke.
” Yes, it said Golden Gate plainly enough,” mur-
mured the major thoughtfully. “ Well, we’ll come
round here and dig directly it’s dark, boys. Mean-
while I think we might stroll down to the Jewish
bazaar and buy some trowels. I don’t suppose Jar-
vice buried his stuff very deep. He certainly wasn’t
the sort to carry a spade such a distance. The prob-
ability is he used his bayonet to scrape a hole, so
trowels will serve our turn very well, and they have
the advantage that they are easily hidden.”
The night was a moonless one, with the stars shining
brilliantly when they set out after dinner. At the
major’s suggestion they had donned soft dark collars
for the expedition. “ The less white we have showing
on a stunt like this the better,” he had said, “ for we
have no official permit to dig in the valley of the
Kidron.”
In a few minutes the great Saracen portal, the
Damascus Gate, flanked with its two old-world towers,
showed in front, rearing up majestically against the
deep blue of the sky; but the three hardly glanced
at it : they were engrossed now with the thrill of the
treasure hunt. Leaving the road at the comer of the
city, they crept along in Indian file beneath the lofty
eastern wall. They seemed now to be in a world of
their own, and realized what it felt like to be without
the city wall at night. Occasionally they heard the


pit-pat of donkeys' hoofs on the Bethany road, and
now and again a jackal would howl dismally among the
tombs in the Jewish cemetery; but from inside the
walls there came no sound. It was like a city of the
dead.
“ Here we are,” whispered the major, coming to a
halt, and looking up at the famous gate, through
which, in the time of the Crusades, the Palm Sunday
processions were in the habit of passing. “ Get out
your trowels.” He stepped out ten yards from the
wall, and began to dig.
The boys joined him with a zest, and in ten minutes
they had turned up a good-sized patch of earth,
every trowelful of which had been felt carefully with
their bare hands. Suppressing the feeling of doubt
which the absence of any tangible result from their
labour had caused to spring into the background of
their minds, they continued the work for another
quarter of an hour, and then Yorke voiced his sus-
picion.
“ Jarvice must have buried his stuff very deep, eh,
major ? ”
Before the Australian could reply, Roy gave an
exclamation. His trowel had struck something small
and hard, which might have been a Turkish watch,
“ What is it ? ” the others asked, and, suspending
their own digging, came close to him to look.
" I don't know yet.” Roy bent down and pulled
something from the hole. The next second there
came the sharp crack of a revolver shot as a thin jet
of flame leapt out from a loophole above. All three
leapt back a pace as a bullet whined its way past their
heads and lost itself in the silence of the Kidron
valley.
“ Get back to the wall, quick,” hissed the major,
and the boys leapt to obey him. Crouching in its
shadow, they saw him drop on one knee, and extend
(3,983) I


his arm towards the loophole. Then there came three
quick flashes from his automatic revolver, followed
by a cry of pain from high above them. The next
moment the major was by their side. ‘‘Along the
wall, quick," he whispered tensely, and they ran like
antelopes, only pausing to regain their breath when
they reached the road skirting the north wall.
“It seems as though we are destined to add our
mite to the long and chequered history of Jerusalem,"
said the major, brushing his garments as well as he was
able, preparatory to walking back to the hotel. “ What
was that you found, Roy ? ”
“ Only a stone. It was just about the size of a
watch, and for a moment I thought I had struck
Jarvice's trove."
ft looks as though some one else was of the same
opinion,” commented Major Todd dryly. “ It's my
belief, boys, we were watched from the moment we
left the hotel to-night. I don't like the look of things,
I must confess. Well, let's get back and have a good
wash. Then we'll have some hot coffee and a good
confab in our room."


CHAPTER V
THE PEEP-HOLE
Sitting on his bed, the major sipped his coffee and
pulled thoughtfully at a long, strong cigar,
“ Our duty, I suppose, as British subjects, is to
report to the authorities that we have been fired on
from a loophole in the east wall," he said slowly,
“ but there are objections to that. We should, for
instance, have to explain what we were doing digging
in the vicinity of the Golden Gate, and that would
lead to a lot of tiresome explanations. So I don’t
think we’ll trouble the police with the affair. But
there are one or two points that are puzzling me, boys.
Assuming that Jacobs and Steele were at the back of
that assault on us to-night, how did they know that
we were going to dig where we did ? I’ll swear that
no one followed us round the wall. It looked as
though the person was expecting us. There was no
one near us on the wall this afternoon when we were
talking about it, was there ? "
“ Only that old beggar," said Yorke.
“Ah yes, I had forgotten him. Now I wonder "
“ You think he might have been a spy ? ” Roy's
eyes opened wide.
“ It’s quite possible, in the light of these after
events. Well, we’ll leave that question for the
moment. Now the next thing. We scoured that


34 THE TREASURE OF THE PASS
patch of ground pretty thoroughly before we were
interrupted. It's quite likely that we could miss a
buried ring, but a bunch of watches is another matter.
Also the probability is that Jarvice used a box or a
wrapping of some sort, which would make the search
easier. But I must confess that all the time I was
digging my astonishment at Jarvice’s choice of such
a spot was growing. I knew the man well, you see,
and I think I could hazard a guess at what he would
do in any given circumstances. Why, then, when so
many more desirable portions of the earth’s surface
were at his disposal, should he choose a spot which any
schoolboy desirous of secreting illicit tobacco would
have passed by without a glance ? ”
The boys shook their heads and gulped coffee in
silence. The question was beyond them.
“ I suppose,” said Yorke presently, " there isn't
another Golden Gate in these parts, is there, major ? ”
“No, not that I know of. That is—ha ! ” The
major swung himself suddenly ofi his bed, almost
upsetting his coffee-cup as he did so. “ Boys,” he
cried, write me down a dunderhead. Yorke, you’ve
hit it. There is another Golden Gate. Or, rather,
it isn't really a gate. It’s a rock, over there in Moab,
across the Jordan, up in the Jisr Ed Damieh track.
Why, it’s as clear as noonday to me now ”
Quick ! ” interrupted Roy suddenly, leaping off
his bed, and making for the door. But even as he
spoke another door banged and footsteps sounded
receding rapidly down the corridor.
Wondering what it was all about, Yorke and the
major rushed after Roy, who was traversing the pas-
sages at a furious pace. The front door closed sharply
as they burst into the lounge.
The reception-clerk, sitting in his little office, raised
his brows and came out to them. “ What is it,
gentlemen ? ” he asked.


Without troubling to reply, Roy leapt to the door,
wrestled with the catch, and flung it open. Then he
dashed into the street, followed by his friends. The
passers-by looked with interest at the three Europeans
as they ran swiftly up the street, peering into all the
shops and side-turnings. But whoever it was that
Roy was chasing had evidently eluded him, and at
last he gave it up in disgust.
“ Let’s come back,” he growled, “ and punch that
reception-clerk's head off his body.”
“ Before we do that, Roy, perhaps you would
enlighten us a little as to the reason,suggested the
major. “It would, I know, be a comparatively easy
task for you and Yorke to endow the hotel with a head-
less clerk, but I should like to be quite sure that he has
deserved his fate before seeing the sentence executed.”
" I’ll give him a chance,” Roy promised. “ But
come back, and I'll show you something.”
In the lounge the Syrian met them with concern.
Roy cut through his babbled inquiries with a curt:
“ Who was that who went out just now ? ”
“ A Syrian gentleman stopping in the hotel.”
" Oh, a Syrian gentleman, was he ? He was in a
great hurry.” Roy looked searchingly at the clerk.
" He said something about posting a letter.”
“He was in a hurry to catch the post, eh ? I see.
That would account for him leaping a whole flight of
stairs. When did he come here ? ”
“ Yesterday. I trust, gentlemen, there has not been
a theft ? ”
“ No, not exactly.” Roy looked at the man sternly.
“ But the fellow was a distinct undesirable. My
friends and I wish to see his room. Take us there.
It was the one next to ours.”
The clerk shrugged his shoulders, but accompanied
them upstairs. All seemed in order in the small,
barely-furnished apartment into which he ushered


them. “He had no luggage, but left a deposit instead.
What is it you wish to see, gentlemen ? "
“ This.” Roy crossed to the right-hand wall, and
lifted a square piece of wallpaper, disclosing a cavity
of some three inches.
The clerk’s amazement and consternation was
genuine. He wrung his hands and looked supplicat-
jngly at the three. ” Never has such a thing occurred
in this hotel before, I assure you, gentlemen. I will
see the police. I will inform the proprietor. This
man shall be tracked down. I will ” He con-
tinued to babble his indignation.
“ Now, major,” said Roy, “ I’m through. I’m
inclined to believe this guy didn’t know about the
peep-hole, and I’ll leave his head on his shoulders.
But you can handle the affair better than I can now.
I reckon.”
Thank you, Roy. Just as you like.” The major
lit a fresh cigar, the previous one having disappeared
in the excitement of the chase. Then he turned to
the clerk. ” I think that a visit to the police would
not be exactly a good advertisement for your hotel ? ”
It is that which I wish to avoid. The proprietor,
you know ” The clerk’s face was expressive.
‘ Exactly. You would wish, then, to prove to us
how deeply you resent being the dupe of an eaves-
dropping guest ? You would like to do some little
thing for us which would have the effect of our recom-
mending this hotel to our tourist friends instead of
curling our lips at the mention of it, eh ? ”
“ Please tell me what I can do.”
“ Well, we find that we have to leave Jerusalem
to-morrow morning immediately after breakfast. We
want three good horses for an indefinite period, and
also we wish to purchase a couple of revolvers—large
bore, if possible. Can you arrange that for us ? ”
The clerk thought deeply for a moment, then his


face set in determination. "It shall be done, gentle-
men,” he cried. “It will mean pulling people from
their beds. But it shall be managed. You would be
willing to pay current rates for the hire of the horses ? ”
“ Yes, and a trifle extra in view of the fact that
some people may lose a little sleep over the deal.”
" Then excuse me, gentlemen. I will see to the
matter at once.” The clerk bowed and hurried out.
“ And now, Roy,” said the major, when they were
back in their own room, ” perhaps you’ll tell us how
you spotted that peep-hole ? I must say I’m curious.”
“ Oh, it was quite simple. I happened to be looking
in that direction when you were speaking, and I saw
the paper move ever so slightly. I suppose the
eavesdropper saw my face change, for I heard a noise
immediately after. I guessed at once what it was,
for I’d seen much the same sort of thing on a film in
Winnipeg once.” Roy examined the wall-paper closely.
“Yes, here’s the pinhole, you see. He was a wily
gentleman.”
“ We didn’t mind him seeing us,” said the major.
“ It's what he heard that may cause us trouble later
on. That eavesdropper knows that there is another
Golden Gate in the Jisr Ed Damieh pass in Moab.”
“ He’ll have to get a move on if he's going to get
there before us,” said Yorke. “ I suppose that’s where
we're setting off to to-morrow ? ”
“ Yes, that’s where we are going, Yorke.” The
major pondered for a few moments. “ Even if they
got there before us, I doubt whether they would find
that rock,” he added presently. “It was Jarvice
who pointed out the resemblance to me while we were
halted for a short spell on our way up the pass. I
had to look at it from a particular angle to see the
likeness. It’s curious that a chance remark of his
should have stuck in my memory, but I've little doubt
that my surmise is correct, and that the ring and the


watches lie buried in the Jisr Ed Damieh. We were
fighting in the neighbourhood of that rock throughout
the whole of one night, and at one period it looked as
if our troop was in danger of being cut ofi and captured.
Jarvice was well aware of the danger, and naturally
he would not wish to have anything of value on him
if he fell into Turkish hands. No, the thing is as clear
as noonday now to me ; he buried the ring and the
watches, meaning to go back at the first opportunity
to retrieve them. . . . But look here, boys, I’ve
ordered horses and revolvers the first thing to-morrow
morning. Perhaps I was a bit hasty. I think I was.
We were fired on to-night in the Kidron valley, and I
think it extremely likely that we shall get fired on
again in the mountains of Moab. I don’t know that
I’ve any right to drag you any further into the affair.
I think perhaps it would be better if I went alone.”
The boys laughed derisively.
Why, the show is just getting interesting, major,”
Yorke said lightly.
" The joke has just begun,” Roy added.
" All the same ” the major began seriously.
“ Speaking for myself,” interrupted Yorke, in the
lazy drawl which it pleased him to assume at times
when he had made up his mind to do something in
spite of all opposition, ” I’m going to ride Moab way
to-morrow, and I expect sooner or later I shall turn
up in the Jisr Ed Damieh pass.” He smiled charm-
ingly. “ Shall we travel together, major, or would
you rather ride a mile or so ahead or behind ? ”
“ Very pleased if you'd come with us, major,” Roy
grinned.
The major gave in. “ I see it’s no good,” he said,
shaking his head. ” I hardly dared hope it would
be. . . . Come in,” he called, as a knock sounded at
the door.
The Syrian clerk entered, busy and smiling.


“ The horses will be here at eight o’clock, gentlemen.
I have arranged that little matter on the telephone.
The revolvers are more uncertain, but I think that
also can be managed."
“ We shall also want a couple of dark blankets for
each saddle," said the major.
“ That will be quite easy."
" Good. Thank you. We will now go to sleep in
your excellent hotel. It may interest you to know
that we find the beds comfortable and the appoint-
ments everything that can be desired."
The clerk smiled intelligently, bowed, and retired.
" I thought we'd better have blankets,” said the
major. “ It's quite likely we may have to spend a
night or two in the open, and though the Jordan
valley is one of the hottest places on the face of the
earth, yet the mountains on either side can be quite
chilly on winter evenings. One of the coldest nights
I ever spent was three thousand feet up on Moab.
I’ll get our friend the clerk to fill a nosebag with
tinned provisions in the morning, and I daresay he'll
be able to raise us a billy." And he lit another of his
strong black cigars, and puffed thoughtfully as he
undressed and got into bed.


CHAPTER VI
RIDERS IN THE VALLEY
Punctually at eight o'clock the next morning the
horses, in charge of a shabby Armenian, were brought
round to the hotel.
“ They'll do,” said the major, running his eye over
them. “ Wiry-looking beggars. Shouldn’t be sur-
prised if they belonged to the Turkish cavalry at one
time. We captured hundreds of them, and I believe
they were sold in Jerusalem.” He began to strap the
blankets, which he had folded in military fashion, to
the saddles. This done, he hung a well-filled nosebag
of provisions from his own cantle, and fixed a billy-
can to one of the others. Then he drew the boys into
a dark comer of the lounge and handed them each
a serviceable-looking Colt. “ Stow these away in a
pocket where you can get at them quickly, boys.
They're both fully loaded, and here's a box of spare
ammunition. The clerk has come up to scratch all
right, but he doesn’t want the fact advertised. Looks
bad, flashing revolvers in a respectable hotel. That's
right. One other thing: I've left thirty pounds
deposit here for the horses. So if they get me down
yonder and you come through, you can collect it and
do what you like with the money.”
“ I expect we shall all come back together, or else
all stay down there together,” said Yorke, thrusting
his revolver into his hip-pocket.


“ I’d bet on that,” said Roy. He broke open the
box of ammunition, and poured a few cartridges into
the palm of his hand. “ Catch hold of these, Yorke.”
The major shrugged his shoulders, but he looked
pleased.
They set out along the road skirting the north wall
of the ancient city, and turned to the right at the
Burj Laklak, or Stork's Tower, to get on to the Jericho
road. The gilded domes of the Russian convent above
Gethsemane glittered in the sunlight as they rounded
the corner, and as they passed the world-famous
garden with its gnarled old olives and picturesque
cypresses showing above its stucco-covered walls, all
three instinctively removed their hats.
44 In this land, more than in any other, a man wants
to be quite sure that his errand is a good one,” said the
major, when they had cleared Olivet, and were plodding
along the road to Bethany. “ Ours is all right, I should
imagine, for it is to help a lady in distress. Otherwise,
boys, I freely confess, I should be much more uneasy
in mind.”
The boys nodded understandingly, and Yorke said
seriously : “ You’ve spoken exactly what was in my
mind, major. If it was for my own gain that I was
coming down here, I should feel tempted to chuck
my revolver away and take my chance. As it is, I
feel more like one of the old Hospitallers or Templars
who used to range these parts. If the infidel comes to
interfere with the work of the Lord, I shall do my
best to smite him.”
Three hours' riding down the long series of zigzags
leading into the wilderness of Judea brought them to
the inn of the Good Samaritan, and there they stopped
for a couple of hours.
“ It’s getting pretty hot,” Roy remarked as they
remounted.
The major smiled. " You should have come here


in the middle of summer, Roy, when it was a hundred
and twenty-two in the shade. You would have had
reason to complain of the heat then. For sheer
physical discomfort the Jordan valley in the summer
time is hard to beat. There are snakes, there are
scorpions, there are malaria mosquitoes, and goodness
knows how many other varieties of insect torturers.
Lying twelve hundred feet below sea level and shut in
by two ranges of mountains, the place is the nearest
approach to an oven that I've ever been in."
The road, the scene of the parable of the Good
Samaritan, which had been sad and forbidding-looking
all the morning, now grew even more desolate and
gloomy, and despite themselves a certain depression
fell on the travellers which they had some ado to
shake off. In the late afternoon they came to the top
of a great gorge, and, by common consent, drew rein,
gazing at the landscape ahead.
"It is like a picture by Gustave Dor 6," Yorke
murmured.
At their feet lay the green plain of Jericho, with
the thin line of river jungle marking the wilderness
beyond like a green ribbon. The little town itself
glowed like a spot of silver in the burning sunlight.
Far away to the right the northern end of the Dead
Sea showed blue and motionless through its pall of
mist, and immediately to the front the mountain
range of Moab rose like an immense wall bounding
the confines of the earth.
The major kicked his feet free of the stirrups, and,
his elbow resting on the roll of blankets, leant his chin
in his hand, the while his keen eyes roamed the familiar
scene.
" It hasn't altered at all," he said presently, “ except
for one thing."
" What’s that, major ? " Roy asked.
" Dust. When I was here last there was dust rising


everywhere. The horses churned it up, and the troops
and the lorries. You couldn’t see the sky for it at
times. Well, boys, I don’t think we shall be able to
cross the Jordan to-night. This continual slipping
and sliding down hill takes it out of the horses badly,
and we want them to be fresh for to-morrow. Now
I have a suggestion to make. Jericho in olden days
was a large and important town, but to-day it has
sunk to the state of being rather an undesirable little
village composed chiefly of mud huts, and rather than
sleep in one of its tourist houses, I should prefer to
inflict my presence on the monks in the monastery
round the comer. What do you say ? ”
The boys agreed at once, and riding down into the
valley, they turned their horses' heads to the north,
and descried their objective perched on a ledge of the
Judean range—a long, white building surmounted by
a big blue belfry, which afforded a pleasing note of
colour in the prevailing desolate grey of the land-
scape.
“ You're right about the dust, major,” coughed Roy,
as thick clouds, kicked up by their horses’ hoofs, began
to envelop them.
“ Filthy stuff, too,” Yorke added, between set lips.
“ Not like ordinary dust. Whew 1 ”
“ You can imagine now what it was like to be riding
at the tail end of a mounted brigade. I've ridden for
hours sometimes without being able to see my horse's
head.”
They rode for half an hour along the foot of the
range and then turned off op a goat track, which they
followed for several hundred feet; then, the path
becoming too rocky and precipitous for safety, they
dismounted and led the horses up to a shed built on a
broad shelf of rock.
“We’ll leave them here,” said the major. “We
can’t take them any higher on ground like this; and


even if we could, I doubt whether there’s any stabling
for them up at the monastery. It's a Greek establish-
ment, and the ass is their favoured mode of con-
veyance.”
The door of the shed was open, and entering they
unsaddled the horses and tied them to rings in the
wall. Then the major filled the bins from sacks of
chaff and grain which he discovered in another
compartment. “We can pay for all this when we
leave by dropping something in their alms-box,” he
said.
Taking a few necessaries with them, they continued
the ascent, and another ten minutes’ climbing brought
them to the monastery. In the little courtyard they
were met by a monk, who smiled amiably and signed
to them to follow him. In his charge they passed
through a narrow passage into the main building, tra-
versed a corridor lined with cells, hurried through a pic-
turesque little chapel, which seemed half-hewn out of
the living rock, its walls adorned with numerous icons
and rather gaudy Biblical scenes, and into a room
abutting on to the great blue belfry. There their
guide motioned them to be seated, and left them, to
reappear in a few minutes with the prior, a calm-eyed
Greek in black robe and sandals, who extended to
them a dignified welcome in English. Having ascer-
tained their wants, he spoke a few words to the monk,
who took them to the guests’ apartments, and showed
each into a simply furnished room with a little veranda
overhanging the precipice. Hardly had they finished
their toilet before a bell sounded from some remote
part of the monastery, and again the monk appeared
to conduct them to the refectory.
For the brotherhood of the monastery it was the
period of their grand fast, and all of them ate sparingly
at this their second and last meal of the day, but an
abundance of good plain food was set before the visitors,


to which, being hungry after their long ride, they did
full justice.
When they had finished, all three repaired to Yorke's
room, which was slightly larger than the other two,
and the major strolled to the window and looked out.
“ Hallo,” he said suddenly, “ there’s a couple of men
just ridden out of the gorge. Did you bring your
field-glasses up from the shed, Yorke ? You did.
Good. Just lend them to me a minute, will you ?
H’m, what do you make of those fellows ? ” He
handed the glasses back to Yorke.
" Bedouin, I should say, major.” Yorke adjusted
the glasses to get the sharpest vision. ” The light’s
going rather, but I can see their robes distinctly. . . .
Have a look, Roy.”
“ Yes, I can see their robes too,” the young Canadian
agreed.
" Oh, I can see their robes,” said the major, taking
the glasses again. ” But I suppose you could hardly
be expected to notice what I noticed at once, for you
haven't lived years in these parts like I have. . . .
The fact is, boys, those Bedouin are riding like no
Bedouin I have ever seen. One can’t ride at all, and
the other sits his saddle like a cavalryman.”
The boys looked again.
“ I see now,” said Yorke, “ that one is riding rather
like a sack of potatoes. Yes, and the other has quite
a good seat.”
They looked at one another, and Roy voiced their
suspicion. “ Ike and George,” he said. “ Seems as
though we are to have some fun in the valley to-morrow,
major. But why their comic opera clothes ? ”
“ Perhaps they didn't want to draw attention to
themselves in this quarter of the globe. The people
in these parts are mostly Bedouin. Those are their
fires that you can see out there.” The major pointed
to the thin columns of smoke which rose here and there


from the plain. “ A tough crowd most of them."
he added.
While the light lasted, they stood by the window,
watching the two horsemen ride into the mist and
shadows beyond Jericho.


CHAPTER VII
TRAPPED
" Last lap for the treasure/' said the major gaily, as
he flung open the door of the shed the next morning.
They had bidden adieu to their hosts at the monastery,
and had dropped a liberal donation in the alms-box.
All three were feeling exhilarated at the prospect of
being so near the end of their quest, and Yorke broke
into the Eton Boating Song as he led his horse down
the rocky track into the valley.
Mounting as soon as it became practicable, they
struck off across the barren waste in the direction of
the Jordan, and two hours’ riding brought them to the
sunken channel of Kor, where a dense undergrowth
of cane, willows, and tamarisks marked the presence
of the river. Dismounting, they led the horses down
the steep banks of white marl, and crossed the yellow
swirling water by a narrow bridge. Clambering up
the opposite bank, they mounted again and set then-
faces once more towards Moab.
Except for occasional wisps of smoke curling up
from distant Bedouin encampments, the scene was
one of unbroken solitude. The dark wall of Moab
rose up in front, mysterious and forbidding, the scene
of innumerable ancient conflicts, with the peaks of
Pisgah and Nebo dominating all, remote, aloof, as
though guarding the secrets of the ages.
(2,983) 47 4


“ Very glad am I that our errand is a good one,”
said the major, glancing up at the barren heights,
“for I have a very strong feeling that our friends
Jacobs and Steele are already ensconced up there, and
are awaiting our approach with impatience, and I
shall be much surprised if we come out of it without
a fight.”
“ There's not much doubt about their seeing us,”
Yorke said, with a slight disgust. " They could pick
up this dust we’re making fifty miles away. I shall
be glad when we get into the hills. Anything is better
than this filthy stuff.” And he sneezed violently.
It was a good three hours' ride from the river to
the foot of the great white irregular cleft which the
major pointed out to them as the Jisr Ed Damieh pass,
and, arrived there, they halted at the foot for a quick
lunch, boiling the billy with armfuls of the thorny
scrub which grew in profusion around.
“ And you mean to tell me a brigade of horsemen
got up there 1 " said Roy, craning his neck as he stared
up at the craggy heights.
" It was done by the Australian Light Horse during
the late war,” nodded the major. “ The Turks thought
the feat impossible, and that helped us considerably,
for we caught them unawares. But it was a very rough
trip, nevertheless.”
“ So I should imagine,” said the marvelling Roy.
“ Gee, they must have been a tough lot, your Aus-
tralians.”
“ The Turks were certainly impressed by the feat.
We discovered that later from captured correspond-
ence.”
The meal over, they stamped out the remains of the
fire, and began the ascent, the major in the lead,
Roy following, and Yorke bringing up the rear.
“ Keep your guns handy, boys,” the major turned
his head to warn them. ” I don't think we shall have


any trouble until we reach the rock and start digging,
but you never know.”
The boys nodded. Both were acutely conscious
of the atmosphere of hidden danger in that wild and
gloomy spot, and well they knew that the silence might
be punctuated with the sharp crack of rifle or revolver
at any moment. But they had been climbing for a
good half-hour up the narrow, rocky path before
Yorke said in a quiet, conversational voice : “ I’ve
just seen a head about three hundred yards to the
right.”
“ Don't halt or stare, then,” counselled the major,
and he urged his steed over a slippery boulder. “ Only
one, Yorke ? ”
“As far as I could see, major. I just had one
glimpse, and then he dodged down. A Bedouin by
the look of him.”
“ H’m, he may be a Bedouin, and he may not.
Anyway, he’s keeping well away from the track, and
that's some comfort.”
“ You’re going to have that comfort torn away from
you, major,” said Roy. “ I’ve just seen three do the
bob-down away there to the left, and I’ll stake my
best broncho they aren’t more than a hundred yards
away.”
“ Whew 1 and I’ve just spotted two more away up
on the right. They evidently are Bedouin, and they’re
lining the track. Boys, it looks to me as if we’ve
walked into a trap. I should have thought of this.
Unless I’m very much mistaken, Jacobs and Steele
have been enlisting help from the Bedouin. No, I
hadn't reckoned on that move. Fighting Jacobs and
Steele is one thing, but fighting Jacobs and Steele at
the head of a little army of these Bedouin is another.
The whole lot will be armed with rifles, of course, and
all they’ve got to do is to lie behind rocks and pick us
off at their leisure.” P


“ Looks rather a tight hole, major," said Yorke,
and began to hum the Boating Song.
" Tight is the word," assented the Australian. u lf
they start shooting, we'd better let the horses go, and
take cover. Tell me if you see any more. We've
spotted six so far."
They plodded on in silence, leading and urging their
horses up the almost impossible track. " And two
makes eight," said Yorke, when five minutes had passed.
“ Nine," Roy grunted. “ There’s a face over there
that hasn’t had a wash for a year by the look of it. . . .
If I only had my Winchester," he added, with some-
thing like a sigh.
“ And two makes eleven," said the major presently.
“ I don’t think we need trouble to count any more.
There’s enough of them here to eat us. But we hold
one trump card, boys. If they plug at us now, they
stand a good chance of killing the goose which is going
to show them the position of the golden eggs. And
the fact that they've held off so long convinces me that
they are waiting for us to locate the place for them.
So we won’t hurry to do that. We're very close to
the Golden Gate rock now. It's on a line with those
sangars up there on the left, if I’m not very much
mistaken. Also, if I remember aright, there's a small
green hollow a little farther up. Now this is what I
Eropose : when we get to the hollow. I'll give a big
op, as if I’d sprained my ankle badly, and you will
gather round and examine it. Then we’ll all do a
bit of play-acting, and convey, if possible, to our
friends out yonder that the sprain is a very bad one
and will necessitate our camping on that spot until
it is better. If the ruse succeeds and the crowd holds
off, we'll stay there till dark, and then get down to the
rock and have ago at finding the ring. We shall stand
a much better chance in the dark if it comes to shooting.
Of course, it’s quite on the cards that they may not


be taken in with our plan, and they may start shooting
at once. But I can think of nothing better. If we
go too far up the pass, they will smell a rat and will
cut us off from escaping through Es Salt. The situa-
tion is fairly desperate, and I can think of nothing
better than trying to bluff them with this stunt of a
sprained ankle. Can you ? "
“ I can think of nothing half so good," said Yorke.
“ Nor I, major. Give your deer's leap whenever
you like. We’ll gather round and massage it for you.”
“We are now passing the Golden Gate rock," said
the major quietly, a few minutes later. “ Have a
casual look at it."
The boys followed on, and passed the rock with a
careless air. There was nothing very remarkable in
its appearance. Geological attrition had fashioned
it to something roughly resembling a crenellated wall
with one outcrop which an imaginative person could
compare with a model of a gateway. Had it not been
for the major's warning, they would have passed it
without a second glance.
“ Not a very arresting resemblance, major," said
Yorke. ,
“ No,” the major agreed. “It is more striking
when seen from farther off. Coming up the track
one misses the general effect of it rather. So much
the better for us. . . . Now, stand by. Here's the
hollow. I’m going to sprain my ankle." He gave
a sharp cry of pain, hopped for a few feet, and then
sat down, nursing his foot.
The boys hurried to him, inquiring in loud, con-
cerned voices what was the matter. The horses,
with their bridles left drooping, stood bunched together,
glad of the respite. The scene presented to an onlooker
was a normal and convincing one.
The major, taking off his boot and sock, submitted
with writhing face to the vigorous massage given him


by the boys, now and then jerking out a sentence in
an undertone on the general situation :
“ I believe we’ve got away with it, boys. . . . We
should have heard from them by now if they thought
we were play-acting. ... Or perhaps it is that
they’re not quite sure, and are just marking time,
awaiting developments. . . . We'll go through with
it, anyway. It’s our only chance. . . . Stand aside a
minute ; I’m going to limp round." And, rising to
his feet, the major essayed one or two painful steps,
and subsided again, shaking his head.
" Major," said Yorke admiringly, " I can’t think
why you put yourself to all this trouble to get a
beggarly ten thousand pounds reward. Why, you are
in the direct line of Garrick and Sir Henry Irving,
and there is a huge fortune awaiting you on the stage."
" The film people would tumble over each other to
sign you on, major," Roy assured him. " Shall we
bandage you up now ? "
"Yes, I think we might get on to that part now.”
The major contrived to twist a smile into an agonized
grimace, and stretched out his leg for the operation.
Five minutes later, his foot blatantly swathed in white
handkerchiefs, he leaned back against a rock and
watched the boys making preparations for a camp.
In reply to a question of Roy's as to the advisability
of removing the saddles from the horses, he nodded
his head.
" We'll have to do it, boys. The impression that
we're aiming to convey is that my foot is badly sprained
and that we’re camping here for the night. Leaving
the saddles on would be as good as a confession that
we're going to make a break away as soon as possible."
So the saddles were taken off, the horses tethered
to convenient rocks and given a feed, and then the
boys made a fire with the dried vegetation they found
around, and put on the billy. During these operations


the major kept a sharp look-out for signs of the
enemy.
“ They're all about us like a lot of ants, boys," he
said presently. " Heads popping up and down all
over the place. But they don't seem to be crawling
in, that's one comfort."
“ Is that a cave I can see over there, just below
that sangar ? " Yorke asked. "It looks as if it might
be one."
The major glanced in the direction designated.
“ Why, yes," he said. " I'd forgotten that cave.
We used it for a machine-gun post throughout the
whole of a very hot day. Those bushes in front
screened the entrance splendidly, and the Turks never
spotted the position. I remember when we left,
which we had to do in a hurry, we buried a lot of gear
in there —bombs, grenades, Mauser rifles, ammunition,
and all the rest of it." The major sat up suddenly
as a thought occurred to him. “ Now I wonder if
that stuff’s still there, boys. By Jove I it might be I
This is a very out-of-the-way spot."
The boys looked eagerly at him. They were putting
a good face on things, but the peril of their situation
could not be ignored, and the prospect of getting
possession of adequate weapons made them tingle
with hope and excitement.
“ Shall I go along and see ? " Yorke asked.
u Not yet, Yorke. If you start pottering about in
the cave, our friends may think that the treasure is
buried there, and perhaps they'd come up to give you a
hand to And it. No, we’ll wait till it’s dark, if they'll
let us, and then we'll explore. If we can get our hands
on a few Mills bombs, some of these ragged people
around us will wish they had stopped in their tents
down on the plain."
" They will that," Roy agreed grimly. He lay
down and looked across the wide valley to where their


hostelry of the night before showed, a tiny white patch,
on the side of the Judean range. " The monks will
be at now in the chapel,” he added. ” Seems
funny, doesn't it ? and us perched up here, surrounded
by all these ragged, cut-throat lads.”
I used to think much the same during the cam-
paign,” said the major. “ There they were, those
monks, pursuing their quiet peaceful occupations in
their nest on the hillside, looking down on the scenes
of war and unrest in this ancient valley, where two
armies were fighting for well over a year. I often
wonder what they thought of it all.”
At intervals during the afternoon the major went
through the performance of essaying to walk, and
between the acts they matured their plans for the
evening. The major had explained to the boys the
probable position of Jarvice’s cache, and it was arranged
that they should move down to the spot as soon as it
was dark, dig for the ring, and then explore the cave
for the hidden arms. After which, if all went well,
they would continue the ascent of the pass, ride across
the level country at the summit, and come down the
next cleft into the valley.
” That’s our plan, and it doesn’t sound too bad,”
the major summed up. “ But we must remember
that Jacobs and Steele have also been making their
arrangements. How far their plans fit in with ours
remains to be seen. Personally, I shall be very sur-
prised if we get out of it without some fireworks.”


CHAPTER VIII
THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE
The boys sighed with relief as the short twilight of
the East faded into dusk, for the long period of inaction
was telling a little on their nerves. As soon as there
was no possibility of their movements being observed,
the major cast off his mock bandages and put on his
boot. “ Now for it, boys,” he whispered.
As noiselessly as possible they set about putting
their plans into execution. The horses were saddled
and the fire doused to the merest glim. Then, on
tiptoe they crept down the track, and reaching the
rock, stepped out ten cautious paces to the east, and
began to dig.
Scarcely three minutes had passed when Roy held
up a warning hand for his companions to cease plying
their trowels. “ I've got something,” he whispered,
and pulled an earthy little bag from the shallow hole
he had dug. Laying down his trowel, he shook
off the dirt and felt the contents with his fingers.
“ The watches are here, and yes, the ring. I can
feel it,”
” Shove them in your pocket.” The major drew
both boys close to him, and whispered the words in
their ears. “ I heard a rock go over there to the left,
and there's another. Listen 1 I believe they’ve smelt
a rat and are closing in on us. This way.” Clutching


their revolvers they moved off stealthily in the direc-
tion of the cave.
The darkness around now began to fill with sounds.
Dislodged pebbles rolled down rocky slopes, a rifle
clicked metallically against a stone, and from not
more than twenty yards above their path there came
the noise of a stumble and a half-stifled exclamation
in Arabic.
Without a pause the major led the way along the
rocky ledge, climbed over the old sangar, that relic
of a stalwart defence during the Great War, and
insinuated himself through the bushes fringing the
mouth of the cave.
“ Just in time,” he said, as a yell came from the
direction of the pass. " They’ve found out that we’ve
been digging. Now you two lie down here at the
entrance and hold them with your revolvers while I
see what's at the back.”
Without a word, the boys flung themselves down,
and began to make a low barricade from the loose
rocks lying around. They were interrupted in this
work by a low cry of satisfaction from the major.
“ They’re all here, boys.” He came back to them,
and laid a handful of Mills bombs by the side of each.
"You know how these things work ? Just pull out
the pin, and then throw it. But be careful not to
hold it for more than three seconds once the pin is out.
Now I'll get back and put some of these rifles into
working order. I've found a full oil-bottle, and that
was a stroke of real luck.” He groped his way back,
and presently they heard him cautiously working the
bolts of the rifles. From outside came other sounds—
the scraping of feet on rocks, muffled calls in Arabic,
and at last a rifle-shot, which echoed and re-echoed
among the hills around. The shot brought the major
quickly to the boys' side. He came loaded with three
Mausers, and a little pile of ammunition.


" Which way did that bullet go ? ” he asked.
“ Went singing away to the left,” Yorke replied.
“ I think it must have been an accident.”
“ Quite likely. Catch hold of this rifle, Yorke.
And here's one for you, Roy. I'll dump the ammuni-
tion between you. Most of it could do with a bit of
cleaning. I've loaded the rifles. Here's a bit of oily
rag. I’m off back to get some more bombs.”
Yorke tore the rag in half, and passed a piece to
Roy. Lying prone behind their low sangar, they set
to work cleaning the clips and ammunition, an occupa-
tion in which they were interrupted by a hail from the
Todd ! Hi, Major Todd ! ”
The boys lifted their rifle-butts and snuggled
into firing position. The major came swiftly to
them. “ There's a spare rifle lying behind each of
you,” he whispered. “ Don’t fire until I give the
word.”
“ Major Todd 1 ” came the hail again. “ It’s all
right. We know you’re in that cave. Now I want to
talk. We’ve got you three properly set. You may
have a couple of revolvers between you ; you may
have three ; but they’re not going to count much
in what's coming to you if you don't listen to reason.
You're there, and you can’t get out. You haven't
too much ammunition, you’re short of grub and water,
and you’re in a very bad way. Now I've got two
dozen well-paid toughs planted out here, all dead
anxious to have a bang at you, and every man Jack
of 'em's got the latest thing in Service rifles. I don’t
say you're not a bit of a tough yourself, major, but
you and your two husky young friends haven't got
an earthly chance of getting away. Now I've got a
proposition. Come out here and hand over that ring,
and promise to keep your mouth shut till we get the
reward, and we'll let you get away. Or, if you don’t


fancy risking that, I'll come up alone to the cave if
you’ll give me your word you won't shoot.
“ You're lying doggo, eh ? " the voice went on, as
the major made no reply. “ Oh, I know you're there.
You reckon I'm bluffing. I'll show you I'm not."
There came a shrill whistle, and the next moment
there came a ragged volley, and a shower of bullets
struck the sides and roof of the cave, filling the air
with white dust. But none of the defenders received
a hurt. The floor of the cave was slightly submerged,
and this and the sangar had saved them.
“ Hang on," the major whispered grimly. “ Don't
fire yet. We can stand a lot of that sort of thing,
and I want them to come within bombing distance,
so that we can make a breakaway before they recover."
The echoes died away, and then the voice hailed
again from the darkness :
I wasn’t bluffing, you see. Now are you going to
hand over that ring, or shall we creep up and riddle
you ? "
" Get ready," the Major warned the boys. ** I’m
going to speak to this crew now, and the odds are they’ll
charge us at once. . . . Bombs first, mind, and then
rattle at them with the Mausers." And raising his
head a little above the level of the sangar, the major
addressed his unseen adversaries. His discourse was
in Arabic, and throughout it was cool, studied insult.
He expressed his surprise at finding the lowest class
of Arab in possession of firearms, the same class which
Colonel Lawrence had passed by when looking for
warriors in Irans-Jordania, as he had no use for men
who sheltered behind their womenfolk in time of war ;
but he confessed to his amazement at the depth of
their degradation in voluntarily linking themselves
with two outcast white men, who only owed their
liberty to the lax system of prison surveillance existing
in their own country. His speech was cut short at


this point by a crackling volley, which brought down
pieces of the roof. In two seconds there came another,
and then a third, this last from appreciatively closer
range.
“ That's done it,” said the major, wiping the dust
from his face with a quick movement. “ They're
coming ! Got your bombs ready ? Good. Sling hard
and fast when I give the word. Phew! they’re
knocking the old place about, aren’t they ? ”
The fusillade was now almost continuous, the
flashes describing a rough semicircle round the front
of the cave, and at every few seconds the radius nar-
rowed. The attackers were evidently in earnest.
“ They mean it this time,” the major whispered.
A graduate in the school of war, he could tell the real
from the mock attack. “ They’re getting confident
too. They think they’ve got us rattled. Steady
now. . . . Get ready. . . . Right, let them have it! ”
The last sentence he shouted during a cessation in
the firing. He had sensed the psychological moment,
and as he yelled the order, a line of wild-looking figures
rose up fifteen yards from the entrance and rushed
forward with fearsome yells. Then above their heads
the darkness split into sudden brilliant light as three
Mills bombs burst with ear-splitting detonations, and
the line wavered and crumpled, while shrieks and groans
testified to the complete success of the surprise.
“ Quick as you like 1 ” cried the major, leaping to
his feet and hurling bomb after bomb. “ That’ll do.
They're running now, what’s left of them. Get the
Mausers on to them now.” They flung themselves
down and sent a hail of bullets after the fleeing tribes-
men.
“ That’ll do, boys. Sling your rifles, and put a bomb
in each pocket. We'll clear while the going’s good.”
Unmolested, they hurried across to the spot where
they had left the horses, and an exclamation of relief


broke from the major as the outlines of the animals
showed up ahead. “ I thought our ragged friends
might have removed them," he confessed, “ and I
must say I don’t fancy a tramp through to Jericho.
Well, we're all right now.”
“ Not quite," said Yorke, with a laugh, as a rifle
cracked from somewhere down the slope and a bullet
whined above their heads. “ One of them isn’t dead
yet, that's very evident."
“ He must be going entirely by sound," said the
major, untying the neck-rope of his horse, and knot-
ting it round the animal’s neck. " Woa, there I " as
another bullet sang close to them, causing his mount
to rear and snort.
They hurried up the track, stumbling badly in the
darkness, the bullets of their invisible enemy following
them at quick intervals, knocking chips off the boulders
around, and causing intense uneasiness among the
horses.
“ Here, this won't do," the major said, as a bullet,
missing his head by an inch, flattened itself against
a rock, and sprayed him with hot lead. “ We're mak-
ing too much noise, and that beggar evidently knows
the he of the pass. All he’s got to do is to fire up it,
and sooner or later he'll get one of us. Yorke, just
run out from the track a bit, and see if you can locate
him. I’ll hold your horse.”
Yorke obeyed with alacrity. Unslinging his rifle,
he ran out along a ledge some fifteen yards from the
track, lay down, rested the barrel of his Mauser on a
convenient stone, and waited. Out of the darkness
below spouted a jet of flame, and another bullet whined
up the pass Yorke pointed his rifle as near as he
could in the direction from which the shot had come,
and waited for the next. It came in a few seconds,
and, altering his sighting a little, Yorke fired " ten
rounds rapid." Then he waited. He waited a full


three minutes, but no more shots came from below,
and, reslinging his rifle, he hurried back to his friends.
“ Good boy," said the major approvingly. “ You
must have got very near to him, for he shut up like a
book. Don’t suppose you hit him, but that doesn’t
matter. All we wanted was to stop him making a
nuisance of himself.”
Without sufiering any further inconvenience from
their late enemies, they climbed steadily for another
hour, and then, the ground permitting riding, they
mounted and cantered across a stretch of level country
to the top of the next defile.
“ Are we going to walk down ? " Roy asked, as the
major dismounted.
“ It’s a case of needs must, Roy. If we try riding
we shall certainly break our own necks and the horses'
too. We'll go as quickly as we can in case some of
our ragged friends have recovered sufficiently to
trouble us again. They could make themselves de-
cidedly unpleasant if they thought of lining this
pass."
The journey down was an incredibly rough one,
and, in spite of their efforts to attain speed, it was a
good three hours before they emerged into the valley.
Tired and bruised as they were, all three would have
liked to camp at the foot of the pass, but they were
not yet out of the danger zone, and the major sug-
gested riding to the river at once. "We shall be
pretty safe, once we get there," he told the boys,
“ and we can pitch camp and get a few hours’ sleep."
He swung himself into the saddle and picked up his
bearings. "If we make to the right of that big star,"
he said, pointing to the south-west, " we shall come out
somewhere near the bridge. We’ll go in Indian file,
as I know the country, and then we can canter."
Two hours later the party arrived on the banks of
the Kor immediately above the bridge. Crossing the


river, they selected a spot in the jungle of willows and
tamarisks, and while Yorke and the major tethered
and fed the horses, Roy lit a fire and made tea with
water which he carried up from the Jordan in a canvas
bucket.
“ This is a very good place for a camp," observed
the major, as they sat down to a light meal. “ The
fire can't be seen at all from the plain, and a man would
have to be pretty close to us in this sunken channel
before he spotted it. These trees and undergrowth
make an excellent screen."
When they had finished eating, the major produced
one of his long black cigars, and lit it with a glowing
twig from the fire.
“ Let’s have a look at that ring now, Roy," he
said. " Throw a few more sticks on, Yorke."
Yorke kindled the fire to a small blaze, and Roy,
spreading out a blanket, emptied the contents of the
small bag on to it —five tarnished watches and a
diamond ring. The latter was a heavy gold one, of
old-fashioned workmanship, its claw-like setting hold-
ing a stone of good size and unimpaired brilliancy.
The major picked it up and flashed its facets in the
firelight. “ I sometimes think it would have been
better for the world if there were no gems in it,” he
said musingly. " This is by no means a large diamond,
as diamonds go, but yet it has been the cause of
several men’s death this night. Sooner or later, every
large or historic stone seems destined to trail in its
wake a record of tragedy. Well, let us hope the
career of this one will be marked by no more blood-
stained episodes." And, wrapping up the ring in a
small wash-leather bag, the major stowed it carefully
in an inner pocket, and glanced carelessly at the
watches. “ Anything good there, boys ? "
“ A couple of gold ones, which would be all right
if they had a clean up," Roy replied. “ These others


aren't much, I fancy. Silver, and a bit battered. What
shall we do with them ? "
“I'm going to take the best of the silver ones as a
memento of an expedition undertaken in very con-
genial and gallant company/’ announced the major.
“ You can please yourselves what you do with the
others.”
The boys flushed with pleasure. A compliment
from such a man as the major meant much.
“ Take your pick, then, Yorke,” invited Roy.
“ You’d like a memento too, I’ll bet.”
“ I should, very much.” And Yorke took one of
the battered silver watches, and hooked it on to his
chain.
“ But,” said the major, as Roy took the other
silver one, “ I meant you boys to have the gold ones.”
“We know that, major,” said Yorke. “ But Roy
feels exactly as I do, I can see that. You've got a
silver one, so we’d like silver ones. Also, I hardly
know how to explain what I mean, but here we are,
camped on the banks of the Jordan, and the Jordan
isn’t an ordinary river. I, for one, don't want to ride
away from a spot like this with anything gold in the
way of spoils.”
“ Nor I,” Roy agreed.
“ I quite see,” said the major. “ We’ll leave them
here, then.”
“ In the river,” said Yorke, and taking up the two
watches, he walked down to the bridge, and dropped
them into the middle of the stream.
“ We have been tossing as to who shall keep first
watch,” said the major, when he returned, “ and the
first spell fell to Roy. We are going to do two hours
each till daylight. You are second shift, Yorke, so
you will wake me. You may hear some wild pigs
rooting about. There used to be quite a lot of them
here in the old days, so don't fire at the first sound. . . .
(3,983) 6


64 THE TREASURE OF THE PASS
Take the nosebags off, Roy, when the horses have
finished eating. . . . Good-night." And wrapping
himself in his blankets, the major lay down, and was
soon fast asleep. Yorke was not long in following his
example, and Roy, sitting on an upturned saddle, his
rifle loaded and ready to hand, kept watch in the sunken
channel of Kor.


CHAPTER IX
A NOCTURNAL VISITOR
“ Anything doing, Roy ? ” A touch on the arm had
wakened Yorke, and, throwing aside his blanket, he
sat up and looked inquiringly at his friend.
“Not a thing,” Roy replied. “ But my two hours
are up, and I know what a stickler you are for doing
your cut, otherwise I wouldn't have disturbed you.”
“ Quite right, Roy. Your turn for forty winks.”
Yorke took up his rifle and strolled across to the
vacated saddle. An hour passed, during which he
heard nothing more exciting than a couple of wild
pigs grunting and crashing through the undergrowth,
the mournful howl of a distant hyena, and the trilling
of a bird, which sounded remarkably like a nightingale,
from one of the trees by the river. And then came
another sound, a sound which caused Yorke to sit
bolt upright and grip his rifle. Clump, clump, clump,
clump, came from the direction of the bridge. A horse’s
hoofs without a doubt.
Yorke took two great bounds to his sleeping com-
rades, shook them roughly, and then crept swiftly
and silently through the willows, dropping on his knee
and levelling his nfle as a horseman in Bedouin robes
left the bridge and urged his horse towards the path
up the steep bank.
“ Halt 1 ”


The stranger obeyed at once. “ Friend 1 ” he
called out.
“ What sort of friend ? " Yorke demanded. “ Don’t
move. I’ve got you covered.”
Roy and the major now came running up.
“ You needn’t worry,” said the horseman. “ I'm
Steele, and I’ve had one of your bullets through my
arm. I’m not fighting any more to-night, thank you.”
” Is he alone ? ” the major asked Yorke.
” I think so.”
“ Good. Keep him covered.” The major walked
towards their visitor.
“ You say you’ve had a bullet through your arm,
Steele. Very well, let me see it.”
Steele displayed the injured limb. A bullet had
ploughed through the upper muscle, and the wound
had been very inadequately bandaged. The major
nodded as he examined it. “You must be feeling
pretty sick with a smack like that,” he remarked.
“ Where are you making for ? ”
“ I was trying to get to Jericho, but ” The sen-
tence trailed, and Steele swayed a little in his saddle.
The major supported him. “ Give me a hand with
him, lads,” he said. “ He's feeling very faint, and
I don’t think he’ll give us any more serious trouble.”
Between them they assisted the wounded man to
dismount, and half carried him to the camp. There
the major gave him a strong nip of brandy from his
flask, while the boys hurriedly set about kindling the
fire and boiling the water. Half an hour later, his
wound bathed, anointed with iodine, and bandaged
with clean handkerchiefs, Steele lay propped against
one of the saddles, feeling considerably better.
“ If you’d got that smack during the war, you’d
be having a ride in an ambulance wagon,” the major
told him. “ But in these private little wars there are
none of those conveniences.”


Steele smiled. He was by no means a bad-looking
man. There was indeed a hint of something predatory
in his keen black eyes, and his thin, lined face showed
traces of a rough and lawless life ; but his features,
seen by the light of the leaping flames of the camp-
fire, were good and even arresting. Had a kindlier
fate placed his energy and individuality on the side
of the law instead of against it, he would undoubtedly
have risen to distinction in his chosen calling.
“ Yes," he said, “ as you say, Major Todd, the little
wars are always the roughest. By the way, what are
you going to do with me ? Hand me over to the police
in Jerusalem ? "
The major pulled his cigar-case from his pocket,
and lit a weed. “ I won’t offer you one of these,
Steele. They’re much too strong for you in your
present condition. But I’ve a cigarette somewhere.
Yes, here they are. Try one of those. . . . What am
I going to do with you, you say ? Why, nothing.
You interfered with us, and you got a crack in the
arm for your pains. You’re free to go where you like
and do what you like. If you meddle with us again,
we shall do our best to give you another smack,
that’s all."
“ I’m not likely to try it, major. I give up. You’ve
beaten me, and you're three good sports. I'll get this
flipper of mine well, and then I’ll streak out for America.
I've always had a fancy to try my luck out there.
I've more than a few quid in the bank, and I reckon
I'll take up land, and turn honest. Looks as though
it pays in the long run."
“ There’s not the slightest doubt about that, Steele.
. . . And what about your friend Ike ? "
“ Ike, I reckon, is lying out there.” Steele nodded
in the direction of the hills. “ I searched a bit before
I came away, and I yelled for him, but not a sign could
I see. Either he got blown to bits by one of your


bombs, or else he got a horse and lit out on his own
somewhere.” He smiled grimly. " You certainly had
it all ready for us up there. We reckoned we had you
boxed up, and then you kicked at us suddenly like a
regiment of fresh infantry—bombs, rifles, and whatnots.
If I hadn’t got away when I did, the Bedouin would
have torn me to bits—what was left of them, that is.”
He took a sip from the pannikin of tea which Yorke
handed to him. “ Thanks, that’s fine. . . . Yes, I
reckon Ike and I have parted company for good. If
he’s alive, he won't turn honest, not Ike.”
“ He certainly gave me that impression when you
called upon me in my Sydney hotel. What induced
you two to go ring-hunting ? But perhaps you're not
feeling up to talking much with that damaged arm of
yours ? ”
“ Oh, that’s all right. This tea is putting new life
into me. If the story will interest you, you’re welcome.
So here goes :
“Ike and I were in Sydney when we first saw that
advertisement about the ring, and we didn’t pay any
more attention to it than most other people. Ike
hadn’t been through the war, but I’d seen a good bit
of it with the A.S.C. I came out here in time for the
Jerusalem stunt, and I stuck it right through to the
end after that. So I know this country pretty well.
After the Armistice I went back to Sydney, joined up
with Ike, and among other things we did was to take
a ticket in a big sweepstake—Tattersall's, to be exact
—and we were lucky enough to draw a horse, which
brought us eighteen hundred quid.
“ Well, we’d gone halves in the ticket, so we split
the prize. We had a good time in Sydney for a bit,
and then we put our heads together and reckoned we
wouldn't blow the lot. We went over to Victoria and
began to do the race-meetings. We did pretty well.
Ike was no good on the back of a horse, but when it


came to putting money on them, he was hard to beat.
One day we heard there was to be a meeting at a
place called Lalla, with one or two good horses running.
So we cut off up there, and on the way we stayed a
night in an empty shack near the railway. I was
sitting having breakfast the next morning when Ike
gave a whistle from the yard. He didn’t whistle like
that for nothing, not Ike, so I left my bacon and went
out to see what was doing. He'd been fossicking about
round a rubbish heap, and had fished out one or two
old letters. He handed me one. It was from Jarvice
to his father, telling him about an old-fashioned dia-
mond ring he'd picked up in the Jisr Ed Damieh pass,
and making a reference to you.”
” To me ? ” echoed the major.
“ Yes, to you. He said that you had advised him
not to wear it, so he had put it in a safe place for a
bit. Ike and I looked at each other pretty hard
when we read that letter, for that advertisement
flashed into our minds at once. We made a few
inquiries in the neighbourhood, and discovered that
Jarvice hadn’t come back from the war, and that his
father had died recently. We gave up the races then,
and went down to Melbourne, where we sent a wire
to the solicitors in London, asking if the ring had been
recovered. We got a reply saying No, and there and
then we decided to have a good go at finding it our-
selves. The first thing to do was to have a yarn with
you. You know what happened at that interview.
We twigged at once by your trunks that you were on
the same lay as ourselves, and we thought the best
thing we could do would be to hang close to you, and
let you do the locating.” Steele drained his pannikin,
and held it out to be refilled. “ It’s this knock on the
arm that's making me so thirsty, I expect. Thanks.”
He took a deep draught and continued :
” I'd done a bit of dressing up when I was out in


this country before, and when we found you’d booked
for Tripoli, it was no trouble to me to make natives
of Ike and myself, and we went up steerage on the
same boat with you, and watched you make friends
with Colonel Villers and his boys. We went up into
the hills after you, and I was watching you from my
window in Rasharbi when you were reading that bit
of paper you took out of the pocket-book. We guessed
from your faces it was a good clue you had got hold of,
pid we clung tighter than ever. We saw you safely
into the hotel at Jerusalem, and then I whipped up
one or two toughs I’d known during the war. One
of them we squared to take a room next to yours at
the hotel. Another was the beggar you gave alms
to up on the east wall. From what he told us we
guessed there would be something doing that night
directly it got dark, so Ike and I planted ourselves
on the wall to watch. We had a rope with us, and we
reckoned that if you looked as if you'd found anything,
we’d plunk in a shot to scare you, and then shin down
to gather up the spoils. It wasn’t a bad plan, but it
didn't work very well. Ike fired, sure enough, but
one of you fired back, and Ike got a piece chipped
out of his cheek. To add to it all, we had to run for
our lives to get clear of a mob of natives who came
swarming up to see what the firing was about. We
were both feeling pretty sore when we got back to our
diggings, but we cheered up when our pal from the
hotel came round and made his report. He was
very hot and flushed, that lad, for it seemed you’d
chased him out of the hotel. But we liked what he
told us immensely. If the ring was in the Jisr Ed
Damieh, we'd a very good chance of laying hands on it.
So I went round and hired a couple of gees while Ike
went to a Syrian doctor and paid him double to keep
his mouth shut and patch up his cheek.
“We were up early the next morning, gave you an


hour's start, and then jogged down into the valley.
When you turned to the left at the bottom, I guessed
you'd be making for the monastery. Ike and I pushed
on over the river, and presently we struck what we
wanted—a camp of Bedouin. I’d had some truck
with those gentry during the war, and I knew how
to approach them. We gave them a couple of quid
each, and then turned out our pockets to show them
we hadn’t any more. We didn’t trouble to take ofi
our boots, where we’d each got a wad stowed away.
Then we explained what we wanted, and promised
them another two quid each after the show, if we were
successful. They jumped at it, and made no bones
about lending us a couple of rifles. At daybreak we
were in the pass, and 1 could see that it wasn't much
use looking for Golden Gate rocks on our own, for we
could have spent a week without hitting on the right
one. So we lined the pass, and waited for you. We
spotted you as soon as you crossed the river, and when
you got into the pass we closed round. That sprained
ankle of yours puzzled us a lot, though."
“ I meant it to,” said the major dryly.
"So it was a bluff, eh ? We thought it might be,
but we weren't going to shoot until we knew where
the ring was, for we had a pretty good idea that you’d
all fight to the last kick. So we made a circle round
you, and watched. When dusk came we closed in a
bit more. Then we heard you digging, and we reckoned
we'd got you. You know the rest. Half of our crowd
went down to your first lot of bombs. I was out on
the wing, and that saved me. I dropped behind a
rock and waited. I heard you come out of the cave
and go up the pass, and then, feeling pretty savage
at the turn things had taken, I sent some bullets up
after you. Then some one pitched in a couple of
clips at me, and I stopped tins one in the arm. I’d
had enough then. I managed to crawl round a bit,


looking and shouting for Ike, and then I found my
horse and started for Jericho.”
His story ended, Steele leant back again, and half-
closed his eyes.
“ You’re looking a bit pasty,” said the major.
“ You’d better stretch out for a bit.”
Between them they assisted the wounded man to a
comfortable position by the fire, and then drew apart
for a consultation.
“ He certainly isn't fit to tackle a ride to Jerusalem
yet.” The major looked critically at the prostrate
man. " He's feeling pretty cheap, if I know anything
about wounds. But we can't leave him here. So
what I suggest is, that we take him along to the
monastery, and get the monks to give him a bed for a
few weeks. We needn’t say anything about his past
career. I really believe he means to turn over a new
leaf.”
“ Seems a good idea,” Yorke agreed.
“ If he likes to go out Alberta way, I'm sure the
dad would give him a hand if I asked him,” said Roy.
“ I still go on with my shift to-night, I suppose
major ? ” Yorke asked.
“You certainly do, Yorke, and when your two hours
are up, you call me.” The major looked at his watch.
“ Hullo, your luck is in, Yorke. It's my shift now.
Turn in and get a couple of hours' sleep. We'll get
an early start for the monastery.”


CHAPTER X
AN EVENTFUL NIGHT
Despite their efforts to get an early start that morning,
the wounded man proved such an impediment that it
was nine o’clock before the party set out for the
monastery. The major rode a little ahead, picking
the path, and the boys rode one on each side of the
sick man, ready to extend a helping hand if he should
need it. It was an arduous journey for Steele, and
although he rode uncomplainingly, he was several
times overcome with faintness, and on each of these
occasions the party dismounted and halted for a long
rest. So that it was not until late afternoon that,
having left their arms and horses at the stables, they
toiled up the steep ascent to the monastery, and stated
their case to the monks. These proved quite amenable
to the major’s suggestion that Steele should be left
with them as a paying guest, and the prior gave
orders that one of the rooms should be fitted with
everything that the building possessed necessary for
nursing, and appointed a brother with a knowledge
of medicine to look after him.
“ We should like to stay here the night ourselves,"
the major added, which request was readily assented
to. But before proceeding to their old rooms, which
were in the opposite wing of the building, they put
their heads in at Steele’s door, to wish him good-night
and a speedy recovery.
n


The sick man waved a hand to them gratefully.
“ I shan’t forget what you've done for me, gentlemen.
To these people I’m a friend of yours who happened
to get shot in a squabble with the Bedouin. That's
what I gathered you told them, major ? "
“ That’s right, Steele. No need to go into details.
It would do you no good and them no good."
" That’s right, major; it wouldn’t. All the same, I
take it as real kind of you to have passed them the
word to look after your ‘ friend.' I appreciate that
even more than being patched up by you last night.
Thank you, gentlemen. I won't let you down."
“ I’m quite sure of that, Steele. Good-night."
The three smiled at him and withdrew, and, soon
after, the brother entered laden with lint and oils to
dress the wound. He stayed in the room some hours,
arranging the appointments to his satisfaction, and
it was nearly midnight before he retired, with a last
injunction to his patient to pull the cord above his
pillow if he should need anything.
The pain of his wound was not poignant, but it was
sufficient to keep Steele awake, and when, two hours
later, the door opened quietly, he turned his head at
once. Then his jaw dropped and his eyes opened wide
in astonishment as a Jewish-looking man with a
plastered cheek sidled into the room and approached
the bed.
" Ike ! ” he cried.
" Not so loud,” cautioned the visitor,
" I thought you were dead, Ike."
“ Dead ? Me ? " Jacobs’ Ups curled unpleasantly,
“ No, they didn't get me. My luck wasn’t dead out.
They got a big Bedouin in front of me, and he toppled
me down as he fell, and I hit my head against a stone.
When I came to, there was nothing on that hillside
but dead men. I managed to find one of the horses
though, and I got down to the river, where I camped.


The first thing I saw this morning was you in the middle
of Todd’s party crawling over here. So I lay doggo
till dusk, and then did the distressed traveller stunt.
Full of sympathy they were, these monks. Told me
that a party of Europeans had ridden in at dusk, and
I would meet them in the morning. . . . Meet in the
morning,” he repeated with a devilish leer. “ Well,
perhaps we will. Todd’s got the ring, I suppose ? ”
" I don't know. They didn’t tell me. . . . But
look here, Ike, don't you go trying any funny games
at this monastery. I reckon they’ve earned that
ring. Let them keep it.”
” Oh, oh, Georgie Steele turning soft ? ” The
visitor sneered.
” Not more than you, I reckon, Ike. But those
three have treated me well. I ran into them last night
by the river, when I was feeling pretty cheap. They
could easily have left me there, or run me into Jericho
and wired for the police. But not they. Instead of
that they brought me along here, and handled me all
through as gentle as women.”
Jacobs’ eyes burned with hatred and malice.
“ Gentle as women, were they ? ” he said venomously.
“ Well, I didn’t notice it, either at Jerusalem or up
there in the pass.” He touched his wounded cheek.
”If you like to give up, you can. But I came out here
to get that ring and the reward, and I’m going to
get it.” Then suddenly he changed his tone. “ Look
here, George, don't you turn soft and start licking the
hand that nursed you. These three high-faluters have
treated us pretty rough all through. They’ve given
me one on the face and you one in the arm. I reckon
we're not going to part company over them, eh ? ”
“ We part if you start interfering with them, Ike.
That’s flat. I’ve turned honest. The other game
doesn’t pay, and the society’s low. Chuck it up, Ike,
and come out to America.”


Jacobs snarled at the suggestion.
“ Keep your honesty. I don't want it. This is the
finish, George Steele. Mind that. Don't wire me for a
fiver when you're tired of your honest work." He smiled
evilly, and disappeared as silently as he had come.
For some minutes after he had gone, Steele lay on
his back, gazing at the ceiling, a look of indecision on
his face. He was debating with himself whether or
not he should warn the major and the boys that Jacobs
was in the monastery. While he was deliberating,
the solitary candle in the apartment guttered and
went out, and the subsequent darkness seemed to
accentuate the danger to his three new-found friends.
“ I'm not going to have those white men hurt in then-
sleep if I can help it," Steele muttered, and, dragging
himself slowly and painfully out of bed, he went out
into the corridor, down which he staggered in the
direction of the belfry.
Some three hours previously, Yorke, having said
good-night to Roy and the major, had retired to his
own room, and was in the middle of undressing when
there came a knock, and Roy entered once more,
holding up a thermos flask.
“ Thought you’d like some of this, Yorke. I felt
thirsty just now, and I’d lapped up all the water in
my room, so I went out on the scrounge. I met one
of the monks, and he smiled all over his face, and told
me to go back and he would bring me something.
He was as good as his word. Handed me in this
flask, he did. Coffee—piping hot and sweet. I
thought it was too good to drink all on my own so
I hiked in."
“ Good boy. Chuck that tooth-brush out of the
glass, and give me a drop in that, will you ? Thanks.
. . . Jove 1 there’s nothing wrong with this, Roy. . . !
Yes, I will have another drop."


They finished the flask, and sat down on the bed.
“ Funny old business it’s been, this treasure hunt,”
Roy remarked. “ Very curious, too, the way this
chap Steele’s come round to our side. I’d bank on
him now, Yorke.”
“ So would I, Roy.”
“ I wonder what did happen to his friend Ike ? ”
Roy went on niminatively. “ I suppose he must have
been killed.”
“ I don’t think so.”
Roy turned, and looked quickly at his cousin. “ Why
don’t you think so ? ” he asked.
“ That's the peculiar thing about it, Roy. I don't
know why I do think he’s alive, but somehow I have
the feeling very strongly. Hullo, what’s that ? ” he
broke off, as the door-bell of the monastery clanged
rather loudly.
“ Ike,” said Roy with a smile, ” asking for shelter.”
Then he grew serious again. “ It’s funny that you
should feel like that about Ike, though, Yorke. How-
ever, alive or dead, I don't suppose he’ll worry us
again.”
Yorke shrugged his shoulders. “It will be his own
look-out if he does, Roy. He should know by now
that Major Todd isn’t an easy man to fool about
with.”
“ I expect he's realized that,” Roy assented. '* Well,
I’ll get back now to my little short bed. They can’t
be used to guests of our inches here, Yorke. I'll
swear that pallet of mine isn’t a fraction more than
five feet nine. Night-night! ”
“ Good-night, Roy. Thanks for the coffee.”
Yorke finished undressing, and, blowing out the
light, got into bed. But contrary to his usual habit,
he did not fall instantly asleep. The fact was that
the monk’s coffee was unusually strong, and the effect
on Yorke was to make him toss from side to side, the


while all the events of the past few days, marshalling
themselves before him in unhurried procession, awaited
his examination and judgment Physically tired, but
mentally stimulated, Yorke found himself giving close
attention to each, and at last, despairing of sleep,
he got out of bed, struck a match and looked at his
watch, and found it to be nearly two o’clock. Yawning
disgustedly, he walked to the window, and stepped
out on to the little balcony which connected the three
guest-rooms, hoping that a breath of fresh air might
compose him to slumber.
Standing out there on the balcony he immediately
forgot his disgust. The night was very still, and the
sky of a velvety blue. Moab was invisible in the
blackness beyond Jordan, but its presence could be
divined by the sudden ending of the great spread of
stars to the east. Down in the valley a single light
gleamed in modern Jericho —a single gleam, where
once the lights of the city must have shone like a huge
swarm of golden bees. Yorke gazed down at it and
tried to picture the town as it must have been in its
heyday, when, rich in her trade of dates and balsam,
a great and important city, set about with rich groves
and gardens, the Greeks and Romans had spread her
fame throughout the world. In those days the hum
of her citizens and the roar of her commerce must have
been plainly audible on this quiet hillside. But
Joshua had come, and had cried after his assault:
44 Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up
and buildeth this city Jericho.” And the curse had
endured.
For some minutes Yorke stood, leaning against the
railing of the balcony, wrapped in reverie. He was
aroused by a gentle knock at his own door, and entered
the room swiftly. " Who’s that ?” he called.
” Steele," was the reply. " Let me in a moment.
I want to speak to you.”


Yorke flung open the door, and Steele half stumbled
in, and subsided on the bed.
“ I’m weaker than I thought,” he said apologetically.
“ It’s all right, though, Mr. Villers: I can get back
to my own room. I’ve come along to tell you that
Ike Jacobs is here in the monastery, and that he's up
to no good.”
“ Jacobs 1 ” Yorke frowned. But Steele met his
gaze squarely.
" Don't think I asked him here, Mr. Villers. He
just turned up on his own hook. You might have
heard the bell go a few hours back.”
“ Ah,” said Yorke. “So that was Ike.”
“ Yes, that was Ike.” Steele rose from the bed.
“ Well, I’ve warned you, Mr. Villers, and I guess you
know what steps to take.” He made for the door.
“ I’ll come with you,” Yorke began, but Steele held
up a hand.
“You stay right here, Mr. Villers. I can get back
all right. Keep a sharp look-out. He may visit you.
Good-night.”
“ Good-night, Mr. Steele. Thanks very much for
the warning. I will certainly keep a sharp look-out.”
Steele went off down the corridor, and, left to
himself, Yorke lit his candle and ruminated over this
new feature of the position. For five minutes he sat
in deep thought, his hand resting on the butt of his
revolver beneath the pillow. Then he came to a
decision. He would not wake his friends. Instead,
he would sit up all night himself, and keep guard.
But first he would see that both their doors were
locked. Creeping out into the corridor, he tried the
handles cautiously. Both were locked, and, feeling
relieved, he returned to his own room, set his door
slightly ajar, and sat down to listen. He was feeling
very confident in his ability to keep an adequate watch,
for he was in a position to hear the slightest sound in
(a.983) e


the corridor, and the most skilful locksmith in the
world could not have hoped to gain an entry into either
of his friends' rooms without detection. The candle,
after some deliberation, he left burning. It might,
he thought, act as a deterrent to Jacobs if he were
inclined to nocturnal prowling; and if it came to a
fight, Yorke preferred to have a little light on the
scene.
An hour passed, and then he heard the creak of a
footstep on the staircase which led to the upper
apartments at the end of the corridor. Yorke stiffened
as footsteps sounded coming along the corridor.
Sitting on the end of his bed, his revolver hidden, but
ready for instant work, he kept his eyes on the door,
and his ears alert, ready for whatever might befall.
But the footsteps passed and went slowly on. Creep-
ing to the door, Yorke opened it a little wider, and saw
the dark figure of a monk moving down the corridor.
Presently a candle sprang into radiance in the little
chapel at the end, and by its light Yorke saw the
brother prostrated in reverence before an icon. Satis-
fied that all was well, he retired again into the room,
and presently he heard the monk come shuffling
back.
Not caring to be discovered out of bed at that hour
of the morning, Yorke lay down and, half-closing his
eyes, feigned sleep. The steps came to a halt outside
his door, and Yorke had much ado to conceal a smile.
This brother, it seemed, had not been able to eliminate
curiosity from his list of mundane imperfections. He
wished to see why one of the European visitors needed
a light at two in the morning. The door opened, and
from beneath his lowered lashes Yorke could see the
monk's gown and girdle. Then, suddenly, as the monk
drew near, some instinct of danger prompted him to
open his eyes and leap up. But he was a fraction of
a second too late. Even as he sprang something struck


him violently on the side of the head, and as he sank
back he had a momentary vision of an evil face glaring
at him in triumph from beneath a monk’s cowl. Then
he lapsed into unconsciousness.
When he came to, he was still lying on the bed, but
helpless, gagged with a handkerchief, and bound hand
and foot. And then he heard Roy’s voice calling from
the balcony :
“ Yorke ! Yorke ! Come on ! Quick ! ”
Yorke tried to throw himself on the floor, but he
hardly succeeded in moving a muscle. He had been
securely bound with a monk’s girdle, straps from his
own saddlery, and torn sheeting. And the candle had
been extinguished. Sick and dizzy, a prey to the
liveliest anxiety, he lay there in the darkness, unable
to budge. Once more he heard his cousin’s voice
calling : “ I’m going down, Yorke.” And then there
was silence.
On Roy the strong coffee had not had such an
invigorating effect, and a quarter of an hour after he
had left Yorke's room he was fast asleep. A finer
specimen of healthy young manhood than Roy it
would have been hard to find, and, like most healthy
young men, he liked to stretch his legs in bed on
occasion. The occasion this night came at about
half-past two, when, after several somnolent attempts
to stretch his pallet's capacity, he was forced to give
up the attempt. Opening his eyes, he gave a dis-
gusted sigh as he realized the bed’s shortcomings, and,
turning on his back and crooking his knees, was about
to resume his interrupted slumbers when a loud creak
from the balcony arrested his attention. Like most
Canadians who have lived a good deal in the open,
Roy liked to know the origin of a noise. He held
his breath and listened. It came again, that creak,
and Roy got out of bed. The idea of any possible


danger did not occur to him at the moment. He was
a guest in a monastery, and that seemed to him one
of the safest places in the world. He simply wanted
to know why woodwork should take upon itself to
creak on a still night when all reasonably seasoned
woodwork should be as silent as the grave.
Stepping out on to the balcony, he waited. The
creak came again, from the left opposite the major's
room. He groped his way there, passing Yorke’s
window without a glance. And then he halted sud-
denly, his further progress barred by a taut rope
which came down from the veranda of one of the rooms
above and disappeared into the void by way of the
railings on that part of the balcony opposite Major
Todd’s apartment. At the sight of that rope suspicion
flared in Roy's mind, and he thrust his head into the
major's room. “ Major 1 " he called sharply. “ Are
you there ? "
There was no response, and Roy entered the room,
groped on the mantelpiece for matches, struck one, and
looked round him. There was no sign of the major,
but the bed had evidently been slept in, and his clothes
were lying in disarray on the floor. Knowing the
major’s neat military habits, that seemed to Roy to
be a very bad sign. For a moment he stood there,
thinking quickly. The woodwork outside gave another
loud creak. “He must have gone down there,” Roy
thought. “ But what on earth for ? I'd better go
and see, I guess. I’ll give Yorke a hail, and get along
with the job.” Running to his cousin's window, he
called his warning, and then, scaling the railings, he
grasped the rope, and went down hand over hand into
the abyss.
For a few minutes after hearing Roy's hail, Yorke
tried desperately to free himself; but at last he had to
admit his impotence, and gave it up in despair. Pres-
ently he heard a step on the veranda, and then a match


flared, and the major, in pyjamas, stood at the foot of
the bed, gazing at him in startled concern.
“ Yorke, my dear boy 1 What does this mean ? "
And then he caught sight of the handkerchief in
Yorke’s mouth, and rushed forward to remove it.
The next moment he had lit the candle and was hard
at work cutting and untying the lad’s bonds.
“ Thanks," said Yorke faintly, when he was free ;
and, sitting up, he began to stretch his cramped limbs.
“ The ring’s gone, I suppose ? ”
“ Yes, that’s gone, Yorke. And Roy’s gone too.
There's a rope hanging over my balcony. . . . But
what happened to you ? "
“ It was a monk, or rather a fellow dressed as one.
Jacobs, no doubt. I was sitting on guard, after
Steele warned me that he was in the monastery, and
he took me by surprise. Hit me out before I could
do a thing." Yorke put a hand to his head, “He
certainly gave me a stinger. . . . But I heard Roy
call a few minutes ago. He said he was ‘ going down.'
We'll have to follow him, major. I suppose he meant
into the valley ? "
“ I expect so. Possibly down the rope. But look
here, Yorke, you’re very sick and bruised. Don't
you think you’d better stay here, and let me inves-
tigate ? "
For once Yorke paid no attention to the major’s
advice. “ Sorry," he said, “ but I've got to be in
this, sore head or no sore head."
“ Get some clothes on, then, and come into my
room for a drop of brandy. I see it’s no use arguing
with you."
In less than two minutes Yorke presented himself
in the major's apartment, and gulped down a mouthful
of neat brandy from the flask which the Australian
always carried in case of emergency.
“ Good medicine, but a bad drink," said the major,


replacing the stopper, and slipping the flask into his
pocket. He was now dressed in coat and trousers
and roughly-laced boots. “ I’ve carried that brandy
for a year, and, with the exception of Steele last night,
you’re the first to have a nip of it. . . . Got your
revolver ? Good. Come on, then.” He went out on
to the balcony and peered down into the blackness.
” I wish Roy would give us a coo-ee or something/*
he murmured.
As if in answer to his wish there came at this moment
the sound of iron-shod hoofs ringing on stones far
below, and then the sharp report of a rifle-shot.
“ Down the rope ! ” Yorke cried.
" Quicker the other way, I think. Come on. I
know the trick of the bolts.” They dashed through
into the corridor and along to the great front door of
the building.
“ Keep the light going, Yorke.” The major thrust
a box of matches into his hand, and wrestled with the
complicated system of bolts and bars by the light of
successive flares. At last the door swung open, and
they hurried down the steep path to the stable. There
a couple of more matches disclosed the fact that Roy’s
horse and rifle were gone.
Crack. Another shot sounded from below.
“ Quick,” cried the major. " Grab your horse and
gun, Yorke. Don't worry about a saddle.”
Hastily untying the animals, they slipped in the
bits, and led them down the path, slinging their rifles
as they did so.
They had been groping and stumbling for some ten
minutes down the uneven way when two more shots
galvanized them into even greater speed.
“ We’ll risk it and mount now, Yorke,” the major
called back. “ The path's rough enough, goodness
knows, but I don't like this firing.”
“ Nor I,” Yorke agreed. " But, all the same, Roy


knows all about night-riding, and I think he can hold
his own with Jacobs at it. That’s one consolation.”
And unslinging his rifle, he sprang on to his horse’s
back, and followed the major at a jog-trot.
“ Hi, major ! Yorke ! Is that you ? ” The hail
came from below and to their left.
“ Thank God,” said the major, his tone conveying
the extent of his past uneasiness, and he shouted
back : “ Yes, we’re coming, Roy.”
“ Keep on the track,” came Roy’s hail again.
“ The show's over, and there’ll be no more shooting.
Take your time.”
Moderating their pace considerably, they rode an-
other five hundred yards along the track until they
came in sight of Roy, sitting on a rock, holding two
horses, and at his feet the prostrate body of a man in
the dress of a monk.
“ His neck's broken,” Roy said, as they came to
halt. “He tried firing from the saddle and cantering
at the same time, and his horse reared and slipped,
and pitched him over the rock. It’s Jacobs, I sup-
pose ? ”
The major dismounted and bent over the body.
“ Yes,” he said, “ it's Jacobs. No doubt about that.”
“ And has he got the ring ? ”
“ Upon my word, Roy, I'd forgotten all about the
ring. We were so alarmed for your safety. But I
suppose he has it, and I suppose I must look for it.
It isn’t a nice job, but I don’t want to have to prove
my claim to other people later on.” He knelt down
and searched the dead man’s clothing. “ Yes, here
it is, in its wash-leather bag. . . . Well, boys, I think
we'll save our explanations until we get back to our
rooms. It is now our painful duty to acquaint the
prior that the latest guest at his monastery was a
thief in disguise, who has broken his neck in a fall
from his horse. I'm glad you didn't shoot him, Roy.”


“ I didn't try to, major. I just wanged the bullets
above his head.”
“ It will save us a good deal of explanation, anyway.
That horse of his came down pretty badly too, Roy.
Just look at his knees. Bring the poor brute along,
and we’ll see to him up at the stable.”


CHAPTER XI
EXPLANATIONS
“ And now, Roy," said the major two hours later, “ I
must confess I am curious to know exactly what
happened."
After reporting the death of Jacobs to the prior,
they had gone down again with a party of monks,
and had assisted them to bring up the body in a litter
to the mortuary. Then they had gone down again
to the stable, where they bathed and bandaged the
knees of the wounded horse. And now the three were
seated in the major’s room, feeling very fatigued after
the night's adventures, but too keyed-up to think of
sleep.
" There isn't very much to tell," Roy replied.
" That bed of mine was so confoundedly short that it
woke me up, and before I could get to sleep again I
heard the woodwork creaking out on the balcony.
So I went out to have a look at it. It was the rope
that was doing it, and there was evidently some one
on the end of it. I didn’t like the look of things.
So I poked my head into your room, major, and found
you weren't there. I thought you must have gone
down the rope, so I gave a shout to Yorke, and went
down after you, as I thought. I was half-way down
when I heard the stable door open, and some one came
out leading a horse. I called to him : ‘ Major, is that


you ? ' but there was no reply, and then it dawned on
me that it was some one else. I shinned down the
rest of the rope as quickly as I could, and ran round
to the stable. Our horses were all there, but one of
the rifles had gone. So I jumped on my nag, picked
up one of the Mausers, and set off to investigate.
Presently he had a crack at me, but the bullet went
very wide, and I didn’t trouble to reply for a bit.
Then I heard him quite clearly scrambling about among
the rocks, and I fired high from the saddle, just to
scare him. I kept within sound of him all the time
after that, and I felt pretty confident. He was going
along at a good rate, but I knew the track, and I’ve
done a fair amount of night-riding out West. Who-
ever he was, I thought, he wasn’t much of a horseman.
He cantered over bad parts and walked over good
ones. I could pick up with him when I wanted to,
but I thought the best thing to do was *to hang on his
skirts till dawn, and then see what sort of a fellow he
was. It did cross my mind that it might be Jacobs,
but, of course, I wasn’t sure. He got very restive—l
could tell that by the way he swore at his horse—and
at last he tried a crack at me from the saddle, and
that finished him. He pitched off, and his horse came
back along the track to me. Directly I saw his knees
I guessed what had happened, and I dismounted and
walked along till I came to the body. I was surprised
when I saw the monk's dress, but when I saw the face
beneath the cowl I knew it was a disguise, and I
guessed it was Jacobs lying there. You know the
rest. . . . Now it’s your turn, major. Where were
you when I went into your room ? "
“ I was in the chapel, Roy.”
“ The chapel 1 ”
“Yes. I suppose that sounds rather a peculiar
place for a man to be in at that hour of the morning.
But I am a man of unconventional habits, as perhaps


you have noticed, and to-night, what with thinking
out one or two problems connected with my sister's
affairs, I was restless in bed. Now it has always been
my experience that a church or chapel is an ideal
place for attaining a broad view of things, and resolu-
tions made in such buildings are, as a rule, free from
pettinesses. So I went into the chapel, and found its
atmosphere soothing and inspiring. I was rather sur-
prised to find a candle burning there, but its light was
just sufficient for my needs, and when I had come to a
decision on my problems, I came back to my room
to find my things in disarray and the ring gone.”
" It's funny that you should have chosen that
moment to go into the chapel,” Yorke said thoughtfully.
“If you hadn’t gone in, you would have been in bed,
and then you would have been at Jacobs' mercy.”
The major nodded.
“ The impulse was a religious one, and the yielding
to it saved me from assault. Quite possibly it saved
my life, for this man Jacobs was evidently in a dan-
gerous mood. . . . The theft, of course, was quite
a simple affair for him. He just went through my
clothes and took the ring from my waistcoat pocket.
Being in a monastery, I had deemed myself safe. . . .
Now, Yorke, it's your turn. What exactly happened
to you ? ”
“I’m almost ashamed to tell it, major. I thought
I was being so 'cute and clever, and instead of that I
let you both down.” And Yorke told them his story.
" Sorry I made such an awful mess of it,” he ended up.
The major laid a hand on his shoulder.
“ Yorke, my boy, you acted throughout like a
gentleman, and you handled the affair like an old
campaigner. But naturally you could not penetrate
to the depths of depravity which could induce a man
to perform actions of mock worship in a chapel. Jacobs
knew that, and he played upon it. . . . But it hasn’t


done him much good, has it ? " The major rose.
“ Now, you two, go and lie down for an hour or two,
even if you don’t sleep. And if you’re feeling fit
enough after breakfast, Yorke, we’ll try and get along
to Jerusalem."
When the hour of departure drew near, Yorke pro-
fessed himself quite fit for travel, and accordingly the
horses were saddled and got ready. Before they left,
the major left a written statement concerning the
night s incidents with the prior. The latter expressed
his regrets that such happenings should have occurred
to the monastery's guests, and shuddered to think
that a man of such evil deeds should go to his death
without absolution. He explained that the room
which had been given to Jacobs was immediately
above the three principal guest-rooms, and adjacent
to the store-room, from which he had purloined his
monk's robes and the rope. Having taken their leave
of the prior, the three called in at Steele's room to
say farewell. The sick man welcomed them warmly.
“ I've heard the news," he told them. " I’m sorry
for Ike, but I’m glad you all came through without a
bad hurt."
"We wish to thank you, Steele, for coming to warn
us as you did," said the major. " I quite realize that
it meant a lot to you to give your former pal away."
“ Couldn't see anything else for it. Major Todd.
I thought pretty hard for a bit, and then I got out of
bed and trundled along. I've been thinking it over
since, and I reckon I did the right thing.”
" Yes, you did the right thing, Steele," the major
assented gravely. " Well, good-bye. If you ever
come to Australia again, look me up, and I'll do any-
thing I can for you."
"Or if you should find yourself in Alberta at any
time, call on the dad," said Roy. " Every one out
there knows Cloudesley - Sillers, and if it's a job


you want, he’ll see that you get the best that's
going."
“ And here’s my father's card, if you should ever
want a friend in London." Yorke laid the pasteboard
on the coverlet.
Steele took it up and examined it. " Cavalry Club,"
he murmured. “ Well, that ought to be easy enough
to find, I reckon. I’m sure I’m much obliged to you
all, gentlemen, and if I find myself stuck in any of these
places, I’ll make a point of calling. Good-bye, and
thank you."
They found it a long, hot, and tiring journey up the
series of steep zigzags to Jerusalem, and it was six
o’clock in the evening before they reached their hotel.
Arrived there, they gave their horses into the charge
of the major-domo, and indulged in the luxury of a
hot bath and a change of clothing. The bell rang for
dinner just as they had completed their toilet, and it
was with a feeling of pleasant relaxation that they took
their places in the dining-room and scanned the menu
card. It seemed to them that they had been a long
time away from the comforts of civilization.
“ We haven't, though," said the major, when Roy
remarked on this. " We've only been away three
days." He twinkled. "We managed to cram in
quite a lot during the time, all the same."
After dinner, not feeling inclined for any further
exercise, they sat in the lounge, studying the French
and English papers and chatting with other European
tourists. Presently the his paper down.
" Boys," he said, " what are your plans now ? "
" Wait about here till the dad comes out," Yorke
replied. " That's it, isn't it, Roy ? "
" Sure thing. I guess we shan't be bored in a town
like this. I've just been looking at a guide-book,
and really the history of Jerusalem is most amazing.


quite apart from New Testament associations. . . .
What are you going to do, major ? "
“ I've been thinking I'd better go to London and
hand this ring to the solicitors. But I’d like to sec a
little more of you young men before I return to
Australia. I was wondering if you’d mind me potter-
ing about with you for a few weeks when I come
back from London ? ”
The boys’ faces showed what they thought of the
project, and the Australian flushed a little with pleasure.
“ It's rather gratifying to me to find that my com-
pany is desirable to you in peace as well as war,” he
said. “ Very well, then, I’ll come back as soon as I
can, and then we’ll do a bit of touring together."
He went the next day, catching the train for Port
Said, where he hoped to be in time for the homeward-
bound P. & O. steamer. He was gone nearly three
weeks, and when he returned he found the boys still
ensconced in the hotel at Jerusalem. Their first
question was about the ring.
“ That's all fixed up," replied the major. "No
hitch at all in that business. Your father was most
helpful there. He put me in touch with the right
people, and acted as guarantee. I received the
cheque almost at once. Have you heard from Colonel
Villers ? ”
“ The last was a week ago," said Yorke. "He said
then that he would be coming out again very soon, as
he had put that little matter right at the War Office.
Since then we've heard nothing."
“ Then I’ve news for you in that direction. He will
be here to-morrow. We came out together on the
same boat, and he would have been here to-day, but
there was some political dinner in Cairo last night
which he was particularly requested to attend. . . .
Now what have you been doing with yourselves in the
interim ? "


** Exploring Jerusalem mostly, with the aid of
guide-books. Roy and I are both dead keen on it.
Also we've done a few excursions in the country around.
We went to Hebron yesterday, and among other things
had a look at the blown glass works. Most interesting
it was to see them turning out lamps and coloured
glass rings. We had intended going out to the monas-
tery of Mar Saba to-morrow, but, of course, we shall
put that off as the dad’s coming back.”
Colonel Villers arrived by train the next day. The
boys, accompanied by Major Todd, met him at the
station, and all four drove to the hotel in a car. After
lunch, when Major Todd had disappeared upstairs in
search of one of his black cigars, the colonel drew the
boys aside into a comer of the lounge.
“I just want to say, lads, how pleased I am with
your conduct. I’m quite proud of you both. The
major gave me a full account of the expedition, and
confessed that without your help he would have stood
no chance of success in his venture, and would probably
have lost his life into the bargain. I may tell you that
he pleaded with me to take a half of the reward on your
behalf, and suggested that it could be put away for
you in case of a rainy day, and that you need not know
anything about it until the rainy day came. I refused
his offer without, I think, hurting his feelings. How-
ever, lads, I think you've earned a reward of some
sort, so what I wish to say is this : for the rest of our
time out here, I place the itinerary of the tour entirely
in your hands. You can go where you like and do
what you like, and I'll pay the piper.”
“ And I call that a real sporting offer, Uncle Herbert,”
cried Roy warmly. “ Yorke, we’ll get up Smyrna
way, and then on to Constantinople.”
“ And we simply must have a look at Albania, Roy.”
" Rather. We'll sprint right across the Balkans.”
“ Ah, come along. Major Todd,” said the colonel


smilingly, as the Australian appeared. " You have an
interest in this discussion. The boys are fixing the
map of our route. I’ve given them carte blanche as a
reward for the way they backed you up in your treasure
hunt.”
I certainly couldn't have wished for better com-
pany, colonel. But I wish they would take something
more tangible than the mapping out of a tour. It
seems to me that I get the lot and they get nothing.”
“You are not quite correct in your summing-up, if
1 may say so, major. They have got something out
of it which is of infinitely more value than mere gold.
Unless I am mistaken, they have gained a proved
friend.”
" Well, they’ve certainly got that.” There was a
ring in the major's voice which showed that the words
were not spoken idly. Then he smiled. “ And where
are you leading us this time, boys ? ”
“ Smyrna, Constantinople, Albania, and across the
Balkans, to start with,” replied Yorke promptly.
“ Are you game ? ”
“ Why, of course. Just give me time to buy a
couple more revolvers and a dagger or two.” The
major twinkled. “ For such a route seems likely to
be the scene of another test of our friendship. Are
we taking in Bulgaria ? ”
“ May as well,” said Roy. “We want to do the
place properly. Why ? ”
“ Oh, in that case I shall add a blunderbuss to my
equipment,” laughed the major.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS




ft fezi X
1508
00136076


/ v


tor Cirls
PATSY COMES TO STAY
Elizabeth Tugwell
JEAN’S TWO SCHOOLS
Ethel Talbot
NANCY AFLOAT
Bessie Marchant
THOSE GREYLANDS GIRLS
Dorothy Smith
For Boys
WARDEN OF THE NORTH
L. C. Douthwaite
THE GLORY OF GREYSTONE
John L. Roberts
SUNKEN TREASURE
Percy Woodcock
A HUNDRED DAYS’ ADVENTURE
John Redwood
SALLY AT SCHOOL
Ethel Talbot
SHIRLEY AT CHARTERTON
Christabel Marlowe
For Boys
SEA WRACK
Percy Woodcock
SECONDS OUT !
L. C. Douthwaite
THE VALLEY OF MYSTERY
Oswald Dallas
A SCHOOL LIBEL
Richard Bird
r , . APEX SERIES
hot Girls « f
NEW ERA SERIES
„ TRIUMPH SERIES
For Girls
SCORING FOR TEIE SCHOOL Marjorie W. Newman
A FAMILY FROM NOWHERE Jessie Leckie Herbertson
THE FAMILY AT SUNSHINE RANCH Helen Dickson
ANN THORNE IN AMERICA Rosamond Bertram
For Boys
KIDNAPPED IN CORNWALL Percy Woodcock
KEEPERS OF THE KHYBER Arthur Catherall
