

UNDER
VICE = REGAL
PATRONAGE.
THE AUSTRALIAN
CONVICT SHIP
“SUCCESS”
EXHIBITION
(ON TOUR).
fc)
CONSTRUCTED
OF
INDIAN TEAK
1790.
CATALOGUE
PRICE-THREEPENCE.
ON VIEW 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
tm- THRILLING DESCRIPTIVE LECTURES AT INTERVALS.
HAMMOND & GREEN, Pbintebs, Sise Lake, E.C




THE external appearance of the old “ Success ” presents a curious
contrast to the “ ocean greyhounds ”of to-day. She left the
slips at Moulmein, British India, in 1790, and, being constructed
throughout of solid teak,* the bluff-bowed barque has filled many
important parts during her remarkably long career. As an armed
merchantman she sailed for over 50 years from Britain to the
Indies, and in 1847, her course was changed and the then hazardous
voyage made to Australia.
In 1851 a second Australian voyage was “ success ’’-fully
undertaken and 200 hopeful immigrants were carried to the land
of new-found gold. Being deserted by both captain and crew, she
was pressed into the prison service, and formed one of a felon fleet
of five, the “ President,” “Lysander,” *• Sacramento,” “ Deborah,” and
the old “ Success,” then moored off Williamstown, Victoria. The
“Success ” is now the only one remaining, and being of historic
interest, is the one last time-rusted link in the chain of convict
history, forms the subject of a special book now offered to the
public on board.
UPPEK DECK-BOW.
1. The Flogging Frame and Triangle.
2. The Compulsory Bath. —The incorrigible and fractious
prisoners were thrust forcibly by the warders into this bath, salt
water was pumped upon them, and two warders, one standing on
either side above, would give them a brisk rub down with long-
handled scrubbing brushes to keep the convicts clean.
3. Original Windlass.
of this almost indestructible wood, 2,000 years old, are
exhibited in the Eangoon Museum, in a perfect state of preservation.


4. Original armour and headgear, worn by “Ned
Kelly,” the ironclad bushranger, weight 92 lbs.
5. The Wheel was part of the mechanism that raised a lift
that brought the prisoners, in their heavy irons, from their cells
below.
6. Original Mainmast, teak wood, the rough voyage
from Adelaide to London in 1895 around the Cape (165 days) only
proved its quality.
7. Original Runups still in splendid working order.
8. Sentries’ Rifles with which the convict Hill was shot
at the Melville “ Rush.”
9. Scripture text and playing cards (specially explained
by attendants).
10. Warder’s carbine, used at close quarters as a club.
11. Officers’ Quarters in 1852. —Warders’ cabins on
either side of passage.
12. Views of British Penal Prisons at Port Arthur,
Van Pieman’s Land, in 1847.
13. Officers’ Bath in the starboard quarter gallery.
14. Tasmanian Land Grant, dated 1813.
15. Martin Cash, bushranger in 1843, transported in 1828.
16. First Convict chain-gang in Hobart Town, shown in
the very rags in which they left the London gaols. (Steel
engraving.)
17. Old Charts, dating back to 1601.
18. Collection of weapons of warders, bushrangers, and
military overseers.
19. Bunch of Heavy Keys with which Warder Jones
struck at the miscreant Melville, while that prisoner was attacking
another warder with a sharpened spoon.
20 Leg-icons, “oval-ed” by a convict, who thereby
gained his freedom.
21. Chain-gang irons, worn by prisoners marching in
single file, with one long chain connecting them.
22 Figure 8 Handcuffs used on prisoners confined in
the necklets.


23. Collection of light “transfer” irons, and leather
covered “ Women’s ” irons used on women’s hulk, “ Lysander,”
24. Original “Conditional Pardon,” dated 1832.
25. Leg-irons, cut with quarrying- tools, by an escaped
convict.
26. Harry Power, a bold bushranger, a skilful bushman,
and a splendid rider, caused no end of trouble to the police
in his early days. In his old age (just as represented in this
cabin) he was (as a free man) utilised as an attendant on
board the “Success” exhibition years ago, and would entertain
visitors with many “hair breadth escapes” from the police and
adventures in the mountain fastnesses to which he was wont to
retreat after a successful raid. He was always kind and courteous
to women in his bushranging career and, though startling as many
as 14 travellers in one day by a sudden call to “bail up,” at the
point of the revolver, and rifling the contents of the mail-bags
whenever opportunity offered, he is said never to have shed blood.
He was a native of Waterford, Ireland, and arrived in Victoria in
1848. His methods of “ levying contributions ” were so bold as to
almost call up a smile, and his implication in the Melville rush in
1856 and subsequent capture in a secret cave in the mountains of
Victoria in 1880 are all detailed in the “ History of the Success.”
After a long and mis-spent career, Power suicided in the Murray
River, Victoria, on the 7th November*, 1891.
27. Original Cat-of-Nine-Tails, with authenticated
initials of the flagellator, and other significant markings on the
handle.
28. Women’s Cat with which females were flogged on
board the women’s hulk, “ Lysander.”
29. Examples of Leg-irons from 14 to 56 lbs. weight.
30. Punishment Ball, 72 lbs. weight, was added to the
irons of the convicts who attempted suicide by making a mad rush
to throw themselves from the bulwarks to the sea.
31, Original Ship’s Bell, with inscription dated 1790.
As a prison bell it often called to mind tne lines of Edgar Allan
Poe—
“ What a world of melancholy its melody foretells.”


MIDDLE DECK—BOW.
«
HENRY POWER —Here shown as in the prime of life,
represented on the main deck in his old age, in the cabin under the
poop. Arrived in Victoria in 1848, and was sentenced to 14 years
for horsestealing’, was imprisoned on the hulk Success, and sentenced
to death for implication in the Melville rush in 1856. Being' after-
wards reprieved, he again led a lawless life. £5OO was the reward for
his apprehension, and when captured, he received 15 years’ imprison-
ment. He seemed much flattered by the attention shown him by the
crowds who followed when he was under arrest, and many instances
of his bravado are described in the “ History of the Success.”
Suicided, 7th November, 1891.
ANDREW GEORGE SCOTT, alias Captain Moonlight,
was a man of dauntless courage and a most notorious scoundrel.
He differed from most in that he possessed a good education, being
qualified as a surveyor and civil engineer. He was born in 1845,
of Protestant parents, at Down, Ireland. Arrived in New Zealand
in the “ Black Eagle,” early in the sixties, and served in the
volunteers in that colony from 1861 to 1867. In 1868 he arrived
in Sydney, and two years after began his criminal career by
berviug a sentence of 18 months for forgery and uttering. On the
23rd July, 1872, he was sentenced to ten years for robbery under


arms in Victoria, His conduct in prison gave ample forecast of his
subsequent criminal career. He was punished for no less than 22
breaches of discipline, two of which were violent assaults ; one on
Chief-warder Kelly and the other on a fellow-convict. On the 17th
February, 1877, he actually had the temerity to “ bail up” the officer
in charge at Pentridge, threatening to murder him with a knife with
which he had armed himself, and demanding his watch and chain
without delay. He then retired with his plunder to the bathroom,
warning the warders not to come near him, “ as he was well armed
and well victualled for a few days.” For this freak he obtained
extra imprisonment. Upon bis liberation in 1879, he gave a series
of lectures in the Temperance Hall, Melbourne, on his prison
experiences, which were a financial failure. He is next heard of
as leader of a gang of desperadoes, who stuck up and robbed the Bank
at Egerton. The police were soon on their trail and encountered the
gang at Wantabadgery, where a bloodthirsty skirmish took place,
which resulted in Senior-constable Bowen and two of the bush-
rangers being shot dead. Moonlight and Rogan, the only other
survivor of the gang, were executed at Darlinghurst Gaol, Sydney,
on the 20th January, 1880. The former wished to make a speech,
but Rogan was stolid and indifferent, and there, standing on the
scaffold, with white caps drawn, they shook hands and were instantly
afterwards launched into eternity.
DANIEL MORGAN, incendiary and murderer, was the
illegitimate son of a man named Fuller, and a woman named Owen,
and was born at Campbelltown, near Sydney, in 1830. His face is an
index of his characteristic cruelty. He invariably bound those be
robbed to trees, and found pleasure in toying the rim of his loaded
rifle against their faces, mocking their helplessness, leaving many in
unfrequented places in the mountains to die of exposure and
starvation. At Mr. Vincent’s, Mittagong Wool Station, N.S.W., he
appeared with his belt bristling with revolvers, and made enquiries
for the owner, who was at once made prisoner. Forcing the
shearers to strap their employer to the fence, and then, still tighter,
till the circulation of the blood was stopped completely, he accused
him of having given the police information, and told him he gave
him now “just five minutes to live.” The air was filled with the
screams of the terrified wife and daughters, and Morgan relenting,
made one mighty bonfire of the well-stored woolshed and station
premises valued at £1,600, and the prisoner at the homestead fence,
who had fainted from heat and exhaustion, was left a ruined and
an almost roasted man. In 1863 at the Round Hill Station,
Morgan fired from horseback, right and left amongst the men he
had mustered as prisoners. Mr. Watson’s head was grazed, and a
ball passed through his right hand raised in protest, and Morgan,
dismounting, placing his revolver against the head of young
Herriott, was just about to fire, when the boy screamed for mercy,


and showed how his leg - had been already broken by a previous
shot. A Mr. McLean asked Morgan if a neighbouring doctor
might be brought, to which the bushranger assented, but afterwards,
fearing information, overtook the unsuspecting man two miles along
the road and shot him through the body. Two sergeants of police
in pursuit were shot deed, one named Thomas Smyth, murdered in
his tent while camped for the night, and a second named
McGfinnity in a desperate hand to hand encounter with the
bushranger at Tumberumba. During that affray the horses of both
were shot dead. The cruel ruffian took aim at an inoffensive
shepherd at Wollondool, and explained the murder of the man by
saying “ I was just trying a new rifle.” This singlehanded brigand
robbed the mails and gold escorts, till a daring descent upon the
Peechalba Station cost him his life. He had the unnerved occupants,
four men and eight women, waiting onTiim hand and foot, the
ladies were forced to play the piano, the servants to prepare a
sumptuous meal, the owner of the homestead to sign a cheque for a
large amount, and while the luxurious rogue half nodded in the
best armchair a revolver in each hand he cautioned all and
sundry that “he always slept with one eye open.’' In the morning,
April 9th, 1865, the station was surrounded by a cordon of police
and station hands, and one of the latter named John Quinlan shot
him dead. His last words were “ why didn’t you challenge me
fair and give me a chance,” but no “ fair challenges ” and “ chances ”
had ever been given to the victims of his wanton murders.


THE TIGER’S DEN.
MIDDLE DBOK-S TEHF
-*s“©4*
PRICE’S MURDERERS.
JOHN CHESLEY—Arrived in 1841 as a prisoner in the
“ Eliza ” but shortly after completing his sentence was found guilty
of assault with intent to rob. He was then sent to Norfolk Island
from whence he escaped, and came to Victoria. He made a most
daring attempt to escape from Pentridge in March, 1855, but was
recaptured about miles from the gaol by a band of settlers who
had joined the warders and police in the chase. As a carpenter he
had been engaged repairing the warders’ quarters, when, one
morning, he boldly mounted one of Mr. Price’s horses and, with his
tools in his hand, attempted to pass the armed sentries as if he had
leave from the Inspector-General. Finding himself challenged he
rushed through, running the gauntlet of the prompt firing from
every direction. One bullet went through his hat, another grazed
his face, while his jumper and shirt were riddled with shot. He was
slightly wounded, and was sentenced to a term on the hulk
“Success” in 36 lb. irons. He was tried for complicity in the
murder of Mr. Price in 1857. During that memorable trial he con-
ducted his own defence, pointing out very ingeniously where its
different points did not agree, and after thanking God for moving
the hearts of the jury in favour of his fellow-prisoners, he boldly
asserted he had neither hand, act, or part in the murder ibis
statement being totally at variance with the evidence he was
executed on April 30th of the same year at the early age of 32.


FRANCIS BRANNIGAN —AIias “ Bragan,” was born at
Birr, Ireland, in 1814. Transported to Tasmania by the “ Tortoise ”
for a trivial offence in 1842 for 14 years. Crossed the Straits to
ictoria in the “ Mary ” in 1854, became notorious through being
concerned in four robberies in the Maryborough District, and,
though committed for trial, escaped from custody when en route
to Castlemaine. He was wounded by the police sentry at the time
and £lOO reward was offered by the Government for his arrest. On
the 14th April, 1 855, he was secured at Bullarook Forest, Victoria, in
company with five others, known afterwards as Brannigan’s gang.
They were all sentenced to 15 years, first three years in irons, for
numerous highway robberies. The leader, being a violent ill-tem-
pered ruffian, was ordered to a special cell on board the “ Success,”
where he afterwards led the wild mob that murdered Mr. Price in
1857. He was the first man to attack the Inspector-General,
whom he hurled to the ground with a double-handed stone. Of the
seven men executed for the crime, April 1857, Brannigan alone
admitted his guilt. On the hour of his execution he recognised his
former captor, Injector Stony, among the crowd assembled at the
foot of the scaffold, and bowing, wished him “ a very good
morning.”
WILLIAM BROWN —Was a mere lad, being scarcely 19
years of age. He arrived in Victoria in 1852 as a free seaman in
the “ Helen,” who had worked his passage out to the colonies. He
deserted his ship, and on finding a mate went to the Forest Creek
goldfields. Being unsuccessful at the diggings he and his mate
started a downward career, for they were implicated in several
robberies with violence. He was secured and received a sentence
of 7 years. He was one of Mr. Price’s murderers, and was
executed on Wednesday, April 29, 1857. In height he was
5 ft. 1 in., of slight frame, fair complexion, with brown hair and
light grey eyes. He was born in Glasgow in 1838. He had been
brought up to the sea, and was a Presbyterian. His appearance
was far from repulsive.
RICHARD BRYANT —Or “Bryan Hennis,” was born in
Dublin in 1803. He had followed the trade of a sawyer, and was a
Roman Catholic. He arrived in Victoria by the “ Moffatt,” in 1840,
and after committing several highway robberies under arms on the
Melbourne road, near Keilor, in company with two others, he was
arrested, the other two getting away. After obtaining his liberty
he was on two different occasions convicted of robbery, for which
he received 7 years. He was an old and hardened offender, in
whom reformation was perfectly hopeless. He was a most
designing man, and nothing ever made him afraid. He was one of
the prisoners concerned in the murder of Mr. Price, and was
executed on the morning of Wednesday, the 29th April, 1857. In
height he was 5 ft. 11 Jin., of stout build, sallow complexion, dark


brown hair and hazel eyes. He was in his 54th year at the time of
his execution. A more “ tiger-like ” demon never paced the boards
of the “ Success,” and as for being concerned in every deed of
violence committed he was one of the ringleaders.
JOHN PRICE —Late Inspector-General of Penal Establish-
ments for Victoria, was also Chief Commandant of Penal Establish-
ments in Van Dieman’s Land. He was a son of Sir Rose Price, a
Cornish baronet, and was married to a niece of the late Sir John
Franklin, and at the time of his death left a widow and six children.
He is supposed to be the Maurice Prere of Mr. Marcus Clarke’s
depicting in “ His Natural Life,” and is here shown as he appeared
after the fatal blows were struck on the afternoon of the 26 th March,
1857, which were committed by the prisoners along with him.
Cells No. 1 to 38 were for the better conducted prisoners
or those whose sentences were of a lighter nature than the lower-
deck, and also for the prisoners who were working ashore in the
quarries after having served a probationary term of two years in
the lower cells.
The Storeroom adjoins the “tiger’s den” and is absolutely
as in use when in full “ rig ” as a convict ship.
LOWER DECK-BOW,
Captain PRICE commanding GIPSY SMITH to return
to his cell at the time of the rush of Melville and his comrades on
the evening of the 22nd of October, 1856.
1. Solitary Confinement Cell.
2. GIPSY SMITH was one of a number who, becoming
excited by the utterances made by the leader of the Chartist
agitation, at a meeting held on Kennington Common, looted a
pawnbroker’s shop in Southampton Street, Camberwell, London.
He loaded himself with watches and jewellery, and was promptly
seized and sentenced to 12 years’ transportation in Van Dieman’s
Land. From thence he escaped, but, being recaptured, was sent
this time to Norfolk Island. He escaped from there to Victoria in
1854. Having taken to bushranging, he was soon standing his
trial for murder, but the charge being afterwards altered to highway
robbery he received a sentence of 16 years on the “ Success?” In
confinement he was notoriously uproarious and insolent, but under
the influence of Mr. Chaup, the Inspector-General who succeeded
Mr. Price, he became so changed as to be released on ticket-of-leave,
and was afterwards employed by Mr. Lang (son of the Rev. Dr!
Lang, Sydney), who often had occasion to entrust him with large
amounts of money, which confidence he never forfeited. Returning
to the Ovens district, he decided to marry, but living unhappily, he


one night drowned his wife in a dam. Doomed to death, he tried
to defeat the law by cutting his throat with a jagged piece of razor
that he had successfully concealed in his boot. ’ He had pretended
to be asleep with a rug over his head, when the warder at his side
felt the prisoners arm fab heavily on him, raised the alarm, and
obtained assistance. Executed on the day following, 22nd April,
1861.
3 and 4. Solitary Confinement Cells.
5. WILLIAM STEVENS.— A native of Cornwall, England.
He arrived in Victoria in the latter part of 1853. One night he was
camped close to Sawpit Gully, near a party who were also proceed-
ing to the diggings. In a drunken state, William Stevens advanced
to the travellers, and demanded a case of brandy, either by payment
or othei wise; but he would have it. The carrier from whom the
grog was demanded refused, which caused a quarrel to ensue, the
result being that firearms were used freely. One of the travellers
was wounded. On the next day he was arrested, and brought to
Melbourne, where he was tried for stealing brandy and firing at
with intent. He received a sentence of 10 years, and was forwarded
to the “ Success,”hvhere he formed in a few years the leader of the
gang which made so desperate a struggle to escape with Melville,
and who was the one whom Melville said struck Owens, the
and then, with the stonecutter’s axe in hand, jumped overboard.
His body was never recovered.
6. RICHARD JONES.— A native of Wales. He came to
the colony a free man, but on arrival started for the Ballarat
diggings, where, in a drunken brawl, a man named Conroy threw a
tumbler at him, injuring him seriously on the thumb. He was
arrested, after resisting violently, and was sentenced to seven
years on various charges. He was the prisoner who feigned sick-
ness for the space of three months for the purpose of effecting his
escape, having secreted five knives in his cell; but after the expiration
of three months, seeing he had only managed to cut his way half
through the ship, his heart failed him and his plot was discovered
7 and 8. Solitary Confinement Cells.
9. HENRY GARRETT —This remarkable man first gained
an unenviable reputation in 1855, by sticking up the Bank at Ballarat,
Victoria, and robbing it of £16,000, in broad daylight. On his
escape to London he was followed and brought back in custody and
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment on the “ Success.” In 1861
he went to New Zealand, on ticket-of-leave, where he resumed his
criminal career. On one occasion, in 1862, he bailed up and tied to
trees no less than 17 men in one day, for which he received another
sentence of 10 years, this time for robbery under arms. On
becoming free he adopted clothes of a clerical cut and white tie, and
carried a large bible under his arm, and while in this dress the
police saw him enter a store by a dark right of way and caught


him red-handed looting the safe and loading himself with valuables.
Some 20 burglaries, of which he had been in no way suspected,
were now traced to him, and he received in all 22 years’ imprison-
ment. Ide had much literary ability, having written and published
a very readable “ Essay on Crime,” and many other interesting
fictional sketches. As a burglar he was ingenious in his disguises
and astute in his methods, and as a bushranger it is said of him that
he never took the life of any of his victims. He died a few years
ago, aged 72, thus finishing a chequered and misspent career.
10, OWEN SUFFOLK —Was a native of London. He was
also transported to Van Dieman’s Land, but did not stay long there,
as he escaped and came over with nine others in the year 1853.
Received 3 years in Victoria, for sticking up the mail coach running
between Melbourne and Geelong. Having served his full time on
that charge, he started on a second expedition, in the way of
forgery, for which he received 17 years. After doing a portion of
his sentence, he was allowed onshore to work in Williamstown, and
during the whole of that time he was always concocting “ rushes.”
He was eventually taken on board the “ Success,” and never
allowed ashore. When he became free he went to Melbourne from
Williamstown, and in a few days wrote a book which was entitled
“ The Days of Crime and years of Sufferance,” for which he received
a sum of £4O. He was the most accomplished rogue that ever
stepped into shoe leather, and whilst on the “Success” he was
constantly concocting something of a villainous nature. He after-
wards went to London, where he married a widow lady with an
only daughter, and one day he arranged with them for an outing
on the water in a small skiff. This was accomplished, and whilst
on their way homewards he threw mother and daughter into the
Thames. He immediately proceeded to the bouse, in order to
secure all his wife’s property and deeds of a portable nature. He
was followed by a boatman who had witnessed the whole affair,
and from his evidence he was sentenced to 22 years’ imprisonment.
The pamphlet he wrote contained a unique and graphic description
of the early days of Victorian criminality.
11 and 12. Solitary Confinement Cells.
13, RICHARD HILL. —A native of London. He was a
well-educated and pleasant-speaking man. He had been a lawyer’s
clerk in London, but came to Victoria in the year 1853. When at
the Bendigo goldfields he committed several robberies under arms,
sticking up several small stores on the outside of the diggings. He
was soon arrested and sent to Melbourne, where he was tried on
the above charge, and sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. He
was sent to the “ Success,” and being clever at stone-cutting was
allowed on shore to work. He was chosen by Stevens as one of
the party in the rush, and was shot through the neck by the
sentries from the “Success,” 1856.


14. RICHARD ROWLEY —A native of Limerick, Ireland,
born in 1817, convicted in his native town of attempted murder,
sentenced to 10 years’ transportation in Yan Dieman’s Land. He
escaped from Port Arthur in 1854, and came to Victoria. After
working at the diggings a short time, he took to bushranging
between Melbourne, Bendigo and the Black Forest, He was captured
at the Lady of the Lake Hotel, at Bulla, near Melbourne, on the
road to Bendigo, nine months after starting his exploits, and re-
ceived in Melbourne, where he was tried, a sentence of 22 years. He
was sent to the “ Success,’’ where he was confined four or five years.
After the death of Mr. Price, he was removed to Pentridge ; being
there a few months he assaulted one of the overseers (Kilmartinj
by striking him on the head with a pick-bandle, at the same time
pushing him into the quarry 30 feet deep. Kilmartin s legs were
broken at the thighs, together with receiving a deep scalp wound
on the forehead. He was attended by the Chief Medical Officer,
Dr. McCrea, who pronounced his case hopeless. He lingered,
however for a period of two years, but eventually recovered
sufficiently to be able to walk about, but he was the most pitiable
object to be seen'at Coburg, or ever the lot of man to discern,
although previous to the assault one of the most upstanding of
men. Rowley was then forwarded to the Melbourne Gaol, and
brought up for trial for assault and attempted murder before his
Honor Judge Barry, He was sentenced to death, and was
executed a short time after.
Necklets— These were worn by prisoners as punishment for
insubordination, for 12 hours on bread and water. The figure 8
handcuffs were fastened behind their backs.
15 and 16. Solitary Confinement Cells.
17. JACKY WILLIAMS— Or “Big Black Jack,” as he
was generally known amongst those on the “ Success.” He was
the recipient of a sentence of 15 years in London, when he was
sent to Yan pieman’s Land, for robbing a store and safe-cracking.
He did a portion of his time there, when he escaped, and came to
Victoria in 1853. He took to the roads immediately after his
arrival in Victoria, but was soon arrested on a charge of highway
robbery. He was serving this sentence on the “ Success” at the
time of the attack on Mr. Price, and while the officer’s attention
was directed towards the outrage he broke his leg-irons and escaped,
was re-arrested and sentenced to wear the iron punishment band
as represented. He was recognised by Mr. Price as an absconder
from Norfolk Island, and it did not require much insubordination
on his part to receive an additional three years from Mr. Price.
He, however, served his full time and became a free man, but
nothing was heard of him afterwards.


18 to 21. Solitary Confinement Ceils.
22. HENRY SMITH— Alias “ Shylock.”—Born in Dublin
in 1818. Arrived in Sydney by the “ Sovereign,” in 1848. He
was then sentenced to a term of seven years, under the name of
Christopher Brennan. His time expiring, he sailed to England,
but returned as a free emigrant 1847, by the “ Coromandel,” and
was subsequently convicted of horse stealing. He had but two
months to serve when he became conspicuous in the attack on Mr.
Price, whose head he shattered with a fearful blow with a shovel.
In evidence at the trial, it came out that during the melee, he
stripped off his shirt (which was one mass of blood) and burned it
in the blacksmith’s shop adjacent. Executed. 28th April, 1857.
23 and 24. Solitary Confinement Cells.
25. Cel! occupied by Power the bushranger while
serving 14 years for horse-stealing and attempted murder.
26. JOHN YOUNG —Was a native of Colford, Gloucester,
England. He was one of the Pentonville’s who were sent to the
colonies and landed quietly at Geelong. Went off to the diggings
and there he settled down to a life of quietude for a considerable
time, but he again became anxious to gain the filthy lucre, as in
an unguarded moment on the part of his comrades, he placed a
quantity of strychnine in the tea, but his plot was discovered.
He was arrested at Bendigo and sent to Melbourne, where he was
tried by Chief Justice Stawell, and received a sentence of 12 years
aboard the “ Success.” He was another of the most troublesome
of prisoners ; he was constantly in trouble. He was kept on
board the ship, never allowed ashore. He, however, served his
full time ; but once free he again became as violent as ever, and
was not long at liberty before he committed one of the most
atrocious of crimes. He was executed in Castlemaine Gaol, 21st
August, 1865. On the 28th December, 1864, a miner named
Graham, residing in Daylesford, on his return from his night shift,
after 12 o’clock, found his young wife Margaret—to whom he had
been married only six weeks lying on her bed with her throat
cut, and her legs hanging over the side of the bed. On the Bth of
the following January, Constable Brady arrested Young for this
most foul murder, and after a great deal of delay and difficulty,
sentence of death was passed upon him on the 28th July, 1865.
Born at Colford, Gloucestershire, about 1881; by trade a miner.
He was also one cf the men tried for the murder of Mr. Price, but
he was acquitted.
27 and 28. Solitary Confinement Cells.
28. WILLIAM JONES —Otherwise “Black Bill”—was a
native of Cardiff, Wales. He was transported from his native
town to serve a sentence of 10 years in Van Dieman’s Land for


attempting arson. He escaped from there, and came to Melbourne,
but hearing of the diggings of 1853, he, in company with two
others, started for Castlemaine and Forest Creek diggings. On
their way they started pilfering and sticking-up, but were soon
captured. They were all tried in Melbourne together and received
various sentences. The Judge gave a light sentence to the two
comrades, viz., five years each, but Jones received rather a severe
one, as the Judge, taking into consideration that he was an
escaped convict, sentenced him to 22 years. He was also
implicated in the murder of Mr. Price, but as there was no
evidence to prove he even struck a blow, he was acquitted. After
serving a long sentence, with as much solitary as would have
killed a dozen others, he was transferred to Pentridge, where he
served the remaining part, and became free.
30. DANIEL DONOVAN —Was a native of Ireland, but
was transported to Van Pieman’s Land for a period of seven years
for arson. After doing some of his time in Van Pieman’s Land he
was sent to Norfolk Island, where he was witness of one the most
revolting acts of humanity it was possible to see. The then Inspector-
General of Penal Establishments, a Mr. Machonochie, was rather
of a humane disposition towards the convicts and allowed them
liberties of which they were pleased, and won their respect. For
instance each prisoner who was of good behaviour was allowed a
little kitchen garden round his hut, besides when at work the
liberty of a “ billy ”of tea at dinner-time. When Mr. Price took
charge and succeeded Mr. Machonochie absolutely, he did not fall
in with this idea, and quickly confiscated the “billy of tea,” besides
removing them to more remote portions of the island, away from
the gardens. This was the beginning of serious acts of revolt and
rebellion, and his life was not safe on the island. In order then
to put their plan into effect a man named “ Jacky Jacky,” who
was serving a sentence for life, murdered one of the watchmen of
a gate at the Stockade, and on Mr. Price coming amongst them,
although always on the alert, had to retreat speedily amongst the
ranks of the soldiers who were keeping guard over them. The
prisoners implicated were tried within the gaol walls by the
visiting Judge, and 11 men were executed. Ponovan soon after
this managed to effect his escape, and crossed to Victoria, but
started a series of highway robberies, aud on being arrested and
tried received a sentence of 16 years, which he served on the
“ Success.” He became a free man, but like many others who had
been in this “ocean hell” found that his health was seriously
impaired, and he soon afterwards died.
31 and 32. Solitary Confinement Cells,
a 3. FREDERICK MACDONALD—A native of Glasgow,
Scotland, arrived in Victoria about the year 1852; originally a


civil engineer, and turned bis mining knowledge to account by
tunn filing right underneath George Street, Sydney, from a house
in which he lived throug'h the floor of the Bank of Australia
opposite, and taking therefrom £17,000 in dollars and notes. In
the morning Macdonald’s house was found deserted, and he was
miles away. Finally for forgery he was arrested in an office
where he was engaged, and held the respect of his employers;
received a sentence of nine years before Mr. Justice Stawell, when
he was also sent to the “ Success.” On the evening of the boat’s
affray he was discovered sitting in the boat, having overheard the
plot, and wishing to be free had secretly hidden there. He was
tried with the boat’s crew, and returned to the “ Success,” where
he served his full sentence.
34. THOMAS MALONEY A native of Limerick,
Ireland. He was transported with another to Van Dieman's Land
for attempted murder, for a term of ten years ; escaped from Van
Dieman’s Land early in 1854, when he came to Victoria, and
proceeded to the Bendigo goldfields. He soon committed a series of
petty robberies, but being caught was sentenced for a term of eight
years, and was sent to the “ Success ”to complete it. He was one
of the most insubordinate of all the prisoners thereon, as his
sentence accumulated to 14 years for insubordination and
breakages of prison discipline. He was one of the gang who
assisted in the murder of Mr. Price, for which he was executed
with the others. The records state that he arrived as a prisoner
of the Crown in the “ King William ” in 1840, and after obtaining
his freedom was convicted of felony. He was by trade a butcher.
In height he was sft.7in., of stout build, pale complexion, brown hair
and grey eyes. He was 32 years of age, and anything but prepossess-
ing; and at his trial after the death sentence had been passed on him
by Judge Barry for the murder of Mr, Price, requested that he might
bo publicly executed.
35 and 36. Solitary Confinement Cells.
37. JOHN HEFFERNAN —Otherwise “Big Jack”—was
a native of Kilkenny, Ireland. He was also transported to Van
Dieman’s Land, and it is known he formed one of a party of ten who
left a boat at Brighton Beach in which they had escaped. He
found his way to the Bendigo diggings, and was arrested for high-
way robbery a sentence of ten years on the “ Success.”
He was nicknamed the “Chief Justice”" of the ship and was
generally respected by his comrades. On the third finger of his
left hand will be noticed a ring which he was allowed to wear, a
concession seldom given to anyone, but as it was a closely fitting
ring and a present from a friend he was allowed to wear it.


38 and 39. Solitary Confinement Cells.
40. The Refractory Cell of “Captain” MELVILLE—
Melville, born 1830, died 1856, transported originally in the
“ Minerva for stealing a potato pie from a countryman’s cart.
Absconded from a “road gang; was “captain” of a band
of 80 men, and for several offences of highway robbery received
in all 82 years’ imprisonment. Reached Port Phillip as a
stowaway in 1852, was there arrested as a bushranger and
imprisoned on the “ Success.” At the Melville “ rush ” in
1856, of which he was ringleader, two warders’ lives were sacri-
ficed, respectively Owen Owens and John Turner, which,
together with numerous sensational escapes, is fully described
in the “History of the “Success,” now sold on board. Then
sentenced to death, but being afterwards reprieved through the
raising of a legal quibble, of which commutation he was about
to be informed, when the warders found him strangled to death
with his neckerchief in his cell.
41 and Black Holes —ln which prisoners were
confined from 1 to 28 days on bread and water.
LOWER DECK-STERN.
THE NOTORIOUS KELLY GANG.
From 1878 to 1880 these desperate men continued a career of
lawlessness unparalleled in any part of the world. To rid the
country of their presence, no less than 217 members of the police
force, besides a number of detectives and black trackers, all armed
with the latest improved weapons of war, were at one time on
their trial.
Ned Kelly, leader of the gang, aged 27, executed Nov. 12th,
1880, for shooting Constable Fitzpatrick in April, 1878, and
murdering Sergeant Kennedy and Constables Scanlan and Lonigan
in October of the same year.
Joe Byrne, aged 21, shot dead by one of 50 police who
surrounded the Hotel at Glenrown, while he was toasting
“ Prosperity to the gang,” at the bar of the hotel.
Steve Hart, aged 20, and Han Kelly, aged but 18, whose
charred remains were found among the debris of the hotel after it
had been fired by the police, 28th June, 1880.
The extermination of this band of outlaws cost £115,000.


THE DOCK HOUSE,
EAST INDIA ROAD,
THE EXCHANGE,
HIGH STREET,
•* POPLAR, E. *•
BIIaIaIKRD mhOOR
2 Tables, BURROUGHS & WATTS.


Convict Ship, “ SDCCESS,”
SHOWN AS
WHEN IN COMMISSION
AS A
PRISON HULK,
Off the Port of WILLIAISTOWN,
VICTORIA,
-m AUSTRALIA.
