

NO. CLI. NEW SERIES.
NO. CLXXXVIII. O.S.
JULY I.
1879.
PRICE 2 s. 6d.
THE
FORTNIGHTLY
REVIEW.
EDITED BY JOHN MORLEY.
CONTEXTS.
PAGE
I. Cardinal Newman. By W. S. LILLY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. A Simple Way out of the Indian Difficulty. By Rt. Hon. R. LOWE; M.P. 24
III. Saint Evremond. By GEORGE SAINTSBURY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
IV. The Progress of Heavy Artillery. By Lt.-Col. LRAN . . . . . . . . . 57
V. Modem Parliaments. By Professor PEASON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
VI. The Coloured Man in Australia. By JOHN WISKER . . . . . . . . . . . 82
VII. Agricultural Prospects. By the EARL of AIRLIE. . . . . . . . . . . 98
VIII. English County Asylums. By Hon. FRANCIS SCOTT . . . . . . . . . . 114
IX. Some New Books. By GRANT A LLEN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
X. Home and Foreign Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
LONDON:
CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY.
NEW YORK: WILMER ROGERS NEW Co. LEIPZIG: BROCKHAUS.
MELBOURNE: GEORGE ROBERTSON. ROTTERDAM : H. A. KRAMERS.
PARIS: LIBRAIRIE LIGNANI. J. G. ROBBERS.
BERLIN: ASHER & Co. VIENNA: GEROLD & Co.
[ The Right of Translation is reserved.]
Advertisements are to be sent to the Publishers, or Adams & Francis, 59, Fleet St. , E.C.


THE COLOURED MAN IN AUSTRALIA.
Tur, coloured races of Australia—as all those not of European ex-
traction are concisely called—are a constant source of anxiety to the
■white settlers. No sooner has the colonist disposed of one “ shade/'
than he is confronted by some trouble arising out of the commissions
of another; and disputes as to the best mode of dealing with
Asiatics, Polynesians, and aboriginals form' some of the most pro-
minent of Australian questions. Erom the date of the first settle-
ment, the degraded original owners of the soil have commanded the
attention of the settlers who appropriated their property. The
mischievous propensities of the aboriginals have been a source of
constant annoyance to the pioneers, whilst the rapid decline in their
numbers has disappointed the philanthropist, who vainly sought to
raise these barbarians in the scale of intelligence, by teaching them
habits of continuous toil and a sense of moral responsibility. The
helpless brutality of the aboriginal does, however, secure him from
active hostility on the part of the white settler; and the problem of
dealing with him in the most humane and advantageous manner will
at no distant date he solved by his disappearance from the face of
the earth. Yery different is the case with the aliens who have im-
ported in large numbers from Asia and the South Sea Islands. These
races show no signs of decay. Their numbers are constantly in-
creasing. They have invaded Australia from Cape York to Port
Philip, and from South Australia to New Zealand. Partly because
they represent cheap labour, partly because “ Australia for the
white man ” is become an article of faith from one end of the con-
tinent to the other, these importations have met with the most
determined hostility—with antipathy which might long ago have
culminated in serious violence, had not the various colonial govern-
ments performed something, and promised more, in the way of re-
pressive legislation. The coloured man is the stock subject of the
newspapers, the regular topic at public meetings, and the theme of
numerous parliamentary debates. In short, he has risen to the
dignity of the question of the day.
The coloured races of Australia are of three principal varieties.
The aboriginal is black, the Chinaman is yellow, and the Polynesian
may he of any tint from copper to black. Since the conclusion of
the Maori war in Hew Zealand, the aboriginal has not attracted any
attention beyond the limits of Australia. The colonists, however,
especially in the north, have by no means heard the last of him.
The fine race of Hew Zealand are rapidly declining through the


combined influence of too much rum, and, apparently, too little
fighting. Drink and inactivity co-operate towards the same result.
Peace is now maintained between the natives and the settlers, and
the former are more considerately treated than of yore ; hut alike
in peace or war, whether drinking rum or cutting throats, the native
New Zealander goes down before the advance of civilisation. The
aboriginals of Tasmania are extinct. On the continent their con-
dition becomes more degraded and hopeless in proportion as they are
remote from-the sea. The coast natives are far superior to those of
the inland districts. The former are capable of continuous industry,
and display a considerable amount of intelligence. Some specimens
that I saw about Moreton Bay (the entrance to the River Brisbane)
were remarkably fine men. In the north of Queensland —in the
peninsula of Cape York and round about the gulf of Carpentaria—the
native is of an entirely different race, and probably migrated origin-
ally from the islands of the great Indian archipelago. He is
athletic, intelligent, ferocious, untameable, and is credited with an
appetite for human flesh. Traces of cannibalism have also been
found in the western interior; but nothing exact Is known of the
natives .of that unexplored region. The most degraded of the
aboriginal tribes have proved less unteacbable than might have been
inferred from the accounts of early travellers ; but nowhere have
these races been so advantageously affected by civilisation as to
afford any hope of their escaping that natural law which dooms the
weaker race to disappear before the stronger. The blacks will occa-
sionally work for the squatters, and work well; but they soon grow
tired of remaining in one place. Continuous applicatiou seems
beyond them. They are useful in tracking malefactors—a business
for which most of them have qualified by a long training as evil-
doers on their own account. In some places areas have been set
apart for them, and homes have been established under the care of
white officials. Here the aboriginal has acquired a little knowledge
of agriculture and some of the simpler arts ; but it is noticeable that
women or old and infirm men mostly seek these institutions, which
thus do little to leaven the lump of able-bodied savagery. In
Northern Queensland the relationship between the whites and the
blacks is one of war to the knife. The savage uses bis spear, the
settler his rifle, whenever an opportunity presents itself. Nothing
is attempted in the way of negotiation, overtures for peace, or re-
clamation. The latter is pronounced to be an impossibility; but no
effort has been made to establish a modus vivendi. It is said—and
probably with too much truth—that the irreconcilable hostility of
these northern savages was first provoked by atrocities on the part of
the early settlers; but it is not at all certain that the blacks could
not be propitiated. They have decidedly the best of the present
g 2


permanent state of warfare, which annually costs Queenslanders
several lives and a large amount of property.
So much for the black man. The Kanaka, South Sea Islander, or
Polynesian, as he is variously termed, may be generally classed as
the brown man, though every island rejoices in its peculiar tint.
These immigrants are confined to Queensland, and almost to one
industry—the cultivation of sugar. About ten years ago the
English Government and people were astonished at the receipt of
reports to the effect that the South Sea Islanders were systematically
kidnapped and compelled to work on the Queensland plantations.
These accounts had too much foundation in truth; hut such practices
wholly ceased long ago. An Act passed in the year 1868 placed
this kind of immigration under strict regulations. Every vessel
bringing Polynesians to Queensland must be licensed. Every im-
porter of South Sea Islanders must sign a bond with two sureties,
agreeing, under a penalty, to fulfil the conditions of the Act. These
stipulate that the Polynesian shall be employed for a term of three
years, at wages not under £6 a year. He is to be provided with a
certain amount of clothing yearly, with rations, and medical atten-
dance when required. At the end of the term of three years his
employer must jorovide him with a passage—the accommodation on
board ship being also specified. These labourers are industrious and
for the most part well behaved. They suffer no hardship from
their employers; but the mortality amongst them is excessive,
arising mostly from pulmonary diseases. Though the climate here
is tropical, the mornings in midwinter are very cold, with occasional
frosts. Some of these Polynosians remain in Queensland after the
expiration of their term of service, and these often display a pro-
pensity for arraying themselves in fine linen and gold chains. The
remainder return to their native islands ,(the Hew Hebrides), carry-
ing with, them the equivalent of their £lB in the shape of rifles,
revolvers, and other instruments of war. As these are. the marks of
civilisation of which they are most proud, it is to be feared that their
intercourse with higher intelligences does not prove an unmixed
blessing to their benighted brethren at home. In the year 1877
the number of Polynesians who came to Queensland was 1986, in-
cluding' only 74 females. The number who departed was 906. The
total number imported into this colony up to the end of March,
1878, was 13,933. Of these 1,694 died, and 6,570 went home again,
•leaving 6,669 in the country.
The insignificant number of women who come hither from the
islands forms an objection to the employment of Kanakas. As for
the rest, it might be thought that a body of labourers who ■ are
engaged for a limited period, and who perform a kind of work that
is not suitable for Europeans, would excite no jealousy or animosity


amongst the whites. This, however, is not the case. The Aus-
tralian’s antipathy to the coloured man is beyond the reach of argu-
ment. The Polynesian, limited as is the sphere of Iris operations,
has narrowly escaped exclusion from Queensland. The Premier who
has just retired from office (Mr. Douglas) was greatly opposed to
Kanaka labour ; and a measure further “ regulating ” the employ-
ment of the South Sea Islander was all but passed in the session of
1877. The newly-arrived immigrant from Great Britain or Europe,
who is landed at the Northern ports, is especially dismayed at the
sight of these dark-skinned fellow-labourers. The immensity of the
distances in these countries, the interminable forests of gum trees,
the roughness of everything around, the villages where he expected
to find cities, and the hamlets where he imagined there wordd be
towns, are calculated to depress the new-comer at first; but these
novel influences are as nothing compared with the prospect of having
to w T ork side by side with blade labour ! Appalled at such an un-
expected discovery, many of the immigrants, who are brought hither
at a cost to the colony of some £2O a head, hasten southwards ; and
thus New South "Wales secures many a good citizen at the-expense
of Queensland.
The Polynesian, however, as an object of public interest and of
public dread, sinks into insignificance before the Chinese. This
übiquitous, all-suffering, all-capable individual —the future possessor
of the world in his own opinion—has invaded Australia in thousands.
He competes with the white man in almost every industry. He is
careless of hardship, and apparently indifferent to climate. He
flourishes equally under the almost equatorial heat of northern
Queensland, and in the moist cool atmosphere of New Zealand. He
possesses the power of working almost without limit, though he is
slower and feebler than the Englishman; he can live upon a sum
which would astonish a Dorsetshire labourer; and he regards an
occasional period of semi-starvation as something quite in the ordi-
nary way of business. These qualities, much more than certain
vices to which the yellow man is addicted, have excited against him
the bitterest aversion. The slang name for this invasion of the
celestial children is sufficiently expressive. It is called the Yellow
Agony. The Chinaman is regarded, in short, as an instrument for
taking the bread out of the white man’s morrth, as an agent for the
reduction of wages; and his tendency is undoubtedly to monopolize
any industry in which he once gets a footing.
It is remarkable that a question which is vital to Australia, and
which is of no little imperial importance, should have excited so
little attention in England. From time to time the English papers
have noticed the Chinese invasion of California ; and some years ago
the Philadelphia correspondent of the Times very felicitously de


scribed tbe hostility to the Chinese in America as caused by their
“underselling white labour, and setting up their idols in a Christian
land.” The Times itself brought the artillery of political economy
to bear ; it upheld the right of the employer to buy labour in the
cheapest market. And possibly this off-hand decision was sufficient
as regards the case in America. The Chinese there are only
obnoxious in the one corner where they reside; they are but a drop
in the ocean of the great republic. If we estimate the Chinese in
California at 85,000 —an extreme number, I believe —such an alien
population is not likely to cause any social disturbance amongst a
community of forty millions, however offensive they may be to their
immediate neighbours. In Australia the case is widely different.
The Chinese swarm throughout the, eastern continent. There are
4,000 in Sydney alone. In Queensland they number at least 20,000,
out of a total population of little over 200,000. The report of the
Queensland Department of Mines for the year 1877 states that the
total number of gold-miners at the end of the year was 17,903. Of
these only 4,634 were Europeans, and the remainder, 13,269, were
Chinese, In some places, notably Cooktown, these visitors form tbe
majority of tbe population. Yiewing the matter apart from pre-
judice, antipathy, or panic, these figures do suggest a serious ques-
tion. If this immigration of Chinese be continued, is there not a
danger lest the yellow race should, at any rate in certain districts,
become the dominant one ? Theso colonies are held by white men
in the name of Queen Victoria; are we to allow any portion of them
practically to pass to the Emperor of China P The question is a
complicated one, since we have to consider—first, the general right
of the employer to get his work done at the cheapest rate; secondly,
the treaty obligations of the empire of which Australia forms a part;
thirdly, the undoubted right of the colonies to self-preservation.
The last consideration seems likely to overpower the others. Hightly
or wrongly, the colonial electors and their representatives have
decided that Chinese immigration constitutes a danger which must
not be suffered to continue. If one expedient fails to keep out tbe
yellow man, another must be tried; excluded be must be. This
feeling is practically unanimous. It has brought about repressive
legislation in Queensland, and tbe example of the younger colony
will spon he followed in New South Wales.
When the Chinaman first arrived in Queensland, he devoted him-
self to occupations in which his services were very welcome. He
raised vegetables which no one else would raise; he caught the fish
which had hitherto swum almost unmolested in Moreton Bay ; and
he did the work both of an English country hawker and a London
costermonger. The Queenslander is apt to despise small industries.
The command of boundless territory, the enervating climate, and the


still more enervating system o£ government, all tend to foster a
dislike to occupations which, require attention to minute detail. To
such a community the plodding Chinaman was useful —and, indeed,
■still is, as far as the above-mentioned occupations go. But the case
assumed a totally different aspect after the discovery of the northern
gold-fields, especially that on the Palmer Elver (1873). The
almond-eyed race rushed thither in thousands, all animated with the
hope of realising that very modest capital which secures a competence
in China. The alluvial diggings of the North 1 were totally unequal
to the support of the multitudes who flocked to them. In some
localities the yield of gold was insufficient to procure the necessaries
of life—even the necessaries of Chinese life. Great privations were
endured hy the majority. ■ Many died of sheer starvation. But their
fate did not check the invasion. A few gained the coveted fortune,
and each individual was willing to brave every risk in tbe hope that
lie might be numbered among the lucky minority. The Chinese
are inveterate gamblers—a propensity in strange contrast with
their indomitable perseverance and plodding industry. Suffering
the Celestial bears patiently.; he holds life cheaply; and so long as
he sees a chance of success for himself, he views with the utmost
unconcern the bleached bones of bis companions around him.
Nearly all the yellow immigrants to the gold-fields came out under
a sort of contract with their wealthier brethren at home. Not
having the money to pay their own passages to Queensland, they
engaged to make over a certain proportion of their gains to the
capitalists who gave them a start. Notwithstanding the number
who left home never to return, the speculation seems to have paid
the Hong Kong merchants who embarked in it, for the stream of
Chinese immigration never ceased to flow as long as the alluvial
deposits on the northern fields held out, and until the adoption by
the Queensland Parliament and Government of the measures which
I am about to describe.
This form of Chinese enterprise gave rise among the Europeans
to a measure of discontent and enmity that never could have been
excited hy fishing or market-gardening. No matter that a European
could not live upon the gains out of which the Chinese would save
money; no matter that the aliens often worked ground that the
European would regard as worthless. The total amount carried off
by the Asiatics was imposing in tbe mass, and tbe white men
considered themselves robbed of their property. It must he ad-
mitted that these Chinese gold-seekers were perfectly useless as
m In alluvial mining the gold is sought by cashing the soil; in the other branch of
>d minino', “ roofing,” the precious motnl is extracted from the quartz rock by orush-
fng The latter operation requires expensive machinery, the former only lie amplest
appliances.


colonists. They did not bring their families, they did not settle.
Their only object was to secure as much gold as would recoup their
patrons and leave a balance for themselves. They then decamped.
During their stay here they dealt with traders of their own race, SO’
that much of oven their necessary expenditure would also find its
way back to China. Immigrants who have left no trace behind them,
except the exhaustion of the alluvial fields oyer which they worked,
could hardly be regarded as desirable colonists. Such visitors cannot
be welcomed. The Colonial feeling, however, goes far beyond this
negative phase. It is a feeling of determined hostility; it has
brought about several Acts of Parliament; and, whilst I write, '
further dramatic novelties of the same order are announced by the
new Government as being in preparation.
But, however precise the public demand might be, a practical
method of meeting’ it was not readily discovered. Queensland is an
integral portion of the British Empire, and the treaty obligations of
the Imperial Government must be respected here as elsewhere. The
Chinese could not be forcibly kept out. They could not be hanged
or imprisoned after they landed. At length the Brisbane Govern-
ment resolved to exclude these visitors by the indirect method of
rendering their expeditions hither unprofitable. The Hong Kong
patrons would not send their countrymen over, unless the specula-
tion proved remunerative; and accordingly the Ministry set them-
selves to prevent such a favourable result by imposing extra licenses,
and exacting a sort of caution money. In a word, the white man
was to bo protected by a duty on the yellow man. The first
measure passed by the Queensland Legislature was the Gold Fields
Act Amendment Act of 1877. This provided that all Asiatic or
African aliens should pay £3 for a miner’s right or license, whereas
the ordinary fee is 10s., and £lO for a business license, whereas the
charge to Europeans is £4. Governor Cairns withheld his assent
from this measure, on the ground that to impose special charges upon
the Chinese was contrary to the spirit of tho Imperial treaties with
China. Ihat tho measure was directed against the Chinese only
was obvious, since Queensland contains no African aliens, nor any
Asiatics except Chinese. The Queensland Ministry of the day
waxed wrath at this interference. They sought and obtained sym-
pathy from the other Australian Governments, and they composed
some Ministerial effusions which must have given intense amusement
in Downing Street. Finally, the bill was assented to. Whilst it
was in abeyance, the Government passed a second measure, which,
though still more oppressive to the yellow man, received the royal
assent without delay. This was the Chinese Immigrants Begula-
tion Act of 1877. It stipulates that the master of every vessel
bringing Chinese passengers to any Queensland port shall, before


making an entry at the Customs, deliver to the collector a list of the
Chinese on board, and pay a deposit of ten pounds for each one of
them. A certificate is given to each of these passengers, and consti-
tutes a sort of passport through the colony. The purpose for which
this deposit is made may be best exemplified by'quoting the 7th
Clause of the Act:—
“ 7._ All sums so paid by or on behalf of any Chinese shall be paid over to tho
Colonial Treasurer, and be by him applied in manner following, that is to say :
If at any time within three years from the date of the landing or arrival of any
Chinese in respect of whom such sums shall have been paid, such Chinese shall
depart from colony to parts beyond the seas, and shall before his departure
prove to the satisfaction of the Colonial Treasurer that during his residence in
the colony he has not been confined in any gaol or lock-up after conviction of
any offence, and that he has paid all fines and penalties imposed upon him
under the provisions of any Act in force in tho colony, and that he has paid all
expenses incurred in respect of his confinement or medical treatment in any
public hospital, benevolent asylum, lunatic asylum, or other place for the care,
treatment, or cure of tho sick poor or insane, and that no expense or charge
has fallen upon the revenue, —then upon tho production to tho collector or other
principal officer of customs at the port of embarkation, of tho certificate given
to such Chinese on his arrival, the amount so paid in respect of such Chinese
shall he repaid to him on board of the ship by wbiob ho shall so depart. But
if ho shall fail to make such proof within the period aforesaid, the amount shall
ho paid into the Consolidated Eeyenue.”
The penalties for the infringement of any of the provisions of this
Act are very severe —heavy fines, the forfeiture of the vessel, &c.
The chance of any Chinese immigrant getting his £lO back is
obviously infinitesimal. He must not only keep out of gaol, not only
pay for his maintenance if he is compelled to go to a hospital, a
benevolent asylum (a sort of workhouse) or a lunatic. asylum—the
latter being a very likely destination for any Chinese who come
hither after the passage of this Act, —but he must prove all this.
The onus of showing that he has been immaculate rests with Mm.
Imagine Ah Sing, tho Hong Kong John Smith, endeavouring to
prove in a strange country that he was not the Ah Sing who did
this or that which he ought not to have done ! In nine cases oat
of ten tho deposit must remain an absolute poll-tax.
The deposit, however, is not all. Ho vessel can carry more than
one Chinese passenger for every ten tons of registry. Previously
to the adoption of this proviso in Queensland, the steamship com-
panies were able to make this trade profitable by carrying large
numbers, tightly packed, at £3 or £4- a head. The Chinese had no
objection to the tight-packing; indeed, they are not thankful for any
of tho blessings of civilisation, as Europeans interpret them; and
they were only too glad to get here anyhow, provided the demand
upon their pockets was of moderate amount. lam informed by a
leading merchant that, under the Act of 1877, a Chinaman cannot
he profitably carried from Hong Kong to Cooldown (the most northerly


Queensland port) under £3O. Anything like this charge would be
prohibitory. As a matter of fact the Chinese Immigrants Regula-
tion Act has achieved its object, that of preventing- immigration
altogether. The number of Chinese who arrived in Queensland in
1875 was 7,254; in 1876, 6,555 ; and in 1877, 7,460. Since the end
■of 1877, the total of yellow immigrants has not reached 200. In all
likelihood a falling off in the number of visitors from Hong Kong-
would have been inevitable' in any case, since the alluvial fields ot
the north are well-nigh exhausted. But so complete a suspension
of the “yellow agony” can only be owing to the effect of these
prohibitive measures. ,
Yet even the two Acts I have described were not deemed sufficient
by an anxious Ministry. The first one—the Gold Fields Act
Amendment Act—proved a dead letter. It was found impossible to
get the license money from the Chinese. In many cases they did
not possess it; in other cases they would not pay. As this patient
race were always ready to starve or to go to gaol, their, m mertim
gained them a complete victory as regards this measure. The
deposit under the Regulation Act must be paid before the Chinese
.can land, and hence the decisive effect of that law ; the license was
payable after the Chinese had got on shore, and in practice could
not be obtained at all. This result was, of course, unsatisfactory.
The Regulation Act prevented fresh importations, hut it did not
.affect those Chinese who were already in the colony. Something
was needed to make these uncomfortable,_ and the Gold Fields Act
Amendment Act had proved a complete failure. Nothing daunted,
the Ministry passed the Gold Fields Act Amendment Act of 1878,
which repealed the Amendment Act of 1877, and forbade “ Asiatic
.or African aliens ” from mining on new gold fields, a field being
defined as “ new ” for three years after proclamation. Thus it a
Chinese gold-seeker does get over the difficulty of the £lO deposit
—which has so far proved insuperable—lie can only take the leavings
■of the Europeans. No new fields worth mentioning have recently
been discovered, and the old alluvial • deposits must speedily cease to
afford a livelihood even to a Chinaman. Some of the ground has
been worked over three times already. Whether this repressive
legislation is in accordance with the spirit of British treaties wit
China is a question for the Colonial Secretary at home . certain i is
that the desire of the vast majority of Queenslanders is rapidly being
realised. , '
The history of the Chinese question in New South Wales has been
marked by a very significant episode. For some time past the com-
petition of the Chinese in that colony has excited the same feeling ot
dissatisfaction which, is manifested throughout Australia, n. y uey
alone the obnoxious race number 4,000. They have almost mono


polized tbe cabinet-making business, for which they display re-
markable aptitude, and in other trades their rivalry is formidable.
The animosity of the whites has often seemed on the point of
breaking out into violent measures, in that moat rowdy-ridden of
Australian cities—Sydney; but peace was preserved up to the
middle of last November, when the Australasian Steam Navigation.
Company—much to their own surprise—brought about a serious
crisis. The A. S. N. Company (as it is popularly called) is one of
the most powerful of Australian, corporations. Its large fleet of
steamers ply along the whole coast of the continent from Oooktown
to Adelaide, and trade with New Zealand, Tasmania, Fiji, and New
Caledonia. Previously to the middle of November Chinese firemen
and dock-hands were employed on board three steamers trading with
Fiji and New Caledonia. The directors resolved to avail themselves
further of this cheap labour, and Chinese began gradually to make
their appearance in the vessels trading between Sydney and Queens-
land. There cannot be the slightest doubt that the Company in-
tended to supersede European seamen and firemen as far as possible
throughout their service. One hundred Chinese were brought
specially from Hong Hong, and this consignment was followed by
another and a much larger one. On Monday, November 18, the
directors attempted to put their resolution into force at Sydney, and
were met by a strike of all the crews in port. The whites broke
their engagements, packed up their effects, and went on shore. The
example was followed by every other crew, when and wherever they
landed, until nearly the whole fleet was laid up. Only with the
utmost difficulty could the Company insure the imperfect fulfilment
of their mail contracts. One steamer was manned entirely by captains
and officers; and very amusing it was to hear the “ Have the good-
ness to, belay that rope, Mr- A.,” and the “ Be kind enough to keep
her off, Mr., B.” The weekly loss to the Company was enormous;
but they held out in the full expectation that the men would he
beaten in the end. And doubtless so powerful a body would have
triumphed without much difficulty in an ordinary strike. But this
was no ordinary dispute between capital and labour. It was a
strike against the yellow man. Thus it acquired a sacred character;
it became an Australian movement, securing universal sympathy,
and, what was more to the purpose, substantial support.
A storm of popular feeling—unanimous, with insignificant excep-
tions, from one end of the continent to the other—burst upon tbe
Company. Public meetings were held everywhere, and without
ceasing. The newspapers mostly took the side of the seamen. Minis-
ters, in esse and in posse, were interviewed, and promised to “settle”
the Chinese question as soon as Parliament assembled, or as soon as
they got into office, as the case might he. The public put tbeir


hands in their pockets, and subscribed for the support of the strikers
a sum much in excess of the requirements of the case. So bitter
was the feeling of Australians generally, that large numbers of
working men forbade their wives to deal with Chinese hawkers and
gardeners, and thus endangered the health of their children, for in
this climate vegetables form a specially essential element in the food
of the young. Violence was studiously avoided, save in one or two
trivial cases; albeit the canaille of Sydney was with difficulty re-
strained from displaying its peculiar style of patriotism. But no
feature of this popular movement was so striking as the fact that the
cause of the seamen was supported not merely by raw politicians
seeking after popularity, novi homines grasping at a chance of making
themselves, but by the moderate and established leaders of Australian
politics. In Queensland the Ministry and the Opposition were at one
in the matter ; and the former gave notice to the A. S. IST. Company
that, in consequence of the irregular delivery of the mails, the
contract for carrying them would be terminated. In a word, the
Company, instead of having to contend against a few seamen _ and
stokers, found itself face to face with the entire Australian com-
munity. Long before the strike terminated, defeat became inevit-
able ; indeed, the Government of New South "Wales threatened
legislative measures. In one circular to the shareholders the directors
hinted at the preposterous expedient of selling their property; in
other, words, having declared that they could not make a profit
unless they employed Chinese labour, they would sell their steamers
because they were prevented, from using such labour ! Better sense
prevailed in the end; and ultimately the directors accepted a oompro-
mise, by which they agreed to pay the wages of the strikers up to the
time of their leaving work, to employ Chinese on certain lines only,
and to restrict the total number so employed to 130. So ended this
important contest; important because it was brought about by the
first attempt of European employers to introduce Chinese labour on
a large scale; for, be it noted, though the yellow man abounds in
such numbers in these countries, he almost invariably works for
himself or an employer of his own race.
The Prime Minister of New South Wales, Sir Henry Parkes, has
lost no time in drawing up a measure for the purpose of effecting for
his colony what the Chinese Immigrants Regulation Act has so
thoroughly done for Queensland. Indeed, the bill is an exact copy
of the Act, with the exception of the use to be made of the £lO
deposit. The Queensland Act makes a pretence, as we have seen, of
returning this sum. Sir Henry Parkes proceeds in a more straight-
forward manner. His bill provides that all sums “so paid by or ou
behalf of any Chinese shall he paid over to the Colonial Treasurer,
and by him set apart under a separate account as a fund to he applied


towards the support of Chinese within the hospitals or other public
institutions of the colony. This affords the Celestial a substantial
prospect. Instead of being buoyed up with the delusive hope of
regaining his deposit in money, he has before him the certainty of
being able to take it out in medicine, or even to claim a wooden
leg for nothing. The measure is not yet passed, but there is no
doubt that it will become law. Sir Henry Parkes commands a
large majority, and it is not probable that any of his followers either
could or would rebel in the present state of the public temper.
The total number of Chinese in Hew South "Wales at the end of
last year was 9,616. There are few, if any, women of this race in
the colony, but 352 European women live with Chinese, of which
number 181 are married. The condition of the remainder is a
favourite topic at the indignation meetings, hut it is right to say that
these women had small social standing to lose when they joined
fortunes with their Mongolian partners. In Victoria the number of
Chinese is comparatively small, and no measures have been taken
against them. A few meetings have been held, and the general
attitude is one of sympathy with the anti-Chinese movements in the
north. In South Australia the Grovernment have issued an order
prohibiting contractors from employing Chinese on any public work.
It will thus be seen that the same disposition prevails throughout the
colonies.
Such are the facts of the case. The logic, the justice of this ques-
tion, are of course another matter. To most Englishmen, probably,
these legislative proceedings will appear monstrous. In British
Columbia, indeed, an impost similar to the deposit or protection duty
levied upon the Chinese in Queensland has been pronounced uncon-
stitutional by the supreme court; but as “constitution” and its
derivatives are precisely that class of words to which everybody
attaches the meaning that pleases him best, it is not probable that a
decision of this kind will make much difference. The Queenslanders
have secured the royal assent to their measure, and what has been
granted to one colony can hardly be refused to another. Equally little
to the purpose is it to uphold the virtues of tbe Chinese on the one
hand, or his vices on the other, though these are generally the subject
of fierce contention between the advocates of the two sides. Both
the good and the bad qualities of the unpopular .race are more or less
doubtful quantities. The Chinese are, inveterate gamblers, but they
are not alone in this respect. Many of them smoke opium, but the
consumption of this drug by the yellow man does not produce worse
effects than the consumption of rum by the white man. Intoxication
is a greater public nuisance than stupefaction. Then these invaders
bring no women with them, and very few can or will obtain European
wives. Hence very mischievous consequences; but it is alleged with


much, reason on behalf of the Chinese that they cannot be expected to
bring women hither, while the men meet with such scant courtesy.
The yellow man, in fact, invariably becomes of a more deplorable
moral character, in’proportion as his industrial rivalry grows more
formidable. “ HenceforthTm opposed to cheap labour,” said Bret
Harte’s Californian, when he found that the Heathen Chinee
could cheat at euchre more effectively than he could himself. On
the other hand, the virtues of the Chinese have been absurdly
extolled, and equally require discounting. He is “orderly and
inoffensive.” Is he so at home, when he finds himself supported by
an overwhelming superiority of numbers ? Here in Australia his
quiet behaviour is very intelligible. The 4,000 Chinese, for example,
who inhabit Sydney have good reasons for being orderly, in the pre-
sence of an unfriendly population of 140,000. Again, that the
Chinaman is industrious is a rule to which I have never met with any
exception. He labours to excess ; his capacity for patient toil seems
inexhaustible. But he lias never had any opportunity of developing
any other qualities besides this plodding perseverance. White phi-
losophy now universally recognises that man should not live for work
alone ; yet many generations of something very like serfdom have
left the masses in China with the power of labour, and with very
little else. The industry of the Chinese is a virtue run to seed.
Let ns fix the moral status of the Celestial as nicely as we may,
there still remains unsolved the perplexing problem arising out of
the European’s instinct of self-preservation. For this is really the
root of the matter. The Australian is neither intolerant nor un-
reasonable with respect to other races generally. All manner of
Europeans are welcomed here : they arrive in shiploads, settle down,
and amalgamate with the rest of the population. The Irish are
remarkably numerous in Brisbane, and, as a class, are prosperous.
Germans swarm in the best agricultural region of Queensland, the
Darling Downs. Out of 6,212 European immigrants who landed in
this colony during 1877, 1,378 were Germans. At the last general
election an important constituency rejected an Englishman who had
sat in Parliament for five years, and had been Chairman of the Com-
mittees, in favour of a German storekeeper, Italians also have been
brought hither at the public expense. The ordinary European is,
in short, sought after, whether he speaks English or not. Why is
the Asiatic so bitterly opposed? The specious pleas of “passion,”
'•'prejudice,” “ antagonism of race,” will not serve to explain a feel-
ing which is so deep and universal. The instinct of self-preservation,
I repeat, is the. true explanation of this difficulty ; the Australian is
fully convinced that the issue is one of life or death, and that where
the Chinese are, the Europeans will, sooner or later, cease to be.
Herds the question merely one of cheap labour l —of underbidding


m the wages market. The adhesion to the cause of the seamen of
nearly all the Austrahan political leaders-including many men of
wealth shows that something more is at stake. A very few words
will suffice to show what this is.
When the A. S. N. Company made their attempt to supersede
white labour, the rate of wages for a European fireman was £8 a
month. The Eastern and Australian Mail Company pay their
Chinese firemen £2 15*. a mouth, and four Chinese are equal to
throe Europeans. The difference between the wages of the two is
therefore equal to the difference between 11 and 24. Can it be
doubted that, with such an advantage in prospect, the employment
of Chinese would, if the A. S. N. Company had succeeded, in time
have become universal P It may be argued that if the capitalists
can command this difference, they have a right to it; hut, before
admitting this inference, let us glance at another set of facts. The
population of Australia is augmented not only by natural increase,
but also by the constant influx of immigrants brought hither at the
expense of the various colonial governments. These new-comers
are collected in shiploads by agents in. London, and, in the case of
Queensland, lecturers are paid to travel throughout Great
and explain to the multitude the advantages of settling in this
El Dorado. Neither lecturers nor agents spare the colouring in
their pictures of colonial life ; yet in the main an artisan or labourer
does benefit by availing himself of these facilities. Queensland is
now suffering from a period of temporary depression, but in ordinary
times the chances of success here are much greater than in the old
country, whilst comfort is almost a certainty. The case would be
utterly altered if the myriads who are ready to leave China at a
moment’s notice were allowed free ingress and an industrial champ
Übre.
To induce Europeans to come hither by holding out a prospect of
from six to fourteen shillings a day, and to leave them after their
arrival to compete with a race who are thankful for half-a-crown,
would be a cruel fraud. It would, indeed, be impossible to practise
such deception. European free immigration would cease altogether,
and what such discontinuance would mean may be inferred from the
fact that of the 6,212 Europeans who came to Queensland in 1877,
only 420 paid their own passages. And not only would the white
man cease to come in; he would in many cases be driven out. A
slow but sure transformation of these British colonies into Asiatic
communities would be brought about, with a result disastrous to all
classes, not excepting the capitalists, whose gain by the employment
of yellow labour would he more than counterbalanced by the loss of
white custom. The spendings of the Chinese are proportionate to
their earnings. Such a result would he all the more calamitous.


since Australians generally are beginning to evince a desire for a
closer connection with tlie mother country, and it is probable that
some of the starving workpeople of Great Britain will be compelled
ere long to seek a new home. This they might find hero with
advantage to themselves and the colonies. If, as is more than pro-
bable, England has reached the limit of her population-bearing
capacity, an advantageous arrangement might be made by which the
boundless capabilities of these regions might be rendered available
for the surplus—Australia would obtain the population she needs,
and England would secure a more extended market for her com-
modities This, however, can never be, if the unrestrained competi-
tion of the Chinese is to he tolerated. That my forecast of the
consequences of such competition is not overdrawn, is evidenced by
the present condition of Cooktown and the district round about.
This region is a Mongolian province. The Chinese are predominant.
It is true that they are not allowed to share in the government, but
they bavo not been trained to desire this kind of power. Their
persons and property are safe, and they are sagely content to leave
the trouble of government to the whites.
It is the reality of this danger which has led a majority of the
educated and well-to-do colonists to join the multitude in the cam-
paign against the unwelcome visitors. On. the whole they cannot ho
blamed. The balance of argument in this most difficult question
inclines to the aide of the exclusioniste. The expedients with which
they have met the invaders are undoubtedly they aro
even, as we have seen, grotesque ; but it is only fair to their originu-
tors to say that they were not tried until all others had proved
useless. Nor can it be doubted that any other English community,
or any European community whatsoever, would adopt similarly
decisive measures if they were suddenly swamped by a horde of
uninvited guests. In matters of this kind the advocates of toleration
arc always those who have nothing to tolerate. In reluctantly
arriving at a conclusion like this, I trust I have overlooked nothing
that can bo urged on the Chinese side of the, question. Indeed, it
would be difficult to do so, since the Chinese have spoken with no
uncertain sound in their own behalf. Three Chinese merchants of
Melbourne, L. Kong Meng, Gheok Hong Cheong, and Louis Ah
Mony, have issued a pamphlet, in which the case is discussed from
their side with great force. They are not supposed to have written
this paper, but the fact that they have been the means of giving so
excellent an'argument to the world does them the greatest credit.
Here is their estimate' of the Chinese character :• —" Man for man,
we unhesitatingly assert that our countrymen will compare favourably
with any European people in morals and manners; in proof whereof we
refer to Hay ter’s Statistics on Crime, &c.: and that they are superior


to the average Englishman in filial affection, in respect for the aged,
in honesty, in cheerfulness, and in patient, plodding industry. They
are free from moroseness and discontent, very good-tempered, grate-
ful for kindness, faithful to their employers, quick to learn, clever to
imitate, peaceful, orderly, sober, and methodical.” Kong Meng and
his coadjutors then proceed to argue that Australia is large enough
for all, and that China is overcrowded. Australia is probably half
as large again as China proper, and. it contains fewer than two
millions and a quarter of Europeans. Why, then, do not the Chinese
betake themselves to some part of Australia where they will not
interfere with Europeans ? If the average Chinaman is half as fine
a fellow as these three merchants represent him to be, he is fully the
equal of the Englishman. Why, then, does ho not (being “ clever
to imitate”) do as the Englishman has done, and found colonies of
his own, instead of trespassing upon other people’s preserves ? The
world would be all the better for a few independent Chinese com-
munities. ■ For the yellow men to settle, down amongst a people with
whom they can no more amalgamate than oil can mix with water, is
merely tempting Providence. During the last ten years they have
invaded various white communities, and yet have made no more
progress towards fusion than is indicated by the formation of a few
connections with women who are generally the most degraded of
their sex. That painful industry, that life-darkening frugality,
which are so much admired by some observers, are not the offspring
of innate virtue, but the result of a permanently inadequate food
supply. It is not possible that a race reared like the English can
imitate such qualities; nor is it desirable, except on the theory that
man was born to make himself miserable. Why continue an attempt
which is obviously futile, and which involves such fierce antagonism
of race ? The world is wide, and still contains numerous unsettled
areas. If the Chinese fail in the endeavour to possess them, the
result will go far to establish that inferiority which their advocates
so strenuously deny.
JOHN WISKER.
