

THE STORY
OF THE
NOBLE OPAL


GILMOUR’S BOOKSHOP
6 VICTORIA ARCADE
opp. Hotel Australia, SYDNEY


Flavelle’s Gem Series. No. 1.
The Storng
of the
Noble Opel.
BY
Sydney B. J. Skertchly.
Late of H.M. Geological Surveys of England and Queensland;
Past President of the Boyal Society and the Field
Naturalists’ Club of Queensland, &c., &c.
Published by
ELAVELLE, ROBERTS and SANKEY, Lid.,
Lapidaries and Gem Merchants,
BRISBANE. QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA.
1908.




Affectionately Dedicated
TO
Mrs. ROBERT LONGSDON.




The Noble Opal.
CHAPTER I.
THE NAME.
The story of the names of Gemstones
is a rich mine as yet unworked by the
scientific philologist. Not a single gem
has a name that can be traced to any
English, Teutonic or Celtic root, and
comparatively few are of Greek or Latin
origin; most have come to us from the
East—some from Persia, a few from In-
dia, but the bulk are of unknown origin,
and it may be that Egypt, Babylonia,
and Assyria may yet prove to be the
lands of their baptism, though, as yet, I
have been able to trace but few to such
sources.
The name Opal comes direct from the
Latin Opalus, which was rendered in the
Greek of the time of the "Roman empire
Opallion, but the stone does not seem to
have been known to the ancient Greeks,
and consequently there is no word to sig


nify it in the old Greek writers. The
word is isolated in the Latin language,
and cannot be referred to any known
root; it is probably a loan word, but
whence derived there is no evidence to
show.
In Pliny’s time, about the commence-
ment of our era, India, “or perhaps Ara-
bia,” was said to be the sole mother of
the Opal, but this was probably only
another way of confessing ignorance of
its origin; for then, as now, it was the
fashion to ascribe all sorts of rare and
costly things to the mysterious and shin-
ing orient. I know of no Indian locality
for Opal, and the official report on the
Economic Geology of India (1881),
which cites all the ancient as well as the
modern records, makes no reference to it;
nor does Dana give any Indian locality
in the latest edition of his classic Miner-
alogv, though he pays special attention
to places of origin.
The name cannot, therefore, be Indian,
and I incline to the belief that Opal was
the native name given by the miners of


Hungary. Of course they were not what
we know as Hungarians, who are a Mon-
goloid race of comparatively recent in-
troduction into Europe. For this opinion,
however, I have no evidence as yet to
offer; still, it is not a crude guess, for I
have expended much time and research
into the subject of mineralogical phil-
ology.
All we can definitely say is that the
Romans in the Augustine age first be-
came acquainted with the stone, and re-
ceived with it the name Opal, which they
did not invent.
They had another name, or nickname,
Pcederos, that is Cupid, for this and
other stones. It, as Pliny himself notices,
is a mere distinction of loveliness that
had become a name; and as Dan Cupid
is the rosy-fingered god, stones with a
rosy tint like the amethyst and garnet
were called Pcederos, and there can be no
doubt that the term was also applied to
the Opal, especially such as had a red
or rosy flash.
Another name cited by Pliny has a


bearing upon the supposed Indian origin.
After describing undoubted Opal, he
says, “ the best kind is found in India,
where it is called Sangenon.” Now this
is an undoubted Indian word. In the
official Eeommic Geology of India, al-
ready cited, a list is given of modem
Hindustani names for minerals, and no
less than eighteen have the prefix
Sang-i, that is, “ stone of,” and though
none approaches Samg-i-non, there can be
n j doubt that in Pliny’s time certain In-
dian stones had this prefix. Now, as car-
nelian is Sang-i-akik, and garnet Sang-i-
----mehtab, it seems reasonable to suppose
that certain Indian stones well-known to
the Romans as coming from India
(among them the fine carnelians and car-
buncle garnets) were known by their In-
dian names, and as the home of the Opal
was (erroneously) supposed to be Indian,
one of the oriental terms was occasion-
ally applied thereto. It is to be noticed
that no stone of a blue or green tinge is
called Sang-i; they are invariably some
shade of red, purple, brown, or black.


Pliny goes on to say, “ the next (best
kind) in Egypt, termed there Tenites
No one seems to have paid attention to
this curious word. In a vocabulary of
ancient Egyptian words I have drawn
up for a forthcoming work on the Mine-
ral Substances of the Bible, I find what
seems to be the original of the Latinised
term. It is variously spelt Tehen, Tahan,
Tahn , and Tahnen, and is generally ren-
dered Crystal by Egyptologists. Now, I
cannot remember any Opal in the grand
collection at Boulak in Egypt, nor have I
seen any (so far as recollection goes) in
a.iv of the Egyptian collections in Lon-
don, Paris, Germany, or Vienna, and I
have failed to find any notice of this
stone in any inscription, or description
of Egypt, Babylonia, or Assyria. None
has been found in Greece or the Islands.
Yet had the stone been known, the
Egyptians, who had a keen eye for gem-
stones and almost worshipped the tur-
quoise and lapis lazuli, would assuredly
have prized this uniquely exquisite mine-
ral —it has never been gazed on by mor


tal eye without exciting admiration. It
certainly does not occur in Egypt.
But whence came Pliny’s undoubtedly
genuine Egyptian name ? I think in the
same way as his Sangenon. It was a
term for some form of coloured quartz
or chalcedony, and the Egyptians prized
both, and especially the Rose and Sap-
phire Quartz. I look, then, upon these
Indian and Egyptian names as mistaken
transfers from other stones.
It has already been pointed out that
the etymology of the name of this stone
is unknown; it puzzled the early minera-
logists, who, like others, delighted in real
or fanciful derivations, and the Opal did
not escape the onslaught of these
pseudo-philologists. An old writer,
Marbodius. boldly declared it to be
Ophthalmitis, the Eye-stone. His reason-
ing is clear, and convincing in the days
(not entirely passed), when the Doctrine
of Signatures held sway. According to
this “ philosophy,” the medicinal herbs
and stones had their virtues stamped in
their shape or colour —brown stones were


good for liver complaint; red ones acted
like a charm in haemorrhage, and as the
Opal delighted every eye, common sense
showed it must be good for sore eyes!
So Opal was Ophthalmius, and the word
being too long and not coming trippingly
off the English tongue, it got shortened
into Ophal, and so we read in the list of
Queen Elizabeth’s jewels of “ a Flower
of gold garnished with sparkes of Dia-
monds, Eubies, and Ophals, with an
Agate of Her Majesty’s viznomy.”
Of the many names, mostly modern
and self-explanatory, applied by minera-
logists and jewellers to the varieties of
Opal and its allies, only two call for
notice, and this rather from their poetic
feeling than their scientific or historic
worth. To the pellucid opal suffused
with bluish and with a rosy flush when
held against or turned in the sunshine,
the name of Girasol —Turn-Sun—has
been given, just as it has to the Sun-
flower of our gardens, and in that it
lacks the iris sparkles of the Noble stone,
the Germans have prettily christened it
Waise —the Orphan.


CHAPTER II.
WHAT IS OPAL.
The chemical analysis of the rocks
which form what geologists call the
crust of the earth brings out the curious
fact that about sixty per cent, of the
material is Silica, either free or in com-
bination with other substances.
To the free silica the name Quartz is
applied. In its perfect crystalline purity
it is Rock Crystal ; in its granular form
it is familiar to all as Sand when in
loose particles ; as Sandstone when com-
pacted together. Quartz is the common-
est of all minerals, and takes on every
conceivable form and colour, from
opaque veinstone to perfectly transparent
crystal—the dull flint and the purple
amethyst which lines its cavities are
alike forms of quartz. We see it in the
agate, the onyx, and the sard; it is the
tender green chrysoprase and the dark
green bloodstone; it is the costly jasper
and the despised buck-reef of the gold
prospector. It is with us everywhere
upon the solid earth, from the drifting
sands of the shore and desert to the
mountain top.


All this is, to all intents and purposes,
pure silica. True, it may be stained with
trifling quantities of various oxides, to
whose presence much of the colour
beauty is due—but it is pure silica for
all that to the chemist and mineralogist.
But silica can exist in another form;
it can take Water into combination; it
can become hydrated as chemists have it.
Now this Hydrated Silica, this silica
which has chemically combined with
water, is Opal. It is easy to detect this
hidden water, this water of crystallisa-
tion, as it is called. All that is neces-
sary is to place a splinter of Opal in a
piece of glass tubing and strongly heat
it. The water is driven off as steam,
and condenses on the cool part of the
glass, and at the same time the stone
becomes opaque and loses all its beauty.
Exactly how the water of crystallisation
exists in the mineral is a debated ques-
tion beyond our present scope; but as the
amount is variable (and for other rea-
sons) it has been thought that, though
always present, it is not essential.


One of the reasons for thinking the
water may not be essential is that silica,
like a good many other substances, occurs
under two conditions having distinct
properties. In the one—that most com-
mon in nature —it is practically insoluble
either in alkalis or acids, but crystallises
readily (e.g., Quartz), while the other
form is readily soluble and never crys-
tallises, from which property it is known
ai amorphous silica —that is, formless or
uncrystallisable.
Opal is amorphous quartz.
The two forms can be changed one
into the other, and in nature we have
mineral substances with both kinds in-
termixed, as we shall presently see.
Opal, then, is amorphous silica, and
not the crystalline form, and as it pos-
sesses this quality independent of water,
and as the quantity of water in Opal is
not a fixed proportion, it may very well
be that the water is non-essential, though
always present. This does not exhaust
the argument, but is sufficient for our
purpose.


CHAPTER III.
OPAL’S POOR RELATIONS.
It is impossible to understand the
story of the Noble Opal without taking
into account the allied forms which are
neither noble nor precious.
Ne have already said that the greater
part of the minerals which go to form the
bulk of the earth’s crust contain silica
in combination with other substances
such as sodium, potassium, calcium
(lime), magnesium, and iron; now all
these minerals are continually undergo-
ing decomposition, especially within a
few hundred feet of the surface, and in
many cases the combined silica is set
free. It may be freed either as the crys-
tallisable or the amorphous form, and if
the latter it is readily soluble, either in
alkaline or acid waters, and may be re-
deposited. In this case, it forms the
mineral Opal.
The most abundant source of amorph-
ous silica is spring water, especially
that of hot springs in volcanic districts.
These deposit their silica on the edges of


the pools, sometimes in enormous quan-
tity, and in all sorts of fantastic forms,
from solid rock to kidney-shaped masses,
coral-like structures, and even filmy
threads. The once magnificent Fairy
Terraces of Rotomahana, N.Z., and the
equally wonderful deposits in the Yel-
lowstone Park, where they attain a thick-
ness of hundreds of feet, and the similar
deposits of the Icelandic geysers are all
Opal—lustreless and worthless to the
jeweller, but still Opal. It goes by the
general name of sinter, and may some-
times be seen forming under bridges
and culverts in which cement has been
used, and forming small stalactites and
films.
Opal of this common sort is often the
fossilising material of trees, though true
quartz is most frequent. Such fossil
trees of Wood Opal, as it is often termed,
may be found in the tin gravels under
the basalt at Herberton, N.Q., near Ho-
bart, Tas., and large tree trunks are fre-
quent in the pumiceous rocks of some
parts of Hungary. Here one may pause


to note that both in Queensland and New
South Wales the fossil shells and cuttle
bones ( belemnites ) of the Cretaceous
rocks are sometimes converted into true
noble Opal, a phenomenon unknown to
me elsewhere.
The finer sorts of Common Opal, trans-
lucent to transparent, but white, yellow,
or green, and occasionally red, but with-
out any fire or iridescence, is plentiful
in many parts of Queensland, as near
Springsure, and should not be altogether
despised, for some of it would cut into
beautiful objects such as paper-weights.
The opaque, porcelain-like, bluish-
white variety which goes by the Tartar
name of Gacholong, also occurs in
Queensland, but I have not seen it in
mass. It turns up occasionally in quite
unexpected places—the finest I ever got
I found embedded in plumbago in the
Graphite mines of Bohemia.
Nor is Opal always dissociated from
quartz. The chalcedonies, which we best
known as agates, camelians, onyxes, sar-
donyxes, etc., were probably formed as
b’


Opal, and have gradually changed into
the chalcedonic form of quartz.
These are only some of the poorer re-
lations of noble Opal, but a list of the
chief varieties is appended at the end of
this work, for those curious in the mat-
ter.
But this bv no means exhausts the tale
of Opal. Animals and plants fashion it
from the soil and water. The marvel-
lously beautiful aquatic plants knows as
Diatoms, which form such charming
microscopic objects, make their tiny
sculptured discs of Opal. These minute
plants people every stagnant pool and
water-hole. They exist in countless my-
riads in the ocean —indeed, upon the sea
floor about the antarctic circle there falls
a ceaseless rain of these little graven
jewels, which the explorer’s dredge
brings up as pale straw-coloured powder.
Nor need we seek the ocean depths to
find the accumulated diatom —waste form-
ing rock masses —in Virginia, in Bohe-
mia, in Scotland, and elsewhere, there
are thick beds of diatomaceous, or as it


is more commonly called, infusorial
earth. The housewife and the lapidary
know it as Tripoli powder, and it is the
kieselguhr with which nitroglycerine is
mixed to make dynamite.
Nor is it only in microscopic plants"
that Opal is found. In India and China,-
probably in Queensland too, though I
have not yet found it, Opal is formed in
the joints of bambu, and is used by the
native physicians under the local name
of Tabasheer. It is Opal, too, whicn
gives the stiffness to straw, and indeed it
is found in many places where the un-
scientific would never dream of seeking
it.
In the animal kingdom it forms the
delicately beautiful skeletons of the min-
ute marine organisms called Radiolaria,
and the harsh spicules of many of the
sponges.
Ine above is hut a meagre and incom-
plete sketch of the poor relations of Opal,
but it will suffice to emphasise the fact
of its wide distribution, and bring into
relief the rarity of the variety which
alone merits the appellation of noble or
precious.


CHAPTER IV.
HOW OPAL GETS ITS BEAUTY.
The beauty of Opal arises from its
translucency and colour. All pure silica
is colourless, and, we may say, trans-
parent, for even the milk-white quartz
owes its opacity to minute fractures —
you know that if you grind the purest
glass to powder it looks white. Pure
rock-crystal is as limpid as water; pure
chemically formed amphorous silica
comes down as a transparent jelly, and
there is a variety of Opal, Hyalite, which
takes its name from being colourless as
-water; the Germans, indeed, call it Mul-
ler’s Glass after its discoverer.
What we may call the ground colour
of Quartz and Opal is due to the presence
of minute quantities of foreign matter—
it seems hardly kind to call them impu-
rities as the chemists do. In the case of
the amethyst, the colouring matter is a
form of manganese. In the red sard or
carnelian iron is the colouring matter.
The chrysoprase owes its delicate leek
green to nickel, and so forth.


At Oberstein on the Nahr, a large and
legitimate, though to a mineralogist a
shocking industry, in colouring chalce-
donies has been carried on for centuries.
The art in Italy is at least as old as the
beginning of the Christian era; indeed,
Pliny says in his time there were as
many artificial as natural agates on the
market.
But notice, the Germans can only
colour the chalcedonic bands in the
agates; tinting the pure quartz is be-
yond their skill. We have already seen
that chalcedony is, or was, an admixture
of crystalline quartz and amorphous
Opal, and this, owing probably to sub-
sequent alteration, renders the chalce-
dony bands somewhat porous, and it is
into the pores that the stains penetrate.
The Romans claimed to be able to stain
the very substance of true crystal, but
it is more than doubtful, and certainly
no examples have survived. The fact is,
that a quartz crystal, and to a lesser ex-
tent Opal, has its particles or molecules
too closely packed to admit of absorption


of foreign matter—the little stones of
these minute temples fit together closer
than the perfect masonry of the old fane
that lies between the out-stretched paws
of Egypt’s Sphynx. The tint of the ame-
thyst and the ground colour of the Noble
Opal are not mere film-stains but per-
vade the stone itself, and were born with
it.
There is, indeed, a form of Opal, inter-
mediate between the coarse, opaque Sin-
ter and the Noble Opal, which is some-
what porous —it will adhere to the
tongue. It is translucent or whitish, and
is called Hydrophane, the “ Water-
clear,” from its property of becoming
more transparent when placed in water.
This property arises from the outer parts
having lost their water and become
opaque; on steeping part of the water is
replaced. Some of our Opals from the
extreme North of Queensland come near
to this form, but they are filled with
changing pale pink, or yellow, or pale
blue, but without any of the fiery flashes
of the true stone. They might truly be


called Girasols from their changeful
hues, as they are turned towards or away
from the light.
This colour change is not entirely due
to the inherent hue of the colouring mat-
tor, for this would only give a single
tint. It arises from the exceedingly
minute size of the colouring particles,
which allow only certain rays to pass
through them and reflect quite different
ones.
This delicate, changeful blue merits a
little closer attention. Milk is white —
milk-white and snow-white are terms
for spotless purity, for absence of all
trace of colour. Yet the old joke about
the colour of town milk so delicately
touched upon by Oliver Wendell Holmes’
Latin tutor in the lines —
“ To me, alas ! no verdurous visions come,
Save yon exiguous pool’s conferva scum ;
To me no concave vast repeats the tender hue
That laves my milk-jug with celestial blue.”
is based on scientific observation. Mix
half-a-dozen drops of milk in a tumbler
of water and look down upon it against
a dark background; it is distinctly and


beautifully blue, and moreover is just
the tone of the blue of the Opal. Now
hold the glass before the window and
look through the mixture; it is no longer
blue, but the lurid coppery tint of a
storm-cloud at sunset —and again it is
the colour of girasol Opals.
Professor Tyndal, long ago, delighted
us with the artificial blue skies he made
in tubes. A non-technical friend de-
scribed it thus: —“ Here the Professor
filled a tube with vacuum, and holding
it up, showed us nothing. It was black.
He then moistened a bit of blotting
paper with some chemical, chucked it
into the tube and out again so quickly,
that even the smell hadn’t time to stop
behind, and the nothing in the tube
turned sky blue.”
Now this dichroism, or double-colour-
ness, is very easily imitated, as you may
see in any bit of the appropriately named
Opal-glass. Even in science this particu-
lar bluishness is called Opal-cscence,
from being characteristic of the Hun-
garian Opal.


So far, we have learned to distinguish
between two distinct classes of ground
colour due to extraneous matter, (a) what
may be called ordinary colour due to
simple reflected light, and (b) Opal-
escence due to reflected and transmitted
light from very minute particles.
It is however, to a third class of
colour that the Opal owes its unique
beauty, and in this case it is due entirely
to the structure of the stone, and is
quite independent of any extraneous
colouring matter. This is the exquisite
play of colours, which is known as iride-
scence, a term aptly made from iris, the
Latin for the rainbow.
It is not possible to enter into an ex-
planation of the optics of iridescence; it
must suffice to say that it arises from
the breaking up of the rays of light —the
colours, in fact, are in the light and not
in the stone. Of course, strictly speak-
ing, all colour is in the light, but no con-
fusion can arise from our rather unsci-
entific way of putting things if the main
fact be realised that the iris tints are


absolutely independent of the nature of
the substance exhibiting them.
Imagine li git-rays to be shreds of rain-
bows deftly woven into strands so cun-
ningly, that the colours do not show, and
let these strands be so fragile, that they
are frayed out into colour wisps, when,
in their flight, they are dashed against
sharp particles of hard matter, and you
have a rough picture of how Diffraction
Colours are formed. Light cannot pass
through narrow slits or tiny holes, or
scrape against the edge of a solid sub-
stance without being so frayed, as you
can easily prove by looking at a small
bright light through your eyelashes. If
they are too short, look through the
feather-web of a quill pen.
Nor is it essential that the light pass
through the fine apertures. The same
thing happens when light is reflected
from fine lines on an opaque substance..
Years ago a Mr. Barton made metal but-
tons that glowed and flashed with pure
iris colour, by engraving fine concentric
lines thereon. You can imitate this by


taking an impression of mother-of-pearl
with black sealing-wax, and the wax will
be found to be almost as brilliant as the
shell.
Light is similarly broken up into its
colour constituents by very thin films,
as we see on the soap bubble, and the iri-
descent film formed by dropping kero-
sine or tar upon water.
Illustrations of these diffraction col-
ours abound everywhere, but most re-
quire looking for; indeed, light cannot
pass the edge or side of any object with-
out getting frayed. The precise mode in
which this takes place would need too
long an explanation, but any elementary
text-book on Light will give the data.
To diffraction from small particles,
fine lines, or thin plates are due the solar
and lunar haloes, but not the rainbow.
Diffraction paints the peacock’s plumes;
it be jewels the crests and gorgets of the
humming birds; puts the sheen upon the
rifle-bird, and spangles the diamond
beetle. It paints the pearl-shell and
turns the dull felspar into the shining


Labradorite ■ Sir David Brewster, as
long ago as 1845, searched for the cause
of the Opal’s fire with the best resources
of his time, and concluded that it was
due to diffraction from thin films of air
in minute cavities within the stone.
But we have more strenuous modes of
attackin'” such problems nowadays, and
Brewster’s explanation is not the whole
truth.
There is, indeed, yet another way in
which light rays are unfrayed, and, if
possible, the most wonderful of all. A
crystal is a temple not made with hands,
whose stones are more perfectly wrought
than the deftest craftsman of Hiram of
Tvre dared dream of. The joints of
these molecular building stones are so
true, that even the deep-seeing micro-
scope fails to perceive them. But when
rays of light traverse such a crystal,
they split in two, one part proceeding
on its journey unchanged in character
or direction, while the other diverges
from its normal course, and is, as it
were, flattened. Such an abnormal ray


we call Polarised, and it gives rise to
beautiful colour effects. All crystals,
save those of the Cubic System (diamond,
garnet, etc.), polarise light. Amorphous,
that is, uncrystalline substances, have
no such power, and by special means it
is quite easy to at once determine
whether any substance is crystalline or
amorphous in structure. Paste gems are
now made so perfect, that they deceive
all but the very elect —but one glance
through a polariscope reveals instantly
and indisputably that they are but glass
—for glass, though limpid as crystal, is
amorphous.
There is, however, one apparent excep-
tion to this otherwise universal rule. If
glass be strained, as by bending a rod,
its particles are so compressed and
stretched, that they polarise light, and
give rise to iris tints.
In the year 1861, Prof. Schultze
showed that one form of Opal—the clear
Hyalite or Muller’s Glass —showed polar-
ising effects, and that this was due to
tension. Diamonds, by the way, often


exhibit this property in spite of their
cubic crystallisation—and this tension
or strain is sometimes so marked in South
African stones, that valuable diamonds
have been known to fairly explode when
removed from the protective pressure of
the matrix.
In 1871, Prof. Behrens made an ex-
haustive examination of Noble Opal,
and proved that the characteristic fire is
due to thin curved lamellae (plates), hav-
ing a slightly different refractive power
from that of the mass. These, he con-
siders, were originally formed in a
parallel position (much like the flakiness
of puff paste), and to have been after-
wards bent into curves, cracked, and
broken up during the consolidation of
the mass.
These broken, curved lamellae must
produce polarisation, and their very
thinness must originate colour, but the
minute pitting and striation of Brewster
still remain a colour factor.
The unique beauty of the Noble Opal
is thus seen to be a very complex pheno


menon. Nature has lavished upon this
stone all the riches of light. Simple
colouring matter gives the ground-tint;
fine particles produce the opalescence;
while the supreme beauty of the spangled
fire is called forth by all the battery of
light acting upon thin plates, fine lines,
and the strained lamellse which indicate
the throes of the Opal’s hour of birth.
No wonder that every eye finds delight
therein, for this stone above all others
symbolises the majesty and transcendant
fertility of Him who IS Light.


CHAPTER V.
THE GEOLOGICAL HOME OF
THE OPAL.
From what has already been said
about the almost world-wide distribu-
tion of silica, it follows that Opal must
be of common occurrence in many places.
But, from what we have learned concern-
ing the characters which distinguish the
Precious or Noble from the Common
Opal, it is equally clear that only under
conditions that but rarely occur, can the
valuable gemstone be formed. All that
is absolutely essential for the production
of the Mineral Opal is some source of
amorphous, or as it is also called colloi-
dal, silica, and this condition is often
found, not only in volcanic districts, but
in others devoid of all traces of volcanic
action.
To cite a few cases. On the top of the
Chalk, at the base of the Tertiary rocks
about London, there is a well-defined old
sea-bed, and in this, for example at Wool-
wich, amorphous silica is not uncom-
mon; again, further south in Surrey, in


the Cretaceous rocks, a certain bed is so
full of it, as to be commercially valu-
able. It is known as Firestone. This
region is, and for long geological ages
has been, free from volcanic disturbance.
Again, both in Few South Wales and
Queensland, the Opal-bearing beds are
Cretaceous in age and marine in origin.
On the other hand, the Opals of Hungary
are derived from a volcanic rock known
as trachyte.
It requires, then, something more than
the presence of amorphous silica to pro-
duce the Noble Opal—it needs those con-
ditions that produce the strain and lami-
nation which give the fire to the gem.
Let us consider what those conditions
are.
They involve the production of incipi-
ent lamination and subsequent fractur-
ing of the laminae. By far the most
powerful agency, or, at any rate, the
most imposing and stupendous, in this
direction, is the mighty force of moun-
tain building. To this we owe our fissile
slates and schists, and indeed all the
C


rock masses which have had lamination
impressed upon them. But of surety,
opalisation is none of these. If it were, so
the Opal matrix must, of necessity, have
shared in result, but it is not so —the
matrix remains unchanged while the
Opal has become modified, and further,
as the Opal prospectors know to their
cost, an Opal vein is never filled with
the noble variety, which is always
confined to a limited space, the bulk
consisting of absolutely worthless com-
mon Opal. We must seek some other
cause for opalisation.
We find such a cause, and a very
probable one, in contraction due to solidi-
fication. Take our Australian Opals as
examples. They are found in rocks of
Cretaceous age (Desert Sandstone, etc.),
which are of marine origin, and have
been gently upheaved without any dis-
turbance to speak of, and certainly with-
out any crumpling such as we get in
mountain regions. The Opal is newer
than the rocks in which they lie, as is
moved by the fossil bones, shells, and


wood, which have been opalised, and by
Opal filling in cavities from which other
minerals (pyrites, gypsum, etc.), have
been removed. Here let me pause to re-
mind the reader that these casts (or
pseudomorphs as mineralogists call
them) give a spurious appearance of
crystallisation to the specimens. Opal
cannot crystallise, but it takes in these
cases, the form of the cavity from which
the crystal has been removed, just as a
blanc mange takes the shape of the
mould.
Nor is it the fossils alone that tell this
story. In the Opal beds of New South
Wales there are rounded boulders of
slaty rocks, for it is an old shingle beach
—and these certainly were not Opal-
bearing. yet their cracks are filled with
precious Opal.


CHAPTER VI.
THE BIRTH OF THE NOBLE OPAL.
All Opal, we have learned, is amor-
phous or colloidal silica, and this sub-
stance is far more widely spread than
the layman imagines. Not only in igne-
ous rocks and sandstones, but in most,
perhaps all, limestones of any geological
antiquity we find veins and nodules of
flint and chert which were once in this
condition, but it is in the volcanic and
sandstone rocks that the Noble Opal is
born.
It might be concluded from this that
Noble Opal is the child both of plutonic
and neptunic parents —that it was unique
among gems as being born of fire and
water —but it is not so. Amorphous
silica is always of secondary origin, al-
ways produced from solution, but the
solution need not be of high tempera-
ture. The presence of Opal in volcanic
and other rocks that have solidified from
a state of fusion is due to solution and
redeposition long after the parent rocks


have solidified, and all that is required
is sufficient heat to allow of the slow
evaporation of the solution of silica of
line.
Nevertheless, there is a distinction of
great industrial value between the Noble
Opal from the volcanic, and that from
the sedimentary rocks. In the igneous
rocks the Opal is simply deposited in
veins and cracks, and is always what
may be called an accidental mineral; it
is never an essential ingredient, but is
derived from some mineral already exist-
ing in the rock. Consequently it is al-
ways rare. Thus, in the famous Czerne-
witza mines in Hungary which, till the
discovery of the Australian gems, sup-
plied most of the market, the Opals are
found in very small nut-like masses, and
it is said that only once in several years
is one discovered as large as a shilling.
On the other hand, Opal which has been
formed in sedimentary rocks, like most
of that of N.S. Wales, and all of that of
Queensland, is much more widely distri-
buted, because it has been formed from


the dissolved silica in sea-water, and de-
posited on a sea-floor; though the actual
solidification may have, and indeed actu-
ally has, taken place long after the
ocean bed had become dry ground.
Judging from what I have seen of the
curious amorphous silica deposits of the
Tertiaries near London, and the Cretace-
ous near Farnham, in England, and
from a comparison with the Queensland
beds, I am more than inclined to think
that such soluble silica has settled upon
old shore lines, sometimes shingly, at
others pretty free from ought but sand,
and upon which life was pretty abun-
dant, especially sponge life.
There is a curious tendency possessed
by many chemical substances (perhaps
all, under certain conditions) which are
sparcely disseminated through a rock,
to gather together in beds and veins,
and especially in concretionary nodules.
We call this action segregation, but
cannot explain it. The lime carbonate
segregates out from a clay, for example,
and forms great nodules (called septaria


from their in-filled shrinkage-cracks),
which were once the source of the raw
material of Roman cement. Similarly,
too. are formed the so-called irony pans
and pugs in gravels so well-known to
alluvial miners, and many other cases
might be cited. Such segregations
gather round some solid nucleus, especi-
ally if of like nature. Thus silica will
accumulate around siliceous sponges,
and chert about siliceous radiolaria.
These conditions are admirably pre-
sented on a shore line. But before ela-
borating this idea, we must revert to the
physico-chemical properties of silica it-
self.
Many substances, both elementary and
compound, though identical in chemical
nature, exist under two or more forms
often possessing widely different physi-
cal properties. The most striking, per-
haps is phosphorus, which, in its ordi-
nary condition, is a transparent, almost
colourless, waxy substance, highly in-
flammable, and deadly poisonous. The
other form is remarkably different. It


is not waxy—is opaque, dull red, only
inflames at a high temperature, and is
not poisonous (however, it is not whole-
some). It is familiar as the chocolate-
coloured material on the friction-paper
of safety-match boxes. The two forms
can be changed one into the other, and
the red kind is the less stable.
In like manner, as already stated,
silica exists in two forms, the more stable
and common is crystallisable, and prac-
tically insoluble. The less common form
is uncrystallisable and readily soluble;
it is easily converted into crystallisable
silica, and even at ordinary temperatures
in time passes into that condition. Opal
is soluble silica.
When a dilute solution of silica is
slowly evaporated, the silica separates
out as a thin, transparent, gelatinous
substance, which, on drying, shrinks,
owing to loss of water, and shivers into
innumerable cracks, but does not fall to
pieces.
It is easy to picture a sandy shore
bathed with sea-water holding much


silica in solution. Let such, a shore be
gradually elevated. The sand will act
as a filter, allowing the water to pass
away, but retaining much of the silica,
which will gradually gravitate to the
bottom. Here are all the conditions for
the deposition of the Queensland and
Wilcannia (N.S.W.) Opal—and, if this
theory he correct, we ought to find a
sandstone, more or less charged with
amorphous silica, having at its base a
shingly deposit containing fossil shells,
bones, wood, etc., partly the flotsam of
the sea, partly the jetsam of the land, all
more or less rich in Opal. Also, we
should expect considerable quantities of
ironstone to be segregated out.
All these conditions are found in our
Opal Fields. Both in Queensland and
N.S. Wales the Opals occur in sand-
stones of Cretaceous age, the formation
being known as Desert Sandstone from
its prevalence in the so-called desert
region of Central Australia. It is a
marine deposit, as proved by the fossil
shells, etc.; it is a shore deposit, as shown


by its basement shingles, and the quan-
tities of (silicified) wood it contains ; in-
deed, sand is never deposited in deep
water far from land. Over much of the
area —many thousands of square miles —
some of these sandstones are so finely
grained, that they have been mistaken
for grey or white clay or shale, and over
all the Opal country much of it has been
hardened into thin platy beds, as if the
material were half baked. To such rock
the appropriate name of Porcelainite has
been given, originally from the baked
clay that is found in contact with vol-
canic and other igneous rocks. This
porcelainite has a significant interest in
the origin of our Opals, as we shall see
directly.
Fine grained sands, such as described,
will, on drying and consolidating, shrink
and crack like drying mud, and the
shrinkage—cracks, both horizontal and
vertical, will form admirable receptacles
for the reception of gravitating gelatin-
ous silica, which will also worm itself
into all the crevices between the tiny


sand grains. So much for theory; now
let us examine the facts.
The cracks in all rocks may be found
filled with silica, forming ordinary
quartz veins, and cavities lined or filled
with quartz or chalcedony (agate) are
plentiful as perjury in a horse case. But
the silica lines the sides of the cavities —
it has been deposited on the walls in suc-
cessive layers, as agates show beauti-
fully.
But in a vertical crack filled with
Opal quite a different arrangement is
seen. It fills in the cavity as if it had
been poured in from the top and not as
if it had merely trickled down the sides,
and the banding is across the vein, and
not parallel to the sides, showing that it
was not introduced as a fluid bathing
the walls and depositing its contents
upon them, but as matter poured in and
then consolidated. Moreover, if any
Noble Opal occurs therein, the best is at
the top of the vein, and its Harlequin
spangles run across it. Further, as you
trace the vein downwards, the Opal be


comes more and more impure, mixed
with, particles of rock and grains of
sand, just as we should expect, and bits
of wood are caught up in it, as flies are
in amber.
Again, in the basement-shingle some
of the boulders are cracked, and have
the fissures cemented with Opal; others,
such as certain slate boulders, which
were originally veined with pyrites or
calcite, have had these minerals removed
and replaced by Opal. Occasionally,
too Opal is found in clusters of apparent
crystals, and we have seen that Opal
cannot crystallise. In this case, groups
of aggregated crystals of gypsum have
been replaced by Opal, atom by atom —a
process we call pseudomorphism. It is
as if, say, a house had each brick re-
moved one at a time and a marble block
inserted in its place, till Brick Cottage
was converted into Marble Hall. In this
way. also, shells, cuttle bones (belem-
nites), bones of great reptiles (Plesio-
saurus), and wood, have been pseudo-
morphosed into precious Opal—medals


of Creation of the costliest and rarest
type. Not alone in the veins and fossils
do we find this evidence of the deposition
of Opal from gelatinous silica saturating
the sandstone. Among the more shingly
beds we find precious Opal in nodules,
and layers, and films, associated with,
and often enclosed, in ironstone. And
it is not very rare to find particles of
ironstone, sand, and other minerals
caunht up in clear Opal, showing that
at the time of deposition the Opal was in
a gelatinous condition. Sand-shot Opal
is one of the banes of the lapidary, often
appearing only on cutting, after the
stone has been bought as pure.
Let us now return to the Porcelainite.
How did it get porcelainised ? What
has it to do with Opal? and what con-
nection have either with kangaroos ?
These three apparently unconnected and
anomalous questions we have to solve.
Porcelainite, as ordinarily understood,
is baked shale or clay, common on the
edges of igneous dykes, due to partial
fusion. But no living soul ever saw


porcelainisation extending over thou-
sands of square miles, and covering the
ground, as it were, with shattered tiles
of pretty poor manufacture. Yet this is
what we find in Queensland. True, we
have extensive sheets of basalt, vieing in
area with the porcelainite, but the basalts
do not porcelainise the beds on which
they lie (as a rule); even when they re-
pose immediately upon lignite they do
not affect it as much as a smoothing iron
does the ironing board. Clearly, the
basalt has not been the porcelainiser,
though in places it may overly such beds.
As a matter of fact, in Queensland, the
Onal fields stretch for some five hundred
miles north and south without coming
within two hundred miles of the basalt.
The basalt must be left out of considera-
tion, and there are no other igneous rocks
in the Opal area.
With respect to the second question,
this particular porcelainite is not baked
clay at all—it is not true porcelainite,
not natural pottery, but rather what we
might, to coin a name, call Vitrite or


glass-stone, except that it is almost pure
silica, whereas glass is a mixture of sili-
cates. I find, on analysis, that our Opal-
field porcelainite is an almost pure mix-
ture of soluble and insoluble silica, and
in this I see the explanation, and it is
here the kangaroos come in.
Eespectable Darwinian evolutionists
have been pleased to point to our Conti-
nent as an example and a warning
against isolation. See, they say, how
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America have,
by free geological intercourse since, say,
Triassic times, developed all sorts and
conditions of Mammals from the lowly
Marsupial to the lofty giraffe, while
conservative Australia has never got be-
yond the Monotreme stage of the Platy-
pus and the maternal-valise stage of the
Wallaby! This is pretty, and should
keep us humble.
Unfortunately it is not true. It turns
out, or, at any rate, is turning out, that
our marsupials are not a survival from
Triassic forms; that we are not poor be-
nighted folk still dight in garb elsewhere


discarded ages ago as unfashionable, but
that they are genuine home-made Aus-
tralian animals, fashioned out of old-
world placental forms, and adapted to
our own Australian wants. Sir Richard
Owen got a glimpse of part of the truth
years ago, as early as the forties of the
last century. He threw out the sugges-
tion that the marsupial character of the
Australian mammals was an adaptation
to climatic conditions; but the pouch and
its modifications, including the imma-
ture character of the newly-born en-
abled the brooding mothers to carry their
young with them in long-distance jour-
neys in search of water in times of
drought. It sounded poetic then; it be-
came a source of ridicule to a newer gen-
eration, and will yet be cited as an in-
spiration by a wiser one. The theory
should appeal to all Australian bushmen,
for thev are all marsupials themselves,
only they carry their pouch in their
hands or at the saddle—D! Climate,
and long distance between water holes,
have given origin alike to the pouch of


the wallaby and the water-bag of his
hunter.
Now for the application of this seem-
ingly incongruous set of propositions.
If the pouch-and-water-bag theory be
true, it follows that our climate has not
changed appreciably since the introduc-
tion of the higher animals —say, since
Mid-tertiary times. Incidentally it will
be made clear that this is not the climate
of pre-marsupial times. Finally, it will
be shown that the new—the present —
climate gave rise both to the Opal and
the ’possum.
A glance at the geological map of
Australia shows that the Continent is
split right across by a broad belt of
marine beds, which separate it into an
eastern and western island. The larger
of these two islands comprises West Aus-
tralia, except the north, and most of
South Australia. As it is the home of
the characteristic Australian flora and
fauna, we will call it Australian Austra-
lia. The smaller mass was a long, nar-
row land, extending from Cape York to
D


Tasmania, with flanking islets to the
west. As it was connected with, and re-
ceived from, Asia, many plants and ani-
mals we will call it Asiatic Australia.
The Cretaceous Sea which separated
Australian from Asiatic Australia, was
shallow, as is proved by the beds which
were deposited all over its area, and so
far must have been like the Arafura Sea
of to-day.
But the climatic conditions were very
different. The Cretaceous Sea allowed
of the interchange of the warm waters of
the north and the cool waters of the
south, right across what is now Central
Australia, giving rise to a comparatively
cool condition, in which reef-building
corals could not grow. It may be urged
that the water was too charged with sedi-
ment to allow of coral growth. But it
was not more muddy than the seas which
preceded and succeeded it, in which
corals abounded. Yet, so far as I know,
there is an entire absence of corals, reef-
building or otherwise, in the Cretaceous
rocks of Australia. Both Australian


and Asiatic Austialia had their climates
so ameliorated, that they must have en-
joyed insular, as distinct from conti-
nental climates. The very extent of the*
Cretaceous rocks, too, points to these oldl
Australias having been exceedingly
well-watered, for it is the water-bourne*
waste of the land which formed the;
rocks in the bed of the Cretaceous Sea.
While that sea existed there were none of
the higher vertebrates in either of the
Australias.
It is only with the last phase of the
Cretaceous Sea that we have to deal. It
was gradually shoaling, owing to steady
elevation being in progress, and this ac-
counts for the great preponderance of
sandy beds, which have given the name
of Desert Sandstone to the top-most mem-
ber of the series. And the Desert Sand-
stone is the home of the Opal.
Elevation continued until the whole of
the Cretaceous Sea became dry land.
The broad strait between Australian and
Asiatic Australia was bridged over and
finally obliterated, and the land became,


for the first time, one great continent,
never to be broken up again. It was the
earliest Federation of the States of the
Commonwealth. Coastal regions in the
west and south were to suffer depression
and re-elevation, but neither Queensland
nor Central Australia were ever again
to sink beneath the waves. Federation
was complete and final; there was to be
no more Separation.
Mark now, not what may, but what
must have happened; yet in mercy draw
not political moral therefrom! With
Federation came inevitable deteriora-
tion. The Coast Range and flanking
lands of Asiatic Australia originally had
bountiful rains on the west, as now on
the eastern slopes, and Australian Aus-
tralia was almost equally favoured. But
with the drying of the Cretaceous Sea
came the desiccation of Central Austra-
lia —it was a gigantic cutting off of the
water supply.
This happened in Tertiary times; but
elevation did not stop when the Cretace-
ous Sea bed was raised to its present


level. It went on until Asiatic Austra-
lia was united to Asia proper, at least
as far as Timor on the west and New
Guinea on the east, and across this tem-
porary bridge came the early mammals
and many another animal and plant,
and by it the Eucalypts may have passed
into Timor, where they give a character-
istic Australian aspect to the landscape.
To one familiar, like the writer, with
these Asiatic lands, it is startling to
enter Australia from the north, and to
see again in the magnificent scrub the
familiar primeval forests which he had
left in those Gardens of the Sun which
cluster about the line. In like manner
an Australian landing in Timor, say at
Deli, and climbing the hills towards the
Estana encounters the gum-trees of his
own land as colonies of naturalised
aliens.
I have said that the early mammals
came from Asia via Asiatic Australia,
but I cannot stop to prove this —we only
have to deal with marsupials in so far
as they toll the same story as the Opals.


It was till recently universally believed
that our marsupials were the descendants
of the early marsupials, whose remains
are found fossil in Triassic, Cretaceous,
and Tertiary beds, in Europe and
America, and that while in the older
continents these creatures developed into
higher forms, in Australia, owing to its
isolation, they retained their marsupial
character through all the wonderful
modifications they have undergone. It
is now becoming more and more clear
that instead of being old-world tories
that have refused to march with the
times, they are brand-new Australian
natives, made to suit the climate, just as
the boundary rider, the prospector, and
the shearer are brand-new types devel-
oped out of old Englishmen. The old-
world immigrants would have died of
thirst had they remained tied to their
mothers’ apron strings. They were
originally placental mammals; they have
taken the back trail along the ancestral
route —that is, if, with most naturalists,
we agree that the early Triassic mam


mals were marsupial, and not insecti-
vores —but they may, with true Austra-
lian cunning, have reinvented non-pla-
centalism for themselves.
There has been time enough for the
development of all our marsupials since
they first arrived on Australian ground.
There has elapsed the whole period of
the Tertiaries—an epoch in which most
of the great mountain ranges of the
earth have been uplifted —the Alps, the
Himalayas, and the Andes. They were
almost certainly evolved on Australian
ground, for no trace of them is found
in the rocks of Europe, Asia, or North
America, and only in comparatively
recent deposits in Patagonia have their
allies been discovered, and this very
doubtfully—and that land of fabled
giants has other things in common with
the land of the Wattle, and may have
received her marsupials (except true
originally placental mammals; they have
opossums) from us. [lt is now proved
that these Patagonian mammals have no
relation to the Australian marsupials.
Subsequent note.]


We know not yet when the immigra-
tion started, for there are no rocks of
Tertiary age known in North Queens-
land, and the beds of that age I am
examining around Brisbane have proved
as yet barren in this respect. Whatever
the precise geological date at which they
arrived, it is certain that they hM not
penetrated as far west as Australian
Australia till late Tertiary times, for the
older Tertiaries of Victoria, South Aus-
tralia. and N.S. Wales show no trace of
their presence, but by Pliocene (Upper
Tertiary) times our marsupials had not
only evolved all the existing types, but
the giants also, which became extinct in
that era. In Pliocene times, also, marsu-
pials had spread practically all over
Australia and Tasmania, though curi-
ously the Platypus has even yet only
reached the fringe of northern Austra-
lian Australasia.
The great fact I wish to emphasise is
that during the long Tertiary period, as
Australia became drier and hotter with
the cutting off of the rain supply, there


was not only time enough for the devel-
opment of our marsupial types, but a
cause for it; the original immigrants had
to change or die. They have changed —
but not more than the mammals of the
Old and New Worlds. It is to Asiatic
Australia that I look for the locality of
the great change, at least in its earlier
phases: it is still richest in species, and
has doubtless peopled the rest of our
continent. Kangaroos, in fact, are due-
to the change of climate consequent upon
the conversion into dry land of the strait,
between the two primeval Austral:as.
Now let us see what this great climatic-
change did for the Opal. Picture the
last phase of the Cretaceous upheaval,
when the sands, which will afterwards-
form the Desert Sandstone, were gradu-
ally being raised above water, and let
these sands be charged with silica in
solution. The salt and other easily
soluble material will soon be washed out
by the rains: the iron will tend towards
the bottom beds, and the soluble silica,
well begin to settle in the cracks and


joint-planes. The rainfall steadily di-
minishes in quantity and the climate be-
comes hotter and drier.
There now arises a very remarkable set
cf conditions, which I believe had a great
influence on the Opal, as it certainly has
upon the commercial value of the land.
The Desert Sandstone is the upper-
most bed, or rather, series of beds, of the
Cretaceous System, and still retains its
original horizontality to a very great ex-
tent. The Lower Cretaceous rocks upon
which it lies fall into two series—first,
the Rolling Downs Formation, consist-
ing chiefly of practically water-tight
•shales, beneath Avhich lies a thick bed of
■extraordinarily pervious, very friable,
sandstone, to which Dr. E. L. Jack gave
the name of Blythesdale Braystone. It
is believed by those Avho understand the
Scottish tongue to be a very appropriate
name, but a poor Sassenach like myself
can only realise its pretty alliterative-
ness, and accept the rest with the
humility of racial inferiority.
These Lower Cretaceous rocks Avere


tilted to the west before the Desert Sand-
stone was deposited. In geological par-
lance, the Desert Sandstone lies horizon-
tally and unconformably upon the up-
turned edges of the Lower Cretaceous
beds. This apparently insignificant
arrangement has had a very marked in-
fluence upon the climatic condition of
the Opal fields and Central Queensland
generally.
As soon as the Desert Sandstone be-
came dry land, it began to be fretted
away by the denuding agencies of rain
and river, and the edges naturally suf-
fered first. Hence, along the eastern
boundary of the old Cretaceous Sea much
of the Blythesdale Sandstone now lies
exposed, which was formerly covered by
Desert Sandstone. Indeed, that sand-
stone is now so worn down as only to
appear as isolated patches —wreckage
whose wide distribution attests its origi-
nal expanse.
The result is that the rains which fall
on the eastern lands, and which would
naturally flow as streams over the west


ern lands, is trapped by the Blythesdale
Bray stone, which lies like a huge sponge
along the western flanks of the eastern
hill country. The central lowlands are
thus robbed of much of even the scant
water they would, under any other geo-
logical conditions, receive. Many causes
have thus led to the dessication, and to
the enhanced temperature of the Opal-
bearing country.
The water trapped by the Blythesdale
Braystone is not entirely lost to Central
Queensland. Owing to the steady wes-
terly dip of the Braystone, the water
flows downwards beneath the Bolling
Downs beds, and is the artesian supply
tapped by our deep bores. Opals, kan-
garoos, and our artesian water supply
are thus proved to be intimately con-
nected, and all to be the result of the
obliteration of the Cretaceous Sea, whose
waters, being withdrawn, converted the
Australian Archipelago into the Austra-
lian Continent. They and the climate
are the first-fruits of the first Federa-
tion.


These results are so remarkable, so un-
expected, and so unparalleled elsewhere,
that it will be well to condense the evi-
dence into a few pithy sentences.
1. Before the Cretaceous Period, the
Australian region was an archipelago,
of which the two principal islands were
Australian Australia and Asiatic Aus-
tralia.
2. These islands were separated by the
shallow Cretaceous Sea.
3. This sea allowed free water circu-
lation from the cool Southern ocean to
the Arafura Sea, across the centre of
the present Continent.
4. The Australian Archipelago en-
joyed a mild, insular climate, with boun-
tiful rains.
5. The Cretaceous Sea was not warm
enough to support reef-building corals.
6. At the close of the Cretaceous era
the Cretaceous Sea was finally upheaved,
and the present continental conditions
established.


7. At this time there were no terres-
trial mammals in Australia.
8. Upheaval continued (through Ter-
tiary times) until Australia was joined
to Asia on the north-east. Terrestrial
mammals, and other Asiatic animals and
plants crossed into Australia, and Aus-
tralian forms passed north into Asia, as
witness the Eucalypts of Timor.
9. The original mammals which
crossed to Australia were placental and
not marsupial.
10. The shcal waters in which the
Desert Sandstone was laid down were
highly charged with silica in solution.
11. The upheaved Desert Sandstone is
still rich in this colloidal or soluble
silica.
12. On the obliteration of the Cretace-
ous Sea the climate steadily deteriorated,
becoming hotter and drier, owing to:
(a) the cutting off of the cool water
from the South.
(h) the diminished rainfall, due to


the obliteration of the Cretace-
ous Sea.
(c) the exposure of the porous Bly-
thes dale Braystone by denuda-
tion, and the consequent trap-
ping of the surface water from
the east.
13. The water so trapped flows west-
ward underground, and is our artesian
water. Much of it would have naturally
irrigated Central Australia.
14. Owing to the above causes, Cen-
tral Australia has been converted into a
huge sand-bath.
15. This facilitated the solidification
of the silica in its colloidal form, and pre-
vented its conversion into insoluble
quartz.
16. As the Desert Sandstone dried and
contraction-joints formed, soluble silica
filled in the cracks by gravitation.
17. The silica was in the condition of
a thin jelly, permitting any included
solid particles to sink through it.


18. Hence in vertical cracks the Opal
is invariably purest at the top.
19. Hence, also, the Opal is most
-abundant at the base of the Sandstone.
20. The bulk of the colloidal silica still
remains in the body of the fine-grained
beds of the Desert Sandstone.
21. Much of this fine-grained rock has
become quasi-porcelainised by the slow
evaporation of the water under the influ-
ence of the sun’s rays.
22. The Porcelainite is chiefly silica
and not silicates, and has been produced
by solar and not subterranean heat.
23. The formation of true Opal, in-
cluding the Noble Opal, was at first
rapid. It is still proceeding, but very
slowly, owing to the diminished water
supply.
24. As the country became more
parched and hot, the terrestrial mammals
became modified to suit the new condi-
tions.
25. Our Marsupials are, therefore, not
Survivals but Revivals —unless, as is


probable, they are entirely new develop-
ments.
It is my intention shortly to publish
the whole of the evidence of this remark-
able, and hitherto unsuspected, series of
consequences of the effects of the eleva-
tion of the Cretaceous Sea upon the cli-
mate, the minerals, the mammals, and
the surface and underground water sup-
ply of Australia.


CHAPTER VII.
OPAL AS A GEM.
The preceding pages may have led the
reader to wonder why the gem Opal is
so expensive, seeing that the mineral
Opal is so common, the Opal Fields of
Queensland alone covering a thousand
square miles. But while Opal—of a sort
—can be obtained by the ton, the preci-
ous or Noble Opal is always bought by
the ounce, and few and far between are
the finds of single pieces of an ounce in
weight. Then again, much of the Noble
Opal occurs in thin scales or coatings,
almost useless to the lapidary; and even
when the thickness is such that stones
can be cut from it, the pattern may be
poor or the colour bad, and often an ap-
parently fine stone, purchased at a high
price, turns out to be sandshot and value-
less when cut. Good stones are still
rare, and the supply is not equal to the
demand. You may still agree with
Burns and—


“ Ask why God made the gem so small
And why so huge the granite
’T was that He meant mankind should place
The greater value on it.”
The possessor of a fine Opal need be un-
der no apprehension that the gem will
decrease in value —personally, I am
sorry for it, for things of beauty cannot
be too plentiful, and it is the acme of
ostentatious vulgarity to estimate beauty
by coin of the realm. Poppies among
com, blue-bells in the copse, and forget-
me-nots by the margin of the brook,
would not be more charming if only
trust magnates could acquire them, and
the rainbow, the Opal of the heavens, is
given us without price.
The story of the Birth of the Opal, too,
has been told in vain, if it be not real-
ised that Opal mining is no holiday task;
no fine, free, open-air life in a delightful
paradise where it is ever spring, and
where winding, flower-fringed brooks
are shingled with jewels. It is serious,
strenuous labour, in a parched semi-
desert, where water has often to be car-
ried for miles—where the miner, as we


have shown, has to become a marsupial,
like the “ big, black, bounding beggars”
that flee before his face. Be sure, then,
if you be mercenary your Opal invest-
ment is gilt-edged. One might even ask
you—parodying Cowper on the sugar-
cane —compassionately to
“ Think how many backs have smarted
For the gem your purse affords,”
but that the Opal miner needs no com-
passion for a life, which, though hard,
is self-imposed, and buoyed ever with the
hope of great reward.
What constitutes a fine Opal, from the
jeweller’s point of view?
Till quite recently the type of the
Noble Opal was determined by the most
brilliant stones from the Hungarian
mines. These have a milky ground, with
brilliant flashes, which from the nature
of the ground are subdued in brightness,
as if seen through thin gauze. The fin-
est Australian stones have the same
milky ground, but less deep in tint, so
that the flashes show out clearly, and
are as brilliant as the rainbow itself.


From a purely artistic aspect they are
unquestionably the most beautiful Opals
known. But fashion, directed by trade
jealousy and vested interest, decreed
these gems to be of second-rate value.
Indeed, there was an attempt to boycot
them on the London market. But their
inherent beauty conquered, aided largely
by the discrimination of our fair Ameri-
can cousins, who, having no fear of
Hatton Garden, or indeed, anything else,
before their eyes, persistently declined to
be put into trade leading-strings. And
to-day, wherever Opals are held in
esteem, and that is wherever civilised or
barbaric man delights in splendid jewels,
our Queensland Noble Opal takes prece-
dence of all others.
A fine Opal, then, must have an appro-
priate ground colour to set off the fire,
and this should be milky, with perhaps
a tinge of blue. The flash or fire must
be pure in colour, and should be defi-
nitely outlined. The pattern should be
regular, and the rarest and justly most
esteemed, is that in which the pattern is


like a mosaic of tesserse cut from the
solar spectrum. Such Opals are termed
Harlequin, and deserve a more aristo-
cratic baptism. Harlequin Opals, it
need hardly be said, are of great rarity,
and it is almost hopeless to try and match
them from separate stones —a perfect
suite can only be obtained by cutting a
large stone into smaller ones. Fine
Opals like fine pearls, increase rapidly
in value by being matched.
Though no man can admire the Harle-
quin Opal more than I, yet I confess that
some of our other varieties delight me
quite as much. We have one sort which
has a spangled pattern, and also indefi-
nite, long, flashes, like little levin bolts
of crimson and green. Their beauty
breaks like summer lightning as the
stone is turned about, and this very
transientness of the flashes is an addi-
tional grace, as is the play of colour on
the throat of a humming bird. It gives
“ atmosphere ” to the stone, to use a
painter’s phrase, and like a fine impres-
sionist picture, suggests more than it defi


nitely expresses. It is as the gift of re-
ticence in poetry —it trusts to the appre-
ciative imagination—one might tire of
rainbows if they were persistent. The
charm of music is that it so soon—
we would not always have Handel’s
Largo falling on the ear —this Opal is
music—it is the Largo in Silica. It hath
no name —let me christen it the Leven
Opal.
y There is a curious property about
these flashing Opals, that I am surprised
the old folk who dowered gems with mys-
tic virtues never seized upon. It is the
most human of stones—the only one that
responds to the touch of kindly hands.
Warm your Opal in the palm of your
hand; its colours will take on a brighter
glow as if in sympathy. Lay them by in
cold neglect, and the fire will die down
as if half banked. But let not this pretty
conceit carry thee away, for there be Opal
copers as well as horse copers, and they
will try and foist on thee pallid stones
warm from the stimulating lamp; buy
stones with cool hands as well as with a


cool head. But this is a little excursus
by the way, and we must return to the
Opal, and to the Queensland Opal in
particular.
Speaking broadly, Queensland Opals
fall into two classes—those with an iron-
stone and those with a sandstone matrix-
Both have the same origin, both occur
in the same area, and it is difficult to say
which yields the finer gems. It may be
taken as a general, but by no means in-
variable rule, that the ironstone yields
the deeper tinted, the sandstone the
lighter hued stones. The ironstone, how-
ever, is the sole matrix of the splendid,
but comparatively unknown, Black Opal,
to be presently described.
The ironstone in which the Opal occurs
is, as already pointed out, of secondary
origin, and has segregated out from the
sandstone. It is usually in concretionary
nodules, formed in concentric coats or
layers: and like all such concretions, is
full of contraction —cracks and planes
of weakness between the layers, besides
being more less porous throughout. Into


these cracks, etc., the Opal has pene-
trated, so that we find it in all sorts of
conditions, from thin films, like a glaze,
any tiny threads like glorified gossamer,
np to half-inch plates and concentric
masses —banded and eyed agates of Opal
and ironstone.
Much of it is opaque, dull yellow,
dirty, or otherwise worthless, but some
of it is the most gorgeous Opal known.
Among it we find, especially as films and
scales, the deepest and richest of pure
violet, with spangles of shining ultra-
marine, pale turquoise blue, with glit-
tering fleckings of sea green; and yet
again perfect Harlequin and other mat-
ter, with spangles of blue, green, gold,
orange, and fiery red. Indeed, almost
every variety of Opal is found among
the ironstones.
From some occult cause much of
this Opal, especially that which is in
scales, is banned by that irrational mon-
ster, Fashion. Yet it is of incomparable
beauty—it is dreamily lovely—it re-
minds one of the rapt visions of the poet


Keats, of the unmatched sunsets of
Turner’s brush —it is Swinburn and
Giorgione in imperishable stone. True,
it will not cut into ring-stones or neck-
lace pendants; gems are meant to adorn
other things than fingers and throats,
though they make exquisite brooches.
For all kinds of inlaid work, and for
such pretty trifles as paper-weights, ash-
trays, and a thousand and one nick-
nacks, they should be ceded at least
equal rank with malachite.
The very depth of colour of the matrix,
warm, ruddy brown of all shades, from
the lightest sienna to deepest Eembrant
umber, is the most artistic background
imaginable.
What I have said about these unjustly
despised ironstone thin Opals applies
equally to similar sandstone Opals. In
both it not rarely happens that fairly
thick, pipy Opal has caught up frag-
ments of the matrix along the back of
the pipe. Fashion says, I will have none
of it. Yet that same addle-headed ETydra
will pay fancy prices for a piece of Eock


crystal with similar inclusions, and will
call them by all sorts of pet names.
There lies before me a piece of ironstone
pipe-opal, two and a half inches long,
three quarters of an inch wide, and half
an inch thick. It is almost clear wine
yellow, with a slight milky tinge,
through which swim scores of clearly-
defined large spangles of shining blue,
green, orange, and red; and the Opal
melts, as it were, into the ironstone at
the back, and has picked up little bits of
fawn-coloured ironstone, which lie at all
sorts of tottery angles. To me it is a
miracle of condensed beauty, and it
would make a shawl-brooch Anthony
might have wooed Cleopatra with. Mrs.
Grundy would not look at it; Cleopatra
would have cherished it —so, methinks,
would Queen Alexandra.
From the ironstone we get that match-
less and little known gem, the Black
Opal As the Black Swan was to the
ancients among bird wonders, so was
the Black Opal—something to be dream-
ed of, something possible but hardly


probable—and Australia has given us
both. It was unknown to the ancients,
or Pliny, who goes into raptures over
the Opal, like the wise man and artist
he was, would have mentioned it. The
lost Opal which the great Napoleon gave
to Josephine, which was called the “Burn-
ing of Troy,” from its fiery flashes has
been thought to have been a Black Opal,
but from the description, I feel pretty
sure it was one of those red-flashing
Opals on an ironstone background,
which Mdm. La Mode of to-day, not be-
ing a Napoleon of any sort, affects to
despise. Even as lately as 1892 Mr.
Streeter wrote, “Under the Name of Black
Opal, a stone appeared a few years ago
in the market, and, like anything new,
was eagerly sought after, and attained a
high commercial value. Certainly the
colours are very lovely in these speci-
mens, yet how they acquire their black-
ness and deep tints is questionable.
Some other hand than unassisted Nature
may have been at work.”
If an expert thus erred, what chance


had this admittedly beautiful gem with
the amateur? The very honesty of the
gem-merchant was against the stone, and
to this year of 1907 the Black Opal, rare
and matchless as of yore, is valued at
much less than its recognised brother.
Yet it was Messrs. Flavelle, the publish-
ers of this work, who were among the
first to put the Black Opal before the
public. They know it, I know it; every
miner and most visitors to our Opal-
fields know it; and we all know it to
come direct from Nature’s own labora-
tory.
But there are Black Opals and Black
Opals. Let me illustrate. Many years
ago, when I was one of the officers of
the English Geological Survey, it fell to
my lot, with others, to map what is now
the valuable Northamptonshire Iron-
stone. We traced it for many miles, and
found it to pass insensibly and horizon-
tally into pure white siliceous sand.
This is a fairly parallel case; we have
the replacement of silica by iron oxide
in both cases, the only difference being


that in England, the silica was the crys-
talisable variety (quartz), and in Queens-
land it was the uncrystallisable form
(Opal). In both places you can find
every possible gradation from pure
silica to pure ironstone. In Queensland
you can gather flint-hard ironstone pep-
pered (irrorated as an entomologist would
say) with Opal points, like the stars in
the Milky Way—it was known to the
old French lapidaries as Prime d’Opal,
that is, Pebble Opal. Prom this you can
pass on to ironstone into which the Opal
has run as molten glass would run into
and bind ashes together. In the next
step the Opal predominates over the iron-
stone, and this is the commoner sort of
Black Opal. Remove all the ironstone
and leave only the Opal stained with iron
as Smoky Quartz is with carbon, and
you get the rare and matchless gem, the
true Black Opal.
It is, however, among the Sandstone
Opals that we find the greatest variety.
Apart from the fine Harlequin and other
kinds of Noble Opal, already described,


we have every variety, from the dull
white and yellowish Gachalong, which
clings to the tongue by its porosity,
through the transparent Hyalite, which
has no spangles, and looks like rich but
delicately tinted stained glass, to the
Girasol or Fire Opal, which, when per-
fect, seems to hold an imprisoned Glow-
worm.
It is unnecessary to repeat what has
been said about the veins and nodules
of Opal in the Desert Sandstone, but
there is one mode of deposition that de-
mands special notice. It is known as
Pipe Opal, and occurs in long ovoid
masses, in colour and shape not unlike
the Finger Cakes which, when I was a
boy, always tasted like crepe, for they
were handed round at funerals, as
melancholy tokens of woe. They aver-
age about five inches long, by an inch
wide, and half an inch thick. (My wife,
who is a Londoner, warns me to keep
confectionery and mineralogy apart.
She calls them Savoy Cakes, which
smacks rather of Gilbert than graves—


but so long as you recognise the thing,
its associations matter not.) These pipes
are often completely filled with pure
Noble Opal.
The Opal pipes are, as Mr. C. Fraser,
of Messrs. Flavelle’s tells me, never found
in a vertical position, but lie at more or
less high angles with the planes of bed-
ding. I am quite unable to account for
their particular shape or position; but,
then, sand-galls and ironstone concre-
tions are always puzzling in the fanciful
shapes and positions they assume. Usu-
ally the upper and lower surfaces of the
pipe have a more or less continuous layer
of Opal in which fragments of sandstone
are caught up. Often the Opal fades, as
it were, imperceptibly into the matrix.
In some pipes the pure Noble Opal occu-
pies the upper half of the pipe from top
to bottom, with impure and opaque Opal
in the lower part; but there is no fixed
arrangement. The pattern lies, as a rule,
across the pipe, and is parallel with the
longer axis.


As would be expected from the mode
of origin, most of the Opal comes from
the base of the Desert Sandstone, and
much is found in detrital material de-
rived therefrom.
The Opal, not being a transparent
stone deriving beauty from internal re-
flection, is not cut in facets, but with a
curved surface— en cabochon, to use the
technical term. It is not well suited for
engraving for two reasons. First, its
particolour destroys, or rather hides, the
workmanship; and secondly, it is not
only very brittle, and so dangerous to
engrave, but the internal minute frac-
tures which give the flash-colours, often
cause the stone to splinter under the
graver’s tool. Nevertheless, our Queens-
land ironstone Opals make exquisite
cameos, the dark matrix forming a fine
contrasting background. Personally, I
think them a mistake; the delicate lines
in a face and in the hair, are lost in the
maze of changing colour. Still, I have
seen boldly cut heads that only an empi-
rical criticism would denounce, and
P


Messrs. Flavelle have cut tiny Opal
doves for pendants that are perfect. The
Opal renders charmingly the “ livelier
iris,” which, in the springtime, “changes
on the burnished dove.”
Much of the Opal that at present finds
no market will, as taste becomes divorced
from Mammon, be wrought into things
of beauty, not necessarily for personal
•decoration, but for the dainty trifles that
beautify the home. Everyone delights in
the purity of cut glass—surely the glass-
clear Opal is as chaste. Opal Matrix is
more delicately beautiful than mother
o’pearl or the Haliotis of New Zealand —
perhaps even the nouveau riche would
patronise it, if it were vended under its
French name Prime d’Opal—roses by
other names by no means smell as sweet
—to some folk.
And now a few words as to the care of
Opals. Few stones require more atten-
tion; none repay it better. Eemember
that the Noble Opal is as dainty in body
as in dress; its tender tints ar'e a reflex
of its delicate nature. Many an old


Opal has become dull and lustreless, and
has lost its fire—and all by ill-usage and
neglect. •
Opal is a soft stone as gems go; it is
not as hard as crystal, which jewellers
class among soft stones, and it can be
scratched with a knife. Hence Opal
rings should not be worn during work-
ing hours. If you have the opportunity
of seeing Opals polished, as you may do
at Messrs. Flavelle’s, you will be aston-
ished at the softness of the material
which puts on the final gloss, and receive
an object lesson from which your Opals
will benefit.
Again, Opal is porous, and conse-
quently absorbent. This is best illus-
trated by an opaque variety, Hydro-
phane, which, when placed in water, be-
comes translucent ; even our Cachalong
adheres to the tongue owing to its
porosity. Though Noble Opal is not so
open in texture as these, it is still por-
ous, and remember the fire is due to min-
ute fractures. Hence Opal soon becomes
dull from, its pores becoming clogged


with, dirt —another reason for taking off
your rings while performing the duties
of chatelaine. The pores are so fine, that
it is exceedingly difficult to clean Opals
■ —indeed, it is an impossibility for an
amateur. Eeaders of “ Kim ” will recol-
lect that one of his teachers was a skilled
Opal rejuvenator. Nothing less than
fell disappointment is the lot of the
novice who tampers with his Opals.
Opals, indeed, alike from their delicacy
of constitution and delicacy of beauty,
are not work-a-day stones; they pertain
to the graces, not to the battle of life.
Some Opals, too, are impatient of
continuous exposure to strong light.
Now, on all these counts Opals lay just
claim to tender treatment. They should
be, not less, but more prized in conse-
quence—Opals belong to the satin gown,
not to the print blouse.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE MYSTERY AND POETRY OF
THE NOBLE OPAL.
From the earliest times Gem-stones
have been endowed with mystic virtues —
Babylonians, Assyrians, Egyptians, In-
dians, and Jews, all valued gems as
much for their supposed mystic proper-
ties as for their beauty. Indeed, the
Jews, until about the Roman era,
esteemed them for no other reason. From
Genesis to Malachi there is no word to
show the Chosen Race adorned them-
selves with gems for mere personal deco-
ration.
The rarity of the stones, which made
them precious, proved, in the illogical
philosophy of the times, that they must
be special arks for the enshrinement of
Nature’s choicest secrets and subtlest
powers. Their unparalleled hardness
was emblematic of their capacity for
holding fast the secrets entrusted to
their keeping—all wise Nature would
not, dare not, could not, risk her most


precious treasures to the guardianship
of anything perishable. And the Divine
presence proclaimed itself in flashing
beams of colour. It was all so simple,
so self-evident, so philosophical—and so
stupid.
It was so stupid it could never die.
It was the prototype of relic worship —
it is seen to-day in the resurrection of
the ancient lucky-pigs that ladies, half-
shamefacedly dangle from their bangles.
It achieved the dignity of a quasi-sci-
ence, in the Middle Ages, as the “ Doc-
trine of Signatures.” Mature, taught
this pseudo-philosophy, “ signed,” or
stamped, everything useful or baneful by
shape, colour, odour, or other property.
Old “ Herbals” are based upon it—the
pretty little English plant we still call
Eycbriaht, from its flowmrs, like the eyes
of Irish girls, was evidently the balm
for smarting lids. Our All-heal, All-
good, Stitch-wort, and Liver-wort still
speak to us of their medicinal virtues, as
do the Dogbane and FooVs Parsley of the
opposite. And the “ doctrine ” held full


sway over gem-stones. The wearer of
the Sapphire’s heavenly blue will remain
pure as an angel, and burning Sappho’s
flame of love was kept alight by the
blazing Ruby that lay upon her breast.
The Opal received kindlier treatment
at the hands of the old Romans than was
accorded to it by mediaeval Europe or by
modern Christendom, for, so far as I
have discovered, there is not one hint
that this stone, so elf-like in its change-
ful beauty, was of old anything but a
icy for ever. It was reserved for Chris-
tian Europe, for a good bishop in solemn
fact, to bespatter its fair fame with slan-
der, and for Scotia’s best novelist to crys-
tallise the aspersions into permanence.
Plinv, the Roman naturalist, gives us
the earliest description of the Opal, and
goes into raptures about it, though he
does not mention it as new; indeed, it
must have been pretty well-known by
his time. Pliny was an artist, as well
as a scientist, and values gem-stones for
their beauty and rarity rather than their
cost; indeed, the Opal is the only stone of


which he quotes the price, and this only
to point an anecdote, as we shall pre-
sently see. Listen to part of his descrip-
tion :
“It is,” says he, “ made up of the
glories of the most precious gems; to de-
scribe it is a matter of inexpressible diffi-
culty. There is in it the gentler tire of
the Euby, the brilliant purple of the
Amethyst, and the sea-green of the Emer-
ald, all shining together in an incredible
union. Some aim at rivalling in lustre
the brightest azure of the painter’s
palette, others the flame of burning sul-
phur, or of a fire quickened by oil.” The
translation is substantially that of the
late Eev. C. W. King, whose unrivalled
knowledge of ancient gems was only
equalled by his skill, technical accuracy,
and elegance in rendering into English
the classic writers on gems and other
mineralogical matters.
Pliny relates an almost incredible
story of an Opal, which .yet has a ring
of truth in it. It appears that one, No-
nius. a patrician, possessed the then fin


«st and largest known Opal. Pliny, who
seems to have known the stone, has no
doubt upon this point. It was the size
of a hazel nut. Nonius cherished it as
the very cockle of his heart, and it is
only due to his memory to record that it
was not the fabulous sum at which it
was valued, about £160,000 of our
money, but the gem itself, that charmed
him. Now, Marc Antony coveted this
gem, but Nonius was as adamant, and
Antony was in office. So this pure
patriot, who you remember, would not
stir us up to any flood of mutiny, and
who insisted on the recognition of Brutus
and his friend as being strictly honour-
able men, proscribed Nonius, in order
that he might legally annex the gem.
But Nonius, the infatuated, fled to
Egypt, preferring exile plus his Opal
to the luxuries of life in the Impe-
rial city, and the friendships of a
lifetime without it. True, it was
voluntary, and not judicial exile,
and though Pliny says the Opal was the
sole remnant of his fortune, we may hope


that one astute enough to evade the long
arm of Roman law was able to conceal
portable property bigger than a hazel-
nut. One wishes Pliny had gossiped a
little more garrulously over the personal
equation in this anecdote. How came
Pliny to see the stone if Nonius got clear
away ? One shudders at the thought
that after all, Pliny gazed upon an “ un-
redeemed ” pledge.
No one has seen this stone since
Pliny’s time, but early this century a
French interpreter named Roboly pre-
tended to have discovered it in the ruins
of Alexandria.
The bard, who, under the pseudonym
of Orpheus, wrote a long poem in Greek,
upon the virtues of precious stones, was
probably a Roman, though Mr. King, his
only accurate translator, is half inclined
to make him a Greek. He, like, Pliny,
has nought but good to sing about the
Opal. It is he who tells us it displayed
“ the complexion of the lovely boy ”
that is, Paederos, whom we better know
as the dangerous little archer Cupid, who


stole his mother’s team of sparrows, and
has been in mischief ever since. The
singer takes us to the heights of Olym-
pus, where the Opal is the delight of the
immortals, and falls again to earth and
humdrum life to note how the Opal, be-
ing fair to view, charms the strong eye,,
and strengthens the weak.
'thus the old Romans had associated
the Opal with nothing that was not
pleasing—it was the delight of man,
mortal, and immortal, yet in its own
dainty way it deigned to act as an eye-
lotion. Now let us see how the Noble
Opal fared at the hands of mediaeval
Christian Europe.
About the year 640, Marbodus, Bishop-
of Rennes, in what is now Normandy,
wrote a Lapidarium, or Treatise on
Stones. He culled from Pliny and
Orpheus, and embellished his work with
mistakes of his own. Ignoring the-
simple explanation that the curative
virtue of the Opal was the natural re-
sult of its soft tints, he boldly twists
Opalus into Ophthalmitis as described in


our chapter on Names. Then he begins
to libel the stone, and says it confers in-
visibility upon the wearer—not, mark
you, for any good purpose, but as he ex-
pressly states, so that the Sykes’ family
may go a-burgling in the sunshine, and
escape the risks of exposure to baneful
night-dews! Fie upon thee, good Bishop!
Doth not the purple Amethyst gleam
upon thy episcopal finger raised in bene-
diction? Did’st not read in those old
Latin manuscripts how the Greeks, blun-
dering philologists, like thy sacerdotal
self, fondly and vainly imagined Amu-
thytos was from a-methuo, wineless, and
hence enabled the wearer to drink his
comrades under the table, and still re-
main sober as a patent filter? Would
not thy venerable sobersides have quiv-
ered with indignation had any lewd
toper hinted thy ring was an “ indul-
gence,” a permit to look long and often
upon the wine when it was red? Yet
thou slanderest the Precious Opal, 0!
thou kindly but superstitious e. nd
addle-pated inculcator of wisdom and


righteousness! But thy sin be forgiven
thee, on the score of invincible ignor-
ance.
Four centuries later, when Marbodius’
land had become Normandy by right of
conquest, the Noble Opal suffered fresh
indignities, and a crude story about Rob-
ert, clepe Le Diable, father of Conquer-
ing William, laid misfortune at an
Opal’s door. ’Twas but a single stone
that foiled the luck of the House of Nor-
mandy, and with its loss the ban was
lifted, and no other Opal suffered wrong.
The spell was broken; but the Wizard of
the North waved his wand, and lo! in
“ Anne of Gierstein,” the Noble Opal was
cursed, even unto this last. But yester-
day a lady, educated and refined, a mem-
ber of a scientific society, asked me—and
asked me as a professional geologist, for-
sooth, if Opals were not, in very truth,
really and demonstrably unlucky. I
could have wept over her (for she was
young and pretty).
Happily our Royal Family have been
free from this superstition, though Rob


ert of the Naughty Name is reckoned
among their forbears. Our late gracious
Queen Victoria, I am told, was especially
fond of Opals, and frequently selected
them as presents for relatives and
friends. If one calls the roll of the
thrones of Europe, and checks the mem-
bers of her family who grace them, it
would seem that the spell of the Opal
could not throw its shadow upon such
high places. The exiled Indian Prince,
Dhnleep Singh, when he visited the land
of his fathers, chose Opals as the gift for
his mother, proving his superiority to the
common belief, as well as demonstrating,
that, as we have already shown, Opal is
not to be reckoned among the Stones of
India. The credulous have but poor
Josephine for company.
Though the superstition is not dead,
and never will depart so long as there
are minds that take fearsome delight in
the occult, yet it is on the wane, thanks
largely to the breezy intellectual vigour
of the charming Daughters of the West.
It was doomed to obscurity when Queens


land poured her treasures at the feet of
Europe. Society was astounded, stag-
gered, delighted. Then, like the Califor-
nian hero, it asked: “Can these things
be?” And promptly began to doubt.
For two thousand years it had been seek-
ing for Opals which, with sufficient
ground-tint to throw up the scintilla-
tions, was vet charged to the highest
potential with spangles of blue, green,
and gold, and above all, with matchless
flash of crimson flame—and here she at
last beheld them, brighter, purer than
she had ever dared to hope, and this,
too, not in solitary stones appearing, like
comets, at odd incalculable intervals, but
in profusion.
So fashion the unreasoning, doubted
the evidence of her own senses; and the
dealer, who is her lord, and not her bond-
servant, as she fondly imagines, saw how
he could tickle her vanity, and drive
fresh rivets into the armour of his vested
interest. He whispered that, after all,
they were not the real thing, not the true
Hungarian Opal, but only Colonial


stones at most. “Ah! Madam, but you
have the true, tenderly sweet, intense
aesthetic faculty. If I might say so, you
are, perhaps, just a shade, a trifle, too,
too sensitive to artistic colour —hut I
agree with you; these Queensland stones
are too bright and perfect—they catch
the eye at once; they are as the roast
beef of the farmer to the white meat of
the ortolan on your ladyship’s Sevres
platter.” And he turned aside and
hummed something parlous like unto “a
greenery, yallery, Grosvenor Gallery,”
something or other.
But the sickly sentimentality that pre-
ferred the green of the gall-bladder to
the chlorophyll of a spring leaf lan-
guished its unmuscular decrepitude into
an unhonoured and forgotten grave. The
Queensland Opal was too honestly beau-
tiful to he cold-shouldered at its debut,
and is now everywhere admitted to be
the ideal Opal, and to stand in the front
rank among beautiful stones.
A gem which has conquered slander
and superstition may be trusted to hold


its own anywhere. Yet, according to my
■own observation, it is only beginning to
make its mark among the Orientals.
The European Turks esteem it equally
with the diamond, but they received it
■early from Europe. In India, it does not
yet rank with the diamond, the sapphire,
and the ruby, or even with the turquoise.
Prince Dhuleep Singh took it to India as
much as a curiosity as for its beauty.
We are entitled to hope that our own
Eanji, now that he has taken to another
royal game, may teach his brother-
princes the cult of the Opal. Among the
Chinese, too, the Opal is almost unknown;
and this is curious, for they have a
pretty taste in precious stones, and beau-
tiful things in general. The sea gives
pearl and coral; the mine yields precious
metal and stone, for the button-badges of
the mandarin’s head-dress; and if you
are inclined to fancy yourself a connois-
seur of Jade, exercise your judgment in
Jade Street, Canton, and then submit
your selection to a Chinese friendly ex-
pert; you will achieve humility. But I
Q


never knew a Chinaman—in China —to
have a passion for Opals, and cannot re-
call ever seeing; them in a Chinese jewel-
ler’s away from the treaty ports. The
Opal seems, as yet, quite unknown in the
Far East.
We have already seen that the Romans
did not, with possibly rare exceptions,
engrave the Opal. I am not sure we
ought to ascribe this reticence to their
aesthetic feeling. Fashion, blind and
brainless oil the Tibur as on the Thames,
would have dyed the peacock’s feather,
and touched up the rainbow, had its gos-
ling leader so decreed. Crispinus, the
exquisite whom Juvenal satirises as wav-
ing his delicate finger “to cool his light
summer ring, being unable to bear the
weight of his massy winter one,” we
feel sure would have meddled with the
Opal if he could. But even a Roman
dandy would hesitate to order a stone
more costly than a diamond to be en-
graved if the chances were ten to one it
would splinter in the process. It was the
purse that protected the Opal from the
Roman dude.


Here we pause to remind the reader
there are two distinct species of engraved
stones —the raised and the depressed—
the cameo and the intaglio. The one we
look onto, the other into ; both represent
solid figures rather than outline form;
hence both depend upon light and shade;
they are sculpture, not drawing. A
little consideration will show that the
material used must be such that it will
reflect most of the light that falls upon
it, and not allow it to be lost by passing
into or through the stone, or the shadows
which alone bring out the form will be
lost. You could not tell the bust of John
Burns from Robert Burns if both were
cut in clear glass, and you could not dis-
tinguish Sir You-kn Ow-who from a
patriot if both walked the street as trans-
parencies. What we need is a certain
amount of opacity in addition to
solidity —glitter and transparency are
fatal to the glyptic art.
But mark, if transparency be fatal, it
is also merciful —it hides its victim —
opacity is equally murderous and more


brutal, for it leaves the corpse on the
highway. The finest sculpture, whether
colossal or miniature, can only he
wrought in a medium that allows some
light to penetrate a little way and come
back again—it mast have a mede of sur-
face translucency—it is the difference
between living marble and dead lime-
stone, between a sleeping and a dead face.
For the nerfect expression of portraiture
in stone, therefore, we require a material
of that happy optical medium between
opacity and transparency which we find
in the chalcedony. Opal, it is true, has
this translucency (generally in excess),
but Tor glyptic art its value is destroyed
by the multitudinous changefulness of
its peculiar beauty.
Mr. King only cites a single engraved
Opal of Roman date, and this not from
his own observation. It is a head of Sol,
between those of Jupiter and Luna; it is
an astrological amulet. The learned
author mentions an Opal ring of the
XIII. century, with cabalistic signs,
again showing it was mystic and not


artistic merit which determined the en-
graving. But he gives an instance of
pure portraiture in an Opal bust of Louis
XIII., which he justly calls “ a piece of
unreasoning extravagance, where work
and material mutually destroy each
other’s beauty and value, the iridescence
entirely neutralising all effect of light
and shade in the relief.”
I cannot but think the Opal continued
to be very rare up till the last few hun-
dred years, for though I would not will-
ingly put curb, or even snaffle, between
the lips of sixteenth or twentieth century
visionaries, I cannot think Peter of Arles
in the time of great Henry of Navarre,
would have babbled about a well-known
stone as he did anent the Opal. Listen
to a choice fragment—it is concerning
a stone the size of a hazel-nut, like that
of Nonius: “ Grace went out from it;
majesty shot forth from its almost divine
splendour. It sent forth such bright and
piercing beams, that it struck terror into
all beholders.” He is so certain of this
property, he returns to it again and


again. It appalled “ all hearts however
bold and courageous. In a word, it
filled with trembling the bodies of by-
standers, and forced them by a predesti-
nated impulse to love, honour, and wor-
ship it. I have seen it, I have felt it;
I call God to witness.”
It seems a pity Peter did not lend it
to Henry at Irvy, then Macaulay would
have written:
“ Above the thickest carnage blazed
The Opal of Navarre.”
The enemy would all have died of fright!
After this it is not astonishing, but
natural, to find the grave Dutchman, An-
selmus De Boot, who wrote in!6o9:“De
Gemmis et Lapidibus," telling us that
“ the wearing of it preserves the sight
and the brightness of the eyes.” Smile
not, gentle reader; remember the learned
lady and the unlucky Opal—you can
buy a cramp ring in enlightened Queens-
land with greater facility than in be-
nighted Italy—l know it, for I have
tried.


If there should be left in you a trace,
not amounting to anything so gross as
superstition, but just sufficient of mystic-
ism to add piquancy to your charms,
take comfort in that the Opal’s merits
outweigh its woefulness. Giovanni
Porta, in 1561, sums up as follows: “It
stimulates the heart, preserves from con-
tagious and infectious airs; drives away
despondencv; prevents fainting, heart
disease, and malignant affections.” And
if October be your natal month, sing
this, which I owe, with other details,to
Mr. Tassin, of the U.S. National Mu-
seum :
“ October's child is born for woe.
And life vicissitudes must know;
But lay an opal on her breast,
And hope will lull the woes to rest.”
Here is a curious bit of negative evi-
dence, which seems to me weighty in
support of the rarity of the Opal until
recent times. Because negative evidence
is a palpable contradiction in terms, and
because it has been so misused by theor-
ists of scant knowledge but unbounded
confidence, it has been scouted by many


reasoners as if it were unlucky as Opal
itself. Yet, in its place, negative is as
good as —indeed merges into—positive
evidence. What is the positive evidence
that there are no trout in the Brisbane
Eiver? Nobody has scrutinised every
fish that has ploughed its waters since
the primeval trout was hatched. Surely,
the negative evidence of every black and
white Isaak Walton on its banks and
bosom, that they never hooked, or speared,
or netted, or poisoned, or dynamited, or
cut a trout out of a shag’s gizzard, is
pretty conclusive.
Now, mediaeval Europe took over the
entire pagan stock of cabalistic nonsense
and enlarged upon it. Twelve stones
presided over the zodiac; twelve stones
were potent over the twelve archangels;
and twelve stones held sway over the
twelve chief devils. The parts of the
body were made up into a round dozen,
each with its ruling stone, and every
month had its spiritual gem. The apos-
tolic virtues were enshrined in stones, the
orbs of heaven, birthdays—every con


ceivable thing concrete and abstract, had
its own stone, and more than this, male-
ficent events could be exchanged for
beneficent by propitiatory offerings of
appropriate stones. No one who has not
studied the question can realise how
potent and all-pervading was the influ-
ence of stones. So hard pushed were
these poor imbeciles for sufficient stones
to mess about with, that they had to use
the same one for different purposes, and
to put up with opaque stones like jasper
and bloodstone, and such common ones
as agate and carnelian.
Now I have wasted much time raking
over these old dust bins, and never once
came across the Opal in any of their
solemn lists. Surely the Opal, with its
mysterious, changeful fires, must have
appealed to these minutely painstaking
seekers after symbolic association; it
was exactly what they required. The
inference seems plain, that it was too
rare for them to make use of. And the
same holds good for India, where it is
still heresy to doubt the efficacy of gems.


Queensland is too young to have grown
any romanticism of her own about gems,
but Mr. C. Fraser, of Messrs. Flavelle’s,
who has travelled widely in our Opal-
fields, tells me many of the miners are
exercised about the origin of the Opal,
and as I have ventured on a theory of
my own, common fairness impels me to
give a rival a chance.
A worthy miner confidentially button-
holed Mr. Fraser, and asked him if he
knew how Opal was formed. This was
not seeking for information, but sparring
for an opening—it was the humble stu-
dent, not the proud Professor, he sought.
Fraser confessed to an ignorance that
was painfully childish.
“ Look round,” said the theorist, with
a wave of the hand, as if he were a cice-
rone illustrating Wren’s epitaph. “Can’t
you see ? ”
"1 see treeless hill-tops, with sandy
soil and a few small trees below.”
“ Well, them trees is Gidgees, Ring
Gidgees. Now, don’t you see?” Light
failed to break, and Mr. Fraser said so.


“ Well, then, did you ever see Opal
where there is no Gidgees ? ” As no
trees grow atop of the Desert Sandstone,
the fact was admitted.
“ Very well. Look at this,” picking
up a piece of silicified wood. “Now, isn’t
it clear?”
A bewildered shake of the head was
the only response.
“ Then I’ll tell you. No Gidgee, no
Opal. Where Gidgees lives they dies.
Dead Gidgees turns to stone. Stone
Gidgees turns to Opal, and there you
are,” and he rounded up the demonstra-
tion by producing a bit of fossil wood
half opalised.
For the behoof of those who have not
the priceless blessing of a knowledge of
the Australian bush, let me say Gidgee
is the native name for a species of Acca-
cia peculiar to Central Australia.
Botanists call it Acacia homalophylla,
which signifies smooth-leaved, a very
appropriate name since the Gidgee hasn’t
any leaves at all but only phyllodia.
The wood is close-grained, hard, and


heavy, and is much used for boomerangs
and spears. So I suppose Pipe-opals are,
broken spear-shafts. This theory I
strongly recommend to theosophists,
Christian scientists, et hoc genus omne.
Of celebrated Opals there is little to
say. We have already mentioned those
of Nonius the Infatuated; Peter Arles
the Overwhelmed; and Josephine of the
Sorrows; and in my reading I can find
nothing of much general interest about
particular stones, for the size and beauty
of the Australian Opals have put all
others into the shade. Some few years
ago the Americans were enraptured at
the discovery of a splendid stone at the
Shirley mine, Owyhee County, Idaho,
the size of a lien’s egg, which cut into a
fine stone of 325 carats. It is described as
transparent, with magnificent green and
red fire. This is undoubtedly a very splen-
did stone, but was not, however, as the
Americans believed, the largest known,
and its transparency shows it was not of
the best quality. Now, before this, Will-
cania, N.S.W., had produced at least


two larger stones of perfect colour and
pattern. One weighed, nncnt, five and a
quarter ounces, the other over ten. This
is not mentioned in depreciation of the
Idaho gem, but to show how Australia
stands, and how comparatively little is
known about her by the public at large.
I do not know that Queensland topped
the record for size. Messrs. Flavelle tell
me the largest perfect stone they have cut
weighed 64 carats.
If I were asked to select a characteris-
tic stone for Queensland I should unhesi-
tatingly fix upon the Opal. The only
possible rival would be the Yellow Sap-
phire. But sapphire is so associated with
Burma and Ceylon, that one does not
think of Queensland when that gem is
mentioned naturally and without effort.
Moreover, our sapphire-fields, though
very rich, are limited in extent, whereas
not onlv can we show the finest Opals on
earth, but they are spread over an area
that would make a principality of envi-
able magnitude.
Then, too, I think the splendour of the


Opal, the witchery of its ever-shifting
tints, is best paralleled on onr coast.
There is nothing so like the shimmering
loveliness of the Opal as the play of early
morning sunbeams upon a gently ruffled
sea when thin haze lies upon the deep.
And this you may see to perfection upon
the pure waters inside our Barrier Eeef.
The film of vapour which clings to the
surface while yet the morning sun is low,
gives just the tempering cloudiness of our
finest Opal, and the low-angled rays re-
fracted by the lips of the wavelets flash
out the prism-tints that are the Opal’s
glory. But the sea must be almost oily
smooth —the wavelets long-sloping pol-
ished planes with steep but shallow
edges, to opalise the face of the waters.
Outbidok Printing Co., Brisbane.


TO THE READER.
Messrs. Plavelle, Roberts & Sankey asked
me to write a series of little books on gem-
stones, and gave me an entirely free hand.
As this, the first of them shows, they will not
be mere gatherings from other harvests, but
original works embodying the results of my
own experience. It was the study of the
Opal, for instance, that led me to see that
Australia is not an “ arrested ” continent, but
the newest and most original. The germ of
this idea will be found in this work; the
details will shortly appear in the transactions
of our Royal Society.
S. B. J. S.
Brisbane, 24th Feb., 1908.


INDEX.
Page
Australia, not a land of
survivals .. .. 47
—Climate .. .. 50
——Geological sketch of 49
Australian Opals, Lar-
gest, .. .. 108
Australia’s Gem, Opal
as, 109
America’s Great Opal 108
Amethyst .. .. 92
Artesian Water .. 59
Asia, Opals in .. 97
Barton’s Buttons .. 26
Behrens, Prof., cited 30
Black Opal .. 72, 75
Blythesdale Braystone 58
Brewster, Sir D., cited 28
Cabalistic Stones .. 104
Caoholong .. 17, 79, 83
Cameos .. .. 99
Chalcedony, Nature of 17
Artificially Colored 21
Climate, Australia .. 50
Colour of Opals Chap. IV.
Colours, Diffraction .. 26
Common Opal .. 17
Corals, Absence of .. 50
Page
Cretaceous Sea .. 50
Cutting of Opal .. 81
De Boot, Quoted .. 102
Desert Sandstone, Opals
in .. .. 41, 50
Dhuleep Singh’s Opals 94
Diatoms .. .. 18
Diatomaoeous Earth .. 18
Dichroism .. .. 24
Diffraction Colours .. 26
Doctrine of Signatures 86
Federation .. .. 51
Fire Opal .. .. 79
Fraser, C., cited .. 80
Anecdote by .. 106
Geology of Australia .. 49
Girasol .. 11,23,79
Harlequin Opal .. 70
Holmes, O. W., quoted 23
Hyalite .. 20, 29, 79
Hydrophane .. 22, 83
Infusorial Earth .. 19
Intaglios .. .. 99
Iridescence .. .. 25
Kangaroos and Opals 45
Kieselguhr .. .. 19
King, Mr., quoted .. 90


Page
Levin Opal .. .. 70
Marbodus, cited .. 91
Marsupials, not Sur-
vivals, .. .. 47
Origin of .. .. 53
Patagonian .. 55
Tertiary Origin of 56
Pliocene Origin of 56
Matrix Opal .. .. 72
Muller’s Glass 20, 29
Mysticism .. .. 85
Names of Opal Chap I.
et seq 5
Nonius’ Opal .. 89
Opal, Names of .. 1
and Kangaroos .. 45
Apparent Crystals 44
as Australia’s Gem 109
Black .. 72,75
Care of .. .. 82
Chemistry of, Chap. 11.
Common .. .. 17
Cutting of .. 81
Engraved Boman 98
Fashion in .. 91
Fire .. .. 79
Fossils in 17, 34, 44
Geology of Chap. V.
Glass .. .. 24
Harlequin .. 70
Hungarian .. 37
Page
in Asia .. .. 97
in Desert Sand-
stone .. .. 41
Largest .. .. 108
Levin .. .. 70
Matrix .. .. 72
Mysticism .. 85
Nonius .. .. 89
Origin of Aus-
tralian Chap. VI.
Origin of Beauty
of .. .. Chap. IV.
Pipe .. .. 79
Prime .. .. 78
Prime d’Opal .. 78
Sand-shot .. 45
Superstitions .. 93
The Mineral .. 15
Veins .. .. 34
Varieties of Noble 68
Wood .. .. 16
Opalescence .. .. 24
Opallion .. .. 5
Opalus.. .. 5,91
Opbal 11
Ophtbalmius .. 10, 91
Owen, Sir 8., on Kanga-
roos .. .. 48
Paederos .. 7, 90
Pans, in Gravel .. 39
Patagonian .. .. 55


Page
Peter of Arles, cited .. 101
Pipe Opal .. . • 79
Pliny, quoted .. .. 88
Polarized Light .. 29
Porcelainite .. .. 42
Origin of .. 45
Porter, G., cited .. 102
Prime d’ Opal.. .. 78
Pseudomorphs .. 44
Opals in .. .. 44
Pugs, in Gravel .. 39
Quartz 12
Veins .. .. 43
Queen Victoria’s Opals 94
Badiolaria .. .. 19
Bock Crystal .. .. 12
Boman Engraved Opals 98
Sangenon .. .. 8
Schultze, Prof., cited 29
Scott, Sir Walter .. 93
Segregation .. .. 38
Septaria .. .. 38
Signatures, Doctrine of 86
Page
Silica, et seq 12
Hydrated .. 13
Amorphous 14, 31, 36
Two Forms of .. 39
Sinter .. .. .. 16
Skies, Artificial .. 24
Sponges .. .. 19
Superstitions .. .. 93
Tabasheer .. .. 19
Tassin, Mr., quoted .. 102
Tenites .. .. 9
Tertiary Geology .. 52
Tripoli Powder .. 19
Tyndal Prof., on Arti-
ficial Skies .. 24
Veins, Quartz .. 43
Chalcedony .. 43
Opal .. .. 43
Waise 11
Water of Crystallisation 13
William le Diable .. 93
Wood Opal .. .. 16
Eeeatcm—p. 92, for Amuthytos read Amuthystos.


