

Great Austral Plain,
Past, Present, and Future;
ERNEST F AVENG.
H. R. WOODS AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
13 Bridge Street.








Great Austral Plain,
Past, Present, and Future:
ERNEST FAVE N C.
Republished from the “ S. M. Herald .”
SYDNEY:
H. R. WOODS AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
13 Bridge Street.




THE GREAT AUSTRAL PLAIN:
Its Past, Present, and Future.
THE heart of Australia, intersected as it is by the Southern
tropic, but owning in its general appearance and charac-
teristics little resemblance to the accepted notion of a tropical
region, is perhaps the most extensive tract of unbroken level
country in the world. Peculiar in its fauna and flora, in its geolo-
gical formation, and in its native inhabitants, it forms almost a
strange isolated world in itself, A fauna and flora similar in their
nature to those of an early period of our globe—as told in the
testimony of the rocks; a physical formation that, as Gregory
says, stamps it as the oldest persistent continent on the globe,
for the later deluges seem to have left no traces in the limestone
of our interior—and a native population who still changelessly
preserve the peculiar and distinctive features noticed by the
earliest visitors to our shores.
Take down a map of Australia, and we find settlement clus-
tering thickly along nearly the whole of the eastern coast, and
from thence extends a blank, excepting where the town-
ship of Port Darwin breaks the monotony, until Perth in the
south-western corner is reached. Thence once more nothing in
the way of settlement is seen until we are at our starting point
again.
Inland, we find South Australia, with a chain of lakes through
it, New South Wales and Queensland, showing rivers and a coast
line of mountains ; but the greater portion of the continent an
empty chronicle, marked here and there with the track of an
explorer.
'yr V o


For nearly a hundred years subsequent to the first landing of
our countrymen on these shores, the thirsty plains of central
Australia guarded their secrets well; and only gave them up
little by little, until even now we scarcely know all of them.
The great plain of Australia comprises the north-western
portion of New South Wales, the west of Queensland, the
northern territory of South Australia, and the greater portion of
Western Australia. Of its past what can be said? For ages it
must have been a solitude more profound than any existing else-
where — a solitude that in its driest portions was destitute of any
form of life, save, perhaps,that of insects. Withaclimate intensely
dry,intensely hot,and at timessubjecttovariationsof comparatively
intense cold, inhabited by a few wandering tribes of blacks,
hanging around the main waterholes, or penetrating into the dry
country, only when the thunder-storm season afforded them the
opportunity of doing so. With a physical formation almost
unchanging in its aspect from year to year, save when the rare
deluges of heavy rain changed the flat plains into shallow lakes,
this strange plain lay unexplored until Sturt’s first resolute
attack.
Sturt, in his last expedition, had orders to reach the centre
of Australia, and then return ; his instructions were strict, that on
no account was he to follow down any river running towards the
northern coast. He thought himself that at last the dream of
his life was going to be realized, and the great inland sea, that
he felt sure existed, be discovered. He found a desert scourged
by long years of drought; a desert that kept him imprisoned,
unable to proceed or return, for many months. On that same
desert cattle and sheep are now depasturing, and it is reckoned
amongst the finest grazing land in the colonies. Sturt’s last
expedition in 1845 may be considered the earliest attempt to
fairly penetrate the interior ; and under him, at that time in the
capacity of draughtsman, was the man who was destined to first
cross the continent —Macdougall Stuart, With Sturt’s trip, then,
the history of the great Austral plain may be said to commence ;
its frontier lines had been before invaded, but no effort had been
made to reach its centre. Sturt stopped short of the parallel
that he started to reach, but it was no fault of his. From his


depot on Eyre’s Creek he tried again and again to achieve the
aim of his journey, and at last, with impaired eyesight, had to
return, baffled. His description of the country would lead one
to laugh at the idea of such a fearful desert ever becoming a rich
pastoral district; but the “ whirligig of time ” has brought it so
about, and fat cattle now find their way to Sydney and Melbourne
from the scorched plains and bare hot sandhills that turned back
veteran Sturt.
This would seem to indicate that either a radical change has
taken place in the country, or Sturt was wrong in his description.
In point of fact the country is unchanged, and I have no doubt—
speaking from actual observation—that Sturt’s description was a
faithful and honest one; and the explanation of this seeming
riddle I will be able to make plain as I proceed.
Leichhardt was probably the next to penetrate the far interior;
for neither Oxley, Mitchell, nor Kennedy went deeper into the
desert than Sturt. How far Leichhardt got, or where he left his
bones, we know not. He is the Franklin of Australia; and
around his name will always cling the romance that surrounds
one whose fate is unknown. It is, however, more than probable
that Leichardt penetrated well into the dry country, and suc-
cumbed at last in some long stretch of spinifex desert. His
meeting such a fate would easily account for the fact that no
traces of the party have ever been brought to light by modern
exploration.
In 1856, A. 0. Gregory approached the great plain from the
north, and crossing the coast watershed, followed down a creek,
which he called Sturt’s Creek, until it was lost in the arid plains,
and he had to return and continue his journey round the coast.
Frank Gregory also got well into the unknown region from
Western Australia, and found it a monotonous expanse of level
waterless country. Long before this, however, Eyre had made
his wonderful march around the Great Bight, and proved that no
watercourse coming from the interior discharges itself into the
sea on that coast.
In 1860 and 1861, Macdougall Stuart was in the field, and,
after two vain attempts, succeeded in crossing the continent
almost in its centre ; and a new era opened in the history of the
Great Austral Plain.


The formation of the overland telegraph line, almost upon
Stuart’s track, marked a fresh departure in the exploration of the
interior. Formerly, the course taken had nearly always been
north and south ; in future it was to be east and west.
Using, then, that line as a basis, Ernest Giles fought the
desert fairly, and though twice beaten, got through to Perth in
the end. Forrest and Warburton also crossed, the one from
Perth to the Line, the other from the Line to the Oakover River ;
and more than one party from Queensland have pushed across
their border, and reached the line from the east. This brings us
up to the present day, when pastoral settlement is rapidly following,
and almost occupying the footsteps of the explorer, and we are
just beginning fairly to realize what a vast and valuable territory
we possess in the dreaded desert of Central Australia. And now
what do we know of the Great Plain, its formation, its climate,
and its resources P A good deal; and most has been learned
during the last twenty years ; it has claimed its victims during
that time, but their lives have not been uselessly sacrificed.
Perhaps the most affecting story connected with the history
of the Great Plain is respecting the fate of the lost man Gibson.
Ernest Giles, in his second attempt to reach Western
Australia, found himself stopped by a waterless and desert tract
of country. There were four in the party. Giles, taking Gibson
and spare horses, started ahead to try to find water ; the knocked-
up horses were abandoned to seek their own way back to the last
waterhole, where the other two men were encamped, awaiting the
return of their leader and his companion. At last, with but two
horses, the two former found themselves almost too far from
camp to hope to safely return; the relentless desert still before
and around them. Giles gave Gibson the freshest horse, and
told him to make his way back to where they had left a keg of
water buried, and from thence proceed to camp, and immediately
return with fresh horses to meet him. He himself would go on
so long as his horse lasted, and if no water could be found
would, he thought, be able to get back on foot to the keg, where
he would await Gibson’s arrival. They parted, Giles went on
until he found that farther progress meant death; then he
turned back. In that desert, where no life exists, a horse’s track


is plainly visible, even to the merest novice; and as Giles toiled
back to the depot, he could see Gibson’s track ahead of him,
until he came to the place where they had abandoned their two
spare horses. Now, horses when dying of thirst lose even the
common instinct that would lead an animal back to the last water
he had drunk at. Dazed and mad, they struggle along in any
direction that they happen to turn. These horses, instead of
following back on their outward track, turned off at random, and
to his dismay, Giles saw that Gibson’s track did the same.
Trusting that perhaps he had only made a rash attempt to recover
the horses, Giles pushed on to the depdt, but the untouched
water-keg left him no hope. With desperate energy he, after some
days—for weak, and starving, he could go but slowly —reached
the camp. Without resting he and a companion started out to
look for Gibson, Need I say, without success. The deaths of
Burke and Wills have been the theme of many a writer ; but to
my mind the unknown fate of this lonely man is far more touch-
ing—so utterly alone, so far from all his kind, nothing but the
unnatural stillness of the desert around him, and not one ray of
hope to help him forward as he reeled and staggered on through
the prickly spinifex to death.
The construction and maintenance of the overland telegraph
line has greatly added to our knowledge of the interior: it has,
in fact, given us a chain of outposts through the centre of the
great plain, where we can note and register the climatic changes,
and after a decade or so arrive at some idea of the amount of
rainfall we may expect to help us in reclaiming this large
territory.
But to return once more to the past. Our knowledge, then,
of the great plain has until quite lately been confined to the
information gleaned by the exploring parties that have successively
—with good or evil fortune —visited it. Of late years, however,
owing chiefly to the more extended knowledge of the principles
of water storage, pastoral settlement has pushed well out, and the
formidable desert vanishes as it is closed with. But although
we have done so much, still we have not yet got beyond the
country that is watered by defined and long lived creeks and
rivers. The hardest part of the task of reclamation is still before


us, and the magnitude of the task is shown in the diaries of the
later explorers. Giles, on his trip with camels, travelled for ten
days over country where not only did he find no water, but saw
neither channel nor depression fitted to catch and retain water
should it rain—an ominous sign cf the intensely dry nature of
the climate. Warburton, further north, had one long struggle,
from one scanty spring or native well to the next, travelling
mostly by night. Forrest and his companions were once only
saved by a timely thunderstorm. For all this there is no doubt
that working step by step, we shall gradually make even this
forbidding expanse of aridity give up its secret, and if not exactly
become a fertile province at least carry sheep and cattle in
thousands and tens of thousands.
The marked difference that exists between the districts within
a few hundred miles of the sea coast and the interior has been
the reason that the latter portion of the continent has been
dubbed “ desert.” And who can wonder at it; to pass from a
wooded country watered by running streams, where grassy valleys
and rich slopes meet the traveller’s gaze, and all seems to speak
of fertility and fruitfulness, to vast plains, covered only with the
dull grey sage brush, cotton bush, and salt bush, with nothing but
isolated waterholes and lagoons to supply the wants of man and
beast, is an abrupt transition. Now, we have found out how
wonderfully nature has fitted this apparently desolate region to
support animal life; every bush and shrub, nay, almost every
tree, is edible; and the long months of drought, that would
shrivel the coast grasses into dry dust, make no impression on
the hardy shrubs of the great plain, while such are their fattening
properties that stock subsisting on them can travel long distances
in and out to water without losing flesh, as they would certainly
do under different conditions. All our records of the past tell
a monotonous, and when compared with the history
of exploration in other lands—an almost uninteresting tale of
man’s struggle against nature in her most repellant mood. No
semi-civilised tribes, whose novel customs, or even whose hostility,
would vary the story with adventure and episode,—nothing but
an unequal fight with the desert. But in the future the spirit
that animated Sturt, Eyre, Stuart, and their fellows, in the field


will be better appreciated than now. Courage that had ever to
go hand in hand with caution —patience and hope that could
never admit the thought or fear of failure —were theirs ; and no
man better deserves a memorial in his honour than the chief of
Australian explorers dauntless Sturt.
Between longitude 121 - and 138' East we find in the interior
an extent of territory in which no river nor creek has yet been
discovered that could be traced for any great distance, or proved
to have an outlet in the sea. The past has told us this. Where,
then, does the drainage go ? It is a question for the present
generation to solve. The Great Austral Plain, then, is almost
without any defined river system. Truly, on the extreme western
slope it is drained by rivers whose courses can be followed and
mapped out until they are absorbed in the flats and marshes of
Lakes Eyre and Hope; but once we cross the Queensland
border, travelling westward, we are in a region where all the
watercourses are, after a comparatively brief existence, lost in
shallow lakes and immense flooded plains. We are fairly in a
land without mountains or rivers, or where both are to be found
in such a modified form compared to the size of the continent
that they may be said to be non-existent, so far as their forming
any system of drainage is concerned. Over a great portion of
the continent the elevations consist only of square-topped hills
and peaks of red sandstone, all of the same shape, and exactly
the same height. Riding between them,'you seem to be in a
broken hilly region. Climb to the top of one —some eighty or
ninety feet as a rule —and you will then see that you are standing
on the remains of a table-land. All around you the flat-toppe
hills and isolated peaks—fellows to the one you stand on—form
one uniform level line against the sky, broken only by the valleys
and flats that have been formed by the long-continued action of
water. This absence of any large river throughout such a great
portion of the continent is due mainly to the level character of
the country, and the uncertain nature of the rainfall. If we take
an imaginary trip from east to west, we shall see this plainly.


The eastern extremity (from where we start) is drained by
tributary rivers of the Darling, the main stream of Australia.
Whilst on these rivers, we are still in a country which, although
at any time subject to drought, is on the whole visited by rain in
regular seasons. Amongst these we may count the Lachlan, the
Barwon, the Bogan, the Oulgoa, the Warrego, and its tributaries.
All these streams flow through flat country, and the districts
they water are only now rising into the importance they must
eventually assume in the dominion of Australia. That all these
rivers have defined channels, and are periodically flooded, is
owing to their sources being near enough to the coast to share in
the yearly rainfall that those regions have the benefit of. If we
go a step farther west, and traverse the country drained by the
Paroo, the Wilson, Cooper’s Creek and its tributaries, the Barcoo
and Thompson, we find ourselves gradually getting amongst the
dry plains and long stretches of prairie that tell we are on the
outskirts of the Great Plain. But even here we are only just
getting into the true interior. We still have rivers and defined
watersheds; we must cross the Diaraantina, and travel a few
hundred miles westward before we are fairly on the great plain.
What do we see around us ? A wide sea of land, with a dull
haze bounding our view on all sides—a haze that magnifies
everything, turning a tuft of grass into a bush, a bush into a tree.
As we look round we can discern some half-dozen dark objects
apparently hovering in the air and quivering as though alive.
They are trees some four or five miles away, and they indicate a
watercourse of some description, so we had better make for it.
Crossing the plain we find it treacherous riding. Fissures and
cracks extend in every direction, and the rich chocolate soil is
soft and puffy; the grass grows widely apart and is almost white
in colour, and the reflected glare of the vertical summer sun is
painful and trying to the eyes. On nearing the timber, it
resolves itself into a thin straggling line of stunted, crooked
trees, growing around a lagoon of milky-looking water. A belt
of polygonum bushes intervenes between the water and the trees,
and close to the edge of the water there is a growth of short
green grass. Ducks and other water fowl of all kinds rise up at
our appaoach ; the smoke of a native camp is visible on the


other side, and as we ride round to it some of the occupants
clamour loudly, and hold up both hands empty as a sign of
peace. It is a miserable camp, a few boughs heaped up on the
windward side form the shelter, and piles of fresh water mussels
stacked at the foot of a larger tree than the generality seem the
only store of food the denizens possess. Huge “ coolamen ”
(vessels chopped out of soft wood for water-carrying purposes)
are scattered about the camp, telling of many a dry tramp
from one water-hole to another. The men are tall and spare,
with straight hair and rather good features, the gins hideously
ugly and emaciated in appearance. It is summer time and
the scarcity of water forces them into the level flat country,
where feathered game, and that only, is plentiful at the main
water holes. When the thunderstorms fall this tribe will break
up into small families and scatter through the spinifex country,
where they more easily obtain rats and “ such small deer.” It is
strange upon what a scanty supply of water a family of natives
can contrive to exist. After the thunderstorm season they
remain as long as possible in the desert country which consists
mostly of spinifex forest, and provides them with the only flesh—
other than fish and fowl —that they ever obtain, namely, rats,
iguanas and the smaller kinds of kangaroo. Many a white
traveller has been lured on to death by seeing the smoke of the
burning spinifex that indicates their hunting ground. Generally
it is a small society of seven or eight individuals who are living a
miserable hand to mouth existence —eking out the wretched
supply of water by eating their food in a half, or quite raw state.
The water they get in some shallow wqll scraped out where a
slight depression has caused a small deposit of water to remain
underground. This drains into their well at the rate of about a
pint an hour, and even if the thirsty white traveller should be
lucky enough to find it, he will scarcely obtain enough to satisfy
his own thirst, apart from that of his horse.
The distance that the dark smoke of the burning spinifex can
be seen is almost incredible. I have known a two days’ journey
to be taken before the fire has been reached, and then the result
has been as above ; instead of a waterhole of any size at all, a
shallow gully, scarcely to be called a creek, and at some bend or


point where the bed rock is slightly lower, a rude hole with
water soaking in, in lingering drops. This probably supports life
in nine or ten individuals, as well as a dog or two, for the blacks
of the interior have domesticated (?) the dingos, and no matter
the privations they are suffering under, manage to spare some
food for them.
Continuing our imaginary journey, we find, after crossing the
most western tributary of Eyre’s Creek and the Herbert, that we
have to depend greatly upon luck or accident to lead us to the
rare watercourses of the region we are in. So slight are the
elevations of the watersheds between the creeks, that even the
aneroid barometer fails to tell you when you are ascending or
descending.
Again, the scarcity of timber leads to an absence of drift
deposit in the dry beds of the creeks, and the traveller often finds
the polygonum bushes laid almost flat by the action of water in a
certain direction ; and, following the guidance of this indication,
will, after a short time, find the bushes laid exactly the opposite
way, showing that the water has run both ways in the same
creek. Nor is this due, as it often is on the coast, to its being
an ana-branch up which a flood in the main stream has backed
the water. Out here a heavy thunderstorm descending upon a
particular spot in a creek that has no decided fall in its bed will
often make the water run in opposite directions, as strongly
against what appears to be its natural course as with it.
Again, in the shallow lakes—often of great size—peculiar to
this region, on every side will be found the marks of an overflow
setting towards all points of the compass. Thus it will be seen
how much mere chance has to do with the finding of water when
striking across this country. The large well-defined creek the
traveller starts to follow in the morning may in a few miles,
disappear utterly, and leave him in the middle of fiat flooded
country, where probably the only drift indications he finds seem
to shew that the water pursues an entirely opposite course to that
of the creek he has just lost. Birds are here nature’s sign-posts.
The “ flock-pigeons ” and the parrots that find their feeding-
grounds far away from the water, and at sunrise and sundown hie
in flocks to drink, these point out the direction in which to look


for water. It is on these immense tracts of country subject to
inundation that the watercourses of the great plain are absorbed
and lost. When we come to consider that an average rainfall of
only some ten or twelve inches yearly, falls on a country were there
are endless plains and dry lakes that have been baked for twelve
months under a tropical sun and scorching hot winds, the absence
of watercourses is not wonderful. Again, embracing as this
territory does so many parallels of latitude, there is, as a rule, no
general fall of rain over it at one and the same time. The wet
season of the tropical coast-line only finds its way on to the great
plain in thunderstorms of greater or less violence, often consisting
only of thunder, lightning and wind.
We have now left the Queensland border some three hundred
miles behind us, have passed through the country which probably
witnessed the death of Leichhardt and his followers, and are
almost on the overland telegraph line that bisects the continent.
As we awake with the breaking dawn, we see to the westward of
us a dark ridge that looks like high downs country. This disappears
with the rising sun, so slight is the elevation ; and yet this distant
dark line, so little above the horizon, is the backbone of Australia,
or all we have to represent it. As we near it, or the place where
we saw it, we find ourselves getting into a sandy desert table-
land, scrubby and barren. Suddenly it seems to break away at
our very feet. We have passed from the eastern to the western
slope, and the descent is abrupt and broken. Gorges and ravines
that only want depth to be as formidable as any in the world, are
beneath us, and beyond, stretching away right on to and across
the boundary of Western Australia, is~a misty sea of gray —the
Great Plain once more. At our feet, at the bottom of the range,
lies the telegraph line —the slender wire that connects us with
Europe. But we will not loiter at it unless we come across a
party of natives employed in cutting the binding wire from the
insulators in order to make fish-hooks thereof. It would be as
well to stop and disperse them if we do, else will communication
be interrupted, and the dwellers in Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Sydney be deprived of their usual cablegrams. As we leave the
line behind us our troubles are thicker than ever as regards
water. We are in the Great Sandy or Southern Desert, as it has


been variously named. Nothing but endless spinifex seems to
surround us. At times a spring or native well will help us on ;
but these are rare, and rarer as we advance. At last, we are
stopped by an expanse of dry country that, unless under excep-
tiouably favourable circumstances, can only be crossed with the
aid of camels. Here we see no sign of life at all, save only ants, and
they are in such swarms as to render sleep impossible. It is
strange that, though living in a country utterly devoid of water,
these insects ravenously attack any vessel containing it that
comes within their reach. Of natives we see here no trace.
The spinifex has been untouched by fire for years, and the
accumulated growth presents such a formidable barrier of spikes
as to almost render travelling impossible. At intervals we come
across grassy plains and stretches of open country that appear
inviting : but we have no time to waste hunting for water. We
must push on in an undeviating course, and trust to chance ; and
if relief comes in time we may continue our journey over the same
description of country until we find ourselves on the heads of the
rivers flowing into the western coast, and off the Great Plain.
It would be well, before proceeding any further, to turn our
attention to the peculiar advantages of this region, and see
how it was that the earlier explorers returned with such an
unfavourable impression of the country. In the first place, over
a large portion of the interior there is a great absence of grass ;
and the true value of the different kinds of edible shrubs not
being then known, the barren aspect presented by these stretches
of ground would make nearly any stranger doubt if such a land
could be aught but a desert. Of all the fodder plants, perhaps
the best known, because the most generally distributed, is the
saltbush. Of this plant there are a great number of different
kinds, from the “ old man ” salt bush of the back plains of the
Darling to the small ground species found in the more northern
scrubs That the saltbush has received rather undue praise for
its fattening qualities is now generally admitted, not but that it


is a grand specimen of adaptability to climatic exactions, but we
now know that nearly all the shrubs and plants of the interior
possess almost equally nutritive properties. But the saltbush
grows in all latitudes, and the other plants, save perhaps mulga,
are restricted in their habitat. A saltbush plain on, say, the
Barwon, is an unprepossessing outlook ; the saltbusb leaves,are
of a dull bluish grey, and small neutral tinted plants, generally
bearing prickly burrs, grow where the grass should be. This
extends all around, broken only by a line of stunted timber or a
low red rise ; and yet a flock of sheep feeding in the neighbour-
hood, and apparently eating dirt, are as fat as one could wish to
see them. Away further west, in the sandhill and cottonbush
country, the view is even more dreary. Unmistakably we are in
what our fancy has always pictured a desert should be. The
saltbush is greyer, and more resembling the dried herbs thrifty
housewives store than anything else. Broad patches of bare
clayey soil are visible, and low flat-topped sandhills glow redly in
the distance, looking as though —like the Island of Laputa —
they were hovering in the air ; for a quivering haze hangs around
their bases, which forms the mirage travellers in the interior
occasionally mistake for distsfnt water. But the resemblance
is seldom sufficiently realistic to lead to any serious error on the
subject.
It is in this kind of country that we make the acquaintance ol
the cottonbush—one of the most wonderful drought-resisting
plants that the great plain possesses. The cottonbush grows
nearly three feet high, shooting upwards and outwards from its
root in straight branches, each bearing clusters of leaves at their
tops ; these leaves being small and thick. When full grown, the
head of the bush forms a circle of nearly two feet in diameter,
which makes an impenetrable shade for the root, protecting it
from the sun at all times of the day. The root, too, penetrates
deeply into the clayey soil which it favours. Its colour, like that
of all the shrubs ot the interior, is of a dull sober green, almost
grey. It is one of our most valuable fodder plants, and will
fatten stock in the driest weather.
Amongst the sandhills we find the curious formations techni-
cally known as clay pans. The drainage from the sandhills


sometimes collects in small flats and hollows whence there is no
outlet. Here, there not being much soakage through the tough
clay, the water slowly evaporates, leaving behind it a deposit of
clay that it has held in solution ; this hardens almost to the con-
sistency of rock, so hard, in fact, that a horse’s hoof scarce leaves
a trace on it, and no well set billiard table can boast of a more
perfect level than these claypans possess. In he dry weather
the glare from the smooth white surface of one is particularly
painful and exasperating to the tiled traveller who, after
struggling over a mile of loose red sand, has hoped to get at
least a drink of tepid muddy water.
If we make to a lower latitude, we come to the land of the famed
Mitchell grass. On the downs and high levels of the interior we
find this, and wherever we find it, whether fresh and green after
late rain, or withered up after years of drought we can rest assured
our horses will do well. The Mitchell-grass is a thick-leaved grass,
growing in successive joints and springing, to a great extent,
from these joints. The growth is scant, compared to the thick
sward formed by coast grasses ; but each tussock is bushy and
luxuriant and about eighteen inches in height. It is curious to
notice how eagerly each joint absorbs whatever moisture there is
going during every slight thunderstorm. Even when the rainfall
has been so slight as scarcely to moisten the rich loamy soil, the
observer will notice a little green spring at each joint, showing
how this plant is adapted to thrive on the smallest possible
allowance of water by taking advantage through the joints in its
stalks of the few drops that could not affect its roots in the
ordinary manner.
To see the genuine desert we must go to the spinifex country
and here, as usual, we find Australia the home of paradox. The
real desert is far more inviting and promising looking than the
supposed one. On the outskirts are shady bauhinia trees and
bright-looking desert apple trees. The treacherous spinifex too
looks fair enough from the distance, and often puts on a coat of
enticing verdure when the plains and downs are parched and
withered. Spinifex, to use the name by which it is known all
over the country, will grow almost on the surface of a hard rock,
and in most parts of the desert we find that the bedrock is covered


with but a shallow coating of soil. To adequately describe
spinifex is hard. Let the reader imagine a thousand knitting
needles thrown into a confused kind of tangle, with all the points
sticking outwards ; then let him imagine this tangle growing
larger and more formidable every year, until a bush fire happily
sweeps it away, and a new growth starts. After travelling some
miles through “ old man ” spinifex, it is almost impossible to
force horses along, so sensitive do their shins become from the
perpetual pricking they receive. As a rule, the spinifex desert is
forest country, consisting mostly of low bloodwood or box; but
in some parts of the continent —notably Western Australia —
there are wide downs and plains covered with this abomination.
It is scarcely necessary to say that spinifex is useless as fodder.
I have heard of stock eating it when it springs up soft and green
after being burned ; but I confess that this has never come under
my own observation. Practically it is utterly useless to man as
an article of food for his stock. Let us remember, then, that the
desert that turned back Sturt, and which even now is marked
upon maps as “ Sturt’s stony desert,” was not, as might be
supposed, a tract of the real desert, i.e., “ spinifex,” but downs
country covered with limestone nodules, and dry plains, from
which the grass had perished from long-continued dry weather;
and the explorers were too inexperienced in this description of
country to properly appreciate the shrubs and herbage which
supplied the place of grass.
There is actually no desert country in the interior, excepting
spinifex country ; that is if we accept the term “ desert ” as
meaning country unfitted to support animal life. There are
flooded plains subject to inundation that during a great portion of
the year are barren, that is to say the grass that grows on them
is of a kind that will not last longer than a few months ; but
these cannot come under the denomination “ desert,” as the
watercourses that intersect them generally contain plenty of feed
about their banks, and the plains themselves terminate in higher
country, carrying grass bushes, &c., all the year round.
The formation of the sand hills of the interior has excited a
good deal of speculation. Many believe, and I think with good
reason, that the wind is the chief agent in heaping them up,


because they are composed of fine sand, such as we see still being
carried about by the wind, and they are formed invariably at
right angles to the prevailing winds of the interior. Frequently
at night out there I have noticed the lightning of an approaching
thunderstorm to have a red glare, almost like the red fire burnt
at the wings of a theatre. As soon as the storm had passed over
the lightning would be once more of the ordinary hue. This
arose from the cloud of red sand which the wind swept into the
air and carried ahead of the storm, and as it approached we saw
the lightning through it as through a curtain. So severe are
these sand storms, and with such force do they sweep over the
shelterless plains, that it is impossible for either man or beast to
face them.
On the sand hills, as a rule, there is a good deal of spinifex,
but it is never so sharp or formidable as that growing on the
sandstone table-lands. In the spinifex country we find more
timber than on the available portions of the interior, and as a rule
we also find that the spinifex affects the crowns of the watersheds
or the higher levels. I have never seen or heard of it growing
on country subject to yearly inundation.
The climate of the Great Plain is one of almost unvarying
regularity. The atmospherical disturbances are short, violent,
and very partial. A heavy downpour of rain will take place on
one side of a creek, and the other side will be untouched by the
fall. I have seen a large storm come quickly up and part when
almost overhead —one half pass on one side, and one the other,
leaving us perfectly dry, although close to us a deluge was
falling.
The winters are cold and windy, the wind blowing keenly
over the plains, causing the blacks to take to their winter
quarters. These are permanent camps, and are generally built
on the side of a sand ridge. Sticks are stuck in the ground, and
interlaced at the top, then plastered over with mud, forming a
beehive-shaped structure, about four feet high, and three or four
in diameter. A fire is lighted on the ground within, and after it
has burned itself out the ashes are raked out, and the occupants
creep in and huddle together on the warm sand. The hole that
forms the doorway is then blocked up, and the inmates slumber


peacefully in this horrible atmosphere until the sun is well up the
next morning. Blacks in their wild state are anything but early
risers. In lower latitudes, where there is more timber, they take
to the scrubs in the winter time, and erecting a breakwind of
boughs on the windward side, pass the dewless winter nights
coiled round a small fire.
The atmosphere during the winter months is wonderfully
clear. The stars at night shine with the most intense brilliancy,
and I have distinctly seen the planet Jupiter at noon on a
cloudless day. During these months a cloud is never seen by
dwellers on the Great Plain. Pass a night there alone away
from the water, and you will first fully learn what silence means.
If it is winter time you will have a cold blustering wind to keep
you company, but during the dry summer months the hot wind
will die down at sunset, and before the short twilight has faded
a still sultry calm will set in. The whole night through you
may watch and listen, and —unless in the neighbourhood of
water —never hear the slightest sound that would indicate that
even an insect existed in the same world as yourself. Perhaps,
as the fierce red flash of approaching day is growing bright, a
faint sigh comes over the plain, and the hot air seems almost to
smite you in the face, as it does when a furnace door is suddenly
opened. If your camp is near water, then the night will be full
of noises. The swift winged widgeon will whirr overhead like a
random shell, the whistling ducks will pipe up, the melancholy
wail of the stilted plover makes itself frequently heard, and a
solemn owl, attracted by your fire, perches himself on a tree —if
there is one —and gazes at you with beady black eyes.
The chief causes, then, that have resulted in the in-
terior of Australia being sweepingly condemned as a vast
desert are the absence of defined rivers, the dryness of the
climate, and the unpromising appearance of the vegetation.
These causes are no longer powerful in influencing us. We
know that in our own portion of this terrritory what was formerly
considered hopelessly dry country is now carrying thousands of
sheep; that the effects of a dry climate, when we once know
what we have to expect, can be successfully counteracted with
our constantly extended knowledge of the principles of water


storage ; and, lastly, that the unprepossessing vegetation has, on
closer acquaintanceship, become an object of our esteem. But a
question arises now that will greatly influence the future of this
portion of our continent. Will country subject to such long and
constant periods of dry weather stand the drain upon it caused
by close stocking; and if any of the vegetation disappear
will other growth take its place ? That the country will
not carry so many head of sheep or cattle to the square mile
as country blessed with a bountiful rainfall, we know { but
whether it will carry enough to pay the cost of colonization,
and yet retain its present high standard, is the question.
The answer is probably in the affirmative, with an “ if,” and there
is much value in an if. Yes ! If we can store sufficient water
to avoid over-stocking one particular portion of the country by
crowding the stock round one or two large waterholes during a
dry season, thus eating down the natural herbage at a time when
it is least able to bear up against it. In a country where the
edible plants require years of unchecked growth to arrive at the
state in which we now find them reckless eating down
in dry weather would, doubtless, prove destruction, and we
would see our invaluable cottonbush, saltbush, &c., replaced by
worthless weeds. The question, however, of water storage we will
defer, and return to the physical formation of the country. We find
that as we approach the northern extremity of the plain, we come
to high downs and grassy country ; as we go south we get
amongst large plains and sandhills, with cotton and other saline
bushes as the means of subsistence for stock. This may be
accounted for by the northern edge of the big plain possessing a
higher elevation above the level of the sea than the southern one.
In fact, some parts of the southern portion of the plain are so low
that Sturt’s dream of an inland sea was neither very wild nor
improbable.
The present natural permanent waters of the interior are
situated in the midst of country subject to being flooded, and
such country is, of all, least able to stand over-stocking. The
creation of dams and tanks on the higher slopes would thus, to a
great extent, remove the undue pressure caused by a dry season,
to country better adapted to bear the strain. In noticing the
food resources of the plain we must not forget the polygonum


bushes which cover so large a portion of the low-lying fiats.
Cattle, as a rule, will not eat polygonum, unless under the
pressure of hunger ; but during hard times they have been known
to fare well and thrive on it. The polygonum swamps too
(swamps only for a month or two after rain) have a growth of
short grass that, during its prime, is of the most fattening
nature.
There is no doubt that the question of water storage is one
that is of the greatest importance as regards the development of
the interior of Australia —in fact, it may be considered the only
question ; given water, and we have all other requisites. Dams,
tanks, and wells will be the means with which we shall make the
Great Plain one of the most reproductive portions of the conti-
nent. Of late years more attention has been turned to the
method of storing water in tanks than formerly ; and this method
presents exceptional advantages when applied to the country
which I have been describing. In the first place, tanks con-
structed in well-chosen situations are more readily filled by
thunderstorms than by any other kind of rainfall; the quick and
heavy downfall peculiar to thunderstorms runs off and collects in
natural or artificial receptacles, when steady and slow-falling
rain would sink into the ground. Again, in a climate of such
intense dryness, where evaporation is so rapid and so constant,
water stored in a tank presents the smallest possible surface for
the sun and wind to act upon. Of course where the country
affords natural facilities for making dams they will be
the means of utilising large areas of fine pastoral
country; but there are thousands of square miles of
first-class country where such facilities do not exist, and
tanks will have to be constructed. In many parts of the interior
the outskirts of the desert will be found the most suitable sites
for sinking tanks. The spinifex country affects, as I said before,
the highest levels, and generally meets the rich downs in a gentle
incline; moreover the desert soil is hard, and well adapted for
running off water; and this is exemplified by the fact that where
the downs country and desert meet, the line of demarcation


generally consists of a flooded flat of greater or less extent. This
would seem to indicate that nearly all the water that falls on the
desert finds its way down to the soft and spongy soil of the downs
country where it is soon absorbed. This theory is borne out by the
fact that the spinifex country is singularly destitute of natural
reservoirs. Further south we find that nature has almost seemed
to indicate the most likely positions by the formation of the
clay pans I have already described. As regards dams, the water-
courses of the interior, short-lived and shallow as they are, will
be found exceedingly easy to dam, and on such level country a
small dam will back up the water for an enormous distance.
Stocking will greatly increase the permanency of the waterholes
already existing. This has been shown over and over again. In
the first place, stock, and more particularly sheep, watering at a
decreasing water-hole, trample and tread the sides to such an
extent that they are far less porous than before, so that when the
hole is refilled much less water soaks away than formerly. Cattle
too, by reason of the deep pads or tracks they make into their
watering places, assist greatly in increasing the amount of water
that finds its way into the holes after a shower, for these pads,
extending, as they do, such a long distance, act as conduits. As
an example of the good done by stocking country: On one station
(a cattle run) in South Australia, not far from our own border—
the principal watering-places on which were shallow lakes—a
flock of sheep were sent out to it, and shepherded diligently
around the borders of these lakes, feeding on the short swamp
grass that grew up as the water receded. After the next flood
the retaining power of the lake was found to have been more
than doubled. Well-sinking in the interior will always be, more
or less, a matter of speculation ; many hold the opinion that there
are large subterranean deposits of water to be found, and that
these underground reservoirs account for the disappearance
of many of the creeks. They contend that the ex-
tensive distribution of flood water over the level country,
and its subsequent evaporation, will not sufficiently account
for a residue not eventually reaching the sea. That
there is some truth in this theory there is no doubt. Wherever
softer veins of earth would allow, a large quantity of water would
find its way into the earth, and permanent springs of more or


less volume will doubtless be discovered and tapped : but their
discovery will, as I have said, be to a great extent a matter of
speculation. There are a few surface springs to be found even
in the dry interior. At Powell’s Creek station, on the telegraph
line, there is a permanent spring, although the station is situated
amongst, unpromising-looking rocks and spinifex ridges, in fact,
a most hopeless looking place for water in a dry season. But a
patch of rich black soil and a good spring are there, and a
garden is successfully cultivated by the station residents. When
we look at the vast extent of territory there is, and think of the
few tracks crossing it, we may well hope to find many perma-
nent deposits of water as yet unknown and undreamt of. That
many lives will be lost before the end is accomplished there is no
doubt ; but they will be well spent in bringing about the settle-
ment of so much new country. Now that there is a prospect of
the markets of the Old World being thrown open to us for the
disposal of our herds, we see that in this once-despised desert we
possess a territory, the pasture lands of which will be one of our
greatest sources of wealth ; a territory that is becoming
thoroughly known to us, just as our scientific knowledge is being
adequately extended to enable us to fully develop its resources.
We are in a much better position to fight the battle of reclama-
tion than we were twenty years ago, now we have closed with the
wilderness and have at our back a reserve force of capital and
skill, and if we do not exactly make it blossom like the rose, we
shall at least make it reproductive and habitable. The extension
of railways will greatly facilitate the rapid settlement of the
interior by reducing the difficulties of land carriage and affording
regular and speedy communication with the seaports. The want
of suitable timber is the principal obstacle to their rapid con-
struction, otherwise from the level nature of the country, they
could be pushed out at an unexampled rate, and by supplying us
with men and material render the construction of reservoirs a
much cheaper and quicker process.
There is no doubt that we shall have an uncertain and partial
rainfall to contend against, but unless during the exceptional
droughts to which the whole of the continent is liable, we may
safely reckon upon yearly thunderstorms and occasional rainfalls
of a more general character. The old fallacy that the hot dry


climate of the interior would convert the growth of wool on sheep
into hair has of course been long since exploded : and, as regards
heat, in our own grand sheep carrying district of Riverina the
thermometer registers as high during the summer as in any part
of Australia.
I write from memory, but I think that the highest reading
obtained by Frank Gregory in the interior was 156' in the grass.
On stony downs country, under the very questionable shade of
a gidea tree, the thermometer with us registered 152* one day,
and that was the highest we registered that summer. One
singular thing in connection with the rainfall of the interior is
the fact that across the northern dividing watershed the rainfall
during the monsoon period is heavier than anywhere on the
continent, for the wet months of 78-79 the record for the
Northern territory of South Australia was over seventy-two
inches. On some of the rivers a rise of thirty feet took place in
a single night. Now there is no doubt that some of this rainfall
would find its way on to the great plain, were the dividing range,
a range in the general acceptation of the term ; but on the inland
slope the approach is a long stretch of sandy table-land, mostly
covered with mulga and hazel scrub. This extends for more
than 100 miles, and contains no watercourses of any length.
Stuart tried vainly to cross this desert on his second expedition,
and on the third only succeeded by accidentally coming upon
Frew’s pond, as he named it, a small rocky waterhole that seems
to have dropped down almost by chance, for beyond a short
shallow gully in the neighbourhood, there is nothing to account
for its existence. Had the Great Plain any rivers whose heads
were situated in the country lying on the limit of the annual
northern rainfall, and occasionally visited by it, a great deal of
water would find its way into the interior to replenish the water-
holes when the local rainfall was insufficient for the purpose.
This, however, only occurs on the eastern extremity of the plain —
on the Herbert and Diamantina. The lower parts of these rivers
are often flooded, although no rain has fallen on the country they
run through.
Owing to the level formation, floods in the interior are
common and extensive, but they are neither violent nor
impetuous. The inundation spreads slowly over the low-lying


plains and flats, filling up the gaping cracks and holes, and
rendering the country almost impassable to horsemen. In some
parts one can ride throughout a long tropical summer’s day and
see flooded land on every side of him. In timbered country a
dark mark on the trees indicates the height of the last flood, and
this mark looks like a level line cutting the trees at an average
height of some four or five feet.
On the beds of many of these dry lakes I have seen the bones
of fish and waterfowl, showing that the water must have stood
for some months. This, no doubt, is often the reason that
explorers, looking for country, immediately after an exceptionally
heavy wet season, have seen lakes and lagoons that after-comers
have been unable to find. Fish, as a rule, are plentiful in the inland
waters, and so fat as to be almost uneatable ; in fact, the same
may be said of all game, particularly ducks and pigeons. The
permanent waterholes are, in dry seasons the resort of count-
less hosts of flock pigeons, and here one first notices the peculiar
habit they have of settling on the surface of the water to drink.
Two or three quick sips is, as a rule, all they indulge in, and they
are able to sustain themselves on the surface long enough for
this.
That the Great Plain is ever visited by more protracted
droughts than the coast regions, is, I think, improbable. It is,
in fact, a country where what we here should call a mild drought
is always reigning, and by reason of this it is, so to speak, always
in training to suffer under a severe one without showing it.
In the Great Plain of the past we see a large tract of country
inhabited by natives of the lowest order in the scale of existence,
visited at long intervals by a few white* men, who have each in
their turn been driven back by what they termed the sterile
inhospitable nature of the country.
In the Great Plain of the present we have the same province
invaded on all sides by the pioneer squatter, crossed and recrossed
by explorers, and gradually taking its place amongst the older
settled districts of Australia.
In the Great Plain of the future we hope to see a land of
flocks and herds —a land that, when the agriculturist has driven
the grazier back from the coast lands, will itself sustain the name
of Australia as a wool-producing country.


PRINTED BY
H. E, WOODS AND CO., 13 BRIDGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
ji




