





THE CO-PASTORATE:
OR,
A PLEA FOR THE SCRIPTURAL RIGHTS
OF THE
LOCAL PREACHERS AND LEADERS
OF
THE WESLEYAN CHURCH.
BY A WESLEYAN.
BALLARAT:
PRINTED AT “THE STAR” OFFICE, STURT STREET.
1873.




PREFACE.
These letters were written under the following cir-
cumstances: —The leading officers of the Ballarat
Circuits met soon after the last Conference, feeling
aggrieved that the question of how laymen should be
admitted to conference, had been referred to a Com-
mittee composed solely of Ministers to report upon.
They felt that laymen ought to have been associated
with them, being assured that any recommendations
emanating from Ministers alone would prove eminently
unsatisfactory. Their prescience in this matter is
justified, it is conceived, by the recommendations as
now submitted in the Appendix. At the several
meetings held, it was the general conviction that
some effort should be made to give expression to the
views of the laity, even before the report of the com-
mittee appeared. Several methods were proposed,
but there were difficulties of doing so effectually,
which led to nothing being attempted. After con-
sultation with a few friends, it was determined to
canvass the question in the public press. The Editor
of the Chronicle having refused to allow the matter
to be discussed in the connexional organ, the Editor
of the Ballarat Star courteously threw open his
columns at no little inconvenience, to whom our
acknowledgments are due.
The object of the writer has been to answer the
two questions: —Ist. Who shall be admitted to Con-
ference ? 2nd. What subjects shall engage the atten-
tion of the representatives ? The difficulty in the
mind of the writer was how could laymen be ad-
mitted into the Methodist Conference without effect-
ing a fundamental change in its polity ? In claiming
for the leaders and local preachers of our Church
co-ordinate jurisdiction with the itinerant Ministers,
as being of the same order, it is assumed that the
difficulty has been met.




WESLEYAN METHODISM.
I.
Sir, —With your permission, I venture to submit
a few thoughts on the anomalous position of Wesleyan
Methodism in these days, with its medieeval laws and
usages, and the modifications of its polity, which its
truest friends see to be imperatively demanded, if it
is to hold its pride of place among the churches of the
land. If any one shall take exception to the mooting
of this matter in the secular press, the answer is,
that the editor of the Wesleyan Chronicle, refused to
allow any expression of opinion on the subject in his
columns. Many members of the Church are dis-
posed to bear with meekness the ills they com-
plain of, rather than risk the possibility of strife and
agitations, fearing it would result in a disruption
analogous in the terribleness of its evils to former
agitations ana disruptions in Methodism. This dan-
ger is not to be apprehended. It must not be for-
gotten that those disreputable and deplorable dis-
putes originated among the ministers themselves—
a class who always go to extremes, understanding
nothing of compromise; that they arose out of the
petty jealousies and ambitions of men who coveted
power and the high places in the tabernacle; while
this movement has originated with laymen who have
no personal objects to compass, no jealousies to em-
bitter, no stirrings of ambition prompting their aims,
but possessed by a simple desire to free the Church of
which they are members from much that is out of
harmony with the spirit of the age, and which para-
lyses her power and retards her progress. The
question is often asked, “ How is it that the
last-born of the great sects of Protestantism—the


one we should expect to find most in har-
mony with the progressive tendencies of the age,
“ and the concessus of contemporary thought”—is the
most obstructive, and least sympathetic with the on-
ward march of things? How is it that a Church,
which boasts of a founder who nobly grew out of the
most narrow and exclusive views and sentiments, out
of a high-churchism and sacerdotalism the most in-
tolerant, to become the greatest religious innovator of
any age, ready at all times to sacrifice on the altar of ex-
pediency the prejudices of his education and the supposed
rights of his class, has become the greatest stickler for
ministerial dignity, pastoral authority, and the highest
pretensions of priestism at all compatible with Pro-
testant principles ? Different answers may be given,
but generally it will be agreed that the priestly
pretensions of exclusive authority to govern
the Church, as embodied in Wesleyan laws
and regulations, may be traced to two facts.
Ist. That at the death of Mr Wesley, the preachers—
they were not ministers then, simply Gospel preachers,
evangelists —found themselves occupying a most
unique position among the clergy of the land. They
were de facto the ministers of numerous Christian
societies and congregations, but de jure they were not
ministers. They had no recognised status, as com-
pared not only with the clergy of the Church of Eng-
land but also with Presbyterian and Congregational
ministers. This did not influence very much, if at
all, the simple-minded men wild labored with Mr
Wesley; but soon another class of men arose, with
different ideas and aims, and who sought, and rightly
sought, a recognised status among the clergymen of
the country. This inferior place in the general
opinion doubtless influenced the preachers of that day
to insist the more persistently for full recognition of
their office among their own people, and, as
an usual consequence, in . their vindicatory
zeal, claimed more than they were entitled to.
2nd. And the more pregnant fact was that the
preachers, after Mr Wesley’s death, fell into the mis-
take that they inherited his authority and occupied
his place in relation to the societies, and on this
assumption they claimed, and still claim, to exercise
the absolute power and despotic sway that Mr Wesley
had always done. Mr Wesley’s position was this—he
found as the result of his preaching that numbers of
people came to him for spiritual counsel, and these


enquirers increased to such an extent that he had to
appoint a special time wherein to meet them. The
origin of the class meeting, which has been the cement*
ing bond of union among Methodists, was most un-
premeditated and undesigned as to what it has since
become. It happened thus:—“The chapel at Bristol
was in debt, and it was agreed that each member
should pay a penny a week to reduce the burden. The
Bristol Society was, therefore, divided into two classes,*
and for convenience one person was appointed to col-
lect the weekly subscription from each class, and to
pay the amount to the stewards. The advantages of
this system, when turned to a higher purpose, at once
struck the methodical and practical mind of Mr
Wesley,” and he afterwards divided the serious per-
sons who sought his spiritual advice into classes, and
appointed judicious persons to meet them every week.
Presently some young men desired to assist him as
preachers. This at first shocked him greatly; but
soon perceiving the leadings of Providence therein, he
sanctioned it, and thus arose the early Wesleyan
preachers, a noble band of heroic men, worthy suc-
cessors of the fishermen of Galilee. Let it be observed,
the relationship which Mr Wesley held towards them,
and ever afterwards towards all that associated them-
selves with him was that of entire independence;
he owed them no obligations, no debt: he never
sought to be connected with them. They sought him,
and so he always held himself at liberty to dictate
to them the terms of their union and co-operation.
They were with him members of a common Church,
possessed of like Christian immunities, rights, and
privileges—not the Wesleyan Church, but the Church
of England. It is to be remembered that Mr Wesley,
his preachers and followers, were members of the
Church of England up to his death. The union of
himself and followers was a purely voluntary one, and
his position gave him perfect right to say to any one
—“ If you wish to remain connected with me and my
doings, do this and leave that undone, if not, we
separate.” By so doing he did not excommunicate
or unchurch these people, they still retained their
membership in the Church, though not co-operating
with him. Now, the Wesleyan Conference failed to
perceive the fact, or seeing it, ignored it, that the
death of Mr Wesley put an end to this state of things,
and placed themselves and the societies which
adhered to them, as, a separate and independent


Church, in new relations, to be determined
by New Testament prescription and usage.
Mr Wesley could say—“ lam independent of you,
leave me!” But the Wesleyan ministers, as the minis-
ters of an independent Church, had not the right to
say that. They had entered into new relationships
which conferred obligations and invested with privi-
leges all parties. The Wesleyan Conference has never
recognised these mutual duties and rights, but has
claimed to step into Mr Wesley’s place, and to be in-
vested with all his authority; and thus, without re-
ference to New Testament rule, or authority, has
assumed to itself all power, holding the ulti-
matum in every concern of the Church, financial, poli-
tical, and spiritual, and regarding every member of
the Church as possessed of neither rights nor privi-
leges as to the legislation or management of the
Church. The laity in the Wesleyan Church, although
taking a more active part in its operations than the
laity of any other Church, have no'jurisdiction, much
less a co-ordinate jurisdiction with the ministers. In
all they have to do their opinions and judgments are
received simply as advisory. In brief, the ministers
are the Church, as much as the catholic priests are the
Church, and the only reason that the thing has been
tolerated so long is, that the, men are infinitely better
than the system, which, beyond doubt, is the most
tyrannical and despotic in Protestantism, and is an
anomaly not to be tolerated amid the liberalism of the
age.—Yours, &c., Wesleyan.


11.
Sib, —In discussing this subject, I desire to be un-
derstood as having no personal reference to any indi-
vidual minister, nor yet to the ministers of the day,
either in England or here. It is the system lam con-
cerned with, which the Church of to-day is not re-
sponsible for; ministers and people alike inherit it,
and many of the former are as fully alive as the latter
to its anomalies and want of congruity with the spirit
of modern institutions, and are prepared to modify it
so as to bring it into greater harmony with
the spirit of the age, which is undoubt-
edly a nearer approach to the spirit of
Christianity than that of any preceding age.
There is. considerable difficulty felt in so presenting
the subject in a few letters as to give a just view of
it as a whole. Methodism is a wondrously complex
system; like the British Constitution it has grown up
out of usages and regulations rather than out of
definite legislation, so that it is difficult to define it or
deal with it as a whole. “For in its positive bearing
Methodism was to be a spiritual rather than a dog-
matic or ecclesiastical reform.” While “all that
Wesley did in the way of organisation was designed
not to work out any preconceived plan or to establish
any particular system, but to save souls,” and so the
wondrous thing has grown to be, perhaps, the most
complicated and marvellous system of ecclesiastical
jurisprudence which the world has known, always
excepting Romanism. From the very first, how-
ever, attempts have been made to insure to the
laity some jurisdiction in its management. The
first Methodist reformer was Mr Kilham. Mr George
Smith, the most judicious and impartial historian of
Methodism, virtually admits that what Kilham
asked for was deserving of consideration; and he
seems to imply that it would have been well if some
at least of his proposals had been acted upon, crude
and undigested as they were. “ For it may, indeed,
be urged,’’.says Mr Smith, “ with some show of reason,
that the laity of Methodism were not in full possession
of those privileges to which every member of a mature
and complete Christian Church has an undoubted
right to.” I venture the opinion that had the confer-
ence of that.day recognised the right of the people,
through their leaders and local preachers, to a voice


in the legislation of the connexion, it would not only
have been saved from the disruptions which have
rended it, but would have placed Methodism in such
a commanding position of influence and power that
would have made it a thousand times more successful
than it has been, and “ its effects on the dogmatic and
ecclesiastical errors of the times” would have been
more appreciable and positive. While it would
then have yielded with grace what it has
since found necessary to do to agitation and
strife, and the growing liberalism of the age.
Your limits will not permit me to illustrate this by
the facts of its subsequent history, which are patent
to every student of it. But one significant fact, I
conceive, establishes this fully. To-day the question
of lay representation, which has held the same place
in Methodist politics that universal suffrage has in
English politics, a question which at all subsequent
periods of its history has been regarded as the wildest
radicalism, and of such a revolutionary character as
necessitated its being resisted to the utmost, has been
actually mooted in the English Conference by one of
its most distinguished members, and would appear to
have been received with general approbation. While
in Australia the principle has been recognised and
adopted, and all that is now left to be done is to de-
termine how to give effect to this resolution. If I
rightly understand, the question to be determined
i s —lst. Who are to be admitted? 2nd. How far is
the jurisdiction of the laity to extend? In urging
this claim of lay representation there has been no
desire on the part of the people to subvert any of the
fundamental principles of Methodism, so far as we are
agreed on what is fundamental. The people main-
tain that the basis of Methodism rests on two prin-
ciples—lst, the connexional principle; 2nd, the prac-
tice of ministerial itinerancy. But the conference
asserts that it has, and every minister has “ a pastoral
function” which renders the pastorate, especially in
its collective capacity as the conference, the
fountain of law, and invests it with all legislative
authority, and clothes it with a spiritual power
which no other officer or officers of the Church can
share with it. It is this that Methodist ministers
have persistently asserted, and which has really been
the bone of contention between the people and the
ministers all through Methodist history. I make no
reference to the disruptions which arose out of Dr


Warren’s case, nor yet the last disgraceful agitation
which involved no principle at all, and both of which
were really disputes among the preachers themselves,
into which the people were unhappily drawn. But I
now desire to submit some thoughts on the pastoral
office, and hope to show that the ministers, in claim-
ing the sole pastorate of the Church, are asserting
claims which have no scriptural authority to rest
upon, and which are peculiarly out of place in the
Methodist economy. It is a dogma of Methodism
that the New Testament prescribes no specific form
of Church government, but that the Church had at
all times to adjust herself to the position and the
times in which she found herself placed, and to orga-
nise herself so as most efficiently to compass her
mission of disciplining the world to Christ; and in
this respect Methodism claims to be formed more
strictly after the New Testament model than any other
Church extant, and, I think, on good grounds. While
I conceive it has appointed officers more in unison
with the early New Testament precedents than any
other Church has done, it has withholden from them
their scriptural rights and privileges. The position I
maintain is this: that the leaders and local preachers of
the Methodist Church occupy the same place as the
New Testament elder, and, as a consequence, are pos-
sessed of all the rights and privileges of that officer,
which, I further submit, is synonymous with
that of the minister. It is too lengthy an argu-
ment, Mr Editor, for your columns, but I will
indicate it as briefly as possible. What were
the officers of the New Testament Church ?
Broadly stated, there were two classes, the itinerant
and stationary: the former being the apostles and
evangelists, who went forth to disciple the world to
Christ: the others, the elders and deacons, appointed
by the apostles to take charge of the disciples
whom they gathered together. The elder, was to
have the spiritual oversight; the deacon was to attend
to the temporalities of the Church, but not exclusively.
He also preached, and also “ gave the bread and wine
in the Eucharist to believers and administered
baptism,” see Dr A. Clarke, Acts vi., 4. It is with the
elder I have new to do, and I submit that bishop and
presbyter, elder and pastor, are in the New Testament
one and the same office-bearer. In Acts xx., 28, Paul
exhorts the elders of the church at Ephesus “to feed
the Church of God,” over which they were overseers


(episcopus). In Titus, i., 5-9, Paul reminds Titus that
he left him at Crete to ordain elders (presbuterous) in
every city, and enumerates the duties of the office,
as a bishop (episcopon) must be blameless, &c.
In I. Pet., v., 1-4—The elders (presbuterous) which are
among you I exhort . . . feed the flock of God
which is among you, taking the oversight (episco-
pountes). It will further be found that the New Tes-
tament bishop or pastor or elder is the same as minis-
ter, teacher, presbyter. (Acts, xv., 23, xv., 2, xx., 17;
Phil., i., 1; Tit., i., 5; I. Tim., i., 5.) The word poi-
menas is only rendered pastor once in the New
Testament, but elsewhere is rendered shepherd.
(Matt., ix., 36; Mark, vi., 14; Luke, ii., 18; John, x.,
2, 11, 12, 14, 16.) It has been well observed— 1 The
same man might be called a presbyter or elder from
his age or gravity; bishop or overseer, from his hav-
ing the oversight of the people; teacher, from the
great work he was to discharge; pastor or shepherd,
from his feeding the flock; minister or servant, be-
cause that for Christ’s sake he was the servant of all.”
In all the New Testament churches there were seve-
ral of these officers; in no instance do we find
one man placed over the rest, but they were all pos-
sessed with co-ordinate jurisdiction. While it was evi-
dently those officers who governed the church, to them
was entrusted the spiritual oversight of the flock, and
with the deacons they had the charge of all the tempo-
ralities. So it was these elders that the churches were
exhorted to honor and obey. “ Remember them that
have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the
word of God,” Heb. xiii., 7. “ Obey them that have
the rule over you,” v. 17; see I. Thess. v., 12-13. And
it was these elders in their associated capacity that
set apart other elders or bishops, I. Tim., iv., 14.
This meagre statement of the case will, I trust, be
sufficient to show that there was no special _ officer,
either a bishop, or priest, or deacon, or minister, or
pastor, or by whatever other name distinguished, who
had that exclusive jurisdiction over the church which
Methodist ministers claim to be invested with.
Yours, &c., Wesleyan.


111.
Sir, —Having briefly indicated the officers of the New
Testament Church, I will as briefly point out how power
came to be gathered up into the hands of a sacerdotal
order, which has no place in the New Testament polity.
I will follow Mosheim, who is, I believe, a generally-
accepted authority. He says, Cent I. part 11. chap. 2
—“ As it was the design of our Saviour to gather a
church from among all nations, and one which should
continue through all ages, the nature of the case re-
quired him first to appoint extraordinary teachers who
should be his ambassadors to mankind, and everywhere
collect societies of Christians, and then that he should
cause to be placed in these societies ordinary teachers
and interpreters of his will, who should repeat and
enforce the doctrines taught by the extraordinary
teachers, and keep the people steadfast in their faith
and practice.” Mosheim says, further, that the extra-
ordinary teachers were the apostles and the seventy
disciples, and the class known as evangelists. “In
those primitive times each Christian church was com-
posed of the people, the presiding officers, and the
assistants or deacons. These must be the component
parts of every society. The highest authority was in
the people, or whole body of Christians; for even the
apostles themselves inculcated by their example, that
nothing of any moment was to be done or determined
on, but with the knowledge and consent of the
brotherhood. —Acts i., 15; vi., 3; xv., 4; xxi., 22. The
assembled people elected their own rulers and teachers
. . . by their suffrages rejected or confirmed the
laws which were proposed by their rulers in their
assemblies. . . . They heard and decided
the causes of presbyters and deacons; in a word,
the people did everything which belongs to those in
whom the supreme power of the community is vested.
. . . The rulers of the Church were denominated
sometimes presbyters or elders, a designation borrowed
from the Jews, and sometimes also bishops.” This
state of things, as early as the second century, began
to give way to the pretensions of ambitious men. It
was found that to carry on the business of the Church
in an orderly manner, a chairman or president had
to be elected, and very early men of commanding
talent, zeal, and force of character, asserted them-
selves, and came to be recognised as leaders, and


the name bishop would appear to be exclusively
assumed by them, while the great body of officers
continued to be known as elders. Presently some
of the bishops asserted pre-eminence over their fellows,
and as the Church grew, and came to acquire the form
of a vast republic composed of many lesser ones,
certain chief men were placed over it in different parts
of the world, in order to preserve the coherence of the
whole body. Hence came patriarchs, and ultimately
a prince of patriarchs, the Roman Pontiff.” I refer
your readers to Mosheim, as the book I suppose most
readily available, in which the growth of the sacer-
dotal class as existing at present is clearly traced, and
where it is shown how the ancient rights and privi-
leges of the people have been usurped. I will, without
insisting too much on this, submit one remark; that
is, that the government of the Church by the
people, at least by its elders and deacons, is perfectly
in accord with the mind of Christ as expressed by the
apostles in their organisation of the New Testament
churches. So that what the Methodists of the
present day ask for is in perfect accord with primitive
precedent and apostolic regulation. I will now very
briefly glance at Mr Wesley’s views on the subject. It is
well known that at the outset of his career he held
extreme views; he believed in “ Apostolic succession,
the priestly character of the Christian ministry, and
the essential distinction of its three orders.” He ex-
pressed himself explicitly to this effect, in 1745, in a
letter to be found in his journal of that year. In
about three weeks after this letter, he records that
he had recently read Lord King’s account of the
Primitive Church. “ In spite,” he says, “ of the vehe-
ment prejudice of my education, I was ready to be-
lieve that this was a fair and impartial draught;
but if so, it would follow that bishops and
presbyters are (essentially) of one order, and that
originally every Christian congregation was a church
independent of all others.” This idea fructified
rapidly in Wesley’s mind, and soon bore fruit in
decisive action. Quoting from Steven’s History of
Methodism, Book 111., Chap. 5, in the disciplinary
miuutes of 1747;—“ The term ‘ church ’ is asserted to
mean in the New Testament ‘ a single congregation.’
A * national church ’ is pronounced ‘ a merely political
institution.’ ” It is conceded that the three orders of
deacons, presbyters, and elders obtained early in the
Church, but are not enjoined in Holy Scripture; that


uniformity of church government did not exist till
the age of Constantine, for the reason that variety in
ecclesiastical administration was necessary for the
varied circumstances of different ages and countries.
He had abandoned, by this, his belief in the Divine
right of Episcopacy. It would occupy too much
space to follow Mr Wesley in his growth of liberal
ideas, and ever-widening catholicity, until at last
he ordained some of his preachers himself. Let
it, however, be noted that Mr Wesley did not
regard ordination by the laying on of hands, as essen-
tial to the ministerial function, but admitted its ex-
pediency, while Bishop Stittingfleet had convinced
him that it was “an entire mistake, that none but
episcopal ordination was valid.” His keen, clear in-
tellect, once put on the right track, “ soon broke away
from all other regard for questions of church govern-
ment than that of scriptural expediency.” How fully
was this borne out in his organisation of the societies.
Some one has remarked that Wesley had a genius for
government not inferior to that of Richelieu. Those
who are most conversant with Methodist polity will
acknowledge this most fully. He adapted the very
best means to the ends he aimed at, as by a kind of
intuition; why not let us say boldly by an inspiration
from above? Does not this receive countenance
from the surprising similarity of his church arrange-
ments to that of the early Apostolic Church ? He
appears to have trodden in the footsteps of Paul in
all his proceedings. There was something Pauline in
the whole cast of his mind. He was, I venture to
think, more like the great apostle than any single his-
torical character with whom we are acquainted; in the
white heat of his enthusiasm, in his sustained and
quenchless zeal, his ever-growing ardor, his indomi-
table courage “in deaths oft,” and the entire abnega;
tion of self. “ Counting all things but dross for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ.” While, like
the apostle, as he gathered converts, he formed them
into societies, banding them in church fellowship in
appointing pastors to those classes under the
name of leaders, and again sending others forth as
evangelists, inspired with his own zeal and courage.
While in those preachers and leaders he insisted on
finding all the qualifications and marks that Paul re-
quired in the bishops and elders to whom he com-
mitted the converts he gathered together. And there
cap be no doubt that had Wesley lived longer he


would have learnt to recognise in his leaders and local
preachers true spiritual officers, possessing co-ordinate
jurisdiction with the men he called out to itinerate,
and whom he made the depositaries of his authority.—
Yours, &c., Wesleyan.
IY.
Sir, —Having shown, I hope, satisfactorily to un-
prejudiced people that there vvere but two classes of
officers in the early Church, the itinerants aud the
elders aud deacons, who were appointed to the over-
sight of the Churches established, it remains for me to
show that the leaders, local preachers, and stewards of
the Wesleyan Church are dc facto the same officers,
possessing all the qualifications, and charged with the
same duties as the New Testament elders and deacons,
and therefore are in justice entitled to all the privi-
leges of the eldership. Ido not suppose that any one
will contend that a name determines the nature of a
thing. A rose called by any other name would not
only smell as sweet, but would still possess all the
essential qualities that constituted it what it is; a
different nomenclature does not vitiate or destroy
essential attributes of character or of office. If, there-
fore, I can show that the officers in the Wesleyan
Church are called to the discharge of the same duties,
and if they are proven to possess the same qualifica-
tions as the bishops, elders, and deacons of the Pri-
mitive Church, then I claim for them, though known
by different names, like consideration. And in their
name I protest against any of their rights being with-
held and usurped by others. The duties of those
officers in the New Testament may be expressed in
two words—they were to instruct and govern. In I.
Timothy, chap, iii., the apostle details minutely the
qualifications and works of bishops and deacons; they
were to be men of blameless moral character, apt to
teach —able to instruct others. Let it be ob-
served that this is a qualification required in all
elders; they are to be men well instructed so as to be
able to communicate instruction to others. I note this
the more especially because it is maintained in certain
quarters that some elders are authorised to rule, but
not to teach; but there is no such distinction made


in the Scriptures—the office demanded aptness to
teach. No one questions but that the apostolic
bishops were authorised to preach and administer the
sacraments, and if it is conceded that bishop and
elder are identical, where is the authority to forbid
the elders of our Church from doing likewise? It is
readily admitted that all the elders of the New Testa-
ment Church did not exercise the function of teach-
ing as preachers, not because they wereinot entitled to it,
but some being more gifted than others, the less
gifted gave way to the more acceptable and most
highly endowed. They acted upon the principle of a
division of labor. In some of the Presbyterian
Churches the elder is looked upon as a mere layman,
whose duty is simply to assist the minister to rule and
govern the Church. This is substantially what Mr
Wesley and the conference regarded the local preachers
and class leaders as. I have no doubt that had Mr
Wesley’s life been crowned by another decade or two
of years, and had he determined to form an indepen-
dent Church he would have seen how illogical and in-
congruous it was to invest men with spiritual func-
tions and duties, and to withhold from them the
privileges pertaining to their office. But it is a fact
that after Mr Wesley’s death the conference made no
advance; there has been no progress since his day.
There has been no development, no growth of liberal
ideas, for while many concessions have been made,
they have been conceded to agitation and pressure. In
the English conference there have always been two
parties, the High Church and the Liberal. But the
former has ever -been the most influential, and has
given tone to all its legislation. The only good thing
coming out of the reform movement of 1849, perhaps,
has been the weakening if not the overthrow of this
influence. The elders of the New Testament were
men divinely ordained to rule, to feed the flock, to
warn them that were unruly, to comfort the feeble-
minded, &c. (1 Thess., v., 12). “ Take heed, therefore,
unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which
the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers,” &c. (Acts,
xx. 28). Without multiplying quotations, let us see
how exactly the duties of class leaders coincide with
this. The business of a leader is thus defined:—“ To
see each person in his class once a week at
least, in order to enquire how their souls prosper; to
advise, reprove, comfort, or exhort, as occasion may
require.” In the Pastoral Address of 1822, we meet


with this language:—“We hope that our class leaders
will endeavor to watch over the souls committed to
their care, as those who are to give an account to the
Great Shepherd,” &c. Is not this language an echo
of Peter’s? “ The elders which are among you I
exhort. . . Feed the flock of God which is among
you, taking the oversight thereof, &c., and when the
Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown
of glory that fadeth not away.” The pastoral office of
the class leaders is thus spoken of by Stevens: —“ The
class leaders appointed by the pastor (for their duties
are pastoral) inspected the society individually and
weekly,” &c. Again, “The Methodist itinerancy
could never have secured the moral discipline, or even
the permanence of its societies, without the pastoral
care of the class leader in the absence of the pastor,
who at first was scarcely a day at a time
in any one place.” The furthest thing from
my purpose or wish in any way is to detract
from the dignity and importance of the ministers of
our Church. Yet, if the question is raised as to who
are the proper and real pastors of the Methodist people,
I have no hesitancy in saying the class leaders and
not the itinerant preachers. If the preachers are the
pastors of our Church, then the pastorate among us
is the veriest farce and sham in existence. There are
members of our Church in these Ballarat Circuits who
have scarcely ever met a minister, many families whose
houses the pastor has never entered. The complaint
in all our churches is that the people never see the
nainister. I have been nearly twenty years in this
colony, and we have scarce had a solitary pastoral
visit. It has not been so with the class leaders; many
of them have been most indefatigable in their
pastoral oversight, and deep interest in my-
self and family. The ministers claim to
discharge their pastoral functions by meeting the
classes once a quarter, and giving the members who
happen to attend on that occasion their quarterly
ticket of membership, and further, by administering
the sacraments. Let me ask men of sense, who is
the shepherd, the man who dwells in the midst of the
flock, moving among them, and sympathising with
them in all their troubles and joys, or the man who
is only known to the majority of the flock by a quar-
terly official visit? I would not be understood as
blaming the ministers in this matter; their circuits
cover too wide an area for them to discharge the


duties of the pastorate. My quarrel with them is,
that they withhold from the real pastors of our fold
the rights and privileges of their office, and so far
they “lord it over God’s heritage.” Such being the
functions of the Wesleyan class leader, who has the
authority to say to these divinely-appointed shepherds
of Christ’s flock that they have no right to comme-
morate his death and promised advent by administer-
ing and partaking of the memorials of his passion
without the intervention of a priest? If such preten-
sions are not priestism, what is? I am willing to
admit it conduces to order to have these things done
by one officer of the Church, but I deny that any
class has a special right to do so, and I protest against
the unscriptural assumption.—Yours, &c.,
Wesleyan.
V.
Sir, —It remains that I should state the position of
the local preachers, and deduce my inference. The
origin of local preachers, like all beside in Methodism,
was unpremeditated, and very much of it adopted in
spite of strong prejudice and determined opposition.
The preaching of laymen originated thus: —The Wes*
leys found it necessary, when compelled to form
religious societies, to enlist helpers to watch over
them. “ The clergymen of the establishment would
not assist. In this dilemma he (Mr J. Wesley) ap-
pointed a Mr Cennick to take charge at Kings wood.”
But like help was needed at London. He therefore
appointed one “he judged to be strong in faith, and
of an exemplary conversation, to meet the society at
the usual times, to pray with them, and giving such
advice as might be useful.” This was Thomas Max-
field, he being “ fervent in spirit and mighty in the
Scriptures greatly profited the people. They crowded
to hear him, and by the increase of their number, as
well as by their earnest and deep attention, they in-
sensibly led him to go further than he at first de-
signed. He began to preach, and the Lord so blessed
the Word, that many were not only deeply awakened
and brought to repentance, but were also made happy
in a consciousness of pardon. The Scripture marks
of true conversion, inward peace and power to walk in


all holiness, evinced the work to be of God.” Mr
Wesley, who was absent from London, was informed
of this irregularity, and he hastened to London to put
a stop to it. His mother was then staying at the
Foundry, in his house. And she perceived on his
arrival that he was troubled, and enquired the cause.
“ Thomas Maxfield,” said he, abruptly, “ has turned
preacher, I find.” She looked at him, and replied,
“John, you know what my sentiments have been.
You cannot suspect me of favoring readily anything
of this kind. But take care what you do with respect
to that young man, for he is as surely called of God
to preach as you are. Examine what have
been the fruits of his preaching, and hear
him also yourself.” He did so; his prejudice
bowed before the force of truth, and he could only
say, “It is the Lord’s, let Him do what seemeth to
Him good.” The first lay preacher was remarkably
successful. (Coke and Moore’s Life.) Here was the
first development of the vertebrae of Methodism;
that which has given it expansion and permanency.
Without its local preachers Methodism would have
been a small thing to what it is to-day. There can
be no question, I think, that this was the greatest
revolution in the Church since the days of Constan-
tine, and a revolution which has not been appreciated
as it should have been, and the issues of which are as
yet but dimly apprehended. Neither Mr Wesley nor
the Wesleyan Conference, much less the simple-
minded local preachers of Methodism, had any idea
what a stride back to primitive usage,, and
New Testament practice was the recognition
of this class as preachers—divinely called of
God, to preach the Gospel. It is from the
employment of this class of ministers of the New
Testament by all the churches (and they are all tend-
ing inSthat direction yet more and more), that ritualism
will receive its quietus, and sacerdotalism with its
unrighteous pretensions be laid at rest. Stevens, in
his history of Methodism, chapter v., writing of the
conference of 1746, says:—“Wesley’s conviction of
the importance and necessity of the lay ministry
had been deepened since the last session. Providen-
tial circumstances every day rendered it more evident
that the great religious interest which had begun in
the land must be conducted forward chiefly by that
agency, or be generally abandoned. Next to revela-
tion itself such providential indications were decisive


of Wesley’s judgment. The lay ministry was then
God’s own means, because the only means
provided for the prosecution of the growing
work. But much discrimination was necessary
to ascertain the fitness of untrained men for
such a momentous responsibility. “ How shall we
try those who think they are moved by the Holy
Spirit, and called of God to preach ?” was an anxious
question asked at this session. Three tests were given
in the answer. Have they grace, gifts, and fruits ?
Fixst, —Do they know God as a pardoning God ? Have
they the love of God abiding in them ? Do they
desire and seek nothing but God ? And are they holy
in all manner of conversation ? Second.—Have they
(in some tolerable degree) a clear, sound understand-
ing? Have they a right judgment in the things of
God ? Have they a just conception of salvation by
faith ? And has God given them any degree of utter-
ance? Do they speak justly, readily, clearly ? Third.
• —Have they fruit ? “As long as these three great
marks concur in any, we believe,” affirmed the con-
ference “ that he is called of God to preach. These
we receive as a sufficient proof that he is moved
by the Holy Ghost.” It may be said that this
refers to those whom Mr Wesley employed
fully in the work of preaching. It does not
appear clearly whether it is so or not; but
granting it, these men were at that time to all intents
and purposes laymen, while this is practically, indeed
literally, the qualification and fitness demanded in
local preachers to-day. The local preacher has to
affirm his belief that he is “ moved of the Holy
Ghost” and “ called of God” before he is accepted.
They have to undergo the same examination, in all its
essentials, as the itinerant preachers; and really the
only difference between them is, that the one devotes
himself exclusively to the work of preaching, and the
other only devotes his Sundays and occasional week
nights, while he at the same time prosecutes his
business. If to attend to secular business detracts
from the essential requisites of a minister of the
New Testament, then Paul at all events was not a
full-fledged minister according to modern pretension.
And I fear it will militate against the status of many
of our own reverends, as we have some become tutors
of our colleges, secretaries of our missionary societies,
managers of our book concerns, and are relieved from
circuit work — placed in reality in the same position ip


this respect as the local preachers. They have no
charge! But it may be said that the itinerant
ministers are ordained by the laying on of hands. To
this it may be said that while Mr Wesley believed all
through his life in the “ appropriateness of ordination
and the usual orderly distinctions of the Christian
ministry, they were no longer essential requisites in
his estimation. His lay assistants were moved of the
Holy Ghost and called of God to do their w r ork; they
were, therefore, by divine right as legitimate preachers
of the Word as any priest or bishop of the land.” So
say we of our local preachers, and what Methodist
minister will dare to say that they are not thus called ?
And if so called, upon what justifiable grounds are
any of the duties and rights of the divinely-appointed
preachers of the Word withheld from them? Further,
if ordination by the laying on of hands is an essential
requisite of a minister of the Gospel, we have the
ugly circumstance left us that the Wesleyan Confe-
rence did not ordain its ministers by the imposition
of hands prior to 1836. Are we to conclude that the
ancient worthies of our Church previous to that date
were not true ministers of the Word? I have now, I
think, shown that every requisite for the office, and
every duty of the office of a New Testament elder,
meet in the Wesleyan class leader and local preacher;
and, further, that in the New Testament the term
bishop, elder, pastor, are synonymous, as designa-
tions of one order of officers. My inference is,
that if invested with the office, and charged
with the duties thereof, and subject to the
penalties attached to the neglect of such duties, they
have every right to all the immunities and privileges
of the office. And I fearlessly say, that to lay upon
them the burthen of the office, and to withhold from
them its rights, is an act of injustice. It is no answer
to say that these officers do not so understand
their office, and make no claim for such recognition.
Some of them do; and an increasing number will, as
the matter is placed in a true light before them.
But such an argument is unworthy of a Christian.
Was it any reason why the Czar of all the Russias, the
other day, should withhold freedom from the serfs of
the empire because tens of thousands did not know
they were entitled to the rights of freemen ? And
are we to be told that because a number of simple-
hearted unlettered leaders and local preachers do not
understand the privileges pertaining to their office.


they are to be perpetually withheld from them?
Let me now say what it is I desire to see accomplished.
First —I do not desire to effect any change in the
fundamental principles of the connexion. I would
preserve in its integrity the connexional and the
itinerant principle. Ido not wish to dispute the
pastoral rights of the ministers. I advocate no altera-
tion in our connexional funds. 1 accept the principle
involved, while I yet think they are capable of modi-
fication with advantage. lam not an advocate for
universal suffrage, so called. That it will be ultimately
granted I have no doubt, but at present I make no
claim for it. lam willing to admit that the Church
should be governed by its proper officers, and not by
the people.—Yours, &c., Wesleyan.
VI.
Sik, —I stated in my last that I acknowledged
the pastoral claims of our ministers. I ana not
very clear as to the justness or propriety of doing
so, for it may be a question how far itinerant
ministers can be pastors. But I grant it fully. Yet
I cannot allow them to be the sole pastors of the
Church. I am prepared to recognise them as the
chief pastors, and would give them the pre-eminence
in all the assemblies of the brotherhood. I would
apply to ministers generally, and to superintendents
of circuits in particular, the langnage Bishop Emory
employed to illustrate the relation existing between
bishops and presbyters—' Being vested,” says he,
“ with official superiority in the government of his
fellow-ministers and the churches, and yet being
intrinsically and inherently but a presbyter among
presbyters, though occupying the first seat and the
first official degree; both in dignity and authority; as
the Speaker of the House of Commons in Great
Britain, who, nevertheless, is still inherently but a
commoner among commoners.” I have no sympathy
with the idea of degrading the ministers in any way,
unless they deem it a degradation to recognise in the
local preachers and leaders co-pastors. This, as I
understand it, is the true campus bellorum between
the ministers and people of Methodism. What we
rebel against is the high priestly pretensions which


are made in behalf of the pastoral office, more
especially the “ collective pastorate,” as the
conference is sometimes euphoniously termed.
The Wesleyan ministers claim the absolute right
to rule; finality in all things rests in them.
It it true that certain concessions have been made
from time to time which have mitigated and softened
these lofty claims, and rendered them a little more
palatable. The rough edge has been taken off, but it
is there still, and the power is in the same hands. For
example, the ministers at first in the early history of
our Church claimed the sole right to receive into and
expel from the Church. That right has been waived
thus far, that no member can be expelled the Church
unless the leaders’ meeting find him deserving of ex-
pulsion; but still the power of expelling is held tena-
ciously by the minister, and he is jealous of the power,
and will not share it with the leaders. I can give you
a case in point, which occurred not very many years back
in this circuit. A woman, a member of the Church, who
was not only charged with “ flagrantissima flagitia et
adulteria ,” but had been unhappily surprised in the
actual violation of the Bth Commandment. A leaders’
meeting was summoned to try her; but for some cause
the minister did not come to his appointment, and so,
according to Methodist law, such meeting could not be
held. The leaders, however, some of whom were
local preachers, and most of them men of years and
experience, deemed the case so flagrant and dishonor-
ing to the Church, that it was imperative to take
immediate action; consequently they dared upon the
unconstitutional course of holding the meeting in the
absence of the minister, and there and then expelled
the woman, and had it duly recorded in the minute-
book. At the next meeting, the minister being pre-
sent, when the minutes were read, he took exception
to this action of the leaders, and refused to confirm
them, unless the meeting would rescind the resolution
of expulsion, but the leaders had just a little too much
self respect to stultify themselves after such a fashion,
and so the matter stood until another meeting, when
the same minister, a young man of a few years’
standing—some five or six—was present again, and
stated that his instructions were that that resolution
must be rescinded. The phalanx was firm, the trans-
gressors were obdurate, and no one would move such a
resolution, whereupon the young gentleman took a
pen and cancelled the resolution by his own lordly


ministerial prerogative, and perfectly right according
to Methodist law, for the minister is the fountain of
power. When the leaders have found the person
guilty, then, the law says, the leaders’ meeting has
discharged its whole part of the painful duty to be
performed, and the case is left in the hands of the
superintendent. On him devolves in his pastoral
character, as the person whose peculiar call and pro-
vince it is to watch over that soul as one that must
give an account, the sole right and duty of deciding on
the measures to be adopted towards the offender. Ac-
cording to this doctrine a leader is an anomaly—a
machine called to do certain work, but to it is attached
no responsibility. He has to watch over souls, but he
has no “ account to give” of them. A rather curious
principle if applied in every day life. I, in com-
mon with most men, conceive that the work
creates the office, not the office the work.
And so it is throughout every branch of Methodist
arrangement; the presence and sanction of the minis-
ter are absolutely necessary to give validity to every
act. Neither a leaders’ meeting, nor a trustee meet-
ing, nor a Sunday-school teachers’ meeting can be
legally held in the absence of a minister, and when
held under his presidency they can pass no resolution
and give effect to it without his sanction. Here is a
law from the statute-book of Methodism, enacted in
1796, and I do not think that it is possible to express
the real spirit of the Methodist conference more
truly. “ Let no man nor number of men in our con-
nexion, on any account or occasion, circulate letters,
call meetings, do, or attempt to do, anything new till
it has been first appointed by the conference.” Now
this species of absolutism is an anomaly in the pre-
sent day, which must cease. Can anything worthy
of the name of liberty exist under such laws ?
True it is not enforced, but it exists, and is held
in terrorem over men’s heads. Great exception
has been taken to my statement, that the
ultimatum rested with the ministers as to
financial matters. That statement has been charac-
terised as a gross perversion of the truth. And the
quarterly meeting has been instanced as a triumphant
confutation of the statement. But it is not so, as I
understand it, and I must reiterate the statement.
The quarterly meeting, it is true, has a certain control
of the purse; for instance, it can just determine what
amount of stipend the minister shall receive, and


whether he shall hare a horse or not; but the quarterly
meeting has no power to refuse to provide a house,
and to furnish and keep it furnished, and to supply
all the wear and tear, from cracked tea-cups to bed
linen, &c. And not only so, but there are the con-
nexional funds; the quarterly meeting has no voice
over those funds; it must supply them; and no super-
intendent of a circuit has a right to pass the accounts
of the quarterly meeting if those moneys are omitted.
You have a case in point at Ballarat East; that circuit
refused at one of their quarterly meetings to pay the
children’s fund, but what has been the result ? Why,
they have shrunk from the consequences of their act,
and have either paid or agreed to pay it. They had
no option. If they persisted in their refusal they
would have to be excommunicated. So that I repeat
the ultimatum rests with the “ collective pastorate.”
If a quarterly meeting determines that it will pay
this, and leave that unpaid, the conference steps in,
and says no. You must pay these funds, or you are
no longer Methodists. Some anxiety has been felt
lest I had lost sight of lay representaion, but I have
not done that, but have been travelling in a some-
what circuitous route towards it from the outset.
Has not the conference granted it? and should not
that satisfy every reasonable man? Possibly, but that
must be determined by what the conference means by
it, but I am disposed to think that the conference, in
doing so, have done more than they intended to do, and
will seek to neutralise the boon by limiting the action
of the people’s representatives to mere finance and the
secularities of the Church, while the so-called spiritual
interests of the Church shall be dealt with by the
pastorate. Of course, this may prove to be unchari-
table surmise, and the report of the committee may
prove to us that the ministers are prepared to admit
the laymen to a full participation in all the
business of the conference. If so, I for one
shall be dumb-founded with gratitude and as-
tonishment. But, for my own part, I have
been in search of a principle of representation
that would be as little revolutionary as possible. The
veriest tyro in Methodist polity must know that the
admission of laymen pure and simple is so diametri-
cally alien to the genius of Methodism, that to sanc-
tion it would be to effect a radical revolution. We
are constantly reminded by high conferencists, that
Methodism, like another celebrated ism, “changeth


not, it only grows.” No change, but development.
I have, I repeat, been in search of a principle that
should admit representatives of the people, in a man-
ner as little opposed as possible to the genius of the
system. This, I conceive, is found in the co-pastorate
of the local preachers and leaders, and the recognition
of their right to have a voice in the legislation of the
Church. There are two principles or theories,
as I understand it, as to church government—the
one government by the people, the other
government by the spiritual officers of the
Church. This latter is the principle recognised
by the Wesleyan Church. But it has confined all the
power to one class, that of the itinerant ministers;
the other spiritual officers, local preachers and leaders,
it has most unscripturally treated as mere lay-
men. I see no mention in the New Testament of
the laity in the churches, we only meet with mem-
bers and office-bearers; there is no objection to the
term laity that I see, as it is distinctive between
office-bearers and the private members, but it is a moot
point whether the private members had any voice in
the government of the Church, although they were
evidently present at the deliberations. Acts xv., 22,
23. This, then, is my position: I recognise in the local
preachers and leaders of the Wesleyan Church, the
New Testament elder, the presbyter, the bishop of
Paul’s epistles. If they are not this, then what are
they? Men called of the Holy Ghost to preach the
Gospel, and who are entrusted with the care of
souls, surely cannot with any consistency be regarded
as laymen. Or are they an original creation
of officers, formed upon no type. A new genius,
having no species, an unique, an original kind. Men
called into existence to do certain specific work, but
freed from all the ordinary responsibility attaching to
such work, and debarred from the exercise of all the
rights and privileges pertaining to the office, the work
of which they perform. Such is the logic of their po-
sition; but it is untenable, it is a fallacy, and must be
abandoned, and their true position acknowledged, and
all the rights, immunities, and privileges of that posi-
tion accorded to them. Allow me, Mr Editor, to ex-
press my warm acknowledgments for the liberal space
you have favored me with. —Yours, &c,, Wesleyan.


APPENDIX.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE.
The Recommendations of the Conference Committee,
as submitted to the various District Meetings, on
Lay Representation in Conference:—
The Conference of 1573 adopted a resolution in
which it declared, “ That this Conference approves of
the principle of Lay Representation, to an extent to
be hereafter determined.”
A Committee was appointed “to prepare a series of
recommendations on the subject of Lay Represent-
ation in our Conferences, to be laid before the District
Meetings and Annual Conferences.”
The Committee have given long and anxious con-
sideration to the important subject committed to
them, and have adopted the following reccommend-
ations:—
I. ANNUAL CONFERENCE.
1. That the Annual Conference be composed of the
ministers within its boundaries, with one layman for
each circuit, who shall be elected by ballot at the
quarterly meeting next preceding the time of holding
the Conference. The laymen eligible for election
must be members of four years’ full standing, and at
the time of election must be members in the circuits
for which they are elected representatives.
2. One layman shall be elected by the committee of
each institution of the connexion to which a minister
is set apart by the Conference.
3. There shall be reserved to be dealt with by the
ministers alone:—
(1.) The election of President and Secretary.
'(2.) All matters comprised in the first thirteen
questions of the Conference of 1873.
(3.) All appeals affecting the status of our mem-
bers.
(4.) The Stationing of the Ministers, and the
election of Chairmen of Districts.


The Stationing Committee, composed of the Chair-
men of Districts, and one minister from each district
elected as representative, shall prepare a Station Sheet
during the first days of the Conference, which shall
be read on the first day of the assembling of the
mixed Conference, for remark and information. This
sheet shall then be revised by the Stationing Com-
mittee and shall be read by the President on the last
day of the Conference as the Appointments for the
ensuing year.
4. During the first four days of the session of the
Annual Conference, the ministers shall meet for the
consideration of the questions reserved for the min-
isters alone.
5. In the election of ministers and laymen as repre-
sentatives to the General Conference, all the members
of the Annual Conference shall be entitled to vote.
11. GENERAL CONFERENCE.
1. The General Conference shall consist of the
ministers, as provided in the Constitution (see page
128, Minutes 1873), with a number of laymen, equal
to the number of ministers chosen as representatives,
who shall be elected by ballot at the Annual Con-
ferences, together with one Lay Treasurer of each
Fund, viz.:—Children’s, Education, Supernumerary,
and Mission Funds, who shall attend ex officio. Lay
representatives must be members of the Annual Con-
ferences by which they are elected.
2. The General Conference shall have no power—
(l.) To revoke, alter, or change any of our doc-
trines as at present established, nor to
establish any new rule or doctrine con-
trary thereto.
(2.) They shall not revoke the “ General Rules of
our Societies.”
(3.) They shall not make such change in our dis-
cipline as to do away with the itinerancy
of our ministry.
(4.) They shall not do away with the privilege of
trial and appeal of our members or min-
isters, as at present existing in our Rules.
(5.) They shall not do away with the right of
the ministers to admit or expel members,
subject to such guards and regulations as
our rules now provide.
(6.) They shall not do away with the right of the
ministers to receive and ordain ministers
in our Church,


(1.) 'They shall have no power to bring into oper-
ation any new law regarding the stationing
of the ministers, or the functions of the
pastoral office, without the concurrence of
a majority of Votes in two-thirds of the
Annual Conferences.
111. The Committee do not recommend the voting
by orders.
*QUESTIONS.
I. Who are now admitted as Ministers into fuii
Connexion with the Conference ?
it What pteachers remain on trial ?
111. What preachers are now received on trial ?
IV. What students are to remain in our Theolo-
gical institutions ?
V. What candidates are now received for training
in our Theological institutions ?
VI. Who are now admitted as Native Missionaries ?
VII. Who remain on trial as Native Assistant Mis-
sionaries ?
VIII. Who are received on trial as Native Assistant
Missionaries ?
IX. What Ministers become supernumeraries this
year ?
X. What supernumeraries are again employed in
the regular work ?
XI. What Ministers have died since the last Con-
ference ?
XII. Are there any objections to any of our Min-
isters or preachers on trial ?
XIII. What persons, who were in full connexion
with the Conference, have now ceased to be recognised
among us j
REMARKS.
As great interest is felt among the Methodist people
to see the recommendations of the conference commit-
tee, it has been thought wise to publish them in con-
nection with these letters.
There appears to be an inexcusable oversight in this


document. There is no attempt whatever made to
set forth the principles upon which laymen are ad-
mitted. We are left in the dark as to whether the
conference recognises the right of the private members
of the Church to have a voice in its legislation; such
a radical change would be startling. If not, in what
sense are the members of the quarterly meetings to
become members of conference. If as spiritual of-
ficers, of what class or order ? What is their status 2
This, it is conceived, is so important a matter that we
are entitled to ask for some expression of opinion
upon it. It is a most characteristic document: its
parentage is written upon its every lineament. Taken
as a whole, it recommends little more than that the
connexional committees be transferred to conference,
as it proposes that the ministers shall meet for four
days to settle and determine all matters pertaining to
the pastorate, after which the laity shall assemble
to deal with the secularities of the Church.
Looked at more in detail, the recommendations are
both instructive and suggestive. It has been a com-
plaint of. all time—how far true I shall not attempt
to determine —against the Methodist Conference, that
when, under the force of circumstances, it has had to
make concessions to popular demands, it has imme-
diately set about framing regulations which reduce to
zero, all that had been conceded. The document
under review appears to be an illustration of this.
Note the first recommendation: —That the annual con-
ference be composed of the ministers within its boun-
daries, with one layman for each circuit. That will
give for the Ballarat circuits two laymen for five minis-
ters. Can anything be more suggestive of the spirit
of the committee ?
The next recommendation, is instructive—“ One
layman shall be elected by the committee of
each institution of the connexion to which
a minister is set apart by the conference.” These
committees are mixed, composed of laymen and minis-
ters. Here we have something akin to the nominee
principle. The ministers have to elect the laymen.
And even in' the quarterly meeting, there is an
ominous silence as to where the nomination lies.
Then follows the essence of the recommendations, and
we ask are they, when calmly considered, anything
more or less than an attempt to fence round and
guard with a sacred jealousy the rights and privileges
of the pastorate ? In theory our ministers repudiate


the idea that their separation to the work and office of
the ministry, invests them with any sacerdotal
rights, or sacramental virtue, but in fact do they not
in these very recommendations make the highest
priestly claims ? If it is not from some right or dig-
nity or virtue pertaining to the office of the minister,
I ask upon what principle do they exclude the laity
(so called) from a voice in the election of the presi-
dent and secretary of the conference, and the other
matters embraced in these thirteen questions ? Dis-
carding the sacramental efficacy of their office as con-
ferring any special gift or grace, whereby they are
enabled supernaturally to perceive the special fitness
of men and things, I ask are not the intelligent mem-
bers of; our quarterly meetings as capable as the
ministers are of forming a judgment as to who should
fill the high offices of the church ?
In the Methodist Church the call of the people is
recognised as essential to the validity of the ministry.
Such being the case, where is the consistency of ex-
cluding the laity from a voice in the consideration of
the matters embraced in these tabooed questions? If
they have a voice in their call, why may they not have
a voice in their oversight and subsequent conduct? I
confess it is an anomaly to me. The great fear —the
iete noir of the ministers—l believe is, that the laity
should be allowed to sit in judgment on ministerial
character. On the principles which govern ordinary
life, this appears to be an absurd objection. Who
should have a right to enquire into character but
those who are served? Assuredly a minister’s character
Is of more interest to the people at large than to the
class to which he belongs. To-day we believe there is
no body in the world more jealous of the purity of
its members than the Wesleyan ministers. But it is
a universal law that every organisation deteriorates
from within; that the process is at work in many
directions in Methodism is very evident (see Mr Allen,
M.P.’s, pamphlet); while it is quite within the range
of possibility that even the Methodist ministry may
become so corrupt as to be regardless of its own cha-
racter. Should not the people, then, have a voice into
the enquiry of the ministers’ character, for their mutual
preservation? Let me ask, further, what is there of
dignity, of sanctity, or of “ divinity that doth hedge
about” a Wesleyan more than any other Protestant
minister, that he should object to allow his
character to be investigated by his people? I


have never heard any advanced but the heathen
one—that they have a right to be judged by
their peers. Summing up the recommendations, we
have this result: —In the annual conferences, all mat*
ters apart from the mere finance and secularities of
the Church are sacredly reserved to be dealt with by
the ministers; while in the general conference nothing
has to be interfered with, not even the antiquated
“Rules of Society,” which one-half of our members
have never seen, and which nobody professes to regard
to-day. So that henceforth and for ever, whatever
the exigencies of circumstances, or the changes which
“ the courses of the suns” may demand, Methodism is
to remain what it is. That which has heretofore re-
joiced in its elasticity and power of adaptation, is to
be stereotyped and crystalised, and to every appeal
to move onward and upward it can give
but one reply, Non possumus! What senility!
Or, put into another form, the recommendations may
be expressed thus:—“You gentlemen are anxious to
come to conference, and it is very evident you will
not rest until you do. Well, come then, but take
heed you are not to touch, to handle, or to inter-
meddle in any way with any of its laws, regulations,
or rules, with a view to their change.” It is, how-
ever, vain to make any further remarks on such a
production; it demands nothing but utter rejection
by the laity of Methodism. Let me say in conclusion
what I regard as the outcome of this movement.
First, it will necessitate separation from the Home
Conference, thereby following the example of Canada,
and leaving the Australian Church at liberty to
organise itself in accordance with the spirit of its
institutions, and the sympathies of its people. This
re-organisation must include the co-ordinate jurisdic-
tion of the laity—or better, the co-pastors—in all
matters, and must free the connexional property
from being in the sole control of the ministers
as at present. The custodians of that property
must fairly represent the people, whose wealth
has created it. And while preserving the fun-
damental principles of the Church as expressed in
the connexional principle, and the itinerancy of the
ministers, the whole of our connexional funds and
domestic arrangements need re-modelling upon the
basis of things as existing at the present
day. The Whole complexion of society has changed
since the existing arrangements between the Church


and the ministers were made, and we feel confident
that such modifications can be effected as will accord
with the ideas of the age, and such as will prove more
agreeable to both ministers and people. I frankly
acknowledge that I have no sympathy with the level-
ling : ideas entertained in some quarters. While de-
manding the rights and liberties of the officers of our
Church, I have no desire to drag the ministers—the
men we set apart to do our highest work—into the
mire. I would crown them with every lawful dignity,
pay them liberally, surround them with ail the sur-
roundings of educated gentlemen, free them from all
anxiety as to the things of this world by making such
provision for j their wives and families as would enable
them, free from all the ordinary perplexities of life, to
devote themselves fully to the work of the ministry.
Since writing these letters, the reports of the
English Conference are to hand. Their perusal and
fuller research and thought upon the subject have
tended to confirm the writer in the belief that he has
suggested the “more excellent way,” the way which
is most scriptural and most consonant with the genius
of Wesleyan polity, for the representation of the
people in conference. His views as to the bishop,
elder, and pastor being synonyms in the New Testa-
ment, are singularly confirmed by the ex-president,
Rev. Luke Wiseman, in his admirable ordination ad-
dress, delivered at Newcastle. It is founded on 1 Tim.
iv., 4, he says. “We affirm that the primacy or
prelacy of a bishop may, under certain circumstances,
be a "convenient arrangement, but that such bishop
cannot claim to be of a different order from his
brethren. We affirm that bishop and presbyter are of one
and the same order.” Enforcing the charge—“ Neglect
not the gift that is in thee,” he says —“ It is not the
same gift of office as is bestowed, for example, upon
the local preachers, or upon class leaders in the
Methodist churches. . . Our local preachers re-
ceive a true and valid appointment to preach the
word. Our class leaders receive a true and valid ap-
pointment to watch over souls, and you cannot com-
mit a more serious practical blunder than to speak
and act as if yours were the only gift or office with
which men are endowed by the Holy Spirit. An excel-
lent local preacher once said in my hearing, ‘I believe
lam as truly called as the president of the confer-
ence is to preach the Gospel, but I am not called to


the work and office of the ministry.’ The affirmation
here is as true as the distinction is just. It is an
evil in the Church when all spiritual functions and
offices are absorbed by the clergy; the tendency is
bad spiritually, bad intellectually, bad financially, bad
socially.” Bearing so directly as this does on the
argument of the letters (the only pity is that the ob-
servations were not more extended,) it demands a
few remarks. It will be seen that the validity of the
appointment to preach and to watch over souls is here
fully acknowledged; and that these men are endowed
by the Holy Spirit with gifts for the discharge of
these duties is recognised. But there is a distinction
implied, which has point given to it by the quotation
from a local preacher, “ But I am not called to the
work and office of the ministry.” What does this
mean? A man called by the Holy Ghost to preach,
and yet not called to the office and work of the
ministry? That is an anomaly surely. If it is
meant that, according to Methodist usage, he is not
called to devote all his time to the work of preaching,
nor yet called to officiate in the distribution of the
bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper nor at the rite
of baptism, in this sense we see no objection to the
statement, and as an arrangement for the orderly
performance of these duties, there can be no
desire to see it altered; but if it is meant
that, according to New Testament prescription and
usage these men are invalidated from aught that
pertains to the work and office of the ministry,
then we join issue with the statement and demand
the scriptural proof. The men who were in the New
Testament —and there were several of them in every
congregation—appointed to watch over souls were the
elders. To these elders was entrusted the govern-
ment of the churches, the ordination of bishops, and
the instruction of the people in word and doctrine. I
humbly submit that these letters prove that the
leaders and local preachers of the Methodist Church
are the officers which in the New Testament are desig-
nated elders, and my claim is that they should be
clothed upon with all the immunities, rights, and
privileges pertaining to their office, and should be
at once invested with co-ordinate power with the
itinerant ministers in all matters 'pertaining to the
Church.
Printed at The Ballarat Star Office, Sturt Street,




