

T H B
ORIGIN OR THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
THREE LECTURES
OtHE ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
CO
CO
04
MELBOURNE:
THOMAS E. VERGA, 154 LITTLE COLLINS STREET.
< 1893.




T H B
of tfyc Cfyurcf? of (£nglat]6
AAt'/A -/Ae €>^-/Ae
i-ty _
MELBOURNE:
THOMAS E. VERGA, 154 LITTLE COLLINS STREET.




THE!
(Drigin of Cfyutxl] of (£nglat}6
THREE LECTURES
THE ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
MELBOURNE:
THOMAS E. VERGA, 154 LITTLE COLLINS STREET.




fVefkde
If the subjects discussed in these Lectures were of only passing
interest, I should not think of publishing them in any permanent
form. But as long as an intelligent interest is taken in early eccle-
siastical history, so long will men turn with pleasure and profit to the
records of that ancient Church of Britain in which, during the five
centuries of its existence, were reflected the life and the action of the
universal Church.
I have not entered into the controversy without sufficient reason.
The repeated assertion made by distinguished speakers at repre-
sentative gatherings, as to the identity of the Anglican with the ancient
British Church, left no choice between silent acquiescence or public
protest.
The limited time at my disposal in the delivery of these Lectures
compelled me to exclude much interesting matter which I had pre-
pared. I avail myself of this opportunity to insert a portion of the
omitted matter, partly by way of addition to the text, and partly by
way of notes.
Though the controversy was made to cover a good deal of ground,
and has lasted for a considerable time, it is highly creditable to pri-
vate and to public taste, that it has been conducted, on the whole,
in a manner worthy of a grave question, and of a courteous com-
munity.
The title of these Lectures, “ The Origin of the Church of Eng-
land,” is not mine. Before the delivery of the first Lecture the title
had become so stereotyped in the public press, that any change would
lead to confusion.
* THOMAS J. CARR,
Archbishop of Melbourne.
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Melbourne,
November 14th, 1893.




M5?55/a 7?7
(Tbc #rigtn 0! the Cbuxtb of dnglaiitr.
LECTURE I.
I wish to say at the outset, that I have no desire for controversy,
I have never encouraged it; I have never willingly engaged in it.
Unless conducted with studied moderation of tone, and a delicate
regard for the feelings of others, it seldom succeeds in changing
the opinion of either of the disputants, and it often leaves behind
unpleasant and embittered feelings.
But there are times when Catholics must raise their voices against
error and misrepresentation; as otherwise by their silence they may
seem to acquiesce in statements contrary to the witness of history,
to the voice of tradition, and to the principles of their faith.
Cardinal Manning, of revered memory, in one of his later writings,
quotes with approval the statement of De Maistre that history
for 300 years has been in conspiracy against the Catholic Church:
“ The Protestant historians of Germany, France, England, and
Scotland,” he says, “ have written a mass of falsified history and
falsified biography, which reigned supreme and unchallenged until
our day. A reaction at last set in. In Germany, Schlegel, Hur-
ter, Ranke, Dbllinger, and many more; in France —Montalembert,
Ozanam, De Broglie, Rohrbacher, and others ; in England —Lin-
gard, Tytler, Hallam, and Friedmann, have broken the spell of
historical falsehood. Maitland, in his book on the Dark Ages,
was the first to expose the persistent unfaithfulness of anti-
Catholic historians, who handed on, with continual embellishment
and exaggeration, a multitude of traditional fables.”
And before Cardinal Manning, Cardinal Newman had drawn
out, in picturesque form, the immemorial and nnauthenticated
tradition which is the sustaining power, and the fable which is
the basis, and the prejudice which is the life, and the ignorance
which is the protection, and the assumed principles which are the
ground of the Protestant view regarding the Catholic Church.
{Present Position of Catholics in England.)


I have quoted the authority of the two Cardinals because, while
their candour stands unimpeached, they themselves once shared
in the prejudice of which they speak, they had an opportu-
nity of looking at Catholic questions from without and from
within; they sounded all the depths and shoals of the historical
and theological controversy.
Their writings may also serve as models of controversial litera-
ture, so clear are they, so temperate, so earnest, so considerate,
and so broadminded. I shall try to imitate these estimable quali-
ties, and to avoid uttering a word which could give reasonable
offence to anyone differing from me.
ORIGIN OF THE CONTROVERSY.
It may be useful to recall to your notice the origin, meaning,
and object of the present controversy. At the meeting of the
Diocesan Festival of the Anglican Church, recently held in the
Town Hall, the Bishop of Melbourne was reported to have
said: “ They belonged to the ancient Church of Christ which, as
long ago as a.d. 314, sent three Bishops from England to France
to represent them at the Council to be held there.”
I felt it to be a duty to protest against the assumption contained
in that statement. As I did not wish to impugn either the intelli-
gence or the sincerity of the distinguished speaker, I facetiously
characterized it as an historical joke. Three courses were open to
those to whom that protest was addressed. They might undertake
to meet it by historical argument, or they might substitute ancient
abuse for argument, or they might allow judgment to go by
default. Some entered on the first course, some sought refuge in
the second, and those most concerned seem content to abide by
the third. Such is the origin of the controversy. Now as to
its nature and object.
NATURE AND OBJECTS OF THE CONTROVERSY.
My protest was directed against the assumption that the present
Anglican Church belonged to, or could trace continuity from
6
The Origin of the Church of England.


or connection with, the ancient British Chnrch 1 which sent three
Bishops to the Council of Arles in a.d. 314. This question has
a political as well as a historical and a theological aspect. But
with the political aspect of the question I am not now concerned.
It concerns those who are interested in the threatened Disestab-
lishment and Disendowment of the Church in England and Wales.
To meet that threat an effort has been made to show that the
present Anglican Church is the moral and legal representative of
the ancient British Church, and therefore entitled to enjoy the
patrimony which has come down from the piety of British, Saxon,
Norman and Plantagenet Catholic donors.
The feeling amongst English Catholics is, I believe, not one of
hostility to the Establishment. They take no part in the cry for
its destruction. Its revenues are not likely, if taken away, to be
applied to their original purposes; and meantime, as Cardinal
Newman says, the Establishment may act as <£ a serviceable break-
water against more fundamental error.”
But we have to deal only with the theological and historical
aspects of the question. And even with the theological aspect we
are not just now so much concerned. Of late years Anglican
writers have set up a new claim to Apostolical Succession. By
i By the British Church is understood the Church planted in Britain during
the time of the Roman occupation of the island. It may not be amiss to recall
a few elementary facts of British history which will serve to explain references
often occurring in the course of this lecture.
When Cfesar landed in Britain he found the whole island occupied by an
ancient Celtic people, of the Aryan stock, called Britons. The Roman armies
were withdrawn from Britain about the beginning of the fifth century. Then
the native princes and tribes waged war, one against the other, till Yortigern, a
native prince, invited the aid of the Saxons to repel the attacks of the Piets
and Scots who inhabited the northern part of the island. This was about the
middle of the fifth century. The conquest of Britain by the Jutes, Angles, and
Saxons, was practically completed, after a stubborn and long continued resist-
ance on the part of the native tribes, after the victory of Aethelfrith under the
walls of Deva, in the beginning of the seventh century. St Augustine and his
companions came to England from Rome in A.D. 597, and henceforth, instead
of speaking of the people or church of Britain, we speak of the Anglo-Saxon
church and people, or the English church and people.
7
The Origin of the Church of England.


Apostolical Succession is meant the legitimate and unbroken
succession of the Church from its Apostolic founders. Apostoli-
city is one of the marks or notes of the true Church. In the
Hicene Creed which is sung or said in the Mass each day, we pro-
fess our faith in the one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church.
As I wish to quote non-Catholic sources, I may mention that
the Apostolical Succession claimed by Anglicans is thus referred
to in The Tracts for the Times (Ho. 1., p. 2) : “ The Lord Jesus
Christ gave His Spirit to His Apostles; they in their turn laid
hands upon those who should succeed them ; and these again on
others ; and so the sacred gift has been handed down to our pre-
sent Bishops, who have appointed us their assistants, and in some
respects their representatives.”
This, in truth, is but an echo of what Tertullian said in the
second century: “ Let them (the heretics} exhibit the succession
of their Bishops, so that the first of them may appear to have
been ordained by an Apostle, or by an apostolic man who was in
communion with the Apostles.” 2
St. Augustine, in the fifth century, says: “I am kept in the
Church by the succession of prelates from St. Peter, to whom the
Lord committed the care of His sheep, down to the present
Bishop.” And, addressing the Donatists of his day, he entreats
them thus: “ Come to us, brethren, if you wish to be grafted in
the vine. We are afflicted in beholding you lying cut off from it.
Count over the Bishops from the very See of Peter, and mark in
the list of Fathers how one succeeded the other. This is the rock
against which the proud gates of hell do not prevail.” 3
It is well known that it was the consideration of the contest
between St. Augustine, representing the Catholic Church, and the
Donatists, representing heresy, that first shook the faith of Dr.
Newman in the Anglican Church.
This claim to Antiquity is intended to render the Anglican
Church independent of its alleged descent from the Church of
Rome. It is intended to get rid of the dreary difficulties con-
nected with the consecration of Parker, and the ecclesiastical
events which accompanied and followed the so-called Reforma-
z Lib, de Prcescrip., c. 32. 3 Psal. Contra part. Donati.
8
The Origin of the Church of England.


tion. It is intended, in a word, to be a short cut to Apostolical
Succession, and a legitimate ministry, in the Church of England.
To establish this claim two things are required ; one, to show
a direct and an unbroken connection with the ancient British
Church; the other, to find an Eastern, instead of a Western, or
Roman origin for British Christianity.
To prove that Christianity came to Britain from the East has
been the ambition of Anglican controversialists, little skilled in
ecclesiastical history. In support of this contention, the favourite
theory has been that St. Paul preached the Hospel in Britain, and
therefore British Christianity can fairly claim an Eastern origin.
But even admitting this Eastern origin of the ancient Church of
Britain, and consequent independence of the Roman connection, it
is still necessary, in order to support the new claim to Apostolical
Succession, to prove a direct and an unbroken descent from the
ancient British Church. These are questions obviously more of a
historical than of a theological character. Hence, Anglicans
appeal to history on both points, and to history, therefore, we
shall go.
APPEAL TO HISTORY.
A clergyman, who has taken part in the discussion, writes :
“We are sorry the facts annoy the Archbishop, but we have
noticed the same antipathy to the appeal to history in other digni-
taries of the Holy Roman Church.”
These words were not wisely chosen. The facts were not in
question. It was the assumption or inference from the facts that
provoked amusement, and not annoyance.
The fact was: Three Bishops were sent from Britain to the
Council of Arles in 314 ; the assumption —therefore the present
Anglican Church belongs to, or is in historic connection with, the
ancient British Church. I shall show presently that such as-
sumption is historically as well as logically unsound.
But before doing so I may assure the writer that dignitaries of
the Holy Roman Church—as he is pleased to call it —have no
antipathy to an appeal to history. It is true that the claims of
the Catholic Church have something more than history to support
9
The Origin of the Church of England.


them, but in vindicating 1 these claims history is a powerfnl auxi-
liary. It is for this reason that the present wise and far-seeing
Ruler of the Catholic Church, Pope Leo XIII., in throwing open
the priceless treasures of the Vatican library more fully and un-
reservedly, to men of every nation and creed, issued a splendid
encyclical letter earnestly advocating the deep study of history,
and pointing out how much the Catholic Church has to gain by
an impartial investigation of the records of the past.
Chillingworth, also, in his day, spoke sneeringly of the appeal
to history as being against the Catholic Church, and this is Car-
dinal Newman’s reply: “ Let them consider that if they can criticise
history, the facts of history can certainly retort upon them . . .
And this one thing at least is certain: whatever history teaches,
whatever it omits, whatever it exaggerates or extenuates, what-
ever it says and unsays, at least the Christianity of history is not
Protestantism. If ever there were a safe truth it is this. And
Protestantism has ever felt it so. I do not mean that every
writer on the Protestant side has felt it; for it w'as the fashion at
first, at least as a rhetorical argument against Rome, to appeal
to past ages, or to some of them ; but Protestantism, as a whole,
feels it, and has felt it. This is shewn in the determination
already referred to, of dispensing with historical Christianity
altogether, and of forming a Christianity from the Bible alone.
Men would never put it aside, unless they despaired of it. To be
deep in history is to cease to be a Protestant.”
“I have elsewhere observed” he continues, “on this circum-
stance : ‘So much must the Protestant grant, that if such a system
of doctrine as he would now introduce ever existed in early times,
it has been clean swept away as if by a deluge, suddenly, silently,
and without memorial; by a deluge coming in a night, and
utterly soaking, rotting, heaving up, and hurrying off every
vestige of what it found in the Church, before cock-crowing: so
that ‘ when they rose in the morning,’ her true seed ‘ were all
dead corpses ’ —nay, dead and buried —and without grave-stone.
‘ The waters went over them; there was not one of them left;
they sunk like lead in the mighty waters.’
10
The Origin of the Church of England.


“ Strange antitype, indeed, to the early fortunes of Israel!—then
the enemy was drowned, and ‘lsrael saw them dead upon the sea-
shore.’ But now, it would seem, water proceeded as a flood ‘ out
of the serpent’s mouth,’ and covered all the witnesses, so that not
even their dead bodies ‘ lay in the streets of the great city.’ Let
him take which of his doctrines he will, his peculiar view of self-
righteousness, of formality, of superstition; his notion of faith,
or of spirituality in religious worship ; his denial of the virtue of
the sacraments, or of the ministerial commission, or of the visible
Church; or his doctrine of the divine efficacy of the Scriptures
as the one appointed instrument of religious teaching; and let
him consider how far Antiquity, as it has come down to ns, will
countenance him in it, No; he must allow that the alleged
deluge has done its work; yes, and has in turn disappeared itself
it has been swallowed up by the earth, mercilessly, as itself was
merciless.” 4
The same writer who refers to the dislike of the dignitaries of
the Holy Roman Church to the appeal to history, also refers, not
very becomingly, as I think, to “ the romances issued as history
by the controversialists of the Italian mission in England.
Dr. Lingard’s “ History and Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon
Church” is a standard Catholic authority on the questions in
dispute in this controversy, and very few, I think, will approve of
the taste of the writer referred to, in designating Dr. Lingard’s
classic work as “ a romance issued by one of the. controversialists
of the Italian mission in England.”
If another writer who has taken a leading part in the discus-
sion had read Dr. Lingard’s work, he would not have exposed
himself to the merited literary castigation which he has received,
for his unhistorical contention that St. Paul preached the Gospel
in Britain. And this brings us to the first main point of our
enquiry, namely,
THE ORIGIN OF THE CHRISTIANITY OF BRITAIN.
If we can show that St. Paul did not preach the Gospel in
Britain, and that the claims put forward on behalf of St. Peter,
4 Development of Christian Doctrine, pp. 6-9.
11
The Origin of the Church of England.


St. James, St. John, Joseph of Arimathea, and other representa-
tives of the Eastern Church, are simply supported by no sufficient
historical authority, the Western, or Roman, origan of the ancient
Church of Britain will be readily conceded.
Dr. Lingard, in his History and Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon
Church, replying to Dr. Burgess, Bishop of St. David’s (Indepen-
dence of the Ancient British Church), sets forth all the arguments of
any weight which have been advanced in support of the Pauline
or Apostolic origin of the British Church.
It is unnecessary to repeat the arguments adduced by Dr. Bur-
gess and the advocates of this theory. They have been recently
put before the public in letters to the daily papers. After setting
aside those which urge the conversion of Britain by any of the
Apostles, Dr. Lingard thus concludes his refutation of the Pauline
theory: “ The reader is now in possession of the ‘ indisputable
proofs ’ on which Dr. Burgess built his Pauline Church in Britain.
I shall only remark, that not one of them all, has in reality any
connection with the question. Those which mention St. Paul take
no notice of Britain; that which mentions Britain takes no notice
of St. Paul. But,
Yelut segri somnia, vanaa
Finguntur species.
“ I shall not,” he adds, “ trespass on the patience of the reader
by directing his attention to two other imaginary facts—the
missionary labours of Aristobulus in Britain, and the foundation
of the church of Glastonbury by Joseph of Arimathea. No one
can examine the authorities on which these statements are founded
without pronouncing them at once collections of fables.”
Although Dr. Lingard may have been but one of the “ contro-
versialists of the Italian mission in England,” still it should not
be forgotten that his History is widely read, and his impartiality
recognised by Protestant and Catholic alike.
Milman s asserts that “ the apostolic establishment by St. Paul
has not the slightest historical ground ; and considering the
state of the island, —a state of fierce and perpetual war between
the advancing Roman Conquerors and the savage natives, may
S Latin Christianity, vol, 11., p. 64.
12
The Origin of the Church of England.


be dismissed as nearly impossible.” And the same author in
his History of Christianity, 6 writes: “ The visit of St. Paul to
Britain, in my opinion, is a fiction of religious national vanity.
Canon Bright 7 terms the conversion of Britain by St. Paul
“ a pious fancy.” “In short,” he adds, “we may pass by all at-
tempts at discovery of apostolic foundation for the British Church.
The theories which modern enthusiasm has created are as shadowy
as the Greek fiction about Aristobulus ordained by St. Paul as
a bishop of Britain” (p. 3).
Haddan and Stubbs 8 say, that “there is-no authority what-
ever for his (St. Paul’s) personal preaching in this island.” It
is “a gratuitous assumption.” 9 Haddan 10 avers he will not
delay to argue the question of St. Paul’s preaching in Britain,
because “ the story must first have feet to stand on, before it
can be needful to waste time in knocking it down.” He refers to
the alleged preaching of Joseph of Arimathea in Britain as “ a
pleasant dream,” which Canon Bright improves on by describing
it as “ a beautiful mediaeval romance.”
Herzog 11 declares “ that the founding of the Christian Church
among the Britons by Joseph of Arimathea, St. Paul, or other
of the Apostles, must be given up as untrustworthy.”
Warren 12 says, “It is hardly possible to pass over in silence the
theory of the Eastern origin of the Celtic Church, which was once
much in vogue, but which is now generally abandoned as untenable.
This theory has, for obvious and polemical reasons, been maintained
by all Protestant, and by some Anglican writers, while it has
been as uniformly repudiated by writers of the Church of Rome.”
Haddan and Stubbs *3 refer to the “ groundlessness of the so
often alleged ‘ Orientalism ’ of the early British Church: ” and
6 Yol, 1., p. 458.
7 Chapters on Early English Church History, p. I.
8 Councils , &c., p. 23. 9 Preface, p. xix.
io The Churches of the British Confession.
Encyclop. Theol., vol. 1., p. 725.
12 The Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church, p. 46.
13 Councils, &c., Preface, p. xix.
13
The Origin of the Church of England.


in the Remains *4 Mr. Haddan mentions “ the common but utterly
groundless idea of a specially Greek origin of the British Church.”
“ The traditions of St. Joseph,” writes Pearson, “ of St. Paul, and
of Aristobulus whom St. Paul is said to have sent, are mutually
contradictory, while no one of them is supported by historical
evidence. Jerome’s language, if it is to be taken at all, shows
that in the beginning of the fifth century, the British Church was
Roman in its ritual and not oriental.” In a note he adds, “ This
is positively asserted by Eusebius j s Vita Constant, lib. iii.,c. 19 ” l 6
Mr. Pearson gives the arguments of the opponents of the theory
of an apostolical conversion, rather than his own.
Thackeray, in his Researches into the Ecclesiastical and Political
State of Britain, quoting Theodoret’s statement that “ St. Paul,
after his release at Rome, went to Spain, and thence carried the
light of the Gospel to other nations,” declares “ this is the most
decided opinion of any expressed by ancient ecclesiastical writers;
but even this does not enable us with the least degree of certainty
to claim St. Paul as the Apostle who preached the Gospel in
Britain.”
The statement of St. Clement of Rome, that St. Paul “taught
righteousness to the whole world, having come to the terma or
boundary of the West,” has been often quoted in favour of
the Pauline Conversion of Britain. Giles, in referring to it,
says, “By the West some understand the British Isles. Such
14 p. 210.
is Eusebius has been quoted for the statement that the British Isles were
visited by some of the first disciples, but it is surprising how anyone acquainted
with the Evangelical Demonstration of Eusebius would found an historical
argument on a statement so transparently rhetorical. “Eusebius, it is true,
speaks as if some of the twelve, or of the seventy, had crossed the ocean to the
isles called the British (Euseb., Bern Evang., hi. 5, p, 112); but he is here
rhetorically mixing up the work of all ancient missionaries with that of the
original disciples of Christ; and when in his History (Euseb., H. E., hi., 1),
he speaks distinctly in reliance on Origen of the mission fields of the Apostles,
he omits Britain altogether.” Canon Bright, ( Early English Church History,
pp. 1,2.)
16 Early and Middle Ages, vol 1., p. 70.
14
The Origin of the Church of England.


an interpretation does not merit a serious answer.” *7 There is
no record, he says, of Christianity in Britain down to A.D. 120.
“ Roman soldiers who served in Britain, or merchants who came
for traffic may have converted individuals. 13
“ The tradition that St. Paul and St. Peter preached the Gospel
in the island found, at one period, general credence. It must he
looked upon with extreme suspicion, there not being the slightest
historical evidence to support it, and the probabilities highly
against it.” J 9
We have seen enough, and more than enough, to satisfy any im-
partial enquirer that the apostolic or Eastern origin of the British
Church must be given up as “groundless” and “untenable;”
or, as Mr. Hadden 2 ° puts it, that “ the ingenuity of most writers
on the subject has been wasted accordingly upon laboured argu-
ments, directed to that most impossible of historical tasks, the
creation of evidence that does not exist.’
It must be borne in mind that all the authorities we have
quoted, with the single exception of Dr. Lingard, are non-Ca-
tholic, and some of them emphatically so, and, as such, they
would if possible, “ for obvious and polemical reasons,” hold the
theory of the Eastern origin of the British Church if it were
not so “ untrustworthy.”
With such a mass of non-Catholic testimony on one side, and
nothing better than unsupported conjecture on the other, it would
be a sheer waste of time to undertake to refute in detail the
reasons advanced in support of the Pauline or Apostolic, and
therefore Eastern, origin of the British Church.
Having shown that Christianity came to Britain not from the
East through St. Paul or any of the Apostles, or any other named
in this connection, it now remains to deal with the second head
of our enquiry, namely —Was there an unbroken connection con-
tinued between the ancient British and the present Anglican
Church p
17 Vol. 1., p. 187.
18 Giles' History Ancient Britain, p. 198.
19 Cassell's Hist, of England, vol. 1., p. 17.
zo Remains, p. 215.
15
The Origin of the Church of England.


NO CONNECTION BETWEEN ANCIENT BRITISH
AND ANGLICAN CHURCHES.
If not, it is needless to say that even though Anglicans could
prove the Eastern origin of British Christianity, the proof would
avail nothing towards establishing the direct Apostolical succes-
sion to which they lay claim. Here again I shall cite non-
Catholic authorities only. And the first of these is one whose
words should be taken to heart by all Anglican controversialists.
Canon Bright, the Oxford Regius Professor, warns them not to
commit themselves to the rash assertion or assumption that the
Anglican Church has its descent from the ancient British Church.
Writing to the Church Times, 21 he says: “Clergymen who
are interested in the literary aspects of Church Defence will
do well to discourage imaginative reconstructions of our old
Church History, and especially those notions about bur rela-
tion to British Christianity, which may seem to support the
anti-papal contention, bet really give advantage to a fairly in-
formed Roman arguer. The English Church did not grow out of
the British, but was founded apart from it, and without it, and
afterwards gradually assimilated and incorporated what was left
of it.”
Before quoting the next testimony which I wish to adduce —the
testimony of a great master of English history, as Canon Bright
styles him—E. A. Freeman, Regius Professor of Modern History,
Oxford, I wish to say that I am not now undertaking to prove
that the present Anglican Church is wrong, or that the Ancient
British Church was right. As far as my present contention goes
the Anglican Church may be right, and the ancient British Church
may have been in error. All lam undertaking to prove at present
is that there is no identity, no continuity, between the two.
Here then is the testimony of Professor Freeman : “ One point
which cannot be too strongly insisted on at this stage is that the
Church of England which was founded by Augustine has nothing
whatever to do with the early British Church. In after times
21 February 17th, 1888.
16
The Origin of the Church of England.


certain British dioceses submitted to English ecclesiastical rule, and
that is all. The Christianity of England did not come wholly from
any single source; and one of the sources from which it came was
found within the British islands. But that source was not a
British source. The Roman planted; the Scot watered ; but the
Briton did nothing ; he refused to do anything ; he would have
nothing to say to Augustine’s invitation to join in preaching
the Gospel to the heathen English. Theologians may dispute
over the inferences which may be drawn from the fact; but the
historical fact cannot be altered to please any man. The Church
of England is the daughter of the Church of Rome. She is so
perhaps more directly than any other Church in Europe. England
was the special conquest of the Roman Church, the first land which
looked up with reverence to the Roman Pontiff, while it owed not
even a nominal allegiance to the Roman Caesar . . . The
English folk were first called to cast aside the faith of Woden,
and to embrace the faith of Christ by men who came on that
errand from Rome herself, at the bidding of the acknowledged
father of Western Christendom.” 22
The Rev. F. C. Warren, a recognized Anglican authority on the
Liturgy of the Ancient British Church, thus emphatically testi-
fies : “ Roman in origin, owing her existence to the foresight of
one of the greatest of Popes, and fostered at first by Roman mis-
sionaries and bishops, the Church of England had been constantly
and loyally Roman in doctrine and practice. Her first Liturgical
Books, as well as her vestments and Church ornaments, came
direct from Rome, being sent from Gregory to Augustine. Her
archbishops from the very first, applied for and wore the pall.” 2 3
And a writer who has devoted himself to the study of church
history during the Tudor period, and whom no one will accuse of
any sympathy with Rome is equally pronounced.
“ Thus when Henry died a complete revolution had been
22 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Art England, pp. 277-8,
23 Introduction, Leaf He's Missal, p. xxiv.
24 In the estimate of the character of Henry YIII., unequivocally given
in the course of this controversy, we have a significant proof of the rapid
rate at which High and Low churchmen alike are travelling. But, like those
17
The Origin of the Church of England.


effected in the history of the Church. Instead of the Church in
England, it had become, in good truth, the Church of England ;
instead, that is, of an integral part of that great Western province
of Christendom to which it owed its first conversion, and with
which it had been one ever since—for nearly a thousand years—
it had become for the first time in its history, a separate Christian
community, of which little could be afiirmed but that, for the time
being at any rate, it agreed with no other, that it retained an
anomalous and decapitated form of Catholicism, and that, in prac-
tice, if not in theory too, it owed its doctrine, as well as what-
ever of discipline it retained, to its lay supreme head.” 2 s
“ The Englishman,” writes Dr. Short, Bishop of St. Asaph,
“ who derives his blood from Saxon veins will be ungrateful if he
be not ready to confess the debt which Christian Europe owes to
Rome; and to confess that whenever she shall cast off these in-
novations of men which now cause a separation between us, we
shall gladly pay her such honours as are due to the country which
was instrumental in bringing us within the pale of the Universal
Church of Jesus Christ.” 26 And, further on, Dr. Short admits
that “ the existence of the Church of England, as a distinct body,
who journey by a quick train, they seem to think that contiguous stationary
objects and not they themselves have been moving. Henry is now a
tyrant and a reprobate—a wicked instrument used by God to reform the
Church, if not to found a new religion. Passing by the utterly untenable
theory that God ever employs such an instrument for such a purpose, we may
contrast this repudiation with the official language of the pillars of the English
Reformation, who exhausted the vocabulary of praise to find meet eulogy of a
monarch so virtuous. Here is the glowing picture of that saintly sovereign
exhibited for the people’s edification on the Sundays. In the third of the
Homilies appointed by law to be read in the Churches we find :—“ Honour be
to God who did put light in the heart of his true and faithful minister of
most famous memory, King Henry the Eighth, and give him the knowledge of
his word, and an earnest affection to seek His glory, and to put away all such
superstitions and pharisaical sects by Antichrist invented and set up, against
the true word of God and glory of His most blessed name, as He gave the like
spirit to the most noble and famous princes, Josaphat, Josias and Bzechias.”
25 Child, Church and State under the Tudors, pp. 264-5.
26 History of the Church of England to the Revolution, 1688, p. 8.
18
The Origin of the Church of England.


and her final separation from Rome, may be dated from the
period of the (Henry’s) divorce.”
To the foregoing I may add the testimony of another historian
who, like Professor Freeman, is looked on in England as a standard
anthority. In his History of the English People, J. R. Green
says; “ The Church of England as we know it to-day is
the work, so far as its outward form is concerned, of a Greek
Monk, Theodore of Tarsus, whom Rome in 668 despatched after
her victory at Whitby to secure England to her sway, as Arch-
bishop of Canterbury . . . When Theodore came to organise
the Church of England the very memory of the older Christian
Church which existed in Roman Britain had passed away.” 2 7
And Wilkins in the Preface to his great work, Concilia Magnce
Britannioe et Hibernire, passes a glowing eulogy on St. Augustine
for his labours in re-christianising Britain.
Referring to the same period, Gardiner, whose Student's
History of England is read most extensively, and whose works like
those of Freeman and Green, are amongst those prescribed or
recommended by the Melbourne University, as well as by the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, says: “ Wilfrid triumphed
and the English Church was in all outward matters regulated
in conformity with that of Rome.” 28
In Herzog’s Encyclopoedia of Theology ( Article , Church of Eng-
land) the writer, though he impartially states that many Angli-
cans advance a claim to antiquity for their church, thus expresses
his own opinion : “ Its history begins with the reign of Henry
VIII., when breaking with the Pope, he was declared head of
the Church in his dominions.”
The last authority I shall adduce to show that there could be
absolutely no connection between the present Anglican and the
ancient British Church, is Ranke, whose history I find is recom-
mended by the University of Cambridge, and whose Protestantism
is undoubted.
z? Yol. L, pp. 57-8.
28 p. 50.
19
The Origin of the Church of England.


“ On the other hand,” he writes, “ British Christian kings made
common canse with the heathen Angles, and w r asted with fire and
sword the provinces that had been converted by Rome. Had not,
in the vicissitudes of internal war, the native church organisation
of the North won influence over the Anglo-Saxons, heathenism
would never have been conquered; it would have always found
support among the Britons. When this, however, had once taken
place, the whole Anglo-Saxon name attached itself to the Roman
Ritual. Amongst the motives for this change those which corre-
sponded to the materialistic superstition of the time may have
been most influential. Yet there were other motives, also, which
touched the very essence of the matter. Men wished to belong to
the great church communion which then, in still unbroken free-
dom, comprehended the most distant nations. ‘ Omnem orbem,
quocunque ecclesia Christi diffusa est per diversas nationes
et linguas uno temporis ordine.’ 2 9 They preferred the bishops
whom the King appointed (with the authorisation of the Roman
See) to those over whom the abbot of the great monastery on
the Island of lona exercised a kind of supremacy. Here there
was no question of any agreement between the German king and
the bishops of the land, as under the Merovingians in Gaul; they
even avoided restoring the bishops’ sees which had flourished in
the old Roman times in Britain.” 3°
In the face of such testimony founded on the plain and
indisputable facts of history, it is worse than useless for Angli-
cans to claim direct succession from, or continuity with, the
British Church. It is only the pressing exigencies of controversy,
and the dislike to acknowledge that if the Anglican Church has
any claim to Apostolical succession, that claim must be derived
from the Roman Catholic Church, that Anglican controversialists
cling to a theory demonstrated to be unsound by their own repre-
sentative men. That theory forces them into two grave errors—
first, that the Christianity of Britain came through St. Paul, or
one of the Apostles, or Joseph of Arimathea, from the East, and
2 9 Beda, Hist, Eccl, iii., 14.
30 History of England, vol. 1., pp. 12-13.
20
The Origin of the Church of England.


next that the present Anglican Chnrch can trace its succession
hack, in an unbroken line, to that ancient British Christianity.
I have, I think, satisfactorily proved (1) that British Christi-
anity did not originally come from the East, and (2) that no
matter from what source it came, it was not the parent of the
present Church of England.
In other words I have shown to-night what the ancient British
Church was not. Next Sunday evening I hope to show what the
British Church really was.
21
The Origin of the Church of England.


LECTURE 11.
In mj last lecture I undertook to prove two points : Ist, That
the ancient British Church had not an Eastern origin, through
the preaching of St. Paul, or any of the apostles, or of St. Joseph
of Arimathea; and 2nd, That no matter from what source the
Church of Britain derived its Christianity, the present Church
of England can claim no descent from, and no continuity with,
that ancient Church.
Having shown what the ancient British Church was not, I
promised in this evening’s lecture to show what it really was.
Whatever remained of it, when Augustine landed in Kent, was
absorbed in the Anglo-Saxon Church. But I maintain that as
long as it existed it was Roman in doctrine, Roman in general
discipline, and Roman in the same intimate connection by which
all the members of the mystical body are bound to the spiritual
head.
It must not be forgotten that we are dealing with the distant
past, and with a period during which contemporary records were
to a great extent utterly destroyed. But enough remains to
prove that the distinctive features of the Roman Church were
impressed on the British, as on all the continental Churches.
Canon Bright has aptly written that the British Church, during
the Roman occupation of the island, shows like a valley wrapt
in mist across which some fitful lights irregularly gleam.”
What is written of the Roman occupation applies, with but little
modification, to the interval which elapsed up till the advent of
Augustine in 597.
Whenever, therefore, the mist rises we must be prepared to
observe carefully what is passing in the valley beneath. In the
middle of the sixth century, a gleam of sunshine, falling on a
monastic house, streams through the aperture of a narrow cell,
where a young monk is engaged writing the civil and ecclesiasti-
cal annals of his country.
22
The Origin of the Church of England.


GILDAS, THE WISE.
His name is Hildas. The flush of youth is still upon him. But,
young as he is, he has already won amongst his spiritual brethren
a reputation for ripe scholarship and for stern sanctity. Ten
years before he had been asked by his brethren not to allow the
fragments of national history to perish, but then he shrank from
undertaking so laborious and so melancholy a task. How, he
accepts the responsibility, not, as he says, through a spirit of
pride, as if he were better than all the others, but with the feel-
ings of one who wept over the misery of his country, and found
consolation in suggesting the remedy of those evils. 1
About one hundred years had passed since the hated Saxon set
foot on British soil. The advance of the invaders had been
checked for a time by a great victory gained by the native Britons
in the year, and at the place, of Hildas’ birth. Comparative peace
had reigned through the country since that triumph of Mons
Badonicus, but still the injurious effects of a long continued war
of invasion were only too visible in the shattered fortunes of
Church and country. While the invading Saxons harassed the
Britons from the South, the rude Piets and Scots made frequent
incursions from the fastnesses of the North, and destroyed when
they could not plunder.
To crown the misfortunes of the Britons, instead of uniting
amougst themselves to resist the foreign foe, their native princes
engaged in internal dissensions, and opened a way to the subjuga-
tion of their country.
These circumstances will serve to explain the disorganised con-
dition of the British church at this time, and also the unsparing
invective with which Hildas inveighs against Saxon, and Scot,
and Piet, and prince, and priest, alike.
Owing to the severity of his language in dealing with the
crimes of his own countrymen, some few modern writers have
ventured either to deny the existence of the historian, or at least
to call in question the authenticity of his work. But these doubts
are based on no historical evidence. Bede, who lived within
Prcef. Gildas, p. I.
23
The Origin of the Church of England.


seventy or eighty years of Gildas, quotes, almost word for word,
six entire chapters of his History. When, at the end of the
eighth century, the Danes began to invade the coast of Northum-
bria, Alcuin advised his countrymen to read the works of Gildas,
and to learn from them the causes and the cure of national disas-
ters. 2 Dr. Lingard proves by quotations from the Book of Llan-
daff that the crimes denounced by Gildas were not of unfrequent
occurrence amongst the Welsh chieftains of that period. 3
Mr. Green, the well-known English historian, analyses the ob-
jections to the authenticity of the work of Gildas, and expresses his
entire belief in the genuineness of the story. “For directly his-
torical purposes the most valuable portion of the work lies un-
doubtedly in the three sections which gave us the British tradition
of the Conquest of Kent. With Dr. Guest we are not ashamed to
confess that the story carries with it our ‘entire belief.’ It has
hardly been noticed with what accuracy all technical terms are
used throughout this narrative, and yet no better test of the
authenticity of a work is to be found, than in its use of technical
terms. It is hardly possible that the forger of a later age could
have known of that peculiar stage of provincial government which
finds its only analogy in Gaul, but which a single phrase of
Gildas sets before us. What he does give, comes, he tells us
plainly, not so much from native writings or written memorials —
for if any such existed, they have been burnt or carried off by
those who have fled into exile; at any rate, they are not to be
found as from accounts brought from over sea (transmarina rela-
tione), which frequent interruption of intercourse leaves obscure.
. . . What Gildas does for us, and it is a service which has
been hardly appreciated by late writers, is to paint fully and
vividly the thought and feeling of Britain in the fifty years of
peace which preceded her final overthrow.” 4
Mr. Pryce s refers to the evidently undesigned use of Celtic
words by Gildas, and characterises the attempt to impeach the
authenticity of his work as “ absurd.”
2 Epist. ad Aethelhard , p. 17, and Epist. ad gent, et pop. Cantuar, p. 78.
3 Hist, of Anglo Saxon Church, note B. Gildas.
4 Saturday Review, April 24, May 8, 1869.
5 Essay on the Ancient British Church, p. 64.
24
The Origin of the Church of England.


Mr. Skene 6 ably vindicates the authority of Gildas, and ex-
plains the discrepancies as to dates which are to be found in his
pages.
Mr. Green, in the paper referred to, gives this vivid picture of
the stern and uncompromising British monk: “Ascetic, keenly
religious in the whole tone of his mind and temper, clinging with
a fierce contemptuous passion to the Roman tradition of the past,
but vindicating as passionately the new moral truths with which
Christianity fronted the world of license, steeped to the lips in
biblical lore, orthodox with the traditional orthodoxy of the Celt,
patriotic with the Celtic unreasoning hatred of the stranger, the
voice of Gildas rings out like the bitter cry of one of those He-
brew prophets whose words he borrows, rebuking in the same
tone of merciless denunciation, the invader, the tyrant, and the
priest.”
Snch was Gildas the Wise, as he was traditionally called. It
will increase your interest in him if I tell you that his labours
were not confined to Britain. He not only preached the Gospel
in Ireland with great snccess, but he became, and continued many
years, Regent or Rector of the great School of Armagh.
Some have supposed that there were two saints of the same
name —Gildas the MGse, and the Albanian Gildas. Theie may
have been, but his biographer, Caradoc of Llancarvan, expressly
identifies Gildas the Regent or Rector of the School of Aimagh,
with Gildas the historian of the Britons. “Gildas,” he says, “the
historian of the Britons, who was at that time (when his brother
Huel was slain by King Arthur) living in Ireland, being rector
of the school, and a preacher in the city of Armagh, hearing of
the death of his brother, returned to Wales, and was reconciled to
Arthur.”
His work, De Excidio Britannioe Liber Querulus , is divided into
three sections. In the first he gives the substance of whatever
we know of the civil and ecclesiastical history of Britain during
the period of the Roman occupation, the incursion of the Piets
and Scots, and the invasion of the Saxons and Angles. The
second section is, as its title, Admonitiuncula , implies, a short
6 IV. Ancient Socks of Britain, vol. 1., pp. 33-7.
25
The Origin of the Church of England.


but almost fierce admonition, addressed to the five native princes
or tyrants, who are upbraided with their gross crimes, and ex-
horted to repent, while time remains. The third section is ad-
dressed to the clergy, of whom he speaks in terms of strong
denunciation, “lest he should be regarded as an acceptor of
persons.”
Such, then, is the one native contemporary authority on whom
we are dependent for our knowledge of the doctrine and discipline
of the early British Church. Of course, besides this direct light
there are side-lights coming from many sources, native and
foreign, which serve to illustrate our subject. After dealing
with the direct testimony of Gildas, we shall make a selection
of as many of these as can be exhibited within the limits of a
lecture. It will be well to bear in mind the cumulative force of
the evidence I shall adduce. The facts taken singly may not
convince, but the cumulative and converging indications of the
facts, collectively, lead irresistibly to conviction. What Butler
in his Analogy says of the evidence on which the Christian reli-
gion rests, is equally applicable to the historical facts surrounding
its presence in any particular country. “ Probable proofs,” he
says, “ by being added, not only increase the evidence, but multi-
ply it. The truth of our religion, like the truth of common
matters, is to be judged by the whole evidence taken together
in like manner as, if in any common case numerous
events acknowledged were to be alleged in proof of any event
disputed, the truth of any event would be proved, not only if any
one of the acknowledged ones did of itself clearly imply it, but
though no one of them singly did so, if the whole of the acknow-
ledged events taken together could not in reason be supposed to
have happened, unless the disputed one were true.”
Religion, says Dr. Lingard, “ was not the subject which he
(Gildas) undertook to discuss; yet he could not describe the
manners of his countrymen, especially the clergy, without occa-
sional allusions to their doctrine and worship . . . That infor-
mation must of necessity be very imperfect, and confined to few
particulars, yet, as far as it goes, it is authentic, and deserving of
7 Analogy, pp. 329-30.
26
i he Origin of the Church of England.


attention.” I shall enlarge it from other sources, and then leave
you to draw your own conclusions as to the main point, namely,
whether the ancient British Church was Anglican or Catholic.
The following, then, is the summary of doctrine and ritual com-
piled by Dr. Lingard, from the work of Gildas.
DOCTRINE AND RITUAL
Ist. “ That the Britons believed in the Oneness of the Godhead
and the Trinity of Persons ; in the Divine and human nature
of Christ, in the redemption of mankind through his death, and
in the endless duration of the bliss of heaven, and of the pains
of hell.”
2nd. “ That the hierarchy consisted of bishops, priests, and
other ministers ; that a particular service was employed at their
ordination; that the hands of the bishops and priests were
anointed and blessed; that they were looked on as successors of
St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and bearers of the keys of
the kingdom of heaven; that they sat in his seat, and inherited
his power of binding and loosing; and that it was their duty to
teach the people, and to offer sacrifice, to stretch out their hands
at the most holy sacrifices of Christ.” (Gildas lays special stress
on the tepidity of many of the clergy who rarely offered the holy
sacrifice, or stood with pure hearts at the altar — raro sacrificantes
et nunquam puro corde inter altaria stantes).
3rd. “ That the Britons had monasteries inhabited by monks
under their abbot; that the monks made vows of obedience,
poverty, and chastity, and that widows often bound themselves
by vow to a state of continence.”
4th. “ That they built churches in honour of the martyrs;
that there were several altars, the seats of the heavenly sacrifice,
in the same church; that the service was chanted by the clergy
in the churches; and that oaths of mutual forgiveness and peace
were taken by adverse parties on the altar.”
sth. “ That the service of their Church was performed in the
Latin tongue; that the translation of the Scriptures was the same
which is now called the Vetus Itala; that they sang the psalms
from a version made from the Septuagint, the same still used in
27
The Origin of the Church of England.


the Latin Church; and that they quoted the hooks of Wisdom
and Ecclesiasticus as of equal authority with the other canonical
books.”
6th. That, according to the complaint of Hildas, there were
amongst them clergymen who, in contempt of the third canon of
the great Council of Nice (this canon is not mentioned in the
text, but the allusion to it is manifest), refused the domestic
services of their mothers or sisters, and accepted those of other
women whom they seduced; and yet while they thus lived in
sin, had the presumption to aspire to the higher orders in the
Church; others who, to procure ecclesiastical dignities, did not
hesitate to pollute themselves with the crime of simony
and moreover, some who, when they were unable to subdue the
opposition of their brethren, would send messengers before them,
and following with costly presents, cross the sea, and traverse
distant lands, till, having obtained the object of their ambition
they returned to Britain, took forcible possession of the altars,
and stretched their impious hands over the most holy sacrifices of
Christ.” 8
Besides his History and admonitory Epistle, Hildas has also
left a code of penitential canons, 9 which, with the canons of St.
David, drawn up about the same time, reveal: 1, the very monas-
tic character of the British Church; the existence of priests (called
both preshyteri and sacerdotes), of deacons, sub-deacons, and
lectors ; the anointing of the hands of the priest with chrism at
his ordination ; the priestly authority and dignity exercised in the
power of the keys, and in offering sacrifice to God; the conse-
quence of public penance in case of priests and deacons as ex-
pressed in the canon : “ Henceforward it is unlawful for the priest
to offer sacrifice, or for the deacon to hold the chalice,” IO these
being then, as now, the distinguishing duties of their respective
offices.
The severe penances imposed for mistakes, or even slight culp-
able negligence, in connection with the words or the administra-
8 Hist, of Anglo-Saxon Church , vol. I. pp. 13, 14.
9 lladdan and Stubbs, Councils , vol. 1., pp. 113, 120, Preface, p. x.
10 Haddan and Stubbs, De Libro Bar. p. 119, Can. xii,
28
The Origin of the Church of England.


tion of the Sacraments, show both the faith and practice of the
British Church. Thus a penitential canon of Gildas prescribes
that, “If any one by mistake make any change in the sacred
words where danger is noted, he will observe a three days fast.
And again, “If anyone,” says another canon, “by negligence let
fall and lose a sacrifice,” or, as we should say, a host, “he shall do
no less a penance than a fast of three Quarantains or Lents.
This reverential care of the Blessed Sacrament was in con-
formity with the language of Origen in the third century when he
said: “ You who are accustomed to be present at the celebration
of the divine mysteries know, when you receive the Body of the
Lord, with what caution and reverence you safeguard it, lest any
particle, however small, should fall to the ground. You judge
yourselves, and rightly so, as guilty of a crime should this happen
through your negligence.”
I might multiply references to points of doctrine and discipline
from other sources going back to an earlier date such as the
Book of Llandaff, the authority of which is recognised by such
writers as Ussher, Spelman, Collier, Dugdale, Cressy, Goodwin,
Lhuyd, Pughe, the Welsh lexicographer, Wharton, and Nicholson;
and the Lives of the Early British Saints , as edited by a Pio
testant clergyman, distinguished for his antiquarian researches,
the Rev. W. J. Rees, M.A., Member of the Cambrian Archeo-
logical Association. In these there is frequent mention of
the Mass, confession, prayers for the dead, devotion to the
relics of the saints, pilgrimages to holy places, invocation of
the saints, vows, monasticism, fasting, and other doctrines, and
practices peculiarly characteristic of the Catholic Church; but
the admissions of non-Catholic historians preclude the necessity
of giving detailed proofs.
Indeed, so deeply saturated with “ Popery ” was the religion of
the ancient Britons, that Mr. Woodward, the historian of Wales,
exclaims, that “ whatever independence of the See of Rome the
British Clergy might boast, they were subject to her superstitions,
the worst slavery of all. The way in which Rome was really
regarded may be perhaps seen in the case of St. Ninian, the
apostle of the Scots, himself a Briton, who went to Rome and
29
The Origin of the Church of England.


there studied for some twenty years the doctrines he afterwards
taught in the Caledonian wilds.” 11
In the same connection Mr. Woodward says that at the end of
the fourth century “ probably, monasticism was introduced into
this country; pilgrimages to sacred places also became more
frequent.”
Speaking of the Council of Arles, Mr. Giles observes: “It may
gratify the upholders of the true apostolical succession to find
that the distinction between the three orders of the clergymen is
prominent in this catalogue, (i.e., the list of those who attended the
Council of Arles), but it reflects no favourable view of the
intellect of the fourth century, that the name of exorcist, an officer
whose duties are too well expressed by his title, occurs almost as
often in that document as those of bishop, priest, or deacon.” «
Dr. Short, Bishop of St. Asaph, admits that, “prayers and
oblations for the dead were probably established in England from
the first.” *3
Schaff, speaking of the isolation of Britain after the with-
drawal of the Roman power says, “that this long isolation
accounts in part for the trifling differences, and the bitter
antagonism between the remnant of the old British Church
and the new Church imported from Rome among the hated
Anglo-Saxons. The difference was not doctrinal hut ritualistic
and disciplinary .” Having enumerated these differences, such
as the time for keeping Easter, the form of tonsure, and the
ceremonies of baptism, he continues: “From these facts some
historians have inferred the Eastern or Greek origin of the
British Church. But there is no evidence whatever of any such
connection, unless it be perhaps through the medium of the neigh-
bouring Church of Gaul, which was partly planted or moulded by
Irenmus of Lyons, a pupil of St. Polycarp of Smyrna, and which
always maintained a sort of independence of Rome
“But in the points of dispute just mentioned, the Gallican Church
at that time agreed with Rome. Consequently, the peculiarities
11 History of Wales, vol. 1., p. 83.
1 2 Hist. Ancient Briton, vol. L, p. 305.
13 History of Church of England to the Revolution, p. 9.
30
The Origin of the Church of England.


of the British Christians must be traced to their insular isolation
and long separation from Rome. The Western Churches on the
Continent passed through some changes in the development of the
authority of the Papal See, and in the mode of calculating Easter,
until the computation was finally fixed through Dionysius Exiguus
in 525. The British, unacquainted with these changes, adhered to
the older independence and the older customs. They continued
to keep Easter from the 14th of the moon to the 20th. This
difference involved a difference in all the moveable feasts, and
created great confusion in England after the conversion of the
Saxons to the Roman rite.” *4
If Professor Schaff had gone to the source, and not trusted
to positive mistranslations, such as Collier, I regret to say,
amongst others has been guilty of, he would have admitted that
so far from the Gallic Church “ always maintaining a sort of in-
dependence of Rome,” the union of the Gallic Church with Rome
was complete and unreserved. The writings of St. Irenasus have
come down to us, for the most part, in a Latin translation from
the original Greek. But of this version it can be affirmed with
great probability, that it dates back as far almost as the lifetime
of St. Irenasus himself. By comparing it with the large fragments
of the Greek text which are extant, we know that it is close and
literal even to barbarism ; and as a further security for its fidelity,
we have a Syriac version made from the Greek of St. Irenasus.
But there is no need to dwell upon this point, for no one disputes
that the Latin text enables us to ascertain the true sense of the
venerable Father. Here, then, is what St. Irenasus wrote:
“ By pointing to that tradition which the most great, the most
ancient, and the universally known Church of Rome, founded and
established by the two most glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul,
holds from the Apostles, and to the faith which has been an-
nounced to men, and which has come down even to us through
the succession of Bishops, we confound all those who, in any way,
whether through self-complacency, or vain-glory, or blindness and
evil passion, hold opinions other than it behoveth them. For to
this Church, because of its more powerful principality, every
*4 History of the Church , vol. 1,, pp. 26, 27.
31
The Origin of the Church of England.


Church must resort (or agree), that is, the faithful every where,tin
which the tradition of the Apostles has ever been preserved by
those on every side.” *5
The writings of St. Irenaeus, venerable for their antiquity, have
a still higher claim upon us. Of the Fathers of his day, he alone
is rightly included in what may be called the “ Apostolic family.”
He was the disciple of St. Polycarp who was in turn the disciple
of St. John. With what sweet simplicity and exquisite pathos he
gives us this story of his early training: “ I could tell the place
where the blessed Polycarp used to sit and talk, his goings out
and comings in, the character of his life, the look he wore, the
discourses he made to the people, how he used to relate his con-
verse with John and with the rest who had seen the Lord, and to
repeat their sayings. I remember, too, how it was his wont to
repeat the things he had heard from these men about the Lord,
and His works of wonder, and his teaching, for he had received
those things from men who had seen with their own eyes the life
of the Word, and all he told us was in harmony with the Scrip-
tures. Then, by Cod’s mercy, I listened to his words with all
the zeal I could, noting them down, not on paper, but on my
heart, and ever, by Cod’s grace, keep them in their purity, and
meditate upon them.” 16
Mr. Skene testifies to the identity of doctrine and practice
in the Roman and ancient British Churches : “ Suffice it to say
that during the Roman occupation the Christian Church in
Britain was a part of the Church of the Empire. It was more
immediately connected with that of Caul, but it acknowledged
Rome as its head, from whom its mission was considered to be
*5 Maximae et antiquissimas, et omnibus cognitae, a gloriosissimis duobus
Apostolis Petro et Paulo, Eomae fundate et constitute ecclesiae, earn quam
habet ab Apostolis traditionem, et annuntiatam hominibus fidem, per succes-
siones episcoporum pervenientem usque ad nos indicantes, confundimus omnes
eos qui, quoquo modo, vel per sibi placentia, vel vanam gloriam, vel per cascita-
tem et malam sententiam, preterquam oportet, colligunt. Ad banc enim Eccle-
siam, propter potiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem con venire ecclesiam,
hoc est, qui sunt undique fideles, in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique, conser-
vata est ea quae est ab Apostolis Traditio.” {Adv. Her. L, iii., c. 3, n. 2.)
16 Iren, ad Florin., apud Futeb., v. 20.
32
The Origin of the Church of England.


dex-ived, and it presented no features of difference from the Ro-
man Church in the other Western Provinces ... We find it
in close connection with the Gallican Church, and regarding the
Patriarch of Rome as the head of the Western Church and the
source of ecclesiastical authority and mission, and with the ex-
ception of the temporary prevalence of the Pelagian heresy in
Britain, we can discover no trace of any divergence between
them in doctrine or practice.” *7
TESTIMONY OP THE EARLY FATHERS.
There has come down to us through all the ages a touching and
instructive evidence of the anxious solicitude with which the early
Fathers followed the fortunes of the ancient British Church. 18
St. Athanasius found solace in his persecution in the thought
that the Britons were loyal to the true faith.
St. Chrysostom testifies that, “ even the British Isles have felt
the power of the Word, for there too are Churches, and sacrificial
altars x 9 have been erected; ao there too, as in the extreme East, or
beside the Euxine, or in the South, men may be heard discus-
sing points in Scripture, with differing voices, but not with
differing belief.” ai
What St. John Chrysostom means by “ sacrificial altars ” the
Great Saint of the golden tongue tells us in his first Homily
On the Betrayal of Judas. “It is not man,” he says, “ who
17 Celtic Scotland , vol. 11., pp, 2, 7.
18 Haddan and Stubbs, vol. 1., pp. 3*16.
19 The several “ visitation articles” of the Elizabethan period enable us to see
how wide was the chasm between the faith of St. Chrysostom and that of the
Reformers. Archbishop Grindal only voiced the feelings of his episcopal
brethren when he enquired, “ Whether in your churches and chapels the aulters
be utterly taken down and cleane removed out of the churche and other places,
and are destroyed, and the places where such impietie was, so made up as if
there had been no suche thing there.” (Articles to be Enquired of, Sec., by
Edmond Grindal, Archbishop of Canterbury, a.d. 1571.)
“ The Churchwardens shall see that the altar-stones be broken, defaced, and
bestowed to some common use.” (Injunctions of same.)
20 Ecu ydp icd/cei iiCK\r/(riai, icai dvaiaarripia ttetr^yenrtv.”
Chrys. Quod Christus sit Ecus,
33
The Origin of the Church of England.


causes the oblations to become the Body and Blood of Christ,
but it is Christ Himself who was crucified for us. The priest,
representing Christ, stands and pronounces the words, but the
power and grace are from God. ‘ This is My Body,’ he says.
This word transforms the oblations. And just as the words, ‘ln-
crease and multiply and fill the earth,’ were once spoken, but
throughout all time give to our human nature the power of gene-
ration, so also the words, ‘This is My Body,’ once pronounced,
produce a perfect sacrifice at each table in our churches from that
day to this, and from now to our Lord’s second advent.”
St. Jerome is glad that Britain “ worships the same Christ,
observes the same rule of truth,” 22 and St. Augustine rejoices at
Britain’s triumph over Pelagianism.
Those who make a claim to Antiquity cannot repudiate the testi-
mony of these venerable witnesses. What then, was the faith in
the spread of which in Britain, these early Fathers of the Church
rejoiced? Was it not the faith that radiated from Rome as the
centre of its unity and the seat of its authority P Let St. Jerome
and St. Augustine speak for all. “ I speak with the successor of
the Fisherman, ’’says St. Jerome, “with the disciple of the Cross, I,
following no leader but Christ, am united in communion with
your Blessedness, that is, with the Chair of Peter. On that rock
I know that the Church is built. Whoever eats the lamb out of
that house is profane. Whoever may not he in the Ark of Noah
will perish in the deluge.” 2 3
St. Augustine’s words are still more familiar: “ Two Councils
have been sent to the Apostolic See; and thence, also, have the
rescripts come. The cause is ended: would that at length the
error were ended.” z 4
Again, in another place, the same illustrious Father finds in the
unbroken line of Roman Pontiffs, what is at once the strongest
proof of the Apostolicity of Catholic belief, and the most un-
answerable argument against his Donatist adversaries.
22 Jerome, Epist.
2 3 St Jerome, Epist. ad Eamasum Papain, 15, alias 57.
2 4 Serm. cxxxi., t. v., p. 930.
34
The Origin of the Church of England.


2 s “If it be a question of the succession of Bishops, the surest way
is to count from Peter himself to whom, as representing the whole
Church, the Lord says: l On this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.’ (Matt, xvi.) To
Peter 26 succeeded Linus, to Linns Clement, to Clement Anacletus,
to Anacletus Evaristus, to Evaristus Alexander, to Alexander
Sixtus, to Sixtus Telesphorus, to Telesphorus Hyginus, to Hyginus
Anicetus, to Anicetus Pius, to Pius Soter, to Soter Bleutherius, to
Eleutherius Victor, to Victor Zephyrinus, to Zephyrinus Cal-
ixtus, to Calixtus Urbanus, to Urbanus Pontianus, to Pontianus
Anther us, to Anthems Fabianus, to Fabianus Cornelius, to
Cornelius Lucius, to Lucius Stephen, to Stephen Sixtus, to
Sixtus Dionisius, to Dionisius Felix, to Felix Bntichianus, to
Butichianns Cains, to Cains Marcellinus, to Marcellinus Eusebius,
to Eusebius Melchiades, to Melchiades Sylvester, to Sylvester
Marcus, to Marcus Julius, to Julius Liberius, to Liberius Dama-
sus, to Damasus Siricius, to Siricius Auastasius . . . who
now occupies the same See. In this order of succession no Dona-
tist bishop is found.”
“ The Bishop of Carthage could afford to despise all his enemies,
seeing himself in communion with the Roman Church in which
the primacy ( principatus ) of the Apostolic See has always flour-
ished.” 2 7
With respect to doctrine and discipline, I have now said
enough, and more than enough, to enable you to judge which
church, the Catholic or the Anglican, a British bishop, or priest,
or layman, would recognize as his own, if he were, after the lapse
of fourteen or fifteen centuries, to reappear on earth.
This is the thought which Cardinal Newman has so beautifully
developed in regard to the early Fathers of the Christian Church:
“ Did St. Athanasius,” he says, “or St. Ambrose come suddenly
to life, it cannot be doubted what communion they would mistake
for their own. All surely will agree that these Fathers, with
whatever differences of opinion, whatever protests, if we will,
25 Epist. liii., ad Generosum.
26 See Appendix.
27 Epist. xliii., 7.
35
The Origin of the Church of England.


would find themselves more at home with such men as St. Ber-
nard, or St. Ignatius Loyola, or with the lonely priest in his
lodgings, or the holy sisterhood of Charity, or the unlettered
ciowd before the altar, than with the rulers or members of any
other religious community. And may we not add, that were the
two Saints, who once sojourned in exile or on embassage at Treves,
to come more northward still, and to travel until they reached
another fair city, seated among groves, green meadows, and calm
streams, the holy brothers would turn away from many a high
aisle and solemn cloister which they found there, and ask the way
to some small chapel, where Mass was said, in the populous alley
or forlorn suburb. And, on the other hand, can anyone who has
but heard his name, and cursorily read his history, doubt for one
instant, how the people of England, in turn, £ we, our princes, our
priests, and our prophets,’ . . would deal with Athanasius *
Athanasius, who spent bis long years fighting against Kings for
a theological term ? ” *9
It is not likely that these Fathers would willingly turn to the
services of a Church in whose Articles and Homilies the Mass
the centre, as we have seen, of Catholic worship through all the
ages down to the so-called Reformation, is designated as “ a blas-
phemous fable and dangerous deceit,” and some of the most ancient
practices of Catholic devotion are stigmatised as “ damnable and
idolatrous.” And to this day, except in the writings of the later
school of High churchmen, we search in vain for a word of
reverence, or even of ordinary respect, for the most cherished
characteristics of Catholic antiquity. We may try to measure
then, the amazement with which these Fathers would hear of a
claim to continuity with the Church of their times from a Church
which repudiates in so wholesale a manner those doctrines in the
enforcement of which they so freely spent themselves.
*8 In a church with Royal Supremacy as its cardinal tenet, Athanasius would
would be strangely out of place. “ What has the Emperor to do with the
judgments of bishops,” demanded the intrepid champion of the Church's
freedom. Has it ever been heard of since the beginning of the world, that
ad SZST" ° f the Church deriTe their force from tbe Emperor ? ” Epist.
a 9 Estay on Development , p. 138,
36
Ihe Origin of the Church of England.


We have been reminded by more than one correspondent that
we have overlooked the distinction between Protestantism and
Anglicanism. But this distinction has no foundation in the his-
tory of the English Reformation. We could quote many authori-
ties, but content ourselves with the words of one who is specially
conversant with the history of the period, and whose statement
covers the whole of this particular question:
“ It is difficult to study the actual facts of sixteenth-century
history, putting apart preconceived ecclesiastical theories, without
arriving at the conclusion that the English National Church was
as completely the creation of Henry VIII., Edward’s Council, and
Elizabeth, as Saxon Protestantism was of Luther, or Swiss of
Calvin or of Zwingle, Obviously no man who sets forth a dis-
tinctive form of Christianity can proclaim himself the founder of
a new religion or a new Church as such. So long as the new
organisation claims to be Christian at all, it must go back for its
foundation to Jesus Christ and His Apostles, and he himself can
appear only as a reformer, a restorer of what professes, and must
profess, to be the religion which they delivered to mankind. In
this particular the claims of the English Reformers of the six-
teenth century were the same as that of Luther and Calvin, or of
Cartwright and Travers, and the whole question about what is to
be regarded as ‘ primitive ’ or ‘ catholic ’ is one of interpretation
and historical theory. The history of the Church in England was
continuous from the Mission of Augustine —or, if we prefer it,
from the Synod of Whitby —to the time when Henry VIII., upon
a disagreement with the Pope about his divorce, cast off his alle-
giance to the Papacy. From that time to the present, with the
short interval between the reconciliation under Mary, and Eliza-
beth’s first Parliament, it has been severed from and excommuni-
cated by the great body of the Catholic Church ; and as the latter
was before precisely that which it has continued since, it is clear
that the former must have been something not the same; and it
is not the mere retention of a few names and titles, used in a kind
of ‘ second intention,’ and a few more or less amputated rites,
which will ever make persons, intelligently instructed, believe
that an establishment, which obviously is the mere creature of fa
37
The Origin of the Church of England.


single State, is the legitimate and adequate representative of that
imposing and magnificent Western Church, which is older than
any existing State in Europe, and grander than anything that the
world has ever seen, and which has been picturesquely described
by an old writer as ‘ the ghost of the old Roman Empire, sitting
robed and crowned upon the grave thereof.’ 3° A fair considera-
tion of the actual facts of the Tudor history serves to show that a
theory like that which prevails so widely at present —which repre-
sents the English Church in any other light than that of one
(though it may, perhaps, be admitted, the greatest and most
dignified) of the many Protestant Churches which arose in the
sixteenth century —is a novelty which took its very earliest rise
some half-century or more after the separation from Rome, as a
direct consequence of Elizabeth’s determination to give no quarter
to the earlier Puritans, and which made little or no progress for
another half-century still. The evidence is simply overwhelming
which shows that, during the whole period from 1552 onwards,
the English Church was considered by friends and foes alike to
be, for all intents and purposes, one with the Swiss churches of
Zurich and Geneva. The divines of the Church of England dur-
ing the period in question differed, no doubt, among themselves
on those minor points, which, as we have seen, were so nearly
carried in favour of the Puritans in the Convocation of 1562; but
their great anxieties were two only, viz., to shake themselves free
from ‘ the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his detestable
enormities ’—to use words which once were sounded forth in all
the churches in the land as one of the petitions in the Litany—
and secondly, to claim brotherhood and sympathy with the Pro-
testant leaders in Switzerland and on the Upper Rhine.” 3*
We may now pass from the doctrine and discipline of the
ancient British Church, which were Roman beyond cavil or
question, to the consideration of the continued connection of that
Church with the Roman See.
3° See Froude, vol. vii., pp. 330-4.
31 Child, Church and State under the Tudors, pp. 272-4.
38
The Origin rf the Church of England.


UNION' WITH ROME
And first of all we may enquire from what source Christianity
came to Britain.
I have already proved that Christianity did not come to Britain
through the preaching of St. Paul, or any of the Apostles, or of
Joseph of Arimathea. This in itself is sufficient to answer the
question substantially. If British Christianity did not come
from an Eastern, it must have come from a Western source. No
Western source is mentioned except Rome or Gaul. And as the
Christianity of Gaul was Roman, the Christianity of Britain must
have been Roman likewise.
But the question is of sufficient importance to justify us in
looking into it a little more closely. Let us bear in mind then
that Britain became a Roman province within a few years after
the Ascension of our Lord. The intercommunication between
Rome and Britain must have been both frequent and extensive.
Britain possessed, we are told, Roman towns, and villas, and roads,
and forts, and even baths. Roman civilisation was considerably
extended as far as the Roman arms penetrated. On the other
hand, we know from St. Paul that the Christian faith spread
rapidly in Rome, and from Rome as a centre through the pro-
vinces. There were Christian soldiers in the army ; there were
Christian merchants and traders who visited Britain in pursuit
of profit. Tertullian tells us the Christians were to be found
everywhere except in the temples of the false gods.
In times of persecution Britain afforded a comparatively safe
retreat. “Many of the Romans who had received the new
religion and fled from the persecutions of Claudius and Nero,
found refuge in Britain where the imperial edicts were less
rigorously obeyed till the persecution of Dioclesian, when the
churches throughout the empire were ordered to be closed. 32
Guizot says that “ Rome brought with her arms the Christian
faith to the British people. The Christians were numerous in
the imperial armies, and their zeal often won to Christ the souls
of the vanquished.” 33
3 2 Cassell’s Hist, of Eng., vol. I. p. 17.
33 Hist of Eng., vol. I. p. 16.
39
The Origin of the Church of England.


I have already quoted Mr. Skene, bat for a different purpose,
as saying l that the British Church “ acknowledged Rome as its
head, from whom its mission was considered to be derived, and
it presented no features of difference from the Roman Church
in the other Western provinces.” 34
For the present we shall pass over the mission of Lucius 35 to
Pope Eleutherius, because we wish to deal with admitted facts,
and this mission, though supported by an overwhelming weight
34 Celtic Scotland, p. 2.
35 These writers found their objections to the mission of Lucius : Ist, On the
silence of Gildas ; 2nd, On the improbability of the supposition that there
could be in Britain, at that time, an independent prince ; and 3rd, That no
reference to that mission appears in the first Catalogus Pontificwm Rom. But
first as to Gildas, if he be read aright there is no discrepancy between his nar-
rative and the records of other chroniclers, native and foreign. This is the
reference Gildas makes to the introduction of Christianity into Britain : “ Tem-
pore ut scimus summo Ti Veri Caesaris, quo absque ullo impedimento ejns pro-
pagabatur religio, comminata, senatu nolente, a prinoipe morte delatoribus mili-
tum ejusdem," i.e., the Gospel was preached in Britain “ at the end, as me know,
of the reign of Ti Verus Caesar ; for then His (Christ’s) religion was being
spread abroad without let or hindrance, since the Emperor had, against the
wish of the Senate , threatened with death, informers against his soldiers.” In
this statement every word points to the reign of Verus Caesar, the colleague of
Marcus Aurelius, and not of Tiberius, as modern copyists of Gildas have erro-
neously written. As to the second objection Mr. Green removes its whole
foundation, when he tells us, in The Making of England, p. 5, “Wales was never
really Romanised ; its tribes were held in check by the legionaries at Chester
and Caerleon, but as late as the beginning of the third century, they called for
repression from the Emperor Severus, as much as the Piets.” Regarding the
third objection, it is surprising that writers of the recognized scholarship of
Haddan and Stubbs should venture on the statement that the evidence in
favour of the mission of Lucius rests solely on the authority of what they con-
sider a later edition of the Catalogus Pontif. Rom. But, in truth, what they term
“ the next edition ” of the Catalogus, was a different compilation from the old
Catalogus, and is a mere compendium of the first portion of the Liber Pontifi-
calis. Prior to the year 235, the Catalogus contains merely dates and names,
but is entirely silent as to the facts and incidents connected with the lives of
the Popes. In the face, then, of the concurrent testimony of such a cloud of
ancient and modern witnesses, we must conclude with Fuller that “ however
learned men differ in the date, they agree in the deed,” (Eccl. Hist, of Eng-
land, vol. 1., p. 27.)
40
The Origin of the Church of England.


of evidence, is denied or doubted by some historians of recognized
authority.
We come, then, to the year 314, the date of the Council of
Arles. The Church in Britain must have been organised, mean-
time, with considerable completeness, as we find it sending three
Bishops, Eborius of York, Restitutus of London, and Adelfins,
probably of Lincoln, to take part in the deliberations of the
Council.
Arles is a town in France, situated on the Rhone, and in the
Province of Bouches du Rhone. It was the primatial See of
France. According to a well-authenticated tradition, St. Tro-
phimus, who was sent from Rome during the lifetime of St.
Peter, was its first bishop.3 6 The seat of ecclesiastical authority,37
it became in time the centre of civil government, and had
many privileges conferred upon it by Constantine and several of
his successors. Two hundred bishops are said to have been pre-
sent at this Council, though only thirty signed their names to the
decree. Amongst these signatures are those of the three British
Bishops. Pope Sylvester was represented by his legates, two
priests and two deacons. After pronouncing on the Donatist con-
troversy, which was the chief business of the Council, the
assembled Bishops drew up twenty-two canons relating to disci-
pline. The first canon or decree adopted the Roman time for
celebrating Easter, and abolished the Alexandrian time and all
others that differed from the Roman; and in this canon the
authority of the Roman See is distinctly admitted, for the
Fathers request that the Pope, according to custom, send letters to
the whole Christian world, to secure unanimity in the celebration
of the Paschal feast. 3 8 If we consider the early date of this
Council and the fact that all previous Councils had been held
whilst the Church was still suffering persecution, we can appre-
36 Larousse, Or. Diet. Univ. Art. Arles. Bouquet, Reoueil des Historians
des Oaules, pp. 775-6.
37 Mater omnium Oalliarum, as the Emperors Honorius and Yaleutinian styled
it. {lbidi)
3* “ Primo loco de observatione Paschae Domini, ut uno die et uno tempore
per omnem orbem a nobis observetur, et juxta consuetudinem literas ad omnes
tu dirigas.” (Hefele, Hist, des Cone., vol. L, pp. 180-194).
41
The Origin of the Church of England.


date the full meaning of the words, according to custom, and the
thoroughly Roman faith of the bishops assembled at Arles.
The second canon, conformably to the thirteenth and fourteenth
of the apostolic canons, forbids ministers of the Church to change
from the diocese of their ordination to another.
The eighth canon forbids the rebaptism of those who had been
baptized by heretics in the name of the Father and Son and Holy
Ghost.
The tenth canon forbids a man who has put away his adulterous
wife, to marry again during her lifetime.
The thirteenth canon declares that the ordinations of traditor
bishops are valid, positis ponendis.
The fifteenth canon forbids deacons to offer the holy sacrifice.
The nineteenth canon directs that in a strange diocese, facilities
should be given to a bishop to offer the holy sacrifice.
The twentieth canon requires the presence of three bishops
at the consecration of a bishop.
The twenty-second canon deprives apostates of communion, who
delay till the hour of death asking for it.
To evade the obvious Romanism of these canons, some Anglican
historians have had recourse to wilful mistranslations. The head-
ing of the nineteenth canon is “ That a place to sacrifice be given
to stranger bishops.” 39 And the canon itself directs that a place
be given them where “ they may offer.” *° Collier thus translates
“4 hat foreign bishops when they come into a city may
have the liberty of consecrating the Holy Sacrament ,” and he
uses inverted commas as if these were the very words of the
Arles i 1 athers. The Thirty-first Article, which denounces “ the
Sacrifices of Masses ” as blasphema figmenta et perniciosce im-
posture, no doubt created a difficulty for the translator. Stilling-
fleet is still more untruthful, for this is his paraphrase, italicised
words and all— As to travelling bishops, that they should he
allowed to perform divine offices in the city they come unto. The
fifteenth canon is headed “ That deacons are not to offer.” “ lit
39 “ Ut peregrinis episcopis locus sacrificandi detur.” Hid.
4° “De episcopis peregrinia qui in urbem solent venire, placuit iis locum
dare ut offerant.” Ibid.
42
The Origin of the Church of England.


diacones non offerant.” And the canon states that “ they ought
by no means to do so,” 4* The Latin word offerre (to offer) is the
same throughout, but Collier and Stillingfleet believe in a variety
of rendering, for whilst clinging to their italics and inverted
commas, the former gives us “That deacons who celebrate the
Lord's Supper go beyond their commission, and therefore that
practice shall not be allowed for the future ” ; and the latter
is a little more elaborate in his ornamentation, thus: The
deacons are forbidden to celebrate the Lord's Supper , there called
offering. It requires but the must rudimentary knowledge of
ecclesiastical history to be able to appreciate the distinction
between the terms, “ offering sacrifice,” and “ consecrating the
holy sacrament,” or “ celebrating the Lord s Supper. In the
original text these canons are inaccessible to the majority of
readers, and Anglicans receive them as they have been filtered
through such purifying processes, that the Fathers of Arles, if
they reappeared on earth could not recognize their own legislation.
When the Synod had concluded its labours it addressed the
following Synodal Letter to the Pope, together with a copy of
the decrees:
“ To the well beloved Pope Sylvester : Marinus Agrecius, &c.,
Sternal greetings in the Lord. United together in the bonds of
charity, in the unity of our holy Mother the Catholic Church,
assembled in the City of Arles, by the desire of the most pious
Emperor 4 Z we salute you, most gracious Pope, with the veneration
that is due to you. We have been called to struggle against tur-
bulent men, who have no respect for the law, and the traditions of
the Church. But by the authority of God, ever present, and by
the inviolable rule of the truth, they have been confounded.
There was neither agreement, nor solidity, in their discourses,
41 De diaconibus quos cognovimus multis locis offerre, placuit minime fieri
debere.
42 “ But all was done by the Bishops or by Presbyters, delegates of absent
Bishops. The Synodical letter runs in the name of Bishops only and Presby-
ters who acted as legates of absent Bishops. Constantine, in his letter to the
Catholic Bishops, says to them. ‘ I say, as the truth is, that the judgment of
Bishops ought to be accounted, as if the Lord Himself sat and judged. (Pusey,
The Councils of the Church, pp. 97-8.
43
The Origin of the Church of England.


their accusations, or their proofs. For this reason, in the name
of God and the Church, our Mother, they have been unanimously
condemned.
“ And would to God, well beloved brother, 43 that you had judged
it proper to assist at this grand scene : their condemnation would
have been more severe, and our joy more entire. But you cannot
quit those places where the Apostles constantly preside, and
where their blood continually gives glory to God.
“Nevertheless we have not considered that our sole duty con-
sisted in treating of the question for which we assembled.
“ In the name of the Holy Spirit and of His angels, and follow-
ing their inspiration, we have made various regulations. We
have also considered it our duty to transmit them to you, who
preside over the great (majoret) dioceses, in order that they may
he made known and promulgated to all the faithful.”
The smallest demand the sanctity of historic truth can make,
is that a writer should give a document of this kind in its in-
tegrity, or else abstain from drawing theological conclusions from
a mutilated version of it. We find Stillingfleet and Collier, un-
able to impugn the authenticity of the letter, wiping out the
remarkable references to the Pope, and then proceeding to de-
molish arguments in favour of the Roman Primacy, which Ca-
tholics deduce from the genuine document. And this is what
some people call writing history. 44
All the circumstances connected with this synod prove to
demonstration that the British Church, represented by the three
43 “ Venerabilis Frater ” is the title, by which, to this day, the Pope
addresses a Bishop.
44 If the subject were not so solemnly serious, one could smile at the in-
genious efforts to put aside Catholic doctrines by deliberate mistranslations
of the writings of the early Fathers. The Sacrifice of the Mass is such rank
Komanism that some euphemism must be used to give an Anglican flavour to
every mention of it. This is only one out of a number of illustrations.
Venerable Bede tells us, that King Bthelbert gave St. Augustine the old
church of St. Martin, and that 44 in this they began to meet, to chant psalms,
to offer prayers, to celebrate Masses, (missas facers') to preach, to baptize.”
Carte, in translating, says, they preached and performed “ other acts of devo-
tion Collier, “they preached, baptized, and performed all the solemn offices
of religion ; ” Churton, “ they administered the sacraments."
44
The Origin of the Church of England.


Bishops who signed the decrees, and sanctioned the Synodal
Letter addressed to the Pope, was thoroughly Roman in its
organisation.
The next time we find mention of the British Church is in
connection with the General Council of Nice, held in 325. It
does not seem that any British Bishops were present, but copies
of the decrees were sent by the papal legates to Britain, and
assented to by the British Bishops. Amongst these, the thirteenth
canon provides that the dying “ should not be deprived of the last
and most necessary Viaticum.”* s The eighteenth prohibits deacons
administering the Eucharist to priests, or taking their place
amongst priests.
In 347, representatives of the British Church were present at
the Council of Sardica. The papal legate presided. After deal-
ing with the Arian question, disciplinary Decrees were passed
with regard (I) to the jurisdiction of the Holy See over eccle-
siastical causes, (2) the right of appeal to the Pope, and (3) the
submission due to his judgment, or to that of the legates com-
missioned by him to examine facts at the place where they
occurred. These delegates have since been called “ legates, a
latere.”
The members of the Council then addressed this letter to the
Pope, St. Julius: “We’still maintain what we have always
believed. Experience proves and confirms what each one has
heard, namely, the truth of the words which the Apostle St.
Paul has said concerning himself: ‘Do you desire a proof of
Christ —of him who speaks through me?’ For as the Saviour
dwelt in him, it was the Holy Ghost whose voice resounded in
his soul, and re-echoed through his bodily organs. You also,
dearly beloved brother, although absent in body, are present in
spirit and will. Your absence was necessary. You feared that
45 Toil reXevratov Kai alayKcuorarov icpodiov fir) a-xoarepuadni. (Hefele,
de cone., vol. 1., p. 407.) When Catholics speak of the last “ Sacraments ” and
“ the last Rites of the Church,” and give the name, Viaticum , to the Blessed
Eucharist when administered to the dying, we see that they but use the
terminology of the Fathers of Nice. The Fathers used the word To
which is the exact literal equivalent for our term, Viaticum.
45
The Origin of the Church of England.


schismatical wolves would come by stealth to devour the flock—
that the heretical dogs would terrify it, by their barking —and
that the serpent, the blasphemer, would infect it with poison.
Therefore there is nothing better or more fitting, than that the
priests of the Saviour from each province should relate every-
thing to the chief, that is to the Chair of Peter.”
In this Council Hosius, a Papal Legate, the President of the
Council, said: “If a Bishop, after having been judged, is so
convinced of the justice of his cause, that he desires to obtain a
second judgment, let us honour , . . the memory of the
Apostle St. Peter, Let those who have examined the case write
to Julius, Bishop of Rome. If he considers it proper to grant a
new hearing, let him appoint judges. If he does not think it
necessary to revise the former judgments, those concerned must
abide by his decision.”
It was also decided that where an appeal to the Pope had been
lodged by a Bishop driven from his See, no new appointment to
that See should be made till the decision of the Pope was made
known. The right of the Pope to send legates to examine facts
in the places where they occurred is recognized.
We next come to the Council of Rimini, a.d. 369. Sulpicius
Severus expressly mentions the presence of British Bishops at this
Council, three of whom, and only three, accepted the hospitality
of the Emperor, lest they should be a burthen to their brethren.
Although the Council had not an orthodox issue, still, all the
bishops at first signed the orthodox formula of faith, and the pre-
sence of British bishops identifies the faith of Britain with the
faith of the other orthodox bishops who were in communion with
the See of Rome.
Here we must pause for the present. When we resume the
story, the labours of St. Hinian and St. Hermanns of Auxerre
will, like a genial gleam of sunshine, dispel for a while the mists
that overhang the history of Britain’s ancient Church. The mas-
sive form of St. Hermanns looms through all the centuries that
have passed since then, and his name finds ready echo in many
hearts as the tutor and life-long friend of Ireland’s glorious
apostle.
46
The Origin of the Church of England,


LECTURE 111.
I FEAR that I may seem to be unnecessarily occupying your
attention, and to some extent, the attention of the public, by pro-
longing a controversy which, as far as the vital point at issue is
concerned, appears to be all on one side.
On the other side, doubtless, much has been written and much
spoken, since the controversy began. But you cannot fail to have
noticed how wide of the real issue the w r riters and speakers, with
a solitary exception, have kept. Some have gone above it, some
below it, some on the right hand, some on the left, but no one
has touched it—much less has any one attempted to grapple with
the stubborn facts that bear on the case.
If the question had not an antiquarian and an ecclesiastical
interest, entirely independent of its controversial bearings, I
should hesitate before adding to the mass of unanswered argu-
ment and testimony which I have already adduced. But as I
am confining myself to the subject in dispute, and to the period
of the ancient British Church; and as a genial light is shed on
this period by the lives of the saintly men whom I am about to
introduce to your notice, I think I shall be readily pardoned if I
finish the work I have begun, and complete my task within
the limits of the present lecture.
ST. NINIAN AND WHITHERNE.
As on a former occasion, when the mist rises, the light falls on a
monastic house, and it now reveals to us St. Nmian, the Apostle
of the Southern Piets. The history of this monastery, and the
records of this saint, are most valuable in illustrating the doctrine,
the discipline, and the Roman connection of the Ancient British
Church.
Nor was the influence of either confined to ancient Britain.
Ireland shared to a large extent in thej learning of the one, and
in the labours of the other.
47
The Origin of the Church of England.


To this fountain, fed from Rome, came Irish students and Irish
Saints, that they might carry thence the living waters of know-
ledge and piety, to fertilize the grateful soil of their native isle.
Ihe history of the great church and monastery founded by St.
Ninian at Whitherne, in Galloway, carries us back to the end of
the fourth century, and carries us forward to the stormy days of
so-called Reformation, when ungrateful Scotland dismantled the
priory, and scattered the relics of its great founder.
What place the monastery and its founder fill in early and
medieval Scottish history may be gathered from the following
passage, taken from the Introduction to the Life of St. Ninian, by
Dr. Forbes, -AjQglic&n Bishop of Brechin i
No one, he says, “can stand within the precincts of the
ruined priory of Whitherne, or look out to sea from the roofless
chapel of the Isle, without emotions that are difficult to describe.
He stands on a spot where the ancient civilisation of Rome, and
the more ancient barbarism of the Meats?, alike gave place to the
higher training of the Gospel of Christ-where the domination of
the earth, transferred to the true faith, but still proceeding from
the Eternal City, laid hold upon the strongest of all the Celtic
races which constitute the population of Scotland—where Irish
learning established the great monastery, and Irish piety received
illustration in Brignet and Modwenna, Mancennus, Eugenius,
Tighernach, and Endeus—where a Saxon Church, remarkable for
the sanctity of its bishops, repaired the breaches caused by con-
quest and foreign oppression—where, amid the ravages of the
Is orsemen, and the feuds of the local princes, a rest was found for
the ashes of St. Cuthbert—where, in the great restoration of the
twelfth century, the civilising influence of the See of York, and
spiritual grace of the Order of Premontre, brought some alleviation
to the barbarism of the times—where an Italian legate, mediating
between the conflicting claims of Scotland and England, brought
his Italian astuteness and Italian tact to bear upon the question—
where Aelred acquired the knowledge which gives local colour to
his narrative—where the bishop of the diocese, so poor that he
needed to act as suffragan and coadjutor to the Archbishop of
York, yet appeared in his true place as intercessor for the rebel
48
fhe Origin of the Church of England.


Thomas to his offended King—where David, wonnded in battle,
found a cure for his festering sore —where year by year the con-
course of devout pilgrims to St. Ninian’s shrine was so great as
to call for royal interference, and in the presence of his sanctity
the old feuds of Scotch and English were for the time to be
forgotten —where the good Queen Margaret, the wife of James
111., found food for a piety which has almost entitled her to a
place in the Calendar of the Saints—where the gallant and
chivalrous James IV., in whom, in spite of the temptations of
youth, the devotional element prevailed, drew in that spiritual
life, which, expressing itself in deep penitence for his complicity
in his father’s death, sent him with an iron girdle of penance
round his waist to the fatal field of Elodden. And all this
historic interest centres round one single figure, sketched in
faint outline by the venerable Bede, filled in by the graceful hand
of the amiable Aelred, commemorated in the dedications of many
churches through the length and breadth of Scotland —Ninian
the apostle of the Britons and of the Southern Piets :
In Paradiso Kcclesiae
Yirtutum ex dulcedine
Spiramen dat virtutum
Ninianus coelestium.”
It is at once fortunate and significant that there is no dispute
about the source from which St. Ninian derived the doctrine,
which he introduced, and spread in the ancient Church of North
Britain.
From various records we learn that St. Ninian was the son of a
Cumbrian prince, or chieftain, and was born in the South-west of
Scotland about the year 360. Having arrived at the age of man-
hood he proceeded to Rome “to refresh his spirit,” as Montalem-
bert says, “in the fountains of orthodoxy and discipline, and
after having lived, prayed, and studied there in the school of
Jerome and Damasus, he received from Pope Siricius episcopal
ordination.” 1
Bede says that Ninian was “ a most reverend and a most holy
i Monks of the West, v. iii., p, 19
49
The Origin of the Church of England.


man of the British race, who was most regularly instructed in the
faith and in the mysteries of truth at Rome ” (iii. 4.)
We have already quoted Mr. Woodward as admitting that
“ the way in which Rome was regarded may be perhaps seen in
the case of St. Ninian, the apostle of the Scots, himself a Briton,
who went to Rome and there studied for some twenty years the
doctrines he afterwards taught in the Caledonian wilds.” 2
st. hihian m rome.
When St. Ninian arrived in Rome, St. Damasus was Pope.
His biographer, Aelred of Rievaulx, tells us that Pope Damasus
received the pilgrim student, with all the affection of a father.
St. Damasus 3 died in December, 384, and was succeeded by St.
Siricius.
About this time St. Ninian’s thoughts must have been engaged
about the sad spiritual Condition of his countrymen. He con-
ceived,” says Montalembert, “the holy thought of returning to
Britain, and of meeting the waves of northern barbarians, who
continued to approach ever nearer and more terrible, by the only
bulwark which could subdue by transforming them. He under-
took to convert them to the Christian faith.” 4
In pursuance of this purpose he received episcopal consecration
from Pope Siricius, left the Eternal City after a residence of
2 History oj Wales , vol. I. p. 83.
3 The Pontificate of St, Damasus was in many respects an eventful one in
the history of the Church. To him is due the overthrow of Arianism. To him
we owe St. Jerome’s translation of the sacred Scriptures known as the Vulgate.
It was by him the Apollinarian heresy was condemned in a Council held in
Rome A,D. 377. It is to him that all the contending factions of the Bast sent
their deputies. To him St. Jerome writes to know whether he is to follow the
communion of St Meletius or of Paulinus of Antioch, each of whom in times of
persecution had been consecrated bishop of the same diocese. It is to him that
St. Basil makes the remarkable appeal to restore peace to the Churches of the
Bast. It was during his pontificate that St. Ambrose was elected Bishop of
Milan, and that the famous monastery of Marmoutiers was founded by St.
Martin of Tours. It was to Pope Damasus that the Emperor Theodosius sent
an embassy that he might confirm the appointment of Nectarius to the See of
Antioch, and thus bring peace to that troubled Church.
4 Monks of the West, vol. 111, p. 19.
50
The Origin of the Church of England.


twenty years, and on his way remained for some time at the
Monastery of Marmoutiers to learn lessons of wisdom and mission-
ary experience from its great founder, St. Martin of Tours.
From that monastery, as Aelred tells us, St. Ninian brought
skilled masons to erect in his native district a church on the
model of those he had seen in Italy and Gaul. This Church,
because it was built of chiselled stone, a style of edifice, as Bede
informs us, hitherto unknown in North Britain, was called
Candida Casa in Latin, and in the native language, Whitherne
(modern Whithorn) or White House.
While engaged in the erection of his Church, St. Ninian
learned of the death of St. Martin of Tours. Such was his
estimate of the sanctity of St. Martin, that Ninian at once chose
him as the patron of his missionary labours, and dedicated the
church to God, under his invocation. This fixes the date of the
erection of Whithorn in the year 397, as Mr. Skene holds, or
the year 402 as is very commonly held.
These circumstances, as Mr. Skene observes, show very plainly
both his relation to Rome as the source of his mission, and his
connection with the Church of Gaul.
The preaching of St. Ninian, Bede assures us, caused many of
the Southern Piets to forsake their idolatry and to become fervent
children of God. s Nor were his labours confined to the district
of Galloway; they extended to the foot of the Grampians.
ST. NINIAN IN IRELAND.
Towards the close of his life he is said to have visited Ireland
in company with St. Palladius. An old tradition preserved in the
Festology of St. Aengus attributes to him the erection of a church
and monastery at Cluain Conaire, now Cloncurry, in the Diocese
of Kildare. Mr. Skene refers without disapproval to an old Irish
life of St. Ninian, in which the erection of this monastery is men-
tioned. An extract from this life is given by Ussher (Brit. Eccl.
Antf), and an abstract of it in the Bollandists (Acta Sanctf), Sept.
16, on which day St. Ninian, under the title of Monenn, was cer-
tainly commemorated in Ireland.
S Bede, iii. 4.
51
The Origin of the Church of England.


he had passed the allotted span of life, he returned to his
monastery of Whithorn preparing himself, according to a writer
already mentioned, “ for the judgment of God, in a cave on the
Galloway shore upon which beat the impetuous waves of the Irish
Sea.”
His death is generally believed, though without any definite
historical evidence, to have taken place in 432.
The chief Irish Saints who resorted to him, or to his monastery,
for instruction and spiritual guidance, were St. Finian of Moville,
St. Enda of Aran, St. Tighernach of Clones, St. Eoghan or Eugene,
bishop of Ardstraw and patron of Derry, St. Rioch who is num-
bered by some amongst the relatives of St. Patrick, St. Talmach,
St. Mugint, author of the beautiful penitential prayer preserved in
the Liher Hymnorum, and St. Manchan, patron of Limerick.
On the other hand, we find further evidence of the intimate
union that existed at this time between Ireland and Wales,
in the number of churches and chapels dedicated in Wales to
St. Brigid. Professor Rees enumerates eighteen, of which he
states, “ From the extent of the parishes attached, it may be in-
ferred that the foundations of several of these churches are of
considerable antiquity, and seem to belong to the class of those
dedicated to St. Michael and St. Peter. There is a vague tradi-
tion that St. Brigid visited Wales, which may in some degree ac-
count for the homage she has received, but veneration for this
holy person has, for some unknown cause of preference, been dif-
fused so widely, that she deserves to be called pre-eminently the
Saint of the British Isles ; for churches have been consecrated to
her memory throughout England and Scotland, in the Isle of Man,
and especially in the Hebrides.” 6
Thus we have many fathers of monastic life in Ireland
directly connected with St. FTinian and Candida Casa, and St.
Ninian directly connected with Rome, —one of the many proofs
which show that the ancient Churches of Britain and of Ire-
land were Roman not only in origin, but in doctrine, discipline,
and communion.
6 Welsh Saints, p. 190.
52
The Origin of the Church of England.


ST. GERMANUS OF AUXERRE.
Following the order of time and, taking note of every manifesta-
tion of the ancient British Church which appears in ecclesiastical
history, we are next led to consider the memorable mission of St.
Germanus of Auxerre, and St. Lupus of Troyes, to Britain in 429.
We shall find in this, as in every other important event in the
history of the ancient Church of Britain, confirmation of the
identity of its doctrine, general discipline, and ritual with the
Roman Catholic Church, and the dependence of the one on the
other. St. Germanus’ life, from his consecration in 418, until
his death in 448 fills a large part of the early history of the
Gallic Church The circumstances of his consecration were
wonderful and unexpected even beyond those connected with
the election of St. Ambrose. From being a keen lawyer, an
eloquent orator, a governor of a province, and an enthusiastic
sportsman, he found himself suddenly raised to the bishopric of
Auxerre, and he became a .strict observer of a most rigorous
penitential discipline.
His early studies were made in Rome, not for the Church, but
for the bar. His noble birth, his commanding abilities, his dis-
tinguished civil position, his sudden elevation to the episcopacy,
his rigorous penances, his special relations with St. Patrick, his
two visits to Britain, his overthrow of Pelagianism in the British
Church, all go to make his episcopate one of the most remarkable
of his time. His life has been written by Constantins, a priest
of Lyons, who was almost a contemporary. St. Prosper, who was
a contemporary, secretary of Pope St. Celestine, and whose autho-
rity is unimpeachable, also gives an account of these visits to
Britain.
The Pelagian heresy would seem to have made considerable
progress in Britain. The British Bishops, unable to cope with
the evil, applied for help to the Church of Gaul, and, as
Prosper tells us “on application of the deacon Palladius,
Pope Celestine, sent as his legate (vice sua ) Germanus the
Bishop of Auxerre, in order that he might drive out the heretics
and guide the Britons to the Catholic faith.” ?
7 Chron. anno. 429.
53
The Origin of the Church of England.


Prosper repeats this statement in his controversial work against
Cassian, in which, referring to Britain and Ireland, he says that
Pope Celestine “ kept the Roman Island (Britain) Catholic, and
made the barbarian Island (Ireland) Christian.” 8
Whether the British bishops applied in the first instance to a
synod of the Bishops of Gaul, as Constantins asserts, or directly
to the Pope, as Prosper implies, it is certain that it was by the
Pope’s action and authority that Germanus and Lnpns were sent
to Britain.
The Lutheran historian, Lappenberg, takes the fact for granted.
“The celebrated heresy of the Briton, Morgan, (also known as
Pelagius) found such favour, that the orthodox, through the in-
tervention of Palladius, who afterwards became the first Scottish
bishop, prevailed on Pope Celestinus to send Germanus, Bishop
of Auxerre, and Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, to confute their oppo-
nents in a public discussion.” 9
The papal legates were everywhere received with great joy and
favour. By their preaching they completely confounded the
heretics, and for a time, saved the British Church from the
subtle danger to which it had been exposed. At the conclusion of
his notice of the Synod of Yerulam, Wilkins™ says that St. Ger-
manus, having succeeded in the object of his mission, returned
thanks to God and to St. Alban, the proto-martyr of the British
Church, to whom he ascribed his victory.
We know from Constantius, his biographer, that St. Germanus
visited the martyr s tomb, opened it, deposited therein sacred
relics he had brought from Gaul, and took from it some of the
clay, supposed to be dyed with the martyr’s blood, which he
deposited in a stately church that, after his return, he built at
Auxerre.
At Paris, on his way to Britain, St. Germanus received the
vows of the faithful Genevieve, and admitted the virgin to the reli-
8 Contra. Cass. c. xli. p. 113.
9 Hist,, vol. 1., p. 62.
io “ Ad propria cum gaudio remeavit, Dei et beati Anglorum proto-martym
Albani, cm victoriam ascripsit, gratus acceptor beneficii, magnalia prEedicando.”
(Cone., vol. 1., p. 2.)
54
The Origin, of the Church of England.


gious state. “ The fact on record,” says Professor Rees, “ that St.
Germanus, while proceeding on his mission was a party to a con-
secration of the nature described (f.e., the profession of a nun),
leaves a fair inference that he introduced the custom into Britain.
On the other hand, it was by no means uncommon for men in
this age to exchange the state of matrimony for that of monasti-
cism.” 11
If we bear this last observation in mind it will serve to answer
many difficulties regarding the celibacy of the clergy, and to
account for what we find stated regarding the sons of priests and
even of bishops. We should remember, too, that in our own day
we have had several instances, especially in England, of married
converts, who had families, becoming priests, some after the
death of their wives, and some by mutual separation. In the
latter case the wives entered the religious state, and, like their
husbands, took the vow of chastity.
St. Ninian died about 432. St. Germanus’ second mission to
Britain came to an end in 436. Then the mist settles again over
the valley. All is silence for a century, till, as Mr. Skene says,
“ it is broken in the succeeding century by the querulous cry of
Gildas.” In giving his testimony I have departed from the
chronological order, both because it is direct, and because he is the
only contemporary historian who wrote within the British period.
SAINT COLUMBA AND lONA.
In the middle of the sixth century the fortunes of the British
Church brighten again. St. Kentigern, or St. Mungo as he is
more commonly called, is evangelizing the Britons in Strathclyde
and South Wales, and Columba, with his twelve companions, is
preparing to set sail from Derry for distant and desolate lona.
These two saints were contemporaries. The strength and
beauty of their spiritual friendship may be gathered from the
mutual interchanges, so full of pathos, which the biographer of
St. Kentigern records as having taken place at their meeting on
the borders of Strathclyde about the year 584. They preached
Rees, Welsh Saints , p. 159.)
55
The Origin of the Church of England.


the same doctrine, and how peculiarly Roman that doctrine was,
the reader of their lives must at once admit.
Thus in St. Kentigern s Life, edited by Dr. Forbes, Anglican
bishop of Brechin, p. 51, we read of a dying man who was visited
by the Saint, “and after making a pure confession, he was
anointed with the oil of remission, and purified with the sacra-
ment of the life-giving Body and Blood of the Lord.”
Again (p. 69): “It was in celebrating the holy mysteries of the
Mass that, in a manner putting off the man and withdrawing him-
self from earthly things, he put on something like a divine
character wholly above the human. For while with his hands
lifted in the form of a cross, he said Sursum Corda, he lifted his
own unto the Lord as he exhorted others.”
(p. 61) : “He retired to desert places every Lent.”
(p. 62): At length, for a long time, before Maunday Thursday,
and after that, on the Saturday before Palm Sunday, he returned
to his people to his episcopal office, and he was received by them
all, as an angel of peace and light. Wherefore he was used to
pass that week with his disciples, and on Maunday Thursday,
after the composition of the holy chrism and oil, he washed with
his own hands the feet of a multitude of poor men—and after-
wards he waited on the people diligently at table—and thereafter
from that hour till the celebration of Mass on Easter Day, he
always remained fasting.”
Passing to the more illustrious of the two—St. Colnmba I
would fain linger over the glories that cluster round a name so
majestic:
“ Saint of the seas—
Whose days were passed in teacher’s toil—
Whose evening song still filled the aisle—
Whose poet’s heart fed the wild bird’s brood—
Whose fervent arm upbore the rood—
Still from thy roofless rock so gray,
Thou preachest to all who pass that way.”
(McGee.)
It would of course be impossible, within the limits of a lecture,
to follow in detail the fortunes of St. Columba, and of the
Columban monks and bishops whether at lona or at Lindisfarne.
56
The Origin of the Church of England.


Suffice it to say that both ancient and modern writers, from Bede
down to our own time, bear testimony to the simplicity of their
lives, the orthodoxy of their faith, and the zeal and success of
their missionary labours.
In proving the thoroughly Roman character of the doctrine and
practices of these early missionaries I will rigidly adhere to my
plan of quoting only non-Catholic authorities on controverted
questions.
With regard to Columba himself, we are reminded by Dr.
Reeves, Protestant bishop of Down and Connor, that, in Adam-
nan’s Life, we have the testimony of one who “ was quite
near enough to the fountain head both in time and place, to
draw from authentic sources, for in his boyhood he had fre-
quent opportunities of conversing with those who had seen St.
Columba, and he was now writing on almost the very spot where
his great predecessor had indited his last words, and surrounded
by objects, every one of which was fresh with the impress of some
interesting association.” 12
It is no wonder, therefore, that Pinkerton pronounces Adam-
nan’s work to be “ the most complete piece of such biography that
all Europe can boast of, not only at so early a period, but even
through the middle ages.” 13
FAITH OF lONA
Let anyone take up this Life and when he finds repeated refer-
ence to Mass for the liviug, and Mass for the dead, the Blessed
Eucharist, Confession, fasting, the Divine Office, vows, relics, and
such admittedly “ Popish ” practices as blessings of salt and
water, &c., how can he deny that the faith of lona was character-
istically Catholic and Roman ? Indeed, so clear is the evidence of
this identity, that Protestant writers of acknowledged authority,
despite their prejudices and theories, have fully conceded our
contention.
I have already quoted Mr. Skene, Dr. Short, and Professor
12 Adamnan, edited by Dr. Reeves, Preface, p. vi.
13 Pref. Enquiry, vol, 1., p. xlviii.
57
The Origin of the Church of England.


Schaff. Here is the emphatic testimony of Canon Dixon: ££Be-
tween Wales and Ireland, the British and the Scottish tribes, there
would at all times be a direct communication. Ireland is said to
have been converted by St. Patrick who was sent from Rome.
It is most probable, however, that the Christian faith had reached
that country before the time of that saint, and Mabillon himself
confesses that the peculiarities of the British Church, in spite of
better teaching, were dominant in the early times in Ireland.”
My readers must not be led away by the ingenious and falla-
cious arguments of modern partisans, and imagine that these
peculiarities involved any material difference in doctrine. There
was nothing of the kind. In faith they were as firmly united as
in the great Councils in the fourth century; the only discrepancies
were in comparatively trivial points of discipline and form, and
the persistence of the Britons and Scots was mainly nourished
and kept up by their old feeling of national independence.” *4
Cunningham gives almost similar testimony: ££ Some writers
have attempted to prove that the Culdees repudiated auricular
confession, the worship of saints and images, the doctrines of
Purgatory and the real presence in the Sacrament of the Supper;
and have delighted to portray them as free from almost all the
errors and superstitions of the Roman Church, the holy children
in the midst of Babylon. An impartial examination of their
history shows this to be a fond delusion, and it is a pity it should
be longer indulged in, as neither Presbyterianism nor Protestant-
ism can gam anything by it. It is certain that they were always
oehmd the Roman clergy in the reception of new doctrines and
modes of woiship, and that the Romish ritual never attained its
full splendour amongst them; but this is to be attributed solely
to the remoteness of their situation, the simplicity of their man-
ners, and the poverty of their country. But they gloried in their
miracles; they paid respect to relics ; they had their monasteries,
their abbots, and their abbesses, and lived according to a monastic
discipline; they performed penances, fasted on Wednesdays and
14 Archbishops of York, vol. 1., p. 13.
r S See Appendix, Note 11.
58
The Origin of the Church of England.


Fridays, used a liturgy, and had something very like auricular
confession, absolution, and Masses for the dead.” 16
Seventy-one years after the establishment of Columba’s monas-
tery at lona, when the faith had almost died out in the kingdom
of Northumbria, where should the Christian King, Oswald, look
for fuel to kindle into living flame the dying embers, but to the
furnace of lona, al which his own faith had been lit ? Thence
went forth missionaries to evangelise the kingdom, and to lay the
foundations of the diocese of Lindisfarne. Aidan became its first
bishop.
How unmistakably Roman was the Church he founded, Canon
Bright will be our witness: “The religion which he taught was
essentially identical with that which prevailed at Canterbury or
Dunwich where his name was held in honour. Mass was cele-
brated at Lindisfarne on Sundays and holidays, certainly with no
splendour of visible surroundings, and probably with rites differ-
ing in some measure, not, of course, as to the essentials of the
service, from those of the Gregorian Liturgy which Augustine
had brought into Kent, and cognate to the Gallican use which
Felix perhaps had introduced into East Anglia; but the usual
language about the ‘ mysteries of the Sacred Eucharist, was as
familiar to a disciple of Hy or Lindisfarne, as to the churchmen of
Gaul or Italy.”
ST. AUGUSTINE AND ENGLAND.
The fateful year, 597, witnessed the death of St. Columba at
lona, and the landing of St. Augustine at Kent. Of Pope St.
Gregory’s part in sending St. Augustine, of St. Augustine s
Roman doctrine, ritual, obedience, it would be a waste of time
to give any lengthened account. Are they not all written in the
head of the book of the ecclesiastical history of England?
With a faithful adherence to historic facts, and an eloquence all
all his own, the great master of the English tongue, has left us
this imperishable picture :
16 Church Hist, of Scotland, vol. 1., p. 93.
17 Early English Church History, p. 145.
59
The Origin of the Church of England.


“Itis an old story and a familiar, and I need not go through it, I need not
ni, • U , *’. '. k° W w hen all was tempestuous, and hopeless, and dark,
nst like a vision of glory, came walking to them on the waves of the sea.
en suddenly there was a great calm ; a change came over the pagan people
m that quarter of the country where the gospel was first preached to them:
and from thence the blessed influence went forth, it was poured out over the
wo e and, till one and all, the Anglo-Saxon people were converted bv it In
a hundred years the work was done ; the idols, the sacrifices, the mummeries of
paganism flitted away and were not, and the pure doctrine and heavenly wor-
ship of the Gross were found in their stead. The fair form of Christianity rose
up and grew and expanded like a beautiful pageant from north to south ; it
was majestic, it was solemn, it was bright, ... it was at once a teaching
an a worship ; it had a dogma, a mystery, a ritual of its own ; it had an hier-
archical form. A brotherhood of holy pastors, with mitre and crozier and
uplifted hand, walked forth and blessed and ruled a joyful people. The cruci-
x headed the procession, and simple monks were there with hearts in prayer
and sweet chants resounded, and the holy Latin tongue was heard, and boys
came forth in white, swinging censers, and the fragrant cloud arose, and mass
was sung, and the saints were invoked ; and day after day, and in the still
night, and over the woody hills and in the quiet plains, as constantly as sun and
moon and stars go forth in heaven, so regular and solemn was the stately
march of blessed services on earth, high festival, and gorgeous procession, and
soot mg dirge, and passing bell, and the familiar evening call to prayer.
Such was the change which came over our forefathers ; such was the Religion
estowed upon them . . . And you know its name ; there can be no mis-
ake ; you know what that Religion was called. It is called by no modern name—
for modern religions then were not. You know what religion has priests and
sacrifices, and mystical rites, and the monastic rule, and care for the souls of
he dead, and the profession of an ancient faith, coming through all ages from
the Apostles. There is one, and only one, religion such : it is known every-
w ere ; every poor boy in the street knows the name of it ; there never was a
time, since it first was, that its name was not known, and known to the multi-
tude. It is called Catholicism- a world-wide name, and incommunicable ;
attached to us from the first; accorded to us by our enemies ; in vain at'
tempted, never stolen from us, by our rivals,” *8
An effort has been made to discount the significance of Angns-
tme s Roman mission, by referring to the refusal of the British
bishops and monks to alter some of their peculiar ritual observ-
ances at his bidding. Butin reality the meeting at Augustine's
Oak furnishes strong corroboration of the agreement of the Roman
and ancient British Churches. Three things and only three, did
18 Cardinal Newman, Christ upon the Waters , p. 127-9.
60
The Origin of the Church of England.


Augustine ask the British bishops and monks to change so ai
to be in agreement with the Roman practices.
Ist, The time for keeping Easter ; 2nd, The form of tonsure •
and 3rd, The complement of baptism. The words of Bede are, “ut
ministerium baptizandi, quo Deo renascimur juxta morem Ro-
man®, sanct®, et Apostolic® Ecclesi® compleatis
Now, we have already shown from the acknowledgments of
non-Catholic writers —what is indeed a self-evident fact, that in
no one of these three points was there any question of doctrine.
They were one and all concerned with variable ritual.
If there was any substantial question on which the British
differed from the Roman Church, surely Augustine would have
put that in the first place. He asks for a change in three points
of ritual observance, therefore there was no point of doctrine, no
want of substantial union with the Holy See, no error regarding
the number or efficacy of the Sacraments, or the Sacrifice of the
Mass, or the Primacy of the Pope, to be changed in order to bring
the ancient British into harmony with the See of Gregory and of
Peter.
Again, the ground of refusal to comply with Augustine’s pro-
posals was not at all a doctrinal one. It seemed to hinge on a
point of etiquette. Augustine did not rise to salute the repre-
sentatives of the British Church, therefore they concluded he was
proud, and would treat them with contempt if they yielded to his
demands. But, doubtless, the real cause of their refusal was, that
Augustine came to them as an Archbishop of the hated Saxons,
who were even then engaged in subduing their country, and
banishing their people to the fastnesses of the North.
In this context, it is satisfactory to find that, at least up to
the present, Spelman’s report of the forged speech of Abbot
Dinooth has not been produced.
VENERABLE HISTORICAL CURIOSITIES.
But there have been produced other venerable historical curio-
sities, and of some of these we shall take a passing notice. Let us
begin with the alleged repudiation by Pope Gregory himself of
61
The Origin of the Church of England.


all claim to the Primacy. The Pontiff censured and reprobated
the title of universal Bishop assumed by John of Constantinople.
Except on the principle that drowning men grasp at straws, it
would be difficult to understand how the repudiation of a title in
one sense, could be held to involve the repudiation of it in a totally
different sense. A recent Catholic writer asks, with pardon-
able surprise, whether it is possible that anyone with a claim
to scholarship still puts forward this transparent fallacy.
If so, he asks such a one to explain the conduct of Pope Gregory *9
himself in his relations with the Saxon, the Gallic, and the
universal Church; his letters to Augustine directing the erec-
tion of archiepiscopal and episcopal sees; his refusal to give
Augustine any authority over the Gallic bishops—“ Over the
Gallic bishops we give you no authority; ” 20 his appointment
of Augustine over all the Bishops of the Britons: “But we
commit all the Bishops of the Britons to your fraternity, that
the unlearned may be taught, the weak strengthened through
persuasion, the perverse corrected by authority;” his grant
of the pallium, the symbol of jurisdiction, to Augustine and
to his successors, but above all, his reason for not sanctioning
the title of Universal Bishop , namely, because, as Gregory ex-
pressly states in his letters, it seemed to suppose that there was
but one bishop: triste valde est, ut patienter feratur, quatenus
despectis omnibus, prsedictus frater et co-episcopus meus solus
conetur appellari episcopus.” 21 “Si unus Patriarcha universalis
dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen casteris derogatur.” And in an-
other Epistle, 22 “ Si unus universalis est, restat, ut vos Episcopi
non sitis.”
This is the very Pontiff who says that “to Peter was committed
the care of the whole church by the Lord,” and that he, as Roman
Pontiff, directs his care to all churches (universis Bcclesiis curam
*9 As to St. Gregory s disinclination to yield any of his rights as Sovereign
Pontiff, consult, amongst other Protestant writers, Canon Bright (Early Eng-
lish Church History, pp. 61-63) ; Neander (General Church Hist., vol. V p
150).
20 Resp. S. Greg., n. 7 ; Bede i., 27 ; Haddan and Stubbs, viii., p. 22.
21 Ad Const, iv., Epist. xxxiv.; 1. iv., Epist. xxxvi., ad Eulog.
22 1. vii., Epist. 69, ad Evseb.
62
The Origin of the Church of England.


impendere), and that every bishop is subject to him,” nescio
quis ei episcopus snbjectns non sit” 2 3
It is wonderful how many venerable arguments have been
rudely shattered by a ransacking of the State Paper Office.
“ Brave ” Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, has had his day.
He complained of an appointment to a canonry in his cathedral,
which he satisfied the Pope was ill advised, and his words have
been seized on as a proof of Rome’s usurpation, and of England’s
resistance, and his name has been cherished as a very beacon light
in those dark and evil times when England was dragged at the
wheels of the papal chariot. But an obscure corner in the limbo
of neglected worthies will henceforth be the portion of the
good prelate, for the State papers have let out the secret of
his devoted loyalty to the Sovereign Pontiff, of whom he wrote:
“ When the sun himself appears and shows his presence upon the
earth, these lesser luminaries give place to the rays of the sun,
being extinguished by the solar light; so does our Lord the Pope
—in comparison with whom all the other prelates are like the
moon and stars, receiving from him what power they possess to
illuminate and cherish the church —manifest his presence.” 2 *
Again, in the very letter in which he complains of the Papal
nominee, he declares that “ to the Holy Roman Church is due
from every son of the Church the most devoted obedience, the
most reverential veneration, the most fervent love, the most
submissive fear.” 2 5 The fact that the writer of these sentiments
has been numbered amongst the supporters of the anti-papal
contention, is evidence of the truth of De Maistre’s assertion that
history for the last three centuries has been in conspiracy against
the Catholic Church.
It is difficult to deal seriously with the argument from ter-
minology for the identity of the Church of England with the
early British Church. We have had all the changes rung on
the words Ecclesia Anglicana. Resort to such an argument
betrays an unfamiliarity with facts that lie upon the surface
of ecclesiastical history. To quote the distinguished Catholic
23 Epist. xxxii., and 1. ix.
24 Letter 127, Rolls Series. 25 Letter 128. Ihid.
63
The Origin of the Church of England.


writer I have referred to : “By the Church of Rome Protestants
are in the habit of designating the entirety of the Churches which
acknowledged the Headship of the Pope. We mean by the phrase
the local Church of Rome as distinguished from the Churches
which own its rule and which are called the Church of West-
minster, of Liverpool, &c.; or, if we group by nations, the Church
of France, of Spain, &c.” As a matter of fact Ecclesia Anglicana is
the title of the Catholic Church in England, which we find in papal
documents written centuries before, as well as in those written
in the centuries since, the so-called Reformation, as anyone can
verify by consulting such a work as Theiners Vetera Monumenta
Hibernorum et Scotorum, or by examining the various rescripts to
the English hierarchy. For instance, in the recent decree of the
Congregation of Rites declaring the beatification of the English
martyrs, Ecclesia Anglicana is the name given the English Ca-
tholic Church.
But like the False Decretals, 26 and monasticism and the
26 As St. Augustine landed in England in 597, and Isidore Mercator did not
circulate his Decretals till 845, it is difficult to see the connection between the
Oirgin of the Church of England and the subject of these decretals. Though
the matter is entirely irrelevant to the question at issue, nevertheless, as it has
been introduced into this controversy I shall quote a few standard Protestant
authorities, both as to the composition of these decretals and the share the Popes
had in their publication. “ The idea is exploded that the false decretals were the
invention of their author’s brain, fabricated for purposes of papal aggrandize-
ment. Many of the apocryphal portions (the Apostolic Canons, etc.) had been
for centuries in circulation as genuine. Of the decretals a considerable number
are authentic, though ante-dated and ascribed to early Popes to give them the
authority of antiquity, while the others embody the traditional contents of
actual but lost decretals. The sources from which the compiler principally
borrowed his materials were the Bible, the Fathers, genuine canons and
decretals, Roman law from the West Gothic Breviary of Alaric, the works of
Rufinus and Cassiodorus on ecclesiastical history, and the biographies of Popes
in the Liber Poutificalis.” (Micycl. Britannioa, Article, Can. Law.)
Dean Milman (Latin Christianity, vol. ii. p, 307.) admits that it cannot be
proved that the pseudo-decretals contain anything absolutely new, anything
that had not been said before, and Mr. Bowden {Life of Gregory VII., p. 56)
re-echoes this opinion. “ The immediate effect of the forgery,” he says, “ was
rather to sanction and consolidate relations already existing between the
different orders of the Christian hierarchy than to introduce new ones.”
64
The Origin of the Church of England.


dense darkness of the Middle Ages, and papal aggression, and the
English Bible, these are some of the favourite retreats of baffled
contro versialis ts.
these subjects, interesting as they may be, have no connection
with our present enquiry. It is wise to close one controversy
before opening another. Till something in the shape of relevant
argument in support of the alleged continuity of the Anglican
Church is adduced, we may adopt the words of the distinguished
Protestant historian, Professor Freeman, and say: “ What the
Neaader ( Church History, vol. vi. p. 7, ed. Bohn.) declares that Isidore had
no idea of introducing a new code ; but only of presenting in a connected form,
the principles which must be recognised by everyone as correct, and on which
depended the well-being of the Church. ... In truth, even what had
been said by Leo the Great (a.d, 410-461.) concerning the Pope’s Primacy
over the whole Church, involves the principle of all that is to be found in the
decretals.” And Reichel ( The See of Rome in the Middle Ages, p. 93), with all
his anti-papal prejudices, is constrained to admit that “ the views advocated in
the decretals are of the most advanced kind, but still substantially the same as
those advocated in the writings of Leo I. and Gregory I.” How little Rome
had to do with Isidore Mercator’s publication, Archbishop Trench ( Mediceval
Church History, p. 153) bears witness. The Popes, he tells us, had no share in
the forgery, and such of them as made reference to the decretals did so in good
faith. “It was long a common opinion that the compiler aimed at confirming
and enlarging the papal power ; but this opinion is now universally abandoned,”
say McClintock and Strong (Encyclopaedia of Bib. Lit. Art. Decretals.), and
they add, “ the most common opinion at present is, that the compiler wished to
free the episcopal power from dependence on the State, and to weaken, for the
same purpose, the influence of the metropolitans and provincial synods.” And
of exactly the same import is the opinion of Herzog ( Dictionary by Schaff,
Art, Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals.') “ Formerly it was quite generally accepted
that the real purpose of the Pseudo-Isidorian fabrication was the extension of
the Primacy of Rome. . . . It is true that the Primacy of the Roman See
and the authority of the Papal decrees are repeatedly recognized and empha-
sised, but that is evidently done in the interests of the bishops rather than in
that of the Popes. At present a number of scholars hold that it was the
general insecurity of society, and more especially the confusion prevalent in all
church matters, which induced Pseudo-Isidore to make this attempt of forming
and establishing a general code of Church discipline. A more searching study
however, of the work itself, shows that its true purpose must have been to free
the bishops from their dependence, not only on the State, but also, and more
especially, on the metropolitans and provincial synods.” The writer whom I
65
The Origin of the Church of England.


mediaeval Church, asks from the student of mediaeval history is
simply justice.” 2 ?
Blackstone has been quoted, but whether as an historian or a
jurist we find a difficulty in determining, regarding the Pope’s rela-
tions to the ancient British Church. If the former, his opinion
weighs little against the accumulated mass of evidence 1 have
submitted; if the latter, then Bracton, a greater than Blackstone,
“the best of judicial classics,” as Sir William Jones designates
him, explains the Common Law of England thus; “As the Pope
has ordinary jurisdiction over all things in spirituals, so the King
has in his realm ordinary authority in temporal things.” 38
How deeply embedded that law was in the hearts of the English
people, consecrated as it was by the sanction of more than a
thousand years, is best told, not in the partisan pages of so-called
historians, but in the authentic records we now possess in the
Calendars of State Papers which bring us face to face with the
actors in the tragic drama which was enacted in the reign of
Henry VIII.
REFORMATION PERIOD.
The supremacy in spiritual things which the Pope had exer-
cised in England since the first dawn of its Christianity was
now, as far as human power could accomplish, to be violently
transferred to the temporal monarch. Of a revolution so strange,
so sudden, and so sweeping, Mr. Brewer might well look for
first quoted ( JEncyc. Britannica, Art. cit.) reminds us, with considerable
emphasis, that the decretals were “ subjected to the fierce attacks of the Pro-
testant Reformers who approached the subject less in a scientific spirit than
with a desire to reveal the iniquities of the Church of Rome. They maintained
with much acrimony that the work was a deliberate forgery, undertaken by the
command, or at least with the connivance of the Pope, to exalt his temporal
and spiritual power. . . . It is now admitted by Protestant writers that the
compilation was produced, not in the interest of the Pope, but of the bishops, in
order that, by protecting them from the oppression of temporal princes on the
one hand, and ecclesiastical councils on the other, to correct some abuses pre-
vailing among the Franks.”
27 Contemp. Rev., vol. XXXI., p. 826.
28 Chron. Mem., vol. VI., p. 249.
66
The Origin of the Church of England.


an explanation. “ Whose genius was it that upset the tradi-
tions of fifteen centuries, and devised an organisation without
parallel in ancient or modern times P Who first conceived the
bold idea —not of a parity of power between the spiritual and
temporal jurisdictions, not Warburton’s figment of an imperium in
imperio, not modern Anglicanism watching to steal a feather out of
the tail of the imperial eagle—but a transfer of the whole authority
of the Church from a spiritual to a temporal ruler ? Who was it
that, with one stroke of the pen, to use the phrase of Bishop
Andrews, ‘transubstantiated Henry YIII. into the Pope,’ and con-
verted the Church from an independent rival to a ready and
submissive dependant on the State. With all the papers and
documents before him needful for the satisfaction of such an
enquiry, we should have been glad if Mr. Fronde had availed him-
self of his precious opportunities; if he had told us by what steps
the authors of such a policy arrived at this result—how they
emancipated themselves from the long prejudices of ages —-how
they ventured, not only in the teeth of Roman - Catholic tradition,
but of that new ecclesiastical liberty then awakening in the
breasts of Continental reformers, to set up an ecclesiastical head-
ship which was neither old nor new, foreign nor Anglican,
Catholic nor Puritan. Whose ingenious brain conceived, who
shaped into practical form, this alliance between Church and
State, wherein both should seem to be equal, but one in reality
was extinguished P Was it the natural consequence of English
constitutional tendencies? Was it the inevitable result of English
Protestantism p Did it find acceptance with the mass of the
people from its own intrinsic excellence, or was it forced upon
them as a State necessity by the subtle ingenuity of Cromwell, or
the iron resolution of Henry YIII. Every man who cares to read
the history of those times feels at once that this is the question,
this is the keystone of the Reformation.” 2 9
“ The power of the Pope was abjured solely in revenge for the
papal refusal to sanction his divorce,” says Foss, in his Judges of
England .3° And Mr. Brewer heartily endorses the statement:
29 English Studies, pp. 301-2.
3° Yol. V., p. 29,
67
The Origin of the Church of England.


“ A Cambridge undergraduate is imprisoned,” ke tells us, “ for saying what,
now-a-days, few would deny : If the Pope would have consented that the King
might have married Anne Boleyn, he would have been Pope still, and been
called Holy Father.” 31
“ Henry was the Head of the Church. From the primate to the
meanest deacon, every minister of it derived from him his sole
right to exercise spiritual powers. The voice of its preachers was
the echo of his will. He alone could define orthodoxy or declare
heresy. The forms of its worship and belief were changed and
rechanged at the royal caprice. 3 2 Half of its wealth went to swell
the royal treasury, and the other half lay at the King’s mercy.” 33
“If the Pope was the Bishop of bishops, so was he. If the Pope
could of himself determine the controversies of faith, so did he.
Whether the doctrine of purgatory, or the sacrament of penance,
or the worship of saints were or were not to constitute part of the
creed and the teachings of the Church of England, depended upon
the King alone. It is true that he did not administer the sacra-
ment and ordain priests and bishops, but if any man had ques-
tioned his power to do so, he would have incurred the penalty of
high treason.” 34
A layman, Thomas Cromwell, was appointed Vicar-general of
Henry VIII. :
“ With power to exercise and execute all and every that authority and jurisdic-
tion appertaining to himself as Head of the Church ; and to appoint others
his delegates and commissaries to execute the same under him ; authorising
„ 31 English Studies, p, 325.
32 Some of the bishops of Henry VIII., and all the bishops of Edward VI.
and of Elizabeth, would indignantly repudiate the assertion now-a-days so
common, that the Tudor settlement of religion effected no change in doctrine.
I can quote a number of authorities, but I content myself with one who is,
in many ways, remarkable. Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, writes to Peter
Martyr, February, 1562 : “Now that the light of the Gospel has shone forth,
the very vestiges of error must, as far as possible, be removed together with
the rubbish, and, as the saying is, with the very dust, and I wish we could
effect this in respect to that linen surplice ; for as to matters of doctrine me
have pared everything amay to the very quick and do not differ from your
doctrine by a nail's breadth." (Zurich Letters, First Series, p. 100.)
33 Green, History of the English People, vol. 11., p, 197.
34 Brewer, English Studies, p. 329,
68
The Origin of the Church of England.


them to visit all dioceses and churches, to summon before them all ecclesi-
astical 'persons, even bishops and archbishops, to inquire into their manners
and lives, to punish with spiritual censures, to issue injunctions, and to exercise
all the functions of the ecclesiastical courts.” 35
The sudden elevation of a character like Cromwell 36 to the
highest position in Church and State is evidence of the servility
of the people as well as of the immorality of the Court. His
rise, as Lord Campbell observes, “ more resembles that of a slave,
at once constituted Grand Vizier in an Eastern Despotism, than
of a Minister of State promoted in a Constitutional Government,
where law, usage, and public opinion check the capricious humours
of the Sovereign.” 37
Dean Maitland tells us how peculiarly fitted he was by his habits
of life to discharge the duties of his exalted office, and I should
hesitate to give the learned writer’s words were it not for his un-
disputed eminence: “ The Lord Cromwell was the great patron
of the ribaldry, and the protector of the ribalds, of the low
jester, the filthy ballad-monger, the ale-house singers, and the
hypocritical religious gatherings —in short, of all the blasphe-
mous mocking and scoffing which disgraced the Protestant party
at the time of the Reformation.” 38
35 Wilkins’ Concilia, Yol. 111., p. 784,
36 It is hard to find in all history a parallel to the rapidity with which
Cormwell mounted the pinnacle of fortune, and his rise is the measure of the
nation’s fall. “In the autumn of 1532 he attended the King to the interview
with Francis at Calais ; in 1533 he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of
the Jewel-house, and Recorder of Bristol; in 1534 he was Secretary of State,
and Master of the Rolls ; in 1535 and the next year Visitor of all Monas-
teries, Vicar-General, or King’s Vicegerent in all ecclesiastical matters, and
Lord Privy-Seal. Within these few years he had engrossed in his own hands
powers such as no subject and no sovereign in this country had ever possessed
before or will ever possess again. As Secretary of State he had the ear of the
king exclusively ; he opened the despatches of ambassadors and dictated
their instructions ; he issued commissions, filled up appointments ; discip-
lined and dictated to the House of Commons. As Visitor of Monasteries he
appointed abbots and priors, disposed of monastic pensions, corrodies, and
leases; interfered with discipline, punished offenders.” (Brewer, English
Studies, p. 321).
37 Lord Campbell, English Chancellors, vol. 1., p. 600.
38 The Reformation, p. 236.
69
The Origin of the Church of England.


That Cromwell’s office was a reality, and that he exercised his
spiritual powers, unsparingly, we have the statement of Mr.
Brewer: “As Vicegerent in ecclesiastical matters he presided in
person or by deputy over Convocation, taking precedence of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; he summoned, dissolved, managed it
at his sole will and fiat. To him archbishops and bishops rose up
and bowed down as to the great golden image which Nebuchad-
nezzar the king had set up. He disposed of livings, he granted
church leases, he regulated the punishments and promotions of
ecclesiastics from the highest to the lowest.” 39
Such a revolutionary change severed the nation at once from
the Roman obedience, and, in the event, from the faith of its
ancient Church, but that such a change had the sanction of the
people is a delusion that has been sedulously encouraged in a
variety of ways. Mr. Brewer, who, according to Freeman, is the
historian of that period, thus dispels that delusion:
“There is no reason to suppose that the nation as a body was discontented
with the old religion. Facts point to the opposite conclusion. Had it been sor
Mary, whose attachment to the faith of her mother, was well known, would
never have been permitted to mount the throne, or have found the task com-
paratively easy, seeing that the Reformers under Edward VI. had been suffered
to have their own way unchecked, and to displace from honour and influence
all who opposed their religious principles. Long down into the reign of
Elizabeth, according to the testimony of a modern historian, the old faith still
numbered a majority of adherents in England. The experiment would have
been hazardous at any time from Henry VIII. to the Spanish invasion, if a
plebiscite could have been impartially taken of the religious sentiments of the
people. ”4o
Mr. Gairdner, who succeeded Mr. Brewer in editing the Ca-
lendar of State Papers relating to the reign of Henry VIII., con-
firms Mr. Brewer’s statements:
“And the seven months of which this volume contains the record (January to
July, 1535), beheld a series of appalling executions, which completely subdued
in England all spirit of resistance, while abroad it filled the minds alike of
Romanists and Protestants with horror and indignation. That the nation at
large disliked the change, there can be very little doubt. On no other subject
39 English Studies, p. 321.
40 Prefaces State Papers , Henry VIII., Vol. 11., p. 469,
70
The Origin of the Church of England.


during the whole reign have we such overt and repeated expressions of dis-
satisfaction with the King and his proceedings. And what was said in secret
we may judge from the evidence communicated at various times by Chapuys to
the Emperor.”
“ At home and abroad it was clearly seen by everyone that neither holiness
of life, high integrity, wit, wisdom, European fame, nor the remembrance of
old familiar friendship, could shield any man from the King’s resentment who
would not declare his acceptance of the new doctrine of supremacy.” 4*
Nor is Mr. Green’s language less emphatic:
“ But from the enslavement of the priesthood, from the gagging of the pulpits,
from the suppression of the monasteries, the bulk of the nation stood aloof.
There were few voices, indeed, of protest. As the royal policy disclosed itself,
as the monarchy trampled under foot the tradition and reverence of ages
gone by, as it s figure rose bare and terrible out of the wreck of old institutions,
England simply held her breath. It is only through the stray depositions of
royal spies that we catch a glimpse of the wrath and hate, which lay seething
under this silence of the people. For the silence was a silence of terror.” 4*
“ But an historian (Burnet) whose bias was certainly not un-
favourable to Protestantism, confesses that all endeavours were
too weak to overcome the aversion of the people towards reforma-
tion, and even intimates that German troops were sent for from
Calais, on account of the bigotry, with which the bulk of the
nation adhered to the old superstition. This is a somewhat
humiliating admission, that the Protestant faith was imposed
upon our ancestors by a foreign army.” 43
Regarding the instruments chosen by the King, and the
methods adopted to bend the people into apparent submission, Mr.
Green writes :
The years of Cromwell’s administration form the one period in our history
which deserves the name that men have given to the rule of Robespierre. It
was the English Terror.
Even the refuge of silence was closed by a law more infamous than any
that has ever blotted the statute book of England. Not only was thought
made treason, but men were forced to reveal their thoughts on pain of their
very silence being punished with the penalties of treason. All trust in the
older bulwarks of liberty was destroyed by a policy as daring as it was un-
scrupulous.
41 Gairdner, State Papers, Henry VIII., vol. viii., pp. i.-xxxviii.
4 z Hist. Engl. People, vol. ii., p. 164.
43 Hallam, Constit,, Hist, of England, p. 62.
71
The Origin of the Church of England.


His blows were effective just because be chose his victims from among the
noblest and the best. If he struck at the Church it was through the Carthu-
sians, the holiest and most renowned of English Churchmen. If he struck at
the baronage, it was through Lady Salisbury, in whose veins flowed the blood
of kings. If he struck at the New Learning, it was through the murder of Sir
Thomas More.” 44
When the hurricane was about to burst, the clergy, although
bewildered at the strange proposals of Henry, offered some opposi-
tion to him. The tyrant, it is true, complained that he received
the loyalty of only half his subjects, yet, we may surely rejoice
for the dignity of the human conscience, that many voices were
raised in indignation before the land was drenched with the people’s
blood. The State papers tell with what desperate fidelity the masses
clung to their old religion, and how they continued to resist till the
life-blood, gushing from their lips, stifled all protest.
“ There was no longer any resistance to the King. Martial law had done its
work in the north, and the country had been completely terrified into submis-
sion. Trees and gibbets along the highways bore pitiful burdens, suspended in
ropes or chains, and however great the sympathy with the victims, it could not
be so safely expressed. Women, however, had ventured to sally forth at night
to cut down their husbands’ bodies and bury them decently, where they could,
in consecrated ground, for rectors and vicars durst not connive at such defiance
of authority. All other expression seems to have been most effectively sup-
pressed.” 45
CRAHMER.
We have seen the picture, with all its revolting surroundings,
that Protestant historians of the highest reputation, have given
ns of Cromwell, and who will deny that the Vicar-General had a
fitting ecclesiastical auxiliary in the official, his inferior in rank,
the Primate of Henry’s new organisation ? What claim he made
to anything peculiarly spiritual in his office, this pliant minion of
royalty himself assures us. “ A bishop,” 4 6 he says, “may make
a priest by the Scripture, and so may princes and governors
also, and that by the authority of God committed to them.”
44 History of the English People, vol. 11., pp. 164-67.
45 Gairdner, State Papers , Domestic and Foreign, Henry VIII, vol. XII., p. 1.
46 Brewer, English Studies, p. 329.
72
The Origin of the Church of England.


“ In common with other reformers, Cranmer looked to all spiritual
functions as absolutely dependent on the will of the King, as
temporal commissions, like those of any other magistrate ; and
consequently, when Edward VI. came to the Crown, he made an
offer resigning his bishopric as if it had been extinguished by
the death of the Sovereign.”
Of Cranmer, Dean Hook, whose name has been often mentioned
in this controversy, writes ;
“ Men at the head of affairs, like Somerset and Cranmer, had found no defi-
nite principles of their own, and were easily moved by every wind of strange
doctrine. In his worst actions Henry VIII. found an instrument in Cranmer. 4®
And Dixon deepens the colouring of the picture :
“ He (Cranmer) was the slave, first of Henry and Cromwell, afterwards of
Somerset, Paget, and Northumberland, In doctrine he rose from one position
to another with the whole rabble of innovators at his heels. We can discern in
Cranmer nothing but the official of the ‘ new loyalty ’ (what a comprehensive
phrase 1) ; in him neither is there any indication of doubt or scruple concern-
ing the enormous measures that were littering the land with ruins and crown-
ing it with gibbets. He was ever ready to be led ; ever willing to trust himself
to those who showed the power of leading.” 49
Few passages of Macaulay have been so often quoted as those
in which he delineates the character of Henry’s Primate, and I
47 That Cranmer did not stand alone in this view, the following statements,
selected out of a number of similar declarations, will show. Bishop Barlow
says : “ If the King’s Grace, being supreme head of the Church of England, did
choose denominate and elect any layman (being learned) to be a bishop, that
he so chosen (without mention being made of any orders) should be as good a
bishop as he is or the best in England.’ (Quoted in Hunt’s Religious Ihought
in England, vol. 1., p. 43, note).
Archbishop Whitgift says plainly, in a letter to Sir Francis Knollys;
“ If it had pleased Her Majesty, with the wisdom of the realm, to have used no
bishops at all, we could not have complained justly of any defect in our
Church ; ” and again, “ If it had pleased Her Majesty to have assigned the im-
position of hands to the deans of every Cathedral Church, or some other
number of ministers which in no sort were bishops, but as they be pastors,
there had been no wrong done to their persons that I can conceive.” (Child,
p. 226.)
48 Hook, Archbishops of Canterbury, vol. VII., pp. 87, 418.
49 Dixon, History Church of England, vol, 1., pp. 154-5, vol, 11., p. 61.
73
The Origin of the Church of England.


quote from them now, because Pocock, a great Anglican authority
on this period, refers to them with unqualified approval, s° as he
does also to a remarkable article in the Saturday Review, July
25th, 1868, in which the relations of Cranmer to Henry are
analysed with unsparing truth, si
“ The origin of his greatness, common enough in the scandalous
chronicles of courts, seems strangely out of place in a hagiology.
Cranmer rose into favour by serving Henry in the disgraceful
affair of his first divorce. He promoted the marriage of Anne
Boleyn with the king. On a frivolous pretence he pronounced
that marriage null and void. On a pretence, if possible, still more
frivolous, he dissolved the ties which bound the shameless tyrant
to Anne of Cleves. He attached himself to Cromwell while the
fortunes of Cromwell flourished. He voted for cutting off Crom-
well’s head without a trial when the tide of royal favour turned.
He conformed backwards and forwards as the king changed his
mind.” &
I quote Blunt the more readily as his name has been already
invoked by some correspondents, and this is his estimate of
Cranmer:
“ A calm review of his character as a whole, a review free from party preju-
dice, must pronounce upon it a very unfavourable opinion. As regards his
personal character he was vain, weak, heartless, and arrogant; vain of his
position as the great man of Lambeth, and the friend of the Sovereign ; weak
in servile submission to stronger wills than his own, as well as to flattering
tongues and pens ; heartless in the ruthless sacrifice of every man or woman
from Queen Catherine downward, who stood in his way. . . . And worse
than heartless, for it is but too certain that when he sanctioned the marriage of
Henry VIII. with Anne Boleyn, and performed the rite, he knew well that the
King had been associated in a licentious intimacy with her sister, Mary Boleyn.
. . . It is hard to look upon such a man otherwise than as one at whose
door must be laid the guilt of many a slain body, and many a lost soul.” S 3
In striking contrast to Cranmer, John Fisher, the aged Bishop
of Rochester, stands out pre-eminently, as the champion of the
papal supremacy in those fearful days, and Protestant writers,
S° Troubles of the Booh of Common Prayer , Pref., p. v.
Si See also Articles in Saturday Review, July 18th, 1868, “ John Poynet,”
and March 10th, 1866, “ Mary Boleyn.”
sz Essay on Hallam. S 3 The Reformation, vol. 11. pp. 330-1.
74
The Origin of the Church of England.


with a marvellous unanimity, have borne testimony to his exalted
virtues and uncompromising spirit. The smiles and threats of
royalty had been tried in turn to break the constancy of the
devoted pastor, but his soul was a stranger to every dishonouring
thought. The State papers give us some measure of the man in
their record of the divorce proceedings when the fearless old Bishop
pleaded the cause of the virtuous Queen Catherine who, now
that her sun was setting, had few outspoken friends ;
“ On the 28th, the monotony of the sittings was diversified by a striking and
unexpected incident. . . . The Bishop of Rochester made his appearance,
and said in an appropriate speech . . . that, to avoid the damnation of his
soul, and to show himself not unfaithful to the King, or neglectful of the duty
which he owed to the truth, in a cause of such importance, he presented him-
self before their reverend lordships to assert and demonstrate with cogent
reasons that this marriage of the King and Queen could not be dissolved by any
power, divine or human. He declared that in maintenance of this opinion he
was willing to lay down his life, adding that as John the Baptist, in olden
times, regarded it as impossible to die more gloriously than in a cause of
matrimony, and it was not so holy then as it has now become, by the shedding
of Christ’s blood, he could not encourage himself more ardently, more
effectually, or face any extreme peril with greater confidence than by taking
the Baptist for his own example.” 54
When confronted before his judges he answered with calm
dignity:
« Having on his part all the Catholic bishops of the world from Christ’s As-
cension till now, joined with the whole consent of Christ’s Universal Church.
“ I must needs’ (said he) account my own part far the surer.
And after his’ sentence, the intrepid bishop again made declara-
tion of his faith :
“ My lords, I am here condemned before you of high treason, for deniai of
the king’s supremacy over the Church of England, but by what order of justice
I leave to God who is searcher both of the king’s majesty’s conscience and
yours; nevertheless, being found guilty as it is termed, lam and must be con-
tented with all that God shall send, to whose will I wholly refer and submit
myself. And now to tell you more plainly my mind touching this matter of
the king’s supremacy ; 1 think, indeed, and always have thought, and do now
lastly affirm, that his grace cannot justly claim any such supremacy over the
Church of God as he now taketh upon him, neither hath been seen or heard of,
that any temporal prince before his days hath presumed to that dignity.
54 Brewer, State Papers, Henry VIII. vol iv., pp. cccclxxvi.-vii.
75
The Origin of the Church of England.


We have already seen Blunt’s estimate of Cranmer. This is
how he writes of Fisher, and I add no comment but leave to
yourselves to judge between the merits of each cause from the
character of its defenders :
“ On the Tuesday following, the Bishop of Rochester ended his life on Tower
Hill, a life of much holiness, much service to the Crown and country, and of
which nothing is known but what is honourable. The good old man’s death
was worthy of him, and of the Master in whose footsteps he was humbly tread-
ing, while he felt for a light whose brightness he did not altogether see on this
side of the grave. Late at night—even in the middle of the night it seems—
the lieutenant of the Tower came to him with the warrant of his execution on
the following day. ‘At what hour ? ’ asked the aged bishop, and the reply
was, ‘At nine o’clock.’ On hearing this he said he would sleep for two or
three hours, and begged to be called at six in the morning, explaining that he
wished to have some sleep, because, being so very old and infirm (he was
seventy-six), he thought it would hardly be possible otherwise to go through ,
his trial. At that time he was aroused, and spent most of the interval in
devotion. When the time drew near ... he put a New Testament into
his pocket, made the sign of the Cross upon his forehead in remembrance of
his Master’s dying hour, and then tottered down stairs. But as it was impos-
sible for him to walk as far as Tower Hill, they carried him as far as the gate
of the Tower. As they waited, in taking the little New Testament out of his
pocket, he lifted up his eyes to Heaven and prayed, 1 0 Lord, as this is the last
time that ever I shall open this book, let some comfortable place now chance
unto me, whereby I, Thy poor servant, may glorify Thee in my last
hour.’ Looking into the book, as he opened it, the first words that met
his eyes were, ‘ This is life eternal, that they may know Thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent. I have glorified Thee on the
earth ; I have finished the work which Thou gavest me to do, and now, O
Father, glorify Thou me, with Thine own self, with the glory which I had
with Thee before the world was.’ When he had read this far, he shut the
book, saying : ‘ Here is even learning enough for me to my life’s end.’ When
the procession came to the scaffold, on Tower Hill, the Bishop once more
tottered up the steps that lay between him and rest, saying : ‘ Accedite ad
eum, et illuminamini, et facies vestras non confundentur ’ —They had an eye
unto him and were enlightened, and their faces were not ashamed. Then he
said Te Deum, and the psalm ; ‘ln Thee, O Lord, have I put my trust,’ re-
membering that his compline hour had come, and gave himself up to be dis-
robed by the executioner. As soon as the head of the aged Bishop was severed
from his body, it was put into a bag by the executioner for the purpose of
being carried to a bridge, there to be put on a pole. But a message came to
carry it to Anne Boleyn, who wished to see it before it was set up. . . .
As she looked on her victim’s dead face she said contemptuously : ‘ls this the
76
The Origin of the Church of England.


head that so often exclaimed against me ? I trust that it shall never do any
more harm.’ Then to suit her action to her words she cuffed the poor speech-
less lips with the back of her hand. But the indignity shown to the old
Bishop’s head was not greater than that shown to his mutilated body. It was
stripped naked and left on the scaffold, guarded by soldiers till eight o’clock
in the evening . . . then it was carried away swinging across a couple of
halberds, 55 to be tumbled neck foremost and naked into a grave on the north
side of All Hallows churchyard, where it awaits the resurrection of the just.
The day of his death was that of the martyrdom of St. Alban (then observed
on the 22nd June), the year 1535, before it came round again the Queen who
had insulted him when dead, had shared his fate within a few yards of the
same spot, on the Tower Green, within the Tower walls.”
Foremost in the defence of the old religion were the Carthu-
sians, in whom, even Mr. Fronde can find nothing that was not
praiseworthy. Of them many touching records are to be found in
the State papers, edited by Brewer and Gairdner, already re-
ferred to. Take, for instance, Reynold’s vindication of himself
and his brethren, confronting the judges under the very shadow
of the gibbet:—
“ The defence made by Reynolds was singularly calm and argumentative.
He said he had intended to have kept silent as Christ had done before Herod,
but being interrogated why he had persisted in an opinion, against which the
Lords and the whole realm had pronounced in Parliament, he replied that if
opinions were to be proved by authority, his were far stronger than those of his
judges, for he could appeal to all the rest of Christendom besides England, and
he was certain that the majority of Englishmen agreed with him, at least,
though partly from fear and partly from hope, they professed the contrary.
On this, Cromwell compelled him to declare, under the heaviest penalties, who
were of his opinions. ‘All good men of the kingdom,’ he replied boldly. As
to proofs of dead witnesses, I have in my favour all the General Councils, all
the historians ( scriptori ), the holy doctors of the Church for the last fifteen
hundred years, especially St, Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and St.
Gregory ; and I am sure that when the king knows the truth, he will be very
ill-pleased, or rather indignant against certain bishops who have given him
such counsel.” 5^
We may cite Sir Thomas More, who will tell us that the laity
were in complete agreement with the clergy on the question of
55 Father Bridgett, in his Life of Blessed John Fisher (p. 499), quotes an
eye-witness for the statement, that one man carried the headless body on his
halberd. “He must, therefore,” he adds, “ have run the hooked part into the
body and carried it on his back, as a butcher moves the carcass of a sheep.”
56 Gairdner, S.S. Papers, Henry VIII., p. 248.)
77
The Origin of the Church of England.


spiritual supremacy. But first let Dean Hooke and Mr. Brewer
testify to the mould in which the mind of Sir Thomas More was
cast:—
“Of Sir Thomas More it is unnecessary to speak. I write not for those who
cannot admire his calm wisdom, his ever-ready wit, his almost prophetic saga-
city, in union with a guileless simplicity of character, his inflexible integrity,
his sense of justice, his tenacity of purpose. His royal murderer admitted him
into a friendship, the hollowness of which was foreseen by More, and was
evinced when More preferred the dictates of conscience to a compliance with
the mandates of a capricious despot.” 57
“ A few years before no one bid so fair as More to engross the favour of
Henry. The smiles for which other men grovelled in the dust, and bartered
their faith and their principles, fell unsolicited on More. On no man’s neck
did the king hang with greater familiarity ; in no man’s conversation and
society did he take so much delight. But More, witty, charming, easy, and
refined, would not bate an iota of his principles. His opinions on the divorce
were too well known ; and he hastened to get away from the uncongenial
atmosphere of a palace.” S 8
“ The pursuits of the Court, and the individuals of which its innermost circle
were composed, were scarcely such as could command his sympathy and appro-
bation. There was hardly one of them whose character was not seriously tainted
with that vice against which the unsullied purity of More’s mind revolted ; not
one who looked upon the transgression of the marriage vow* as deserving repro-
bation or censure, or at least as worse than a jest.” 59
At the bidding of conscience he resigned his place in the Coun-
cils of the State, and, from being Lord High Chancellor of Eng-
land, was now a prisoner awaiting his death sentence. 60 And
never was nobler or more dignified speech than this in which the
illustrious prisoner witnessed to the antiquity of the Papal Supre-
macy.
“ I have, by the grace of God, been always a Catholic, never out of the Com-
munion of the Eoman Pontiff, but I had heard it said at times that the authority
of the Roman Pontiff was certainly lawful and to be respected, but still an
authority derived from human law and not standing on a Divine prescription.
Then when I observed that public affairs were so ordered that the sources of
57 Archbishops of Canterbury , vol. VI., p. 267. 58 English Studies, p. 320.
59 Brewer, Prefaces State Papers Henry VIII, vol 11., p. 161.
6o “We must regard Sir Thomas More’s murder as the blackest crime that has
ever been perpetrated in England under the form of law.” (Lord Campbell,
English Lord Chancellors .)
78
The Origin of the Church of England.


the power of the Roman Pontiff would necessarily be examined, I gave myself
up to a most diligent examination for the space of seven years, and found that
the authority of the Roman Pontiff which you rashly—l will not use stronger
language—have set aside, is not only lawful, to be respected and necessary,
but also grounded on the divine law and prescription. That is my opinion,
that is the belief in which, by the Grace of God, I shall die.”
The radical change and widespread spoliation begotten of that
change, have been vividly portrayed by many Protestant histo-
rians for whom Mr. Ingram may be allowed to speak: “ Everything
was done to outrage the devotional sentiments of a grave and con-
servative nation. The whole outward aspect of religion was
altered, as it were in a moment, and the ancient practices, how-
ever innocent and inoffensive, were banned as superstitious.
Customs and ceremonies, consecrated by immemorial antiquity and
endeared by a thousand associations, were scornfully ‘ reformed ’
—such was the expression. Contemporaneously with the changes
in discipline and doctrine, England presented a scene of havoc
and desecration never before witnessed in a Christian country.
Churches were demolished for their materials, their lead was
stripped off for exportation, their bells were taken down and sold.
The sacred utensils, 61 ornaments, and plate were purloined by
private persons, encouraged by the example of the Government,
or were seized by the State. Shrines, 6z altars, and images 6 3 were
ruthlessly destroyed ; monumental brasses were torn from tombs,
horses were watered in stone or marble coffins from which the
bodies had been ejected, altar cloths and copes were displayed in
61 “ It seems very doubtful if so many as twenty old English chalices and
patens remain throughout the whole of the two provinces.” (Lee, The Church
under Queen Elizabeth , vol. 1,, p. ft.)
6z images, pictures, and al monuments of fained miracles, as well in walles,
as in glasse windowes, be defaced ; and, namely, the Image of the ( rucifixe,
and the two Mauries in the Chauncell windowes,” (Bishop Middleton’s Injunc-
tions, printed in 1583).
63 “We are only constrained, to our great distress of mind, to tolerate in
our churches the image of the Cross, and Him who was crucified, the Lord
must be entreated that this stumbling block may at length be removed.”
(Bishop Cocks, Zurich Letters , Ist series, No. 28).
79
The Origin of the Church of England.


the houses of the gentry as carpets or coverings ; chalices *4 were
used as carousing cups, and libraries were scattered to the winds.
No English Protestant can read the first chapter of our religious
reformation without pain and indignation.” 6 s
The duty I have undertaken is now discharged. I have en-
deavoured to examine every scrap of evidence which has come
down to us regarding the teaching of the ancient British Church.
I have cited popular manuals of history, as well as recondite
sources of information. I have quoted the very words of the
authorities I cited, and not confined myself to vague generalities
or rhetorical clap-trap. I have used the indirect as well as the
direct lights that illumine the history of those distant times.
I have quoted, almost exclusively, non-Catholic authorities, even
though I had at my command an ample supply of unimpeachable
Catholic testimony. I have argued from the rule, not from
the exception —from the exercise of authority, not from resistance
to it, knowing that there is no authority, human or divine, that
does not encounter occasional opposition. I have confined myself
to a stated period and to a definite subject, feeling that if con-
troversy is to be at all profitable, it must be kept within defined
limits.
I have shown that the doctrine and ritual of the ancient British
Church were identical with the doctrines and ritual of the Roman
See, as they were the very antithesis, as a whole, of the one and
the other as professed and used by the Church of England whether
it be called Protestant or Anglican. I have not noticed the
argument that the retention of the Apostles’ and Nicene creeds
and of some collects taken from the ancient liturgy, proves the
Continuity of the Church of England. These are only a few
spiritual stones from the antique, but immortal pile of the Roman
Church; and I thought with La Mennais, that the Arab who
64 For a detailed account of the sacrilegious uses to which the sacred vessels
and vestments were degraded, see Peacock’s English Church Furniture,
with its official record entitled Inventarium Monumentorum Superstitionis, and
also Lee’s Church under Queen Elizabeth ,
6s England and Rome, pp. 204-5.
80
The Origin of the Church of England.


comes forth from the desert and steals some fragments from the
base of the towering pyramid and then disappears into the wilder-
ness from which he emerged, might, with as much reason, claim
the ownership of the mighty monuments of the Pharaohs. I
have abundantly proved that in the past, as in the present,
the jurisdiction of the Roman Pontiffs was operative, supreme,
and universal. Even in those distant ages the Popes were every-
where : “ them first, them last, them midst, them without end.”
And as there can be no continuity without previous existence,
and as the assertion of the existence of the Anglican Church dur-
ing the British period is precluded, by the absence of all trace of
its characteristic doctrines, and by the utter failure of every attempt
to prove such continuity, it only remains for those who still cling
to that idea, to fall back on the deluge coming in a night, and
hurrying off every vestige of what it found in the Church, and
then in turn disappearing itself, “ being swallowed up by the
earth, mercilessly, as itself was merciless.”
I have constructed cumulative proofs, the force of which,
when taken together, seems to me to be irresistible. I have, I
trust, shown due courtesy to others, as I have received great
consideration from them. For that consideration I am grateful,
and I trust that the net result of our historical discussion will be
to stimulate enquiry, without wounding charity, or lessening
mutual esteem.
81
The Origin of the Church oj England.




APPENDIX.
NOTE I.
Rationalistic writers, having no pet theory to safeguard, subject Catholic
traditions regarding St. Peter’s connection with Rome, to the same canons of
criticism as they do any fact of ordinary history, and, from an historical stand-
point, Catholics have no reason, on the whole, to complain of their conclusions.
But for an Anglican to admit that St. Peter was Bishop of Rome is practi-
cally to reach the parting of the ways. To appreciate, then, the force of the
following admissions, we have only to remember that the doctrine of the Papal
Supremacy, which is confessedly the outcome of St. Peter's Roman Primacy,
is the turning point of controversy.
That St. Peter resided in Rome and died there, and that he was Bishop
of Rome, are historic facts which were never disputed before Calvin s time,
and to which a crowd of learned Anglicans freely testify. On the text
“ The Church that is in Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you,
and so doth my son, Mark ” (1 Peter, v. 13), Grotius writes ; “Ancient and
modern interpreters differ about this ‘Babylon.’ The ancients understood
it of Rome, where that Peter was, no true Christian will doubt.” The
Speakers’ Commentary says: “We find an absolute consensus of ancient
interpreters that here Babylon must be understood as equivalent to Rome.
... We adopt, without the least misgiving, this explanation of the
word as alone according with the mind of the Apostle, and the testimony of the
early Church. So also Thiersch, Ewald, and Hilgenfeld very positively.
Again, in the Introduction to St. Peter’s Epistle : “We have to encounter the
uniform , unvarying testimony of early Christian writers. From whatever
quarter their voices reach us, they affirm that Babylon is here a recognized
appellation of Rome. In fact, no other view of the passage was entertained or
suggested before Calvin , who argued that the old tradition was connected
with false notions as to the position of the Roman Church. In a note
the writer adds that the presence and martyrdom of St. Peter in Rome “are
maintained by (the non-Catholic writers) Credner, Bleek, Wieseler, Meyer,
Hilgenfeld, Renan, Mangold, and nearly all unbiassed critics.” Bishop Elli-
cott admits : “ It may be called the established interpretation that the place
here meant is Rome. . . . Nothing but Protestant prejudice can stand
against the historical evidence that St. Peter sojourned and died in Rome.
Whatever theological consequences may follow from it, it is as certain that t.
Peter was at Rome as that St. John was at Ephesus.” And in the Introduction
to the Epistle : “ The whole subject has, of late years, been sifted to the bottom
by various German and other writers. . . . Though every conceivable differ-
ence may be found between these authors respecting the dates and duration of


Bt. Peter’s sojourn at Rome, very few are so hardly sceptical as to reject alto-
gether evidence as strong, early, and wide, as that on which we believe that
Hannibal invaded Italy.” Bishop Lightfoot asks, “ Can we doubt that it is
the Church in Rome ? It cannot be the Egyptian Babylon which was a mere
fortress ( Strabo, xvii., p. 807). If therefore it was not the great Babylon it
must have been Rome. To this latter more especially the mention of Mark
points ; for Mark is designated by a very early tradition, as St. Peter’s com-
panion and interpreter in Rome. This tradition is in full accordance with the
latest notices in the new Testament (Col. iv. 10. Philem, 21. 2 Tim. iv. 11),
which represent him either as staying in Rome, or journeying towards Rome.”
Nor was Babylon a new name for Rome, dating from the Neronian persecu-
tion. It had been a mystical name for this world-wide power with the Jews
before it was inherited by the Christians. As such it appears even in the
Sibylline Oracles (v. 158). . , . The Church of the Romans reports that
Clement was ordained by Peter (Tertullian —De Prtescrip., p. 36). ... St.
Paul was martyred in Rome, as is allowed on all hands. Is not the over-
whelming inference that St. Peter suffered in the same city also. This in-
ference is all the more certain when we find that, outside the testimony of
Clement, tradition is constant in placing his death at Rome. {St, Clement
of Rome, part 1. pp. 492, 493.) Dr, Farrar witnesses : “ I strongly incline to the
belief that by Babylon the Apostle intended to indicate Rome. So the Fathers
unanimously." (Early Days, ii., p. 516.) Smith and Cheetham remark : “As
no tradition ever assigned any other place than Rome as the scene of St. Peter’s
martyrdom, every allusion to that event is also an indirect confirmation of his
visit to the Capital.” {Diet, of Christian Antiquities, vol. 11., p. 1653.) Dr.
Cave writes : “ That St. Peter was at Rome, and for some time resided there, me
intrepidly affirm mith the whole multitude of the ancients. We produce wit-
nesses altogether unexceptionable, and of the very highest antiquity—lgnatius,
Bishop of Antioch, a disciple of St. Peter, or at least, his successor in the See of
Antioch {Epist. ad Rom.) ; Papias, of Hierapolis, a hearer of John the Evangelist,
or of the (contemporary) Presbyter John {Ap. Euseb. Hist. Ecc. 1., ii., c. 15) ;
Irenseus of Lyons, a man of the Apostolic age, and disciple of St. Polycarp
(Adv. Hcer. 1,, iii,, c. 1;c. 3) ; Dionysius of Corinth ( Ap. Euseb. 1„ ii., c. 15) ;
Tertullian {De Prcescr. Hcer,, c. 36 ; De Rapt., c. 4 ; Scorpiace, c. 15 ; Adv.
Marc. 1., iv„ c. 5) ; Caius, the Roman presbyter, an ecclesiastic of great renown
{Apud Euseb. 1., ii., c. 25) ; Origen (tom. iii., in Gen.; Ap. Euseb. 1,, iii., c. 1 ;
Conf. 1., vi., c, 14), After names so venerable, therefore ; after monuments of
antiquity so many and so illustrious, who will call in doubt a matter so clearly
and constantly attested.” {Script. Eccles. Hist. Inter., p. 5.)
It has been rightly said that the patristic evidence adduced by Bishop Pear-
son is one of the best apologies that can anywhere be found for the fact of
St. Peter’s connection with Rome, He writes, “ For although in this age a dis-
sertation treating of this Apostolic succession (whether, namely, the first Bishop
of Rome had some one of the Apostles as author and predecessor) may be
84
Appendix.


called a question, yet in the primitive Church it was never looked upon as a
question, but as a real and indubitable truth.”
A further proof in favour of St. Peter’s residence at Rome is deduced from
his connection with the Evangelist, St. Mark, whose gospel according to Canon
Westcott, “ mat by the universal voice of antiquity referred to the authority of
St. Peter,” (Canon, N. Test., 3rd Ed. p. 103) and Dean Alford writes, “ It was
universally believed in the Ancient Church, that Mark’s Gospel was written
under the influence and almost under the dictation of Peter,” (Greek Test., vol.
1, proleg. c. iii.). The eminent Non-conformist divine, Dr. Gardner, quotes
Papias, Irenseus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, Eusebius, Atha-
nasius, Epiphanius, Gregory Nazianzen, Ebedjesu, Jerome, Chrysostom, Augus-
tine, Victor, &c., &c., and says: “ The general account of the above-named
writers is, that Mark wrote his gospel at Rome. In this there is a remarkable
agreement with very few exceptions. . . . that it was writ at Rome, or in
Italy, is said not only by Epiphanius, Jerome, Gregory Nazianzen, Victor,
and divers others, but the Egyptian writers all along say the same thing, that
it was writ by Mark at Rome in the company of the Apostle Peter.”
“ Mr. Baratier proves in his first chapter most thoroughly, as Bishop Pearson
had done before him, that St. Peter was at Rome,” says Whiston, the trans-
lator of Josephus. Little’wonder that he emphatically adds: “This is so
clear in Christian antiquity, that it is a thame for any Protestant to confess
that any Protestant ever denied it.” (Memoirs , London, 1750.)
Quite a host of other Protestant authorities might be quoted in support of
St. Peter’s residence in Rome ; and that he was Bishop of Rome, we have
the most outspoken declarations from learned Protestant writers. Arch-
bishop Bramhall testifies : “ That St. Peter had a fixed chair at Antioch, and
after that at Rome, is what no man, who giveth any credit to the
ancient Fathers and Councils and historiographers of the Church, can
either deny or will doubt.” {Works, ed. Oxon, p. 628.) Dr. Gardner,
asserts that “it is the general , uncontradicted , disinterested testimony of
ancient writers in the several parts of the world—Greeks, Latins, Syrians.
.. . There were in the second and third centuries disputes between the
Bishops of Rome and other Bishops and Churches about the time of keeping
Easter and about the baptism of heretics. Yet none denied the Bishop of
Rome to have what they called the Chair of Peter. It is not to our honour
nor our interest, either as Christians or Protestants, to deny the truth of
events ascertained by early and well attested tradition.” (Hist, of the Apost.
and Evang., ch. xviii.) Palmer writes; “Hence we may see the reason for
which the Bishops of Rome were styled successors of St. Peter by some of the
Fathers. They were bishops of the particular church which St. Peter had
assisted in founding, and over which he had presided ; and they were also, as
bishops of the principal church, the most eminent among the successors of the
Apostles ; even as St. Peter had possessed the pre-eminence of the Apostles
85
Appendix.


themselves. - ’ (Palmer, A Treatise on the Church, vol. ii., part vii., c. ill.)
Again, “ the Roman Church was particularly honoured as having been presided
over by St. Peter, and was therefore, by many of the Fathers called the See of St.
Peter.” Qlhid.') Chamier, approvingly quoted by Cave, says : “ All the Fathers,
with great unanimity, have asserted that Peter did go to Rome, and that he
did govern that Church.” ( Panstrat. Cath. de Rom. Pont. 1., xiii., c. 4.)
Neale says, “ There were many Christians, both at Antioch and at Rome, before
St. Peter set foot in either place, yet antiquity always considered him as the
founder of the Church in each place.” (Eastern Church , p. 5.)
Pearson, proving (1) that Saints Peter and Paul founded the Church of
Rome, cites Iremeus, Epiphanius, Eusebius. To prove (2) that they were
not merely founders, but Bishops of Rome, he quotes the words of Epipha-
nius. And (3) to prove that the Bishops of Rome derived their succession
from St. Peter alone, he appeals to Caius as being a Greek, and to the
Latin Fathers generally, v.g., Tertullian, Cyprian, Pope Stephen, the author
of the most ancient Catalogue, inproemio, who says : “Alter the Ascension of
Christ, the most blessed Peter undertook the Episcopate Optatus, S. Jerome,
in his Catalogue and elsewhere ; Sulpitius ; Auctor Quaestionum utriusque
Testamenti; S. Augustine,
NOTE 11.
The term Culdee, or more correctly Ceile De, means a friend of God,
a servant of God, or, as we novv-a-days express it, a man of God. Originally it
was a conventional equivalent for the Latin phrase servus Dei, which signified
the same as the English word monh, just as servire Deo meant to live in the
monastic state. We find no mention of the word Culdee till the eighth
century, when the term servus Dei had become familiarised in the language
of the Church, especially in Ireland, where the writings of St. Gregory the
Great must have been widely spread, as we find in the Irish records tender,
reverential references to the illustrious Pontiff whom they call the Bel-oir, or
Golden-mouthed. One of the earliest examples on record of the use of the ex-
pression occurs in the life of St. Findan, who died about the end of the eighth
century, and whose life was compiled not long after. “In the lapse of ages
the term underwent all the modifications or limitations of meaning which the
changes of time and circumstances or local usage produced in the class to whom
the epithet was applied.” (Reeves, p. 120.) The Four Masters, for instance,
apply the epithet to the Dominican Friars of Sligo so late as the sixteenth
century.
But the fanciful theories that so many writers have built upon the term
Culdee in the effort to give a non-Roman faith to the early Scottish Church
86
Appendix.


Imve u° foundation in history. The late lamented Protestant Bishop of Down
and Connor, Dr. Reeves, i the great Scottish historian, Skene, * and the distin-
guished antiquarian, Pinkerton, 3 have exploded them.
“ In one point, however, even the ablest of modern writers on the Culdees, has
alien into the national error of supposing them to have been a peculiar order
who derived their origin from St. Columba ; in other words, that they were
olumbites, m the same sense that we speak of Benedictines. It is true that
after the lapse of centuries, Culdees were found in churches which he or his
iscip es founded, but their name was in no way distinctive.” ( Reeves )
in the whole range of ecclesiastical history there is nothing more entirely
destitute of authority than the application of this name to the Columban monks
° i ! ! and seYenth centuries, or more utterly baseless than the fabric
which has been raised upon that assumption.” (Skene),
“Some, who would contend for the uniformity of an order bearing the name
of Cede De, endeavour to reconcile these incompatibilities by supposing the
existence of two classes m the order, the one of stricter, the other of laxer dis-
cipline ; but this expedient is unsupported by record authority.”
Pinkerton was one of the first to throw light upon this subject. More than
a century ago he wrote : “The Culdees united in themselves the distinctions of
monks and of secular clergy, being apparently from Columba’s time to the
e eventh century, the only monks and clergy in Scotland, and all Irish, as
formerly shown. Dr. Reeves declares that some of the Culdee saints enume-
rated by Boece are distinctly Irish. “ Modocus,” he says, “is our Modoc
erns, who died m 624. Calanus, Ferranus, and Ambianus were no men
if they were not Caelan, Forrannan, and Abban, Irish saints of the sixth cen-
ury , while Carnoc, the South Briton, adopted Ireland as his home.”
r. Skene thus sums up his researches : “ The result, then, that we have
armed atm that the Culdees originally sprang from that ascetic order who
adopted a solitary service of God in an isolated cell as the highest form of
religious life, and who were termed Deicolae ; that they then became associated
m communities of anchorites or hermits, that they were clerics and might be
called monks but only in the sense in which anchorites were monks ; that
they made their appearance in the eastern district of Scotland, at the same
nme as the secular clergy were introduced and succeeded the Columban monks
who had been driven across the great mountain range of Drumalban, the
ITTu P ° f the PiCtiSh Ki^om, & nd that they were finally brought
some r extn“ ICal rule alon S with the secular clergy, retaining, however, to
some extent, the nomendature of the monastery, until at length the name of
Keledeus, or Culdee became almost synonymous with that of secular canon,”
* Transactions, R.IA., vol. XXIV.
2 Celtic Scotland, vol. 11., p. 226.
3 Inquiry into the History of Scotland.
87
Appendix.


Dr. Reeves says that the Culdees in North Britain followed the rules drawn
up by Saint Carthage and Saint Maelruan for the parent monasteries in Ire-
land (pp. 82-84), and as these rules are extant there can be no ques-
tion of the orthodoxy of those early anchorites. The Encyclopaedia Bri-
tannica (Art. The Culdees ) following Reeves, says : “It was long fondly ima-
gined by Protestant writers that the religious belief and worship of the Cul-
dees supplied complete evidence of primitive truth having been preserved free
from Roman corruptions in one remote corner of Western Europe. It is now
certain that this opinion is entirely opposed to historical evidence. In doctrine,
ritual and government, there was no difference between the Culdees and the
monastic communities in the Latin Church.”
88
Appendix.




