

A.I.F. Land Book No. 3.
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
EDUCATION SERVICE.
THE BUSINESS
OF FARMING.
London:
EDUCATION SERVICE, A.I.F., ADMINISTRATIVE HEADQUARTERS
32, Grosvenor Place, Westminster, S.W.I.
1919,








A.I.F. Land Book No. 3.
THE BUSINESS OF FARMING.
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
EDUCATION SERVICE.
LONDON:
Education Service, A.1.F., Administrative Headquarters,
32 Grosvenor Place, Westminster, S.W.I.
1 9 1 9 ...




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
THE OUTLOOK ... ... ... ... ... 5
MENSURATION ON| THE FARM ... ... 8
BOOKKEEPING FOR THE FARMER ... ... 20
FARM INSURANCE ... ... ... ... ... 26
THE WEATHER ... ... ... ... 28
BUYING AND SELLING ... ... ... ... 31
AGRICULTURAL CO-OPERATION ... ... ... 34
SOURCES OF INFORMATION ... ... ... 47
FARMING POLICY ... ... ... 51
land pursuits TEXT-BOOKS ..... ...... ...




THE BUSINESS OF FARMING.
THE OUTLOOK.
The Local Market. —The local market, in its very
accessibility, has an obvious advantage over foreign
markets. In a comparatively new and sparsely settled
country like Australia an unusually large proportion
of the produce must be exported. The chief way to
increase the local demand is to increase the local popula-
tion, and that, though admittedly Australia’s greatest
need, is outside the scope of this scheme.
What, then, can be done to stimulate local demand, or
to induce Australians to use Australian instead of imported
products ? As a rule the Australian article is so superior
in quality that it has only to be known to be appreciated,
and the best form of advertisement is the distribution of
, samples. This is work that could very well be undertaken
by associations of growers. The war will have been of in-
direct benefit in this respect, in that the shortage of
shipping will have forced people to use Australian products
which they have not used before.
To what extent can increased production take the place
dff now T imported, or to what extent do we
fail to avail ourselves of the local market we already
have ? It will astonish most Australians to learn, for
instance, that we import huge quantities of oats. Taking
the five years 1911-16, our average annual importation of
oats was 1,466,670 bushels, and our average exports only
245,847 bushels, leaving a net importation of 1,220,823
bushels.
Our average net imports of other agricultural products
for the same five years are as follows ; Maize, 1,247,845
bushels; barley, 183,554 bushels ; malt, 81,634 bushels ;
potatoes, 6,308 tons ; cane sugar, 61,324 tons; dried fruits,
4,721,408 lbs. ; hops, 958,205 lbs. This leaves out of the
question such products as cotton, coffee, rice, cocoanut


and fibres, which, though they have been grown success-
fully on a commercial scale, may perhaps still be regarded
as in the experimental stage. To encourage the production
of these, the Commonwealth Government pays bonuses
extending over a number of years. The value of tobacco
imported in 1915-16 was £736,893. Other established
industries in which local production has not reached local
consumption are olives, flax and linseed, walnuts, peanuts
and other nuts, broom millet and canary seed.
Tse Outlook foe export.
The Effect of the War. —One of the most apparent effects
of the War is the deficiency it has caused in the supply
of the staple articles of food in Europe. This is partly
owing to the shipping shortage, and partly to the huge
drain made upon the man power of the combatant nations.
This shortage of foodstuffs guarantees high market
prices in the immediate future. Australia, however,
cannot expect to benefit to the same extent as producing
countries that are closer to Europe, owing to the high
freights.
The Return to Settled Conditions. —-To the man who is
now considering taking up an occupation on the land,
the immediate markets are not of great interest. It is to
the future that he must look. After the signing of Peace,
and as the ship building programmes of the United
Kingdom and United States of America are developed,
the world’s markets will return to something like normal
conditions.
In considering what these conditions will be, little atten-
tion need be paid to the damage wrought by the war in
France and Belgium, nor by war and revolution in
Russia and Poland. This damage is transitory. A
consideration of the more permanent results of the war is
encouraging to the farmer.
The Standard of Living.— The end of the war has
brought with it great popular movements. The farmer,
as a farmer, is not concerned with their political signifi-
cance ; his interest centres upon their economic effects.
It is certain that, whatever form the world reconstruc-
tion takes, higher wages will result in a general betterment
of the standard of living in Europe, and this must mean a
greater demand than ever before for foodstuffs.


Meat. —On the Continent of Europe, and even in some
of the agricultural districts of the United Kingdom, meat
has been hitherto a luxury. As shipping facilities enable
meat to be sold at more reasonable prices, the demand is
likely to be far greater than in pre-war days.
During the war, Australian frozen meat has received a
wonderful advertisement. In countries such as France
and Italy, the importation of frozen meat before the war
was almost impossible owing to the standards and re-
strictions imposed. The consumers of these countries have
now learnt to appreciate the qualities of frozen meat.
An indefinite expansion of the frozen meat trade may,
therefore, be confidently expected.
Wool. —-With an increased standard of comfort clothing
and woollen goods will be in greater demand in Europe.
The demand for wool may, as a consequence, be expected
to increase rather than decrease as normal conditions
return.
Wheat. —-In the case of wheat the tendencies pointing
to an increased demand are not so apparent as in the case
of meat. Nevertheless, the European demand for cereals,
and particularly for wheat, is likely to increase.
In Russia and in Central Europe rye bread forms the
staple article of diet. A higher standard of living will
probably have a similar effect on these countries to that
which it had on England in the first half of the 19th cen-
tury, that is to say, the wheaten loaf will probably take the
place of rye bread. If this occurs to any extent it will lead
to the Eastern European populations consuming a far
larger proportion of their own wheat, and thus lessen the
supply available for export from these countries to Wes-
tern Europe,
Butter, Eggs, Poultry, etc —Dairy and poultry products
will be affected in the same way as meat, and a con-
siderably increased demand may be anticipated.
Fruit. —A higher standard of living in Europe will cer-
tainly increase the demand for fruit, both fresh and pre-
served, Australia, however, is likely to be at a permanent
disadvantage in all forms of fruit export in which the
fruit retains its bulk (fresh fruit and canned fruit), owing
to her distance from the world’s 'markets and to the con-
sequent higher freights.


This does not mean that apples, pears and oranges will
not continue to be exported profitably, but it suggests that
the fruit grower should turn his attention more towards
developing an export trade of fruit in its less bulky and
perishable form.
The Australian jam industry has received a great adver-
tisement during the war. It has achieved a high reputation
owing to the splendid quality of fruit available in Australia
for the jam industry. Jam is regarded by shipping com-
panies as good stowage, and freights are not likely to
prove a serious handicap.
It is in the dried form that fruit is least bulky. One
part of dried fruit is equivalent to from 5 to 7 parts of
fresh. The British consumer has not been educated to the
value of dried fruit. Advertising to secure publicity for
the quality and comparative cheapness of dried fruit
should lead to a far larger demand.
MENSURATION FOR THE FARMER.
A Few Useful Rules for Men on the Land.
{a) Water Conservation.
Cubic Measure :
1,728 cubic inches = 1 cubic foot.
27 cubic feet = 1 cubic yard.
Liquid Measure :
2 pints = 1 quart.
4 quarts 1 gallon.
Connection between Cubic Measure and Liquid Measure :
1 cubic yard of water contains 168| gallons.
1 cubic foot of water contains 6J gallons.
Weight of water : 1 gallon weighs 10 lbs.
Water is stored in tanks —Underground,
Above ground.
Excavated reservoirs.
Above-ground tanks are either [a) Rectangular.
(b) Cylindrical.
To find Cubical Contents of Rectangular Tank.
Contents = L X B X H. When L == Length.
B = Breadth.
H = Height.


What is the cubic capacity in cubic yards of the follow-
ing tank, and how much water would it hold when full ?
■ 6 ft, long, 6 ft. wide, 6 ft. 6 in. high.
6 X 6 X 6| Answer in yards.
27
6x6 X X = Answer in gallons.
To find Cubical Contents of Cylindrical Tank.
{a) Measure diameter.
(h) Measure height.
Half diameter is called the radius.
General Rule.
Area of base X height = Cubical contents.
R Radius.
Area of base tt r 2.
Where tt = 3f.
Contents of tank = tt fh.
Problem. —How much water should the following tank
contain when full ?
Diameter, 15 ft. ; height, 10 ft.
Rule—
tr fh = Cubic capacity.
R =l\ h= 10 TT =. 3i.
(7|-) 2 X 3fX 10 = Cubic capacity in cubic feet.
(7|) 2 X XlO X 6|- = Contents in gallons.
Excavations.
To find the cubical contents of a tank with following dimen-
sions
Top, 100 ft. X 100 ft.
Bottom, 60 ft. X 60 ft.
Depth, 10 ft.
General Rule.—(Area of top + area of bottom -f four
times area of middle section) divided by 6 X by depth
= Cubical contents.
As follows :—-
100x100= 10,000 area of top.
60 X 60= 3,600 ~ bottom.
160 x 160= 25,600 4'times area of middle section.
39,200 = sum of these areas.
10 X 39,200 = Cubical contents in cubic feet.
6
(10 = depth).
Slope of sides.


Generally speaking, slope on 3 sides of 2 to 1 is advis-
able ; on side to which stock will have access, slope may be
4 to 1 ; have this corduroyed or built solid with stones.
Slope of 2 to 1
If a tank has top dimensions of 80 X 70 with slope of
2 to 1 on 3 sides and 4 to 1 on one side and tank is|6 ft.
deep, bottom dimensions will be as follows :
Dimensions of tank are : 80 X 70 (top).
46 X 44 (bottom).
Depth 6 ft.
Problems . —What should it cost to excavate a tank of
[a] following dimensions at rate of Is. per cubic yard :
Dimensions 100 ft. x 80 ft. x 8 ft. Slopes
of two in one on three sides and 4 in one on
other side.
(b) How much water should it contain when full ?


(c) Assuming that a sheep required gallons of water
per day, and that it is necessary to provide
approximately one year’s supply, how many
sheep would a tank of above dimensions provide
for ?
[d] Dimensions of a tank required to supply 4,000
sheep.
{e) What are the internal dimensions of—-
{a) Rectangular iron tank to hold 500 gallons.
[p) Cylindrical iron tank to hold 1,000 gallons.
To find cubical contents of pit for silage of any given
dimensions -
Perpendicular sides.
Ends slope 4 to 1.
Depth 6 ft.
Dimensions at top 60 ft. X 40 ft.
Since triangle is \ area of parallelogram on same base,
and between same parallel.
The area of triangle A.B.C. is same in each case.
Volume of whole will be 36 X 6 X 40.
Hay Stacks and Hay Sheds. —-Cubical contents most easily
arrived at by two operations.
Calculate Volume—-
[a) Below Eaves.
(&) Above Eaves.
Hay Sheds.
Volume below Eaves L b H.
H = height from ground to Eaves,
Volume above Eaves L b H
2
H = height from Eaves to Ridge.
Volume of hay shed—L b L x Lb L
2


Rectangular stacks whose sides and ends are not
perpendicular.
Case 1 when length of
ridge equals length at
eaves.
Below eaves as for excavation of tanks, i.e. (area at
ground + area at eaves + four times area of middle
section) divided by six, multiplied by height from ground
to eaves.
Above eaves ... ... ... Lb H
~2
Case 2.—Where length of ridge is less than length of
eaves.
Below eaves. As above.
Above eaves. Same rale as for below eaves.
Example :
Ground dimensions ...40x30
Ground to eaves ...7
Dimensions at eaves ...47x37
Eaves to ridge ...6
Length of ridge ...40
Below Eaves... ... 40 X 30 1,200
47 x 37 1,739
87 x 67 5,829
Total ... ... ... 8,768
8768 x 7 = 10,062 cubic feet,
6
Above eaves ... ... ... 47 x 37 1,739
40 x 0 0
87 X 37 3,219
4 958
4958 X 6 4,958 cubic feet.
6
Total ... 10,062 + 4,958 = 15,020.


The density of hay varies according to size of stacks,
age of stack, and the material from which hay has been
made. It would be necessary to cut out a cubic yard from
a stack to determine definitely the density in any given case.
Assuming that hay weighs 300 cubic feet to the ton, the
above stack would contain 15020, that is 50 tons.
~300~
Circular Stacks.
Below Eaves 2 at ground.
irf at eaves.
4 ary 2 4 times middle section.
Add these areas together multiply by the height|from
ground to eaves and divide product by 6.
Above the eaves ... ... volume
■ 3
(H in this case equals height from eaves to peak.)
Add these two items together for total contents of stacks.
Measurement of Land —-
Length —l2 in. = 1 foot,
3 ft. = 1 yard.
220 yards - = 1 furlong.
1,760 yards = 1 mile.
Area —144 sq. inches 1 sq. foot.
9 sq. feet = 1 sq. yard.
4,840 sq. yards = 1 acre.
Chain —IOO links = 1 chain.
22 yards = 1 chain.
80 chains = 1 mile.
Sq. chain —IO,OOO sq. links = 1 sq. chain.
10 sq. chains =1 acre.
Measurement of Land.
In case of complex measurements surveyor will be neces-
sary.
Simple means of calculating area of irregular shaped sur-
face is by drawing to scale same on graph paper and count
ing square included. In all cases on boundaries where a


square is dissected if half or more than half is included
count it, neglect others.
To Measure Land. — Chaining best method. Two men
required leader to have given numbers of pegs, say, 10;
second man collects pegs as he proceeds. When he has
collected 10 he makes a note of it, hands pegs to leader
and proceeds as before.
As a slight error will make a lot say in the course of a mile
care must be taken to follow a straight course, and to
mieasure exactly A steel measuring chain properly
divided is necessary.
Areas.— Area of rectangular fields equals L x B.
Area of irregular fields : Divide the area diagonally.
Calculate the area of each triangle so formed as follows:
Area of triangle equals Base X Height divided by 2.
(Height equals perpendicular from base to apex).
To mark out a Right-angle. — Mark out a line,at right-angle
to which it is wished to draw a right-angle, drive a peg in
at point from which the right-angle is to be drawn. Mark
out forty feet on this line and put in another peg, take a
tape eighty feet long, hold one end on each of the pegs.
Then holding the tape at the thirty foot knot walk out from
the original peg till both portions of the tape are taut.
Drive a peg in at this point. As an error of half an inch
will make a considerable difference in say a mile, accuracy
is essential.
Planting out an Orchard. —Dimensions of a field 800 yards
by 600 yards.
Trees to be thirty feet from the edge of the field and
twenty feet apart in every direction. How many trees
will be required ?
Taking sixty feet from ,800 yards we have 2,340 feet, i.e.,
accommodation for 117 trees in the row.
Taking sixty feet from 600 yards we have 1,740, i.e., that
is accommodation for 87 rows.
87 X 117 = 10,179 trees.
Useful things to remember :
1 bushel of wheat weighs 60 pounds,
barley
Oats „ 40
maize ~ 56


Wire Gauge.
Weight
of 1
mile.
Length of 1 cwt.
cwts
qrs.
lbs.
yards.
4
6
1
14
276
5
5
1
7
332
6
4
1
19
397
7
3
2
20
479
8
3
0
8
573
9
2
2
. 10
680
10
2
0
7
819
11
1
2
18
1,050
12
1
1
2
1,393
Posts to
the mile.
Ft.
Ins.
No. .
Ft.
Ins.
No.
—
—
12
0
440
8
3
640
13
0
409
9
0
587
14
0
377
10
0
528
15
0
352
11
0
480
16
6
320
1 bushel of bran weighs 20 pounds.
pollard „ 20 „
1 ton of flour „ 2,000
bran ~
pollard ~ ~ „
1 stone of beef or mutton weighs 8 lbs.
Fencing . —Drawn wire.
Measurement of Firewood. —Firewood is generally sold
by the cord. A cord is 128 cubic feet. Cord wood
should be cut 4 ft. long and stacked in heaps 8 ft. or a
multiple of 8 ft. long by 4 ft. high. Double rows should
not be allowed.
Problem : What should be the value of a heap of wood
56 jx 4 X 4 ft. at Is. 6d. per cord ?
Sawn Timber— Sawn timber is always sold by the
superficial foot, which is 1 ft. by 1 ft. by 1 in.
To calculate the number of superficial feet multiply the
running length in feet by the breadth in inches by the
thickness in inches, and divide the product by 12. Thus,
if we have ten pieces of 5 X 4 timber each 20 ft. long
we have in all running length of 200 ft., i.e., 200 X 5 x 4
12
equals 333£ superficial feet.


£
s.
d.
8 X 18 equals
7
4
0
Value of Nitrogen.
6x5
1
10
0
Value of Phosphoric
Acid.
13 X 2/11 „
1
17
11
Value of Potash
£10
11
11
Value of Manure per
Ton.
Analyses of Fertilizers. —There is a fertilizer adulteration
act in force in Australia, which provides that every manure
merchant shall supply an analysis with his wares. The
analysis affords a means of comparing the actual value of
a fertilizer with the price charged for it. For example,
the Department of Agriculture publishes each year a list
of the mean values of the useful ingredients in fertilizers.
For this purpose a unit is considered 1 per cent. Thus,
if the unit value of phosphoric acid is 55., the actual price
of a superphosphate containing 17 per cent, of water
soluble phosphoric acid is 17 X 5 equals £4 ss. per ton.
Rule. —To calculate the value of any special fertilizer
multiply the unit value of each ingredient by the percentage
of that ingredient. The total will give the value per ton of
the mixture.
Problem. —What is the value of special fertilizer con-
taining 8 per cent, nitrogen, 6 per cent, phosphoric acid,
and 13 per cent, potash, when nitrogen is worth 18s. per
unit, phosphoric acid ss. per unit, and potash 2s. \\d. per
unit ?
It must be remembered that the unit value does not
always represent the actual value, which is influenced by
local conditions, such as cost of preparation, mixing,
bagging, freight, etc. It, however, affords means of com-
paring the value of special fertilizers.
Problem. —-Which is the cheaper manure ?
( a) One containing 3 per cent, nitrogen, 13 per cent.
phosphoric acid, and 6 per cent, potash, at £7
per ton.
(b) One containing 4 per cent, nitrogen, 14 per cent.
phosphoric acid, 6 per cent, potash, at £8 per
ton.


Unit Values of Fertilizing Ingredients in different
Manures for 1915.
Per Unit.
s. d.
Nitrogen in nitrates ... ... ... 18 0
„ ammonium salts ... ... 15 4
„ blood, bones, offal, etc., fine ... 15 11
„ 'nitrolin... ... ... ... 15 7
Phosphoric Acid in bones, offal, etc., fine 3 0
~ ~ superphosphate and
mineral phosphate—
Water soluble ... ... ... ... 5 0
Insoluble ... ... ... ... 211
Potash in sulphate of potash. (Not available
owing to the war).
Fertilizer analyses furnish a means of knowing how
much actual plant food is supplied per acre. Thus, if a
dressing of a half cwt. of 17 per cent, superphosphate be
applied per acre, this will supply 17 X 56 = 9-52 lbs. of
100
phosphoric acid per acre.
How much superphosphate containing 15 per cent, would
have to be supplied per acre to add the same quantity
phosphoric acid ?
15 lbs. is contained in 100
1 lb. „ 100
15
9’52 lbs. „ 100 x 9-52 = 63-5 lbs..
15
General Problems.
(1) It is intended to sow 400 acres with wheat, using,
super-phosphate at the late of 56 lbs. per acre. How much
must be oought and what will it cost at £4 ss. per ton, plus
freight at 15s. per ton ?
(2) Anticipating a 20 bushel yield per acre from 400 acres,,
how many wheat sacks will be required for the harvest
(3 bushels per What will these cost at sevenpence
per sack ?
(3) A man has 640 acres conditional purchase and 1 320
acres conditional lease. Capital value £1 per acre. Rate
B


of interest 2f per cent. Payments are made annually
at the rate of Is. per acre. Assuming that the only rent
charged is the 2J per cent, quoted, by how much is his debt
on the C.P. reduced each year ?
Note.— lt is recognised that in some particulars this
problem does not exactly represent the terms of C.L, and
C.P., but all the processes involved are considered in a
problem of the nature set. Assume that 2f per cent, pay-
ment is obligatory on the whole 1960 acres, but that all in
excess of this amount is applied to the reduction of the prin-
cipal of the C.P.
(4) A man has a C.P. valued 30s. per acre, interest
2y per cent., calculate the annual amounts paid in interest
and liquidation of the capital value before it comes freehold
if he pays at the rate of Is. per acre per year.
(5) A man buys 1,000 sheep at 255. per head with a
7 per cent, rejection at 15s. per head. He has to pay drov-
ing rates at Is. per 100. What does he pay for the sheep,
and what does the seller receive for them after paying trans-
port at the rate of 2s. per 100 auctioneer’s commission,
at 24 per cent., and yard dues at the rate of Is. per
hundred ?
(6) A man buys 750 ewes at 12s. 6d., droving fees at 13s.
per 100, losses of ewes 35 prior to lambing, he has a 70 per
■cent, lambing, shears his sheep at a cost of £1 15s. per 100,
average yield 10 lbs. wool, realising on the average 9 d. per
pound. Cost of marking, etc. ss. per 100 lambs. Lambs
sold at ,an average of 9s. Charges for rent, etc., £B.
Reckoning the value of the original ewes at the time of the
sale of the lambs to be 10s., calculate his gain or loss on the
transaction.
(7) A man has 950 sheep averaging 451bs. dressed weight,
killing, dressing, freight, etc., 2s. 6d. per head. Price
obtained at Smithfield 2s. 6d. per stone. Bank charges,
>.etc., £5 6s. B d. Find the amount realised.
(8) A man buys 100 sheep at £l, and gives a bill for the
■amount due in sixty days, money being worth 6 per cent.
What does he actually pay for the sheep ?
(9) A man commences work on the 4th of January, 1918,
at the rate of 7s. 6 d. per day, and is paid off on June sth,
he does not work on Sundays. How much did he earn ?


(10) A squatter sends 100 bales of wool to market. The
average contents of the bales is 350 lbs.
Costs of Sale. —Receiving, weighing, lotting, etc., one
eighth of one penny per lb.
Commission :
3 per cent, for £2OO or under.
2 ~ £2OO to £5OO.
fi „ £5OO and over.
Insurance.— One shilling and sixpence per cent.
If his consignment averages 13J pence per lb., how
much should he receive ?
The feeding value of fats is approximately 2b times that
of carbo-hydrates. To find the nutritive ratio of albumi-
noids to carbo-hydrates multiply fat by 2| and add carbo-
hydrates. Divide the total by the albuminoids.
Oil cake contains 24 per cent, digestible albuminoids,
29 per cent, digestible cybro-hydrates, and B.| per cent,
fats. Therefore 8| X 2|- + 29 = 21J + 29
24 - ' 24
equals approximately 2-2. That is 1 albuminoid to 2-2
carbo-hydrates.
To find the approximate commercial butter from a given
quantity Test X weight = butter fat.
Ido
Butter fat X 17-5 = overrun.
TOO
Butter fat + overrun = commercial butter
Note.—The Government allows 17-5 per cent, of water,
salt, etc., in finished product over the actual pure butter
fat. This is called the overrun.
100 lb. milk with a 3-5 per cent, test will yield commer-
cial butter as follows
100 X 3-5 = 3-5 butter fat.
Tod
3-5 x 17-5 = 2-45 = -60 overran.
idd~ "T
3.5 -60 == 4-1 commercial butter.
Butter ration would be 100 24'3.
4-1
i.e., 24.3 lbs. of milk to produce 1 lb. of butter.


Problems. —Approximately how much commercial butter
should you obtain from 375 lb. milk, with a 3-7 per cent,
fat test. The loss in separation is • 1 per cent, fat, and
in manufacture and handling another • 1 per cent, is lost
What would be the butter ratios of the above quantities
of milk both true and false, and what loss would you
suffer in one year if separating and manufacture each lost
•1 percent., and you were handling 3,000 gallons of milk
daily, and commercial butter had a fixed rate of Is. per lb.,
1 gallon milk being equal to 10-32 lb.
Note. — By true and false ratios is meant : —The actual
ratios if no loss were suffered in separation, etc., and the
ratio after losing the • 2 per cent. This example will point
out how even a loss so small will mount up in the year.
To compare the feeding value of two different brands of
oil cake or concentrated fodder.
Estimate the unit value of actual food in each case as
follows : —Take a fodder with a guaranteed composition as
follows 34 per cent, albuminoids, 27 per cent, carbo-
hydrates, 10 per cent, oil, price £8 per ton.
Reckon the value of albuminoids and oil as being 2\ times
that of the carbo-hydrates. Therefore —
34 X 2\ equivalent of albuminoids as carbo-hydrates.
10 X 2\ = equivalent of oils as carbo-hydrates.
27 = carbo-hydrates content,
that is 137 = the total number of feed units in the fodder.
£8 = Is. 2d., which is the value per unit.
137
BOOKKEEPING FOR THE FARMER.
Bookkeeping affords the only means of knowing the
actual financial standing of any business concern. It
affords a means of determining the actual profits or losses of
any particular department of that business. The double
entry system of bookkeeping by which every transaction
is entered in two separate accounts is necessary for farm
bookkeeping.


Columnar or Tabular System of Double Entry.
1. When there are not a great number of transactions
to record as in the business of a small mixed farmer, the
above system should be easy to understand, should
minimise labour, and concentrate items of a similar nature.
2. The personal aspect of each transaction is posted to
the debtors or creditors account in the ledger, individually,
also transactions affecting capital and asset account, but
only the totals at end of trading period of accounts in
columns 2,3, 4,5, 6, 11, 12, 13, and 14, need to be posted
to the respective accounts in the ledger to complete the
double entry in same, thus saving a great amount of labour
in posting, whilst at the same time there is a valuable com-
parative statement (in departmental totals at foot of each
page), in the cash journal at any time during the year.
3. It is to be observed that more columns could be pro-
vided, with appropriate departmental headings, but the
idea should be to limit the analysis in this manner to the
most important departmepts, or rather the departments
having the most numerous transactions to record.
4. If further analysis into departments is desired without
increasing the size of the cash journal and number of
columns treat the transactions in the same manner as asset
transactions described above, and as shown at foot of c.
Journal examples marked with an x.
5. It is suggested that no expense account be kept, but
that such transactions be analysed and debited to the
departments concerned as they occur {see rates and taxes
paid on 6.6.18). The disadvantage of this method would be
that expenses would appear in the final departmental
account included in the total debt, whereas if the expenses
items were debited to a general expenses account as they
occurred, such account would at the end of the year be
practically a list of expenses in a concise form, and could
then be closed by crediting it with apportionments trans-
ferred to departmental accounts concerned. However,
if simplicity in keeping accounts is the main consideration’
cut out the classifying general expenses, etc.
6. Repairs and Maintenance. —Debit the departmental
account or accounts concerned and credit bank or creditor.
For instance, in the case of repairs to cow sheds paid for,


enter cost in dairy account debit column and bank credit
column.
7. Natural Increase of Stock. —The respective depart-
mental accounts get credit for such increases when stock
on hand is valued and credited at end of trading period.
If an animal died it would have the opposite effect on the
total credited for stock on hand.
8. Valuation of Growing Crops, Stock, etc— Growing
crops. The actual cost involved in sowing, manuring, etc.,
will be the value of the growing crop so far as the books are
concerned until such time as the valuation may be made.
Valuations should, if possible, be made by an independent
party,, as the owner is apt to be optimistic.
Value of Stock. —Great care should be taken in valuing
stock as it stands, and at the present time, otherwise there
is a danger of anticipating future profits. To deal with the
transactions in the cash journal at the end of the year debit
a ledger stock account, and credit departmental accounts
with stock on hand. This would leave stock account with
a debit balance in the ledger and appear as such (asset) in
the balance sheet and be carried forward in the cash
journal as debit balances in the departmental accounts
concerned.
9. Income Tax Requirements.— These differ in different
States, but the cash journal and valuation lists should
enable the farmer to work out the necessary information
for filling in the form such as the attached.
10. Sales of Old Plant.—' Credit plant account, and
debit cash account to record a changed nature of asset.
11. Depreciation. —Debit the departments responsible
for the depreciation and credit the fixed asset account
(plant, buildings, etc.). If, in the course of time it is found
that an item, say, in plant account, for example a plough,
has according to the detailed list kept in connection with
that account been written down to the value of £2, and that
it is sold for £3, it proves that the profits of previous years
had been debited with £1 too much. To adjust, credit the
department concerned with £l, and debit the plant account
with that sum.
12. What an Auditor would require. —The cash journal
would give him a chronological record of transactions. He


would require receipts for all expenditure, the reference
column should give him the number of the invoice. He
would require all invoices for purchases, which should be
filed in numerical order, as set out in reference column of
cash journal. He would require copies of consignment
notes, credit notes, etc., from merchant debtors. He
would also require bank pass book and cheque book. If
auditing on account of a prospective purchaser of the farm
he would require title deeds, and certificate of an inde-
pendent expert valuer.
13. Household. —lt will simplify the bookkeeping if
the household be considered as one of the departments of
the farm.
14. Wages. —Keep a monthly wage sheet. Dissect the
wages according to departments and debit accounts con-
cerned.
15. Farmer’s Own Pay. —Charge the business with the
owner’s estimated salary and consider the total net return
as a direct interest on the amount invested.
16. Opening Entries. —-A careful inventory must be made
of all assets, including amounts owing to you. Debit each
department separately with the amount for that depart-
ment, and credit the total to capital. A complete list of
liabilities must also be made out. Credit each account
separately with the amount in question and debit the total
to capital,
17. Diary. —The farmer should keep a careful diary in
which every transaction should be recorded as it takes
place. The items concerning the particular accounts will
be entered from the diary into the narrative of transactions
as attached.
In the diary should be recorded where the various
labourers are working each day.
Service of all breeding animals should be recorded.
Sowing and harvesting operations should be recorded.
Weather conditions should be recorded daily.
If monthly accounts are run with local business people
they must be dissected and the amounts charged in each
case to the departments concerned.


Information Required for Income Tax Returns.
Income of Farm, Orchard, Dairy, or Pastoral Under-
taking for the Year ended 30th June, 1918.
Item No. £
51. Sales, both Cash and Credit, for year: —
' {a) Sheep sold for
Cattle sold for
Horses sold for
Other live stock sold for
< (b) Wool £ Skins and Hides
(c) Grain, Hay and other Fodder ...
(d) Milk, Cream, Butter, Poultry, Eggs, etc.
{e) Timber, Firewood, Bark, etc. ...
(/) Fruit, Vegetables, etc., £ Wine, etc.
I ig) Potatoes, £ ; other sales
Sales.
52. Other income {see Instruction /.)
53. Value of stock and produce given in exchange
for goods, provisions, etc. ...
54. Estimated value of live stock, poultry, milk,
butter, eggs, fruit, vegetables, etc., taken off
the farm, station, or orchard, for use of house-
hold and sustenance of employees
55. Stock on hand or in transit on 30th June, 1918,
namely :
i a ) Sheep at each
Cattle at each
Horses at each
Other Live Stock
(&) Farm produce, viz. :—Grain, ;
Wool, ; Other, £
Total of Items 51 to 55 ... ... £


Business Deductions for Year.
56. Stock on hand or in transit '3oth June, 1917,
namely ; £
[a) Sheep at each
Cattle at each
Horses at each
Other Like Stock
(b) Farm Produce, viz. : —Grain, £ ;
Wool, £ ; Other, £
57. Purchases during year, namely
" ( a) Sheep at cost of
Cattle at cost of
Horses at cost of
Other Live Stock .. v
- (6) Fodder (not exceeding own grown)
Seed (not exceeding own grown)
Fertilisers and other manures ...
(c) Value of stock, etc., received in exchange
for produce, etc.
58. Wages paid for cultivation of farm, or of orchard
in bearing, or upkeep of station, repairing
fences, etc. (not for any improvements or
additions to the farm, orchard, or station).
Directions in item 35 apply here also
59. Rent of farm or station paid (not including C.P.
payments). Give name and address of owner
60. Sustenance at per week of wages
men while exclusively engaged on the farm,
etc., in cultivation of upkeep
And of aborigines so employed at
£ per year
61. Of Stores used for sustenance of such employees
62. Interest paid during year on borrowed money
used in this business ... ...
(Attach a statement as described in Item 17),
63. Repairs (not alterations or additions) to plant,
machinery, implements, tools (wages of em-
ployees not to be included)
64. Rates and Taxes paid during year on premises
used in this business. (Give details in State-
ment 5, on page 4).


65. Sacks, Twine and Cases, £ Fire
Insurance
66. Deduction for services of my children over 16
years of age regularly employed in my
business, and not paid wages, viz : (Give
name and age of each child so employed, and
nature of services) ...
67. Four per cent, of my equity in premises owned
and occupied by me and used only in my
business, viz. :
Land ... ... £
Improvements ... £
Total ... £
(Attach details as in Item 49).
68. Depreciation on the written down value of Plant
and Machinery, including Implements, at
per cent, on £ ... ....
69. Other business expenses (as per list attached)
See Instruction [p) on first page ...
Total of Items 56 to 69 ... ... £
Net Income transferred to Summary
INSURANCE.
Insurance to a reasonable limit, is acknowledged to be
a sound business proposition. This applies particularly
to insurance against fire of the Australian farm owing
to the dry and inflammable material of which the home-
stead and improvements are generally constructed, and
to the conditions of our climate.
Homestead— The farmer should not neglect to take
out a fire policy to cover the homestead, stables, and all
other farm buildings, and should take care to keep it
on foot by paying the annual premium before the due date.
Stock. —Stock may be insured under various policies,
covering the risks of death by natural causes, or accident.
The limit is generally up to two-thirds of actual value of


the stock, except blood stock, which may be covered up to
three-fourths of actual value. Stock are generally insured
for a period of from one to twelve months.
Horses. —Ordinary policies cover horses from Ito 10 years
old. If the horse is over that age, an extra premium of
10s. per cent, for each year or part thereof over ten years
is usually charged.
Extra premiums are charged for castration risks with
stallions, and increased according to the age of stallion,
when operation is performed.
Mares, in foal, are insured against foaling risks. The
period of insurance, commencing with the act of foaling,
is usually thirty days.
An extra premium is charged for a mare carrying her
first foal, approximately threepence for each pound insured.
Mares and foals may also be insured.
Cattle. —lf over 6 years, an extra premium of 10s. per
cent, for each year or part thereof over 6 years, is charged.
Risks included in general policies are castration, speying,
pleuro, tuberculosis, anthrax, and transit by sea.
The following shows the approximate rates for various
classes of cattle
Rate per cent.
Bulls, and cows (including calving risk) ... 10
Bullocks, and heifers (including calving risk)
—Farm work 0n1y.,. ... ... ... 71-
Bullocks, all other work ... ... ... 121 r
Cattle for fattening or grazing (excluding risk
of calving) ... ... ... 6J
Extra premiums—
(a) To include castration and speying ... 5
(b) To include pleuro, tuberculosis and
anthrax ... ... ... ... . 2-i
.
Sheep and Pigs.- —General policies cover pigs over 6
months, but not exceeding 3 years.
The risks covered are death from natural causes and
accident, including accident during transit by road or
rail, and breeding risks.
The following risks are excluded. —Foot-rot in sheep,
swine fever, anthrax, transit by sea.


Insurance is limited to two-thirds of the value.
The usual classification and approximate rates are as
under ;—•
Boars ... ... \
Ewes ... ... (
Rams (high class) j
Sows ... ...
Rate 12 \ per cent.
If over 3 years, an extra premium of 20s. per cent, for
each year or part thereof over 3 years, is charged.
Crops. —Growing crops may be insured against fire on a
3 months policy to cover the ripening and harvesting period
Stacks may be covered either by a 3 months or a yearly
policy.
Crops in some districts are insured against hailstones.
This is more frequently done when there is a particularly
heavy crop.
The following are some approximate rates for insurance
against hailstones : —Barley, Maize, Oats, Rye and
Wheat
Rates per cent.
• s. d.
One month ... ... 20 0
Two months ... 27 6
Three months ... 35 0
All other classes of crops
Rates per cent,
s. d.
One month ...... 40 0
Two months ... 50 0
Three months ... 60 0
THE WEATHER.
Official Forecasts.- —-The farmer should at least have
an elementary knowledge of the principles of meteorology,
so that he may be able to obtain an approximate idea as
to how the official Government weather forecasts will affect
his district. Every day an outline map of the Common-
wealth is published in the daily papers, showing lines of
equal barometric pressure, and a few notes are added with
regard to the position of the approaching disturbance. It
will, therefore, be a great advantage to him to be able to


make use of these predictions, and to judge to what extent
an approaching disturbance will affect his particular
locality.
How Weather is Forecasted.- —Every farmer should obtain
a reliable barometer, and have it tested, and then find the
height of his residence above sea level, so that his baro-
meter readings will be comparable with those published
in the press. The height above sea level can generally
be obtained from the nearest railway station or the local
surveyor. Roughly speaking, 1 inch should be allowed
for every I,oooft. above sea level. For instance, if your
elevation is 2,000 ft., your barometer would read 28-00 in.
as against -30-00 in. at sea-level. If you make allowance
accordingly, you can follow the different disturbances
shown on the daily weather chart.
Some people think of the weather as having no special
order or system, whereas, to a large extent it is very orderly.
Examine a chart showing wdiat is called “ Southern
Hemisphere high-pressure belt.” This belt is caused by
the flowing down from equatorial regions of air which has
been heated, has risen and expanded, and then overflowed
the surrounding air, and reaching more southerly latitudes
has become jammed owing to the smaller circumference
of the earth at that point. This creates a pile of air with
consequently greater pressure. Owing to causes which
cannot be dealt with here, this high pressure belt be-
comes broken up into a series of revolving masses, known as
anti-cyclones. South and north of these, and sometimes-
in between, are cyclones. Do not imagine that the word
cyclone, so commonly used in this connection, means a
furious storm—it merely means wind travelling in a circle.
This whole chain of cyclone and anti-cyclone is moving
from west to east, though subject to varying speeds, and
sometimes complete stoppage. The cyclone is made up of
winds travelling round a centre and (in the Southern
Hemisphere) in the same direction as the hands of a clock.
The anti-cyclone is revolving in an opposite direction. The
cyclone is a low-pressure area—a hollow in the air surface
while the anti-cyclone is a mound. You will see on the
chart these high and low-pressure areas, represented by a
series of concentric or curved lines. Such lines are
known as isobars, or lines of equal pressure. To make his
chart, the meteorologist jots on a map the barometer


readings received by wire, and joins those of the same value
by lines ; this gives him his weather chart. Then, by
noting the character and number of the curves so drawn
and other details, he is enabled to make a forecast.
The forward edge of an anti-cyclone is characterised by
S and S W. winds, and you will see that as these winds are
circling up from cool southerly regions they are likely to
beTool or cold winds. As our rains in Australia are almost
always from the lower pressure areas, just in advance of the
high pressure, it will be realised why rain is so often
followed by cold (in winter), or cool (in summer) S.W winds
The central area of the high pressure is generally calm and
clear and it is then we get our heavy frosts in winter, and
calm’ clear days and nights in summer. The rear edge of
the high pressure brings warmer northerly or east winds,
which are so often the prelude to a change to cloudy or
rainy weather. In winter the low pressure areas that bring
us rain come up from the south as tongues which push up
in between two advancing high pressure areas. In
summer, our best rains come in monsoonal tongues whicii
push in’from the north.
By watching the chart for the first appearance on the
coast of Western Australia of cyclone or anti-cyclone, and
noticing the direction of the wind, you have, then, a means
of estimating approaching weather several days before it
reaches the States on the Eastern side.
The Practical Value.— Such forecasts are of the greatest
moment to the Australian agriculturalists, in the following
ways; — _ .
1. In wool scouring, drying preserved fruits, and in-
dustries relying upon an out-door exposure.
2. To farmers and pastoralists as a guide when to sow
and reap ; when to house sheep during the shearing
season to avoid waste of time and money caused by
wool getting wet; when to repair decaying shelters
because violent winds are expected ; when to convey
stores to, and produce from, farms if one is depen-
dent upon the good condition of the roads ; when to
remove stock from areas likely to be flooded.
3. To conveyors generally, giving thern an opportunity
to protect perishable goods from impending rain,
. head or cold.


4. To growers, by notice of impending frosts, &c.,
especially where protection from frost is practised'
The Rain Gauge.— ~Almost everyone is vitally interested
in the amount of rainfall in his particular district. Rain
gauges cost about 10s., and are very simple provided a
little knowledge is gained in the correct use of the instru-
ment. Xne best place for the gauge is in an exposed
position, on or very near the ground. The method of cal-
culating the amount of rainfall in inches is as follows ;
A fluid ounce of water equals 1-728 cubic inches, and
there are S fluid drachms in an ounce. The area of the sur-
face of the receiving vessel should be found in square inches.
Now, by multiplying the number of fluid ounces of rain
collected by 1-728, and dividing the result by area of the
covered surface (which has been found in square inches)
the amount of rainfall in inches will be found.
As' there are 100 points to the inch of rain, each fluid
ounce equals 24 points, and each fluid drachm equals 3
points.
BUYING AND SELLING.
In buying the necessaries and selling the products of a
t <ll m a man needs sound knowledge of market values in
his own and other centres.
One method adopted_ largely by experienced farmers is
t hat of placing the business in the hands of a competent
and reliable firm of stock and station agents. By doing
uiis he saves a great deal of his own time, and is usually
able to learn the best time to buy or sell. If he requires
financing at any time he can generally make satisfactory
arrangements with such firm.
Whenever payments are made, properly signed and
stamped receipts should be taken and carefully filed and
kept.
Buying.
Sto°k is mostly bought in the open market from an
auctioneer, and may be paid for in cash or bought on a
bill. If a man requires to buy on a bill he should make
the necessary arrangements with the auctioneer before
the sale commences.


Discount is generally allowed for cash. The terms
under which the sale is conducted are always read just
before the auctioneer starts selling. All risks and faults
have to be taken by the purchaser, so he should inspect
all stock carefully before buying, and see that they are
not diseased, blind, lame, etc., that ages are right and
that descriptions and brands are correctly entered on the
receipt.
Machinery is generally bought from manufacturers or
their agents.
When buying implements a farmer should find out
which make and type is most suitable for his requirements
and buy it, and not be cajoled into buying something of
very little use to him by agents whose business it is to sell.
Discount is usually allowed for cash. If it is not con-
venient to pay cash and a farmer is buying machinery on a
bill or time payment, he should read carefully any agree-
ment before signing it, and see that the conditions are-
right, the rates of interest charged not too high, and the
dates of delivery correctly stated.
Machinery should always be bought on the under-
standing that it is to be in satisfactory working order.
The farmer should not sign for a machine before giving it
a trial and finding everything in working order. If it is.
not correct it is generally best not to waste time or money
on it, but to let the firm put it right or send another
machine.
Artificial Manures.— Fertilisers are sold by nearly all
firms dealing in agricultural produce at so much per ton
on rail or wharf. A farmer should order his manure in
time to have it carted and under cover before the wet
weather sets in, or it may be damaged in transit. Gener-
ally the most convenient time to have manures delivered
is when the farmer is carting his wheat. He can then
take a load back instead of an empty wagon, and he is not
likely to be bothered with weather conditions at this time
of the year.
Seeds. —Care must be taken when buying seeds that
they are free from all foreign seeds, have not been in stock
long enough to affect their germination, and are true to
name.
These points are best secured by only buying from estab


lished firms who have a high reputation for the purity of
their seed.
Bags, Woolhales, Twine, Oil, etc.— These are sold by
stock and station agents, grain merchants, machinery
firms, etc., and should always be ordered in good time to be
delivered before they are needed.
The market price of these goods fluctuates consider-
ably. By studying the market and buying at the right
time a farmer can often make a considerable saving.
Selling.
. Stock and produce of any kind naturally realise the
highest prices when in a prime marketable condition.
Generally the farmer does not give nearly enough attention
to this part of the work, and is at a considerable loss in
consequence.
Stock. When stock is sold by an auctioneer at public
auction or otherwise the seller does not generally take the
risk of the purchaser paying unless he has specially made
arrangements with the auctioneer to do so. The general
practice is for an auctioneer to take all risks in collecting
the proceeds of a sale, and to send the seller a cheque, less
5 per cent, commission, within a few days of the sale or as
soon as accounts are balanced.
Wool.- Wool is sold by stock and station agents or wool
bickers at so much per pound, in bales averaging from
250 lbs. to 300 lbs. in weight.
The buyers have their agents at most of the country
towns, rail stations, etc.
Care must always be taken that the bales are branded
and consigned correctly.
Farmers frequently make the mistake of not giving
enough attention to classing the wool. Bellies, etc., are
sometimes put in with good fleeces, and a good bale of
wool is very often spoilt in this way.
Fay .—Chaff and grain merchants are the largest buyers
of hay, which is sold at so much per ton over the weigh-
bridge, or in stacks or at per acre as a standing cron or
in stooks. r
Dairy Produce, Poultry, Rides and Skins. —These are
mostly sold by produce merchants at auction. Farmers
also sell a good deal of this kind of produce to country
storekeepers, taking stores, etc., in payment.
G


AGRICULTURAL CO-OPERATION.
The farmer sells his produce to the merchant, and often
feels that there is too great a»difference between the price
he receives and the price the consumer pays. As a pur-
chaser of farm implements and requisites he experiences
the same thing in an inverted form. As an individual he
sees no way of remedying this. The chief markets for
agricultural produce, both for home consumption and for
export, are in the big cities. Agents and merchants seek
large supplies of each variety of produce and require that
the grade shall be uniform and standardised, and they
-demand that one sample should be sufficient to judge the
whole consignment. As a result the individual farmer
finds that his small lots, which almost necessarily vary in
..quality, become increasingly unattractive to buyers.
The necessity for farmers to combine to produce saleable
''Commodities in large quantities and of standard grade, and
to protect their interests from exorbitant charges of middle-
men, has resulted in most countries of the world in agri-
cultural co-operation.
Historical.
Denmark. —■ About 1880 a wave of agricultural de-
pression affected Denmark and the other wheat growing
countries of Europe owing to the vast increase in the
amount of wheat exported from the United States. The
Danish farmers then turned their attention to dairying.
The difficulties encountered in obtaining satisfactory
prices from private export firms, and the need to establish
a high uniform standard of butter for the British markets,
induced the dairymen to combine for productive co-
operation.
In 1882 the first co-operative dairy factory was started.
The movement was successful from the first, and so
greatly had it prospered that in 1909 Denmark had 1,157
co-operative creameries with 175,000 members.
The rapid success of co-operative creameries in Denmark
is probably due to the number of small holdings. To the
small holder, co-operation is a vital necessity. In 1909
Denmark was divided into 183,313 farms, with 1,282,254
cows (an average of 7 cows per holding), and of these
154,568 holdings, with 1,059,956 cows, were associated
with co-operative creameries.


The benefit that co-operation has been to Denmark
cannot be over-estimated. Formerly, it was practically
impossible for the small holder to deal with his milk
products so as to secure a high standard of butter and
cheese. He had to be content with sales on the local market,
and his by-products were usually wasted. Through his
associations he is now able to get the best market obtain-
able, and his by-products are utilised.
In 1887 Germany prohibited the importation of Danish
pigs ; the pig raisers were forced to find fresh markets, and
turned their attention to export of bacon to the United
Kingdom. Bacon curing was then in the hands of private
firms, who seized the opportunity to reduce the price for
pigs, irrespective of the price of bacon on the British
markets. As a result the first co-operative bacon curing
factory was started in 1888.
Co-operative bacon curing did not achieve so easy a
success in Denmark as co-operative dairying. The private
curing firms seeing their monopoly threatened, fought
hard, but the co-operative principle had come to stay.
In 1909 Denmark had 36 co-operative bacon factories,
with a membership of 95,000, and handling 1,362,500 pigs
per annum.
The Danish co-operative factory does not normally ex-
port its own produce. Federations of the co-operative
factories have been formed to carry out the export of pro-
duce independently of middlemen.
For the dairy industry alone there were, in 1909, six
federations representing 225 factories, and doing an
annual business of about £1,758,000.
The Danish Agricultural Co-operators have instituted a
central society, with which most of the local co-operative
societies are affiliated, to represent the interests of the
industry, to secure the best information as to transport
and markets, and to diffuse the best scientific information
for the general advancement of agriculture.
Ireland— The development of agricultural co-operation
in Ireland is a most interesting study; it affords a marked
contrast to the Danish development.
The movement in Denmark was largely a spontaneous *
growth, due to efforts of the small holders themselves. In
Ireland, however, a great deal of propaganda had to be
carried out before the farmers saw the value of combina


tion, and lost their distrust of the movement, and of one
Like the other European countries, Ireland had suffered
from the agricultural depression in the 80’s. The situation
was however, rendered almost desperate, owing to her own
peculiar troubles. Sir Horace Plunkett, in 1889, started
a movement towards economic betterment on the basis of
For some years little progress was made, but gradually
the number of co-operative creameries increased until in
1911 there were in Ireland 312 dairy societies, with a
membership of 44,792, doing a business of just under
£2 000,000 for the year. The result has been that
Irish butter has gained a high reputation on the English
markets, and the economic position of the Irish farmer
has been greatly improved. . .
The Irish Agricultural Organisation Society (i.A.U.b.)
now carries on propaganda for co-operation, and organises
and supervises the local co-operative societies. ihis
Society has broadened the basis of agricultural co-opera-
bv establishing Credit Societies, which have proved one
of the most valuable of the 1.A.0.5.’s achievements.
These enable the small holder to borrow small sums for
productive purposes at a reasonable rate of interest.
Marketing societies and combinations for the whole-
sale purchase of requirements.have also been successfully
established. . . ,
In addition to the economic advantages gained, a new
spirit has been established in the rural districts, founded
on the principle of “ self help through mutual help
These happy results have been reached, not so much by
enthusiastic appeals to men’s higher qualities as by the
demonstration of better business methods, and the appeal
of pounds, shillings and pence.
United States of America. —America is a country of
wonderful fertility, and raises agricultural products as
cheaply as anywhere in the world. In no country, how-
ever has there been so great a difference between the price
paid to the farmer for his produce and the retail price paid
by the consumer. . , , ,
This has been largely due to the exactions of highly deve-
loped combinations of capital, such as railway companies
and trusts.


In the U.S.A. more than in any other country the early
efforts towards agricultural co-operation were started by-
social enthusiasts and doctrinaires. The result has been
that the country districts are strewn with the wrecks of
co-operative societies started with the loftiest motives and
run either on thoroughly unsound lines or with far too
ambitious a programme.
Some modern American experts on agricultural co-
operation have even insisted that social enthusiasms
should debar a man from a seat on the directorate of a
co-operative undertaking, and that “tangible economic
saving or improvement must result in order to make agri-
cultural co-operation successful.”
The other chief cause of failure has been the unwilling-
ness of the American farmer to realise the necessity of
employing a manager of first-rate business ability, often
begrudging the payment of a sufficiently good salary to
attract first-class men.
In spite of the prejudice against agricultural co-operation
caused by its many failures, co-operation for marketing
has expanded in an extraordinary way.
The Californian Fruit Growers’ Exchange is an example
of the scale upon which a co-operative society can operate.
The central society comprises 14 district associations,
representing 100 local societies of fruit growers. The
local society _ collects and packs the growers’ fruit and
dispatches it in car-load lots to the markets in the Eastern
States, Canada or London.
The central exchange has its own agents in most of the
principal markets, and the scope of its activities is shown
by the fact that it has expended as much as £15,000 in one
year on telegrams to advise its affiliated societies of
market fluctuations. In 1909 the number of growers
associated with the exchange was about 12,000 ; the con-
signments of fruit amounted to 14,500,000 cases, and the
aggregate profit was £4,575,000. In addition to the
increased returns, the associated growers saved about
50% of the cost of packing, transport and marketing.
Co-operative creameries have been very successful,
especially in the state of Minnesota, where, in 1913, 614
creameries had been established with a turnover of close
on £6,000,000 a y r ear.
Another branch of co-operative effort which is typically
American is the co-operative grain elevators, brought into


being by the grasping policy of the commercial interests
controlling the railway grain elevators. In 1913 there
were 2,020 co-operative grain elevators in the U.S.A.
In the states where stock-breeding is the chief industry
and where the individual breeder has no difficulty in
marketing his stock in car-load lots, co-operation in stock
marketing has not so far been found essential.
. In the states, however, where mixed farming is prac-
tised and where each farmer runs a few head of stock upon
his farm, co-operative itock marketing societies have been
formed to cut out the profits of the middleman and to
dispatch live stock in full car loads to the markets. A live
stock marketing association is about the simplest example
of co-operation in agriculture. No capital is needed.
The association engages a suitable manager, who assem-
bles by telephone the beasts from individual farms. The
members await the returns of each consignment, and, after
deducting expenses, the balance is divided amongst them.
The manager is paid a salary based on the stock which
he handles, usually at the rate of 3d. per 100 lbs. live
weight.
England. —ln England co-operation in agriculture has
developed more slowly than in any other democratic
country. This is partially due to the large market for
whole milk in England and partially to the innate con-
servatism of the English farmer. In the last ten years,,
however, co-operation has made great progress in England.
The outstanding feature of English agricultural co-opera-
tion is its organisation through the Agricultural Organisa-
tion Society. This society, which is now largely financed
by Government grants, exists to promote agricultural
co-operation, to advise its affiliated societies as to markets
and methods of procedure, and to arrange for the proper
auditing of the accounts of the local co-operative societies.
Since the foundation of the Organisation Society in 1901
the movement has grown from 23 societies with 517 mem-
bers to 532 societies with 62,680 members and a business
turnover of £4,964,000.
France. —ln France co-operative societies for the pur-
chase of farmers’ requisites are known as co-operative
syndicates. In 1910 France had 5,146 syndicates with
777,000 members.


Co-operative societies for the preparation and sale of
agricultural produce numbered 2,500; of this number
cheesemaking factories accounted for over 1,200, while
half of the remainder were butter factories. Co-operative
production in France embraces a wide variety of indus-
tries : wine-making, starch-making, oil mills, distilling,
milling, sugar manufacture, etc.
Agricultural co-operative credit banking has also under-
gone wide expansion.
Germany. —ln Germany, in 1910/ there were 2,265
co-operative societies for collective purchase, 3,364 dairy
factories, 2,836 co-operative societies devoted to other
branches of agricultural pursuits.
The most important development of agricultural co-
operation in Germany is the Credit Banks. These are
formed to grant small loans to the farmer on the collective
responsibility of the whole society to which he belongs.
The power to grant or to withhold a loan rests with the
co-operators themselves, and the loans are granted accord-
ing to the character and personal integrity of the applicant.
As the granters of the loan are severally responsible for it
this system gives excellent results.
Other European Countries. —Agricultural co-operation is
practised on an increasing scale in most of the countries
of Europe. In Belgium and Holland the position of the
peasant proprietors has been very greatly improved,
while in Italy and Roumania the movement had in the
years immediately preceding the war advanced very
rapidly.
Agricultural Co-operation in Australia.— There is little
detailed or statistical information available on the sub-
ject of agricultural co-operation in Australia, although
in most of the States it has yielded very beneficial results.
In 1888, when the prices for wheat fell so low that wheat
farmers could not get adequate returns, a commission
called the Vegetable Products Commission was appointed
in Victoria to enquire into the causes of the depression.
As a result of the recommendations of the commission
a system of bonuses was instituted to encourage the pro-
duction of new vegetable products, and to establish
factories for transforming the raw produce into the
manufactured article.


Under the stimulus of these bonuses the farmers in
certain districts started to replace wheat growing by
dairy farming. At the same time, they established co-
operative dairy factories. In Gippsland the earliest
attempts were generally unsuccessful, and the factories
put up by the farmers were subsequently taken over by
proprietary companies at a very low price. The chief reason
for these early failures was the want of business training
among the farmers, which led them to prefer a poorly
paid and consequently inferior man as manager.
In the Western District, although similar troubles were
experienced, better general results were achieved. In
1888 the first co-operative butter factory, the Cobdenand
District Co-operative Pioneer Co. Ltd., was formed.
In 1891 the Company paid out only £2,235 for milk,
while in 1913 the amount paid to members was £58,347.
In the 22 years £817,659 was paid for milk and cream, and
an additional £32,627 distributed in the shape of bonuse Q
and dividends.
The superior quality of the butter produced by the
factory method is one of the factors that has made for the
success, of the co-operative system in butter. _ In 1914
there were, in Victoria, nearly 100 co-operative butter
factories with a paid up capital of £225,673, and producing
70 per cent, of the total butter made in the State.
When co-operative dairy factories were first started,
the farmers were very backward in subscribing, the neces-
sary capital, which was largely subscribed by outsiders.
Co-operative methods were easily extended to include
poultry and eggs, the existing dairy factories handling this
class of produce for shareholders.
The success that co-operative production in the dairying
industry had attained naturally led to the formation of
co-operative marketing associations. In 1900 the
Victorian Butter Factories Co-operative Co., Ltd., was
started with a capital of £1,490.
In 1914 the Company had a capital of £B,OOO,_ a reserve
fund of £4,500, and had invested £17,000 in freezing works,
and in a butter box factory.
Since its inception the turnover has been £4,500,000 and
the profits £38,250. The Western District Factories Co-
operative Producers Co., Ltd., was formed in 1904. The
articles of association laid down that the shares should be
held by co-operative butter, cheese and bacon factories


only. The turnover in ten years amounted to £5,344,972.
and the profits were about £50,000 for the period ; out of
the latter, £12,500 have been invested in a butter box
making factory.
As a result of the success attained in the application of
co-operation to dairying, the Victorian Farmers became
more critical regarding the methods of the middleman, and
realised the value of organising for their own protection.
Co-operation has been successfully applied to the
handling of potatoes, onions, cereals, hay and chaff.
Co-operation has been most successfully applied to the
Fruit Industry. A good example of this is the Bendigo
Fruit Growers’ Co-operative Association, formed in 1901.
In the first year the operation of the Association only
dealt with £5,353 ; in 1913 the sales exceeded £30,000.
During the twelve years a net profit of £13,712 had
been made.
Co-operative bacon-curing has had a more checkered
career, but is now firmly established in many districts.
The need for organisation became apparent owing to the
extraordinary fluctuations in the price of pigs, which
varied (from 2d, to Bd. per lb. live weight. These unstable
conditions lead to great variations in the numbers of pigs
bred by the farmers. The large firms controlling the bacon-
curing industry were able to make large profits, for the
fluctuations in the prices of pigs did not affect the price of
bacon to any large extent. In various States an attempt
was made to remedy this by the opening up by the
Government of an export trade in the hope of thus stabilis-
ing the demand for pigs, and although the farmers were
willing to co-operate with the Government, the curing
firms met the proposal with opposition.
The early failures in organising co-operative bacon-
curing were due to lack ’of experienced management and to
the determined opposition of the private firms, who were
able to build up large fighting funds after the failures of
the co-operative pioneers. The straggle between the
firms and co-operative factories still continues, but many
successful co-operative bacon-curing factories have been
established and have placed the pig-raiser on a sound
economic footing. The earliest successful company was
the North Coast Co-operative Company of New South
Wales (whose butter factory at Byron Bay is claimed to be


the largest in the world). From a small beginning they
had, in 1910, reached the total of 29,679 pigs killed for
bacon-curing.
In Queensland the Darling Downs Co-operative Bacon
Company established the first successful factory. In Vic-
toria, after an unsuccessful attempt to establish one large
co-operative bacon factory for the whole State, separate
co-operative societies were successfully established, a
notable example being the Murray District Co-operative
Bacon-Curing Co., Ltd., founded with a nominal capital
of £IOO,OOO in £1 shares, of which £39,600 were subscribed
by 4,000 farmers.
Dried Fruit. —Owing to the great difficulties experi-
enced in marketing the dried fruit, an association was
formed called the Australian Dried Fruits Association.
This association estimates the annual Commonwealth
consumption of each variety of dried fruit, and arranges
for the export of all fruit in excess of this requirement. It
also arranges that only dried fruit of high quality should
be placed on the Australian market.
Distilleries. —A co-operative distillery has recently been
formed at Denmark, on the River Murray, which has
proved an unqualified success. The capital was subscribed
by the settlers, no shareholder being allowed to hold more
than 200 £1 shares. The profits are divided among the
shareholders in accordance with the tonnage of grapes
delivered*
Co-operation in Various Branches of Agriculture.
Production. —ln order to meet the public’s demand for a
high standard of excellence and the merchants’ demand
for large consignments of uniform grade, produce such as
butter, cheese and preserved fruit must be handled in the
producing stage in large bulk, while poultry, eggs and fresh
fruit ought to be graded and packed on as large a scale as
possible. This necessitates a central factory or packing
house. Private companies carry on such businesses, but
have not the same interest in maintaining a high grade and
in obtaining a consistent price as the producer. Again,
the chief concern of a private company is to pay divi-
dends, and requires a proportion of the profits for this
purpose. Co-operative factories or packing houses, on


the other hand, are worked on the basis of paying farmers
the highest price compatible with a safe business margin,
and the profits, which are therefore small, are distributed
to the producers. Productive co-operation has been
found very valuable, and in certain industries, especially in
dairying, has become the predominating method.
Marketing. —The difference between the price the farmer
receives for his produce and the price the consumer pays is
often, startling. This difference goes to the agent, the
wholesale merchant and the retailer. So far as the re-
tailer is concerned, a good margin of profit is necessary,
especially in those lines such as perishable goods in which
he has to take most risk. Attempts to extend agricul-
tural co-operation to the retail trade have, as a matter of
fact, usually been failures. It is the profits of the middle-
man that co-operative marketing generally seeks to
eliminate, his profits being often admitted to be out of all
proportion to the amount of business risk he incurs.
Purchase of Requisites. —Combinations of farmers for the
purchase of seeds, manures, implements, etc., are the
longest established form of agricultural co-operation.
Many such combinations have been formed on joint stock
company lines, but these have done little more than
benefit the few original shareholders ; even when the
company is started by the majority of farmers in a district
the subsequent transfer of shares has generally converted
the company into an association of merchants trading for
. profit out of the farmer. A combination of farmers on
sound co-operative lines buys in the wholesale market and
sells to the farmers at the lowest price compatible with a
safe margin, while any small profits made are divided
amongst the purchasers at so much in the pound on their
purchases.
By co-operation farmers are able to place orders for
goods in bulk, and if their society is large enough, or if it is
one of a number of affiliated societies for the purchase of
goods, it can obtain rock-bottom prices. The individual
farmer buying retail has to pay, in addition to the manu-
facturing cost and the manufacturer’s normal profit, the
cost of advertisement, of agents, collection expenses, and
the manufacturer’s allowance for bad debts. These
expenses are particularly heavy on farm implements and
machinery, and according to recent American .experience,


add from 25 to 35% to the price at which the manufac-
turer can afford to sell in large quantities to a sound finan-
cial combination.
In buying fertilisers and foodstuffs it is a great advan-
tage to be able to deal in large consignments, for in addi-
tion to saving the middleman’s commission, one sample
only need be analysed for each.consignment. This pro-
tects the farmer from inferior or adulterated goods.
The experience of most agricultural countries has been
that the small purchaser is often imposed upon in buying
seed. ’The bulk purchase of seed requires careful tests
for purity and germination, and a co-operative society
should be able to guarantee its members a high standard
in' these respects.
Ownership of Machinery. —One remedy for the increased
cost caused by high wages is to use labour-saving
machinery wherever possible. Most Australian farmers
prefer to own their harvesting machinery, but many
farmers cultivating a small area are not able to use expen-
sive implements economically, the amount of work on
which they can be employed not justifying the outlay.
This difficulty can sometimes be overcome by the farmers
if a district combines for the joint ownership and use of the
more expensive farm machines. Co-operative ownership
could be very usefully employed, for instance, with expen-
sive machines like motor tractors, or, in fruit-growing
districts, power sprays.
Ownership of Sires. —The large farmer or stock owner
naturally prefers to own his sires, in order to practise the
best principles of selective breeding.
In many parts of Australia, however, the stock owned by
small farmers is of a very poor type. This is principally
due to inability to obtain first-rate sires for service.
In Denmark and those parts of the U.S.A, where small
holdings predominate, the co-operative ownership of
stallions, bulls and boars has led to a wonderful improve-
ment in the class of stock. For this reason joint owner-
ship of sires should be particularly valuable in repatriation
areas where closer settlement is likely to be the general
rule


Principles of Agricultural Co-operation.
What Co-operation Is. —Co-operation is not a "get rich
quick ” method, nor a panacea for all the ills of the business
side of farming. Co-operative combinations of farmers can
be usefully formed to achieve the following objects :
To obtain better value for produce.
To improve the quality and appearance of produce.
To cut out all unnecessary middlemen’s profits.
To break up rings.
To cheapen purchases and insurance.
To facilitate the obtaining of credit.
To create markets and to steady them.
To make possible the utilisation of the best machinery
and sires.
Co-operaiion a Service. —Agricultural co-operation is not
a business in the ordinary sense of the term, but a service
organised by farmers for the joint and exclusive use of
farmers.
It follows that a society organised to perform a service
should not attempt to make a profit, but should always
aim at rendering that service to its members at as near the
actual nett cost as the obvious necessity of a safe margin
will allow.
The society should undertake no unnecessary risks or
speculations, and should be managed with the strictest
responsibility. It should welcome the inspection of its
methods by members, and manage its affairs with a maxi-
mum of publicity. Finally, it should be self-reliant, and
thus encourage the utmost local pride and endeavour.
When Farmers Should Combine. —The experience of every
country in which agricultural co-operation is largely prac-
tised is that “ the self-help through mutual help ” engen-
ders improved methods of farming and a more intelligent
appreciation of business by farmers. Nevertheless, co-
operative societies should only be formed where the farmers
feel that there is a definite economic advantage to be gained
thereby.
If the middle man, the agent, the selling firms, etc., are
giving the farmer a square deal, and the percentage which
is pocketed for the services rendered or the risks incurred
are not unreasonable, there is little advantage in combina-
tion. The opportunity for a successful co-operative society


exists when farmers see that combination is needed to
cheapen purchase or sale, to secure unadulterated goods,
to exploit a new market, or to achieve any of the other
purposes already mentioned.
The Composition of an Agricultural Co-operative Society.
—There is one golden rule to follow, namely, that the
Society should be composed exclusively of farmers, and that
while the representatives of private firms with or through
whom the society trades may be called in for expert advice,
they should never be given a voice in the management, or
in the policy of the society.
The size of the society, and the area over which it should
operate,depends upon local conditions, and upon the type of
service for which it is formed. It is generally found that
the society flourishes best which is so limited in area that
its members are able to be mutually acquainted, and that it
is representative of one definite locality.
On the other hand, societies formed for purchase or
marketing require a large turnover for success. This can
be attained either by the federation of local societies or
by the formation of a large wholesale or marketing associa-
tion, to the funds of which each local society contributes
a proportion in accordance with its own turnover.
While it is usually best to limit the area of a society, it
is essential that every farmer and incoming settler should
be able to become a member. Exclusiveness contradicts
all that co-operation stands for.
Organisation of the Society.
The organisation of a society should be on non-profitlines.
The necessary capital should be subscribed by the mem-
bers, and it is usual to limit the holding of any one member
to a certain sum, say 200 £1 shares. The dividend payable
on the shares should not be higher than the normal bank
rate of interest.
All profits made, over and above this dividend, should
be divided among the shareholders in proportion to the
volume of business done through the society.
Voting power is not in proportion to the number of shares
subscribed, but on the principle of one man one vote;
where, however, there is a very great difference between
the volume of business of members, votes in proportion to
the volume of business, with a limit on voting power in


favour of the smaller members,has frequently been resorted
to.
As an unregistered society has no existence in law, and
can therefore neither sue or be sued, it is essential
that a society should register.
In Australia, where no special legislation covering co-
operative societies exists, a society can either register under
the Companies Acts or else under the Provident and
Friendly Societies Acts. In the latter case the co-operative
non-profit character of the society is emphasised.
In order to run an agricultural co-operative society
successfully it is necessary for the management to know
what proportion of the crop it will handle, or what its
purchases of farmers’ requisites will amount to. The mem-
bers agree to trade through the society, promising either
the whole or a proportion of their business.
A co-operative society may meet with opposition from
the firms whose trade it threatens, and the most usual
form of attack is for the private traders to attempt to
undermine the loyalty of the members by temporarily
offering prices for produce in excess of the market figure.
Many attempts at agricultural co-operation, both in
Australia and in other countries, have been broken up
in this way. After the society is broken up the attrac-
tive offers of private firms will vanish. To meet this
difficulty it is now the custom amongst co-operative
societies in Europe and America for members of an
agricultural co-operative producing or marketing society
to bind themselves by a legal agreement to deliver the
whole or a definite proportion of their produce to the
society for treatment or sale. Provided that the society
is run on purely co-operative lines, no valid objection
can be raised to such a practice, while the advantages
to the society, and through the society to the members, are
many, and include, stable business conditions, a sound
financial position and its consequent advantages.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION.
However expert a farmer may be or however well he
may be getting on, he should always find time to widen his
knowledge of the latest farming methods, etc., and an
exchange of ideas among farmers upon such topics will be
found of considerable mutual advantage


Other Farmers.- —Many sources of information are open
to the farmer. The first of these is the other farmers in his
own district. The newcomer especially will find the
experience of the older residents useful to him. The
experienced man will be able to help him in the matter of
the crops that grow best, the methods of tillage that are
most suitable, the conditions of labour, and so on.
Agricultural Societies or Bureaux. —ln most districts in
the different States the farmers have established their
agricultural associations, bureaux, or societies as a means
of bringing together men who are anxious to learn from
one another.
The main objects of the agricultural bureau are to impart
agricultural education to farmers and pastoralists by
means of lectures and demonstrations by departmental
officers, and to encourage farmers to assist one another by
gathering together regularly and exchanging ideas and
experiences in regard to local conditions and agriculture
generally. These bureaus receive supplies of the various
publications of the agricultural departments, such as
bulletins on general subjects, crops and stock. Any
member can, in addition, obtain for himself through his
bureau copies of such publications as he may desire. These
bureaus may be of further benefit to the member by the
establishment of reference libraries on agricultural sub-
jects. The first agricultural bureaus were established in
South Australia about thirty years ago. The meetings are
usually held monthly. A definite programme of work at
least three months ahead is arranged. Papers are read
and discussion follows. Each member is held responsible
to introduce some suitable subject for discussion during
the year. The movement has been an undoubted success
in keeping farmers of a district in touch with one another
and with the developments of agriculture generally.
In New South Wales since the foundation of agricultural
bureaus in 1911 highly satisfactory progress has been made,
there being at the end of 1916119 branches throughout the
State. An officer of the State Department of Agriculture
is now in charge of the bureau work, whose duty it is to
assist in the formation of new branches and assist those
already formed, especially in arranging and obtaining
suitable lecturers from the various branches of the Depart-
ment. In the early days of agriculture in the State of


Queensland meetings were held in different centres, notably
in East Moreton, which may be said to have formed the
nucleus of the present splendid National Agricultural and
Industrial Association of Queensland.
The dissemination of useful and practical information
upon agricultural subjects is attained by opening up a
subject by the reading of a paper upon it, but more par-
ticularly by the discussion which these papers stimulate.
In Victoria annual farmers' conferences are held, four
delegates being appointed to the conference from each
agricultural society. At these conferences papers on
different subjects are read and discussed.
Agricultural Departments.- —Each of the State Govern-
ments has its Department of Agriculture, with its experts
and qualified assistants in the various branches of agri-
culture. Advice and information can always be obtained
from them free of charge. In this way the most expert
advice is given by the scientific staffs appointed to direct
operations in agricultural chemistry, viticulture, entom-
ology, botany, irrigation, fruit-growing, tobacco-growing,
veterinary science, biology, poultry farming, apiculture,
dairying, cattle and sheep-breeding, cold storage and
export and similar subjects.
Experts also visit the various districts and give lectures
and demonstrations, which are free to anyone interested,
and any man desirous of obtaining not only advice but
practical assistance can get it. The Departments also
offer information gained by scientific investigation and
practical experiments regarding the causes of the failures
of crops, of improved methods of cultivation, of the means
of combating pests, of the effects of fertilisers, of the intro-
duction of new plants, new implements and transport of
produce to available markets.
Each Department publishes periodically (generally
monthly) agricultural journals or gazettes, which contain
the results of scientific researches and the investigations of
official'experts, gives practical advice on the economic
results dictated by these investigations, and supply sea-
sonable notes on matters of scientific, practical and indus-
trial interest. Bulletins are published at frequent intervals
and are issued for the guidance of the various classes of
rural workers. These are written by the various Depart-
mental experts and will be found very instructive.
D


Experimental Farms. —These have been established in
the various centres, and afford ocular demonstrations as to
the crops, etc., best suited to the respective districts, and
proper methods of control. They promote agricultural
study, and more scientific systems of stock-breeding and
dairying. Experimental work is carried out with cereal
and other crops, not merely for the purpose of showing
what varieties it is practicable to produce under certain
conditions, but also to show how to make a farm pay.
Courses of instruction are arranged for students for
various periods, and shorter courses are held during the
winter months for farmers themselves. Opportunities aro
afforded for practicing general agricultural work, and
instruction is given in the conservation of fodder, in cheese
and butter making, in the management, breeding and
preparation for the market of live stock ; in the eradica-
tion of pests and weeds ; and in such subsidiary trades as
carpentry and blacksmithing.
Agricultural Shows,— -Throughout Australia there are
many associations known under different titles which
seek to foster the interests of men engaged in pastoral and
horticultural pursuits by the holding of an annual show.
Prizes are offered and healthy rivalry is stimulated,
different types and classes of stock and produce, machinery
and implements are exhibited, and practical methods are
demonstrated. A modern show is a great education for the
farmer and the public generally.
These societies in the several States receive subsidies
from their respective governments (usually about 10s.
in the £). Some of the States Governments also grant
sums of money for agricultural education to be conducted
by the agricultural societies, including lectures and de-
monstrations to farmers.
There are, in addition, numerous other smaller bodies
or societies, which confine their activities to some parti-
cular branch of agriculture, &c., such as horticulture,
poultry and dogs. Some of these hold important shows
and do much to promote the interests of the section in
which they are engaged.
Other Sources of Information. —In addition to those
already mentioned, there are also many agricultural papers
published as the result of the enterprise of private in-
dividuals.* The daily or weekly papers usually denote


space to articles on agricultural subjects which are often
worthy of the farmers attention and study. In spite of
these activities there is still room for considerable ex-
pansion in agricultural publications of educational value
to the Australian farmer.
FARMING POLICY.
Farming in recent times has been almost revolutionised
by the introduction of artificial manures and labour saving
machinery, of improved varieties of seeds and breeds of
stock, and by the demand for high quality produce of a
standard grade.
The objecfiof the producer is primarily to earn an income
from the land. To do this, he must not only learn how to
raise crops and stock and get his products to the market,
but must also have some knowledge of the business of farm-
ing in its widest sense.
Some of the topics dealt with in the following notes may
be regarded as controversial, but are included as sugges-
tions of suitable subjects for discussion amongst those
interested.
The Business of Farming. The business of farming
differs greatly from the business of the manufacturer,
because the manufacturer knows definitely when he
commences to manufacture an article that it will be
delivered and sold as such. The farmer, on the other hand,
does not, as a rule, end the year’s work by selling off the
farm the exact article or the exact quantities he set out
to produce. He may, for instance, as his judgment directs,
either sell his oats as hay, or feed it to stock ; or may allow
it to ripen and sell as grain as the season and prices dictate.
The actual price offered for food stuffs off the farm, is not,
therefore, always the governing factor in influencing the
farmer to sell his produce. In this sense the farmer, to be
successful, needs to be a good man of business.
Adaptability of Enterprise . —One of the most important
factors in determining profit in farming is the adaptability
of enterprise to soil and climatic conditions, and especially
to existing economic conditions. Adaptability to soil and
climatic conditions are so obvious as to need no comment,
but the question of adaptability to economic conditions
is not so well understood. Take, for example, the wheat


farmers of Southern New South Wales or Northern Victoria,
Many farmers in these centres carry on dairying during the
winter and early spring months, allowing their cows to dry
off as soon as the grass commences to turn colour. Even
if they do not earn ordinary wages for the work they do-
in the dairy during the period engaged, it is frequently
the case that the time thus employed would otherwise be
largely wasted. So that any profit they make over-
actual expenditure in this particular business is so much
added to their annual income. ■ Therefore,, although the
centres mentioned are not good dairying districts in the
ordinary sense, nevertheless, it is a sound business pro-
position for the farmers there to engage dairying.
This is true of many other districts in Australia.
Fires .—Fires are more frequent in the hot summers of
good seasons when dry grass and other feed is plentiful
Every precaution should be taken for their prevention
on all kinds of farms and grazing properties.
When hay or grain crops are bordered by grass fields
or are adjacent to railway lines and loads, a good break
should be made around the edge before the grass is dry-
enough to burn. This is best made by cutting a sufficient
strip around the crop and ploughing the cleared portion.
Grass paddocks should be treated in a similar manner. In
timber country there is no better fire break than a belt of
green timber, and some Government leases specify that
such belts shall be left around each holding. If the trees
are reasonably close together they prevent the grass from
growing. The break is of course better if dry timber is
cleared away as it falls. Such timber can be used as fire-
wood, and before many years the settler will find the belt
of timber invaluable for many purposes.
' Haystacks should never be built near any buildings
where there is any danger of their being set on fire from
sparks or ashes out of chimneys, etc. The ground around
them should always be kept clear of. loose straw, hay or
rubbish of any kind, whether scattered about or in heaps.
The same applies to stables and other buildings of all
descriptions. . . . , .
Great care needs always to be exercised with cigarettes,
pipes or matches.
Good fire checks or breaks should be _ made at not too
great intervals on grazing land, which' will enable a fire to


labour, when obtainable, should always be used and paid
for accordingly.
The farmer should keep himself in touch with all develop-
ments and inventions in labour-saving machinery.. While
avoiding any tendency to take up new things without
due enquiry, he should always' keep an open mind and
beware of prejudice against new things just because they
are new. Such a high standard has already been reached
in labour-saving machinery for harvesting and cultivation
that the advances of the future will probably take place
chiefly in the handling and transportation of produce.
Prices and Values of Plant Foods. —To follow the correct
farming policy, it is advisable that the farmer should
know the relation between the price received for his crop
and the amount of plant food contained in it.
The amount of fertility lost to the farm by the sale of
different crops varies greatly. The loss in grass (hay) and
cereal crops is much greater than in vegetable and fruit
crops. If a ton (2,000 lbs.) of wheat, which contains
38 lbs. of nitrogen, 19 lbs. of phosphoric acid and 13 lbs. of
potash, sells for 2s. 6d. per bushel, the nitrogen sells for
Is. Bjyd. per lb., and the phosphoric acid and potash for 7d.
per lb. If a ton (2,000 lbs.) of milk which contains 12 lbs.
nitrogen, 4| lbs. potash and 3| lbs. of phosphoric acid, is
sold for £6, the nitrogen in it brings Bs. 4d. per lb., and the
potash and phosphoric acid 3s. per lb. _ If, however, cream
or butter is sold and skim milk fed to pigs and calves, most
of the plant food is recovered in the manure of these
animals.
Droughts. —-Large tracts of Australia are known to be
liable to periodical droughts. The chances of loss to the
farmer or stockbreeder may be considerably lessened by
the conservation of fodder and water.
Experience has proved it is a wise precaution always to
have at least four months supply of feed on hand, such as
hay, ensilage, grains, straw, cocky-chaff, etc. Should
the drought prove serious, the farmer will have four
months in which to sell his stock as fats. Of course
a supply for a longer period is better still. Wherever there
is a permanent water supply, giving a sufficient quantity
and quality of water to irrigate, as much land as possible
should be kept under irrigation. Even if there is only a
small patch, a little green food will have a very beneficial


effect on all classes of stock, and if more fodder than is re-
quired for immediate use is grown it can always be made
into hay and stacked, or else cut for ensilage.
The best methods of obtaining permanent supplies of
water are boring and well sinking, but where these are not
successful, water must be conserved in dams and various
kinds of tanks.
An ample water supply is just as necessary as a good sup-
ply of fodder, and every precaution should be made to en-
sure it. Thousands of pounds worth of stock have been
lost in drought time, when there has been plenty of dry
food, but no water. Conservation of water, therefore,
should be the first consideration.
Politics and the Farmer's Interest.—-The information
supplied in this course deals almost wholly with actual
agricultural operations. The end aimed at is practical, not
philosophical; concrete, not abstract; particular, not
general. The question of Co-operation, was not outside the
proper scope of the scheme ; for to exclude it, in face of the
urgent declarations of practical men that some industries in
some districts could not be carried on without co-operation,
was impossible. There are other factors which are certainly
not less far-reaching in their effect upon the livelihood
of the primary producer. The difference between one
system of land tenure and another may make, and often
has made, the difference for the farmer between prosperity
and poverty, even between serfdom and freedom. The
incidence of a tax may create or kill an industry. Such
considerations, for example, are of vital importance to the
sugar growers and dried fruit producers of Australia. The
fact is constantly brought home to them. But every other
man on the land is affected no less profoundly, though
often in a less direct and obvious way.
To pursue the subject further might be to encroach upon
debatable ground, and involve questions of controversial
politics. But enough has been said to show that it is to the
highest interest of the farmer himself and of the nation
that instead of regarding politics and political economy
as an infliction and a bore, he should,apart altogether from
his duty as a citizen, realise that they are subjects
directly affecting his own personal and pecuniary interests.


Land Pursuits Text^books*.
Syllabus Courses.
A.I.F. Land Books.
I.C.S. Instruction I
3 apers.
Title,
No.
Title.
No.
Title.
No.
Introductory ...
1
Land Selection and Im-
provements ...
1
The Business of Farming
3
Stock Raising and Wool
2
Beef, Mutton and Wool...
2
Horse Management
1327 A. and B.
Ponies, Asses and Mules
1328.
Horse Judging ...
1326,
Types, Breeds and Market Classes
Wheat and General
of Horses
1325 A. and B.
Fafming ...
3
Wheat and General
Farming
4
The Soil
1300 A. and B.
Soil Properties ...
1551.
Soil Drainage ...
1304 A. and B.
Tillage
1305 A.
Corn
1308.
Potatoes ...
1310.
Silos and Silage
1314 B.
Stable Manure ...
1301 A.
Root Crops
1311,
Fruit Growing
4
Fruit Growing ...
5
Essentials of Fruit Culture-
1385 A. and B.
Viticulture
6
Apple Culture ...
1387 A. and B.
■ y
Pear Culture
1390 A. and B.
Apple Pests and Injuries
1388.
Cherries, Apricots and Quinces...
1398.
Citrus Fruits under Irrigation ...
1355 A.B.C.D. and E.


Syllabus Courses.
A.I.F. Land Books
>.
I.C.S. Instruction Papers.
Title.
No.
Title.
No.
Title.
No.
Dairying and Pig
Raising
5
Dairying
7
Breeds of Dairy Cattle ...
1330.
Pig Raising
8
Dairy Cattle Management
1331 A. and B.
Beef and Dual Purpose Breeds...
1334.
Principles of Animal Feeding ...
1315.
Feeding Standards
Dairy Bulletin 1.
Dairy Cak Raising
Dairy Bulletin 2.
Development of Dairy Herds ...
Dairy Bulletin 3.
Milk
1332 A. and B.
Dairy Barns and Equipment ...
1329.
Swine Breeding
1320.
Irrigation and Lucerne
6
Irrigation
9
Swine Feeding and Judging
1319.
Lucerne ...
10
Tropical Agriculture ...
7
Tropical Agriculture
11
Minor Agricultural
Pursuits
8
Poultry ...
12
Artificial Incubation ...
1355.
Bee Keeping
13
Laying Hens
1351.
Market Gardening
14
Artificial Brooding
1356.
Standard Bred Poultry
1371 A. and B.
Poultry Appliances
1362.
Poultry Farms ...
1360 A, and B
Diseases of Poultry
1364,
Essentials of Vegetable Growing
1550.
