

m
THE CUTTER’S GUIDE:
A Manual of Dresscutting
and Ladies’ Tailoring*
m
By M. E. ROBERTS.
I
,
•
-
'■
I
I
■
1
I
I
}
s
■ ■■■’ :


THE CUTTER’S GUIDE


THE CUTTER'S GUID
A MANUAL OF DRESSCUTTING AND LADIES’ TAILORING
M. E. ROBERTS
LECTURER AT SYDNEY TECHNICAL COLLEGE
With iiq Diagrams
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1907


JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, SYDNEY.


P R E F x\ C E
This Manual of Drcsscutting and Ladies’ Tailoring is published in
response to many appeals from students and ex-students to have my
lectures printed.
The nature of the subject on which the lectures are given makes it
necessary to show new developments from time to time as fashion alters,
so that the lectures must alter from year to year —even from month to
month.
It is manifestly impossible to publish in a text-book the method of
cutting all the different garments that would be cut in the classrooms,
even in one season—much less for every year.
It has therefore been my endeavour to illustrate the principle on
which ladies’ garments of all kinds are cut, to show the system on
which a cutter must work in copying any style which fashion presents,
and to omit that which is merely a variation of something already
explained
This system has already commended itself to business men and
women, not only because it gives good style to garments cut by it and
is accurate, reliable and easy to learn, but because there are neither charts,
machines, nor other mechanical appliances to purchase and carry about.
Many students of this system, after a few months’ tuition, finding
themselves in a position where they could obtain no appliances, have cut
out a dress with no other aids than a tape measure and a straight stick
for a ruler.
I gladly publish these rules for cutting out, which are the fruits of
years of practical work, not only for the help of my students, but for the
assistance of many ex-students who are now fellow-workers with myself,
teaching in different parts of the States and trying to make “ rough
places plain ” for the girl who needs the means to earn a livelihood.


aJ, A<f 7UOtfa
n-i- ?sr
CONTENTS
I. Measures foe Bodice, Sleeve and Skiet ... 1
11. Bisections foe Bodice Deaft 3
111. Sleeve Deaft 10
IV. Stout Lady’s Bodice 11
V. Slendee Lady oe Giel’s Bodice and Defoemed Figuee 15
VI. Skiets ft)
VII. Sleeves ----- 27
VIII. Blouses 36
IX. Collaes ----- 44
X, Cuffs 49
XI. Tea Jacket 50
XII. Peincess Robes, Weappees and Empiee Gowns - - 54
XIII. Coats 61
XIV. Capes 67
XV. Childeen’s Gaements 70
XVI. Coesets 73
XVII. Undeeclothing 74


CHAPTER I.
MEASURES FOR BODICE, SLEEVE AND SKIRT
Diagrams 1
Bodice.
1. Neck.
2. Bust.
3. Waist.
4. Length of Back.
5. Under Arm.
6. Length of Front.
7. Dart.
8. Height of Hip
9. Around Hips.
10. Across Back.
11. Scye.
12. Chest.
13. Shoulder.
2, 3, 4, 5.
Sleeve.
14. Neck to Elbow.
15. Inside to Bend.
16. Inside to Wrist,
17. Upper Arm.
18. Middle Arm.
19. Elbow.
20. Lower Arm
21. Wrist.
Skirt.
22. Front.
23. Side.
24. Back.
Directions for Taking Measures. —Diagrams 3, 4, 5.
(Shewing the position of the Tape Measure, lettered, as in directions.)
2. Neck. —Take a close measure outside the collar, or moderately loose one if no
collar is worn, as low down on the neck as the tape can be put around. AA.
3. Bust. —Take a loose measure over the fullest part of bust and around the back
across the shoulder blades. 888 B.
4. Waist.—Take a tight measure around the waist. CC.
5. (Now put a belt on and push it well down to ensure getting the length measures
taken to the same level at waist.)
6. Length of Back. —Take the measure from the bone at neck to the bottom of
belt. DD.
(Many figures have the bend of the waist at back somewhat below the
belt. It is necessary to measure this “ extension ” below the belt.)
7. Under Arm.— Place the pencil horizontally as high up under the arm as possible
and measure from this to the bottom of belt. EE.
8. Length of Front. —Measure from the hollow of the neck to the bottom of
belt. FF.
9. Dart. —From the bottom of belt to the swell of bust. GG.
10. Height of Hip. —Measure from bottom of belt to.highest part of hip bone.
HH.


Dia. 1. Dia. 2, Dia. 3.
11. Abound Hips.—Measure around the hips in the same place as the height of
hips was measured to. 11.
12. Across Back. —Measure from arm to arm across widest part of back. KK.
13. Sc ye.— Place a ruler perpendicular at back and front of shoulder and measure
across from back to front.
(Diagram 2 shews a little contrivance tailors have for taking scye measure.
Diagram 1 shews it put on to the figure in the place where the measure is
taken. Another way to find the scye measure is to take a tight measure
around the arm-hole —where the seam is to be —subtract | inch from arm-
hole measure and divide the remainder by 3.)
Dia. 4.
Dia, 5.
14. Chest. —Across chest from arm to arm. L L
15. Shoulder. —Place the end of tape at neck on the highest part of shoulder and
place it straight out to where the sleeve will be set in. MM.
16. Neck to Elbow. —Keep the tape on the shoulder and carry it down the back
of arm to elbow. MM M.
17. Inside to Bend. —Measure the inside of arm from the axilla to bend of elbow,
with the arm bent. NN.
18. Inside to Wrist. —Measure the inside of arm from axilla to wrist with the arm
straight. NN N.


19. Upper Arm. —Take a loose measure over the arm as high up as the tape can be
put under the arm. O.
20. Middle Arm. —Take a loose measure half way between upper arm and elbow.
P.
21. Elbow. —Take a close measure around the elbow with the elbow bent. Q.
22. Lower Arm. — Take a close measure around the thickest part of arm below
elbow. R.
23. Wrist. —Take a loose measure around the wrist. S.
24. Skirt Front Length. —From bottom of belt to the toe of the boot.
25. Skirt Side Length. —From belt over hips to I inch from ground.
26. Skirt Back Length. —From belt to J inch from ground,
27. Children’s measures are taken the same as adults excepting that they are all
taken loosely.
28. It is just as necessary to put the waist belt on for children as for adults.
CHAPTER 11.
DIRECTIONS FOR BODICE DRAFT.*
Diagrams 6, 7, 8
1. Line lis parallel with the left side of the paper.
2. Line 2is at right angles with line 1 and 12 inches from the bottom of the paper.
3. Mark half the across-back measure on line 2to right of line 1. Rule line 3 from
aoross-back dot parallel with line 1.
4. Make dot A $ inch from line 1, on line 2. Mark the length of back on line 1,
above line 2. From length of back rule a line through dot Ato length of
extension.
5. Mark on line 1 above line 2 the under arm measure, and rule line 4 from this
dot parallel with line 2.
6. Mark on line 1 above line 4 the scye measure, and rule line 5 from this dot
parallel with 4.
7. Line 6is hal" way between 4 and 5 and parallel with them.
8. Make a dot on line 4at half bust measure from line A. Rule line 7 from line
5 through bust dot, down to length of front.
9. Make dot Zon lin» 2to right of line 3at half scye measure. Rule true waist
line from length of front to dot Z, and from Z to back extension.
10. Rule a line from the top of back line to right of line 1, ith of neck measure.
11. Make a dot on line sto left of line 7at inch less than one-fourth of neck
measure.
♦Throughout this volume the numbers for lines and letters for dots used in Diagram 6 (page 6)
ace also used in making the foundation for the draft of every other garment.


12. Rule a line inch longer than one-fourth of neck and perpendicular to line 5
from dot just made.
13. Curve from the top of perpendicular line of neck to line 7 for front neck.
14. Measure this curved line and the back neck line. This should always be some-
what larger than neck measure, to allow something to be taken off the front
to curve for bust line. Whatever the neck measure is too large is to be taken
off, half to left of line 7 on line 5 and half from the end of back neck line.
15. Curve for bust line from neck dot through the junction of lines 7 and 6 down to
the height of dart, then in to the waist line.
16. Rule line 8 from the top of perpendicular line of neck to the junction of linea
3 and 5.
17. Make dot Bon line 6to right of line 3at half scye measure. Rule line 9 from B
to the end of back neck.
18. To mark for the armhole :—Make a dot on line Bat shoulder measure from the
neck line. Place the ruler with one end on perpendicular line of neck and the
other end on dot B, and mark for shoulder measure from neck.
To the left of line 7 on line 6 make a dot at half chest measure.
19. Mark on line 9 the back shoulder, which must be J inch longer than front
shoulder.
If line 9 is too short for back shoulder between line 3 and neck line, lengthen
it by adding part on at the neck, (making a new curved line for neck), and
part at armhole. If too long take part off at each end.
20. Now curve from back shoulder to junction of lines 3 and 6, down to line 4, up
to chest dot, and to shoulder dot on line 8.
21. Multiply the scye measure by 3 and add | inch, to find the size the armhole
should be.
22. Measure the armhole, and whatever it is too large is taken out in a V dart at
front of armhole, between lines 4 and 6.
23. If the armhole is too small add the amount to the front shoulder and rule a new
shoulder line to perpendicular line of neck.
24. When drafting for a developed figure, the armhole will always need a V dart in
front. When drafting for an undeveloped or flat figure, the armhole will be:
too small and need the extra amount added to the front shoulder.
25. Rule line 10 from the junction of lines 3 and 4to dot B.
26. Make dot Con armhole | inch to right of fine 10.
27. Make dot I) on armhole as far below line 6as back shoulder is below line 5.
28. Make dot Eon true waist line 1| : inch from back fine.
29. Dot His on true waist line I inch to left of line 3.
30. Dot Fis on true waist line half the distance between line 3 and A.
31. Curve for side line of back from Eto D.
32. Curve for back line of sidebody from Fto meet side line of back on line 4,
33. Curve for front line of sidebody from Hto C.


34. (These curves may be made with a piece of string 19 inches long. Pin one end
to dot D and with a pencil fastened to the other end draw a curved line to the
right of the draft. Pin the string to dot E, and make a second curve crossing
the first. Pin the string to where these two lines cross and curve from Cto D.
All the other curves may be made in the same way. The neck curve will be
made with the string 3 J inches long.
To save time in making the curves, two pieces of cardboard may be cut the
shape of those given in diagrams 118 and 119. Make the curves for the seams
of bodice and darts with the full sized curve of diagram 118, The neck curve
is made with the curve of diagram 119.
35. To measure for darts : Make a dot on line 2to left of line 7at half chest measure.
Divide this space into four equal parts. The two centre spaces are for the
darts. Make a space between the darts f inch by marking at f inch each side
of centre dot.
36. Draw a line from the centre of the space for front dart to the height of dart,
slanting toward the top of perpendicular line of neck. Draw a line from the
centre of space for back dart on the same slope as the front dart and | inch
higher.
37. Curve for darts from the top of centre lines down to true waist line. Add half
an inch to the back of back dart for busts under 36, and 1 inch for busts 36
and over.
(Curved lines of darts may be made in the same way as curved lines for the
back—with a string 19 inches long.)
38. To find the back line of front and under arm gore : measure those parts of the
waist that are already defined—the back, sidebody, front, up to first dart,
and space between darts. Subtract this amount from half waist measure,
and mark for the remainder of half waist on line 2 from back dart.
39. Make dot Kat one half the distance between waist dot and back dart. From K
rule line 11 up to armhole and make dot G.
Medium Waist.— Diagram 6.
If half the waist measure falls to right of line 3, make dot I at half waist
measure and rule line 12 from Ito C. Line Gto K will be the front line of
under arm piece as well as back line of front. Make Las well as Kon waist.
Large Waist. — Diagram 7.
41. If half waist measure falls to left of line 3, make line Kto G sloping a little
toward the front at the top.
42. Rule line 13 from Gto waist, and line 12 from Cto waist. The space between
lines 13 and 12 will be too small at the waist for under arm (which must be the
same width as the space between K and back dart).


DlA. 6 DlA, 7.
Add whatever the under arm is too small, part to left of line
part to the right of line 13 and make dot L.
under arm and from L to G for front of undei
G for front of under arm
Small Waist. —Diagram 8.
12 and mark I, and
Rule from I to C for back of
44. If half waist measure falls on or near dot Z. Rule line from Kto G slanting
toward back at the top. Rule line 13 from Gto waist and line 12 from Cto
waist.
45. Whatever the space between lines 12 and 13 is too large for under arm at waist,
take part off at line 12 and make dot I, and part off at line 13 and make dot
L. Rule from Ito C and from Lto G for underarm.
46. Measure the height of hip below 2 and draw hip line parallel with line 2.
47. Extend lines 1 and 7to bottom of paper. Rule a line from Ato the bottom of
line 1.
48. Extend the centre lines of darts to the bottom of the paper parallel with line 7.
49. Slope side lines of darts to meet centre line at the bottom. (12 in. below waist.)
50. (If the lady wears flat fronted corsets the side lines of darts are made parallel
with line 7.)
51. Make dots E, F, H, I, K, Lon the hip line, exactly underneath these dots on
the waist line.


itII
Dia. 8.
52, Rule from Eto | inch to right of Eon hip, from Fto 1 inch to left of Fon hip
line, from H to 1 inch to right of H on hip, from I to 1 £ inch to left of I on hip,
from L to 1 £ inch right of L on hip, from K to 1 £ inch to left of K on hip.
line and if too small for hip measure slope hues
53. Measure each piece on the hip
I, K, and L a little more.
54. Note I. None of the
pieces of the body
overlap or have any
space between them
at the armhole.
55. Note I. The pieces
may overlap or have
a pace between them
at the waist.
56. Note 111. The lines
below the waist are
straight excepting
those on each side of
under arm and the
side line of front :
these are curved.
57. Note IV. The curved
seam of back —be-
tween back and side-
body—may be taken
to a higher point at
armhole so as to make
sidebody wider and
back narrower. That
is to say, dot D may be put above or below line 6 as taste or fashion re
quires, but the two curved lines must meet on line 4.
58. Note V. This seam may be made straight from waist to shoulder as shewn in
diagram 7. This is done by ruling a straight line from dot Eto shoulder for
side line of back and ruling a line from F to meet side line of back on line 4.
Then a line may be curved from the top of the back dart to meet the
back seam on the shoulder.
59. Note VI. The back of bodice at the waist may be made narrower or wider than
inch as directed. To do this, move dot Eto right to make it wider or to
left to make it narrower. Dot F must be moved in the same way as dot E.
That is to say: if the back is made wider the sidebody must be made narrower,
and if back is made narrower the sidebody must be made wider.


60 Note VII. When cutting out the fitting bodice lining observe the following
rules :
61. Have the lining double so as to trace through the paper on to both sides at
once.
62. Place the draft on the lining so that the selvedge runs up and down and the
waist is on the straight of the lining.
63. Trace the front of the bodice on to the front of the double lining, then lift the
draft off and cut it out, allowing | inch for seam beyond the tracing. Repeat
this with each piece of the bodice.
64, Place the sleeve on the lining with the middle of the top part on the straight
of lining.
65. Note VIII. When tacking the different pieces of the bodice together, be
careful to have the waist lines exactly meeting at every seam excepting the darts,
and tack on the tracing lines.
66. Begin tacking the darts together from the top and work downwards,
regardless of waist lines.
67. Note IX. The bodice for an ordinary figure has four pieces, viz,, front, back
under arm and sidebody.
68. Note X. When the bodice is tacked together and stitched up it will be im-
possible to press the seams out flat unless they are notched to within £ inch
of the sewing line. Make one cut at the waist fine, two above, and one
below the waist line, about 1£ inch apart, then round the corners off.
69. Note XI. Before cutting the material examine it to find which way the nap
or pile and the flowers run. Let the smooth of surface run down the dress,
flowers run up. When the material must be all cut running the same way
an extra yard will be required on the dress length.
70. Note XII. The material for every part of either bodice or skirt is cut with
the selvedge running up and down.
71. Note XIII, For frills, cut the material on the cross. Allow half as much again
as the space to be covered for the length of frills.
72. Bands or folds are cut on the cross.
73. Ruches are cut on the cross. Allow six times as much as the space to be
covered for the length.
74, For box-pleating the material is cut on the straight, allow three times as much
as the space to be covered.
75. For kilting the material is cut on the straight. Allow four times as much as
space to be covered for the length.
76. The facing for the bottom of the skirt is cut to the shape of the skirt.
77. Crape should always be cut on the cross and lined with domette, however wide
the fold may be. The grain of the crape should run from edge to edge of the
fold.


78. Facings for a bodice are cut on the cross, excepting where the buttonholes are
worked—this should be cut on the straight,
79. Note XIV. The quantities of material required for a lady of medium height
are ;
For a dress .. .. .. 7 yard of material 42 inches wide.
lO „ „ „ 30 „
„ 14 „ „ „ 21 „
For a Skirt .. .. 5 ~ ~ ~ 42 ~ ~
„„7„„ „ 30 „
„ „ 3|: „ „ „ 60 „
, 10 „ „ „ 21 „
For a Blouse.. .. .. 2 ~ ~ ~ 42 ~ ~
„ „ 3 ~ ~ „ 30 „
41 21
5) yy • • • • • • T 2 yy » yy yy yy
For a Short Coat and Skirt 4J ~ ~ ~ 60 ~ ~
For a Long Coat and Skirt 5|- ~ ~ ~ 60 ~ ~
For a Rain Coat .. .. 4| ~ ~ ~ 60 ~ ~
For a Bodice Lining.. .. 1| ~ ~ ~ 42 ~ ~
„ „ „ .. .. 2 „ „ „ 30 „
„ „ „ .. .. 3 „ „ „ 21 „
For a Skirt Lining .. 4 ~ ~ ~ 42 ~ ~
„ „ „ .. .. 5| „ „ „ 30 „
„ „ „ .. ..10 „ „ „ 21 „
These quantities will only make plain garments. Extra material must be
allowed for an exceptional amount of tucks, frills, or gathers.
80. Note XV. When deciding in what style to cut a dress, have consideration
for the figure that is to wear it.
81. Lines running from neck to hem of skirt give length to the figure, therefore it
is suitable for a medium figure, and necessary for the short stout figure
to have the trimmings and lines running up and down, but not for the tall,
slender woman.
82. A long cape will fall in graceful folds on a short woman and make her look
taller, but on the very tall woman will accentuate her slenderness and make
her look thin to meagreness.
83. A woman with a long back should never have a pointed bodice with tucks,
pleats or bands from neck to waist. A wide belt and yoke line or bertha
will take off from the thinness.
84. Lines running across the bodice and around the skirt tend to make the figure
shorter, therefore the short, stout figure must never have a bertha, or straight
belt, or lines around the hips or bottom of the skirt. This style is eminently
suitable for the slender figure, whether the lines around are in the form of
bands, gathers, trimming, or tucks.


CHAPTER III.
SLEEVE DRAFT.
Diagram 9.
1
1.
Rule line 1 parallel with left side of the paper
J) C z
and 3 inches from it.
i X
2.
Make dot A on line 1, 3 inches from the bottom.
1-/-
5.
/
3
3.
Make dot B on line 1 at inside to wrist measure
\f
from A.
4.
Mark on line 1 at scye measure above B and
A
\
1
rule line 2 from this dot, at right angles with
A
line 1, and twice as long as scye measure with
i \
1
1 inch added.
1 \
\t
5.
Mark dot C in centre of line 2.
y?\ y
6.
Dots D and E are 1 inch to left and right of C.
c?
p
7.
Mark on line 1 half way between B and line 2
l i
■—
and rule line 3 from this dot twice as long as
1 1 j
scye measure with inch added, and parallel
/ /
with line 2.
// / /
8.
Dot E is on line 3 at one-fourth of scye measure
Ij / /
from the end.
li / /
9.
Dot G is on line 3 one-third of the distance
%Ul L
between F and line 1.
10.
Curve from B to G for top of under sleeve.
/
11.
Curve from B to D, to E and down to F for top
Dia. 9.
of upper sleeve.
85. The stout lady should have some arrangement for the front of her bodice
that does not too clearly define the waist : such as an open front with a full,
soft vest in it.
86. When making yokes, fronts, collars, &c., of net, lace, chiffon or any other
flimsy material, make it up on paper and tear the paper out when finished.
This enables the worker to keep it more shapely.
87. Note XVI. However well cut and put together a bodice is, it will not fit
unless put on properly. To fit a bodice : Always leave a wide margin of
lining at the centre front, and fit from the front—even if the front is after-
wards closed and the bodice is fastened at the back. If the bodice is fastened
in front, the seams should be finished off and boned before it is fitted, and
the bodice should need no alteration if measures have been taken correctly.
Begin at the waist to pin the fronts together, and work upward to the neck ;
never begin pinning together at the neck and work downwards. Give the
bodice a vigorous pull downwards at the back and sides to set it in place
before pinning the front together.


12. Dot His on line 1 at inside to bend measure below B.
13. Dot lis 1| inch to right of H.
14. Dot Kis 1| inch to left of A.
15. Curve from Bto I, and rule a line from Ito K for inside of upper sleeve.
16. Place point of square on dot K and long arm f inch to right of I and rule line 4
on short arm for wrist.
17. Make dot Lon line 4, 1 inch to right of K.
Dot M is one-third of wrist from L.
Dot N is two-thirds of wrist from K.
18. Line 4, from LtoM, is the wrist of under sleeve.
19. Make the front of upper sleeve longer by adding £ inch below K and rule from
this to N for the wrist line of upper sleeve.
20. Place the square parallel with line 8.1. and the shoulder measure on dot E.
Mark at neck-to-elbow measure.
21. Buie line 5 from I through neck-to-elbow dot.
22. Measure for elbow on line sso that the upper sleeve is 1| inches larger than
under sleeve.
Mark 0 for under sleeve and P for upper sleeve.
23. Rule a line from Gto 0 and from oto M for back of under sleeve.
Rule a line from E to P and from P to N for back of upper sleeve.
Rule from I to L for inside of under sleeve.
24. Measure horizontally from B for upper arm. Add or take off whatever it is
too small or too large, and make a new line for back of under and upper sleeve.
25. Measure for middle arm half way between B and H.
26. Diagram 9 shews a draft that came out quite right at upper arm but had to be
made smaller at middle arm —hence the curved lines from G to 0 and F to P.
27. The curved lines of top must be made to meet the back hues of sleeve on line 3.
28. When tacking the lining together the corners at the wrist and at the top must
be put exactly together. The upper sleeve will be gathered at the elbow.
CHAPTER IV.
STOUT LADY'S BODICE.
Diagrams 10, 11, 12, 13.
1. The stout lady’s bodice is drafted in the same way as for an ordinary figure,
excepting that there is 1 inch space between the darts : there is | inch added
to front dart as well as 1 inch to back dart : there are two under-arm pieces.
2, The two under-arm pieces are made by dividing the space between waist dot.
and back dart into three parts.
Medium WAisT.—Diagram 10.
3, If half waist measure falls to right of fine 3 divide the distance between this dot
and back dart into 3 and make a dot for each third.


I | i
Dia. 10.
Half-waist dot will be marked I. Rule a line from Ito C for back of under-arm.
Middle dot will be marked L and N. Rule a line from Lto armhole and make
0. Line L 0 will be
for front line of se-
cond under-arm and
also for back line of
first under-arm.
The nearest dot to
darts will be marked
K for front and M
for under-arm. Rule
a line parallel with 3
to armhole and make
dot G. Line G K
will be side line of
front as well as front
line of first under-
arm.
Large Waist.
Diagram 11.
If half waist measure
falls to left of line 3
divide the space be-
tween this dot and
back dart into 3 and
mark only K for the portion nearest the dart
Rule a line from K up to the armhole, slanting toward the front at top, and
make dot G.
Line 13 is from G to waist line, parallel with 3.
Line 12 is from C to waist line, parallel with 3.
Dot 0 is on armhole, half-way between dots C and G.
Line 14 is from 0 to waist parallel with 3.
8.
9.
The space between lines 12 and 14 is for second under-arm, the space between
14 and 13 for first under-arm.
These under-arm pieces will be the exact size at armhole. They must be made
the same size at the waist as the front is from Kto dart. Add part of the
amount they are too small at waist, to left of line 12 and make dot I, and
part to right of 14 and make dot L. Rule from Ito C and from Lto 0
for second under-arm.


amount the under- | s. | \ ' \
arm is too small, to |L _ _N— _ _ A
left of 14 and make I N
dot N, and part to 1 _
right of 13 and make 1 A A A
dot M. Rule from N 1-- — _
to 0 and from M to | / | \ \ 111 I
G for first under- | /fir 11 I 1 A I
arm - J // i k fi f\ A \ 7
Small Waist. j_ 1 / I Jj A - pi-
Diagram 12. J I * t f [\ i 1 I
sure falls on or near I _ 1 I /j__|_/l _ 11 L _ L _ _
dot Z, divide the dis- I U / 1 1 | 1 | I
tance between that I II 1 1 • i
and back dart into I 1 L |
3 and mark K for 1 1 / 1 1 1 | j
the portion nearest j I 1 1 I 1 ! 11
the dart. 1/1 1 1 1 (ij f|
DIA. 11.
14. Add part of the J
15. When half-waist mea-
16. Rule a line from K to
armhole, slanting a little
towards the back, and
make dot G.
17. Rule line 13 from G to
waist, parallel with line
3.
18. Rule fine 12 from C to
waist parallel with line
3.
19. Dot 0 is half-way be-
tween C and G. Rule
line 14 from 0 to waist
line.
20. Measure the distance from
12 to 14 at the waist


Whatever it is larger than the front from K to dart must be taken off. part
to right of line 12 and make dot I; and part to left of 14 and make dot L.
21. Rule from Ito C and from Lto 0 for second under-arm.
22. Measure the distance between lines 13 and 14 at waist and whatever it is too
large must be taken off, part to right of 14 and make dot N ; and part to left
of 13 and make dot M. Rule from Nto 0 and from Mto G for first under-arm.
The bodice is finished below the waist the same as an ordinary draft.
23. Note I. The two under-arm pieces may be made in any bodice. If fashion
demands a number of seams, the distance between the back dart and the
waist dot may be divided into as many portions as the cutter pleases.
24. Note 11. The V dart at armhole will be larger, the fuller the bust measure is,
but it is not made more than 1-| inch.
25. Note 111. A stooped figure, or any figure short-waisted in front, will have
the true waist fine above line 2—as illustrated in diagrams 10 and 11. The
dots for darts are not then marked on fine 2. Mark for darts on whichever
line is at the top whether that is fine 2 or true waist line.
Extra Stout Lady.— Diagram 13,
Dia. 13.


26. The extra stout lady’s draft is made in the same way as stout lady, but the
space between waist dot and dart is divided into 4 to make three under-arms.
27. If, when fitting the bodice, it proves that the armhole measure has been taken
too tightly, do not cut the armhole out to make it larger, but let out the
shoulder seams.
CHAPTER V.
SLENDER LADY OR GIRL’S BODICE AND DEFORMED FIGURE.
Diagrams 14 and 15.
1. The undeveloped figure needs a bodice with only one small dart in front and is
made in three pieces—back, front, and sidebody
DIA. 15.
Dia. 14.
2. The first ten lines and armhole will be drafted by the same rules as an ordinary
bodice. Dots Eto F will be marked as usual.
3. Move dots E and F | inch to right to make back wider and sidebody smaller.


4. Measure for darts as usual and take the middle dot for centre of dart. Rule a
line for centre to height of dart, slanting to left at top —just as the darts
slant in an ordinary draft.
5. Mark J inch each side of centre line and curve from height of dart to these dots.
6. Measure the waist from Ato E and from line 7to the dart. Subtract this
amount from half waist and mark for the remainder on line 2 to left of dart.
7. Mark dot Kat half the distance between waist dot and dart. Mark Hat the
same distance from F as K is from the dart.
8. Rule a straight line from Kto armhole and make dot G. Curve from Gto H.
9. Slope the lines from waist to hip the same as for ordinary bodice.
10. Note I. The armhole of a slender lady’s bodice always needs some extra
length put on at shoulder and does not need a V dart.
11. Note 11. Dot His always just as much to left of Kas half waist measure is
to right of F, and as much to right of K as half waist is to left of F.
Stooped Figure.— Diagram 15.
12. When a lady stoops or is round shouldered, the bodice will be very long at the
back and short in front. The centre back line will be round. Draft the
bodice the same as for slender lady, with these exceptions :
13. Make dot A 1 inch from line 1. Rule from junction of 1 and 4 through dot A
to length of extension (the extension of a stooped figure will be extra long).
14. The amount that is usually taken off the ba<?k neck line at shoulder is taken off
at line 1, and the back is sloped from this dot junction of lines 5 and 1.
15. The lines below the waist are the same as fora slender lady.
CHAPTER VI.
SKIRTS.
Diagrams 16 to 35,
1. Diagrams 16 and 17 shew the draft of a plain skirt.
2. Make dot A 4 inches from top of paper. Rule line 1 from Ato the length of
skirt.
3. Rule line 2 from Aat right angles with line 1 and 6 inches long.
4. Make dot B | inch above the end of line 2. Rule line 3 from Ato B. Line 3
will be the correct slant for the top of front gore.
5. Make dot Con line lat height of hip below A. Divide the around-hips measure
into as many parts as you want widths in the skirt. This is a 7-gored skirt,
the hips are 35 inches. Divide the hip measure (35 inches) into 7 parts and
you have 5 inches for the width of each gore.


4 is at right angles with 3.
7 rf^F\
c p // y n A
I 1 \ /0 \\y
Dia. 16. Dia. 17.
Diagram 17.
6. As diagram 14 only represents half the front, the distance from Cto D across
the front will be half the width of the side gores —in this case 2J inches.
7. Line lis placed on the fold of the material so as to cut the front double the
width of the draft.
8. Line 4is ruled at right angles with line 3 through dot Dto length of skirt, that
is to say —place short arm of ruler on line 3 with long arm passing through
dot D and rule along the long arm to length of skirt.
9. There is no width of front at the bottom given because it ought to be wider
for stouter figures, it will work out so if line 3 is on the right slant and line
10. Make dot F 4 inches from the top of paper. Rule line 5 from Fto the length
of skirt.
11. Rule line 6 from dot Fl2 inches long, and at right angles with 5
Make dot G 2 inches above the end of line 6, and rule line 7 from F through dot
G to half the waist measure.
12. Make dot Hat the height of hip below 7on line 5.
13. Dots H, I, K, L are each one-seventh of around-hips apart (5 inches io this
case) and height of hips below line 7.
14. Rule line Bat right angles with 7 through dot Ito the length of skirt. Make
dot M at the bottom of line 8.


15. The width of the gore at the bottom will determine itself, and be the wider
as the figure is larger, if line 7 is on the right slant and line 8 is at right angles
with it. But whatever the width of this first gore, all the others must be
the same at the bottom.
16. Measure the distance between dots M and line 5 and make dots N and 0 the same
distance apart.
17. Rule line 9 from N upward through Kto line 7.
18. Rule line 10 from 0 through Lto line 7.
19, A “ flare ”is put on to the back to give extra spring. This skirt has 5 inches
between 0 and P, but that can be made as wide as the amount of fulness
required. Line 11 is ruled from Pto junction of 10 and 7.
20. Now measure line 3 from Ito 4, and line 7 from sto 10. The sum of these two
lines is sure to be some inches larger than half waist measure.
21. Whatever it is too large is to be taken out in curves for darts, as at lines 5, 8& 9.
Whatever the amount is that is to be taken out in darts must be distributed
evenly to each side of lines 8 and 9, and to right of line 5 and left of fine 4.
22. Always measure the length of skirt, from line 7to the bottom, four times on
each gore as well as at each seam.
23. The lines indicate where seams are to be, excepting line 10. —Line 11 is for
seam in centre back.
24. This is the plain foundation skirt from which skirts with flares, flounces, gathers,
etc., are cut.
25. A nine-gored skirt is drafted in the same way, but with around-hips divided
into 9 parts, and so making an extra side gore. Diagrams 18 and 19.
26. So with a five-gored skirt, or eleven gores.
27. Note I. If, in dividing the skirt into equal parts, the front is narrower than
you wish it to be, take half the hip measure and divide it into four for a
seven-gored skirt, into five for a nine-gored and six for an eleven-gored skirt.
Then the space between dots C and D will be the same width as the side
gores, and, when the front is cut double, with line 1 on the fold, the front
will be twice as wide as the side gore.
28. In fact, the front gore may be made any width and that amount subtracted
from half hip measure ; the remaining portion of hip measure to be divided
into as many parts as there are gores required.
29. Note 11. To prove the skirt the right size around the hips, measure from
C to D and from H to L—this must be the same as half hip measure.
30. Note 111. If a skirt with more width around the bottom is required, the
extra width may be given by adding flares to each side of the gores.
Or they may be made wider by making dot G from 3 to 5 inches above line
6. This will make line 7 more slanting and, when line 8 is made at right
angles with line 7, the first gore from line 5 to 8 will be wider, and all the
other gores are made the same width as the first.


[TTt\ f r f]
I 1 \ \ x 1 I ' 1
I \ \ \ \ 11 i\\ j i\
I 1 \ \ \ | ;l A I \' /! ' \
( I \ * \ * \ j '|i /; ■ A \ , ’< \
I \ \ \ ! : i v / I ; \
[ !■ |j j. : a j :
Dia. 18. DiA. 19. DiA. 20. Dia. 21.
•31. Note IV. Sometimes a skirt needs to be made longer at the front than back
or vice versa. Always make the draft to the shortest length and if the skirt
is to be made longer in the front than back, put the extra length on at the
top. See diagrams 30 and 31. The lines above lines 3 and 7 are used for
the new waist line. When measuring the new waist line it will be found that
the extra length put on to the darts takes something off from the size of
waist. Whatever the waist line is too small must be put on to the back, as
at dot G.
‘32. Note V. If the skirt is to be made longer at back or sides than the front the
extra length is put on at the bottom.
“ Flared ” Skirt. — Diagrams 18 to 24.
33. This shews the draft of a nine-gored skirt
34. When the seams have been numbered, so as to make sure they will be fitted
together in the same position as they are in the draft, cut them into separate
gores.
35. A -£ flare ”is added to each side of each gore. These -c flares ” may be any
width at the bottom and any height required according to how wide the
fskirt is to be made. In diagrams 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 21 the flares are narrow
and short in the front, graduating higher and wider toward the back. The
first two flares, which fit together, are 2 inches wide and 19 inches high. The
■second two are 4 inches wide and 21 inches high. Third flares are 6 inches


n
\
\
\
\ \
A
i\
\
\ \
\\
' \ \
\ N \
\
\ y ' •
/
/';
\ \ \
; A
; \ \ \
/ 1 5 * > \
1 \
/i ' \
' \ A
/ ’ \
\ '
23.
Dia. 21.
A
I I l l'\\
I !:"■
i \ ' ' I ' \
j I , ' \ / ' i Ja '
/ , *• > \ / ; i '
/ i 1 \ i i \
/ ! ; \ / ' i '
wide and 25 inches high. Fourth flares are 8 inches wide and 27 inches high.
They may be made as wide and as high as the cutter pleases, but, usually,
the wider they are made the higher.
36. The line for the flare must be made exactly the same length as the original line
of shirt. In diagram 23 the flare is 27 inches high, the line for flare is ruled
from this point and made exactly 27 inches long. This necessitates the
bottom of the skirt being curved up to the end of flare, and prevents the
ugly “ dip ” sometimes seen in a badly-cut skirt.
Dia. 22.
37. Diagrams 23 and 24 shew two ways of treating the back of the skirt.
When shewing the draft of a seven-gored skirt the spring for the back
is given by adding a flare from waist to the bottom of skirt (diagram
17). This will give a little fulness at the top. If it is required to make
the skirt tight fitting to the hips: make a dot 6 inches below waist on line
10 (see diagram 24, dot T) and flare from this dot out to width of flare at
the bottom.
38. If it is required to have a skirt with some fulness in the back, but with the
fulness not all in the centre, the back gore is cut up twice from the bottom
to the top and each cut spread out at the bottom. Diagram 23 shews each cut
spread out for 6 inches, but this may spread out as much as there is fulness
required.
39. Note I. In diagram 23, where the back is cut up and spread out, the
waist fine is curved. The more the cuts are spread apart the more will


the waist curve, and care must be taken to get this curve traced exactly
right on to the material.
40. Note 11. In diagram 24 where a flare is placed on the back, the waist
is slanting down at the back. Take care to get the skirt cut exactly
on this slant.
41. Note 111. The side of each gore that faces toward the front is placed on the
straight of material, then, naturally, the side of each piece facing the back
will be en bias. The selvedge of material must run up and down, never across
the skirt. The nap must brush down and flowers run all the same way.
42. Note IV. When putting the skirt together, begin by pinning each seam
with waist lines together. Then pin the bottom lines of the seam together.
Then tack the two tracings together from top to bottom.
43. Each seam will have one side on the straight and the other en bias. If you
begin tacking at the top you are almost sure to get the side that is en bias
stretched and so you will find one side longer than the other at the bottom.
If the waist lines are pinned together and the bottom lines together, one
side will fit into the other and there will be no chance of stretching.
44. Note V. Much of the appearance of a skirt depends on the pressing, but it
is impossible to press a seam out flat if it has been stitched unevenly.
45. Note VI. A seam that is quite straight will set flat when pressed out, but a seam
that has a bend or any shape must be cut wherever there is a bend. See
diagram 20 with the notched seam indicated by dotted line. It is usual
to put the seams together first and cut them after.
Umbrella Skirt.
46. To cut an umbrella skirt : first draft a plain seven-gored skirt to measures.
Diagram 25.
47. Place the centre front on the fold of the material.
48. Place the first side piece against the front with hip dots touching and waist
lines touching. This will make the seams (lines 4 and 5) spread apart at
bottom of skirt.
49. Repeat this at next seam, that is, place the hip dots together and waist lines
together with skirt spread out at bottom as at 8 8 1.
50. Repeat this at the next seam, as at 99 K.
51. Cut the back width up twice from bottom to waist and spread each cut out
for as much fulness as you wish to make, as at R R and SS. This skirt has
each cut spread out for 10 inches, but it may be made narrower or wider.
52. This skirt has only one seam in the centre back. Sometimes they are cut
with the back on the fold and a seam down the centre front.
53. The front width may be cut in a separate piece, the centre back on the fold,
and there will be a seam down each side of front.


V-V
r<" ■
\' 1 i 1 '
\ \ , 1 / /
\\ i ' ;
\\ , , / / r \
\\i, / / / \
\ ' , 1 ' / / /
\ \ , i / , , / ' \
\ I / s S S
\ \ , i / / /y ' N
\|/// ' s \ s
\I I // / / / \ j
\\ i , / / / / / X 5
V <i - /
Vl 1 /'/ '' ,- ''
, I
I I o=^
i i oy
! i 1 / / /«^v
1 I 1 /' / /
1 i I ' / / x
I/ / A
/ l / / /
!!/' / / / , \ S
11 ''/ / / / \ a
jll /' / / B
'' / // - '
'///// X '
I///// '
/// '/ / "
\ * '
\ ~ " _ - -4" - " ',


TT \ \
i \ \
j I \ V \
f: ' ' N 5 ' NR
; i, 'r N ,.\,A
' Lf h - " ' r ’ ” \ \
/);i/\' v A *\ I ' \ \
A 'aVV ! ;
S, i j i j l
DlA. 27. Dia. 28. Dia. 29.
Diagrams 28 and 29.
54. Diagram 26 shews an extra wide umbrella skirt. This is made by not only
spreading each seam out at the bottom, but by making a cut between each
seam and spreading that out, as at T T T, and WW W, and spreading
the cuts in the back out more.
55. Note I. The waist line curves as the skirt is made wider at the bottom.
The wider it is made the more the waist line curves. Care must be taken to
trace this curve exactly in the position where it falls.
56. Note 11. The ordinary double-width materials are not wide enough to cut
an umbrella skirt in one piece and have the material with selvedge running
up and down. The front will be cut with the material folded across the
double width if there is to be only a seam in back, and even then there
will be need to join at the bottom at back.
Tucked Skirt. — Diagram 27.
57. This skirt is tucked at the waist and the top of the frill
58. The foundation from which this is drafted is a five-gored skirt.
59. There are no curves taken out for darts. The back is made 5 inches wider at
the waist to allow extra fulness.
60. Instead of ruling line 10 from the flare dot up to junction of lines 7 and waist,
rule line 10 to 5 inches beyond line 9, on waist line. Measure the length


fr ft* r-'
1 1 \ Y"' r: )
4 * \
/ 2 1 f/V ) v * v- ' ,7
L ' ''
of skirt from the bottom upward and it will be found necessary to make the
waist line about 1 inch higher in the centre back. Curve down to waist at
line 9.
61. Line 11 is ruled down the front, 11, inch from line lat top and 21 inches from
line 1 at bottom.
62. With line 1 placed on the fold of material this will give the narrow panel front.
Extra material may be allowed on each side to form a tuck if required.
63. The dotted line 12 inches from bottom indicates the top of the frill and the
bottom of the top skirt. In this case it is 12 inches from bottom, but it
may be any distance from bottom of the skirt.
64. Diagram 27 has a train, but these directions are for the same skirt without a
train. A train is given in directions for diagram 34.
65. If the material is wide enough cut the whole of the top skirt, excepting the
front panel, in one piece. To do this place lines 3 and 5 together and place
line 11 on the selvedge of material.
66. If the material is not wide enough for this, place lines 3 and sof draft together
and cut one piece from line 11 to line 8, the other side piece from line Bto line 10.
67. The frill is cut in straight widths and must be three times as long as bottom
of skirt. The depth of the frill will be 12 inches with 3 inches for hem and
1 inch turnings—l 6 inches. Join all the widths together, hem the bottom,
and tuck the top for 4 inches down. Make the tucks 4 inch wide so that the
edge of each tuck just touches the stitching of the last.
63. Tuck the top of skirt from waist 4 inches down, making the tucks inch wide
and 1 inch apart.
Dia. 30.
Dia. 31.
Dia. 32.


Shaped Flounce. —Diagrams 30, 31, 32.
1)9. A skirt with a shaped flounce may be drafted as a five-gored skirt (diagram 30,
31) and a line marked for the top of the flounce to whatever shape it is
required. On this one the top of flounce is in scollops. This can be marked
by cutting one scollop out in paper and marking half on the front and re-
peating it around the skirt, taking care to keep the peaks the same distance
from the bottom of the skirt.
70. Cut in paper the bottom of the skirt from line RR R R to the bottom. Cut
this piece of paper from bottom to top every 2 inches. Spread out each cut
as shewn in diagram 32. The diagram shews the cuts spread more at the
back than they are in front, to give more fulness at the back. The cuts may
be spread out as much as the cutter pleases according to how full the bottom
of skirt is required. If the cuts are 2 inches apart and are spread out for
2 inches, that will naturally make the skirt twice as wide as the draft. As
the draft of an ordinary skirt is about 34 yards around the bottom, the
spreading out for 2 inches would make the flounce 7 yards—-this is very wide.
A medium size would be to spread the cuts 1 inch if they are 2 inches apart.
Notice that spreading the cuts out makes the scollops at the top more
curved. The more they are spread apart, the more the top will curve.
Skirt with Inverted Pleat. — Diagrams 33 and 34.
71. To make api at at the seams it is necessary to add a piece to each side of
every gore of skirt to the height the pleat is required. Diagram 33 has 2
inches added 14 inches high. The piece that joins this (diagram 34) has
4 in lies added 14 inches high.
72. If the same amount were added to both sides the seam would be in the middle,
and, when pleats were put in evenly on both sides, the seam would shew.
If the seam is more to one side than the other it will be hidden in pleats. Line
8 is the second seam and the same amount will be added as at the first seam.
73. Before making the inverted pleat in the back, the flare from waist to the bottom
must be added —see line 11. Then fold the paper down line 11 and fold it
back again so as to make a double fold 1 inch wide at the top and 4 inches
wide at the bottom.
74. Trace along line 11 and on the bottom, and on line 7as far as the fold. When
unfolded the tracing will shew an additional width to the skirt the shape of
the piece between lines 11 and 12. Dotted line 13 will be the fold. Line
12 will be centre back, and the whole of the draft from line 12 to line 8 will
be cut in one piece.
Trained Skirt. — Diagram 34.
75. When making a trained skirt it is necessary to add the length of train all along


(i n\ ■>§'' ;
\ \ X \\ 1 !
\ \ in 1 i
\ \ I S ' i
1 \ \ \ \ 1 \l 1
I I 1 J \ "\ Ik !
; I n 1 ' \ \\ i k '
I ! , 5 ' ' /5 \ i 1
1 I 1 1 " \ \ G 1
1 — u l I - 1
Dia. 33. Dia. 34. Dia. 35.
Gathered Skirt.. — Diagram 35.
the bottom, from centre back to the middle of side back gore ; then gradually
curve up to the front of side gore. Skirts are usually made 1 1 inch longer
at the side for short train and 3 inches longer for a long train.
A skirt to be worn on the stage is 1-J- inch longer in the front than walking
length (this is put on at the bottom) and gradually longer toward the length
of train.
77. A skirt that is to be full enough to have it gathered at waist and over hips,
must have every gore made wider. Never attempt to make gores wider by
adding to each side. Whenever fulness is required in any piece—whether of
skirt, bodice, or sleeve, a pleat is put into that part of material where the
fulness is to be and a plain draft placed on to pleated material to mark shape.
78. The draft of the side gore of a skirt, marked on to the pleated material, is
shewn in the diagram. The double lines connected by crossway lines repre-
sent the pleat in the material.
Each gore of skirt will be marked on the pleated material in the same way.


\ ' I \ i i
/ I \ I
I V \ / / v. \
Dia. 36. Dia. 37.
CHAPTER VII.
SLEEVES.
Diagrams 36 to 49.
1. Every sleeve made for a lady’s bodice is a variation of one of the three follow-
ing ;
2. (1) Plain Fitting Sleeve, (2) Gigot or Leg of Mutton, (3) Bishop.
3. For all kinds of sleeves the first requisite is a draft of a fitting sleeve to the
lady’s measure.
4. It is very easy to get a paper pattern of a bishop or gigot sleeve or any other
style, but it takes one who knows how to alter that pattern to fit any figure,
and the very cleverest cutters are constantly making misfits when working
on that principle.
5. It is a much more sure way of getting the style you want, and getting it to fit,
to take a sleeve drafted to size and cut the style from that.
6. This chapter is to shew how to get any sleeve from a draft made to measure.
Plain Sleeves. — Diagram 36.
7. This is a plain fitting sleeve with a seam back and front and a peak over the
hand.
8. Extend the wrist line 4 inch to the front of sleeve (dot P) and curve from,
the end of this line up to 24 inches above the wrist.


9. Extend the wrist line 1-J- inch to back (dot Q) and curve from the end of this
line to 21 inches above the wrist.
10. Measure from the centre of wrist line to 1| inch below (dot R) and curve
from P to R and from Q to R.
11. Make the same additions to the under sleeve, excepting that the peak is only
1 inch below the wrist.
12. The width of the flares put on at the seams and the size of the peak may be
varied at pleasure, but the front flare is usually smaller than the back and
the peak on the under sleeve smaller than that on the upper.
“ Fish mouth ” Cuff.— Diagram 37.
13. To make a “ fishmouth ” cuff, flares are added to the back and front of the sleeve
as in diagram 36. Instead of curving down to a peak, the bottom lines curve
up to 1 inch above the wrist lines.
14. When this sleeve has the seams sewn up, and well pressed, it opens out over
the hand like a fish mouth—hence its name.
15. If the sleeve is to come down well over the hand, as these sleeves usually do,
add 2 inches on to the length of sleeve before putting on the flares.
16. Be careful, when adding flares, to keep them an even length with the sleeve,
that is to say, line Pto Q must be a straight line through the wrist line. Other-
wise the front seam of sleeve will twist over the arm when the garment is
worn.
Gigot or Leg of Muttox Sleeve. —Diagram 38.
17. There are three variations of the gigot sleeve on the one diagram, as the sleeve
draft is placed in the same way for all three.
18. Place the under and upper sleeve with the back lines just touching each other
from the wrist to the elbow. This will, naturally, make them spread apart
at the top as at H C.
19. Begin from H and trace on the top of under sleeve, down the side, on the wrist
and up the front of upper sleeve to 2 inches above the elbow then curve out
to dot D, which is 2 inches to left of B. Make the new line from Ato D the
same length as the original line of sleeve from A to B.
20. Curve from Hto D, making the line very round from Hto the top.
21. The dotted line marked Wis the kind of curve not to make—give the line more
roundness.
22. Sometimes a sleeve is required with not so much fulness at the top. This can
be effected by drafting the sleeve in the same way and taking out a dart at
the back of the under sleeve.
23. The space for the top of dart, between dots L and H, is 5 inches.
24. Make dot Kon under sleeve about 2 inches above the elbow.
25. Curve from Kto L, making the line the same length as the line from Kto H.


i \ A / / h 7 /V
//[ '
Dia. 38. ElA - 3!) -
26. Then make a new curve line around the top from Lto B.
27. In this sleeve there will be no widening of sleeve as from Ato I), but the original
line of sleeve will be used from A to B.
Elbow Sleeve.
28. The top half of diagram 38 is often used for a full short sleeve
29. Make dots M and N 8 inches above the wrist and curve a line across the sleeve
from there. This will be the bottom of the sleeve.
30. Finish the sleeve off with frills or lace, or a gauntlet cuff.
31. If a fitting lace sleeve down to the wrist is required, it may be cut from the bot-
tom part of diagram 37, or from diagram 38 from line M N to wrist.
Small Gigot Sleeve. — Diagram 39
32. When a gigot sleeve of smaller proportions is required it is necessary to have
a seam down the back as well as a front seam. Then the upper sleeve has a
flare added to each side at the top. In this case it is U inch wider on each
side. That is to say, dot D is 1 1 inch to left of B and dot H U inch to
right of L. This extra width may be increased according to fulness required,
but, however wide a piece is added, the new line of sleeve must be made the
same length as the original line.


/ SL \ I i '
I'" 1 ' N \ \ I '
/ / I V \ ' i I ,
/ 1 / \ 1 ■ ' / I
( 1 I \ I \ \ : I \
! / A i > . ;
\ | ,' / \ ; ;■ •
' / \ I / / a ; i
1 i / / ! , , \ ' i
; / x i - ' * \ i
/i ; / / i / f V \ i
*4 / r - \ \i
/' / i
/ / ! / I
; / I
I
Dta. 40. !
i
j
I
i i
DlA. 41.
33. Curve from Dto H, keeping an even distance from the top of draft.
34. There is no alteration made to under sleeve.
Coatee Sleeve. —Diagram 40.
35. A gigot sleeve for a coatee is made 3 inch wider at wrist than for a dress,
and with not so much fulness at the top.
36. Place the under and upper 3 inches apart at the wrist and just touching at the
elbow. (They may be placed 1 inch apart at elbow if a wide sleeve is needed.)
Take care that the distance from N to D on the upper sleeve is the same as from
M to D on the under sleeve.
37. Line CR is straight in the middle of upper sleeve and is to be placed on the
straight of material when cutting out the sleeve.
38. Curve around the top from front of upper sleeve to back of under sleeve


Bell Sleeve.— Diagram 41.
39. Place the patterns with the top back corners of under and upper sleeve level
with each other and 8 inches apart at the wrist and 1J inch apart at the
elbow. Trace all around the size of the draft, connecting the wrists with a
curved line.
Angel Sleeve. — Diagram 41.
40. The draft is placed in the same way for an angel sleeve as for a bell sleeve, but,
instead of tracing all around to the size of the draft, only the top of the sleeve
is shaped.
41. Straight lines are ruled from the top of the upper and under sleeve, through
the wrist dot, down to length of skirt.
42. A straight line is ruled across the bottom, connecting the side lines.
43. This sleeve is not seamed up, but is left open from the armhole to the bottom.
It covers the arm when down at the side, but leaves it bare when the arm
is raised.
Bishop Sleeves
44. The bishop sleeve is also cut with only a front seam, but is very different from
the gigot sleeve. It has the draft placed in position from the top and not
from the wrist.
Plain Bishop Sleeve. —Diagram 42.
45. This shews a bishop sleeve with no fulness at the top and some fulness to
gather into the cuff at the wrist.
46. Place the draft of the under and upper sleeve just touching at the top comers
of the back seam.
47. Make dots M and N 1 inch from the bottom of sleeve on the front seam, to
allow for cuff.
48. Curve the bottom of sleeve from Mto IST, making the curve deeper according
to the amount of pouch required.
49. Trace around the top of draft and down the front lines to dots M and N.
Shiet Sleeve. —Diagram 43
50. A shirt sleeve is much the same as a plain bishop, except that it has more
fulness at the top.
51. To do this, place the top corners of the back of upper and under sleeves 2
inches apart, but exactly level. Let the drafts touch at the elbow.
52. Trace all around to the size of sleeve, but curve the top of upper sleeve I inch
higher than the draft.


( ' 1 /
\ 1. \ 1 1 /
\ i i \ ' ; /
\ ! \ i- /
,i >. \ I
/ \ \ / /\
/ ' \ / / x \
/ 7 ' \ / / N \
/ / '
I' 1
1 \ ' / A \
/ / / ' \ / ' ' \
v / \ \ I / / \ \
/ / ' A\ / / / \ \
1 / / x ' / / / \ \
\ „ 7 ' 7 /A
DlA. 44. DlA. 45.
DIA. 42.
DIA. 43.


Pouched at Bottom. —Diagram 44.
53. To make a deep pouch at wrist it is necessary to add flares.
54. Place the draft with the top back comers touching.
55. Make dots M and N 3 inches from the wrist on the front seam, to shorten for cut.
56. Make a dot 3 inches to right of M and curve from there to 2 inches below
bend for elbow.
57. Make a dot 3 inches to left of N and curve from there to 2 inches below the
bend for elbow.
58. Measure the original line of sleeve from bend to dots M and N, and make the
new line exactly the same length.
59. Curve from flare to flare, making the middle of curved line 7or 8 inches below
the end of flares.
Full Bishop Sleeve.—Diagram 45.
60. This illustrates the sleeve that is gathered into the armhole and wrist and is
full all down the length of sleeve.
61. The draft is placed in the same way as for plain bishop sleeve, but the material
must have a pleat from top to the bottom.
62. The pleat—as indicated by the two lines connected by crosslines—must be
put in the material where the middle of the upper sleeve will be placed.
There is no pleat or fulness in the under sleeve.
63. For a very full sleeve put three or four pleats, one on top of the other.
64. Trace all around the draft, taking off the depth of the cuff from the bottom.
65. A short puff sleeve will be cut in the same way, but, usually,with more pleats
for fulness. Measure from the top down the front of upper and under-sleeve
the length required, as at 0 P.
66. Connect 0 P with a curved line, curving 2 inches lower down in the middle.
67. If the short sleeve is to pouch over all round, cut it 2 inches longer than
line OP.
Tucked Sleeve.
68. If a sleeve is to be tucked at the top, make the tucks, in that part of the ma-
terial where the upper sleeve will fall, before cutting out.
69. These tucks will commence as far from the edge of material as dot 0 is. There
are no tucks on the under sleeve.
70. Place the drafts on and cut out the same as for a bishop sleeve.
Gathered Sleeve.— Diagram 46,
71. This shews a sleeve that is to be gathered up and down, from top to wrist.
72. Allow the fulness for gathers by putting pleats across the material, from sel-
vedge to selvedge, as shewn by the double lines connected by cross lines.


line MN for a long sleeve.
/ \
XXXX7
( 11 /
VvXV\ 1
\ ! /
sm,' I y-ksjs:
\\ 1/ I
) *' 1
iWv A W\\\
/ / \ \
DIA, 4:6.
73. These pleats are 1 inch wide with 3 inch spaces between.
74- Place the drafts as directed for diagram 42. Trace all around and down to
75. Make dots 0 P 7 inches from the top and connect them with a line, for the
bottom of a short sleeve.
76. There will also be a pleat in the material from top to wrist.
Fancy Sleeve. — Diagram 47.
f 77. Any sleeve that fashion may require can be cut on one or the
v 1 other principles which are given in the foregoing rules. That
\is to say, the drafts will either be placed together at wrist as
\ for a gigot sleeve or placed in position at the top as for a
1 bishop sleeve. When the drafts are correctly placed put pleats
\ in the material wherever fulness is required.
7B. For instance, this diagram gives an illustration of a fancy
® IA - ' sleeve cut on the same principle as a bishop.


"
/ 1 ■; 1 / i
/ /\ / i
/ /-u-. . \X / |
/"' \ \ - 1 /
Dia. 48. DlA. 49.
Diagram 49.
Diagram 48.
Shews the drafts placed as for a bishop sleeve. Measure on the back seam
7 inches from the wrist and make dot D on upper and E on under sleeve.
F is 2 inches to left of D, and G 2 inches to right of E.
Make a curved line from D to F, and from E to G to form peaks.
Make dot H 1| inch from the top of upper and K 1£ inch from top of under
sleeve.
Connect H and K with a curved line the same shape as the top of sleeve. Curve
from H to F in as nearly the same curve as the side of sleeve as possible.
From G to K the same curve as side line.
Trace all around the outside of drafts for the outside of sleeve
Now trace on another piece of paper the centre part of sleeve—that is, the part
outlined by lines F to H, H to K, K to G and a curved line from G to F.
This piece is placed on the material that has a fold in it to make fulness to gather
into the top and into the peaks just befow elbow.
Note I. There has been no enlarging or alteration of any kind to the top of
under sleeve.
Note 11. The corners, top and bottom, must be made exactly right. Of
course, every part of a dress must be made exactly right, but it is so easy to
trace out or chalk the corners of sleeve at the wrist a little longer than draft.


If one side is made | inch longer and the other inch shorter, that makes
inch difference —quite enough to make the front seam twist over the arm
when the sleeve has been put in the dress.
89. Note 111. When putting in the sleeve see that the middle of upper arm falls
straight from the highest part of shoulder. In diagram 40 line A C marks
the middle of upper sleeve.
90. When the sleeve is pinned in, hang the bodice on the hand with highest part
of shoulder on top and side seams verticle. Line AC or centre of upper
sleeve should hang in the same direction as the side seams of bodice —that
is, straight down. If it slopes toward the back, move the front seam of sleeve
forward and vice versa.
91. Note IV. Another rule for setting in sleeve is to place the back seam £ inch
below the rounded seam at back of armhole. But as rounded seam can be
moved at will, this will only apply when it is placed as directed in Chapter 11.
CHAPTER VIII.
BLOUSES.
Diagrams 50 to 64.
1. To draft a blouse ; make the first 10 lines and armhole as for a dress.
2. Put in all the dots for the waist, without making any curved lines for back or
darts.
3. Line A will be the centre of back as usual.
4. Curve from Hto C for side line of back.
5. Rule a line from Ito C for side line of front.
6. Centre line of front is ruled from neck dot through the highest part of bust
down to waist line, see line 8.8.
7. This diagram allows 2 inches below the waist line for pouch in front.
8. The waist line of blouse is traced on line 2at the back as far as Z and then
on true waist line to centre front. If it is to be pouched, from 2to 4 inches
are added to length of front below true waist line, and the waist for blouse is
traced from dot I on true waist line as far as the chest dot and sloped from
there down to length of pouch.
9, The armhole, shoulders and neck will be the same as for a bodice
10. If the figure requires a V dart at the armhole it is folded out on the paper
draft before it is traced on to the material.
11. (The V dart at armhole is never shewn in the outside of a garment. It is
only put in the lining and the material stretched over it.)


c
r\ v x -I- ' C_ jk* _
f 'i- \ n _
I ~X_X “ X X
1 X -5
12. It will be seen from this draft that there are two parts of the blouse pattern—
back and front.
13. The back is traced on centre back line, on line 2 for waist line, on side line
from H to C, on armhole, shoulder and neck.
14. The front will be traced on line B B for centre front, on pouch line from B
to I for waist, on side line from I to C on armhole, shoulder and neck.
15. When the blouse is to be fastened at the back, line B B is placed on the fold of
material to cut both fronts in one
ance for hem at back.
The backs are cut separately with allow
DIA, 50.
16. When the blouse is to be fastened in the front : the centre back line is placed on
the fold of material to cut both sides of back in one piece. The fronts are
cut separately with allowance for turning or box pleat in the front.
17. A coatee will be cut on the same principle.
18. If the coatee is to have an open front, rule a line from junction of shoulder
and neck lines, parallel with line B B, as indicated by dotted line E E.
19. A blouse or coatee may be cut from a fitting pattern already drafted to size.


x
\ 1 X
1 Nx '
" 1
\
/ 1
/ 1 u
x
C
/ 1 h
7 Vcj
'll
/ /
1
; 1
1 / /
// <i
/ .■ '/
1
1
; .
; ; !\
/ * /1
J
j ! 1 ' /
1 /
' ' '"Xo i ' i 1
___
1 / r
'
' i/ i
/ /
1 1 1 1
* i
! 1 | X
Dia. 51,
Dia, 52.
Diagrams 51 and 52.
20. These show the plain draft of blouse from a bodice pattern, with a yoke marked
on it.
21. Line AB is ruled from neck through the highest part of bust to length of
pouch, and all the other lin s are the same as in the draft diagram 50.
22. If line GH in diagram 51 is used for side line of back, there will be a little
fulness to gather in at the waist.
23. To make the back of blouse quite plain at waist —with no gathers —measure
the distance between back and sidebody, take that amount from H and make
K curve from K to G.
24. Straight line CD is to fit on to the curved line G H. This
will not be such a difficulty as seems to present itself at first sight. In
dressmaking it is often necessary to join a seam one side of which is curved
in quite a different way from the other side. That will be always necessary
when the figure to be fitted is not quite flat. This can be done without any
wrinkles and will press out quite smoothly if the seam is notched ”on the
inside.
Tucked Blouse.— Diagrams 53, 54, 55.
25. When a blouse is to be tucked, the tucks are put into a straight width of ma-
terial first and it is cut into shape afterwards.


j t
| i
j |
' | I j
: i : !j; j;/ 1 7 1
i j | , 1 1 t W ! LI y j
' jHini;; i j y j I
1 ; i: i * i 1
> : I J
‘ i 1
Dia. 53. i I
DlA.54.
26. Diagram 54 shews the material, which has been cut the length of the draft
from shoulder to waist, and tucked from the top 10 inches down. Ic is
opened out singly and the pattern placed on only one half in the diagram.
When cutting out, fold the material on the centre tuck and place the front
line of draft on the fold so as to cut the front double.
27. Diagram 53 shews the material for back of blouse tucked and the pattern
placed on with the centre back on the first tuck.
28. If the blouse is to be buttoned down the back, the centre back line will be
placed 1 inch beyond the tucks to allow space for buttonholes.
29. This blouse has a square yoke cut out of the material and filled in with tucked
net.
30. If there is no yoke the blouse will be, naturally, cut up to the neck. The front
yoke is marked from shoulder at 2| inches from neck. Dot E, diagram 52,
rule a line from this parallel with front line 10 inches long. For bottom
of yoke a line at right angles with front. The back yoke is traced in the same
way to 3 inches below shoulder.


1 ;
'Wvii'ii
i 1 i 1 1 1 , 1 ‘ i i
A 1 ; i:!^I;; i
i 1 V'li 11 1,1
11; V |! i ■ " "
Diagram 55.
31. Shews the yokes on a piece of net—that has already been tucked on the straight—
placed so that the tucks are on the cross of the yoke.
Dia. 56
DIA. 55.
32. Any or every blouse or coatee may be cut on the same principle as the fore-
going with whatever variations as to trimming, etc., that fashion requires.
For instance ; a coatee as shewn in diagram 56 may be taken as an illustra-
tion. It is made double breasted with no seam on the shoulder and two
seams —which may be stitched and piped—down the front and back.
Double Breasted Coatee with no Shoulder Seam.- —Diagram 57
33. Shews the draft for the coatee which is, in all the outlines, the same as diagrams
51 and 52, excepting that the centre front line is moved ; and there is one
dart taken out at seam.
34. Begin by marking Don waist line 1 inch from centre back. Eis at the end of
back shoulder. Curve from Dto E.
35. Trace the back on a separate paper with line D E marked on it.
36. Place the back shoulder line touching the front shoulder line with the neck
lines exactly even so as to cut the back and front in one piece.
37. (In a well cut pattern the back shoulder is -J- inch longer than the front shoulder.
This is to allow room for stretching the front shoulder and to so prevent
wrinkles. When there is no shoulder seam the stretching cannot be done, and
the I inch extra length of the back shoulder is left over at armholes.)


2
i
s' "* p
— ‘
vir
/ / S5
/ / i ‘ g


j\ A
\ 'I LI
5 I 4- \ \
I—.! \\ \\
Dia. 60. Dia. 61. Dia. 62.
38. Make dot S 4 inches below neck on front line. Curve from Fat back of neck
along neck line as far as shoulder, then from shoulder through dot S to G ;
which is 2 inches beyond front line, to make coatee double breasted.
39. Rule a perpendicular line from G down to 2 inches below waist line and make
dot H. From H rule a horizontal line to the front of back dart and make
dot T. Make R opposite Ton back of back dart.
40. From R curve up to waist and on waist line to Kat back of under arm.
41. Make a line from top of back dart to meet line ED. Mark dot N where this
line crosses the armhole line. Line T) EX R will be the second seam.
42. Make dot Aon shoulder 1J inch inside dot E. Another dot Aon waist line
halfway between back line and D. Curve from Aon waist to Aon shoulder
and down to back of front dart. This will be the first seam.
43. Measure the distance between back and sidebody at the waist, and take that
amount out at side seam as shewn at M. Curve a new side line from Mto C.
44. For the collar make line P and 0 four inches below neck line FS G, and con-
nect G and 0 with a horizontal line.
45, Now the draft is finished and the coatee will be traced out in five pieces as
shewn in diagrams 58, 59, 60, 61, 62.
46. The first piece (diagram 58) is traced from the draft down the centre back to
waist ; on waist line to A : from A to A on shoulder and down to A at back
of front dart : from A to H ; from H to G for front line, and from G through
S around the neck to F.
47. The second piece (diagram 59) is traced from A at back waist to D ; from D
to E N and down front of back dart to T ; from T to A at front dart, and on
line AAA over the shoulder.
The third piece (diagram 60) is traced from the draft on side line from K
to C ; from C on armhole to N ; from N to dart and down the back of dart
to R ; from R to K at waist.


/
: /’v -
, /] - *
r 11 i
: i
48. The fourth piece (diagram. 61) is traced from Mon waist line to D ; from D
to E : from E on armhole to C ; from C on side line to M.
49. The fifth piece (diagram 62) is for collar and is traced on neck line from F
to G ; from G to 0 : from 0 to D, and from D on back line to F.
50. The sleeve and cuff are given in the chapter on sleeves and cuffs.
Deep Round Yoke. — Diagrams 63 Y 64.
51. The bottom of the yoke is traced on the draft as low down from the neck as
the depth required ; but usually not below line 4 at the front or line 6 at the
back. Line ZZ is for depth of front yoke, and line Y Y the back yoke.
52. Trace the back yoke out on a separate piece of paper and join the shoulder of
it to the shoulder of the front, exactly fitting at the neck lines.
53. Connect the bottom lines of the yoke with a curved fine as from Zto G.
54. Place the front line from neck to Zon the fold of the material, and cut the yoke
out with no seam anywhere.
' ' " >E
'' /""I
\
'' 'l '
' I '
‘ . I V '
" Liu'
1 ' ' 1 [
'“'ll
1 /
DIA. 64.
DIA. 63.
55. When the yoke is cut so deep over the shoulder it is necessary to take some off
the top of the sleeve.
56. Mark dot W where the back seam of the sleeve will be put, and dot A for the
position of the front seam.
57. Measure the distance from Wto the back yoke and mark dot E above the back
seam of sleeve at that distance (diagram 64).


58. Measure the distance from Ato front yoke and mark dot F above the front
seam of sleeve at that distance. Rule a line from Fto E.
Saddle Yoke.
59. A saddle yoke is cut in the same way as a round yoke, but, instead of using
the curved line from Zto G, the armhole line Gto Z will outline the yoke. It
is usually cut not to reach below the neck line in front.
60. Note I. If the blouse is cut to the waist and put into a band, there should be
no gathers under arms, and only enough gathers at the back to draw it into
the size of a fitting back and sidebody together.
61. Note 11. The blouse put into a band is likely to become short waisted when
washed. It is a better plan to cut the blouse 2 inches below the waist line.
Gather the blouse as directed in note 1, and sew the waist line on to a piece
of tape the size of the waist.
62. Note 111. When making a boned bodice a fitting lining must be cut, on which
to drape the material. The material for draping will be cut in the same way
as a blouse.
63. Note IV. When cutting the material for a blouse or to drape on to a
lining, see that the selvedge runs up and down. If there is a nap on the
material it must brush downwards. A flowered material must have
the flowers all running the samfe way.
64. Note V. Wherever fulness or gathers are required in a blouse, put pleats in
the material before placing the draft on to out it out.
CHAPTER IX.
COLLARS.
Diagrams 65 to 74.
Rink Collar. —Diagram 65.
1. Line 1 represents the back of collar. Line 2is at right angles with line 1 and
6 inches long.
2. Dot Ais 1 inch above the end of line 2.
3. Curve from the junction of lines 1 and 2 through dot Ato half neck measure.
Dia .65.


i \ '\
A
4. Line 3, front of collar, is from neck measure slanting back so that the top of
collar is 1 inch smaller than bottom.
5. Curve for the top of collar so that the front is J inch lower than the back
Turnover Collar.— Diagram 66.
6. A collar that is to turnover from the top of a rink, is made by cutting up the
rink pattern from bottom to top four times, and spreading out each cut
for J inch.
7. This will make it wider round the bottom and more curved at the top than
the rink.
DIA, 66.
8. The front may be pointed or rounded as shewn in diagram
9. The collar may be scalloped or have any variety of shape at the bottom, but
the top line must take the curve given it by spreading out the cuts, and
must not be altered.
Medici Collar. — Diagram 67.
Dia. 67.
10. The Medici collar is cut from a rink collar, but the measurement of half the
neck is made on the top of the rink and it is turned upside down. Then
cut from the top to the bottom 8 times and spread each cut out for inch.
11. Trace along the bottom and top, curving off for front of collar.


'N
J \
/ N
Sailor Collar. —Diagram 68.
12. Place the back and front yoke of the dress with the shoulder lines touching at
the neck, and spread apart inch at armhole.
13. Measure down back line the depth of collar and rule at right angles with the
back to width of collar.
14. Trace up the back line, around the neck to shoulder, from shoulder to highest
part of bust.
DiA. 68.
15. From highest part of bust make a horizontal line 4 inches long ; from the end
of this line curve to the end of line for width of collar at the back.
16. All round collars are cut with the yoke placed in this way,
17. If they are to fit right up to the neck —trace around the neck instead of from
shoulder to bust line.
18. Whatever shape the collar is to be, trace it from that part of the bodice on
which it is to fit.
Coat Collar.— Diagram 69
19. Line lis 6 inches long.
20. Dot Ais at the bottom of line 1. From dot A rule line 2 1 inch long and slant-
ing away from line 1. The top end (dot B) is [- inch from line 1.
21. Line 3is 2 inches long and is ruled from Bto meet line 1.
22. Line 4is from dot Bat right angles with line 2 and 8 inches long.
23. Curve for the neck line of collar from dot A through the end of line 4to half
neck measure.
24. Line sis from neck measure on curved line 21 inches long and at right angles
with line 4.
25. Curve from Cto end of line 5 for outside line of collar.
26. Lines 2 and 3 are the centre back of collar and a seam is made there in the
canvas only. The material is cut in one piece and stretched over the canvas.


\
i '//'-A
r ' / \
DIA. 70.
27. This coat collar will allow the material to be cut on the straight in the centre
back, so that it is suitable for a material with stripes which must have the
grain running up and down at the back.
DIA. 0!-*.
28. If the collar is to be cut on the cross and stretched on the outside ; line 4 will
be ruled from dot B in the same way as in diagram, but at right angles
with line 1 instead of at right angles with line 2. The rest of the collar is
drafted in the same way as in directions.
Sailor Coat Collar. —Diagram 70.
29. A sailor coat collar must be cut with more “ spring ” around the outside than
the ordinary coat collar.
30. To get this, draft a coat collar to size and cut it twice from outside to neck
line. The first cut is If inch from the back and the next cut J inch from
that.
31. Place the back of pattern so that the dots A and C are on the fold of the paper
The centre back of sailor collar will be on the straight and have no seam.
32. Spread out each of the cuts for |-inch.
33. Measure down the fold (which is centre back) the depth the collar is required.


w 7
34. Make a line at right angles with the fold to half the across back measure.
35. Curve from across back up to the point of collar, on the end and around the
neck.
36. Note that the neck line ol tlie sailor collar is quite a different shape from that
of the round collar. This is caused by the cutting up and spreading out.
Care must be taken to give the neck line of collar just the curve that the
spreading of the cuts give it.
Storm Collar. —Diagrams 71 to 74.
Dia. 71.
37. A storm collar is cut from a rink pattern turned upside down.
The neck must be measured on the line of the collar that is at the bottom
in this diagram.
38. This collar is cut into three pieces as indicated by the lines. The line with one
mark is for centre back ; the line with two marks is for first seam ; the line
with three marks for second seam.
39. Each piece is traced along the bottom and up the sides to 1 inch high. From
there the line curves out at the top to 4 inches high.
Dia. 72.
Dia. 73.
Dia. 74.
40. The amount of curve is shewn in diagram 72. The back line is ruled straight up
for 4 inches, and the end of curved line is 1 inch from the top of straight
line. All the other pieces are curved in the same way on both sides, except
the centre front. This is left straight (diagrams 73 and 74).
41. The collar is 4 inches high all around, but sloping down to 3 inches high at
centre front.
42. These three pieces represent half the collar.


CHAPTER X.
CUFFS.
Diagrams 75 and 76.
Narrow Plain Cuffs.
1. A narrow cuff for a shirt blouse is
quite straight and one inch longer than the
wrist measure.
A Wide
Plain Cuff.
2. This must be cut from the bottom
3. Place the front lines of the under
part of a fitting sleeve pattern.
and upper sleeve together, exactly even at
the wrist. Mark from the wrist up the depth the cuff is required.
4. Trace all around the outline of the sleeve and allow one inch wider for the
under sleeve to lap under.
Gauntlet Cuff. —Diagram 75
5. Line A.B. is 6 inches long and at right angles with line I.
6. Dot Cis 2 inches above dot B.
7. Curve from Ato C.
8. Dot Disat a point 3 inches from C and 3 inches from B,
9. Rule a line from Cto D.
Du. 75.
10. Curve from Dto line 1, making the cuff 3 inches deep all along.
11. Line one is the front of the cuff and cut on the fold of material.
12. This will give a cuff as shewn on coatee in diagram 56. Should a smaller cuff
be required to fit on to the wrist ; mark half the wrist measure on line A C,
and make a new line, for back of cuff, parallel with line C D.
Handkerchief Cuff. —Diagram 76.
13. Measure that part of the sleeve that the cuff is to fit on to —the wrist or elbow
as the case mav be.
14. Rule a line as long as 4 the cuff measure (C C).
15. Dot Bis in the middle of line CC. Make a loop of cotton long enough to reach
from Bto C. Pin one end to dot 13, and with a pencil in the other end
describe a circle from C to C.
16. This circle will be the line where the cuff is sewn on to the sleeve.


CHAPTER XI.
TEA
JACKET.
Diagrams 77 to 82.
1.
All cuffs and collars are cut on the same
2.
principle as one or other of those given
in Chapters IX. and X.
It would be impossible to give samples of
all the collars and cuffs worn, even in
CiAA-w
'li!
/ $J$ft j A* C f /\
3.
present fashions, but the principles on
which they are all cut are given here.
The rule is that any trimming for bodice
or sleeve is to be cut from that part of
the garment on which it is to fit. If
the article is to be made full with
gathers in it the shape must be put on
material that has pleats in it to allow
4.
for gathers.
If the article is to be made full, without
Dia. 77.
any gathers where it is sewn on, the
J)
/ £
J9
17. If the cuff is to be circular, measure from Cto A the depth the cuff is to be.
Make a loop of cotton long enough to reach from Bto A. Pin one end of it
to B and. with a pencil in the other end, make a circle for outside of cuff.
18. If the cuff is to be square, rule line CC longer at each side to the depth of
cuff (A A). Rule lines D D parallel with line CC, and the same length as
from A to A.
19. Rule lines through dots AA to the end of lines D D and at right angles with
them.


t "tj )_ _
I; I r 1
I ! I '1
If | '/! J ¥ M
I \ I I
1 / \ 1 1
I i I \
i \ i!
/ \ - i
! \ l
| u., J !
Dia, 78.
shape must be cut up from the bottom to the top and the cuts spread
out, more or less, according to the amount of fulness required.
5. To illustrate this cutting up and spreading out, all the parts of the tea
jacket are given in this chapter.
Diagram 78.
6. The first ten lines are drafted as for a bodice, but with the bust measure 2 inches
larger.
7. The front line of the jacket is a straight line from the neck through the junction
of lines 6 and 7 to 8 inches below the waist.
8. Dot lis one inch to left of dot Zon line 2.
9. Rule line 11 from Zto B. Rule for side line of front from junction of lines
11 and 4 through dot I to 8 inches below the waist line.
10. Dot His one inch to right of Zon line 2.
11. Rule a line from the junction of lines 11 and 4 through dot Hto 8 inches below
the waist for side line of back.
12. Dot Ais 1 inch outside line lon line 2.
13. Rule a line for centre back from the back of neck through dot Ato 8 inches
below waist line.
14. Neck, armhole and shoulder are the same as for bodice.


\ \ ' /
\ Z y/ 1
\ /
3 \ / \
/ \
I
I \
/ \ \ \ I
/ v N x / /
\ y
/ I ' //
/ i
Diagram 79.
To cut the collar : place the back and front shoulders of the jacket pattern
together at the neck and spread out | inch at armhole.
Trace up the front line of jacket ; around the neck ; down the back line for
8i inches : from bottom of this back line rule a straight line to a point 10
inches from neck line over the shoulders ; from this point curve a line so as
to make the collar narrow down to 1 inch inside front line at the bottom
of the coat.
Dia. 7'. 1 .
DiA 80.
17. This would make an elegant collar as it stands, but with less fulness than the
one in diagram.
18. Rule a line wherever fulness is required as shewn by lines 1, 2 and 3
Tell Collar. —Diagram 80.
19. Cut the collar up at lines 1, 2 and 3. Spread the cuts apart 3 inches at first cut
and 6 inches at each of the others.


/ / \ \ 1 ,^; / //\\vy
Dia.81. Dia, 82.
20. In spreading these cuts out the collar is not only made wider all round the out-
side, but the neck line and front line are altered in shape.
21. Care must be taken to trace the neck and front lines exactly to the new shape.
22. Round of! the points on outside line of collar.
23. By fitting the bent line of the front of collar on to the straight line of front
of jacket, the collar will set in “ waterfall ” folds.
Sleeve.— Diagram 81.
24. Place the under and upper of fitting sleeve together at the top, back corners,
and trace around the top and down each side to the wrist.
25. Make a dot 2 inches below the back line of upper sleeve for the depth of point
26. Rule a line from front of upper sleeve at wrist to the point, and from the point
to front of under sleeve.
27. Dots B and C are 5 inches from the top of sleeve on front 'lines
28. Connect dots B and C with a slightly curved line.
29. The upper part of sleeve is traced from line BC to the top of sleeve draft.
Fill Frill for Sleeve.— Diagram 82
30. Trace on a separate piece of paper from line C B down —all the lower portion
of the draft of sleeve.
31. Cut this from the bottom up to line C B at every inch, and spread each cut out
until the frill forms -J of a circle.


!
ills
Mm
// y 1
I / /' /i
/ / A /i
j 1 1 1 j
PRINCESS ROBES, WRAPPERS AND
Princess Robe Draft.
Diagram 83.
1. To cut a Princess
Robe ; make the
bodice draft to
measures the same
as usual, taking
care to have the
hip measures ex-
actly right.
2. The bodice may have
the seam between
the back and side-
body curved into
the armhole, as in
dicated by the
dotted lines, or
straight from waist
to shoulder. With
the straight seam
in the back, a seam
will be made
through the darts
in the front. For
directions for this
see Chapter 2, dia-
gram 7, paragraph
3. Rule line 7 down to
the length of skirt
for the centre
front.
Rule the centre
line of back dart
down to the length
of skirt and up to
shoulder.
CHAPTER XII.
EMPIRE GOWNS.
Diagrams 83 to 92
Pi a, su


4. Make the width of front of princess robe across the bottom the same as the
waist measure.
5. Rule a line from side line of front on hip line down to the across-bottom dot.
6. From the front line of under arm on hip line, rule a line parallel with line 7
down to the length of skirt.
7. Make the under arm 18 inches wide across the bottom.
8. Rule a line from side line of under arm down to across-bottom dot.
9. From the front of sidebody on hip, rule a line parallel with line 7 down to the
length of skirt.
10. Make the sidebody 18 inches wide across the bottom.
11. Rule a line from the back of sidebody on hip lines down to the across-bottom dot.
12. Rule the side line of back on the same slopes as it already takes from the waist
to the hips, down to the length of skirt.
13. Make the back 18 inches across the bottom.
14. Rule from centre back on hip line down to the across-bottom dot.
15. Measure the length of skirt from line 2 down to the bottom of back, and side-
body from true waist line in front.
16. The widths given here for the bottom of each piece is the narrowest that will
be wearable. The skirt may be made as much wider as required by adding
flares or a shaped flounce.
17. The flares may be as wide as fulness required and as high as fashion demands
fulness. But the robe must never he altered above the hip lines.
Diagrams 84 to 88.
18. These show the princess robe with a train added and made wider with flares.
19. The dotted lines indicate the shape of skirt without train and flares. Care
should be taken to get this right first and add flares afterwards.
20. To add the train the front of the robe is sloped down to 1| inch longer at
side front.
21. The front of under arm gore is Tl inch longer than walking length, sloping
down to 3 inches longer at back of under arm.
22. The front of sidebody is 3 inches longer, sloping down to full length of train —
in this case 8 inches.
23. The back is 8 inches longer all along the width.
24. Tim front of the robe, from centre front to the seam through the back dart,
may have the front seam and darts sewn in the lining only and the material
stretched over it so that there is no seam shewing in the material.


I Dia.
Dia. 84. 1 IA. t-...


\ •/' \
\ h \
/; A / / \ \
/ A /' A
/ 1 A A A
' 1
Dia. Bfc.
Dia. 87.


r]
\
I \
\
\
! \
Wrapper.
Diagram 89.
In cutting a wrap-
per the front and
under arm may
be cut in one
piece with a
seam between
the two reach-
ing from arm-
hole to hip line.
The back and
sidebody may
also be cut in
one piece.
Cut the fitting
lining to reach
down to the
hips.
Place the front
lining with the
highest part of
bust 5 inches
from the edge
of material to
allow gathers
into the neck.
28. Cut the material
at the neck J
inch higher than
the neck line.
Dia. 89.
29. Place the lining of the under arm with the flip line just touching the hip line
of the front and the waist lines level with each other.
30. The lines given in the diagrams are just the size of the tracing lines —where the
gown is to be sewn. In cutting out, a seam must be allowed beyond the
sewiny line all around.


\' I
I \ I'
l |
Diagram 90.
31. Put the back lining on the ma-
terial with the back of neck 9
inches from the fold of material
and waist 10 inches from the
fold. This allows for the “wat-
teau ” back.
32. Place the sidebody with the waist
line exactly opposite the waist
line of the back, and from 4 to
10 inches apart, according to how
much fulness is required.
33. Cut the material to the shape of
lining all around (allowing mar-
gin for seams) down to hip line.
34. When the seam is sewn in from
armhole to hip line, the fulness
of the material at hips will be
made in box pleats at the bottom
of the seam.
35. The dotted lines in the diagram
indicate the shape of back and
sidebody with the curved seam
into armhole. The ruled lines
are the shape when the seam is
straight from waist to shoulder.
36. To measure the length of skirt a
straight line must be ruled
through the waist lines of side-
body and back to the fold of
material, and the length meas-
ured from tliis, from true waist j
line in front. [
37. The dotted line down the centre back
shews where the material will be
dia. yu.
cut to allow for seam and to separate the “watteau” back from the fitting part.
38. The fulness of material from the fold of material to back line is the amount
that is to be pleated into the neck to form the “ watteau."
39. If it is desired to have the skirt of the wrapper fuller around the bottom, the
underarm may be cut separate from the front and the sidebody separate
from the back : as is done for a princess robe.


cut it out.
SW
/ \ / Vf\
.£rM / \ -A
fJA y W h\
* i \- 8 n a c !o / m
I | \ H / / \
L_J| IS I _ j
ra W i i n ra
Dia.91. Dia. 92.
Diagram 91.
Empire Gown & Corselet Skirt. —Diagrams 91, 92.
40. The draft for an empire gown is the same as for a princess robe (diagram 83).
41. Trace a line on each of the pieces, above the waist line, as high as the empire
skirt is to reach to. In this case, line AA on the front is 6 inches above
waist, sloping down to 3 inches above waist at side seam.
42. Line BB on underarm is 3 inches above waist line.
43. Line CC on sidebody 3 inches above waist sloping up to 4J inches.
44. Line DD on back 4J inches sloping up to 6 inches above waist line.
45. If a corselet skirt is required trace it out just to the size of pattern, allowing
flares or inverted pleats at the bottom and a train if needed.
46. An empire gown must be made full enough to gather in to the top of the corselet
skirt.
47. This is done by allowing a pleat in the material when placing the lining on to
48. Place the front of the draft with the highest part of the front line and the hip
line on the fold of material.
49. Make a pleat in the material as indicated by the double line with cross lines
between.
50. Cut all around the size of the pattern, from line AA to the bottom, allowing
1 inch for seams.
51. Place the underarm on the material with a pleat in it to allow for gathers and
cut out, allowing for seam, from line B B to the bottom.


Dia. 93.
52. The under arm and front will probably fit into one width of material as shewn
in diagram. That is. if the material has no ‘‘ up and down.” If it has a
floral pattern that must all run up the one way, or the nap of material brushes
the one way, then the pieces must be always cut with the bottom toward the
same end of material. This, obviously, is not such an economical way of
cutting, but materials that brush the one way are always more wasteful.
53. The sidebody and back will fit into the one width of material, with a pleat in
each. They are cut all around to the size of the pattern, except the centre
back. This has a straight line ruled from the top of the corselet skirt (dot
D) down to the width at the back (diagram 92).
CHAPTER XIII.
COATS.
Diagrams 93 to 101.
All coats to be worn over a bodice must be drafted with the neck, bust, and waist
1 inch larger than the dress measures. The armhole is made larger after the
draft is made by
making a line I inch
outside the drafted
line. The sleeve is
drafted with armhole
and all measures
around arm 1 inch
larger, wrist 2 inches
larger.
Fitting Coat
Diagram 93.
For a “ fitting ” coat,
all lines are put in
the same as for a
bodice, except the
darts. The back dart
has no addition to the
back of it as a bodice
has, and the front
dart is omitted. The
dots for the front
dart are put in so as to get the measurement for the waist


3. If a coat is required without a dart, put the dots only for the darts and measure
the width of the back dart. Take this amount off from the side of front
and make dot Pto right of K. Rule a line from Pupto G at armhole for
new side line of front. So that the side line of front, when no dart is put in,
is from G to P and down to L.
4. The side line of front, when the back dart is put in the coat, is from G to K
and to R.
5. The back of the coat may be made wider at the waist and the sidebody narrower
by moving dots F and E as shewn in chapter 5, diagram 14, and dot D may be
put above line 6 to make the back narrower and sidebody wider at armhole.
6. Make dot Mon line 4, 11, inch to right of line 7. Rule a line from M parallel
with line 7 down to length of coat.
7. This makes the front wide enough for a single-breasted or chesterfield coat.
For a double-breasted coat dot M is 3 or 4 inches from line 7.
8. Make dot Xon line sto right of line 7 the same distance as the neck dot is
to left of line 7.
9. Rule a line from neck dot to the junction of lines 6 and 7 and from dot Nto
same point. This forms the V dart to be taken in at the neck.
10. Make Q for the new neck dot J inch to the right of N. This dot is where the
end of collar will fall. Sometimes it is required to have the end of the collar
and rever higher up on the shoulder when turned back. This is done by
putting dots N and Q 1 inch above line 5, ruling the V dart up to the new
dots, and putting a new neck line from the top of the dart up to the shoulder.
11. Make dot S 1 inch above line 5 and 3 inches from dot Q. Rule a line from (}
through dot S to the length of rever required (in this case it is 3 inches long).
12. Curve from the end of rever down to dot M. The rever must curve slightly
outward.
Sacque Coat.' — -Diagram 94.
13. Draft the first ten lines, armhole, front of coat, and rever, the same as for a
fitting coat. This one has dot M 4 inches from line 7 to make it double-
breasted.
14. Make a curved line for side line of front from dot C through dot I down to hip.
Then rule, on the same slope, a straight line down to length of coat.
15. Make a curved line for side line of back, from C through Hto hip line. Then rule,
on the same slope, a straight line down to length of coat.
16. Line 1 will be the centre back of coat if it is to be made without any fulness in
the back.
17. To make the back full make a dot at waist line 1 inch to left of line 1 and rule
a line from the top of back line through this dot to the length of coat.
18. The sacque coat may be made fuller still by making the side lines the same as
for a child’s coat (Diagram 110, Chapter XV).


I
L--J—I 1
I I I 1 1 s
r 1/
\ I I t) J


f\ ■ i\\ \\
I
DIA. 96.
I <1 I I
i }
M l\ I
Dia. 97.
Semi-Sacque Coat. — Diagram 95.
19. The first ten lines, armhole and front of coat are
drafted the same as for a fitting coat.
20. The semi-sacque coat is drafted in three pieces the
same as the slender lady’s bodice, with this
\ exception —though there are no darts made in
\ the coat, the dots for the darts are put in, in
i j order to get the waist right. Both darts must be
f marked —not one dart as for slender lady’s bodice.
I 21. Make the back, at the waist, half the si/.e of
across-back measure.
Sacque Coat with Long Capes.
Diagram 96.
22. The body of the coat will be cut the same as a
sacque.
Diagram 97.
23. This shews the draft the same as diagram 94, but with no reuer for neck


X
I \ \
1 \ \
I I \ x
\ \ x
\ / \ \
r - \ - 7 \ \
! 1
\ '
Dia. 99.
Instead of making the rever, draw a
curved line from the top of perpendi-
cular line of neck to dot INI.
w"|
Diagram 98.
To draft a stole ; place the front and
back of coat together at the shoulders,
with the neck lines exactly even.
Trace around the neck from A to B.
Line C D is 2 inches from line A B.
Dis 4 inches above dot B. Line F E
is 1 inch from line A B.
\ i
.Us
Connect E and D with a line sloping
downward. Connect B and F with
same slope.
Dia. 98.
If the neck of coat is to be made higher,
add inch to the top at back of neck
and gradually slope off from the
shoulder to the front. Then it will be
necessary to cut the back and front of
stole separately and have a seam on
each shoulder.
Diagram 99.
To cut the capes : place the shoulder
lines together at the outside line of
stole (C D) and spread out for -;l inch
at armhole.
Dot H is on back line 8 inches below
C. Trace a line from Hto G making
the cape 2 inches longer over the
shoulder than the front and back.
The underneath and fuller cape is cut
in the same way, but made 12 inches
longer at the back, from H to the
point, 12 inches longer in the front
and 5 inches longer over the shoulder.
Bolero. —Diagram 100.
The bolero is cut from the bodice draft.
Sidebody and back are cut in one with
the bottom, 3 inches from the waist-
line at the side, dot M, sloping up to
the centre back at N.


,f ! j
/ / j 1
I ! 1
A
n
/'. J
1
1
1 i 1
/
i
‘ , f
D X A, 100.
1
„ £ C Z Q
r ~K-
*i? \ i
!\ 1 i
i\ l '
' '*) I
/
D f v
i> / i i
35. The under arm and front are cut in one and made 3 inches short of the waist
line as at L, sloping down to the front as at K.
36. The bade dart is put into the canvas lining and the material stretched over it,
shewing no seam on the outside. The front dart is omitted.
37. The front may be curved to any shape required. In this instance the neck is
curved from the shoulder down to 7 inch below the neck in front.
38. The front line of bolero is 11 inch inside the bust line of fitting bodice.
DIA.IOI
Coat Sleeve. —Diagram 101.
39. Rule line 1 parallel with the left side of the paper.
40. Dot Ais on line 1, 3 inches from the bottom.
41. Make dot Bon line lat inside to wrist measure from A.
42. Make a dot on line 1 at scye measure above dot B and rule line 2 from this
dot, at right angles with line 1, twice as long as scye measure with 4 inch
added.
43. Dot Cis in centre of line 2.
44. Dots D and E are 1 inch to right and left of dot C.
45. Rule line 3 parallel with line 2 and the same length as it, half-way between
dot B and line 2.
46. Dot Fis on line 3at one fourth of seve measure from the end.


47. Dot Gis on line 3 one-third of the distance between F and line 1.
48. Dot Ris 4 inch below dot Bon line 1.
49. Curve from Rto G for top of under sleeve.
50. Curve from RtoD to E and dovvn to F for top of upper sleeve.
51. Dot His on line 1 at inside to bend measure below dot B.
52. Dot lis inch to right of dot H.
53. Dot Kis i inch to right of dot A.
54. Curve from Rto I and from Ito K for inside of sleeve.
55. Place the point of square on dot K and long arm # inch inside dot I, and rule
line 4 on short arm for wrist.
56. Mark for wrist measure on line 4so that the upper sleeve measures 1 inch
more than under sleeve. Dot M for under sleeve and X for upper sleeve.
57. Place the square parallel with line 81, and with shoulder measure on dot C,
mark at neck-to-elbow measure.
58. Rule line 5 from dot I through neck-to-elbow dot.
59. Mark for elbow on line 5 so that the upper sleeve measures inches more
than the under sleeve.
60. Make 0 for under sleeve and P for upper sleeve.
61. Rule from Gto O and from oto M for back of under sleeve.
62. Rule from Fto P and from P through Xto 4, inch longer for back of upper
sleeve.
63. Rule from end of back line to fv for wrist of upper sleeve.
CHAPTER XIV.
CAPES.
Diagrams 102 to 105.
Roped Cape.— Diagram 102,
1. Most capes are cut from top of a bodice pattern, but, for capes to be worn
over a dress the draft must be made 1 inch larger around the neck.
2. A round cape is cut by placing the front at neck inch from the fold of material.
3. The back of draft will be placed so that the shoulder line touches the shoulder
line of front at the neck.
4. The back of neck is placed exactly on the fold.
5. This will make the centre back line sloping in from the fold of material and
so allow some fulness in the back of the cape as well as over the shoulder.
•6. The fold is the centre back.
7. Trace around the neck and down the front in a straight line from neck through
the highest part of bust.


O - 7 G J /S
1 l ""
Dia. 102.
Dia. 104.
Dia. 10,1
Measure the length of cape from the neck line, making it 1 inch longer at the
back than the front, and 2 inches longer at the side.
Coachman’s Cape.— Diagrams 103 and 104.
A Coachman’s cape is much narrower around the bottom than a round cape
and has a seam on the shoulder.
To get this place the front of bodice with the front line, from neck to bust,
inch from the edge of material.
Place the back with the shoulder line touching the shoulder line of front at
armhole and spread apart at the neck for 3 inches


12. The space between the shoulder lines is cut out and the shoulder lines sewn
together, forming a seam or dart from neck to shoulder.
13. Trace on the back line, around the neck, on shoulder lines and a straight line
down the front from the neck through highest part of bust.
14. Measure the length 2 inches longer at side, and 1 inch at back longer than the
front.
15. This is the kind of cape which is made into a cape with a shaped frill.
16. When making a shaped frill the front of the cape is usually rounded at the
bottom.
17. Instead of making the square front as at dot A, round the cape off by the bust
line.
18. Mark for the depth of frill 1 inch wide at the neck, gradually getting wider at
the bottom and keeping the same width around the centre back. Line 888.
19. Trace off the shape of the frill on the outside curved line, on neck to B.
20. On line BB B, and down centre back.
21. Cut this frill from the bottom to the top and spread each cut out for 1 inch,
as shewn in diagram 104.
22. Note that this is not cut and spread-out in the front from the neck 6 inches
down. This is because it is not necessary to have the frill full there.
23. Care must be taken to have the neck line of the frill exactly right, to be able
to fit the collar on evenly.
Nukse's Cape.— Diagram 105.
24. A nurse’s cape has a shoulder-seam and some gathers at the top of arm.
25. This is drafted with the first ten lines the same as for a bodice, excepting that
the over-arm bust measure is used.
26. (To take the over-arm bust measure : clasp the lady’s hands together at the
waist and measure over the fullest part of bust and over the arms —not under
arms as is done for a dress measure. The over arm bust measure is usually
8 inches larger than bust measure.)
27. The front shoulder and chest are 1 inch smaller than dress measures. What-
ever amount is to be taken off the back shoulder is taken off at armhole
as at A.
28. Slope from A down to the junction of lines 3 and 6.
29. Curve from junction of lines 3 and 6to the chest dot, making the curve as high
in the centre as the front shoulder.
30. Make dot B 1 inch to the left of line 2 and rule centre back line from back of
neck, through B to length of cape.
31. Make dot Cto right of line 7on line 2.
32. Buie line for front from junction of lines 6 and 7 through C to length of cape.


i,
I
J- - -- - - .. . _ jc
i: ' ■
I'
I :
I i
DlA. 105.
CHAPTER XV.
33. If the cape is to reach to the bottom of the skirt, measure the length of skirt
from line 2.
34. For capes to put on to a stole see Chapter XIII
CHILDREN’S GARMENTS.
Diagrams 106 to 110.
Child’s Bodice Lin in o. —Diagram 106.
1. A child’s bodice is cut in two pieces—back and front.
2. The first ten lines and armhole are drafted the same as ordinary drafts.
3. Make dot Con line 4at half scye measure to right of line 3.
4. Measure the waist from Ato line 7 and, whatever it is too large take off part
to right of Z and make dot B, and part to left of Z and make dot I).
5. Rule side line of front from Cto B.
6. Rule the side line of back from Cto D.


: .2) <; -z
8.
Line K to G for side line of front may be put 1 inch
1 — — —-
to right of Z, or moved nearer to the front or back
L/C _ _
at pleasure.*
£,
9.
Rule the lines for the skirt from the waist, sloping
them out at the hip line the same as an adult’s
\
bodice.
c
Child’s Sleeve.
Cj
vT
/
/
'/ /
"
Diagram 108.
'/ /
10.
A draft for a child’s sleeve is the same as an adult’s,
excepting that dot I is 1 inch from H ; dot L is
/i . / /
i inch to left of A.
11.
Line I L is used for front of both under and upper
ip PPP'
I! ! ft ! 1 I 1 (
'! i/:\ 1 1 \ I
—■ W^V--
DlA, 106. /V A
Child’s Princess Robe. | / A I \
Diagram 107. / / \ I \
•/ / \ / \
7. A child’s princess robe is drafted |/ / \ / \
the same as a slender lady’s |! / \ / \
bodice, but with no dart in front. j j \ j
Dia. 107.
sleeve, and line 4 for wrist measure of both under
and upper sleeve.
Dia. 108.


1^ —-=/_\ v_ 1 1 1
/'! 1 \ //":•; ~ 1 j / I
I 1 ' 1 ! / : \ ,) ' ! Jm 1
In ;.|\ : 1 i / f I
I , 'I \ 'I ij , I _\
/j ij - ~ y —- : j?- ■■ ~j
U±J I \ I1
Sailor Blouse. — Diagram 109.
12. The first ten lines and armhole are drafted the same as for bodice.
13. Dot Ais on line 2, 1 inch to right of line 1.
14. Rule for centre back from neck through dot Ato 6 inches below waist.
15. Dot D is 11 inch to right of Z. Rule for side line of back from C through D
to 6 inches below waist.
16. Dot Bis 11 inch to right of Z. Rule for side line of front from C through B
to 6 inches below waist.
17. Dot Eis on line 2, 1 inch to right of line 7.
18. Rule centre line of front from the neck dot through dot E.
19. Rule a line from junction of shoulder and neck lines to front line on line 4 for
the open front.
20. For sailor collar see Chapter IX, diagram 68
Dia, 109.
Dia. no
Reefer or (’on vay Coat. —Diagram 110.
21. A child’s coat is drafted the same as an adult’s sacque, as described in Chapter
XIII, diagram 94, excepting the side seam.
22. Dot Dis 1 inch to right of Zon line 2. Side line of back is ruled from C through
dot D to length of coat.


;x " , (
_J S L. - * "I-
ii 1 K : i
M —I — _{ — >— — —V — _
' i | ,\ . X
,T F irr 1 :~
■* r^/r 1 - 1^
!' />/ , ''ll,
I i 1 i \, 1 11
i 1 ' / w ' ! 1 ; ! 1
, 1 i I ' w i i i 1 i i
23. Dot B is 1 inch to left of Z on line 2. Side line of front is ruled from C
through dot B to length of coat.
24. Line 7is the front line of a conway coat
Child’s Skirt.
25. A child’s skirt is cut in straight widths and gathered into the waist.
20. To make a shaped skirt ; draft the same as for a five-gored skirt, without taking
out the darts. Add 4 inches to the back. See diagrams 28 and 29. Chapter
VI.
27. The full material for a child’s blouse or yoke will be cut from the fitting
draft the same as directed for adult’s blouses, Chapter VIII.
CHAPTER XVI
CORSETS.
Diagram 111.
I. The measures for corsets are the same as for a bodice, excepting that the
waist is made 2 inches smaller


2. The draft is made as for a bodice with the straight seam between sidebody
and back.
3. Move dot E £ inch to make the back 2 inches wide. Dot F must be moved the
same.
4. The centre line of back must be ruled through dot Ato length of corsets —not
sloping out below the waist.
5. The outside line of darts are ruled, from waist to the bottom, parallel with
line 7.
6. There is no curve for bust in front. Line 7is the front line
7. The swell for bust is added by ruling the centre line of darts, up to line 4; making
a dot on line 4, -1, inch each side of centre lines of darts and curving from
each dot down to the top of darts.
8. Line A A indicates the top of corsets. It is a little higher at back and front
than under-arm.
9. Line BB is the bottom, but the corsets may be made as high above the wauL
or as long down over the hips as may be required, from the same draft.
CHAPTER XVII.
UNDERCLOTHING.
Xkihtitre ss.— Diagram 112
1. The first ten lines and armhole of draft for nightdress are the same as for a
bodice, but with the following measures enlarged ;
Bust 3 inches larger.
Neck 1 inch
Across-back 1
2. This will make the armhole a great deal larger, but it is necessary to make it
even larger still. This is done by making a dot 11 inch above back shoulder
line, at armhole (dot Y), and rule a new shoulder line from neck to Y.
3. Line lis the centre line of back and is ruled down to the length of skirt from
line 2.
4. Make a dot N 2 inches to right of Z, on line 2.
5. Make a dot Ton line 4. at half-scye measure from 3.
6. Rule the side line of back from T through Nto length of skirt.
7. Line 7is centre front line. Make dot W 2 inches to left of Zon line 2.
8. Rule side line of front from T through W down to length of skirt,
9. Neck, shoulder, and armhole are traced out on drafted lines


' "i
I /'
— wAr j\ i\
\ ! : \
I I (| | I •
I \ I I'! \
\ I ; / \
/ \ M .1 1
/ \
I ' ; ' : \ \
I \ i ’ \
I \ i ■ M
I \ I j _J i
I \ j Dia. 113.
1 |
Dia. 112.


10. This gives the plain draft, but a nightdress must have some gathers, tucks
or pleats in front and back for fulness. These are put in the straight
widths of material before they are cut to shape of draft.
11. The sleeves of a nightdress will be cut the same as a bishop sleeve.
12. Fashion or taste will suggest many ways of tucking and trimming a cown
with this foundation from which to cut it, but the following is an example
of how it may be done.
13. The finely dotted lines on the draft indicate the shape of a square yoke. This
may be cut in pay er and rows of embroidery or lace insertion stitched on
and cut the shape of it. The gown may be tucked or gathered where it is
joined on to the yoke, or it may be made fuller at the bottom by cutting up
the draft from the bottom to the yoke and spreading the cuts out to the
fulness required, as is done on the collar, diagram 80, Chapter XI.
Chemise. — Diagram 113.
14. The first ten lines and armhole are the same as a bodice draft, but with bodice
measure 2 inches larger.
15. The side lines of front and back are the same as for a nightdress.
16. The neck is cut low.
17. Make dot Won front shoulder 1-1 inch from armhole.
18. Curve neck line from W down to junction of lines 6 and 7 (dot T).
19. Make dot Yon back shoulder 11 inch from armhole.
20. Make dot Xon line 1 half-way between 5 and 6.
21. Curve neck line from Yto X. The chemise will have tucks or gathers at the
neck to make fulness ; or it may be cut up from bottom to the neck and the
cuts spread out to the fulness required.
22. For example of trimming lines A B form a peaked yoke and the tucks or
gathers made below that.
23. Xote I. The side lines of both chemise and nightdress may be shaped as for
a sacque coat, diagram 94, Chapter XIII. This is indicated on chemise
draft by finely dotted lines.
24. Xote 11. There is no V dart at the armhole of either nightgown or chemise.
Bloomers. — Diagram 114.
25. This draft gives the front and back of bloomers in one.
26. Besides the measures already taken for a dress it is necessary to measure from
waist to knee and to seat.
27. Measure, with the lady sitting on a chair, from waist to the chair, for seat
measure.
28. Measure from waist to knee -when the lady is standing up
29. Line lis parallel with left side of paper and as long as waist to knee measure.
39. Dot Ais on line 1 and at seat measure from top.


—r ■ -b
V
! p
/
1 3 /
' I /
I |
Dia. 1U.
31. Line 2 is at right angles with
line 1. from the top of it, and
as long as one-quarter of hip
measure.
32. Line three is from the bottom
of line 1 at right angles to it
and 9 inches long.
33. Dot B is at half hip measure
from A.
34. Curve from B to the end of
line 2, and from B down to
end of line 3.
35. This outlines the front. The
back is the same from B to
line 3. on line 3 and on line 1,
but waist and back lines must
be made larger.
36. Make dot C 3 inches above,
and D 3 inches to the right
of line 2.
37. Curve from B through Dup to
the waist line.
38. Rule waist line from the junc-
tion of lines 1 and 2 through
dot C to the back line.
39. These bloomers will just reach to the knee. To make them long and full
enough to gather into a band below the knee : Rule line 5, 4 inches below
line 3 and 4 inches to left of line 1.
40. Rule line 4 from the junction of lines 1 and 2to the end of line 5.
Combinations. —Diagrams 115, 116, 117.
41. Make a bodice draft with bust measure 2 inches larger than dress measures.
Front or Combinations. —Diagram 115.
42. Trace the front of bloomers on to a separate piece of paper
43. Place the front of bodice draft with the waist line on the waist of bloomers
and with the front lines exactly even. This will make the side line of bodice
fall about 1 inch short of the side line of the leg.
44. Curve from the side line of bodice to line lat 41 inches below waist, as at dot A,
45. The dotted lines down the front indicate the shape of the curved lines of draft.
This is sometimes considered too much curved for the front of combinations
and a straight line is ruled from neck through highest part of bust (C C C).


1< J I
A ' ■' / I
/ \ i\ . \ /
I 1!' ■ <
hK \
ii t
y \ x \ :
x \ r\ \ i
N I / ' !
/ i 1 Dia. 116.
/ / '/ "]
/ // ! :
/ / / i I i
/ I 7 ' I
/ I ' 1 '/
/ I LJ.
Dxa. 115. Dia. 117.
46. The back dart only is cut in the combinations and is made 8 inches below
the waist.
Back of Combinations. — Diagrams 116 and 117.
47. The back of leg is the same as back of bloomers and cut separate!} 7 from the
bodice to allow it to be gathered in to the waist.
48. The underarm, sidebody, and back of bodice placed together and cut out all
in one piece, with the centre back on the fold of material.
Under Skirts.
49. An underskirt is cut from the same draft as diagram 28 and 29, Chapter VI.


INDEX
The Homan numeral* indicate Chapters ami the figures Paragraphs.
Armhole II —2l, 22, 23, 24, 54 ; V—lo
Coat XIII—I
How to enlarge if too small II —23 ;
IV—27
How to find the size of ll—2l
How to reduce if too large . . . 11—22
Relative position of seams at 11—54
V dart 11—24; VIII—IO, 11
Where to mark for ll—lB
Where to place the curve ll—2o
Back—
Across, How to measure I—l 2
Back and front in one piece .... V 111—36
Centre Line II—4; V—l 3, 14
Centre line below waist 11—47
How r to measure length I—6
Line of bodice, Stooping figure
V 12. 13, 14
Line of sidebodv 11—27, 30, 32, 57.
58, 59 ; V—2, 3
Line of sidebodv moveable 11—57,
59; V—3; XIII—S
Of Bloomers XVII—3S to 38
Of Blouse. .VIII—2, 4, 8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 23,
24, 27, 28, 30, 36, 60, 61
Of Bodice Lining ll—l to 7, 9. 20,
25 to 34, 57, 58, 59 ; V—3 ; XIII—S
Of Bolero X 111—34
Of Gapes XIV—3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14,
27, 28
Of Chemise XVII—2O, 21, 22
Of Child's Bodice XV—l to 6
Of Child’s Sailor Blouse,-. ... XV—l3, 14, 15
Of Coats .... XIII —2, 5, 15, 16, 17, 21, 34
Of Collar ... IX—l, 13, 20, 21, 30, 31, 32,
33, 38, 40
Of Combinations XVII—47, 48
Of Corselet Skirt X 11—45
Of Corsets XVI—2, 3, 4
Of Nightdress XVII—2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Of Princess Robe ... XII—2, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 23 ; XV—7
Of Sailor Blouse XV—l2 to 15
Of Skirt ... Vl—lo to 22, 37, 38, 39, 40,
51, 53, 73, 74, 75
Of Sleeve 111—22, 23 ; VII—7, 9,
18, 38, 39, 46, 51
Of Tea Jacket Xl—ll, 12, 14
Of Wrapper XII—3I to 38
Of Yoke VIII—SI, 52, 53, 57
Seams of Bodice 11—57. 58, 59 ;
V—2, 3, 12, 13, 14
Seams of Coat XIII—S, 16, 17
Back— continued.
Side line of .... 11—27, 28, 31, .57, 58, 50
Side line of, below waist 11—52
Slope of back line of bodice ll—4
Bands II 72
Of Crape 11 —77
Belt for measuring length of bodice . . . I—s, 28
Bloomers XVII—2S to 40
Blouse, any Style V 111—32
Back VIII—I 3, 15, 16, 23, 27, 28
Back without fulness at waist . . . V 111—23
Below Waist VIII—6I
Fastened at back VIII—IS
Fastened in front VIII—I 6
From fitting pattern VIII—I 9, 20
Front VIII—I 4, 15, 16, 26. 29, 30
Front Line VIII—6, 16
Pouch VIII—7, 8
Put into a waist band VIII—6O, 61
Sailor XV—l2 to 20
Shoulder V 111—36, 37
Side Seam VIII—4, 5, 22. 23
To draft VIII—I to 9
To gather at waist V 111—22, 23, 60
Tucked V 111—25, 26
V-dart at armhole VIII—IO, 11
Waist line of VIII—B
With fulness at the waist at back . V 111—22
Yoke V 111—29, 30. 31, 51 to 59
Bodice Draft .. . ll—l to 53 ; IV—l to 27 ;
V—l to 15
Draft for child XV—l to 6
Draft, Medium figure ll—4o
Draped V 111—62
Facing ll —7B
For deformed lady V—l 2 to 15
For extra stout lady IV—26
For flat figure V—l to 11
Lining, Back ... ll—l to 10, 17, 18, 19, 20,
25, 26 to 34, 57, 58, 59. 62, 67 ; XII—3I
Lining, Front ... ll—l to 16, 18, 35 to 45,
62, 63, 67 ; X 11—27
Lining, How to cut out .. . ll—6o to 66, 68
Lining, How to place the draft on ll—6l, 62
Lining, Sidebodv ... 11—25, 26, 27, 29, 30,
32, 33, 34, 62, 67 ; X 11—32
Lining, Under arm . . . ll—3B to 45. 62. 67 ;
X 11—29
Ordinary size II
Slender lady V
Stout lady IV
To cut out ll—6 to 64
To drape V 111—62


Bodice Draft — continued.
To place draft on lining . . II —60 to 04
To tack up 11—65, 66
V-dart at armhole .. . 11—22, 24 ;I\ —24 ;
V—10; VIII—IO
With only three pieces 4 —1
With four pieces II —67
With five pieces —l, 26
Bolero X 111—33
Back X 111—34
Front XIII —35
Boxpleating ll—l4
Bust, How to curve front line over .... ll—ls
How to measure I—3
Over-arm measure XI4 —26
Where to measure on draft II —8
Buttonholes facing H—7B
Capes ■ • • XI 1 *
Cape, Back of Xl\ —4, 5, 13
Coachman’s XII —9 to 14
Draft for Xl\ —l, 25
Fitting plain XIV —9 to 23
For Coat XIII—3O, 31, 32
Front Xl\ —7, 10
Full XIV—2 to 8
Fulness at back of Xl\ —5
Nurse's XI4 —24 to 33
On a stole XI’V —34-
Round XIV—2
Shoulder XIV—3, 11, 14, 27
To measure length Xl\ —8
With shaped frill —ls to 23
Chemise XVII—I 4 to 24
Chest dot lI—IS
How to measure I—l 4
Child’s bodice draft X\ —1 to 6
Coat XV—2l_to 24
Princess Robe —i . 8. 9
Reefer XV—2! to 24
Sailor Blouse —l2 to 20
Skirt XV —25, 26
Sleeve XV—K), II
Children’s Clothes X\ —1 to 27
Coachman’s Cape Xl\ —9 to 23
Coats ■ XIII
Coat, Armhole XIII—I
Back XIII—S
Capes XIII—3O, 31, 32
Child’s Conway XV—2l to 24
Child’s Reefer —2l to 24
Collar IX—l9 to 36
Darts XIII—2, 3, 4. 20
Double breasted XIII—7
Fitting XIII —2 to 12
Front line of XIII —6 and 7
Measures XIII—I
Neck dot XIII—B, 9, 10
Rever XIII —H, 12, 13
Sacque XIII—I 3 to 18
Sacque made full XIII —18
Sacque with full back XIII—I 7
Sacque with plain back .... XIII —16, 22
Sailor Collar IX—29 to 36
Coat —contin tied.
Semi-sacque XIII —19. 20, 21
Side line of back of saoque . . XIII—IS. 18
Side line of front of sacque . . XIII—I 4. 18
Single breasted XIII—O, 7
Sleeve X 111—39 to 63
Stole X 111—25 to 29
V-dart at neck XIII—B, 9
Without dart XIII—3
Without rever X 111—24
Coatee VIII—I 7, 18, 19, 32. 33 to 50
Double breasted V 111—32 to 45
With open front VIII —IS
Collars ....... IX—l to 42 ; Xl—l, 15 to 23
Bottom curve of IX—3
Coat IX—l9 to 3G
Coat cut out on bias IX—2B
Coat cut out on straight of material . . . IX
Coat, depth at back IX—2l. 33
Coat, neck line IX —23. 36. 37
Coat, seam at back IX—26
■Medici IX —10, 11
Neck line IX—3, 7, 10. 23, 36, 37
Xeck line of sailor IX—l4
Rink IX—l to 5
Round IX—l6, 17
Sailor IX—l2 to 18
Sailor coat IX—29 to 36
Sailor Coat, to give more spring IX
—3O. 32
Slope of front of rink IX —4
Storm IX—37 to 42
Storm foundation IX—37
Storm, How to measure neck .... IX—37
To place pattern for sailor IX—l2
To shape outside IX—9, 18
Top curve of IX—5
Turnover IX—6 to 9
Combinations XVII—4I to 49
Concert Dress \ 1—76
Conway Coat XV—2l to*24
Corsets —
: How to draft XVI—I to 9
Measures for XVI—I
Swell for bust XVI—7
Corselet Skirt XII—4O to 45
Crape II —77
Cuffs X—l to 19
; Fishmouth VII—I 3 to 16
Gauntlet X—s to 12
Handkerchief X—l 3 to 19
Long VII—3I ; X—2
Make sleeve shorter to allow for VII
—47, 55. 64
Narrow X—l
Round X—l 3 to 17
1 Square X—lB
| Wide X—2, 3, 4
i Curves for back seams of bodice, How to make
I 11—31, 32, 33, 34, 57, 58, 59 ; XIII—S
| Cutting material with nap or pile 11—69 ;
V 111—63


Cutting out II—(50 to 78 ; Vl—4l, 56 ; I Front— continued.
VII—B9 ; XII—3O Of Bloomers XVII—29 to 35
Seams 11—63 Of Blouse ... VIII—S to 12, 15, 16, 18, 21,
Darts 11—35, 36, 37, 38, 49, 50, 66 ; <HV 24 > 26 ’ 28 > 30 ’ 36 > 37 > 38 ’ 39 > 40 > 46 > 61
I 25 • V 4 5 • XII 2 24 • XIII Of Blouse Lining ... ll—B, 9to 18, 20, 35
J_2, 3, 20, 36 ; XIV—I 2 ; XV 7 to > IV—l> 6, 7, 13, 16, 25 ;V —
For stout lady IV—l, 25 1, 4, 5 to 9, 12
Front, for robe XII—2, 24 Of Bolero - 5' V ' — 3^
How much to slant ... 11—36, 37, 48, 49, 50 Of Cape Xl\ —7, 10, 16, 32
How to measure I—9 Of Chemise XVII—IS, 16, 17, 18
In child’s Princess Robe XV—7 0f Child’s Bodice XV—l to 5
On Cape shoulder XIV—I 2 0f Child’s Princess Robe XV—7, 8
Space between 11—35 ; IV—l Of Coats ... XIII 1, 2, 3, 4, 6to 12, 13,
To mark on waist IV—25 ; V—4, 5 f 4 > 1 9 > 29 > 23
To tack II 66 Of Collars ... IX—4, 8, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17,
V-dart at armhole ... 11—22, 24 ; IV— 24 ’ 49 > 4^
24 . y jo Of Combinations XVII—42 to 46
V-dart at neck of ,'coat XIII—B, 9 Of Corselet Skirt .. X 11—45
V-dart in any garment VIII—II Of Corsets XVI 5, 6, 7
V-dart of Blouse VIII—IO, 11 0f Empire Gown XII—4I, 48
Where to place them 11—35 Of Nightdress XVII 7, 8, 9
-p., iiu’ur wno-tir Of Princess Robe ... XII—2, 3, 4, 5, 20,
Deformed lady s bodice V—l 2 to 15 21 22 24 ■ XV 7
Draft of Blouse VIII—I to 9 Of Skirt ... Vl—l to 9, 27, 28, 31, 35, 47,
Of Bodice ... ll—l to 53 ; IV— 1t022 ; 48, 53, 56, 61, 62
V—l to 9 Of Sleeve ... Ill—2, 12, ’l3, 14, 15, 23 ;
Of Skirt Vl—l to 26 VII—7, 8,13, 19 ; XV—ll
Of Sleeve Ill—l to 28 Of Tea Jacket Xl—7
For Capes XIV—I, 25 Of Wrapper .. X 11—25, 26, 27, 28, 36, 39
For Corsets XVI—I to 9 Of Yoke • VIII—SI
For stout lady IV—l to 22 Side line of V—7, 8 ; 11—39, 41, 44
Draped bodice V 111—62, 63 Side line of below waist 11—52
Elbow ... Ill—2o, 21, 22; VII—IB, 19, 28, Side line of for Stout Lady ....IV—7, 16
29, 30, 36, 51 ; X 111—57 Fulness for gathers ... Vl—77, 78 ; V 11—62,
Length of sleeve to Ill—2o 71, 72, 77 ; VIII —64
Line Hl—2l Without gathers ... Vl—3B, 39, 69, 70 ;
Measure I—2l Xl—4, 5, 17 to 20, 33, 34 ; XIV—IB to 23
Where to mark for size of 111—22 Gathers ... Vl—77, 78 ; V 11—62, 71, 72, 77 ;
Empire Gown XII—4O to 53 VIII—6O, 64 ; Xl—3
Back X 11—53 Gathered Skirt Vl—77, 87
Front XII—4B to 50, 52 Height of Hip, Where to mark on draft .. 11—46
Fulness for X 11—47 Hips—
Sidebody X 11—53 Around, How to measure' I—ll
Under Arm XII—SI, 52 Height of, How to measure I—lo
Extension ll—4, 9 ; V—l 3 Lines ... ll—sl, 52, 53, 56 ; V-—9, 15 ;
Where to measure I—6 Vl—s, 29, 37
Where to put onlbodice ll—4 Lines, Where curved 11—56
Extra stout lady IV—26 Of Skirt Vl—s
Facings 11—76, 78 Where to reduce if too large 11—53
Fitting II—87; IV—27 Inverted Pleat VI —71, 72
Flares ... Vl—3o, 35, 36, 45 ; V 11—32, 53 to Jacket Back line Xl—l3
59 ; XII—I 7, 18, 19 Front line Xl—l to 23
Flounce ... Vl—69, 70; Xl—4, 5, 17 to 20, Tea Xl—l to 23
30, 31 ; XIV—IB to 23 Kilting 11—75
For a Cape XIV—IS to 23 Length of Skirt Vl—22, 31, 32, 75, 76
Flowered material 11—69 Lining fitting ll—6o to 68, 87 ; X 11—26
Folds 11—72 Lower Arm, How to measure 1—22
Frills ... 11—71 ; Vl—63, 67 ; Xl—3o, 31 Material, How to cut 11—69, 70 to 78 ;
Frill Shaped ... Vl—69, 70 ; Xl—34; 1 XIV Vl—4l
—lB to 23 Up and down of 11—69 ; Vl—4l ;
Frill, tucked Vl—63, 67 V 111—63 ; X 11—52
Front for Sailor Blouse XV—l6 to 19 Measures for Children 11—27
Length, How to measure I—B What to take I—l


Medici Collar IX—lO, 11
Middle Arm, How to measure I—2o
Where to measure on draft 111—25
Nap ... 11—69 ; Vl—4l ; V 111—63 ; X 11—52
Neck, How to measure I—2
Neck-to-Elbow, How to measure I—l 6
Neck line of sailor collar IX—l4
Of Wrapper XII—2B
To draft back of II —10
To draft front of ll—H> 12
Where to reduce the size ll—l4
Nurse’s Cape XIV—24 to 33
Over-Arm measure for capes XIV—26
Overlap, Pieces may, at waist 11—55
Not at armhole 11—54
Paper patterns VII—4
Patterns to alter, to fit VII—4
Pile or Nap ... 11—69 ; Vl—4l ; VIII —63 ;
X 11—52
Platform Dress Vl—76
Pleats Vl—7l to 73, 77, 78 ; X 11—49
Pressing Vl—44, 45
Princess Robe XII—I to 24
Front seams X 11—24
Hip measure XII—I
Skirt from hip line of bodice .... XII—I 7
Slope for skirt lines XII—3 to 14
Width for bottom XII—4, 16
Princess Robe for Child XV—7, 8, 9
Quantities of material 11—79
Reefer Coat XV—2l to 24
Rever Coat XIII—II, 12, 13
Rink Collar IX—l to 3
Round Collar IX—l6, 17
Ruches 11—73
Sacque Coat XIII—I 3 to 18, 22
Made full XIII—IB
With full back XIII—I 7, 22
With plain back XIII—I 6, 22
Sailor Blouse XV —12 to 20
Coat Collar IX—3O, 32
Collar IX—l2 to 18
Scye—How to measure I—l 3
Where to mark on draft ll—6
Seam, Of back moveable . .11—57, 59 ; V—3 ;
XIII—5; XII—2
Of back taken to shoulder ll—sB ;
XII—2
Stretching on bias side Vl—43
Through back dart XII—2, 24
To cut out II —63
To notch ... ll—6B ; Vl—4s ; V 111—24
To press flat when curved .. ll—6B ; VI—
-45 ; V 111—24
To put a straight and shaped side together..
V 111—24
To tack together .... Vl—43 ; V 111—24
Seams .... 11—58, 63; Vl—4s; V 111—24
XII—3O
Curved Vl—4s
In back of bodice, curved .. 11—26 to 33, 57
In back of bodice, straight 11—58 ;
XII—2
Seams— continued.
In front of Princess Robe II—2; X 11—24
Margin for X 11—33
Shoulder 11—16, 18, 19, 20 ; V—lo ; VIII
—32, 52; XIV—3, 11, 27
Back line ll—l7
Front line ll—l6
How to lengthen or shorten back ... ll—l9
How to measure I—ls
Of Cape XIV—3, 11, 27
Sidebody, Back line of .. 11—27, 30, 32, 57, 58
Back line of below waist 11—52
Front line of .... 11—26, 29, 52; V—7, 8
Side line of back 11—27, 28, 31 ; V—2, 3
Line of back moveable . 11—57, 59 ; V—3;
XIII—S
Skirts Vl—l, 78
Skirt, Back gore Vl—37
Child’s XV—25, 26
Darts Vl—2l, 59
Depth of frill Vl—63
Eleven gored Vl—26
Facing 11—76
Five gored Vl—9, 26, 28
Flared Vl—3o, 35, 36
Foundation Vl—24
Front Vl—3, 4, 9, 27, 28, 56, 62
Full at back with no gathers .. Vl—3B, 51
Gathered Vl—77, 78
Gores —bias and straight Vl—42
Hips Vl—s, 12, 13, 37
How to avoid bias stretching .... Vl—43
How to measure for 1—24
How to place pattern Vl—4l, 56
Inverted pleat Vl—7l, 74
Length Vl—22, 31, 75, 76
Length of flare Vl—36
Narrow front Vl—2B, 61
Nine gored Vl—2s, 33
Plain Vl—l
Pressing Vl—44, 45
Seams Vl—23, 45
Seven gored Vl—s
Shaped flounce Vl—69, 70
Side gores Vl—lo to 19, 28, 29, 30
Stretching Vl—43
To avoid unevenness around the bottom. ..
Vl—l9
To make back wader Vl—l9
To make longer in front than back . Vl—3l
To mark seams Vl—34
Train Vl—7s
Tucked Vl—s7 to 68
Umbrella Vl—46 to 56
Waist .... Vl—4, 11, 20, 21, 39, 40, 43, 55
Width at bottom Vl—3o
Worn on platform Vl—76
Sleeves, Any from draft VII—6
Angel VII—4O, 43
Bell V 11—39
Bend Ill—l 2
Bishop (full) VII —60, 67
Bishop (plain) V 11—45 to 49


Sleeves— continued. Tucks Vl—67 ; V 111—25, 26
Bishop, To place draft for .... V 11—46, 61 Put in material before cutting VIII —26, 27
Coat X 111—39 to 63 Turnover Collar IX—6 to 9
Coatee V 11—35 to 38 Umbrella Skirt Vl—46 to 56
Curve top of under .... Ill—lo ; VII—B7 Under Arm, Back and front line of, below waist
Curve top of upper Ill —11 11—52
Depth of top curve Ill—4 First IV—l4, 22
Difference between Gigot and Bishop . . j For large w T aist 11—42, 43
11—52
V 11—44 For medium waist II —40
Draft Ill—l to 28 i For small waist 11—44, 45
Elbow VII —28 I How to measure I—7
Fancv VII —77 to 86 Pieces, Ist and 2nd .. IV—4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10,
For child XV—lO, 11 , 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 23
For dee]) yoke VIII —55 to 58 ; Pieces, Stout Lady’s IV—l, 2, 3
Foundation of different shapes .... VII—3 : Pieces, To enlarge at waist 11—43 ;
Gathered from top to wrist .. VII —71 to 75 IV —13, 14
Gigot VII—I 7, 18, 19, 20 Pieces.to reduce at waist, IV —20, 22; II —45
Gigot, Roundness at top VII—2I 1 Second IV—l3, 20, 21
Gigot, Small VII —22 j When to put two IV—2, 23
Gigot, Three kinds •• VII —17 Where to mark on draft II —5
Gigot, To place draft for .. VII —18 Where to place on draft .... ll—3B, 41, 44
Gigot with dart at back .... VII —22 to 27 Undeveloped figure V—l
Gigot with medium fulness at top •• A ll | Upper Ann, How to measure I—l 9
22 to 27 1 Where to measure on draft 111—24
Gigot with one seam VII—I 7 to 31 V-dart at armhole .... 11—22, 24 ; IV—24 ; V
Gigot with two seams .... V 1 1 —32, 33. 34 — lO ; VIII — 10, 11
How to put into armhole .. VII — 80,90,91 At neck of coat XIII — B, 9
Inside line of upper .. Ill—7. 12, 13, 14, Of Blouse VIII —10, 11
15. 19 ; XV—ll I Waist .. ll—9, 40, 44, 55, 59, 65 ; IV 7 —3 to 22 ;
Inside of under .. Ill—7, 12, 13, 14, 15 ; I V—6, 7 ; VIII —8, 22, 23, 60
XV—ll ! Band on Blouses VIII —60
Inside-to-bend, How to measure .. I—l 7 ; How to measure I—4
Inside-to-wrist, How to measure .... I—IS j Large ll—4l
Lining, To cut 11—64 ; V 11—37 1 Line on Lining 11—62 ; X 11—32
Lining, To tack Ill—2B Lines, Importance when tacking . . 11—65
Peaked over the wrist VII—7 to 12 Medium ll—4o
Pleat for fulness. .V 11—62, 63, 05, 72, 73, 86
Pouched at the bottom .. V 11—53 to 57, 67
Shirt VII-*-50. 51, 52
Short Puff VII —65
Three kinds VII—I, 2
To draft Ill—l to 28
To place drafts for fancy V 11—77, 79
To place draft on lining 11—64
To place on the material 11—64; V 11—37
Tucked VII—6B
Tucks, Where placed V 11—69, 70
Twist of front seam VII—IS, 16, 88
Under VII—B7
Where to curve back line of.. 111—23, 26, 27
Where to mark inside length Ill—3
With full frill Xl—24
Slender Lady’s Bodice V—l to 15
Stole X 111—25 to 29
Stooped figure IV—25 ; V—l 2, 13, 14
Storm Collar IX—37 to 42
Stout Lady’s Bodice IV—l to 25
Styles ll—Bo to 86
Any from fitting pattern VII—S
Tacking Ill— 28 ; Vl—42 ; 11—65, 66
Trains Vl—7s, 76 ; XII—IB, 23
Train on flared skirt XII —18 to 23
Trimming for any style.. ll—Bo to 86 ; Xl—3
Of Skirt .... Vl—4, 11, 20, 31, 39, 40, 59
On Child’s draft XV—4
Small 11—44
Size on draft IV—4, 6, 15
To draft for large .... ll—4l, 42, 43 ; IV
—6 to 14
To draft for medium .... ll—4o ; IV—3
To draft for small .. 11—44, 45 ; IV—
-15 to 22
To mark size on draft .... ll—3B ; V—6
True line ll—9
“ Watteau ” XII—3I, 37, 38
Wrapper X 11—25 to 38
Back XII—3I, 34, 35, 37, 38
Front X 11—27 to 30, 36
Pleats at back X 11—34
Sidebody X 11—32, 34, 39
Under Arm X 11—29, 39
“ Watteau ” back XII—3I, 37, 38
Wrist. .111—16 to 19 ; VII—IS, 16 ; X 111—56
How to mark size of Ill—l 7, 18
How to measure 1—23I —23
Line Ill—l 6, 19
Yoke V 111—29, 30, 31, 51 to 59
Deep VIII—SI to 54
Saddle VIII —59
Without a seam VIII —52, 53, 54




INDEX TO DIAGRAMS
Angel Sleeve 41
Bell Sleeve 41
Bishop Sleeve, gathered from top to bottom 46
Full r 45
Large at top 40
Pouched at wrist 44
Bodice without seam on shoulder 57
Bloomers 114
Blouse 50
Sailor, for child . 109
Tucked 53, 54, 55
With yoke 51, 52
Bodice draft, for deformed lady 15
For child 106
For extra stout lady 13
For slender lady or girl 14
For stout lady 10,11,12
Large waisted 7
Medium figure 6
Small waisted 8
Bolero 100
Capes 1 102 to 105
With’shaped frill 103
Child’s, Coat 110
Draft 106
Princess Robe 107
Sailor Blouse 109
Sleeve 108
Chemise 113
Coachman’s Cape 103
Coat, Collar 69
Child’s 110
Fitting 93
Sacque 94
Sailor Collar 70
Semi-sacque 95
Sleeve 101
With Cape Sleeves 96
Without Collar 97
Coatee 56
Draft 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62
Collar, Coat 69
Coat, Sailor 70
Full 80
Medici 67
Rink 65
Sailor 68
Storm 71 to 74
Turnover 66
Combinations 115,116, 117
Corset 11l
Cuff, Gauntlet 75
Cuff, Handkerchief 76
Round 76
Curvatures 118, 119
Deformed Lady’s Draft 15
Double Capes 99
Elbow Sleeve 38
Empire Gown, back and sidebody 92
Front and under arm 91
Extra Stout Lady’s Draft 13
Fancy Collar 79
Fancy Sleeve 47, 48, 49
Five-gored Skirt 28, 29
Fitting Coat 93
Flared Skirt 20, 21, 22, 23, 24
Front of Skirt 16,19
Fishmouth Sleeve 36, 37
Full Collar 80
Gathered Skirt 35
Gauntlet Cuff 75
Handkerchief Cuff 76
How to take measures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Jacket, Tea • • • • 77, 78
Inverted Pleats 33, 34
Large-waisted Figure Draft 7
Leg-of-mutton Sleeve 38
Small 39
Measures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Medici Collar 67
Medium Figure Draft 5
Nine-gored Skirt 18, 19
Nightdress 112
Nurse’s Cape 195
Princess Robe 83
Back 88
For Child 107
Front 84
Sidebody 87
Side Front 85
Underarm 86
Rink Collar 95
Round Cape 192
Round Cuff 76
Sacque Coat 94
Sailor Collar 68
Semi-sacque Coat 95
Shaped Frill for Cape 104
For Sleeve 82
For Skirt 32
Shaped Flounce 32
Side and Back Gores of Skirt 17,18
Skirt, Front 16,19,28, 30
Five-gored 28, 29
Gathered 35


Skirt— continued.
Longer in front 30,31
Side and back gores 17,18
Tucked 27, 28, 29
Umbrella 25,26
With shaped Flounce 30, 31, 32
With Inverted Pleats 33, 34
Slender Lady’s Draft 14
Sleeve, Angel 41
Small Bishop 42, 43
Small-waisted Figure Draft 8
Sleeve, Bell 41
Bishop, large at top 40
Child's 108
Draft 9
Elbow 38
Fancy 47
Fislmiouth 36, 37
Full Bishop 45
Gathered 46
Sleeve— continued.
Leg-of-Mutton 38
Pouched 44
Small Bishop 42, 43
Small Leg-of-Mutton 39
To fit on round yoke 64
With Shaped Frill 81
Seven-gored Skirt 16,17
Stole 98
Storm Collar 71, 72, 73, 74
Stout Lady’s Draft 10
Stout Lady’s Draft with large waist 11
Stout Lady’s Draft with small waist 12
Tea Jacket 77,78
Tucked Skirt 27,28,29
Turnover Collar 66
Umbrella Skirt 25, 26
Wrapper, Back and Sidebody 90
Front and Underarm 89
Yoke 51, 52, 63
JOHN SANDS, I’RINTBR, GEORGE STBBBT AND DRUITT STREET, BTDNKT.


—- — ” ~ —
\ Diagram 118
\ /
%<$>'
f cuWc \ / So*i ' n - \ V A X"^
/ \ / ° Ca fe carve \ X
Diagram 119
curVe


Vs «);*
< J-wf
1
| , |u , wvW
>© vs s»>o
| 1 Go g£
|
, "Sr I ■
5 .


3 1508
00341940


1 $0m
'
wmmm
iiipiis
.f?
V £ -1
4f x -T '■
■
; ' _
;
'M v' - ,, ' * ii r
« | pgf
: ; te 'V : ;;'■'^v;^ ::^;;;;: ;;’;;; ; vy^::; :
, **?
i 1 i
■j
'rJ$ -^>T;" : / ' : ;* 4|&
. ■ -S' ’ ' e M■ ■ •" , ■■■
. ‘ . ' •
wr J ife,:: s li
•?•' ' ''"H''- ; s ' S , ' £ 1 ,
5 1 p|| * I (if'
'^mmMmW&SiM : k
A,X% 0$:
V/. ■■ ■ |
- / * * ; * " ■'<„
|i| ■ v yyyyy\ .? i||ii ii \ y'y&h
.
I ■* | !/ r v / - |
-M III I *
f/ /y 'jj£, <' /Vs %y s'- 1 ? \ -x
- lx
' ' T ' v /* 'is '/■-<-'/- *?, ' ■ < ’ ' ' v . - -
■ , ,f ' ' 11 /'
/tpy,’'' S / ', ‘ * _,/K
