

SR rs) P#VtVl V. Ac. 1%0
USTRALIA
780
The Country and its Resources, Population,
Public Works, and Finances
IN 1897
with Remarks on the manufacture of Wool in
the Colonies, Emigration, federation, the Funding
of Australian Public Debts, &c.
By Edward A. Petherick
A Colonist of Forty-four Years
“We have seen the country, and behold it is very good”
LONDON: EFFINGHAM WIFSON, 11, Royal Exchange, E.C
GLASGOW: JOHN SMITH & SON, 19, Renfield Street
Second Edition
With Two Maps
June, 1897




RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
The Right Honourable SAMUEL JAMES WAY
HON. D.C.1,. OXON., HON. D.C.L. CAMB., LL.D. QUEEN’S UNIV.,
KINGSTON, CANADA, LL.D. ADELAIDE
CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
LIEUT.-GOVERNOR AND CHIEF JUSTICE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
THE FIRST REPRESENTATIVE
OF AUSTRALASIA UPON THE JUDICIAL COMMITTEE OF
HER MAJESTY’S PRIVY COUNCIL
ETC., ETC.




PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.
A few corrections and additions [within brackets] have
been made to this issue, to include latest available statistics.
My thanks are due to several private correspondents and
to the critics of the Anglo-Australian newspapers, for their
kindly notice of the little brochure upon its first appearance.
Some have discovered in the letters more than the writer
himself had seen.
Commenting upon the rough Balance Sheet (page 38), one
critic says: “Mr. Petherick considers that Australia could
pay fifty-three shillings and fourpence in the £” This may
be a just and reasonable inference to be drawn from the
figures, but my critic should have noticed, at the same time,
a matter of more serious import, namely, that these small
communities, aggregating three and a-half million souls only,
are, for public and private borrowings, directly and indirectly
burdened with interest, amounting to not less than ten
millions annually ; that expenses of civil government amount
to another eight and a-half millions, and that ten millions more
is required for municipal purposes. These are burdens far too
heavy to be borne by so small a population. The remedy,
as I have pointed out, will only be found in a large influx
of population ; in other words, the systematic introduction
of an industrial population selected from the manufacturing
classes of the mother country, to work up the natural pro-
ductions of these Colonies. This must be reiterated and
repeated over and over, again and again, until action is
taken by our responsible statesmen. (See paragraphs 36,60.)
Will Great Britain allow Australia—with New Zealand,
the most characteristically British of her possessions beyond
sea—to be dependent upon promiscuous immigration; and,
by the introduction of foreign elements, to become as cosmo-
politan as the United States is, and as Canada and South
Africa are fast becoming ? Or, will the Home Government,
through their Emigration Office, take the initiative, and
prudently and methodically transfer from the redundant
population of this country to the southern colonies eligible
and suitable artizans, and thus render the British charac-
teristics of the present colonists permanent ? The colonial


governments can, for their part, find workmen’s homes and
offer facilities for the introduction of manufacturing plant
and machinery.
Fifty thousand people—ten thousand families—could be
shipped off and planted in these colonies for less than the cost
of a first-class iron-clad ! Could not some of H.M. troop-
ships be utilised for the purpose ? Nay, are there not at this
moment a dozen large steamers on the route, carrying less
than a half of their complement of passengers ?
Since the first edition was issued, a Federal Convention
has been elected, and has held its first Session in Adelaide.
A scheme for a Federal Parliament which shall consist of two
Chambers has been formulated. One Chamber is sufficient
in a Colonial Federation where every interest and all interests
are represented. With the three estates of the realm in
Great Britain—Queen, Lords, Commons, there has grown
up what we call the “Fourth Estate”—public opinion as
expressed in the newspapers and journals. That we have
in Australia, a Press second to none in the world. A free
and independent Press constitutes to-day, the best safeguard
against class legislation, or against hasty legislation, the only
reasonable excuse for a Second Chamber. Or, how much
more wisdom dwells, to-day, in Upper Houses than in Lower ?
No more, and no less. In these Colonies, an Upper Chamber
is an expensive and useless luxury, for, over the public purse
it has no control ! and the labours and wisdom of some of our
best statesmen are also rendered of no effect, because that
Chamber alone can have the benefit of their arguments and
votes. As the Minister of a Department can only speak in
one House, he must be represented in the other by an irre-
sponsible substitute. Such are some of the anomalies of a
Second Chamber. Because, under Constitutional Govern-
ment, two Houses have been evolved in Europe and America,
that is no reason for bi-cameral government in a E>emocratic
community. If Australians want a Peerage, they may have
one of merit—a Life Peerage in which should be enrolled
all such as render honourable service to their country, a
Grand Council, to meet in conference with the Federal
Parliament, in time of war or of national commemoration,
or for revision of the Constitution.
E. A. P.
3, York Gate, Regent’s Park,
London, N.W., May 24, 1897.


SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.
* m * The figures in parentheses denote the numbers of the paragraphs.
Preface to Second Edition 1
Introductory Letter from [An Investor in Australian
Securities] criticising the present state of affairs in Australia 5
Acknowledgment of his letter 8
Letter I.— The Six Colonies, New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and Tas-
mania
Geographical Description (I)—Communications : telegraphs (2)
Railways (3)—-Roads, bridges, lighthouses, harbours, docks,
& c . ( 4 ) —Towns and cities, their healthy situation, parks, public
edifices, &c. (s)—Adelaide and surroundings (6)—Melbourne
and suburbs (7) —Health resorts near Melbourne, and general
character of Australian scenery (B)—Tasmania (9)—Brisbane,
Perth, Goulburn, Bathurst, Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo (10)
[see also par. 55, p. 43]—Sydney, Port Jackson, Parramatta
river, &c. (11)—New South Wales National Park (12)—-Ceme-
teries (13)—The Settled Country: agriculture, farming and
live stock (14)—Total Exports (15)— Imports (16)—Aggregate
trade (17)
Letter II. — The Population of Australia 18
General circumstances of the people, savings banks, life assur-
ance (18) Friendly societies (19) —Religious denominations and
organizations (20) —Primary, secondary, and technical educa-
tion (21)—Public order, Courts of Law and Justice (22)—Public
Charities and the boarding-out system (23)—Outdoor pastimes,
cricket, football, yachting, society functions (24)—Horse racing,
Randwick, Flemington, and the ‘ Melbourne Cup ' (25)—The
< rough ’ element (26)—The Drama and Music (27) Public
libraries, museums, learned societies, newspapers and reading (28)
—Colonial authors (29)—The ‘ breadwinners ’ (30)


Letter 111. — Australian Finances and Public Works ... 27
Financial troubles of 1826, 1842, 1866 (31) —Australian bank-
ing operations (32) —The late ‘ Land Boom ’ and bank failures
(33) —Consequent decline in volume of imports (34) —Fall in
prices, wages, rent and necessaries (35) —Colonial Manufactures
and Industries (36) Public Works : Convict Labour (37) —Gold
discoveries of 1851, influx of population (38) —Rise in prices,
the unemployed, the lands thrown open, necessity for Railways,
Water works, and Loans (39) —Present annual Expenditure (40)
—General Revenue (41) —Cost of Administration (42) —Total
receipts from sale and lease of Lands (43) —Protection to Native
Industry and indirect taxation (44) —Resulting deficiencies (45)
—Summary: approximate Liabilities and Assets, public and
private, of the Six Colonies, with rough Balance Sheet (46)
Australian Federation and Future Policy 39
Present Constitutions of the Six Colonies (47) —Area of present
Colonies (48) —Necessary modifications of present Assemblies,
Legislative Councils and Government Departments (49) —Scope
of Federal Government (50)—The proposed Convention (51)
—The new Senate or Federal Parliament (52) —Grand Council
(53)—Future Capital (54) —Some of the Cities proposed (55)
[see also paragraphs 6 to 11, pp. 11 to 15] —Suggested Movable
Senate or Federal Parliament, for ten years (56) —Federal Policy
(57) —Consolidation and Conversion of Debts (58) —Municipal
Loans (59)—Necessity for Systematic Emigration and Coolie
Labour (60) —Defences (61) —Birthplaces and Loyalty of
Colonists, native, English, Irish, Scotch, and foreign (62) —
Authorities quoted (63)
Postscript 48
APPENDICES.
A. Railway to India and the East ... 50
B. and C. Letters on Emigration to Australia ... ... 52, 54
D. An Australian Navy ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
MAPS, AT END.
‘‘ Oceania,” showing European protectorates, &c.
“Australia,” showing political divisions, railways, telegraphs, &c.


London, Ist September, 1896.
To E. A. Petherick, Esq.
My Dear Sir,
I was very much impressed with what you said the other
evening about the present financial troubles in the Australian
Colonies, and although your fuller knowledge and closer
acquaintance with the state of affairs may warrant your belief
that things will become more satisfactory and right themselves
in a few years, I still think your views are too sanguine.
My memory goes back between fifty and sixty years to the
period anterior to the gold discoveries of 1851, and I have
good reason to remember that there was then a state of
general bankruptcy in New South Wales and Port Phillip,
and these colonies have passed through several financial crises
since that time, though none have been so serious, I think, as
the present one. I remember also that during the earlier
period, there was as much agitation for Separation among
these colonies as there now is for Federation. “ Let us have
the management of our own affairs,” said the Colonists ; “ our
troubles are caused by the present system of mis-government; ”
“ our circumstances are misrepresented and not understood ; ”
“ we have been too long under the direction of irresponsible
officials at the Colonial Office in Downing Street; ” “ give us
responsible government and we shall prosper.”
We gave you responsible government. With one exception
the Australian colonies have been freed from the control of
Downing Street, for more than forty years. * During that
time you have enjoyed the privileges of local government to
the fullest extent : you have had absolute control of the public
lands and your fiscal operations have been managed regardless
of external interests—even those of the Mother Country or
other British possessions have not been considered.
* New South Wales, founded 1788, Tasmania (Van Diemen’s Land) 1804,
South Australia, 1836; Victoria (Port Phillip District) 1835, and Queensland
(Moreton Bay District) 1824, were separated from New South Wales in 1851
and 1859 respectively. Responsible government was given to these Colonies
in 1855. Western Australia (Swan River Settlement) founded in 1829,
received her constitution in TB9O. —E. A. P.


I would remind you also that before responsible govern-
ment was granted, part of the proceeds of land sales was set
aside for emigration purposes. To this you have devoted
little or nothing. Nearly all has been taken into the general
revenue. You tell me that eighty or one hundred millions
sterling has been received from the lands. This, with customs
and other duties, has apparently been insufficient for ordinary
expenditure, necessitating a high tariff in addition, which does
not produce what was expected because of the great falling
off of imports during the last few years, resulting in deficien-
cies all round of between seven and eight millions. Nor is
this all, you have borrowed for public works,
and bankruptcy and repudiation have been talked of in certain
quarters.
My opinion is that young and energetic communities like
the Australian Colonies should not have been in their present
circumstances. They are isolated in many respects from
European influences, and unencumbered by any burdens of
former generations, and they ought to have profited, politically
and economically, by the experience of older countries. Your
several governments are now on their trial and must be
prepared to give an account of their stewardships. They
have been selling part of their estates in order to live,
and borrowing, or mortgaging revenue, to pay for improve-
ments.
“ Rome was not built in a day.” We, in this country, are
proud of you as Colonists ; you have done much. But the
possession of so vast and rich a country, set, as your lecturers
are so fond of telling us, in tropical and temperate zones,
washed by the waves of three oceans, and equal in area to
Europe—the possession, I repeat, of such a great estate
implies and involves more than ordinary duties and obli-
gations ; not only obligations to discover and explore the
wealth of Nature and to share that wealth with the world
at large, but obligations to till and sow, plant and cultivate,
and restore the gifts of Nature so that she shall not be im-
poverished. Do you now (as Lang says you used to do)
destroy forests without replanting them ? Do you take all the
goodness out of the arable land and then leave it and go to
pastures new ?
Besides these natural obligations, there are duties which no
commonwealth can neglect with impunity—the duty to pre-
serve the body politic in health and peace ; your industries
must not be disturbed, nor your workmen harassed. It is no
less your duty to educate all children and to iirculcate in them
the purest morals, as it is also your duty to be prepared to
pass on to future generations the blessings of good laws and
stable government, together with the good name and that


high prestige which you, as colonists, may have secured for
yourselves, or have inherited from your forefathers.
As the result of forty years of self-government in the
Australian Colonies we look for something more than short
parliaments and the ballot, manhood suffrage and the female
franchise, land transfer made easy, free secular and compulsory
education, religion without State aid, the boarding-out system
for the children of the State, unmonopolised railways and
water-works, and such-like measures. I offer no opinion as to
the wisdom, policy, or expediency of these measures. But,
with their golden opportunities, ought your Colonists not to
have been able to work out some of the more difficult problems
of modern state-craft—the questions of direct or indirect
taxation, and that of the currency ? I hear you have your
bi-metallists as well as mono-metallists, your advocates for
free-trade, fair-trade, and protection. If these problems are
not yet worked out in Australia, what hope is there for
us —the denizens of older countries, who cannot move with-
out trenching upon, or interfering with, long vested interests
—that we shall ever be able to work them out ?
All these, it may with reason be said, are merely incidental
questions, and that the best systems of laws and government
are those that meet the needs of the citizens, or which win the
greatest amount of respect and obedience from the governed.
Now, however, that there is a movement in your Colonies
towards Federation, a movement accompanied by proposals
for the consolidation and conversion of their public debts, you
may be sure that people in this country will desire to know
the facts concerning those Colonies —not coloured, exaggerated,
or party statements, but the whole truth as to their condition,
financial history, and future prospects. They will desire to
know what lands have been alienated, how much of the terri-
tory has been opened up for the reception of our redundant
population, and to what extent the natural, especially the
agricultural resources, have been developed. And investors
will want to know what has been done with the money they
have lent to the several governments and whether it has been
spent upon unproductive or reproductive works.
I am, &c.,
[An Investor in Australian Securities.}


My Dear Sir,
Since receiving your letter of the Ist inst. I have been
thinking about the subject of your remarks and have decided,
as I shall be located here for two or three weeks, to write an
account' of our Australian Colonies, describing the country
from personal knowledge, the people, their condition, occupa-
tions, &c. I will also attempt to sketch the origin and causes
of the present troubles, and will add a few remarks upon
future policy and prospects under Federation. I am away
from books of reference, but will support all my statements by
figures and facts upon my return to London.
I am, &c.,
E. A. P.
Pwllheli, Carnarvonshire, 22nd September, 1896


LETTER I.
The Six Colonies.
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland,
Western Australia and Tasmania.
1 . AS recently as twenty-five or thirty years ago, maps
of the great South Land, exhibited little more
than its ten thousand miles of coast line, indented by bays
and harbours, and a few meridional lines indicating certain
territorial boundaries. To-day, maps of Australia delineate
the physical features as well as the political divisions.
They show a margin of fertile country around the sea
coast, varying in width from fifty to five hundred miles,
drained by numerous rivers. Behind this coastal margin,
and separated from it by mountain ranges, rising from two
to eight thousand feet, —mountains which, for a quarter of
a century presented an impassable barrier—lies a vast
interior consisting not of worthless territory, fit for no
purpose of civilized man, likely to be occupied for ages
only by the kangaroo and wandering aboriginals, as the
early explorers believed, but of extensive undulating table
land and grassy plains, of hills and valleys covered with
magnificent forests or low woody scrub. This hinterland,
which has its rainy as well as its dry seasons, forms a basin
of more than a million square miles, the waters of which,
in flood time, are drained by creeks and rivers into salt
lakes (below the level of the ocean) and there evaporated
or absorbed. Some of the rainfall, it is conjectured, finds
its way to the ocean by means of underground rivers.
Crossed and recrossed from East to West, and from North
to South, by explorers and “ overlanders ” in search of
new pastures, the island continent now lies open, inviting
the redundant millions of the fatherland to the sunny


south and offering them occupation and homes for them-
selves and their descendants. At present scantily settled
by less than three fourths of the population of London,
we are told that Australia is capable of supporting a
population of two hundred millions.
* * * *
2. Upon the maps may be traced forty or fifty thousand
miles of telegraphs (eighty thousand miles of wire being
in use) connecting the country towns and interior pastoral
districts with the respective capital cities, these capitals
with each other and with Port Darwin in the north.*
3. The maps show also that railways traverse the settled
districts and important pastoral and mining districts in the
interior, connecting them with sixteen or eighteen ports
round the coast.f Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and
Brisbane, the four capitals of South Australia, Victoria,
New South Wales, and Queensland, being connected by
direct lines of railway, are now less than one day’s journey
—actually seventeen, eighteen, and twenty-three hours, —
from each other, respectively. In short, ten thousand miles
of railway run through the occupied districts, and other
two thousand miles connect them with the principal cities
and seaports. Another three thousand miles of projected
lines passing through outlying pastoral districts to the
north and west, will link the termini of existing lines
with Port Darwin, and thus bring the most distant parts
of Australia within three weeks of London.];
4. Good macadamised roads traverse the settled districts
in every direction, and timber or iron bridges, punts and
ferries, are frequent at all rivers, creeks, and water-courses.
* Twenty-four years ago Australia was (with Tasmania and New Zealand)
linked by cable from Port Darwin, with Java, Singapore, China, Japan,
India, Africa, Europe, and the great states of the Western Hemisphere.
t Beginning at North Queensland, these are Cooktown, Cairns, Townsville,
Bowen, Mackay, Rockhampton, Gladstone (Port Curtis), Maryborough,
Brisbane, Newcastle, (the great Australian coal depot) Sydney, Bairnsdale
and Port Albert (for Gipps Land), Melbourne, Geelong, Warrnambool, Belfast,
Portland, Rivoli Bay, Adelaide, Wakefield, Augusta, Lincoln, Albany, Bun-
bury, Freemantle (Perth), Grey (Geraldton) &c.
+ The extension of the present Russian Central-Asian railway system along
the old caravan route as far as the Eastern Himalayas, with branches to
Calcutta, Saigon and Canton, would bring the British and French East Indies
within ten days of London and Paris ; and, when the Australian trans-conti-
nental line is completed, Melbourne in sixteen, and New Zealand in twenty
days. See Appendix A.


Besides roads, bridges, railways and telegraphs, the several
governments have constructed lighthouses, fortifications,
harbours, piers, breakwaters, docks, reservoirs and water
works for towns and gold fields.
5. Dotted over the maps, and in the gazetteers, may be
counted five or six thousand towns, townships, and cities.
A tour through these colonies would reveal to the intelli-
gent visitor the fact that the indications of towns on the
maps represent not staked-out sites of future towns and
cities but busy thriving communities, however new or
primitive some of these towns may be in appearance. In
the majority of the lesser, as well as in the larger towns,
besides churches and chapels there are numerous edifices
and works of public utility which have been undertaken
and carried out by the local municipal bodies, such as
post-offices and town-halls, mechanics’ institutions, market-
houses, abattoirs, drainage, and other local improvements.
The public buildings in the cities and muncipalities are
especially remarkable, when it is remembered that the
gum-tree and the kangaroo were the sole occupants of the
sites of many of the larger towns little more than a
generation ago. Perhaps the most noticeable features in
the towns and cities are the public gardens and open
spaces. The streets are generally shaded by trees, and belts
of vegetation divide the cities proper from their surround-
ing suburbs. The first privilege granted to the inhabitants
—after a free press, and trial by jury, was that of local
government, and to this is attributable the present healthy
condition of the towns, their streets, lighting, cleansing,
and approaches.* An eminent English writer some years
ago expressed his strong dislike to the generality of the
colonial cities with their straight streets. His dislike
could have been acquired from maps alone, for Australian
towns, as a rule, are picturesquely situated ; few are laid
out on level ground.
6. Adelaide, originally laid out on a plain, is separated
from its suburbs by a belt of park-like land, and is inter-
* The death rate in these colonies for twenty years, 1873 to 1893, varied
from I9'oB per 1,000 in 1875 to 1277 in 1892, mean 15• 17, which is lower
than the rate in any European country or in any other of the British colonies,
New Zealand, St. Helena, and Nova Scotia excepted. The death rate, in
Melbourne and suburbs in 1893 was 17^07; in extra-metropolitan towns 21 ‘54 ;
in country districts of Victoria 872. In England and Wales during the ten
years 1881 to 1890 the death rate in urban districts was 207 per 1,000, and
in country districts 177 per i,oco.


sected by the river Torrens, —the banks of which have
been beautified. Viewed from a distance, however, the
city and its suburbs appear to lie sheltered at the foot of
the Mount Lofty ranges.
7- The objector to straight lines had Melbourne, or the
map of Melbourne before him. But in this instance his
objection was unfortunate, for Melbourne and suburbs, with
nearly one hundred and fifty miles of streets, parallel and
at right angles and with few curves, is situated upon un-
dulating ground. It is, in this respect, like Rome, a city of
seven hills. The city proper lies on the slopes of two
of these hills and her lofty towers and spires can be
seen from a distance of twenty miles by sea and land—
churches, cathedrals, public offices, hotels, coffee-palaces,
warehouses, and shops which rival (in appearance as well
as in contents) those of Regent, Bond, and Oxford
Streets. In and around the city are public gardens and
recreation grounds, parks, squares and reserves alto-
gether four thousand acres in extent. These relieve Mel-
bourne and her suburbs of all possible monotony, while
the ever-flowing Yarra Yarra, —crossed by thirteen bridges
—winds its way for thirty miles amidst charming rural
scenery,—its banks shaded by weeping willows, mimosa,
acacia, and the evergreen eucalyptus,—through suburbs,
several of which recall while they perpetuate the names
of Heidelberg, Malvern, Kew, Abbotsford, Richmond, St.
James’s Park, and Twickenham. If I am tedious in this
description of Melbourne and its surroundings it is because
it is the seventh city in the Empire, and may be the future
Australian capital. Half a million souls, one seventh of
the whole population of Australia, dwell on the banks of
the Yarra, —such are the windings of the river that few r of
the suburbs are very far from the stream. Here may be
counted hundreds of villas and mansions in ornamental
grounds, or embowered in foliage, thousands of lesser villas
and cottages, each with its beds and borders of flowers.
The old garden favourites : daisies and roses, geraniums
and fuchsias, grow profusely in the open air all the year
round, as well as the laurel, magnolia, and rhododendron.
Detached houses are usually surrounded by verandas,
covered with ivy, honeysuckle, Virginia, and other creepers,
or closed in with Venetian blinds to shade from the
summer-sun. The main roads to the suburbs are lined
with terrace after terrace and detached villa residences for


miles—residences adapted to the exigencies of a changeable
climate and exhibiting some of the best examples of
modern domestic architecture. Government House, Mel-
bourne, at present occupied by Lord Brassey and suite,
is a palace fit for any European prince, and is situate
in extensive and ornamental grounds, overlooking the
botanic gardens and the Yarra, and within a few minutes’
walk of the city. Around all, even in the less picturesque
parts, in the humbler homes and cottages of the labouring
classes, there is an air of comfort, for the occupiers are
often the owners, or the owners reside near by. Railways
and a very complete system of cable tramways render
access to the city, or egress from it, to the most distant of
the suburbs, possible within the half hour.
8. Within easy distance of Melbourne, there are many
places of resort for excursionists, seaside and inland, where
Australian nature in her wildest and weirdest form may be
seen :—valleys of ferns tall as forest trees, hills whereon are
forest trees
• • • • “to equal which the tallest pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills were but a wand; ”
giants towering to the height of 250, 300 and 400 feet,*
some in the full glory of their branching foliage, others
long since dead—probably destroyed by bush fires, which
have left their gaunt and now whitened limbs, stretched out
to a cold and frosty sky; fresh and tall young saplings,
side by side with the monarchs of past ages—others
gnarled and twisted, scarcely rising above the low scrub or
undergrowth—all types of the everlasting and interminable
gum tree spread, now thickly, now sparsely, over the con-
tinent, even into Tasmania.
9. From her situation, within 40° and 44 0 south—the
same latitude as Central Italy in the north, but with a
milder climate tempered by the breezes of the Southern
Ocean, Tasmania, with her lovely places of resort, by
mountain, glen, lake, stream, and sea—scenery beautiful
almost beyond description—-has long been, for Australians
* The trunks of some of these “big ” trees, now lying low, measure 300 feet
to their lowest branch : when in full glory their topmost branches could not
have been less than 480 or 500 feet from the ground,—trees with their foliage,
greater in height, and equal in expanse to the dome of St. Paul’s, or even St!
Peter’s at Rome !


and Indian officers, a retreat and place of rest. Ninety
years of cultivation has softened the original weird scenery
of the districts around Launceston, Hobart, and other towns
and they now wear something of the aspect of English
provincial towns.* The sea-passage across Bass straits,
between Port Phillip Heads and Launceston, occupies
eighteen hours. For a more invigorating climate like that
of Scotland and Switzerland, the Australian holiday
maker seeks South New Zealand, and is not disappointed.
10. To return to the Australian mainland. Brisbane and
Perth, the capitals of Queensland and Western Australia,
are also beautifully situated upon rivers and surrounded
by picturesque suburbs and forest scenery. Goulburn and
Bathurst, next to Sydney and Parramatta, the oldest towns
of importance in New South Wales ; Geelong, Ballarat,
and Bendigo (Sandhurst) in Victoria, if they are not pic-
turesquely situated, they have for a long time been receiv-
ing all the attention that art can give, and are becoming
more attractive year by year.
11. Sydney, seated upon a series of promontories jutting
into a harbour which has been pronounced the most beau-
tiful in the world, has, with the estuary of the Parramatta
river, one hundred miles of water frontage, every acre of
which is made more beautiful by villas and mansions,
public and private gardens, their lawns and green foliage
coming down to the water’s edge. Here, not much more
than a hundred years ago, came the first pioneers,—the
greater number a wretched band of outcasts. From a
tedious voyage across a dreary waste of waters, they
came to a land, —a wilderness, which could offer them only
wood and water. Hewers of wood and drawers of water
they were forced to remain. For years Nature and the
pioneers waged war with each other, and Nature the
strongest defied the efforts of the invaders for a quarter
of a century. When forests were cleared, crops sown, and
* A distinguished visitor in 1888—the late Earl of Carnarvon writes
that: “ Hobart, under unclouded skies, looked that which its loyal people
most desire it should look, an essentially English town. On no part of
Australia are, I think, English characteristics more strongly impressed than on
Tasmanian things and persons. Life is simple and habits homely, the eager
competition of business and politics is absent, the vast fortunes of the main-
land do not exist; but the turn of thought and conversation, the social
influences, the very look of mute and material things, the roads, the hedges,
the enclosures, all wear a distinctly English character.” —Fortnightly Review,
March, 1889.


farmsteads erected upon the banks of the Hawkesbury,
She gave enough for a year or two for half the settlers and
then mocked them with floods which disheartened and
might have broken up the colony had the settlers been
nearer “ home.” But in the end the pioneers won. Beau-
tiful for situation, Sydney must always remain the Queen
city of the South. She has, in addition to her water
frontages, 115 miles of streets, and her suburbs have spread
in every direction. Like Adelaide and Melbourne, Sydney
has her cathedrals, churches, town hall, post office, and
vice-regal residence. The government offices in Sydney
as in Melbourne, are comparable in extent and appearance
with those in Whitehall and St. James’s Park. The chief
cities have, in addition to public offices, their free public
libraries, technical museums of natural and industrial pro-
ducts, botanic and zoological gardens, theatres and opera
houses.
12. The New South Wales “ National Park,” situated a
few miles to the south of Sydney, contains 35,000 acres of
the loveliest woodland, forest, mountain, and river scenery,
and has a frontage of eight miles to the Pacific. It lies ad-
jacent to the country watered by the river Nepean, on
which are situated the villages of Camden, Campbelltown,
and Narellan, in the midst of the original estates of the
Macarthurs, the Macleays, the Cowpers, and other founders
of Australian wealth and greatness.
13. And while the State thus ministers to the comfort
and out-door enjoyments of the living, the departed are not
forgotten. The dust of the generations of those who built
the cities of Europe, who filled her granaries, fought her
battles—of peace as of war—who wrote her literatures, is
sacred. The “ Brookwoods,” “ Greenwoods,” “ Mount
Auburns,” and “ Campo-santos,” of Europe and America
are repeated in this new world. While the graves of not a
few of the first three generations of Australia’s pioneers lie
“ Far in the forest shade,”
the remains of the majority rest in well laid-out ceme-
teries in and around the towns and cities —sites not long
since wildernesses, which these departed pioneers have
made to blossom as the rose.
14. The visitor will soon discover that it is not in the
towns of Australia that he must look for the best evidences


of progress. In the settled districts nearly ten millions of
acres are under cultivation, and probably one third of the
whole continent—five or six hundred million acres—is
under periodical,. if not permanent, pastoral occupation.
he agricultui ist is able to grow more wheat, potatoes, and
other foodstuff than is required for local consumption, and
a proportion of his crops have long been exported. * The
visitor will, in his rapid journey, see not only cornfields, and
market gardens, but vineyards, cotton-fields, sugar planta-
tions, ostrich and poultry farms ; forests cleared, and forests
replanted with European and other exogenous trees and
shrubs, as well as indigenous trees, such as the eucalyptus
for its oil and the wattle for its bark. And, if the visitor
does not see, he will be told of cattle—and horses too, upon
a thousand hills, he will hear of flocks of sheep grazing
over hundreds of thousands of square miles of grassy
slopes and plains sheep aggregating more in number
than are now to be found in the hills and dales, or upon
the rich and well-watered meadow lands, of their old home
in Western Europe.* During several months in the year
hundreds of waggons and bullock teams are travelling
along the bush tracks and the highways ; and barges are
making their way down the Darling, the
and the Murray, to the railway depots, conveyances
mostly laden with bales of the golden fleece, which will be
shipped from the seaports to European and American
maikets. There the bales will be exchanged for the
greater part of the necessaries of life (food excepted)
and those conveniences and luxuries without which no
community can, in these days, claim to be fully civilised
These waggon and barge loads, of wool, when manufac-
tured, clothe one third of the people of Europe and the
United States of America.!
. Australia and Tasmania, with only three and a half millions of inhabitants
in 1894 possessed 1,679,154 horses, 12,337,391 cattle, 100,940,609 sheep,—
more than Germany Austria, France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Holland,
Denmark and the .Unned Kingdom, countries peopled by two hundred mil-
lions. A writer in The Mother Colony of the Australias (1896) gives the
number of sheep in Australia in 1894 as 121,161,247. S
t Of seven hundred million pounds weight of wool imported into Great
Britain in the year 1895, five hundred and forty-one million pounds weight was
received from Australia and New Zealand. This was valued, in a depressed
year at £18,204,871. Shipments from Australasia to other countries made
up the total to £19,532,205. In other words, as far as the colonists are con-
cerned, every shearing means £'2o,ooo,ooo,—and a fall of a penny per lb
something like a loss of two and a quarter millions of money.


15. Wool and other natural productions gold, silver,
copper, tin, coal, tallow, hides, leather, grain, sugar butter,
cheese, frozen and preserved meats and fruits, wine, cotton,
tobacco, live stock, &c., —made up the amount of exports
from Australia and Tasmania in 1895, to
This, it is to be noted, is external trade; foodstuffs and
other local products and manufactures consumed by three
and a half millions of the population and domestic ani-
mals, may be, in some degree, imagined from the fact that
actual want in these colonies is unknown, while there must
be much waste and consequent loss from various causes,
as by periodical and sudden inundations destroying crops,
or long-continued drought when cattle die in thousands
and sheep in tens of thousands for want of grass and
water.
16. The imports into the six colonies consist chiefly of
textile fabrics (largely manufactured from Australian wool),
drapery, haberdashery, and other apparel, leather, boots,
and shoes (also largely manufactured from Australian
hides and skins), fancy goods, glass and chinaware,
jewellery, paper, books, stationery, drugs and chemicals,
iron and steel, machinery and hardware, railway plant,
military stores, &c. During the eleven years 1885 to 1895
these imports averaged ;£"S3> OOO >CXX) per annum.
The volume of Australian trade will thus be seen to
aggregate considerably over one hundred millions annually.
These results—in the cities and towns, in the agricultural,
pastoral, and mining districts of Australia—amply redeem
the obligations of the colonists to work-up the natural
resources of their country. Indeed the achievements of
three generations of pioneers in cutting through forest and
scrub; in opening paths across the mountains and through
the deserts; in stocking, and producing such marvellous
results in pastoral, agricultural, and mining pursuits, in so
short a time, on a continent, which, unlike all other conti-
nents, possesses no great navigable rivers, or permanent
inland water communication, are perhaps, without a parallel
in history.
. In my next communication, I shall treat of the popula-
tion, their condition and circumstances, savings, morals,
religious and educational advantages, amusements” occupa-


tions, &c., having now obtained a copy of Greville’s latest
Australian Year Book and some other statistical works
from the Australian Agents-General in London.
I am, &c.,
E. A. P.
Pwllheli, sth October, 1896.
LETTER 11.
The Population.
18. TN my former letter I described briefly the general
appearance of the country, its towns and cities,
and summarized its internal and external trade, and indus-
tries. A closer examination will show that the general
air of comfort pervading the different communities is not
apparent only but real. Despite the heavy clouds of com-
mercial and financial depression which have darkened thou-
sands of Australian homes during the last two or three
years, the latest published returns (1894-95) show that the
amount of deposits in the Post Office and Trustee Savings’
Banks of the six colonies was ,£20,076,709.* The number
of depositors was 701,732, the average amount for each
depositor being £2B 4s. od., equivalent to £5 15s. 4d. per
head of the total population f —nearly thirty pounds for
each household of five persons. This average which is
a fraction higher than that for 1883, when it stood at
£"2B 3s. 4d. for each depositor, shows how little the lower
middle-class of the population has suffered from the recent
depression. The class above has suffered most, and this is
made clear by the reports of the Life Assurance Companies.
There has been a large number of surrenders as well as
free borrowing on the surrender value of Policies. The
status and funds of the various companies have, however,
been maintained, and thirty thousand new policies were
[* The returns for 1895-6 show that this amount had increased to
the depositors to 741,386; and the average for each depositor
to £29 6s. 6d.]
f The amount per head of population in the United Kingdom is less than
half this average, £2 16s. sd.


issued in 1895. [An improvement in nearly every respect
is reported as of business done during the year 1896.] *
19. The Benefit and Friendly Societies, thirty-three in
number, including lodges and orders of Freemasons, Odd-
fellows, Foresters, Druids. Rechabites, Gardeners, &c., have
2689 branches, and an aggregate membership of a quarter
of a million, nearly all of whose wives and families are
entitled to sick allowances and medical attendance. Their
present funds amount to and they are reported
to be in sound and flourishing condition, present and pro-
spective, having contributions and incomes sufficient for
outgo as well as for periodical investment. All this speaks
favourably for the material well-being of the great mass of
the population.
20. The moral and intellectual habits and condition of
the people are not less gratifying. Christianity is professed
by nearly the whole of the European population. At the
last census only about thirty per thousand were “ unspeci-
fied ” and “ol no religion.” The respective order, in point
of numbers, of the different persuasions was : —Church of
England, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Wesleyan and
Methodist, Congregational and Independent, Baptist,
Lutheran, other Christians. Jews numbered 14,000. Habi-
tual attendants at churches, chapels, and meeting houses,
were estimated at not less than one third of the whole
population. Six or eight hundred thousand children regu-
larly attend Sunday Schools. In the fourteen bishoprics
of the Church of England there are eight hundred clergy
besides readers, 1500 churches and as many more school
churches and dwellings used for service.! The Roman
Catholic organization comprises four arch-dioceses and
eighteen dioceses and vicariates, with their archbishops,
bishops, priests (secular and regular) religious brothers,
nuns, colleges, numerous churches, orphanages, schools,
and homes. The other denominations, above mentioned,
are well organized, having their respective Assemblies,
Unions, Councils and Conferences. With the exception of
occasional grants of land in outlying districts and a few
money grants in two only of the colonies,! insignificant in
* “Year Book of Australia for 1897,” p. xxiii.
+ The bishop of Sydney has hitherto been Metropolitan of Australia.
“ The Anglican Synod sitting at Sydney has decided to designate a Primate
of Australia, with the title of Archbishop.”— Reuter , Oct. 10, 1896.
+ ;£B°s9 in New South Wales and in Western Australia.


amount, all churches are, and have been, indepemdent of
state-aid for more than a quarter of a century. tSome of
the smaller bodies, (the Congregational and the Baptist)
have, as a rule, always declined government grrants in
every shape and form.
21. There are three universities in Australia andl several
affiliated colleges. Grammar schools, and high schiools for
ladies, are numerous; and the youth of these Colconies do
not now find it necessary to visit Europe unless to) qualify
for the higher professions or to travel. The greatt educa-
tional features, however, in Australia are the National
systems of primary, secondary, and technical ediucation,
and the inducements offered for the advancerment of
scholars to the universities. Thousands of the ycouth in
the National schools matriculate at the universities and
qualify for the civil service, but go no further.. The
statistics relating to Primary Education are emiinently
satisfactory as showing the results of (almost) free,*
secular,! and compulsory education. Altogether’ there
are more than six thousand primary schools in Australia
employing upwards of twelve thousand teachers’; six
hundred thousand scholars are enrolled, and, considering
that a large proportion are children in the country, sixty
per cent, is a high average attendance. Of the total sum
of expended in Primary Education in 1894,
was provided from state funds.! In addition,
nearly ten thousand pounds was expended by the state in
various forms of secondary and technical education, and
forty thousand pounds in support of the universities.
“That such magnificent provision for every branch of
* The State system is free in Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia,
but fees are charged in New South Wales, Western Australia, and Tasmania,
although they are partially or entirely remitted in the case of parents being
unable to pay them.
t The “secular” system has sometimes been characterized as a “godless”
system, probably from association of the word with “secularist.” If
“secular” or “godless” means that the Church, the Shorter, Butler’s or
Watts’s Catechisms, are not in use in the State schools, this is true ; but if the
word means that moral and religious training is not given in State schools, it
is not true, and a libel upon the community and upon common sense. The
Bible is not shut out of the schools, and a high moral and religious tone
pervades the reading books specially prepared for use in all the six colonies. As
far as the Catechisms are concerned, they are not now much used in the Sunday
schools.
[J In 1895 the number of scholars had increased to 650,000, but expenses
were lessened, having been spent by the State and
received in school fees, &c.]


education should be made in a period of deep depression
„ n ° , s str iking than gratifying. As an indication of
n , res ?^ ve the Australian people to place the
(f u llest educational advantages within the reach of every
(( prober of the community, this liberal expenditure may
be pointed to with pride, and may well make every
colonist teel that he is a citizen of no mean country.*
22. If the pride of the colonists is in their educational
institutions they must glory in the dignity and purity of
their Courts of Justice. When it is remembered that fifty
years ago these colonies were looked upon as receptacles
and prisons for the worst of British convicts, and that
transportation to New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land had no sooner ceased than the gold discoveries
brought adventurers from every country in the world f
the Colonists may glory in the fact that they have always
been an orderly and law-abiding people. On the gold
fields, when all were strangers to each other, whether police
aid was available or not, all sorts and conditions of men
banded themselves together for mutual protection, and
like the Britisher everywhere, proceeded to elect a chair-
man.* Boisterous and rowdy the meetings were, but order
would be secured and the “chair” obeyed. Nor was there
any Lynch law. If a culprit was discovered by the com-
munity he was tied to a tree in the camp until officials
arrived to take him in charge.§ In the older colonies of
New South Wales and Tasmania there was no free press
till 1824; no trial by jury until 1830 ; the first Legislative
Council was composed of officials and government nomi-
nees, and government nominees remained in the Council
until the introduction of responsible government in 18515
Local government for the principal cities was introduced
in 1842. To-day, from the Chief Justices down to county
court judges, police magistrates, and justices of the peace,
Greville, “Year Book of Australia, 1896,” p. 430.
t Tens of thousands of immigrants poured into Melbourne weekly, and
homeless thousands thronged the streets or congregated upon the gold-fields
These included the “scum” of Europe and America, according to some
writers, a statement I do not hesitate to contradict.
X The first public meeting of the inhabitants ever held in New South Wales
was in 1799, when the settlement principally consisted of stockades for the
convicts, barracks for the soldiers, and slab huts for officials and a few settlers
The object of the meeting was to raise funds for building a gaol !
§ The Ballarat rioters of 1854, were not filibusters, but honest men deter-
mined not to submit any longer to an exorbitant monthly fee for miner’s
license, levred by a well-intentioned government upon all diggers alike.


points of law may be raised, but decisions of the courts are
never questioned—complaints that justice is not righteously
administered are rarely if ever made : the faintest breath
of suspicion would create a scandal. The Colonial Bar is
above suspicion ; it has had, and still possesses, members
whose ability and brilliance as advocates would have
adorned the English Bar. In the Colony of Victoria the
two branches of the legal profession have been merged.
As regards the people it may be added that the old convict
taint died out almost with the first generations and that
crime is not more rife in any one of these colonies than it
is in Europe. During the period of the early gold dis-
coveries when bushranging was rampant, and “ robbery
under arms” was made a capital offence, crimes of violence
and murder were generally traced, not to the free popula-
tion but to “ tickets-of-leave,” or as they were then called,
“ old lags ” and “ vandemonians.”
23. The public charities, consisting of hospitals, orphan-
ages, and asylums for the blind, deaf, dumb, and aged, are
supported by Government grants and voluntary contribu-
tions. The grants in 1894 amounted to The
children of the state are boarded-out in foster-homes or
in licensed-service homes, under the active supervision of
ladies who give their services ungrudgingly to the depart-
ment. Experience has shown that the boarding-out sys-
tem is the best for the children that has ever been adopted
in these colonies.
24. Favoured with sunshine and fine weather for nine or
ten months in the year, it is not surprising that the youth of
Australia should be fond of outdoor pastimes, especially of
cricket. Of the prowess and achievements of the teams
which have visited this country it is unnecessary to speak
here. Football in these colonies is second only in popu-
larity to cricket. Cycling and yachting * are more in vogue
in Australia than at home. Garden parties in summer
and balls in winter are features among the well-to-do classes ;
and mothers and daughters among the elite of Australian
society look forward to the vice-regal drawing-room with
quite as much interest as their prototypes in London anti-
cipate the presentations and receptions at Buckingham
Palace. Australian young men and maidens have ac-
quired, with the freedom born of outdoor occupations and
pleasures, a natural ease and grace of movement, no less
* See Appendix D.


than self-confidence. A readiness of speech and repartee
among the youth which has sometimes been characterized
by strangers as pertness, is really the outcome of agree-
ableness and candour, bespeaking straightforwardness and
honesty. Comely and vivacious, both sexes early reach
maturity. The rapid growth which at one time gained for
Australian youth the name of “ cornstalks ” is less evident
to-day. This is probably owing to the fact that vegetable
food and fruit is abundant, and that animal food is not
excessively consumed. Even on the squatting stations, the
rations do not now consist solely of “ mutton and damper
and tea” as they did a few years ago. The results are
more muscle and bone and more sustenance to the mental
faculties. With the same educational advantages, as young
men—the same preparation in the higher schools for
matriculation and civil service examinations, the young
women have gained strength of character as well as ability.
While among the few there is the same love of dress and
pleasure as in this country, circumstances are different,
and the leavening of high-mindedness, tempered by cheer-
fulness, has added a not unpleasing trait of self-reliance
and independence. In proof of this are the numerous
examples of the readiness with which young women of
rank adapted themselves to the circumstances brought
about in many families by the recent financial collapse.
An amusing story illustrating this phase of Colonial life
has recently been published.*
25. Racing is, obviously, a matter of very great interest
in a country which has become a new home for man’s
noblest companion, the horse. Randwick and Flemington
race-courses have rivalled each other for more than a
generation. The race at Flemington for the “ Melbourne
Cup” (the blue ribbon of the Australian turf) is the great
event to which all eyes in the South are turned in the
spring of every year. Tens of thousands of visitors from
the other colonies crowd into Melbourne at the beginning
of November, and the carnival lasts for a week. On
“ Cup ” day parliament rises, nearly all places of business
are closed, and, for a few hours, the city is more quiet
than upon a Sunday. Hundreds of thousands flock, by
road and rail, to Flemington. Upon the flowered and
* A Humble Enterprise. By Ada Cambridge, long resident in the Colony
of Victoria.


grassy lawn gather the lovely and beautiful as well as the
gay society of the Australian world. The vice-regal party
is usually accompanied by governors from the adjacent
colonies, their ladies and suites. Ministers of the Crown,
statesmen, leaders of the professions, and their families,
even bishops are reported to have been present on some
occasions. It is the gala day of Australasia, a Southern
Ascot and Goodwood in one meeting, to which, as regards
the beau-monde , Parisian and London modistes, as well as
those of Melbourne and Sydney, lend their aid and effect.
To say that the “race” draws the society is to some
extent true, but it is not altogether correct. Tens of
thousands go for the sight who know nothing of horses.
26. The “rough” element in some of the cities is occa-
sionally noisy and troublesome, but it is easily restrained
from riot and brutality. The new word “ larrikin,” coined
to describe a rough character, has become common and in
that way, an assumption that “ larrikinism ” is rampant in
the colonies, has grown into a belief with a few who have
written upon Australian life and characteristics. Visitors
to these colonies too often, for effect, describe the ex-
tremes. Most of them visit the “ slums,” but few describe
the mass of the people : as if one should go to the hospitals
to discover the healthy, or visit London slums to find the
English ! The low life and scenic vulgarities of Epsom
Downs on “ Derby Day ” would not be tolerated in
Australia. The great evil in these colonies is acknow-
ledged, even by votaries of the turf, to be that of gamb-
ling. This is a cause of much solicitude outside puritanical
circles and the pulpit. I use the word “ puritanical ” in
no narrow sense ; for, Australian society is well-leavened
by that puritanism which has secured to Englishmen
many of their rights and liberties, including freedom of
conscience.
27. The people of Melbourne support five theatres;
those of Sydney three. Numerous burlesques and panto-
mimes, and a few acting-plays have been written by local
authors, but the Colonial stage is generally occupied by
popular English and American dramas. One, sometimes
two, companies occupy the local operatic stage. Of all the
fine arts music has the greatest vogue in Australia : both
instrumentalists and vocalists are well-patronized. This is
not surprising : the masterpieces of music can be rendered
as perfectly in Sydney and Melbourne as in any European


city, but the works of great painters or sculptors are rarely
exhibited in these colonies, save in copies or in replica.
As evidence of the hold which the sublime art has gained
upon these communities it may be mentioned that the
corporations of Sydney and Melbourne have placed in
their town-halls two of the finest organs in the world, upon
which recitals are given free, daily, throughout the year.
28. Public libraries, art galleries (containing pictures
by local artists, and not a few by “ R.A.’s ” and foreign
academicians) and museums, as before mentioned, are in
the chief cities ; and mechanics’ institutes and schools of
art in every important country town. Royal Societies of
Science and of Geography are in each of the colonies
and among their members are learned and enthusiastic
scholars devoted to every branch of natural, physical and
applied science.* The colonists are great readers. Every
district has its local newspaper, weekly or bi-weekly; the
larger towns their dailies and evening newspapers. The
morning papers record the news of the world received
during the night, sometimes in advance of London papers,
—rarely less than a column, sometimes six columns.
When the Australian cricketers are playing in this country,
the scoring is cabled with the fall of every wicket. Besides
weekly papers reporting all the political, social, religious,
iiterary, theatrical, scientific, and sporting news, there are
numerous religious, professional, and trade organs. Austra-
lian readers delight in English literature: British and
American authors are as well known in Australia as in
their own countries, and upwards of seven shillings per
head of population, nearly two pounds for each family ! is
annually spent in these colonies in English books and
magazines. Probably not more than twenty per cent, of
the total amount is spent upon novels or light literature.
The imported literature consists principally of books of
travel and voyages, works in natural and physical science,
technical and religious publications, biography, history,
and school books.
29. Australian authors and pamphleteers are a very
* News is cabled as I write (Oct. io) of the decease of the doyen of them
all—Baron Sir Ferdinand von Mueller at the age of 71. It is to be feared
that his retirement from the office which he had held for more than forty
years —that of Government botanist—cost him his life. “ Othello’s occupa-
tion gone,” the link between life and life’s interest was severed. One of the
world’s enthusiastic savants, he was also one of the most amiable of men.


numerous class, but not many are known outside the land
they live in. A few important historical and political
works have been produced, and some have found their way
to English universities. Many novels by colonial writers
have been heartily welcomed at all the circulating
libraries in Great Britain, and some have received the
honour of translation into continental languages. Austra-
lian poetry has been heard of in this country, but how
few of the well-informed on these matters know that
several hundred local writers have essayed, in verse,
their experiences of colonial life, or attempted to give
voice, in measured tones, to the originality of nature,
animate and inanimate, of that Southern world.
30. The population of the six colonies at the end of
1894 was 3,467,638,* [1895, 3»539»644] of which more
than half were born in these colonies. Nearly one-third
of the whole population is located in nine cities and
their suburbs.! Social economists may learn that of
the three and a half millions, nearly two millions are
children ; that there are comparatively few pensioners or
other dependants, not more than thirty-three or thirty-four
thousand, two thirds of these being women ; that agricul-
turists and other primary producers number nearly four
hundred thousand ; mechanics, artisans, and others engaged
in industries, four hundred and twenty thousand ; and
those engaged in commercial occupations, two hundred
and sixty thousand. One hundred and twenty thousand
* New South Wales (founded 1788) 1,277,870, Tasmania (1803) 160,934;
Western Australia (1829) 101,235; South Australia (1836) 358,659; Victoria
(1835) 1,181,769; Queensland (1859) 460,559, including about 10,000 Polyne-
sians ; the Chinese scattered through all the colonies and numbering 36,000,
are included in these figures. They follow the European miners in alluvial
diggings, living upon the “ tailings,” and are good market gardeners and
fishermen, but their habits and customs, especially in the Chinese quarters,
are said to be offensive to their European neighbours.
The aborigines, estimated at not more than 60,000, still remain in the
“hunter and fisher” state, those near the settled districts being for all
practical purposes useless. During the period of the early gold discoveries a
few were found useful as mounted police in country districts. Useless to
squatter as to civilian they often spear sheep by way of retaliation upon the
white man who shoots black man’s kangaroo. The few remnants of tribes
which once wandered about the present settled districts are taken care of by
Government protectors, and lodged in aboriginal villages.
t These are, in the order of their foundation: Sydney (1788) 383,385 ;
Hobart (1803) 33,450 : Launceston (1804) 21,316; Brisbane (1824) 93,657 ;
Perth (1829) 8447 [25,000 in 1897]; Melbourne (1835) 490,896; Adelaide
( 1836) 133,252 ; Ballarat (1851) 46,033 ; Sandhurst, i.e. Bendigo (1852)
37,238. The figures given are those of the Census of 1891.


women and forty thousand men are engaged in domestic
duties, and eighty-three thousand in professional occupa-
tions, of which twenty-seven thousand are women. In
other words, there are one million three hundred thousand
bread-winners in these colonies. Add to these one
hundred thousand ablebodied men and women who have
been in Australia, but have left it, retired to their father-
land or to other countries, and a further two hundred
thousand pioneers who braved the ocean, and helped to
change the face of the “ inhospitable ” land, who “ made
the wilderness and the solitary places to be glad,” but who
now rest from their labours, and we have the total of say,
one and a half millions for whom the claim may be ad-
vanced that they have made of this former waste continent
what it is to-day. It possesses no soil which if ‘tickled
with a hoe will laugh with a crop.’ Not without immense
toil and severe tribulation—of ‘road-gangs,’ ‘chain-gangs,’
and much ‘sweat of the brow’ of free labour—came the
grand results of the first Australian century.
I am, &c.,
Pwllheli, 10th October 1896. E. A. P.
LETTER 111.
Australian Finances and Public Works,
31. fAN the whole, the Australian Colonies have been
very prosperous. They have prospered in spite
of continuous trials and vicissitudes. For many years
after the original settlement was founded the community
was distressed by sickness and famine. Four times the
farms on the banks of the Hawkesbury were swept away
by floods and the crops destroyed. A long period of
drought followed extending over eleven years. When hard
experience had taught the colonists the characteristics of
the climate and the seasons and they could in some
measure prepare for the inevitable “ rainy,” or “ dry,”


day, the community was prostrated by a financial crisis.*
Sheep farming at this time (1826) was still in its infancy,
and, by many, reckoned unprofitable.! Those who could
sell out did so and invested in cattle in preference to sheep;
others abandoned both occupations for commerce. The
truth is that those who engaged in pastoral pursuits, had
not only to stock their “runs” and to wait for the shearing,
but also to wait another twelve or eighteen months before
they could receive the value of their wool, unless they
obtained advances from local money lenders or from the
local bank, at very high rates of interest. The distance
between the place of production and the market, in other
words, the “ geographical difficulty,” has never been over-
come and must always be considered in commercial trans-
actions between London and distant colonies. In 1842,
through the misfortunes of the leading house in Sydney,
one of the two Australian banks, then in existence, stopped
payment, and the whole community was again involved in
the failures, t Port Phillip (Melbourne) firms, being largely
dependent for their supplies upon Sydney firms, were
in a worse predicament. The new Province of South
Australia, founded in 1836, depending too much upon
the home government and extraneous capital, also col-
lapsed. After the Californian gold discoveries in 1849 had
drawn off many from these Colonies, richer discoveries of
the precious metal were made both in New South Wales
and Victoria, and during the years 1851 to 1854, money,
* There had been also a bastard currency, mixed and vitiated : a silver
Spanish dollar, with the centre punched out, was legal tender for ss. ; the
“dump,” or punched-out part, is. 3d., a guinea 225., a johanna £4, half
johanna £2, a ducat 9s. 6d., a gold mohur 375. 6d., a pagoda Bs., a rupee
2s. 6d., a dutch guilder 25., an English shilling is. id., any copper coin
(id.) 2d.
t The price of sheep fell, in 1830, to is. 7d. per head : at one sale of 2000,
at that figure, the lambs were given in. Allowing a “ dump ” (quarter dollar)
for the skin the value of the carcase was fourpence ! In 1843-44 the price of
sheep fell to is. 6d. per head ; about 1866 thousands were sold, owing to the
drought at one shilling per head ! At the same time and for some time after,
a side of best mutton could be bought in any butcher’s shop in Melbourne
for eighteen-pence !
J During the years 1842 and 1843 there were twelve hundred insolvencies
in Sydney (New South Wales) alone and there had not been a recovery of pros-
perity up to 1850. The liabilities of the insolvent estates up to 1849 amounted
to nearly six millions ; unsecured estates, amounting to four millions, realised
less than 2s. 6d. in the £. Among the insolvents were men of reputation and
stability, who had firm faith in sheep farming and believed it could be carried
on profitably.


or gold dust, was plentiful. The extraordinary high prices
for all necessaries as well as wages, soon, however, dispelled
as an illusion, this appearance of prosperity. Responsible
government was introduced at this time and borrowing for
public works began. The circulation of part of the loans
in wages* no doubt, prevented another collapse. In 1866,
the banks (some of them then but recently established)
were again constrained to put pressure upon their cus-
tomers, the squatters, whose interests suffered once more.
With increasing supplies of wool and a rise in its price,
the commercial barometer rose again. Melbourne and
Sydney merchants whose transactions in the European
markets had increased in volume, beyond the means of
individual firms, were also dependent upon the Banks for
working capital.
32. Australian bankers thus assumed in addition to the
ordinary business of banking, that of traders in wool and
other merchandize. In the circumstances this was legiti-
mate business, but when they, or some of the banks, later
on, having millions more money than they needed—sent to
the Colonies for investment —when they lent it to specu-
lators,! or to mortgage companies and building societies,
this business was, to say the least, hazardous. But having
advanced it upon what was accounted the best security,
which to have questioned a few years earlier would have
been deemed financial heresy!—the Banks were able
to pay high rates of interest to depositors and extra-
ordinarily high dividends to pleased and gratified share-
holders, who invariably voted “ hearty thanks ” to the
management. Bank shares thus became a favourite in-
vestment and many realised other property and invested
in them, so that the Banks had plenty of money. Com-
* The larger part of the loans reached the colonies in the shape of railway
iron, rolling stock, and iron water pipes. See paragraph 39.
t Speculation took shape mainly in Company mongering—land, building,
mortgage, estate, and investment societies. During the twelve months ending
31st May 1888, two hundred and seventy new companies with nominal capital
of £50,000 [query fifty millions] were registered in Melbourne alone. Some
of these survived but a few months. Between January and September 1892,
the period immediately preceding the Bank suspensions, one hundred and
thirty nine companies were placed in liquidation. In the same period there
were eighty-four private compositions and arrangements with creditors, the
of liabilities of which amounted to ,£3,000,000, and sixty individual insolvencies
of £"3,000 and upwards, aggregating £2,850,000, besides numerous insolvencies
for lesser sums. These figures are based upon returns for nine months, and
for Melbourne alone ! Vide Age , Melbourne, Sept. 30, 1892.


paratively little cash, however, circulated in the Colonies.
There, most of the business transacted is upon paper—bills,
promissory notes, and cheques ; and every Colonial bank
issues its own notes (£l, £5, &c.), which is the ordinary
currency in these Colonies, and is, as a rule, preferred to
gold, scarce as it always is.
33. In the mean time gardens and paddocks, parks and
estates, accessible from the cities, were bought by specula-
tors, cut up into small allotments and sold; properties in
favourite localities rose in market value rapidly, and the
fever for speculation, called the “ Land Boom,” set in. Many
properties changed hands several times at an advance, and,
sometimes, at quadruple their ordinary value. In the best
parts of the cities of Melbourne and Sydney (Collins and
George streets) the prices rose so enormously high (£SOO
to ,£1,500 per foot frontage) that they were practically
unpurchaseable. The owners of these properties, as a rule,
held them. A few bold speculators, in the manner related,
made large fortunes, upon paper, became Bank directors
and, in popular estimation, millionaires. Hundreds of
smaller emulators bought only to sell at an advance,
paid cash deposits, and gave bills or promissory notes for
the balance. The failure to keep their engagements, was
not, however, so serious to the community, as that of the
imaginary millionaires, who had borrowed for the pur-
pose of erecting mansions in the suburbs, colossal city
warehouses, grand hotels, coffee palaces and city offices,
rising eight, ten, and fourteen stories in height—when these
speculators failed, the mortgage companies and building
societies began to totter. It has been stated that rumours
of their instability reaching London, the depositors on this
side gave notice to withdraw their deposits, and that this
caused the failure of three Australian banks and the panic
which ensued, necessitating the closing and reconstruction,
in 1893 of eleven other banks, besides inconveniencing all
legitimate colonial trade for many years. This statement
is incorrect. The “ run ” on the banks occurred mainly
in Melbourne, and in a less degree in Sydney, in anticipa-
tion that on the position of affairs being known on this
side, the British depositors would take fright. As a
matter of fact the withdrawals on this side were insignifi-
cant. Two of the reconstructed banks have already released
the whole of their deposits, others a portion, some are
about to do so, two have converted portions of their


extended deposits into longer dated obligations, two have
arranged for reductions of interest to depositors, the City
of Melbourne Bank failing to do so, has gone into liquidation.
* * * *
34. Necessarily there has been an enormous reduction in
the volume of ordinary trade. The distressed community
persuaded of the absolute necessity of increasing their
own natural productions have more than maintained the
volume of exports. Notwithstanding a fall in the price
of wool, the value of the Exports for 1894 amounted
to £53,669,008 [and to £56,000,000 in 1895], exceeding
the Imports by nearly twelve millions !*
35. As the result of the “land boom,” thousands among
the thrifty lost the savings of years, hundreds the savings of
a lifetime. Officials in all the government departments,
members of parliament, and ministers of state have all
had to submit to reductions. Yet the mass of the popu-
lation will not suffer as severely as might be supposed.
While there have been large reductions in wages, house
rents, food and other necessaries have also fallen in price.
Clouds of depression will for a time rest upon thousands
of innocent homes, but the Colonists may take to them-
selves this consolation that although a few ignorant specu-
lators may wreck a whole community they cannot utterly
ruin a country like Australia.
36. [The late financial troubles have been universally
felt, and their effects will not pass away for many years;
but the ultimate results will be for good. The gradual
reductions and assimilation of prices with those of older
countries, especially with English prices, will pave the
way for local manufactures and the influx and growth
of a large industrial population, benefiting the old and
blessing the new country, and thus remove the ground
of the common complaint that manufacturing in these
Colonies (so wonderfully rich in natural resources) will
not pay. This complaint will die away like other com-
plaints of former periods in Australian history. “Agri-
culture would not pay,” said the earlier settlers, for very
few of them knew anything about the art. “ Sheep-
* Imports declined from in 1891 to in 1894
[but rose to 364,054 in 1895]. While these figures show less business
transacted with Great Britain and other countries, they place the colonists,
in regard to their commercial creditors, in a much better position, probably
to the extent of between thirty and forty millions in the last four years.


farming would, not pay,” said others, later on ; “Commerce
is played out,” many have said, more recently. These
complaints made by suffering humanity in times of deep
depression because the science of economics is not
taught and therefore not understood—have been, and will
again be contradicted, as time goes on, in Australia.
Her vast and varied resources lie at hand, waiting only
tor the advent of sufficient, and willing, workers.]*
* * * *
37> J HAVE now to speak of the public works in these
colonies, the growth of the government debts and
government policy. Founded originally by the Home
Government as an outlet and penitentiary for the worst of
er criminals, “ Botany Bay,” the name by which the settle-
ment was known for two generations, was looked upon
and treated as an experiment. The woods and forests
surrounding Sydney were cleared, stockades for the con-
victs, and slab huts for the officials and military were
built, but no permanent buildings of any kind. Governors
and officers alike, with one or two notable exceptions
looked only to the period of their engagements when they
might get back to England. As for the mass of the con-
victs, transported for ever so short a period, there were no
opportunities for their return. So terrible was the tale of
their sufferings from disease and famine that Old Bailey
convicts preferred death to transportation. An experiment
of the colony was considered by Bentham and economists of
the Utilitarian School. When the benevolent governor,
General Lachlan Macquarie, improved the condition of
things, opened up the country, founded inland settlements
and made good roads to them, erected hospitals, orphan-
ages,. churches, law courts, and official residences, enemies
to his administration and critics at home rendered his
position intolerable. . They complained that he had made
the colony “ a paradise for convicts,” forgetting that every
year added thousands to the free inhabitants. When in
after years, the “free” and “emancipated ” numbered two
thirds of the whole population and the majority protested
against the continuance of transportation, it is surprising
that the Home Government should have kept up the
supply of convicts for another ten years at a cost to this
country of .£200,0c0 per annum. No doubt the influence
* See paragraph 60, pp. 45, 46.


of the minority in the colony, favourable to the system,
was powerful in this matter. While the shiploads of con-
victs. continued to be sent out, that minority was fully
provided with free labour. It was by free, or convict,
labour that the government roads and other public works’
including also the numerous public edifices in Sydney,
were carried out.
38. When the supply of convict labour ceased at the time
of the great influx of population consequent upon the gold
discoveries, an extension of roads became necessary as well
as the introduction of railways and telegraphs. New
South Wales and Victoria having passed through seven
or eight years of commercial depression, as above de-
scribed, money for public works had to be borrowed. The
gold produce gave to the Governments little or no mone-
taiy aid towaid public works which became more urgent as
the result of the discoveries. It is believed that the hundreds
of millions of pounds worth of gold, dug from Australian
mines, in the first twenty years after its discovery, realized
m Europe no more than the cost of its production—labour,
machinery, collecting, and transmission.
39. In Victoria an era of high wages and high prices
ruled for two or three years to be succeeded by another
period of depression, when the unsuccessful diggers—
thousands of able-bodied men and their families were
added to the town populations. The “ unemployed ” then
became the most urgent question of that time. Hundreds,
including men of education, accepted employment from
the Government and did what had formerly been done by
convict gangs,—broke stones upon the roads. Among
remedies proposed at this time was the establishment of
locai industiies, with protection. The governments were
also advised to “ Throw open the lands ! ” and to “ Settle the
people on the lands ! ” With these cries would sometimes
be heard that of “ Down with the squatters !” a catastrophe
always to be prayed against in these colonies. The order
of the golden fleece has been and ever will be the best
emblem for Australians to wear. The lands were surveyed
and thrown open—millions of acres of arable land—and
inducements offered to the people to settle upon them, on
the whole with success. But railways were “ wanted ”
everywhere, and water works. The proceeds of land sales,
and lents of crown lands, being required principally for the
expenses of government and land surveys, money had to


be borrowed for iron pipes, railway iron, railway plant
and roHmg st °c k The greater part of the loans benefited
the English and Scotch ironmasters, the rest was circulated
among a little army of surveyors and engineers, overseers
hnn naVVI I S ’ P late - la y er s, engine-drivers, stokers,
booking clerks, traffic managers, station masters, &c. all
under the direction of the public works and railway depart-
en o S Q lS 7° one thousand miles of railway were open •
in 1880 four thousand; in 1890, nearly ten thousand,’
another two thousand, making 12,000 miles in all, have
been completed since. The total expenditure upon rail-
ways has been one hundred and twelve millions, all derived
from loans with the exception of five millions taken from
general revenue. In the absence of navigable rivers
railways have been absolutely necessary to the develop-
ment of the whole of the natural and industrial resources
of the country—wool, tallow, hides, gold, silver, &c., all
have to be brought from the interior: coal only, being pro-
curable on the sea coast, at Newcastle, New South Wales.
Much attention has been given in recent years to the con-
servation and storage of water, the boring of artesian wells
and the formation, of reservoirs. Upon water works and
irrigation about eighteen millions have been expended,
r expendlture upon harbours, breakwaters, docks, and
lighthouses works partaking of an international character
has been nearly seven millions; that upon deferces has
been from one and a half to two millions. Threeor four
millions have been spent upon main roads and bridges
since the days when these were constructed by ;onvict
abour; four millions upon other public works and build-
ings, such as law courts, government, post, and tebgraph
offices and houses of parliament; and two and 1 half
millions upon school buildings.
4°. The gross annual expenditure of the six olonies
which has always been out of proportion to their Imited
popuktion, has been reduced from twentv-six and 1 half
millions m 1890 to twenty-four and a half millions ini 80c-
-90. f his includes seven millions for interest upon the *ublic
.Debts, nine millions for working expenses of railways
supply posts, telegraphs and other reproductive T orks
and eight and a half millions for the general expenes of
government, law, police, gaols, defences, customs anc har-
bours management, lands, agriculture, and mining adninis-
tration and surveys, public instruction, science, medica and
c antable institutions, allowances, pensions, &c.


41.. The Revenue 1895-96 derived from customs and other
taxation, lands, railways, water supply, and other sources
amounted to twenty-five millions—the surplus of about
half a million being devoted to reduction of previous years’
deficiencies. The revenue from land was three and a half
millions and from reproductive works ten millions the
latter two millions more than working expenses but insuf-
ficient to cover working expenses and interest upon capital.
The sole reason for this insufficiency was the falling off of
all classes of traffic. Reductions in mileage, in staff, and
in wages will, it is expected, result in a balance, and, when
traffic resumes its normal state will, apparently, show
profits available towards the repayment of loans, or for
extension of the lines.
42. A more serious difficulty in the near future, will
be the reductions necessary to be made in the ordinary
expenses of government. In some departments salaries
were fixed when prices of necessaries and rents ruled high.
The cost of administration (excluding interest on debts,
management of railways and other reproductive works)
amounts, as above stated, to nearly eight and a half mil-
lions per annum or forty eight shillings per head of popu
lation (3,500,000), three times as much as in the United
States and Great Britain.* An explanation for this great
disproportion may be found in some of the details, such
as education, as well as in the limited population.' To
abolish offices or to make drastic reductions in order to
bring this expenditure within reasonable limits would be
injurious and unjust. Increase of population is, therefore,
the only cuie. But the figures imply that there was some
truth in the complaints which used to be made that Aus-
tralian civil servants were the masters of the situation, and
not the ministers. There is, however at present great
disparity in the salaries both of ministers and of civil
The cost, of administration of the Federal Government of the United
States, including departmental expenses, customs, and pensions to the soldiers
of the civil war (,£27,600,000), and excluding army and navy and interest
upon national debt, is not more than fifty millions, or sixteen shillings per
head of population (63,000,000). In Great Britain (also excluding army, navy
and interest),. the expenditure for the civil and consolidated fund lists, supply
sei vices, public works, law and justice, education, collection of customs, in-
land, postal, and other revenue, amounts to thirty-four millions, being an
average of eighteen shillings per head of population (38,000,000).
comparison I exclude from the total Australian expenditure the cost of rail-
way management and other reproductive works, because these are not public
property in the United States and Great Britain.


servants : the salaries paid in Tasmania are not more than
half the amount of those paid in Victoria and New South
Wales.
43- Figures giving total amount of land sales, or of rents
for lands, up to the present, are not available. Probably
two or three millions of acres were granted free, before the
period of responsible government. For other alienated
lands, or lands in process of alienation, a sum of eighty to
one hundred millions sterling has probably been received.
This approximate sum, as well as the rents for pastoral
and mining lands, appears to have been absorbed into the
general revenue and very little of it used, as was antici-
pated, to. encourage immigration. None of it was placed
to. a capital fund for special purposes. The reason for
this is to be found in the natural aversion to direct
taxation. The land revenues, as well as customs’ duties
have therefore been necessary to carry on administration.
44- The excuse for high customs’ duties was “ protec-
tion to native industry’’—when indeed there were few
colonial industries, or none, to protect. The mass of the
electors in these Colonies, have no doubt been influenced
by the United States and continental countries in this
policy of Protection, but they are now awakening to some
of its fallacies.* In agreeing to tax “ luxuries ” they
believed that the incidence of taxation would be upon
those who used the luxuries, and that they themselves
could do. without them. It was long supposed also that
protection was the cry and the badge of the labouring
classes and “free trade” that of the commercial classes!
This is now discovered to be a mistake. The importer
and the middleman, both profited by higher prices, and
the consumer has hitherto paid for the original article, the
duty upon the article, and an additional rate of profit
to the merchant. Again, the supposed assistance to
the local manufacturer was not so great as had been
imagined. The heavy duty upon the imported article
Leaders of the Free Trade movement in the United States have been
recently engaged upon elaborate and intricate inquiries into the incidence of
indirect taxation, with some remarkable results : “ The wealthy class pays
less than one tenth of the indirect taxes, the well-to-do class less than one
quarter, and the relatively poorer classes more than two thirds. [Here follows
a table summing up the incidence of these taxes in 1890]. “In the domain of
direct taxation ,” the writer continues, “such injustice would not be toler-
ated ONE MONTH ; BUT IN THE DOMAIN OF INDIRECT TAXATION IT IS
ENDURED YEAR AFTER year.” An Essay on the Present Distribution of
Wealth m the United States, by C. B. Spahr (Library of Economics and
Politics), New York, [1896].


enabled him to keep up, and often to raise, his prices, on
the plea that his material, or part of it, his tools, and
machinery were imported, and subject to duty ; his goods
he also argued were superior to those imported, as im-
ported goods were, in time, reduced in quality as well as in
price, to suit the market.
45- The Governments have not always received as much
revenue from customs’ duties as they reckoned upon ; the
duty upon many articles has been more than swallowed up
in the cost of collecting' it j and dutiable goods reshipped
being subject to rebate, the results have not been commen-
surate with the cost of landing, bonding, and examination.
Furthermore, the Minister at the head of the Victorian
Department has been compelled to apply to Parliament for
additional powers to enforce the Act because of its fre-
quent evasion. Depending for revenue upon imports and
customs’ duties thereon, rather than upon direct taxation,
has been the chief cause of the deficiencies during the last
three or four years. From sixty-two millions in 1890 the
imports fell off in 1894 to forty-two millions [but rose again
in 1895 to forty-four and a-half millions.] These de-
ficiencies in total revenue, provided by Treasury Bills, now
amount to between seven and eight millions.
46. Are we, then, to assume with certain critics, that
because these Colonies have parted with so much of the
national wealth, and are one hundred and seventy-five
millions in debt, they have therefore failed financially and
are likely to repudiate? There is not the smallest reason
for such an assumption. Thus far, they have been able to
fulfil all their engagements, even during periods of length-
ened depression, and while passing through crises which
might have crushed older states. We are witnesses of the
vigorous and strenuous efforts which the several govern-
ments are making to meet their luture engagements, and
can we doubt that they will succeed in retaining that first
class financial position in which they, as British Colonies,
have hitherto stood firm—a position which, as I have
shown, has been jeopardized only by the ill-considered,
incautious, and ignorant actions of a very few private
speculators. The Australian Colonies are financially sound.
They have alienated part of their estates, selling too
cheaply, and the proceeds have been swallowed up in
the expenses of government, instead of being devoted to
improvements—railways, &c. For these they have bor-


Colonies
Assets.
Government Railways, Water Works,
and other Public Reproductive
000,000
Works, Public Puddings, &c.
Private Property, in Towns and in
Country, estimated upon Rateable
Value!
Personal Property, Sheep, Cattle’
350,000,000
Horses, &c.J ...
Personal Property, Goods in Shops
100,000,000
and Warehouses
/j
0
b
0
p
b
0
D
Government Savings’ Banks
20, OOO, COO
rowed, and are in debt. They have still left, the larger
portion of these estates; will they alienate this in the
same manner ?* These are, however, mere matters of
policy, it will be said, “ If these estates do not belong to
(( t™ 2 Crown, as once they did, they belong to the people,
who can be taxed, and so we can get our revenues and
“ our interest in that way.”
I have said the colonies are financially sound. Let us
look at a rough Balance Sheet.
Liabilities.
Government Loans for Public Works,
&c r
t TiA j"' » ”• A i 7s)°°o,ooo
Indebtedness of all Australian Banks,
Mortgage Companies and Private
Mortgagees 110,000,000
Indebtedness of Colonial Merchants for,
say, six months’ imports, less pro-
portion advanced by the Banks,
forming part of their liabilities ... 15,000,000
Approximate Public and Private In-
debtedness of the six Australian
£&oo, 000,00
Approximate Public and Private Assets
of the six Australian Colonies
* See footnote to paragraph 49.
+ The depreciated value of rateable property in cities, towns, borouhs, and
shires in the Colony of Victoria, alone, in 1893 was £189,461,35. The
capital value of property in Sydney city in 1895, by another autbrity is
x>ss> 0 _ 00 ) 000 » that in Sydney suburbs is £70,000,000, Brisbane city £5, bo, 000
Adelaide city With that in other cities, towns, niunicpalities
and shires in the six colonies the total can scarcely be less than .£400,00 000
but I have set it down at £350,000,000, *
+ A moie recent estimate than mine sets down this item at £300,000000.


The estimate of some of the Government statists would
be £ 1,000.000,000 or more, but accepting the lower esti-
mate, it shows a surplus of five hundred millions without
taking into account the unoccupied lands and mineral
resources, which scarcely can be claimed to belong to the
present generation, except in as far as they may use them.
The loans are secured not upon lands or mines, but upon
revenue. Such results are enough to excite the jealousy,
if not the cupidity of a foreign enemy. The Colonists are
to be congratulated upon the fact that the railways and
water works are not in the hands of syndicates or mono-
polies.*
This concludes my examination of the financial position
of these Colonies. Such mistakes as have been made in
fiscal policy are due to circumstances rather than to lack
of foresight, and are neither ruinous nor irremediable.
The Colonists are, therefore, rather to be envied in their
possessions and their opportunities than to be commiser-
ated for the mistaken policy, faults, or omissions, of their
several governments.
I am, &c.,
Pwllheli, October 14, 1896. E. A. P.
Australian Federation and Future Policy.t
47. advocates of Federation in the Australian
-*■ Colonies believe that some of the errors of
past policy, as regards the lands, loans, tariffs, and minor
mistakes in departmental management will be remedied and
rectified under Federal Government. At present each of
the six colonies has a governor appointed by the Crown,
* A few years ago the government of Western Australia allowed one of
their lines to be constructed by a syndicate, but has now purchased this from
the West Australian Land Company for the sum of ,£1,100,000.
t New Zealand, sometimes reckoned with the Australian Colonies, though
geographically and politically distinct, and more or less self-contained, is
apparently not to come into an Australian Federation. Possibly she might be
included in a Federal Government comprehending New Zealand, Fiji, and
other island groups of the Pacific at present under the British flag, with benefit
to herself and the Mother Country.


an executive or ministry, a legislative council, and a house
of assembly. In New South Wales and Queensland the
legislative assemblies are elective, and the members of the
legislative councils or upper houses are nominated for life
and unlimited in number. In South Australia, Victoria,
Western Australia, and Tasmania both chambers are
elective. Altogether there are 217 members of councils or
upper houses, and 415 members of assemblies, or lower
houses. In all twelve houses and 632 members.
48. To abolish these governments, even if practicable,
would be unwise. For, these colonies, though limited in
population, can scarcely be treated like English counties.
The smallest, Tasmania, is nearly as large as Ireland
Victoria is as large as Great Britain ; New South Wales is
the size of France and Italy; Queensland is larger than
France, Italy, Austria and Germany combined ; while
South Australia (with the Northern Territory) and Western
Australia are greater, each containing an extent of territory
equal to that of France, Italy, Austria, Germany, with
Spain and Portugal and Great Britain and Ireland thrown
in. Or, taking Great Britain as the unit, Tasmania is one
third, Victoria equal, New South Wales four times, Queens-
land eight times, South Australia ten times, and Western
Australia eleven times as large as the Mother Country.*
49. Centralization cannot, therefore, cure all the ills,
even those of departmental government. Victoria and
Queensland were separated from New South Wales
because their representatives were not numerous, or
influential, enough to secure a fair proportion of expendi-
ture for their respective districts. New South Wales as
well as the larger Colonies may, at no distant period, find
further subdivision desirable.! With an increase of popu-
lation in those great colonies, decentralization will be as
necessary for practical government as Federation. The
The actual figures in square miles are Great Britain (mainland) 87,823 •
Tasmania, 26,375 ; Victoria 87,884 ; New South Wales, 309,175 ; Queensland, *
668,224; South Australia, 903,425 : Western Australia, 975,920. Total of
Australia and Tasmania, 2,970,003; of Europe, 3,555,000; of the United
States (exclusive of Alaska), 3> 02 7>59 1 * [See accompanying map.]
t The Clarence River District should be separated from the ‘ Mother
Colony _ and united with South Queensland, capital Brisbane, according to
the original plan, and Rockhampton (or Gladstone) and Townsville made the
capitals of two new Colonies in North Queensland Small Colonies may soon
be formed in North and North-Western Australia, with Palmerston (Port
Darwin), Derby (Kimberley District), Roebourne (Pilbarra and Ashburton


present governments should therefore be modified only
governor, executive, and a house of assembly with depart-
ments sufficiently staffed for administration of lands,
agriculture, mining, education, law, police, the manage-
ment of railways, water works, posts, and telegraphs, and
the collection of revenue. Municipal government would
of course remain as it is.
s° : Taxation and appropriation, loans (national and
municipal), army, navy, and defence, fisheries, treaties,
copyright, patents, naturalization, New Guinea, Polynesian,
Chinese and Coolie labour, and other measures common to
the whole, would be assumed by the Federal government.
Permanent officials would no doubt be selected from the
present colonial staffs. Whatever method of taxation is
adopted the Federal government should come to an
arrangement with the English Treasury by which remit-
tances abroad shall be exempt from the incidence of
taxation in Great Britain, or any British possession, and
vice versa. Investors will hesitate to deal in Colonial
securities if they are liable to a double tax—deductions on
both sides. Sufferers by the recent Victorian impost have
submitted to the exaction under a very strong feeling of
injustice.
51. The Convention which it is proposed shall draw up
the Federal Constitution should restrict the number of mem-
bers : one for every six or seven thousand electors, eighty or
one hundred in all. They should be elected in groups of
three or five so that every interest in every one of the
present colonies, land, labour, capital, agriculture, pastoral,
mining, manufacturing, commercial, professional, educa-
tional, and other interests will be represented. Some
“ proportionate ” plan of voting should be adopted with a
view to this result, and to prevent waste of votes.
52. These members would constitute the Senate or
Federal Parliament and one house should be sufficient.*
Districts), and Carnarvon (Gascoyne District), as capitals. Local progress
and prosperity has always dated from the erection of separate Colonies. The
outside districts should be considered, and treated, as “ Territory” belonging
to the group, and disposed of only for the benefit of the whole until such
time as new Colonies might be carved out of it.
* Earl Grey’s “Australian Colonies Government Bill” introduced into the
House of Lords in 1850, provided for a Federal Council or General Assembly
and a single Chamber for each Colony. Of what use is a Second House in a
Pure Democracy ? Indeed Lord Abinger argued the provision would make
the constitution a “ pure Democracy.” The clauses embodying these provi-


That, with Governor General or Viceroy, and executive
selected from members of the Senate, should be ample for
all purposes for the present, or for ten years. Qualifica-
tions for Senators should be British or Australian birth, age
—not less than thirty years—and residence in either of the
Colonies. Legislation on national subjects might be intro-
duced in the State or Colonial Assemblies, and members
having charge of the Bills might be permitted to speak
upon them at the Bar of the Senate, though not to vote.
53. For honourable gratification Senators, after serving
one or more constituencies in three Federal Parliaments,
should be enrolled members of a Grand Council and retain
the title of “ Grand Councillor” for life. To the roll of the
Grand Council should be added the names of those who
have achieved aught in science, art, and literature, or who,
in other ways, may deserve well of their country. . Is
the idea too sentimental and visionary ? The civilized
world is mostly influenced by sentiment: the people that
rewards its great men is always great and holds securely
in its grasp the possibilities and potentialities of the future.
The Grand Council should be called together to confer
with the Senate, upon any revision of the constitution, or
in case of war. For the next ten years and until the
Grand Council is inaugurated, these discussions should be
jointly conducted by the members of the Convention and
the Senate. Thus, in ten years, there would be four
branches of the Government: —
1. Urban District and Municipal Councils
2. The State, or Colonial Assemblies
3. The Senate, or Federal Parliament
4. The Grand Council —a Life-Peerage.
54. Naturally there is much local jealousy as to the
choice of a capital for the united Colonies. I have
already described Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide, the
chief among the present capitals. Hobart has also been
suggested, but, however mild and salubrious or otherwise
suitable, Hobart can be reached from the other colonies
only by sea, and its communications could therefore be cut
sions, although passed in Committee, were afterwards amended or wthdrawn,
and the Lords’ Amendments assented to in the House of Comrons, Mr.
Gladstone informing the House that “although the federative clause formed
an important portion of the Bill sent out to Australia in 1849, the did not
form an acceptable portion” \i.e., to the N.S.W. nominee L'gislative
Council].—Pari. Debates, 3. S. Vols. in, 112, 113. May to Aug., 150. See
preface, pp. 1, 2.


off or delayed by rough weather. Brisbane and Perth are
not central, the latter city being practically as far away
from Melbourne and Sydney as New York is from
London. Even by railway (when completed) her distance
from Adelaide would be three, and from the eastern cities,
four days. From Adelaide, supposing that city to be
chosen,. Melbourne is one, Sydney two, and Brisbane three
days’distance by rail, and Hobart three, by sea. If Sydney
be chosen Melbourne and Brisbane are one and Adelaide
two days by rail, and Hobart three days by sea. Or, if
Melbourne be chosen, Adelaide and Sydney are one, and
Brisbane two days by rail, and Hobart two days by' sea,
—via Launceston, five hours by rail and one day by sea.
55- Not Sydney, Adelaide, or Hobart, however, is so
central as a capital of their respective colonies, as Mel-
bourne is; some of the representatives of New South Wales
would be nearer Melbourne than they would be to their own
capital. Certain inland towns also have been suggested ;
Goulburn, 133 miles S.W. of Sydney by rail, situated 2,000
feet above the level of the sea, and Albury on the river
Murray, 386 miles S.W. of Sydney and about 190 N.E. of
Melbourne. But neither of these towns has anything more
to recommend it than its geographical position. A much
more eligible inland city would be Ballarat, 75 miles N.W.
of Melbourne, on the direct route to Adelaide. Ballarat is
1,400 feet above the level of the sea, is situated in the midst
of an agricultural district, will be the seat of a large manu-
facturing district, and is already the fifth city in Australia
having a population of 46,000. Ballarat is safe from naval
attack, is well-laid out, her buildings being handsomely
constructed, while her citizens have always been noted for
their enterprise and public spirit. If an inland capital is
desirable no other is at present more eligible than Ballarat.
A new house of parliament and public offices must, how-
ever, be erected if Ballarat be chosen. But Melbourne is
scarcely less central; forty miles from the Ocean, she is as
free from naval attack by an enemy as Ballarat, while
Adelaide and Sydney could both be bombarded from
the open sea. For representatives coming from the other
colonies by sea, Melbourne is more conveniently situated
than any other city we have mentioned.
.56. The members of the senate being limited in number
might, for a few years, hesitate to fix upon a capital, and
hold their sessions in the state capitals, alternately. Such


an arrangement in the earlier years of the Federation
might be convenient both to members of the senate and
to the leading constituencies. In the meantime, as a
seventh governor is not absolutely necessary to inaugurate
the Federation, the governor of the parent Colony could
perform the functions, ex-officio , of Viceroy or Governor-
General of Australia.
57. One of the first measures to which the F'ederal
government will, in all probability, address itself is Free
Trade. This should be settled at once and for a length-
ened period of, say, ten years, and a system of direct
taxation introduced. The act of Federation would at once
abolish border duties and admit to every colony the pro-
ducts of the other Colonies free of all duty. Excise would,
of course, be collected in each colony, as at present.
58. The consolidation and conversion of the Australian
loans will probably be entrusted to a special Commission
by the several governments to report upon before the
Federation is accomplished. The total borrowings of these
governments have been altogether about two hundred
millions, of which twenty-six millions have been paid off.
The balance, one hundred and seventy four millions,
consists of ordinary loans, debentures, and treasury bills'
These are over two hundred in number, varying in amount
from half a million to three millions, due at different dates,
the latest in 1945. A few loans (after due notice) are
redeemable at dates subsequent to the period originally
fixed, and some have no fixed date of redemption. The
rates of interest vary from three to five per cent. The
variety of scrip in circulation is so numerous and in some
respects so insignificant that many brokers treat it as “un-
marketable.” The funding of the whole will, it is said,
make it marketable and save the colonies one million
per annum in interest. As these loans have been incurred
for the benefit of posterity as well as the present generation,
there is no reason why posterity should not bear its share
of the burden. The scheme may be carried out without
difficulty, as it is believed that holders of the present bonds-
and debentures will prefer to exchange them for an
equivalent in permanent bonds guaranteed by the United
Australian Colonies. It is also assumed that the Imperial
Act will be amended so that Colonial and other trustees
may be permitted to invest in Australian consols as well
as in the British and Indian funds.


59- Municipal and other local Loans should be included
in the general Consolidated Fund, and it ought to be a pro-
vision of the new Constitution that no money shall be
borrowed for Municipal purposes except of, and through,
the medium of the Commissioners of the Consolidated
Fund empowered by Act of the Federal Parliament.
60. Another measure necessary to be undertaken by the
Federal government is the encouragement and promotion
of immigration. In a footnote to my description of the
natural products of these Colonies (ante p. 16), I mentioned
that five hundred and forty million pounds weight of wool
is annually exported to Great Britain and other countries.
Some of this is sent back manufactured. I also stated
that more food is produced in these Colonies than is re-
quired by the present population, and that large quantities
are exported. The attempt to bring frozen meat across
the ocean has not been so successful as was at one time
anticipated. New Zealand mutton arrives in better condi-
tion than that which comes from Australia. But if all of it
was, upon its arrival, as fresh as English meat, how far would
it go in this country ? Would a shipload daily provide a
breakfast for a tenth of the population of London ? Vege-
table food and fruits, as well as butter and cheese would
also be sent from Australia freely but that the shipments
hitherto made have resulted in loss. Such failures are
to be regretted. The true economy would be to send the
people to the country where the food is abundant. There
is plenty and to spare in Australia. Rents are low enough
now. Bread is cheaper, and the best joints of beef and
mutton are retailed in Melbourne at and 3d. per
pound, or twelve pounds of assorted meats for one shilling !
Work also is abundant, for certain of our industrial
classes. Why not manufacture the wool in the colonies ?
The Federal government should offer some inducement to
a few Yorkshire woollen manufacturers, to lead the way.
Great Britain would be benefited as well as Australia, if a
hundred thousand of her woollen operatives with their
families were removed and located in the sunny southern
colonies. The secret of prosperity is industry. When
Philip 11. harried the population of the Netherlands rather
than consent to be the sovereign of heretics—not knowing
that a nation’s wealth consists in a large population actively
employed, undisturbed and undistracted by internal dis-
orders, the Netherlands became an “ Indies ” to England.


Driven from the continent, thirty thousand workmen found
a home in England, where they helped to build up the
English woollen industries, while those of Antwerp and
other Flemish cities declined. Here is Australia’s oppor-
tunity : she has abundance of food and abundant work.
England now can spare the people 1* [They should be
located in the temperate parts of these Colonies ; the
Northern districts need Coolie or Kanaka labour. White
men can superintend but cannot perform plantation work.
The banana, cocoa-nut, pine-apple, lemon, orange, citron,
tapioca, sugar, rice, tobacco, cotton, the tamarind, nutmeg,
cinnamon, pepper, all find their natural home in tropical
Australia.]
61. Industries and peaceful employment naturally lead
us to consider war and defences. About one million and
a half has been already expended in fortifications and
other works of defence, but more is necessary. To burden
themselves with an army or a navy can hardly be expected
of these young colonies. But they may be attacked.
Their commerce is great; forty or fifty vessels are always
at sea carrying goods to or from these colonies, valued at
not less than twenty millions sterling. Some vessels are
coming or going by way of the Suez Canal, others round
the Cape of Good Hope. British merchants own the
vessels and probably the larger part of the shipments
belongs to them. In time of war these vessels would be
convoyed by vessels of the Imperial navy, but that does
not prevent Australia from doing her duty. If a small
island like Great Britain required a navy in the past, how
much more will such an island as Australia with ten
thousand miles of seaboard need one in the future ?
Australia must be prepared to guard her seas, and help to
keep the peace of the world. History teaches that the
strong and lusty youth of a country should be inured to
hardihood and given the opportunity of a disciplined train-
ing by sea, or by land, not that it should be compulsory
for them to adopt either the army, the navy or mercantile
marine as a profession. All boys should be taught a trade,
for a people, still in their lusty youth, we may add, can
only “ hope in their hands.”
62. The loyalty of Colonists is sometimes questioned,
but we are assured that Australian colonists do not desire
separation or independence. They are proud of their
* See Appendices B and C.


connexion with Great Britain, and have more than once
given evidence of their practical sympathy with national
and imperial aspirations. While people of other nation-
alities have settled in Australia, those of English, Irish and
Scotch descent predominate.* As long as the Colonists
are left unmolested in their internal affairs, and treated
as part and parcel of the nation ; permitted, if need be,
to stand shoulder to shoulder against foreign aggression,
and to share in the nation’s vicissitudes as well as its
glories, so long their attachment will remain unabated and
unalterable. Invariably the health of the Queen is drunk
with cheers at all Australian gatherings, in the towns and
in the bush. Never have Australian Colonists—citizens,
settlers, or miners—been wholly absorbed in the pursuit
of gold or other pecuniary interests. They have never
forgotten the “Old Land;” their deepest thoughts, feelings,
and sympathies have been centred in the “Old Land.’’
They carried with them, into the new country the
treasured memories of the “Old Land,” and the names of
British heroes—soldiers, sailors, and statesmen Welling-
ton and Nelson, Collingwood and Gordon, Palmerston
and Beaconsfield, Russell and Gladstone—the names of
hundreds of cities, towns, and hamlets in the “ Old Land,”
are to-day engraved upon their charters and upon their
maps. Even at the height of the gold fever, the Colonists
followed the history of the “Old Land,” closely and inti-
mately. Often, came the diggers out of their mines and
“ Quaff’d a cup and sent a cheer up for the Old Land ! ”
When Australian children shall ask, “ Why these names
upon our streets, and roads, and stations, and upon the roll
of Australian municipalities: Alma, Balaclava, Inker-
mann, Redan, Malakoff, Sebastopol, Lucknow, Raglan,
St. Arnaud, Cardigan, Yea, Havelock, and others?” they
will be told the story of the last great wars and reminded
that the hearts of their fathers were one with the brave
men who fought and died for Old England.
63. I cannot conclude without a reference to the authori-
ties for the statistics given. Australian Government statis-
* According to the Census of 1891, 2,183,659 of the inhabitants were born
in these colonies and New Zealand, 470,398 in England and Wales, 226,949
in Ireland, 123,518 in Scotland. There were also 36,000 Chinese,
born in Germany, 7,500 natives of the United States, and 80,000 born in o’ther
foreign countries.


ticians have long been noted for their comprehensive
well-arranged, and exact compilations (to be obtained from
ie Agents-General, London). I am most indebted to
Alr - GreviHe s Year Book of Australia (London, Kegan
Paul, Trench & Co., 10s. 6d.) The latest volume gives
concise reports and summaries upon all matters pertaining
to the natural and industrial resources of these colonies
specially written articles upon Australian banking and
insurance companies, a chapter on steam routes, as well as
a variety of information upon land administration, law
education, religion, medical, military and naval affairs rail-
ways, posts, telegraphs, sporting,—and gazetteers of the
several colonies.
London, October 1896.
POSTSCRIPT.
* f any justification is necessary for publishing my views
UP °^ AuStr^ l - an a j Pai^ s ’ or for expressing my opinions with
confidence, it is to be found m the fact that I am so frequently
asked for information about them and that I have been asso 7
ciated all my life with Australian officials, professional men
and clergymen, journalists, merchants, tradesmen and me-
chanics, and apart from business, have been actively engaged
with literary friendly and religious societies in these colonfes.
might add that I knew Gordon, Kendall, Clarke, and many
other colonial writers, and was most intimate with the
founder of Melbourne, John Pascoe Fawkner, for the las?
fifteen years of his life. I have known Melbourne since'the
greater number of its inhabitants lived under canvas or dweff
in houses of weatherboard, when the grass was growing on
what are now its main streets. I have seen many oth™
Australian towns and cities, having travelled through the
country by rail and mail coach, by buggy on horseback I
on foot, from Adelaide to Brisbane 7 I hfv’e iLd o n S q U attinf
stations, have camped on the diggings, have dug gold in
allu\ ial mines, have been down quartz reefc, and have
worked with my head as well as with my hand;. For more
than thirty years it has been my great privilege b dwell under
the shadow of the tree of knowledge and to ibserve what
literature the people of Australia, as well as lew Zealand
have been reading. I have also suffered (aid few have
suffered more than I have) from the late lank failures
Nevertheless my knowledge and experience mke me hope
ful and confident of the future of all these Colones. P


“ What does he know of a country who only that country
knows ? ” some may ask. To which I reply, that it has also
been my privilege to visit other Colonies and countries,
including Canada and the United States. Though I have
lived so long in London I still can say that “ Australia is the
ocean to the river of my thoughts,” and if I can dispel any
ignorance regarding my adopted country or its people, it will
be my highest gratification to do so.
I am, &c.,
Edward A. Petherick.
London,
20th January, 1897.


appendices.
RAILWAY TO INDIA AND THE EAST.
To the Editor of “The Colonies and India.”
(l X OI E. nobce of the Hon. Mr. Campbell’s pamphlet
“India in Six, and [N.W.] Australia in Sixteen, Days’’
induces me to offer a few remarks upon the subject.
communication with our Eastern possessions and Southern
Colonies becomes of more importance daily. But a short time
we were satisfied to be taken to India in twenty days
and to Australia m forty. Now that the cable is our daily and
ourly experience, we find it desirable to transport ourselves
and B,e C Sn h i°L 6r rT • But the conn ection between Europe
wh d off h nfl? Uthern C ° lo . ni ? s 1S a subject of importance to the
whole of Europe and Asia, as well as to the British Empire
throughYentral Asia r ° U ‘ e *° th ° Se C ° lonieS must be
a i The SU?5 U ?^ rat ®,l X alle y route involves so many changes and
1 a Tt to ° costl y. a route for the conveyance of
goods. Indeed, Ido not think it can ever be of use except for
conveyance of mails and of light goods to and from India
Besides which, the cost would have to be borne by Great
by it 3 ° ne ’ aS She 1S the ° nly nation to be directly benefited
• T he alterna J lv ® route > which I have studied for some years
is by W ay of Central Asia to the western borders If the
niHr a eS fh Empi L re ’A thenCe descendin g th e valley of the Brahma-
putra through Assam, with branches to (i) Calcutta, fa)
Saigon and (3) Canton. This line, unlike that of the
uph rates \ alley, would be always passing through healthv
world emP T e h ate C °. Unt , rieS ’ S °™ ° f themostVoducfive in the
°. v. ,T be products would be gathered on the route and
teTfromThT ‘ h A dr Siberia??!* and
. . C ,,’ As f m ’ &c -i and these would be brought
ores'ent ?? h and Wlfh r losin S an y of their qualities as
r ent ° th ] e Passage by sea—products also that would
Ll r for C^ r J, age , b 7 radwa y- None of those mentioned could
be brought direct by the Euphrates Valley line ; in fact, that


line would be available only for passengers and mails. It
cannot be a comfortable journey, passing as it does for a
great part through unhealthy districts, under a broiling sun,
without any ocean breeze to temper the heat.
By the alternative route through Central Asia, travellers
would always be passing through a mild climate and clear
atmosphere, while the after-voyage from Saigon, or from
Singapore, would be through the Eastern Archipelago, sur-
rounded by beautiful scenery, in one of the most delightful
parts of the world, fanned by the “ spicy breezes,” where
the lotus-eaters live, and where, in the words of the [late]
Laureate, “ it is always afternoon.”
More than a third of this line is already constructed. If
through trains were started it would be possible now to go
direct from Calais or Ostend across Central Europe and
Russia to Orenburg. [And a further section is in progress.]
The middle section would be partly along the old caravan
route traversed by Marco Polo and the merchants of the
Middle Ages. Calcutta would thus be brought within eight
or nine days of London, Hong Kong and Saigon would be
reached in the same time (though so much farther from the
proposed terminus of the Euphrates route). Japan and Aus-
tralia would be only a week farther off; Melbourne and
Sydney, when the overland Australian trunk railway is
completed, would be reached within nineteen days, a much
shorter time than by either of Mr. Campbell’s suggested
routes.
The recommendations for the Central Asian route are—(l)
that it is a world’s route : England, Holland, France, Ger-
many, Russia, India, China, Japan, Australia, New Zealand,
are all interested in it. (2) It passes through temperate
regions, and food and fuel are obtainable all the way along.
(3) More than a third of the line is already constructed, and
on the remaining sections there are no great rivers or high
ranges to be crossed. (4) It passes, not through compara-
tively unpopulated districts like the Euphrates Valley and
Syrian deserts, but through the most productive parts of the
world, and opens up a highway to four hundred millions of
people. (5) It would carry us nearer to Japan and Australia
(not requiring several changes which the Euphrates Valley
line involves), one change only taking travellers for those
countries, or, if via Australia, three for passengers to New
Zealand.
I am, &c.,
E. A. P.
London, April 18, 1883.


EMIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA.
To the Editor of “ The Bridgwater Mercury.”
Sir,-As a colonist with nearly thirty years’experience I
have read with much interest your leader respecting emigra-
tion to Australia. You say that there is here a redundancy of
population and a scarcity of food, and on the other hand in
Austraha a super-abundance of food with a small population.
r • , . F ° r attempts now being made to bring some
of this surplus food across sea, we ought to be grateful; but
the steam vessels now on the Australian route could not
bring meat sufficient, alive or dead, to reduce the present
die g nnnr Pri TE- t 0 a reas ° nab le figure or within the means of
- f P 7 , Thls 1S no f tbe P lace to sh ow the impracticability
and feel our e want nor 1S “ ne “ SSary - En ° Ugh ‘ hat we know
Neither should there be occasion for arguments about
emigration. As we cannot buy meat here, and animal food is
needful, we must give up some ©f our sentimental objections
sever some of our ties, and send such as are strong and
enough to bear transplantation where they can get it A
voyage to the antipodes to-day is not such an undertaking as
F YfYu y 0r thirty / ears a g°- our fast steamers Sow
perform the passage m forty days [thirty-five days in iBq6l
a nd as every reasonable comfort is provided it may be con-
sidered a holiday pleasure trip. Far from being exiled from
all home associations and shut out from all the rest of the
world as the pioneer colonists were, “new chums” (so we
style new arrivals) find themselves in a comparatively settled
country, and since the laying of the telegraph cable we are
daily acquainted with all that goes on in the old country
ourseNes 61 W ® n ° Small part ° f the reat world
But, Sir, there are objections not sentimental. The
strongest of these come from the Colonies. Many there say
Don t send any more people here-thousands among us am
often out of work, sometimes for long periods ;we are not so
well off, nor so rich and comfortable, as some represent; in
fact, most of us are poor. Some of us regret having left the
tw C u, Un ry ’ wh e re we were more comfortable; but, hearino-
that this was a land which flowed with milk and honey we
came, and are disappointed. We don’t want any more people
e > ?- c - Su( jh remarks are not made without reason—l
now them to be unselfish. We have our periods of local
l d , eP H r h S m° n \ and n OUr u POlltlClanS ’ sc l uatters (another term for
landholders), and others are sometimes blamed as being the


cause. As far as possible the several governments find occu-.
pation on public works for the unemployed, but as the funds
for public works are mostly borrowed, and therefore limited,
they cannot find permanent occupation for all. There is
often, therefore, a cry to be heard, “ Find us employment,”
and certainly, some reason for the objection to receiving
additions to our colonial population. The real cause is not
far to seek—we do not receive enough of the right sort ; we
need more of the industrial classes. Probably more has been
written during the last forty years about emigration than upon
any other great public question of the period, and without
any satisfactory, adequate result. Emigration, to be satis-
factory in its results, must be systematic, and wholesale. We
must send away those only for whom occupation can be
found. The first and last idea in this country seems to have
been to get rid of the super-abundant population somehow;
get it out of the country anyhow, and if possible into our own
Colonies. And in the Colonies the several governments have
welcomed all comers, especially those who have had a little
money to give in exchange for land. I don’t say they should
not have been welcomed; but more of the right sort should
have been encouraged. A few communities have been care-
fully planted in various colonies, on the whole successfully, by
private enterprise ; these, however, form but a minute part of
the whole population which was drawn directly and indirectly
to Australia and New Zealand by the gold discoveries—
though probably not one in fifty or a hundred ever saw a gold-
field. By far the larger proportion, mechanics and artizans,
with a large number of unskilled labourers, mostly accus-
tomed to town life and town occupations here, they have
congregated into towns there, and many are often out of
employment. This evil will be overcome when we have
enough of the class of operatives capable of working upon our
chief production, which is wool. We need more of the
industrial classes, as I will now show.
It may surprise some of your readers to learn that we
produce in Australia other things besides tinned meats. We
possess eight million head of cattle, seventy million sheep, a
million horses, besides pigs and goats, and wool grows on the
backs of Australian sheep as elsewhere—as good or better
wool than can be grown elsewhere. Of the four hundred
million pounds weight of wool now annually imported into
this country, three hundred million pounds [over five hundred
million pounds in 1895] comes from Australia. It arrives
here in its raw state. Now, I would submit to statesmen,
capitalists and manufacturers, especially manufacturers con-
nected with the woollen trades, whether it would not, con-


sidering the condition of the operatives, be more reasonable to
manufacture this wool in the Colony than to bring it here n
its raw state Some portion of it must go back again when
manufactured, as well as to the other colonies and^America.
y not transfer some of the manufactories to the Colonies
where the operatives can be fed well and cheaply ? If the
S n n? ed . in thls trade - or P a rt of them, were trans-
ferred, I believe it would be better for both countries and a
oncr^t ?Pier + S i! ate ° f thmgS WOuld be the result as far as the
peratives, their wives, and families, were concerned And
not only to the woollen trades are these suggestions appiicable
but to the cotton and allied trades, though in a less degree
In a few years Queensland will produce enough cotton to
operatlves? USandS ° f ° f ° Ur English ’ Irisb > a nd Scotch
iE^f U E S - tr f aha u- u apable ° f su PP or ting many more millions than
the thirty which manage to exist in this country. At present
the population there is only about half that of London—a
lnrl fE° Ver ° milll ° ns [ three and a half millions in iBo6l_
Fifmnp 7 a ? f attered over terr itory equal in extent to that of
Europe, which supports nearly three hundred millions
10 sum up the foregoing remarks briefly. As it is im-
e t - the sur P lu s food from Australia, the people
hi tll b f Cam f d th?re ' Emi gration, to be satisfactory, must
be select, systematic, and extensive, and chiefly from amone-
e operatives in our woollen, cotton, and allied industries as
ey can be employed in the manufacture of the raw material
whmh is already produced in as great as, if not in greater
abundance than, food. Capitalists and manufacturers must
devote their attention to the establishment of woollen and
cotton factories in the Australian Colonies.
London, 21st May, 1881. 1 p
Extract from Letters to the “Nun of Kenmare.”
Dear Miss Cusack,— You have set yourself no easy task in
attempting to compile a book of “ Advice to Emigrants.”
able 3 to°lo n tn Ske r my °,? ini T as the Col °ny most desir-
able to go to. Generally those who propose to emigrate
would like to be assured of finding suitable occupation upon
’ S ° me th j nk f P ° SSlbl f, to secure engagements before-
Sr; • • 1 alwa ys tell these applicants, principals
erks and tradesmen, that there is no likelihood of their
engagement before their arrival out, because business in the


Australian Colonies is now as well organized as in the cities
of Great Britain or America. No unskilled person should go
out to these Colonies, for everyone in a new country may
have, at one time or another, to turn to manual labour for a
livelihood. As for mechanics, they have just about the same
chance of finding work abroad as at home, and no more.
Abroad the necessaries of life are abundant and, on the
whole, cheaper. The climate, usually, is genial and in-
vigorating, preferable to that of these Islands with their
long winter, fog, mist, rain, and snow In the
Australian Colonies we have bright sunshine nearly all the
year round ; the wet seasons, as a rule, last two, at the out-
side three months only. Snow in the principal towns is
almost unknown. . . . The summers are dry, and the
heat at times intense and oppressive, when work in the sun
is to be avoided, and light and thin dresses are to be worn.
I have heard old Australian Colonists say that they have
suffered more inconvenience in a hot summer in London than
ever they did in Australia. I think that comparatively fewer
die of Australian summer heat than of your northern winter
cold and fog
Your other question is answered in a letter which I recently
wrote to a provincial newspaper ; a copy is enclosed.
* ❖ %
I am, &c.,
London, 1882.
E. A. P.
AN AUSTRALIAN NAVY.
Admiral Bridge, of the Australian station, distributed the
prizes won at the Sydney Yachting Regatta, in which 250
boats and 157 1 persons competed. In the course of a few
remarks the Admiral expressed his opinion that “ yachting in
Australia was, perhaps, the most manly and most practical
form of the sport to be seen in any portion of the world, and
as one who had been forty years on the sea he was certain
that a great naval class would spring up in the colonies.”
The [Lords of the] British Admiralty have not done much to
encourage the youth of Australia to train for positions in the
Navy, and, in fact, by their refusal to allow any but the
English-born to be eligible as naval officers on the Austral-
asian fleet have aroused a strong feeling of resentment. —
Sunday Times, Jan. 31, 1897.


■
I
L








> .
ft.
