

THE
ACCOUNTANT
AND
SECRETARY
BLENNERHASSETT'S INSTITUTE OF ACCOUNTANCY LTD.
Sydney Brisbane Melbourne Adelaide Perth




The Accountant
and
The Secretary
"As our commerce has increased, the demand for the services
of professional accountants has become a national necessity
Lord Sankey (Lord Chancellor)
"There is no better or more valuable training for a young
man who desires to adopt a business career than the acquisition
of a thorough knowledge of accounts; and it is of material aid
should he later on take up the more executive functions of
commercial life.’’
Lord Inchcape (Shipowner)
"No profession has made such great strides in its status
and in its importance and dignity in the public eye as the
profession of Accountancy.’’
Lord Hailsham


BLENNERHASSETT'S INSTITUTE OF
ACCOUNTANCY LTD.
Professional Commercial Coaches
Accountancy and Secretarial Specialists
HEAD OFFICE:
Herald Building, 66 Pitt Street, SYDNEY
Phones: 85388 - 8W6236
QUEENSLAND OFFICE:
Colonial Mutual Life Building, Queen Street, BRISBANE
Phone: 85856
VICTORIAN. OFFICE:
McEwan House, 343 Little Collins Street, MELBOURNE
Phone: Central 569
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN OFFICE:
Epworth Building, Pirie Street, ADELAIDE
Phone: Central 8999
WEST AUSTRALIAN OFFICE:
St. George's House, St. George’s Terrace, PERTH
Phones: 87134 - 87135
Sub-Branches at NEWCASTLE and TOWNSVILLE
Agencies at Country Centres


Foreword.
This book is written to assist you. The information it gives,
and the courses of study and training it suggests, are expressly
designed to show you how to make the most of your oppor-
tunities: how to use your time to the best advantage.
Only the fittest can survive to-day, and there are no open-
ings worth while in modern business for those who lack the
ambition and the determination to acquire efficiency.
To ensure success in the future you must make the best use
of the present: you must be prepared.
Your prospects of advancement, the demand for your
services, and your earning capacity will depend upon what you
have to offer.
Youths and girls contemplating a business career; parents
concerned about the future of their sons and daughters; those
ir, employment seeking to fit themselves for higher positions;
unqualified accountants and secretaries anxious to secure the
advantage and the status of a degree: and all those intent on
obtaining an adequate equipment for business life; will find in
the 8.1. A., Courses and Service just what they need, and the
best that it is possible to secure.
The 8.1. A. specialises in practical training for actual work
under Australian conditions; so our students become not merely
successful examinees, but competent workers.
Read this book, then call on us and talk the matter over.
We want to help you, and our service is free.


Contents
The Accountant .... .... .... .... .... 5
The Secretary .... .... .... .... .... .... 7
The Business Man .... .... .... .... .... .... 3
History and Progress of the 8.1. A. .... .... .... 10
Accountancy Course .... .... .... .... .... 12
Secretarial Course .... .... .... .... .... .... 13
Business Course .... .... .... .... .... .... 15
Bookkeeping Course .... .... .... .... .... 16
Sectional Courses .... .... .... .... .... .... 18
The Service .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 19
The Comercial Educational Society of Australasia .... 21
The Contract .... .... .... .... .... .... 23
Fees .... .... .... .... .... .... .... ■■■■ 24
Examinations .... .... .... .... .... .... 25
Examining Bodies .... 25
Model Answers .... 27


The Accountant
The remarkable development of accountancy during recent
years is a striking tribute to its value, both as an educational
equipment and as a practical science.
It affords convincing evidence of the emphasis placed by
the community on the necessity for accounting knowledge as
a primary essential In the effective administration and control
of national, industrial, and commercial affairs.
The Practising Accountant: expert In accounting and audit-
ing; investigator, financial administrator, and business organiser
and consultant; is a member of one of the best of the pro-
fessions; high In repute, and wide in influence In the com-
munity.
The Commercial Accountant occupies a distinctive and most
important executive position. He has great responsibilities,
but excellent opportunities; and his work is both Interesting
and remunerative. Modern business demands a high standard
of efficiency, and qualification is essential.
Accountancy offers unlimited scope for efficient service,
with commensurate rewards, and there are splendid openings
for qualified men of initiative and enterprise.
The general manager of one of the largest concerns in
Australia said recently; "Commerce is aching for good men,"
and this applies with particular force to those adequately
equipped, by specialised knowledge and training to record,
analyse, interpret, and direct the financial operations which
are the basis of all business enterprise.
To-day, it is not only the accountant as a specialist who Is
in demand. Accountancy qualifications are required for prac-
tically every responsible position carrying high remuneration.
There is a growing recognition of the fact that an expert
knowledge of finance Is essential to successful administration,
not only in commerce and industry, but in State and Civic
affairs.
It follows that when executive positions are to be filled in
the leading Business Houses, the large Banking Institutions, the
Public Service, and Civic enterprises, the possession of an
accountancy degree is required as evidence of competence.
Improved methods of manufacture, the great Increase in
transport facilities, the growth in public and in civic finance,


and changing economic conditions, are a few only of the
developments of recent years that offer unique opportunities
to the qualified accountant.
The day of the routine worker: of rule-of-thumb methods:
of mechanical as opposed to intelligent service, has gone for
ever. Modern business will not tolerate the inefficient.
The modern accountant must be competent to instal new
systems to meet new conditions, and to devise improved
methods of control. He must have a practical knowledge of
finance, particularly in relation to expenditure, Investment, and
capital; he must understand budgetting and costing; he must
be able to organise and control credit; to undertake investiga-
tions; to administer trusts; to act In bankruptcy and winding-up
proceedings; and, in general, be competent to function as a
specialist when occasion demands, and at all times show his
ability to apply the knowledge he possesses to practical Issues.
It is obvious that the office of accountant: responsible and
remunerative, calls for an equipment that can be acquired only
by instruction and training under expert guidance.
The possession of an accountancy degree must be your pre-
liminary objective; that is the first step. Neither exceptional
ability, nor a high standard of general education is needed
to ensure an examination pass or to acquire the knowledge
necessary to enable you to function efficiently in the practical
work of the profession.
All you require is determination and concentration.
The Examining Bodies admit both males and females to their
examinations.
There Is no age limit, but the sooner you start your studies
the better your prospects; and the best time to begin is
"NOW." if you have allowed youth to pass with its oppor-
tunities neglected, the past cannot be recalled; but you can
ensure the future, and it is never too late to seek to Improve
your efficiency and your earning capacity.
If you will undertake to devote a few hours each week to
regular and conscientious study, and to take full advantage of
our personal services; the 8.1. A. will coach you until you obtain
your degree in the minimum of time, by the most practical
and up-to-date methods, and for the inclusive and moderate
fee set out in our scale of fees.


The Secretary
The function, scope, and duties of a Secretary vary accord-
ing to whether the person concerned is a Private Secretary, a
Public Secretary, a Company Secretary, or a Practising
Secretary.
A Private Secretary, is one engaged by an individual, a
Proprietor or the Managing Director of a business, whose main
duties are to attend to and conduct personal and confidential
correspondence, take precis' of interviews, and file and index
letters and documents.
A Public Secretary, excluding the Secretary and Under-
Secretary of State, is the secretary of a public body such as
an Hospital or a Charitable Institution; a Trades Union, or
Club or Association. These positions are open to competition.
The duties vary according to the particular body concerned;
but the proper fulfilment of the office demands a competent
knowledge of the general principles of secretarial work and
practice, and the possession of a secretarial degree gives an
applicant a material advantage.
A Company Secretary is one engaged by a limited liability
company. He is an officer occupying one of the most im-
portant executive positions, and is subject to certain statutory
obligations and liabilities under the Companies' Acts of the
various States.
He must possess a general knowledge of Company law, and
a particular knowledge of the law governing companies in his
own State. He must be familiar with the procedure at meet-
ings, competent to prepare Agendas and to write Minutes,
and be a good correspondent.
In addition, he must be a trained accountant, have the
ability to organise, conduct internal Investigations, prepare
reports, and know how to present business data in both
statistical and graph form.
The Practising Secretary is one who either alone, or in
partnership, acts as Secretary to several small companies, or
as local Secretary to companies registered in another State,
but carrying on business where he practises.
It is advisable to qualify as an Accountant as an essential
preliminary to proceeding for the Secretarial Degree. The
possession of the Accountancy Degree exempts candidates for
the examination of the Secretarial Institutes from all subjects
except the papers set in Secretarial Work and Practice.
The work of the Secretary is congenial and remunerative,
and offers wide scope for initiative and enterprise and the
position is one well worth striving to gain.


Legislation is pending, that is designed to operate in all
States, whereby the office of Secretary to a limited liability
company is to be restricted solely to the holders of a
Secretarial Degree.
This, of course, will affect not only prospective applicants
for such positions, but also those unqualified persons who are
at present occupying them.
If you are already a Company Secretary, and unqualified,
you will be well advised to secure your degree and obtain
the professional status that should attach to your office.
The unqualified man, no matter how many years he may
have been a secretary, cannot go beyond a limited stage. He
has imposed a severe restriction on his usefulness and his earn-
ing capacity by neglecting to seize the opportunity of
acquiring the specialised knowledge and training essential to
the highest achievement.
The Business Man
The business man must have not only an intimate knowledge
of his business, but such specialised training as will enable him
to understand and interpret its conditions and tendencies, and
to set out its operations clearly and informatively.
The day has gone when it was necessary to emphasise the
relation between training and efficiency. Most business
executives now give close attention to staff training, and the
unfit or the indifferent are quickly weeded out.
Practical experience Is useful for the lessons it teaches, but
it Is not a substitute for efficient training. We may learn by
our mistakes, but business to-day will not suffer the cost of
those mistakes due to a lack of commercial training.
A prominent Australian business man said recently: "The
preparation for business was never more intense than it is
fo-day. It has become a matter of the engagement of the
fittest, and the retention of the best."
Training will not give a man brains, but It will enable him to
use the brains he has to the best advantage.
Training is not cramming the mind with facts, but teaching
it to make an intelligent application of principles.
Business, in its primary operations is a matter of buying and
selling goods, utilities, or services; but in its practical and
ultimate issues it is a matter of profit or loss.
It follows that no business man can hope to achieve the


highest success under modern conditions unless he possesses
a business training, and that includes, as essential factors, a
knowledge of accounts, the ability to interpret figures, and
familiarity with the principles of commercial law.
One of the most successful business men in London has ex-
pressed the opinion that there is no better or more valuable
training for a business career than a thorough knowledge of
accounts: and no business man can claim to be efficient who
neglects this necessary training.
Business openings worth while are restricted to those
qualified by training to produce the best results.
The increased knowledge and practical efficiency demanded
by business executives can be acquired only by specialised
training.
The methods of yesterday are unsuited to the conditions
existing to-day. The routine man is at a discount. The in-
efficient worker, however willing he may be, is not wanted.
It is necessary to undergo a course of training in the prin-
ciples and practices of modern business, if a youth wishes to
take up a business career; and it is even more necessary for
the youth who has secured a position, if he wishes to retain
it and to get advancement.
The need for training, particularly in accounts and com-
mercial law, is not confined to youth.
Men of mature years will find themselves supplanted by
younger and more efficient men if they neglect to keep in
fouch with modern developments, and when they can under-
take a course of study in fheir leisure time, and at their own
pace, they are unwise to take the risk of neglect or in-
difference.
Men carrying on a business of their own such as contractors,
estate agents, indentors and storekeepers, are careless of their
own interests when they are content to rely upon others both
for the compilation and the Interpretation of their accounts.
It is not necessary or practicable that they should do the work,
but it is essential that they should have the training to enable
them to form an independent judgment.
The 8.1. A. has a Business Course, detailed in another part
of this book, expressly designed for business men and for those
intending to enter business life. The executives of some of
the largest concerns in the Commonwealth have been so im-
pressed with the practical value of our Business Course that
they have encouraged its study not only by the clerical staffs,
but by the members of the Sales and Technical Staffs.


Hlennehassett’s Institute of Accountancy Ltd.
History and Progress
Founded in 1927, Blennerhassett's Institute of Accountancy
Ltd., has, in the course of a few years, won general recognition
as the most progressive commercial coaching organisation in
the Southern Hemisphere.
The reason is to be found in the Course, the Service, the
Policy, and the Objects of the Institute.
Mr. R. N. Blennerhassett, the Founder and Managing
Director, with the active co-operation of several leading pro-
fessional and business men, started the 8.1. A., in order to meet
the pressing need for an up-to-date course of commercial
training: practical in its nature, modern in its methods, and
suited to Australian conditions.
The response was immediate, and steady and rapid progress
has been made.
To-day the 8.1. A. has students in every State, and a Branch
Office in every capital city of the Commonwealth. It offers
educational facilities that cannot be obtained anywhere else
in Australia.
Our policy has never changed. It was directed at the
outset to securing for our students an unequalled course of
Instruction and a distinctive personal service; and every
auxiliary facility we have since created has been inspired by
the same motive, although the scope of our activities has
been materially widened.
We owe our success in the past to the fact that we do not
rest on it. Our main concern is with the present and its oppor-
tunities, the future and its possibilities, and to that end our
lessons, and our methods are kept right up-to-date, and
the training we give is adapted to the actual conditions exist-
ing in business as it is to-day and as circumstances indicate
it will be to-morrow.
As the pioneers of accountancy, secretarial, and business
training on specialised and modern lines we have extended


our activities in various directions in the Interests of young
people and of the business community.
Blennerhassett's Commercial Educational Society, with an
interstate membership of 5,000 subscribers; our Employment
Service Section with business connections throughout the
Commonwealth; and the annual competitive Scholarships we
offer to the boys and girls leaving School In every State, are
some of the evidences of our policy of service that have
gained the hearty endorsement of educationalists and business
executives alike.
It is worthy of note that more than three of the six years
during which the B.i.A. has been in existence represent a
period of unprecedented depression in commerce and industry.
Unemployment has been widespread, and opportunities re-
stricted. Notwithstanding these disabilities, the Institute has
developed from a small local concern to an interstate organisa-
tion of acknowledged high repute and wide influence.
The facts need no elaboration: they speak for themselves.
This brief review of the genesis and the progress of the
8.1. A. is given for the information and guidance of prospective
students. We want you to know who we are, what we have
done and what we intend to do. We give you our confidence
to Invite yours.
The choice of your Coach is a vitally important matter. To
entrust your training to the 8.1. A. is to eliminate all risks. You
cannot afford to make a mistake. Experiment is not only
costly, it is unnecessary. We have shown you that our organis-
ation has fulfilled adequately a real need, and what we have
done for so many students in the past, and are doing for
others at the present time, we can do for you.
At a recent address at the King's Hall, Sydney, a well known
business man said: "I congratulate the 8.1. A. on the high
standard of the commercial education which it disseminates
throughout Australia."
The essential points for you to consider are the quality of
the instruction you will receive, and the extent and nature of
the individual attention you will get; and the 8.1. A. offers you
the best obtainable in Australia to-day, as well as unrivalled
educational facilities and resources, with associations and con-
nections that will prove of Invaluable assistance to you not
only during the period of your studies but throughout the
whole of your subsequent professional or business career.


The Accountancy Course
The 8.1. A. specialised Accountancy Course, in substance,
style, form, and method of instruction, stands alone. It is the
product of practising accountants who rank at the top of the
profession, leading barristers-at-law, and successful business
men of Interstate repute; compiled under the direction and
close supervision of highly qualified specialists of wide experi-
ence in teaching and training on modern lines.
The 8.1. A. Accountancy Course comprises authoritative and
comprehensive instruction in the principles and practice of
modern accountancy methods and systems; a thorough prac-
tical training in the auditing of accounts and the conduct of
investigations; and skilled training in the law governing
accounts and commercial and industrial affairs.
It includes the preparation and criticism of Manufacturing,
Trading, and Profit and Loss A/cs., and Balance Sheets; the
accounts of partners, limited liability companies, subsidiary
companies, and public utility companies; distinctive classes of
enterprise, such as Banks, Mines, and Collieries, and Stations;
particular types of accounts, such as those relating to Con-
signments, Joint Ventures, Hire Purchase transactions,
Branches, Bankruptcy, Dissolution and Winding-up, De-
ceased Estates and the accounts of non-trading bodies; the
compilation of Comparative and Statistical Statements, both
in accounting and graph forms; office organisation; principles
of costing: the writing of reports; the preparation of State
and Federal Income Tax Returns and adjustments: the law
relating to partners, limited liability companies, arbitration,
executors and trustees, contracts, agency, negotiable instru-
ments, shipping, insurance, and general mercantile law.
The 8.1. A. Accounts, Auditing, and Law Lessons are easy to
understand and essentially practical. The Course being right
up-to-date and kept so, is free from obsolete methods and
contains no impractical examples. It is Australian: specially
designed to suit local conditions, so that the student Is
engaged throughout his studies in dealing with the same things
and problems that he has to meet during his professional or
business career.
The instruction and training given is both exclusive and in-
clusive. it covers not only the examination syllabi of the
various Accountancy Institutes, but extends to tne actual re-
quirements of the professional and the business man.
Striking evidence of the practical nature of the 8.1. A.
Course is seen in the recent open competition conducted by
a well-known Interstate Business Journal, where the first prize


for a criticism of the published accounts and Balance Sheet of
a business, was won by a 8.1. A. student.
The 8.1. A. Tutorial Staff consists of highly qualified practical
men, each of whom is a trained specialist In coaching. The
staff devotes the whole of its time, and all the resources of
our Institute, to the correction and criticism of students' work,
and to guiding and advising students in interviews and corres-
pondence, to enable them to study to the best advantage and
to make the most of their opportunities. All homework is
corrected locally in each State, so that no student has to suffer
the loss of time and inconvenience occasioned by waiting some
days for the return of his corrected work.
The man who achieves is the man who Is prepared.
Advancement to-day is not a matter of luck, but a matter of
fitness. If you wish to become an accountancy practitioner or
a commercial accountant qualification is essential.
The 8.1. A. Accountancy Course, the best obtainable in
Australia to-day: the most authoritative in its teaching, the
most comprehensive in its scope, the most up-to-date in its
methods, and the most efficient in its training and personal
service; offers you the opportunity of realising your ambition.
The Secretarial Course
The 8.1. A. Specialised Secretarial Course, designed mainly
for the Instruction of qualified accountants who wish to secure
the Secretarial degree; either to enable them to extend the
area of their activities, or to specialise in Company Secretarial
work, or to take up a position as a private, public, or company
secretary: has won a high repute in the commercial com-
munity throughout Australia.
It is to-day not only an unequalled course of practical
instruction for students who desire to obtain the Secretarial
degree; but it is used extensively by qualified secretaries as
an authoritative manual of reference.
The 8.1. A. Secretarial Course, written by qualified and
experienced Secretaries: men who are acknowledged
authorities on Secretarial Work and Practice; and expressly
designed to meet the needs of the student who wishes not
only to obtain his secretarial degree, but to acquire a practical
training in the actual work of the Australian Secretary, has met
adequately, and with conspicuous success, an insistent demand
for a practical and up-to-date Course.
It comprises full and detailed instruction in the duties of
the modern Secretary, including company work and practice


with the law governing them; the preparation of Agendas,
Minutes, and Reports; the conduct of meetings; business
correspondence and precis; office machinery, methods, and
systems: office, works, and staff organisation and control; credit
organisation and control and business and financial adminis-
tration. The lessons are cross-indexed, so that any particular
matter, resolution, form, precedant, or ruling may be referred
to at once.
The 8.1. A. Secretarial Course is distinctively Australian,
essentially practical, and deals with matters as they exist in
actual business. Qualified Accountants are exempted from all
examination tests except the three Final Papers set in
Secretarial Work and Practice; and our Course covers both
examination requirements and the training necessary to enable
the student to fulfil with competence and confidence the
onerous practical duties of the Secretarial office.
Every member of our Tutorial Staff possesses his Secretarial
degree and having had practical experience knows not only
what the examiners require but the standard of efficiency
demanded in the actual performance of Secretarial Work and
Practice.
The trend of impending legislation indicates that in the
near future the possession of a Secretarial degree will be
essential both to securing and retaining the office of Company
Secretary. This position is remunerative, as well as responsible,
and neither the aspirant to the office nor the unqualified man
occupying it at present, can afford to take any risk.
In many small concerns, women are engaged to do
secretarial work. The position is more congenial and more
remunerative than that of typiste or unskilled clerical worker;
but qualification is required. There are good openings, and
an increasing number of women and girls are taking up a
course of training in Secretarial Work and Practice to increase
their business efficiency and earning capacity.
The best opportunities are available for the Company
Secretary. He occupies an executive position of great re-
sponsibility; but a high standard of efficiency is demanded,
and the unqualified man has little chance of selection.
The 8.1. A. Secretarial Course is a most interesting and
profitable course of training, and most of our students take
up the 8.1. A. combined Accountancy and Secretarial Course
at the outset, thus securing the dual qualification in the
minimum of time at the minimum of cost.


The Business Course
The 8.1. A. Business Course is a special course of instruction
and training for business men and for those who wish to qualify
to enter on a business career with the assurance of success.
Its purpose Is to make the student familiar with business
conditions in Australia: commercial and financial: and to train
him on such lines as shall enable him to attain the standard
of efficiency demanded from those actively associated in
modern business enterprise.
The 8.1. A. Business Course comprises comprehensive Instruc-
tion in the methods and practices of business as it is carried
on in Australia to-day: expert training directed to the develop-
ment of efficiency, particularly in the economising of time,
labour, and expense: competent teaching of the principles of
accounting and of commercial law.
It includes Works, Shop, and Office organisation and ad-
ministration; credit control, the principles of costing: business
correspondence: the keeping of accounts; the understanding
of Manufacturing, Trading, and Profit and Loss A/cs., the
correct Interpretation of Balance Sheets and Financial and
Statistical Statements: and those provisions of company and
general mercantile law that affect accounts and business
transactions.
This Course should appeal particularly to those wishing to
enter business, and to those already occupying positions, who,
whilst they do not intend to specialise in accountancy or
secretarial work, realise that the only sure way to secure ad-
vancement in the stress of modern competition, Is to possess a
definite commercial value.
You may be, or wish to become, a Salesman or Buyer in a
Wholesale or a Retail Store; you may be, or wish to become,
a Contractor, or an Indentor, or an Estate Agent. You may
be a shop assistant, or a storeman, or a packer, anxious to
improve your prospects. Your ambition may be to follow a
profession, to become a lawyer, an architect, an engineer, or
a surveyor.
All these positions or callings are intimately concerned with
business: and to be able to make the mosf of your oppor-
tunities it is essential that you should have a sound preliminary
training in the methods and practices of modern business.
The 8.1. A. Business Course makes the achievement of
efficiency a pleasant and comparatively easy task. The lessons
are written clearly, worded simply, and graded carefully. The


instruction is practical, and the examples are taken from actual
business transactions. This Course will give you a solid founda-
tion on which to build for future success. The knowledge you
will gain will be an invaluable business asset: it will inform
your judgment and widen your outlook. The practical training
you will receive will prevent you getting into the rut of routine
work: it will develop your business sense, quicken your
initiative, and in increasing your efficiency It will expand your
earning capacity.
We have connections with the leading Business Houses
throughout Australia, and when a position is vacant, the in-
variable request of executives is for someone who has under-
gone a course of business training. This speaks for itself. It
indicates what cannot be too often reiterated and emphasised:
that the highway to achievement in business to-day is trained
efficiency: that it Is not the amount of hard work a man is
willing to do, but the amount of efficient service that he is
trained to render, that counts for most in the fight for success.
The 8.1. A. Business Course, studied conscientiously, with the
guidance and service that Is an essential factor in our training,
is the finest preparation for a business career. The knowledge
and training you receive will gain you a position, enable you
to retain a position, and immeasurably increase your earning
capacity and your prospects of achievement.
The Book-keeping Course
The 8.1. A. Book-keeping Course is a simple and compre-
hensive course of instruction in practical book-keeping and
business principles and practices.
It comprises a thorough training in elementary accounting
as used In commerce, and in the methods and usages of
business as carried on in Australia to-day; each student study-
ing under the personal direction of practical men possessing
an intimate knowledge of modern business conditions and
requirements.
The 8.1. A. Book-keeping Course, starting with the nature
and uses of the books and records necessary in every kind of
commercial enterprise, proceeds in easy and interesting stages
to instruct how business functions: the machinery and methods
it adopts and the principles on which they are based; with
the substance and form of the accounts in which its progress
and results are recorded.
The student learns how Manufacturing, Trading, and Profit
and Loss A/cs. are constructed; how the financial position Is


disclosed in the Balance Sheet; and how particular transactions,
such as Consignments, Accounts Current, and Bills are
recorded. He is trained to keep ever In mind the ultimate
aim of book-keeping and business methods and practices, and
thus, in the later stages of his studies learns how production
and administration costs are ascertained; how statistical, com-
parative, and graphical statements are prepared; and how,
what the business has done and failed to do is disclosed in its
accounts; and how Its accounts and records comprise the es-
sential data for the guidance of the Management and the
shaping of future policy.
The student early begins to realise the vital importance of
accounts In the control of business activities. The production,
technical, and sales staffs, as well as the office staff, must
understand the use and significance of figures, in a book-
keeping sense, If they aim at the highest efficiency. They
must be able to interpret correctly the operations and results
of those sections of the business in which they are primarily
interested, as set out In the accounts, otherwise they are
handicapped: and progress, both individual and general, is
seriously impeded.
A practical knowledge of how accounts should be kept, and
of how they should be presented and interpreted, is one of
the first essentials in business education.
Our Book-keeping Course is specially designed to lay the
necessary foundation in the training for a successful business
career. The aim of the lessons is to provide a practical equip-
ment for business: and to assist the man carrying on a business
of his own to acquire an Intelligent understanding of its
financial operations as disclosed in the accounts submitted to
him.
The 8.1. A. Book-keeping Course offers an unique opportunity
for practical training on up-to-date lines that should be con-
sidered seriously by every parent and guardian anxious to give
to those under his control the advantage of a sound elementary
equipment for business life.
It offers to the ambitious young man and young woman an
interesting and inexpensive means of acquiring a definite
commercial value.
Under the competitive conditions existing to-day, competent
instruction and efficient training offer the only assurance of
permanent success.


The earlier you start your studies the better will be the
prospects of advancement.
The 8.1. A. Book-keeping Course; simple in form; practical
in substance: and comprehensive in scope, is well within the
capacity of every student, young and old, who is seeking
efficiency and an increased earning capacity.
The Sectional Courses
The 8.1. A. Sectional Courses comprise both brief and
extended courses of instruction arranged to meet the needs
of those who require special or revisionary coaching for the
Final or Intermediate Examinations of any of the recognised
Accountancy Institutes.
A student may have failed to pass some section of his
Intermediate or Final examination; or he may be weak in some
of the prescribed subjects; or he may wish to gain an Honours
Pass. He will find the 8.1. A. ready to assist him to achieve
his purpose In the most direct and efficient way.
A separate course of revisionary study is arranged for each
student, planned to cover his particular requirements; special
examination tests are made; and under close personal direction
and supervision the student gains not only fhe knowledge he
needs, but learns to give adequate expression to It under
examination conditions.
If you contemplate a sectional course of study, an interview
at our Head Office or at any of our Branch Offices can be
arranged immediately you get in touch with us. If you should
be unable to call on us, write explaining your requirements.
We always welcome the opportunity of acting in a general
advisory capacity. It is part of our service policy to give to
those who seek It the benefit of our advice and experience
and this involves no obligation.
A Sectional Course with the 8.1. A. may be arranged at any
time. It is planned in consultation with the student, who may
start his studies forthwith.
The cost is a matter for mutual agreement, the main factor
in determining it being the ground to be covered; and pay-
ment may be made, either in cash on the signing of the
contract, or by way of a deposit and subsequent monthly
instalments.


The Service
SERVICE is the dominant factor in the activities of our
Institute.
Service is an economic necessity to the highest achievement
in any enterprise, commercial or educational, and It cannot
function to the best advantage except through service.
The most efficient coaching organisation is the one that
gives the best service, and we claim for the 8.1. A. a personal
service unequalled in Australia.
Service to our students—past and present—and service to
the business community directs all our activities, absorbs all
our energies, commands all our resources, and controls and
dictates our policy.
We give to our students as a body the best service because
we serve them not only collectively but individually. Each
student is made a special study. We seek to learn his circum-
stances, the conditions under which he has to work, his
aptitudes, and his particular needs.
If he be too far distant from Head Office or its Branches
to allow of regular personal interviews, we keep in close touch
with him by correspondence. The student himself is studied
as carefully as the work he sends in for correction. Our
Tutorial Staff welcomes students at any time during the day,
and if a student finds it Impracticable to call In business hours,
an interview can always be arranged after such hours to suit
his convenience.
Our service creates an association that endures when the
student has completed his course of training.
We not only watch his subsequent progress with keen
interest but we keep in continuous touch with him, and our
advice and assistance is always at his command.
Throughout his studies, the progress of each student Is
measured by frequent tests, and every test is made a new
occasion for a searching and sympathetic review of his special
needs and difficulties.
A most valuable service to students is rendered in keeping
our lessons right up-to-date. Changing conditions, reflected
in new and improved methods, and in alterations in statute
law, are at once incorporated in our Courses; either by means
of supplementary lessons, or reprints, according to the nature
and extent of the changes Involved. This service ensures that
every 8.1. A. student receives instruction and training in accord


with current legislation and on the lines of the conditions
existing in actual practice.
8.1. A. service to the mercantile community takes many
forms, the main of which are represented by the activities of
our Employment Service Section and Blennerhassett's Com-
mercial Educational Society.
The purpose of the Employment Service Section is to assist
both employers and employees by seeking to meet adequately
the needs of each party. We have made remarkable progress
In this service, notwithstanding adverse economic conditions,
and to-day our connection extends to the leading Business
Houses and professional firms throughout Australia.
The 8.1. A. Employment Service Section does not restrict Its
advantages to 8.1. A. students, it is open to all; and neither
employer nor employee are put to any expense, our organisa-
tion functioning voluntarily and In an honorary capacity in the
common interest and for the mutual benefit of all concerned.
Blennerhassett's Commercial Educational Society, with its
large and increasing Interstate membership, is, as its name
denotes, a society having tor its main object the promotion of
commercial education. It serves both the student and the
business and professional man.
It affords the student the opportunity of Increasing his
knowledge and widening his outlook. If he removes to another
State, it ensures to him, as a member, an immediate introduc-
tion to other students and to a large circle of influential
people.
It affords business executives and their staffs, practising
accountants and secretaries, and members of the legal pro-
fession, the opportunity of hearing and reading lectures on
important matters of current interest, and brings into closer
association different classes of the community to their mutual
benefit.
The 8.1. A. stands for service, personal, continuous, and ever
expanding both in the area of its operations and the scope of
its activities.


Blennerhassett’s Commercial Educational
Society of Australasia
Blennerhasseff's Commercial Educational Society was started
soon after the founding of the 8.1. A., to provide educational
facilities for the business community.
The first lecture was delivered in the King's Hall, Sydney,
and the members of the Society then numbered six hundred.
To-day we have an Interstate membership of five thousand
subscribers. The lectures have been increased from ten each
session to twenty, and lectures are now delivered in Newcastle,
Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Perth, as well as in Sydney.
Every lecture is printed in booklet form, and a copy posted
to each member. Nearly ninety lectures have been printed
and the booklets, in themselves, form an unique reference
library of great value.
The activities of the Society have not been restricted to
its members and supporters; but have been extended to the
staffs of public instifutions and those of large commercial and
industrial enterprises. Lecturers, under the auspices of the
Society, have delivered series of lectures to the staffs of the
Government Savings Bank, the Bank of New South Wales, the
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., and other large organisations.
The lectures given each month cover a wide range of topics
of current interest and of special value to business and pro-
fessional men and students. They have dealt, inter alia, with
Psychology in Its various phases, including vocational and
industrial psychology: with economic, constitutional and ad-
ministrative policies and problems; with trade relationships,
including tariffs and war debts; with various classes of industry,
including secondary Industries and public utilities; with the
promotion, reconstruction, amalgamation, and winding-up of
companies, including the re-organisation of capital; with State
and Federal Taxation; with Salesmanship and Advertising; with
professional and commercial education; with Chain Stores,
Cash Order and Time Payment Organisations; with Bankrupt,
Assigned, and Deceased Estates; with international, national,
and commercial finance, including investments, modern bank-
ing, and published financial statements: with problems of
currency, including inflation and deflation, legal tender, and
monetary problems; with Secretarial Work and Practice; with
various aspects of commercial law and statutory intervention


in business: with the use of Statistics; and with many other
diverse topics of general Interest, such as the problems of
transport, and the art of public speaking, and business letter
Writing.
The lecturers are leaders in education, business, and the
professions, and come from our Universities, leading Business
Houses, and the front rank of the legal and accountancy pro-
fessions. They give their valuable services in the interests of
the community, and do all in their power to assist our educa-
tional service policy. We get from the Universities of Sydney,
Melbourne, Queensland, Adelaide, and Perth, such lecturers
as, Professor H. Tasman Lovell, M.A., Ph.D.; Professor A. H.
Charteris, M.A., LLB.; Professor R. C. Mills, LL.M. (Melb.),
D.S.c. (Econ.) (bond.); Professor F. W. S. Cumbrae Stewart,
K.C., D.C.L.; Professor N. T. M. Wiilsmore, D.Sc., (Melb.),
F.1.C., M.A., Ch.E.; Professor J. B. Brigden, M.A. (Oxon.); A.
Grenfell Price, M.A., F.R.S.S.; F. A. Bland, M.A., LL.B., and
Fterbert Mayo, K.C., LL.B.; from the business world such leaders
in commerce as the Hon. Jas. Murdoch, K.8.E., C.M.G., M.L.A.;
Charles Lloyd Jones; E. T. Fisk, F.lnst.R.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.);
Arthur Burley, F.A.1.5.; and Major-General H. Gordon Bennett,
C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.; from the leaders at the Bar, such
men as the Hon. W. A. Holman, K.C., M.P.; R. Windeyer,
K.C.; the Hon. R. G. Menzies, K.C., LL.M., M.L.A.; Norbert
Keenan, K.C., and F. A. A. Russell, K.C., M.A.; from the
Accountancy profession, such men as A. E. Barton, M.8.E.,
F.C.A. (Aust.); Herbert Priestley, F.S.A.A. (Lond.), F.C.A.
(Aust.); C. A. le Maistre Walker, C.8.E., F.C.A. (Aust.); E. W.
Painter, A.C.A. (Aust.); E. S. Wolfenden, F.C.A. (Aust.), A.I.A.
(Lond.); C. Harding Brown, C.A. (Aust.), and Norman Bede
Rydge; and in addition, such widely known public men as Dr.
A. H. Martin, M.A., Ph.D.; Dr. Donald Fraser, M.A., M. 8.,
Ch.M.; Sir John Butters, C.M.G., M.lnst.C.E., M.1.E.E.; W. J.
Cleary, B.Ec.; A. A. Brackpool, F.F.1.A., A.C.I.S. (Eng.), City
Treasurer, Sydney: J. G. McNichoil, F.A.1.5., A.1.C.A., L.C.A.,
Treasurer Metropolitan Board of Works, Melbourne; Dr. F. A.
Maguire, D. 5.0.; the Hon. W. M, Hughes, P.C., K.C., M.P.;
the Hon. E. S. Spooner, F.C.A. (Aust.), M.L.A.; the Hon. B.
S. B. Stevens, F.F.1.A., L.G.A., M.L.A.; Lawrence Campbell;
A. M. Pooley, M.A. (Cantab.); and C. Brunsdon Fletcher, the
editor of the "Sydney Morning Herald."
Only a nominal membership fee is charged, 5/- per session,
v/hich includes a printed copy of each of the twenty lectures;
and every BJ.A. student is entitled to join the Society at the
reduced fee of 4/- per session.


The Contract and Fees
The 8.1. A. Contract fulfils a dual purpose. It constitutes
the basis of a mutually binding agreement, and represents a
definite form of service in accord with the policy of the
Institute.
The specific undertaking and the general conditions com-
prising the agreement for study and service are designed
expressly to meet adequately the needs of the student.
The Fees for the Standard Courses are fixed and uniform,
and the Fees for Sectional Courses vary according to the
nature and extent of the requirements of the student; but
terms of payment are arranged in consultation when the con-
tract Is made.
The 8.1. A. Contract is simple, clear, and concise. The
student knows precisely the nature and extent of his obliga-
tions, his rights, and his privileges: he knows just what he has
to do and what the 8.1. A. engages to do for him in return.
The 8.1. A. undertakes to supply printed lessons dispensing with
the need for any text-books; to give a thorough, practical,
and efficient training suited to existing conditions; and to give
continuous individual service in tuition, guidance, and advice.
The 8.1. A. guarantees to coach the student until he qualifies
for his degree as a successful examinee, regardless of the time
taken and without any extra fees. The 8.1. A. does much more
—it equips its students to fulfil competently the far more
exacting requirements of modern business.
There are no onerous or ambiguous clauses, and no oppres-
sive or unreasonable conditions in the 8.1. A. Contract. It does
not penalise the student, who on account of unforseen circum-
stances, is obliged to seek a temporary suspension of the
obligations under his contract.
Where the necessity arises, a 8.1. A. student may apply for
a suspension, and every consideration will be granted to meet
the circumstances of the case. On the expiration of the
period of suspension a student may resume his studies without
Incurring any additional expense whatsoever. Whilst it is in
a student's own Interests to complete his course within a
reasonable time, no extra liability Is imposed should his studies
be protracted beyond the normal time usually taken.
The 8.1. A. fees are moderate and inclusive. They are the
lowest compatible with efficient instruction and training, and
there are no extras. A student knows at the outset the total
cost of the course of study he has undertaken. He can make


his plans without any risk of the annoyance and embarrassment
caused by unexpected additions to the financial obligation he
originally assumed.
The 8.1. A. is always prepared to arrange reasonable terms
of extended payment to suit the convenience of students; and
in the case of unemployment, sickness, and similar disabilities,
tc make mutually satisfactory arrangements to meet the con-
tingency.
The Standard Fees
Combined Accountancy and Secretarial Course—
Cash Fee, £3O.
Terms Fee, £35 —£3 deposit and £1 per month.
Accountancy Course—
Cash Fee, £25.
Terms Fee, £30 —£3 deposit and £1 per month.
Special Business Course—
Cash Fee, £lO.
Terms Fee, £l2—£2 deposit and £1 per month.
Secretarial Course—
Cash Fee, £5.
Terms Fee, £7 —£2 deposit and £1 per month.
Book-keeping Course—
Cash Fee, £5.
Terms Fee, £7—£2 deposit and £1 per month.
NOTE. —Special payment plans may be arranged to suit
individual cases. SECTIONAL COURSES vary in their cash
cost according to the particular course of revisionary study
desired. Terms may be arranged.


Examinations and Examining Bodies
The technical qualification for an Accountant or Secretary
is the possession of a degree. It is conferred on the successful
examinee by an Examining Body of Accountants or Secretaries
whose diploma is recognised as evidence of specialised study
and training, and as an indication of educational and pro-
fessional fitness.
The various Institutes of Accountants and of Secretaries sef
examination standards to ensure a preliminary adequate equip-
ment, they actively promote the general interests of the pro-
fession, and carefully safeguard the rights and privileges of
their members.
The examinations of the Accountancy Institutes are divided
into three main sections—Preliminary, Intermediate, and Final.
The Preliminary Examination is an educational test only, and
comparatively few candidates are required to sit for it, as a
dispensation is granted to all those who can produce
satisfactory evidence of their right to exemption. The Inter-
mediate and Final Examinations embrace Accounting, Audit-
ing, and Law; and although there are minor variations, the
requirements of the various Institutes are substantially the
same.
The Examining Bodies in Accountancy, conducting examina-
tions in Australia, are :
THE COMMONWEALTH INSTITUTE OF ACCOUNTANTS.
The examinations are held in April and October. The pass
standard is 70% in Accounts and Auditing, and 65% in Law.
The degrees conferred are L.I.C.A. (non-practising Account-
ants) and A.I.C.A. (practising Accountants).
THE FEDERAL INSTITUTE OF ACCOUNTANTS. The
examinations are held in May and November. The pass
standard is 65% in Accounts and Auditing, and 60% in Law.
The degree conferred Is A.F.I.A.
THE ASSOCIATION OF ACCOUNTANTS OF AUS-
TRALIA. The examinations are held in May and November.
Ihe pass standard Is 65% in all subjects. The degree con-
ferred is A.A.A.


THE INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS IN
AUSTRALIA. The examinations are held in April and October.
The pass standard is 70% in Accounts and Auditing, and 65%
in Law. The degree conferred is A.C.A. (Aust.), but only those
candidates who are employed in the offices of Chartered
Accountants are eligible to sit for the qualifying examinations.
The examinations of the Secretarial Institutes are divided
into three main sections—Accounting, Law, and Secretarial
Work and Practice; but those candidates who possess an
Accountancy Degree are exempted from all subjects except
Secretarial Work and Practice.
The Australian Examining Bodies of Secretaries are :
THE AUSTRALASIAN INSTITUTE OF SECRETARIES
(Incorp.), which confers the degree of A.A.1.5.; and
THE INSTITUTE OF INCORPORATED SECRETARIES, which
confers the degree of A. 1.1.5.
The examinations of both these Institutes are held In March
and September, and the pass standard is 60%.
We shall be pleased to forward full details of the examina-
tions and fees of the various Accountancy and Secretarial
Institutes on application.
The 8.1. A. will prepare you for the examinations of any
Institute you may choose; and guarantee to coach you until
you secure your degree, regardless of the time taken, or of
changes In or additions to the syllabus, for the inclusive charge
set out in our schedule of fees.
The 8.1. A. is not a cramming Institution. Our main aim Is
to equip every student to function efficiently In the actual
practical work of professional and business life, so, of necessity,
the instruction and training given extends beyond the require-
ments of the syllabus of any particular Institute.
Examinations being the beginning and not the end of the
students' career, we prepare him for service as well as for his
academic test. Our policy has been amply justified, not only
in the many students who to-day are doing excellent work as
practising accountants and secretaries, and as executive
officers; but in the outstanding success achieved In the exam-
inations.
A very high pass standard has been consistently maintained,
and a large number of the Honours Places awarded have been
gained by 8.1. A. students.


Australasian
State
First Places
43
123
Second Places
27
95
Third Places
24
76
94
294
During the comparatively brief time we have been present-
ing students for Institute examinations, the following Honours
Places have been awarded to them :
a total of 388 Honours Places, of which 166, or 43% were
First Placesl
The facts speak for themselves. They are convincing
evidence of the quality of the instruction we provide, and
the efficiency of the training we give; and it is to these
factors, allied to the distinctive personal service each student
receives, both before and after his examinations, that we
attribute the remarkable success of the 8.1. A. as a coaching
institution; which starting a few years ago in Sydney Is to-day
a great interstate organisation.
Model Answers
Every student of the 8.1. A., by virtue of his contract, be-
comes entitled to Model Answers to the Examination Papers
set by the Institutes for whose diploma he is a candidate.
More marks are lost at examinations by lack of method than
by lack of knowledge: and the careful study of Model Answers
constitutes valuable training in concentrating on the essential
points raised in different types of questions.
As a means of enabling a student to secure an independent
and practical standard for assessing the value of his Own
answers; to enlarge his experience in setting-out, expression,
and style; and to create familiarity with examination conditions
and requirements: Model Answers are invaluable, and in
themselves they constitute a useful series of supplementary
examples for the purpose of test and revision.
All other coaching organisations who supply Model Answers
charge a fee for furnishing a Model Answer to any specific
question set; but this valuable educational facility is free of
cost to the 8.1. A. student, being a part of our unique personal
service.


K H. BOOTH & SON LTD.
2 Printers
31 Burton Street, Sydney
