

THE BROAD
AND
THE NARROW WAY.
AN ADDRESS,
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE UNITED RELIGIOUS MISSION,
HELD IN
THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, WINDSOR,
DURING THE WEEK ENDING OCTOBER 2nd, 1875.
BY JOHN TEBBUTT, F.R.A.S., &c.
1 8 7 5.




THE BROAD AND THE NARROW
WAY.
The following is the opening address, delivered at the
last of the series of evening meetings, held in con-
nexion with the United Religious Mission, at the
School of Arts, Windsor, during the week, ending
October 2nd, 1875. The address, as originally deli-
vered, was partly written and partly extempore. As
it is now published it contains some few additions
and corrections, together with the extempore portions,
as nearly as they can be remembered. It is now sent
forth, in the hope that it may prove useful to the
friends of the Mission and serve as a pleasing me-
mento of an event calculated to evoke the heartfelt
thanks of all followers of the Lord Jesus Christ.
The speaker, having read the 7th chapter of St.
Matthew’s Gospel, proceeded as follows :
My Dear Christian Friends, —
I shall not attempt to comment upon the whole
of the chapter which I have just read, for, by so doing,
I should occupy more time than has been allotted to
me. I therefore propose to confine our attention to a
small portion of it, which, small as it is, furnishes
ample matter for our instruction, digestion, and edifi-


cation. The words to which I desire to draw your
attention are those contained in the 13th and 14th
verses of the chapter. They are as follow :
“ Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the
gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction,
and many there be which go in thereat: because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the wav, which leadeth unto
life, and few there be that find it.”
You all know, that in the days of infancy and child-
hood our path in life is innocent and simple. It con-
tinues to be very plain and very straightforward, till
we arrive at the years of discretion, at that period
when it becomes us seriously to consider what life is
and what are its aim and object. We, for the first
time, begin to feel the w'ay is not so simple and plain
as we fondly imagined it to be. We come to a point,
in the highway of life, where it seems to divide into
two roads, the entrances to which are guarded as it
were by two gates, the one narrow and the other wide.
Over the narrow gate we behold, with our carnal eyes,
the finger-board with the inscription, “ To Jesus and
eternal salvation.” But, alas! with our carnal mind
we know not who Jesus is : we really know nothing of
the salvation of which he speaks. On glancing through
the narrow gate, we find the way to be very narrow
and hedged on each side with thorns and briars. Al-
though, it may be, we perceive Jesus in the distance,
we are discouraged by the thorns and briars. We
shrink from the prospect of travelling along such a road
and we take a glance through the other, the wide gate,
to see if that will prove a more pleasing way for the
pilgrimage of life. We find, indeed, on looking through
the gate, that the road is a well-beaten one. Multitudes
are passing along it; the tracks along it are very nu-
merous. At the outset of it we see, as it were, beau-
tiful fields and meadows, and further on, these seem to
fade away into gardens, containing lovely flowers of
every hue and tint. Oh! how inviting. We do not
now want much time for decision, but we enter that


pate and we go along rejoicing with the vast multitude.
Yes, my dear friends, many of us have entered on that
way. Some of us have only just passed through the
gate, others have proceeded a considerable distance on
the way, and others again have well nigh pursued it to
its end. I have said that pleasant fields and beautiful
flowers invited us on this way, but many of us have
already found that those pleasant fields are clothed
with poisonous herbage, and that those beautiful flowers
are the noxious foxslove and the deadly nightshade of
sin. I have also said that there are many tracks along
the broadway, but they are, in truth, the tracks of sin.
For an enumeration of them I would direct your atten-
tion to the 19th, 20th, and 21st verses, of the sth
chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians. All
these tracks are pleasant to our fallen nature. We will
glance at them for a few moments, and more particu-
larly at one which forces itself so prominently on our
notice at the present time. I allude to the sin of
drunkenness, which is now so frightfully prevalent in
our midst. Ah, my dear Christian friends, the drunk-
ard’s track along the broad road of destruction is a
fearful one. It is a track that branches oft into many
others of a sinful nature. One of the saddest states
of alienation from God is that of the drunkard.
Drunkenness is the most fearful and widespread crime
that falls under our experience. O, what a state is
that of the man who has so exercised himself in this
sin, that the very sin itself becomes at length his daily
bread. He is at length brought to that state, that exces-
sive indulgence in his favorite sin becomes absolutely ne-
cessary for the sustaining of his bodily existence. How
clearly this fact brings home to our minds the won-
drous wisdom, as regards even this life, of those words
—“ They shall eat of the fruit of their own way.”
In the dark category of sins I do not think, my friends,
there is one more calculated to place us in the position
of reprobates. The excessive indulgence in intoxi-
cating liquors may bring us at last to that position that


we become devoid of shame, hardened, callous and
impenetrable to any suggestion or warning that is
intended to bring us again to the path of sobriety,
purity and holiness. Ah, my dear young friends, I
have seen people in this shameless hardened state. O
that I could bring before your mind’s-eye an instance
1 once saw of a poor old man, of three score years and
ten, who had evidently been well brought up, well
instructed in the word of God, and who had, notwith-
standing, given himself up, in his old days, to this
detestable vice. There he was, poor old man, just
emerged from the confines of a gaol and begging for
money, his very frame eaten up with the accursed sin.
There, I say, he stood before me, with the warnings of
God’s holy word respecting drunkenness pouring from
his lips, while he at the same time denied the fact of
his habitual sin. But, alas! those words of warning
came only from the lips : they came not from a broken
and contrite heart. They were only employed as a
cloak for his sin, and in order to enable him to get
more money to carry it on. Can there be a deeper
.state of degradation and uncleanness than this ? When
you contemplate this character, can you for one moment
suppose that it would be allowed to approach the gate
of heaven, still less to enter it, and take its place
among tbe blessed, the pure, the holy and the redeemed?
No. my friends, if even such a character could lind its
way, unforgiven and uncleansed, within the pearly
gate, the very atmosphere of the pure and blissful
heaven would be unendurable torment. It would look
in vain for a sympathizing spirit there. Its own place
will be the region of despair, where the worm dieth
not and the fire is not quenched. Yes, in that region,
which is the end of the broad road, there will be un-
availing cries and wailings over the days of youth and
manhood wasted and ruined in the grog-shop. In that
never-dying condition will be remembered, with keen
anguish and remorse, the first glass, which led the way
to the eternal destruction of a soul that might have


been clad in the pure white robes of praise and thanks-
giving. The first glass is frequently the prelude to
destruction. To those who have drunk the first glass
as a beverage, I would say, let it be the last. You
have only just entered on the dangerous track. To
those who have gone some distance down that traek, I
would say, retrace your steps to the narrow gate, which
you saw earlier in life. You perchance hear the gentle
voice of God’s Holy Spirit, entreating you to come
back to the narrow gate of repentance. But instead
of listening to that voice, you call to mind the thornS
and briars of ridicule. You hear the siren-like en-
treaties of your bosom companions on the one hand,
or see their sneers and contempt on the other. Your
heart faints. You will not make up your mind to go
by the narrow way of the cross. Ah! no, your kind
friends, who accompany you on the broad-way, ask
you to go over to the nearest tavern and enjoy a social
glass with them. What think you can be more friendly
or more sociable than to drink to each others health
and prosperity. But how often has this plea been
but the suggestion of the evil one in his garb as an
angel of light. You cannot bear to slight the entrea-
ties of your friends, or to be lacerated by the thorns of
ungodly sneers and the briars of ridicule, but you
have no compunction about disregarding the entreaties
of the heavenly Monitor. So you turn from the road
which leads to the Crucified One in whom at length
you would find every peace and every joy.
Prayer, my dear friends, not the intoxicating cup, is
the means by which we should express our wishes for
our companion’s health and prosperity. The Apostolic
injunction is “ Pray one for another.” While on this
part of my subject, I would for a moment address
myself to parents. Many a blooming child has been
made a drunkard in a very simple way. A sober
parent, for instance, after his daily potation of spirits,
has taken his child upon his knee and offered him the
sweets contained at the bottom of the glass. This


may be, thought a very insignificant thing, but there
are now in this world, and doubtless also in the regions
of the damned, those who can trace the upas-tree of
their destruction to the bottom of a rum tumbler. I
would warn all parents who have the charge of precious
souls to be jealous of all their doings, even their
smallest doings, in connexion with their children.
Among the numerous tracks which lead down the
broadway of life is, I fear, that of the man who devotes
himself to the race-course. The best that can be said of
the sport of racing is, that it is an empty kind of amuse-
ment But I hold it cannot be carried out without
cruelty to the noblest animal of God’s inferior crea-
tion, if not to man himself. Is it not true that the
rider is almost always a youth of tender years, who is
thus placed in extreme peril of life and limb. Is it
not true, that in the last races held here, one poor
boy was brought to a premature grave from the field
of sinful pleasure, and is it not true that others were
brought almost to death’s-door ? Apart from this, is
not the race-course surrounded with an atmosphere of
sin and crime? Is the drunkard not to be found
there ? Is the swearer not to be found there ? Is not
the vanity of person and dress to be found there? Are
the gambler and defrauder not to be found there, and
that in the very exhibition of all their deformity of
character? Is this the atmosphere, dear fathers and
mothers, in which you would bring up your sons and
daughters ? I may be unfashionable in my utterances
against this evil. I know I have powers and princi-
palities against me. There is, for example, that mighty
power of the Press, which, in many instances, is exer-
cised for the promotion of the shameful practice of
betting. I may have even high official authority against
me in the matter of the race-course, but I do not come
here to flatter either the Press or any earthly authority..
I feel that I have a solemn responsibility resting upon
me, and that is, to speak on behalf of God to immortal
souls—in fact, to warn my fellow-sinners against prac-


tices which I conceive to be soul-destroying. I fear
the frequenter of the theatre must also be included
among those whose footsteps are to be found in the
broad road. It is sad to think how rnapy are beguiled
by the glitter and unhallowed associations of this place
of amusement.
Down the broadway of life there is, too, the track
of the gambler. He first stakes his own money, in
his fascinating course of sin; by-and-bye his track
grows broader and he stakes that of his employer,
who has implicit faith in his honesty and integrity;
by-and-bye his track becomes so broad that he wins
from his fellow gambler that which should go to the
support of a heart-broken wife, or her famishing chil-
dren ; and, finally, his track may approach, if it do
not actually become, that of highway robbery and
murder. My very young friends, I turn my address
to you for a moment. When you play marbles, do
not play for what you are pleased to call “keeps."
This is the very germ of covetousness and gambling.
This warning to you, young folks, may seem very un-
necessary, but it is highly expedient. Take the ad-
vice of one, who, in his childish days, did, on one or
two occasions, play for “ keeps,” but for which sin he
received correction, aye, that correction which at the
time did not seem joyous but grievous, but which
afterwards yielded the peaceable fruit of a character
free from the stain of gambling.
My dear friends, you who are the fathers and mothers
of children, let me once more kindly address a word of
warning to you. Train your children up in the way
they should go, and when they are old they are not
likely to depart from it. Should they depart from it,
you will at least have the consolation of knowing and
feeling that you were co-workers with God’s go'od
Spirit for the salvation and happiness of those com-
mitted to your care.
The tracks of the vain young man and the vain
young woman are also to be found down the broad-


-way of life. Ah, my dear friends, how many soul-
destroying sins have been created and promoted by
vanity? How many a precious soul yearned after
and followed by the Blessed Spirit of God, has been
overwhelmed and ruined by vanity of person and dress?
Besides the tracks of sin which I have already con-
sidered, there are numerous others down the broad
road to destruction. There are those of the self-
righteous and the haughty man ; the proud afid the
unforgiving man. There are those of the necromancer
and the spiritist; the atheist and the infidel. If we
look at God’s commandments we shall be enabled to
summarise the different travellers of the broad road
as follows:—the idolater, the swearer, the sabbath-
breaker, the dishonorer of parents, the murderer, the
slanderer, and him who hates his fellow-man the
impure thinker, the impure talker, and the impure
doer; the thief, the liar, and the covetous man.
Among these are included those numerous tracks
which the world is pleased to call little sins, such as
sins of the thoughts, sins of the tongue, sins of the
temper, and sins of omission. These sins which ap-
pear so small tn the sight of the unregenerate man, I
need hardly remind you, are of awful magnitude in
the eyes of an infinitely pure and holy God.
Now, my dear friends, let us bring home to our own
consciences what has been already said. Is there one
here present who can say that he or she has not pur-
sued some one or more of these paths along the broad
road of destruction ? Not a conscience here but must
answer that it has done so. But some of you have been
arrested in your downward course. I speak, of course,
to those who now enjoy the peace of God. You have
•either suddenly, or by imperceptible degrees, been
arrested in your evil course, and this has been done
either by the thunderings of Sinai, or by the still
small voice of the Spirit of God. When surveying
the dark catalogue of your sins against the God of
infinite purity and holiness, you have been led to


exclaim, with the sin-stricken Psalmist of Israel —
“ Innumerable troubles are come upon me: my sins
have taken such hold upon me that 1 am not able to
look up, yea, they are more in number than the hairs
of my head and my heart hath failed me.” “Thine
indignation lieth hard upon me and thou hast vexed
me with all thy storms. Thou hast put mine acquaint-
ance far from me and made me to be abhorred of them.
I am so fast in prison that I cannot get forth.”
Blessed be God you have felt the full force ol these
words—but thrice blessed be His name, you have
been enabled, by the love of Jesus and by his Spirit,
to say also —“ 1 waited patiently for the Lord and he
inclined unto me and heard my calling. He brought
me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and
clay, and set my feet upon the rock and ordered my
goings. And he hath put a new song in my mouth,
even a thanksgiving unto our God.” Yes, my friends,
when cast into the pit of sorrow and affliction, on ac-
count of our sins, we must wait patiently. Remember
that word patiently. There is no short easy comfort-
able by-path by which we can get out of the broad
road of destruction into the narrow way, which we
iormerly refused to enter. God will have us retrace
our steps and review the dark catalogue of our offences
against him. He will take us back by the road by
which we came, in order that we may see it stained
with our past folly and wickedness. We must possess
our former iniquities till we come again on our way
back to the narrow gate of repentance. Then shall
we behold, with the eye of faith, that precious blood
shed on the cross and feel the force of those encou-
raging words of the Apostle:—“ Jf we walk in the
light as he is in the light we have fellowship one with
another and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth
from all sin.’’
There are, doubtless, some Odd Fellows and Free-
masons among those who listen to me. Well, you, my
friends, may have your sign and your password, but


all who are in fellowship with Christ Jesus have this
sign. The Lord knoweth them that are his. And
again:— Let every one that nameth the name of
Christ depart from iniquity.
May all here present to-night, both speakers and
hearers, who are yet in the broad road, accept at once
the call of Jesus.' May they all be Odd Fellows, as
regards the passing fashion of this sinful world. May
they all be Freemasons, free in that liberty wherewith
Christ hath made us free, at the same time strengthen-
ing and building up one another in our most holy
faith If we accept Christ, let us take heed that we
be not again entangled in the yoke of bondage. May
we, indeed/ enter at last into that lodge, our blessed
rest in heaven, where, without ceasing, we shall pour
forth the overflowings of grateful hearts to the honor
and praise of the Lamb.
And now, my dear friends, you who are still on the
broad road, I would offer a few closing remarks to
you. Let me kindly entreat you to come back to the
gate of repentance, which opens the way to the Cruci-
fied One. Listen to the sweet voice of God’s good
Spirit, which would charm you along the road, hedged
with thorns and briars, for let me tell you, it is only
the beginning of the road that is thickly set with
temptation, sneers and ridicule. By-and-bye, as you
approach nearer to Jesus, you will get fuller and
brighter views of the author and finisher of your faith.
The briars and thorns will become less numerous.
You will find the narrow road lined with gardens alto-
gether different from those you saw in the broadway.
Here will be trees of Paradise, bearing such fruits as
love, joy, peaee, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness and temperance. And these fruits will
at length become so exceedingly delicious, so transcen-
dency elevating and refreshing to the spirits, that they
will cause you to triumph over all your temptations. You
shall live in the Spirit and you shall walk in the Spirit.
Your souls shall be buoyant with hope, faith and love.


You shall see more and more clearly the prize that
stands at the end of the narrow way, even the Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. By the indwelling of his
blessed Spirit you shall become more and more sancti-
fied, more and more like our dear Master, till you
sweep at last through the pearly gates, to a full frui-
tion of peace and glory. Then shall you enjoy what
with your carnal mind you could not understand —that
saying of the Apostle : —“ Eye hath not seen nor ear
heard, nor have entered into the heart of man the things
which God hath prepared for them that love him.”
In conclusion, my dear brethren, I pray God to
shower his best blessing upon the efforts that are now
being made for the extension of his kingdom. There are,
doubtless, some among you, who, through the instru-
mentality of this Mission, have been touched by the
love of Jesus. There are, doubtless, some of you
who feel that you have within yourselves the witness
of the Spirit. To you I would say : —Let your light
so shine before men that they may see your good
works and glorify, not yourselves, remember, but your
Father which is in heaven. Prove to the world that
your faith in Christ is not a dead one, but that your
conversation is like that of the Master himself. His
was not a mere passive, but an active religion. He
went about doing good. And as you profess that He
is your example, do you also the same. We have a
wide field and golden opportunities before us. The
barvest is extensive, but the labourers are few. I
trust each of you may prove as the little leaven, to
leaven the whole mass of society about us. You love
Christ, love also his members. Attend to the Sunday
School. Lead the children, the youth, the young and
the old to Christ, both by your precept and by your
example. Attend to the wants of the needy, as far as
lies in your power. Visit the widow and the orphan
in their affliction. Comfort the sick and afflicted, and
shed the balm of Christian consolation over the last
moments of the dying. If you take delight in these


kindly offices for Christ’s sake, and offer them to God
through him as an expression of your faith and love,
you will show to the world that you at least have cho-
sen the narrow way which leads to eternal happiness.
May the result of the Church of England Mission
and also of the present Mission be, that many a poor
wandering soul in our dear town of Windsor, now on
the broad road of destrumon, shall be brought back to
the narrow gate of repentance, shall pursue its path
in faith along the narrow way of the cross, and even-
tually take its place among the redeemed. May there
be cause for the angels in heaven to rejoice over many
prodigals returning from the broadway of sin and
eternal death to the narrow path that leads to holiness
and to heaven. Amen.




