

THE
RIGHTS
OF
MAN.
BY THE
Rev. JAMES S. WHITE,
M.A., LL.D., Syd.,
Gowrie, Singleton.
ARGUS PRINT, SINGLETON.




THE EIGHTS OF MAN
BY THE REV. JAMES S. WHITE,
M.A., LL.D., Std.,
Gowrie, Singleton.
The term “ right ” is derived from the
Latin rectum , strained or straight. In
economics, it means the line which
regulates the interests of parties as to
each other, and indicates, throughout
their converse, the point short of
which they may not fall, and beyond
which they may not be pressed. A
right is that which entitles us to be,
to do, or to have anything, and is
either absolute or conditional. An
absolute right can belong only to the
Creator. Of right, therefore, He alone
can be the source, dispenser and
administrator. All the rights of the
creature, including man, are His gift
mero motu —of His sovereign will.
His will is declared in the laws by
which he governs the universe in its
several departments —physical, intel-
lectual, moral, and spiritual. These
laws, as expressions of His will, are
fixed, invariable and universal, for He
changes not. His kingdom is an ever-
lasting kingdom, ruling over all, and
of His dominion there is no end.
To ascertain his rights, then, man
must search out and understand these
laws. He may have a right de jure ,


and yet be ignorant of possessing it.
He can know that he possesses it
de facto, only because by the operation
of these laws he is enabled to exercise
it. According to the ancient Homan
law, a perfect right implied not only
potestas but auctoritas. As between
each other, men define their so-called
rights, and, in terms of their defini-
tion, exercise them, knowing before-
hand, more or less accurately, their
nature and predicates. But it is not
so between man and the Creator. Man
knows nothing of them beforehand.
They reveal and interpret themselves,
little by little, in the course of his
exercise of them. Not until they
have been fully exercised do they
fully reveal and interpret themselves ;
and as the full exercise of them
requires every, even the last, moment
of life, and, as, when death comes,
he is cognizant neither of the mode,
nor the fact of the existence of
the laws upon which they are founded,
he cannot define them. In the course
of the exercise of their rights, men
find, at every period of their experi-
ence, either that there is something
more to follow, or that they are
deprieved of them —it may be sud-
denly and abruptly. What are the
rights bestowed by the Creator upon
man ? Corresponding to the three
elements of man’s nature —the physical,


intellectual, moral, and spiritual—he
has three classes of rights. He has
rights belonging to him as a physical
being, for he has a body. He has
rights belonging to him as an intellec-
tual being, for he has a mind. He
has rights belonging to him as a moral
and spiritual being, for he has a moral
and spiritual nature. There are laws
applying to each of these elements
upon which the rights belonging to
each are founded, and by which they
are governed and regulated. As to
his body—man has a right to all chat
the operation of the material laws
implies. He has aright to be,to occupy
a certain space to the exclusion of all
other matter, to have a certain form,
to be divisible, to be of a certain
composition and texture, to be incap-
able of itself, either of moving when
at rest or of coming to a state of rest
when in motion, to have cohesion of
parts, to act upon other matter, and
to be acted upon by it mechanically
and chemically. As an intellectual
being he has a right to his mind ;
because the mind is capable of exer-
cise, and there is no power in vain,
and because it cannot exist without
exercise he has a right to exerc.se it
in perceiving, observing, reflecting,
comparing, judging, deciding. As a
moral and spiritual being he has a
right to conscience, which concerns


the actions of the moral and spiritual
element of his nature, and is insepar"
able from it.
Des Cartes argued Cogito ergo sum •
This is reasoning in a circle, and is*
therefore, inconclusive. But, I have
a mind and a conscience, whose very
existenceimplies action ; therefore, that
1 have the right to exercise them, implied
in the right to possess them, is con-
clusive and final. The fact that the
Creator has bestowed certain rights
upon man as to his body, mind, and
moral and spiritual nature implies
that they are to be exercised, and
exercised for the purpose of attaining
their highest stage of improvement;
for the Creator is perfect, and of
His creatures, after their kind,
must will the progress, whose ulti-
matum is perfection, which is a
law of the universe. Man being
capable of improvement, and the
Creator willing his improvement, it is
necessary that the Creator should
provide for him all means and appli-
ances thereto. He has provided them,
and with his right to exercise his
body, mind and moral and spiritual
nature, he possesses, therefore, the
right to use these means and appli-
ances, and it is his duty to use them.
What are these means and appliances ?
They are, as to the body, space and
opportunity for the exercise of its


members. As to the mind, they are
the teaching of the works of creation
and providence—the tongues in the
tress, the psalms in the running
brooks, the sermons in stones, and the
didactic ministry of everything
whether the familiar phenomena re-
ferable to the operation of the laws of
whose mode man knows sufficient to
prevent wonderment in contemplating
them, or those which belong to other
laws than those with which he is
acquaint! d, or those altogether beyond
the domain of laws by which nature
is usually governed. Under the last
head may be classed Kevelation, or, as
Blackstone styles it, the “ revealed
will of God.” Some, indeed, deny the
fact of revelation. They cannot deny
that the Bible, purporting to contain
this will, exists. It must be either of
Nature, or of the God of Nature. If
it is of Nature it must be of God, for
Nature is of Nature’s God; therefore,
according to objectors themselves, men
have a right to its teaching. The
rights enumerated are derived from
the Creator, and, therefore, as some
affirm, they are neither absolute nor
indefeasible. They are conditional
upon the will of the Creator, which
will He expresses through the opera-
tion of His laws. Obedience to these
laws being the basis and guarantee of
man’s rights, they can be possessed


only by those who obey them. Dis-
obedience and right are utterly in-
compatible.
Some deny the existence of a
Creator, and affirm that man’s rights
have their origin and guarantee in the
operation of the laws of Nature, fixed
invariable and universal. Whether
there can be laws without a law-giver,
action, without generating energy,
order, and harmony, without an intelli-
gent and a benevolent disposer, are
questions which need not be discussed
so far as this paper is concerned.
Suppose, with the Buddhists, that the
aggregate of the laws of nature con-
stitutes the Deity, and the aggrega-
tion of their operations constitutes the
universe, the supposition does not
affect the question of man’s rights.
If it be admitted that the laws remain
the same, although self-originated and
self acting, man’s rights are still based
upon, and guaranteed by, them, and
obedience is still necessary in order to
the possession of them. The idea of
a personal Deity merely imparts, in
connection with man’s right, the moral
elements of obligation, responsibility,
and of reward and punishment as such.
Some deny that the laws of Nature
are fixed, invariable, and universal,
and affirm that all the phenomena of
the universe are of “ chance.” There
is in reality no such thing as chance.


It is but a name for the operation of
laws whose nature and mode are not
understood. It is but a term used to
cloak man’s ignorance. As science
advances, the term is becoming more
and more restricted, as phenomenon
a ter phenomenon isbrought within the
domain of laws more or less under-
stood, and more or less plainly formu-
lated. Fifty years ago, all meteoro-
logical phenomena, such as electric
disturbances, wind, rain, snow, ha:F
etc., were regarded as of chance-
They are all now referred to the
operation of fixed, invariable, and
universal laws. All the results
formerly attributed to chance can
now be calculated, for all practical
purposes, with mathematical certainty.
As to their essence, mode, and pre-
dicables, generally, they are perfectly
known to the omniscient Creator only j
therefore, He only can define them.
He has not defined them. If He bad,
the definition of them would be to
man, or to any creature, utterly in-
comprehensible as the rights them-
selves ; so that the definition of them
would have served no purpose. So
far as it is our interest to understand
them, they define themselves to our
apprehension in the course of their
development in our experience. Men
define their so-called rights as between
each other, to guard them against


wrong, and for the purpose of redress
if wrong is done. But the Creator
cannot wrong man Actus Dei nemini
facit injuriam. If it were possible
for Him to wrong man there is no
redress, and a right implies redress
übi jus ibi, remedium. Under the
perfect government of the Creator,
the absence of the remedium neces-
sarily implies the absence of the jus.
A.gaiu, as between the sovereign and
the subject, there can he no partnery,
so between the Creator and man there
can bo no partnery and, therefore, no
conflict of rights. Quando jus regis
domini et subditi concurrunt jus regis
praeferri debet. Man, in respect of
his rights, is but the beneficiary of
the Sovereign Creator, and that not of
himself, but his will and his capacity
intelligently to receive, and his ability
to use and enjoy them are the gift of
the Creator. Man’s rights being
dependent upon the operation of
fixed, invariable, and universal laws
are essentially incommunicable.
Inasmuch as it is not good for man
to bo alone, and inasmuch as the
Creator wills his true and substantial
happiness, not only as an individual,
but as a member of society, he takes
with him into society all his rights as
an individual, and shares them witli
its members in the way of the exercise
of them for the public good. When


used in social aggregation they are
styled “human rights,” tut errone-
ously ; for, although used in social
combination, they are no more of
man than when used individually.
The rights of society are but the
aggregate of the rights of its indivi-
dual members. Inasmuch as man can
understand his rights, so far as the
intelligent and benevolent exercise of
them concerns society ; inasmuch as
they may be disputed, and the circum-
stances of their exercise vary ; inas-
much as there may be partnery be-
tween man and man, involving exten-
sion, limitation, and modification and
possible wrong, they must, in their
social exercise, be sanctioned on the
one hand by a penalty and on the
other by a reward, over and above the
penalty annexed by Nature to the
breach of her laws and the reward
annexed by her to their observance.
In order that, as between man and
man, rights may be vindicated and
wrong punished, it is nesessary that
they should be defined ; and in all
societies they are defined more or less
clearly and fully. But, however, man
may define them, whether as an indi-
vidual or a citizen, based as they are
on, and controlled by, the natural
laws ; he can exercise them only in
accordance with, and under, their
control. In presentia majoris cessat


potentia minoris, so that whatever in
human right is contrary to, or incon-
sistent with, these laws neither is, nor
can be, of validity. They brook no
rival near their throne; they are
abhorrent and intolerant of an
imperium in imperio.
In human legislation, as a rule,
these laws are either ignored or defied.
Indeed, the majority of legislators are
ignorant, not only of their mode, hut
even of their existence. When a man
becomes a member of society, he is
required to surrender into its hands
all his natural rights—corporeal and
incorporeal. This he cannot do ; for
he cannot divest himself, either iri
whole or in part, of any natural right.
As to his body, e.g., he cannot divest
himself of any right based on the
operation of the material law, any
more than he can possess, as to his
body, any right not based thereon ;
and the same may be said of the other
elements of his nature. Proceeding
on the fallacy that man can enter
society stript of all his natural rights,
legislators profess to invest him with
rights regarded as more numerous
and more valuable than those fore-
gone. Among these may be enumerated
(1) the right to life ; (2) the right to
maintenance; (3) the right to an
equal portion of the earth’s surface or
substance; (4) the right to make laws.


As to the right to life, man has that
of the Creator conditional upon the
operation of the natural laws, upon
which the gift and its continued
possession depend. Instead of enlarg-
ing and extending this right, human
legislation contracts and abridges it;
for it makes the continuance of it
dependent upon obedience to human
law, which, whilst it cannot prolong
it, may, and often does, cut it short
from ignorance, caprice, malignity,
etc. A member of society risks not
only the result of the operation of the
Jaws of Nature in shortening life, but
the result of the operation of human
laws besides. A citizen, under the
natural laws only, might be sure of
life, say, for 70 years, whilst under
human laws its term may be short-
ened. As to the right of maintenance.
The right to life necessarily implies a
right to maintenance, and both rights
ar6 inter dependent. The cancella-
tion of a right to life implies that of
the right to maintenance, and vice
versa. But whereas Nature furnishes
maintenance under laws fixed, invari-
able, and universal, legislators make it
dependent on laws unsettled, varying,
local, and temporary. 3. As to the
right to make laws. There can be no
right to do whatfis impossible. Law-
making is, and it can be, a prerogative
of the Creator only. He has exercised


that prerogative as to every constituent
of every department of the universe.
There is neither room nor need for
additional laws, nor for the modifica-
of those existent. Even the Creator
Himself, during the present constitu-
tion of things, can neither add to
their number nor modify their mode-
If it were possible for man either to
make or modify the Creator’s laws, his
action would be futile. If they were
inoperative they would not be laws-
If they were operative, they could be
so only as existing laws energized
them and not otherwise, and, there-
fore, the laws under them would be
but the same laws, it may be, with
another name. Existing laws, whether
framed and administered by a being
infinite in wisdom and benevolence, as
well as in power, or self-generated and
self-acting, are universally admitted
to be perfect in themselves, in their
mode and in their result, in securing
to the greatest extent, and in the
highest degree, the true and substan-
tial happiness of all sentient creatures,
especially man, and this result is the
universally - recognised test of the
character of law. If existent laws
are perfect, there can be no room for
improvement, and all attempts at im-
provement must be, not only futile*
but injurious. What shall the man
do that cometh after the King ?


Suppose legislators made laws ignor-
ing the law of gravitation, the laws of
sanitation and hygiene, of thought,
and those of social life and moral
intercourse, and based upon these
laws of their own devising—rights to
have, for example, stable structures,
health of body and soundness of mind,
and domestic and social security,
peace, and happiness, would these
rights—if they might be styled such —
imply those benefits ? No. Why ?
Because they would be based upon
laws having no potence or virtue, and.
incapable of having potence or virtue
by reason of the omnipotent action of
the Creator’s laws. Not only would
the exercise of such rights not bo
beneficial, it would be injurious, and
injurious precisely to the extent of
their exercise. One great aim of
jurisprudents is to bring all social
phenomena within the domain of law.
After the labor of thousands of years,
they have failed of their object. Not
only so, but, as they themselves ac-
knowledge, they are farther than ever
from their end. They admit, after
having multiplied laws until the most
learned of them are bewildered and
confounded by their number and in-
tricacy, that Omnis novitas plus novi-
tate perturbat, quam utilitate prodest
and De minimis non curat lex im-
plies that there are trifles for which


the law makes no provision. Why ?
Because the imperfection of legal
knowledge places them outside of the
sphere of legal apprehension. Why
have they failed P Because they at-
tempted to make laws, there being no
room for law-making. All they can
warrantablv attempt, all they should
attempt, is to search out the laws of
the Creator, and to copy them as fully
and faithfully as possible, and apply
them in their respective departments.
4. As to the right to an equal
portion of the earth’s surface or
substance. This question will be
most clearly and satisfactorily dis-
cussed in respect of a single State.
The right of a State to its lands is
just the aggregate of the right of
each citizen thereto. This is abso-
lutely the only material upon which a
State either mav, or can, act. The
onl7 function of legislators is to
apportion the State’s aggregate right
placed in its hand, among the citizens
justly and wisely, so that the true and
substantial happiness of the State
shall be secured. If the true and
substantial happiness of the whole be
secured, the true and substantial
happiness of each citizen will be
secured ; for, if the body rejoice, every
member must rejoice with it. To
assign to each citizen an equal portion
of the lands of a State is impossible.


If by an equal porton is meant an
equal area, the apportionment might
be made with square and rule. But
this is not what is meant. By an
equal portion is meant a portion of
equal value, whether equal in area or
not; for a quarter of an acre, in one
locality, might be worth more than
one hundred acres in another. Sup-
pose the apportionment made’to be
just and satisfactory at present, a
fresh apportionment would be neces-
sary on the oceasion of every increase
or decrease of the population, on every
change of local climate, and on every
fluctuation of the local and foreign
markets, in respect of every article of
produce. The question would be
further complicated by a priori and a
fortiori considerations, such as the
claims of former occupants (as in the
case of the aborigines of New Zealand
and of this colony) involving the rights
of conquest in all its aspects. The
apportionment of an equal area of
the land* of a State to each citizen
would, therefore, on these and many
other grounds, be practically impos-
sible. If possible, it would be unjust.
The lands of a State can be justly
apportioned only on the ground of
relative desert. All citizens do not
deserve equally of the State—no, not
even those who, touching its laws, are
blameless. If its lands be equally


apportioned, a fundamental principle
of justice is violated. The State would
be neither a terror to evil-doers nor a
praise to those who do well. The
less deserving would be endowed at
the expense, and to the wrong, of the
more deserving. The State, being the
depository and guardian of the rights
of all the citizens, may not justly
alienate to any citizen, or body of
citizens, any of these rights without
an equivalent. Non potest rex gratiam
ja cere cum injuria et damno aliorum.
The State that acts otherwise is an
unprofitable and wicked steward. But,
if just, the equal apportionment of the
lands of a State among its citizens
would be inexpedient. The well-
being, prosperity, and stability of a
State depend on the progress of its
citizens. A State cannot stand still.
It, must either advance or retrograde.
If it do not advance it must retrograde,
and the end of retrogression is ruin
for facile descensus averni. In order
to advance, the powers of the citizens
must be stimulated. The great agent
of stimulation is hope, and, according
to the advocates of the equal appor-
tionment of a State’s lands themselves,
a main object of hope is the acquisi-
tion of land to an indefinite extent.
If the possibility of this acquisition
be taken away, then hope is weakened,
if not paralysed. Every citizen would


see, in his allotted portion of land, all
that he could hope for: and what a
man seeth, why doth he yet hope for ?
It is for the interest of a State that
every citizen have an opportunity of
doing his best for the State, and that
he avail himself thereof to the utmost:
while, if the lands of a State were
equally apportioned, some citizens
would have an opportunity of doing
more for the State than they would be
eitherable or willing to do, whilstothers
would not have an opportunity of
doing all that they could aud would
do for its benefit. It is for the good
of a State that there be division of
labor. Under the equal apportion-
ment policy all would be tillers of the
ground and keepers of sheep on a
very limited scale. If all were tillers
of the ground and keepers of sheep,
there would be no division of labor.
Every citizen would be his own artizan.
Every one would do everything for
himself, and would be able to do
nothing well. The State would wane
in civilisation, and, in process of time,
would revert to a state of bar-
barism. Moreover, inasmuch as it is
not in man’s nature to be satisfied —the
eye with seeing, the ear with hearing,
nor the heart with possessing—it must
needs be that offences come. If an
offence —adispute: ifa dispute —litiga-
tion : and if litigation —a necessity of


definition. All the above rights would
be contested, in a court of law. In
order to establish a right in a court of
law, there must be a full, clear, and
exact definition of the right: and in
order to give practical value to its
establishment, there must be a remedy.
Incorporeal rights are practically inde-
finable. The right to light is an ease-
ment, under the law of England, and a
semitude under that of ancient Rome
and modern Scotland. Light, in the
legal sense, in each case, means the
Sun’s rays. The Sun’s rays are now
known to consist of three elements—
light, heat, and colour. Although
these three elements serve three dis-
tinct ends, yet practically, for general
purposes, it is impossible to separate
them, so that any one or two of them
may be utilised. But suppose, by some
means, one eliminated from the Sun’s
rays their heating and colouring
elements, and allowed only the lighting
element to reach his neighbour, and
appropriated the heating and colour-
ing elements, he would be frustrating
the object of the law, but would not
be actionable. Why p Because those
who male the law were ignorant of
the threefold properties of the Sun’s
rays, and, being ignorant of them,
they could not precisely define the
right intended to he conveyed.
As to corporeal rights, especially the


right to land, they must be defined
A citizen’s portion of land might, as
to area, be defined from a surveyor’s
notes, but it would be impossible to
define it as to its relative advantages
as to locality, etc. Yet an accurate
definition of these would be absolutely
necessary in order to a perfectly just
decision, or even to a hearing, in a
court of justice, for it acts necessarily
and rightly on the principle De non
apparentibus et non exhtentibus eadem est
ratio. True, decisions are given by
judges most learned in the law, and
whose integrity is unquestioned and
unquestionable, on defective definition,
and yet with the acquiescence of those
concerned. But such decisions are
not absolutely the best, but only the
best obtainable in the present state
of our knowledge ; and acquiescence
in them is based on the conviction
that they are so, and, that, what is
styled substantial justice, has been
rendered. One of the main objects of
the administration of law is the con-
tent of the citizens and the peace of
the State. This end can be most
effectually secured by decisions based
or. a thorough and perfect knowledge
of all the facts in all cases. Why are
the rights in question not defined ?
Because they are not definable. Why ?
Because the laws on which they are
supposed to be based exist only in the


imagination of those who advoeate
them. Again, Übi jus ibi remedium,
and conversely, where there is no
remedy there is no right. Indeed, so
jealous is the law of England on this
point that, for a wrong, without statu-
tory remedy, a remedy is provided
Quod remedium destituitur ipsa re valet
si culpa absit On this principle is
founded the doctrine of remitter,
applied originally to the jusprobrietatis
in land. For the violation of none of
the rights in question does the law
provide a remedy. A legal remedy
can apply only to the party whose
right is violated. If the State, directly
or indirectly, justly or unjustly, de-
prive him of life or maintenance, or
deny him the right to make laws, or
to use a portion of the earth’s surface,
etc., the law can supply no remedy.
In the case of deprivation of life or
maintenance a remedy is impossible.
In the case of denial of the right to
make laws or to use a portion of the
earth’s surface, etc., there is no
remedy. The decision of a court of
law may be invoked. If it be unfavor-
able, the lack of a remedy is expressly
emphasized. It be favorable, it in-
volves only compensation: but com-
pensation is not remedy. The rights
in question, as has been shown, are
not based in the laws of the Creator.
Neither are they recognised by human


law, inasmuch as it has not only not
provided a remedy for the violation of
them, but cannot do so. In fact, the
rights in question are not rights in
the proper sense of the term. They
are but privileges, accorded from con-
siderations of eon ventional expediency,
which is founded in ignorance and
selfishness, unstable as water, and
local as the territory of its exercise.
As rights, in order to be rights, with
all the predicables of rights, must be
based on, and regulated by, the laws
of the Creator, in order to fully under-
stand them these laws must be in-
vestigated. Our physical and intel-
lectual rights are to be ascertained
and understood specially from the
laws regulating matter and mind, cur
moral and spiritual rights specially
from conscience—what is called the
light of Nature, and from Revelation.
If the laws on which health of body and
soundness of mind were ascertained and
obeyed, obedience would constitute a
right to these blessings. If the teach-
ing of conscience, Nature and revela-
tion, respecting the laws upon which
personal, domestic, and social happi-
ness depends was obeyed, then our
obedience would constitute a right to
the possession and enjoyment of it.
If legislators attained a perfect know-
ledge of the laws of the Creator, and
framed their laws in their image and


after their likeness, the rights of
citizens, instead of being obscure and
imperfect, would be clear and perfect,
and instead of being held under the
precarious tenure of the will of selfish
man, they would be held under the
certain tenure of the will of the bene-
volent Creator.
AYhatever the rights of men may be
in themselves, there must be a rule
whereby to exercise them. The char-
acter of that rule must determine
whether the result of the exercise of
them be beneficial or injurious to our-
selves and others. A rule is, therefore,
to be expected, and, in accordance with
the benevolent design manifest in all
the departments of Nature, a rule, in
acting in conformity with which, the
good of ourselves and others would be
secured. There is a rule, and one
realising, this expectation. Man’s
nature being progressive, this rule
has been made known by degrees,
line upon line, precept upon precept,
here a little and there a little, at
sundry times and in divers manners,
but at every stage of disclosure,
embodying all the essential qualities
of a rule, fixed and invariable, pre-
scribed by supreme authority (even
if the idea of a first cause be excluded)
and calculated to secure the true and
substantial happiness of all sentient
beings, especially of man. First,


there was right reason, to enable man
to judge aright of the facts and
phenomena cognisable by the percep-
tive organs especially, and, conscience,
witnessing to the moral character of
his attitude and action in respect of
them. But eian did not avail himself
of either right, reason, or conscience.
Reasoning at every step he trod he
yet mistook his way, and he violated
the law of conscience, according to the
light of Nature herself, putting light
for darkness and darkness for light,
and good for evil and evil for good ;
so that Reason and conscience ceased
to be reliable guides. Guided by
either, or both, or, in addition, by
Nature, as both exhibited her, man
failed, not only in securing true and
substantial happiness, but realised
real and substantial misery. Black-
stone says: “ Man’s corrupt and
clouded faculties have proved unequal
to the task of guiding him to the
attainment of true and substantial
happiness. Providence, in compassion
to our faults and imperfections and
blindness of human nature, hath been
pleased, at sundry times and in divers
manners, to discover and enforce its
laws by a direct revelation. The
moral precepts of the law are, indeed,
of the same original with those of the
laws of Nature.” Elsewhere he says:
“Ample light, hcwever, is now afforded


to man by the benign interference of
divine Providence, which, in compas-
sion to the frailty, imperfection, and
the blindness of human nature, hath
been pleased, at sundry limes and in
divers manners, to discover and enforce
its laws (the laws of Nature) by an
immediate and direet Revelation. The
doctrine thus delivered we call the
revealed or divine law, and they are
to be found in the Holy Scripture.”
Elsewhere he says : “ The moral pre-
cepts of the law are of the same
origin as the law of Nature, but
their intrinsic obligation is of equal
strength and perpetuity. Yet, un-
doubtedly, the revealed law is of
infiuitely more authority than the
ethical systems framed by ethical
writers, and denominated the natural
laws —because the one is the law of
Nature, expressly declared to be so by
God Himself ; the other is only what,
by the assistance of human reason, we
imagine to be a law.” This law, for
present purposes, may be regarded as
the “ Decalogue,” or Ten Command-
ments, summarily comprehended in
the two great Commandments, “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God w'ith all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind ; ”
and “ thou shall love thy neighbour as
thyself.” This rule embodies all the
essential qualities of a rule, as before


enumerated. It is a rule, and not a
compact, for it is obligatory only. It
i« fixed and invariable, for the degree
in which the sentiment is to be
exercised is definitely set forth. It is
prescribed, for it known by all the
leading nations of the world, and the
knowledge of it is in course of com-
munication to every nation, kindled,
and tongue and people. Indeed, it
has been prescribed universally from
the beginning, inasmuch as it has
been written, though not with ink and
pen, yet in fleshly tables of the heart,
leaving all men inexcusable. It is
prescribed by supreme authority. It
is of the Creator, who is supreme, in
the opinion of all who believe in a
great first cause. If it is of nature, it is
supreme, in the opinion of those who
believe Nature to be both cause and
effect. It covers the whole domain
of man’s duty to himself, to his fellow-
men and the Creator, his nature in all
its comprehension, his existence in all
its extension, and all his interests as a
mortal or immortal being, or both.
It is plain, so that he who runs may
read, and a wayfaring man, though a
fool, needs not err therein. It is
proper to man’s nature, for the bands
of love are the proper cords of a man,
for restraint and constraint. It is
sanctioned by reward and punishment,
sure, without contingency, swift, with-


oat delay, free, without foreign inter-
ference, and full, without lack. It
secures the true and substantial happi-
ness of society, as has, in all ages,
been proved in the experience of those
who have used it as a rule of life.
Let us hear the practical conclusion
of the whole matter. The government
of the universe is an absolute auto-
cracy. If we believe in a personal
ruler, He has all power in Heaven
and in earth. None can stay His
hand from working or call Him in
question. If we believe only in
Nature, it, too, is absolutely auto-
cratic, only, unintelligent!} so. Under
this absolute autocracy man has the
perfection of rights, because his rights
are based on, and are guaranteed by,
perfect laws, which are the expression
of perfect intelligence, justice, and
benevolence—the three essential factors
of perfect laws for the government of
sentient, and specially, intelligent and
moral creatures. At all events, the
utmost efforts of right, rea-ou, and
benevolence have not only not formu-
lated, but have not even conceived of
a better system of better laws than
those of Nature and Revelation.
Therefore, absolute autocracy is the
form of government most favourable
to the rights of man. If a man could
be found possessing a perfect know-
ledge of the laws of Nature and


Revelation, and a spirit of perfect
benevolence to apply them, the rights
of tnan, under his rule, would be
perfect in themselves, in their posses-
sion, and in the results of their
exercise. But such a man neither
does exist, nor can exist. It is
possible, however, to approximate to
perfect knowledge and perfect bene-
volence, in a Government, although,
on the principle of the asymptote,
perfection never can be reached.
Whilst no one man possesses either
perfect knowledge or perfect bene-
volence,an approximation to perfection
in both is possible by aggregation.
One man knows something of some
of the laws, and another man knows
something of some other of them,
and so on. The aggregated, scientific,
and moral qualification of experts
guaranteed by a University degree in
the one case, and general public moral
approbation, on the other, though fall-
ing far short of perfection, would
secure the best legislation practicable.
The laws male by such men would be
the wisest and best attainable. The
rights of citizens would be ascer-
tained, respected, and secured. Such
a government is neither unreasonable
nor impracticable. Reason suggests
and justice demands such a govern-
ment for intelligent and moral sub-
jects. Such a government has been


the ideal of all enlightened and philan-
thropic jurisprudents in all ages. It
was illustrated in the ancient Roman
Senate, more fully in the Areopagus,
and, with the additional light of the
Revealed will of (lod, still more fully
in the British Senate. The wisest
and best men of their day framed the
laws in all three cases. Why should
not our laws be framed, and our rights
i)ased on them be defined, by our
wisest and best men ? Experts, it is
true, would require adequate remunera-
tion, but such remuneration would not
imply an increased demand on the
public funds. On the contrary, it
would effect a large saving. Our
present Legislative Assembly consists
of 125 members, costing the country,
directly and indirectly, not less than
£50,000 a year. It the colony were
d.vided into, say, seven electorates, with
seven representatives for each, there
would be 49 instead of 125 members
a reduction as to numbers much to
be desired and long sought. Each
member might receive, say, £7OO a
year, a salary fairly representing the
income of experts, such as University
professors. Forty-nine members would
be amply sufficient to secure the
services of experts in respect of the
interests ot the State in all its
departments as indicated below. 1.
Material, including all dealing with


either the earth’s surface or substance,
as in agriculture, grazing, road and
bridge-making, mining, etc. 2. Intel-
lectual and moral, including secular,
and, may be, religious education,
law, etc. 3. Sanitary, including drain-
age, ventilation, quarantine, etc. 4.
Protective, including police and tnili-
tarv forces, etc. 5. Social, including
marriage, social status, etc. 6. Ex-
change, including finance, demand and
supply, wages, tariff, etc. 7. Inter-
national, including the relation of
foreign States, intercourse with them,
customs, etc. This list is submitted,
not as being by any means complete,
much less exhaustive, but merely as
illustrative and suggestive. Suppose
there were seven experts under each
of these seven heads, when a question
relating to agriculture, e.g., arose, the
experts under the first head would
consider and discuss it in a scientific
and technical point of view. The
experts under the sixth head would
consider and discuss it in a financial
point of view, and so on, of the experts
under the other heads. The question
would then be considered and discussed
in every possible light, and the legis-
lation anent it would be up to the
science of the day, and no more could
be reasonably expected. In point of
fact, all matters involving scientific
knowledge are now referred to experts


at enormous cost of money and time.
On questions of political
such as the relation, obligation, and
responsibility of capital and labour,
our legislators deem it unnecessary to
obtain the opinion of experts. Acting
on their own opinion, whilst utterly
ignorant of the subject under any of
its aspects, they have inflicted, and
they continue to inflict, upon the very
class whose interests they profess to
serve, injuries which ouly a long
course of wise legislation can repair.
As to the mode of election. The
colony might be divided into, say, 49
electorates. There would be not fewer
than seven experts in each depart-
ment, or not fewer than 343 candidates
in all. If there were only one for
each department in each electorate,
the seven would be returned. If
there were more than one for each
department, then their names might
be submitted to the ballot, and the
candidate polling the most votes would
be returned. The object would be to
secure one expert for each department
for each electorate. There would be
no innovation either in the principle
of representation or in the mode of
voting. Suppose the Legislative Coun-
cil were composed of, say, seven
experts nominated by the Legislative
Assembly, and appointed by the
Governor in Council, the Governor


being as presently appointed by the
Sovereign, we would have a Constitu-
tional G-overnment framed on the lines
of the British Constitution—the same
in principle, but vastly superior in
character and usefulness, and in all
the qualities essential to the intelligent
and affectionate obedience and well"
being and propenty of those sub-
ject to it. Both houses would be,
what the House of Commons once
was, one of the national models of
the correct use of our noble language,
of debate conducted on the strictest
principles of chivralous courtesy, of
dignity begotton of high intellectual
and social training, and, lastly, it
would be a model of virtue, silently
but surely ameliorating and elevating
the moral tone of society, till vice, as
ashamed, would hide her head, and
righteousness, which exalteth a nation,
would run down like a mighty stream.
At the present time, the most im-
portant crisis in the history of Greater
Britain, and, perhaps, of the world,
the subject of the “ rights of man,”
demands special attention, and ought
to receive it.




