

DELIVERED IN THE MECHANICS’ HALL, MELBOURNE,
BEFORE THE
JOHN KNOX YOUNG MEN’S ASSOCIATION, if
ON WEDNESDAY, MAY 10th, 185-1,
M
BY
m
EDWARD STONE PARKE li,
Sg
MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF VICTORIA, AND FORMERLY W
ASSISTANT PROTECTOR OP ABORIGINES. W
PuWfo&eß iJj) meanest.
MELBOURNE:
s
if
m
m
i
m
m
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HUGH M'COLL,
LONDON ; JAMES NISBET & Co.
EDINBURGH: JOHN JOHNSTONE.




ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA,
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED IN THE MECHANICS’ HALL, MELBOURNE,
BEFORE THE
JOHN KNOX YOUNG MEN’S ASSOCIATION,
*
ON WEDNESDAY, MAY 10th, 1854,
EDWARD STONE PARKE 11,
MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF VICTORIA, AND FORMERLY
ASSISTANT PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINES.
Ihiblisijeß Dg Request.
MELBOURNE :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED HY HUGH M'COLL.
LONDON : JAMES NFSBET & Co.
EDINBURGH: JOHN JOHNSTONE.
1854,




U OOJJ / r. '
Q- 8- 71
PREFACE.
The following Lecture is published in obedience to the request of the
numerous and respectable auditory to whom it was addressed, and by
the solicitation of many friends, who deem its circulation a mea-
sure likelv to be attended with benefit to the Aborigines themselv.es.
The deep interest manifelted on the occasion of its delivery,
afforded me peculiar gratification, as indicating that the unhappy race
for whose interests I have been so long concerned, have still a large
share in the sympathies and benevolence of the Christian public.
It has long been matter of regret to my mind, that the various
sections of the Christian Church in this colony have made such
inadequate efforts to fulfil their known and acknowledged duty, in
reference to their perishing brethren; and that they appear to
have yielded so readily to the false and destructive notion, so
commonly entertained, that all efforts to benefit the Aborigines have
unavoidably failed—that their case is hopeless —that the race is
doomed. If the publication of this lecture have the effect of
counteracting this error, so utterly unworthy of the followers of
Him who sent His Gospel to all nations,> —of rousing the energies
of the Church to efforts commensurate with the forcible claims


and urgent necessities of these perishing people, of inducing
Christian and humane men to stand boldly forward as their friends,
and insist that they shall not be needlessly immolated before the
march of civilization, I shall indeed be amply rewarded for the
efforts I have here made. The only difficulty I have found has
been that of making an appropriate selection from the abundant
materials with which a long residence and intimate acquaintance
with these people have furnished me. To the lecture, as delivered,
I have appended a few illustrative notes, and added information
on some points which were unavoidably omitted for want of
time.


ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA,
A LECTURE.
The subject to which your attention is to be directed this
evening, is invested with much interest and importance, Next
to the study of the Supreme Mind of the Universe, of its
wondrous creations, its glorious developments, its mighty and
benevolent purposes, as expressed in the whisperings of nature,
but chiefly in the clear and distinct voice of revelation, no topic
has a more powerful claim on our attention than the study of
Man, —in the various phases of his existence, his physical and
moral condition and capabilities, the causes of his deterioration
to barbarism, and the means of his progress to civilization and
perfection. The science of Ethnography has of late years engaged
more of the attention of the philosophic world than formerly.
To examine the different races of mankind, —to note their pecu-
liarities, — to investigate the sources of their diversities, —to
rescue from oblivion the varied details illustrative of the physical
and psychological history of the uncivilized portion of the human
raC e, —these are pursuits fraught with deep interest to the
natural philosopher, and involving many important results to
the cause of humanity. But to the Christian philosopher these
enquiries have a far higher interest. The study of human
nature should be pursued by him with reference to the attain-
ment of infinitely superior objects than the acquisition of merely
scientific intelligence. In his view, man, whatever be the varie-
ties of his colour, his social grade, or civil condition, stands forth
as the Creature of God, the offspring of a common parent,
the inheritor of a nature identical with his own, in its origin, its
capabilities, and its destination. If he scan the diversity of
nations, it is not for the gratification of mere philosophic
curiosity, but to guage and estimate the extent and urgency of
the claims of his fellow-men. If he dive to the lowest depths of
human barbarism, and surveys human nature in its ultimate
degradation, the effect should not be to pamper his self-conceit


in the pride of a superior civilization, but to appeal to his deep-
est sympathies and his most active beneficence, that he may bring
up his fellow-sinner from the darkness of his dungeon, and
place him in the full radiance of the “ Sun of Righteousness.’'’
The pursuit of these investigations, in reference to the “ Abo-
rigines of Australia,” I regard not merely as an interesting
topic of intellectual study, but to an association of Christian
young men, a point of moral obligation. You have listened to
the tale of the missionary or the traveller, as they told of far
distant lands, where men grovelled in destitute barbarism, or in
a semi-civilized heathenism, not less dark and deadly in its
aspects ; and your hearts have burned within you with pity for
suffering humanity, and desire to aid in its elevation. Your
sympathies cannot be less deep, your sense of what is due to your
fellow man ought not to be less strong, when the object of your
pity is your “ neighbour,” and stands full in your view, in all
the abjectness of his social and moral condition. In the land in
which we live the highest civilization and almost the lowest bar-
barism dwell in juxta-position; and no rightly-governed Chris-
tian mind can be placed in such a relation, without a more vivid
appreciation of its obligations and opportunities, as to its duty
to God and to.man.
I think it must be deemed a subject of reproach, that though
the aboriginal inhabitants of this land have been so long and so
closely under our observation, there is so great an amount of
ignorance as to their real character and habits, and capability
for moral and intellectual improvement. Bad as their condition
unquestionably is, its aspects have been darkened by prejudice
and misrepresentation. Scarcely a single writer who has noticed
them can be found, who has not fallen into great mistakes in
reference to their peculiar habits and character 5 and some of
these mistakes have been cruel, and even fatal in their results.
In the brief sketches which I propose to bring before you this
evening, I shall endeavour to expose and correct some of these
mistakes.
I must take occasion to express my gratification that this
particular subject has been selected for consideration by an
association of Christian young men. It will be my aim to give,
to the uttermost of my ability, correct information, by dwelling
more upon the results of actual observation, than upon mere
speculative theories, whether my own or others. Although the
subject of the lecture has been announced in general terms as
"The Aborigines of Australia,’’ my remarks will have more
specially reference to the Aborigines of Victoria: To some who
are present, much of what I have to adduce cannot have the
charm of novelty. There must, however, be a large number of


persons now in the community, whose migration hither has been
too recent, to have given them much opportunity of becoming
personally acquainted with the peculiarities and prospects of the
aboriginal population. Among these, more especially, it is my
wish and purpose to raise up friends for the wanderer, whose
country is being rapidly alienated from his possession.
The range of enquiry presented by our subject is somewhat
extensive. Within the limits assigned to this lecture it is
scarcely practicable to do more than trace out the outlines of a
sketch, which should exhibit the aborigine as he has been, and as
he is. I must therefore condense as much as possible the infor-
mation 1 have to furnish. Several years ago, a section of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science drew up and
circulated a series of enquiries respecting the human race, with
the view of investigating many interesting questions of a psycho-
logical, physiological, and philological character, respecting those
races, more particularly, whose existence was passing away. I
shall take the general outline of that paper, and the more im-
portant questions there propounded, as the basis of the remarks
1 have to make.*
The Physical Characteristics of the people first claim
attention. The designation “ black fellow' ’ has been constantly
and universally assigned to them. It is an utter misnomer. I
have seen about 1500 of these people in the course of my expe-
rience, and I never met with one to whose complexion the term
black could be really applied. Uncleanly habits, the use of pig-
ments and unguents, as charcoal and fat, in many instances
darken the original colour ;t but when the heats of summer
compel them to frequent bathing, or when the progress of civiliz-
ation leads to habits of personal cleanliness, then the true colour
is seen. The most usual colour is a chocolate brown. There
are many individuals to be found of a lighter shade. A few I
have met with, whose age and history demonstrated their pure
* The document referred to above, originated in the reading of a paper at the
Birmingham meeting of the British Association, in 1839, 1 On the Extinction of some
varieties of the Human Race.” by Dr. Prichard. At the suggestion of the Natural History
section, “ a sum of money was voted by the association for printing a set of queries to be
addressed to those who may travel or reside in parts of the globe inhabited by the races
threatened with extinction." At the same time the Ethnographical Society of Paris
printed a set of questions on the same subject, and the committee of the British Asso-
ciation acknowledged the assistance they had derived from the comprehensive character
and general arrangement of the Ethnographical Society’s list. The queries were
arranged in 89 paragraphs, under the following sectional heads : —l, Physical Character.
2, Language. §, Individual and Family Life. 4, Buildings and Monuments. 5,
Works of Art, 6, Domestic Animals. 7, Government and Laws. 8, Geography and
Statistics, 9. Social Relations. 19, Religion, Superstitions, &c. To carry out the
entire enquiry, in reference to the natives of Australia, would require a bulky volume.
I have selected those topics which are most important, and likely tc be most interesting
to a public audience
f It was the custom among the women to cover the bodies of newly-born children
with powdered charcoal.


Australian origin, quite as light-complexioned as the half-caste
children. One instance I have seen of a female in the interior, so
light as to have a clear and distinct blush on her cheek ; and
yet she was unquestionably the child of native parents, born long
before the white man entered the land.
There is much variation in stature; quite as much as among
Europeans. The shortest male adult I have met with was about
four feet nine inches, the tallest six feet two inches. Stature is
obviously much influenced by local circumstances. On the basin
of the Murray and its tributaries, in places where abundance of
animal foodisfound, inthesupplyof fish, and of vegetable sustenance
in the farinaceous roots of the rush, the men generally attain a
finer physical developement. Here tall men are frequently met
with. But on the arid plains, and in those localities where the
supplies of food are comparatively scanty, and frequently inter-
rupted, a stunted growth is the rule and not the exception. I
have met with but very few instances indeed of tall women. The
tallest would not exceed five feet five inches. In common with
all uncivilized people, the lot of the females is hard and wasting.
Brutal treatment, frequent privations, and too early marital
associations, combine to impoverish and deteriorate the consti-
tution of the aboriginal female. The same causes give a much
more limited duration to the life of the women than the men.
Aged men I know, who were noted as aged men -by the earliest
dwellers in the country; and I think it is by no means uncommon
for the wild denizen of the forest to reach the ordinary limit of
threescore and ten. But the women rapidly decay, and I doubt
whether many could be found who had passed the age of fifty.
It is an opinion generally entertained that the native youth
attain the attributes of puberty at a much earlier period than
Europeans. I demur to that opinion. I have marked the
developement of children, whose birth I have recorded, and at
twelve or thirteen years of age there were no greater indications
of physical or mental progress than in their white brethren. I
have marked, too, the progress of others, whose age, as children,
when I first knew them, I could approximately estimate, or
exactly ascertain, and I found that the attainment of puberty
could scarcely be said to take place at a period any earlier than
ordinary. In fact, as the native-born youth of European deriva-
tion indicate a more rapid developement than in the colder clime
of our father land, I do not think that any real difference
exists.
I am not an implicit believer in all the dogmas of the phre-
nologist. I think the science, as yet, but imperfectly known. I
cannot admit, for instance, that the peculiarities of bodily con-
formation can be the cause of the peculiarities of mental
copstlliitioii; but l ean readily admit that a variation in mental


development may become the occasion’ of a corresponding varia-
ation in the conformation of the head. I do not, therefore, lay
much stress upon phrenological developments, as indicating an
unvarying character and uncontrollable propensities. It is,
however, interesting to observe that the facial angle in the Aus-
tralian aborigine approaches closely to the Caucasian type, if,
indeed, it be not in some instances identical with it.* The fore-
head is, however, generally narrow, and this narrowness is
often characteristic of the entire head, indicating, according
to phrenologists, among other deficiencies, the absence of the
quality called conscientiousness. So far as 1 have been able to
investigate the subject, the greatest deficiencies in the develop-
ments of the aboriginal cranium are in those organs which are
regarded as indicative of motal qualities. In the general contour
of the face, there is in some a close resemblance to the European
expression. Two features only exhibit a marked, difference : the
somewhat flattened nose and, distended nostril, and the thicker
lips. But for these distinctive features, and in many individuals
they are by no means exaggerated, I have often seen fine young
men, who, with an identic complexion, might stand without
remark by the side of their white brethren.
The colour and form of the hair is a topic indicated for inves-
tigation in the document I have referred to, issued by the British
Association, as one of the characteristic features which mark the
distinction of races. In this particular there is a remarkable
uniformity. The colour is universally jet black. I have seen,
in a few instances, an approach to the curly and woolly appear-
ance of the Negro type; but nothing decidedly identical. For-
merly it was the custom to affix the teeth of kangaroo, the claws of
birds and shell-fish, and similar trinkets, to the hair, as memorials
of particular events, or of deceased relatives ; but that has almost
disappeared. Those natives who become cleanly in their habits,
and adopt the comb and brush, with the free use of oil, speedily
exhibit a luxuriant mass of jet black curls, which, apart from other
associations, might be the envy of many a lank-haired exquisite.
Some travellers have noticed the slenderness of the lower
extremities as a marked peculiarity in the physical conformation
of the native of Australia. They are certainly not so fully deve-
loped as in other races. Yet with this apparent defect, accurate
observation will discover much greater pliability of muscle. A
native can use his toes almost as readily as his fingers, in picking
up and transferring even the smallest article laying on the ground.
An amusing instance of this facility may be seen in one of the
illustrations to Sir Thomas Mitchell’s first expeditions in the
* The facial angle in the Australian is from 75 to 85 ; in the European 80 to 90


interior, where the natives of the Darling are represented as
watching the blacksmith at his work, looking in his face, while
they are purloining his tools with their toes, and passing them by
the same means from one to the other.
There is, however, great diversity in physical conformation and
corporeal appearance among the aborigines; quite as much so
as among any European race. In the representations given by
Sir George Grey and Capt. Stokes, of the natives of Western and
North-Western Australia, I see marked differences from those
tribes with which I have been most familiar. The high cheek
bone, the protuberant lips, and the receding chin, give these
p 3ople a very inferior appearance to the aboriginal inhabitants
of Victoria.* Some of this diversity may be attributed to local
circumstances. Plentiful food, and 'easily acquired, give a full,
and often handsomely developed figure; while scanty food,
frequent privations, and severity of climate, give an angularity and
skeleton-like appearance to the frame, repugnant to our notions
of what is pleasing in form.
1 have had opportunities daring the last five or six years of
marking the effects of regular habits, both upon adult and
juvenile aborigines. Where the manners and rules of civilised
life are permanently adopted, the results are strongly marked
and highly satisfactory. A superior physical development,
fostering and promoting a more hopeful and improvable mental
development, is the certain consequence. Put where the com-
forts and appliances of civilization are temporarily sought, and
made to alternate with the exposure and occasional privations of
their original mode of life, I have found the natives to become
more highly susceptible to disease, and I have had to regret in
many instances their premature death, from pulmonary and other
intlammatory affections.
Geographical and Statistical Information may next
claim our attention. And here an important question presents
itself to our minds. What was the origin of this people?
Were they originally emigrants from the Asiatic continent? or
is it uossible that their ancestors may have found their way across
the Indian Ocean from Central Africa ?t I think the question
of an American or Polynesian origin must be at once settled in
the negative, when we mark the well-defined differences which
* There is unquestionably much difference in the appearance of shine of the
Victorian tribes. The descriptions I have given above would be too flattering as to
some of the tribes of the wi st and north-west, in their original condition.
+ This opinion was maintained by Baron Field, late Judge of the Supreme Court,
New South Wales, in a paper read by him to the Philosophical Society of Sydney in
the year 1822. By many ingenious arguments he endeavours to prove that the Abori-
gines came from Ethiopia.


exist between tnc races. The theory that appears to me the most
tenable is that which regards them as a mixed race, between the
Malay of the Eastern Archipelago and the Papuan or New Gui-
nea Negro. It is one of the many strange anomalies of Austra-
lasian geography that a branch of this Papuan race should have
been found in Tasmania, whose woolly hair and blacker complexion
clearly distinguish them from the Continental Australian; anti
yet that no branch of the same family should be found on the
shores of the mainland nearest the presumed locality where the
race originated. No one who has been much associated with
the natives of this country could have failed to remark the fre-
quent occurrence of a close resemblance to the Malayan type or
family of the human race. I could readily collect within the
lange of my own observation a score or two of individuals, who
might be blended with the small-featured Malayans, and not be
very easily distinguished from them. There is another circum-
stance which indicates a Malayan origin. I have invariably
found, when endeavouring to trace the origin of their customs
or superstitions, that the north was pointed to as the direction
from which their traditions came. In no single instance have I
met with any reference to a southern origin. The occurrence of
w r ords of eastern derivation is another important fact illustrating
this part of our enquiry; for it is a remarkable circumstance that wmrds
of Hindostanee, Persian, and Sanscrit origin are to be found in some
of the dialects on this southern coast; and there can be little
doubt that a careful collation of the different dialects with the
Indian languages, would exhibit many coincidences, and throw
much light on the origin of the Australian tongues.
I found on my first investigations into the character and
position of these people, that the country was occupied by a
number of petty nations, easily distinguished from each other by
their having a distinct dialect or language, as wall as by other
peculiarities. Each occupied its own portion of country, and, so
far as I could learn, never intruded on each other’s territory,
except when engaged in hostilities, or invited by regularly ap-
pointed messengers. Thus, for the sake of example, the country
on the northern and eastern shores of the Port Philip Bay, and to
the northward and westward up to Mount Macedon w r as inhabited
by the Wawurrong; the country around Geelong and to the
northward of that place by the Witowurrong; the Upper Goul-
burn by the Taoungurong; the Lower Goulburn and parts of
the Murray by the Pangurang; the plains and tributaries of,
the Loddon by the Jajow'urrong; the Pyrenees and country to
the westward by the Knindowurrong: the terminations wurro or
wurrong referring evidently to diversity of speech, as wurro,
wurrong, in several dialects, mean the mouth, and by a meter T iflf


speech or language. These petty nations have been erroneously
designated tribes, as the “Port Philip tribe/' “the Goulburn
tribe/' “the Loddon tribe/’ and so on. But the term tribe is
more correctly applicable to an association of families and indi-
viduals, nearly or remotely related to each other, and owning
some individual as their head or chief. And this distinction
exists most clearly among the aborigines. Each of the nations
or languages I have instanced, as well as others I have thought
it too tedious to enumerate, is divided into several tribes, some-
times as many as ten or twelve, each of which has a distinctive
appellation, known by such terminations as bulluk, people,—
goondeet, men, — lar, or in other dialects, willam or illam, house
or dwelling place. Thus we have on the Goulburn, the Yowang-
illam, “the dwellers on the mountain/' —the Yerrawillam, “the
dwellers on the river;" —and on the Loddon, the Kalkalgoondeet,
“ the men of the forestand from Pilawin, the native name of
the Pyrenees, and Borurnbeet, the well-known lake, we have
Pilawin-bulluk and Borumbeet-bulluk. The terms Mallegoondeet
and Millegoondeet are very precise in their application, as indi-
cating the men of the Malle country, or the inhabitants of the
banks ot the Murray, which is known, for a very considerable
portion of its stream, by the native name of Mille; One tribe in
my own neighbourhood, and a rather numerous one, is designated
the IVorng-arra-gerrar, literally, the u leaves of the stringy bark."
Each of these tribes had jts own district of country, its extent
at least, and in some instances its distinct boundaries, being well
known to the neighbouring tribes. The subdivision of the territory
even went further than that; each family.had its own locality; and
to this day the older mfen can clearly point out the land which
their fathers left them, and which they once called their own.
It is fair to presume, from these known and well-ascertained
facts, that as there is so general a resemblance among all the
Australian aborigines that have hitherto been discovered, that
similar geographical divisions and territorial distinctions exist
among them.
It is a great mistake to suppose that these different people
take a wide range in their wanderings. That is one of the com-
mon errors that prevail in reference to their social state. Sir
Thomas Mitchell fell strangely into this error, when he supposed
that his Sydney native, travelling with him to the previously
unknown regions of Australia Felix, was able to communicate
with all the different tribes he encountered even to the far
Glenclg. There is tolerably plain evidence that he either mis-
understood his own supposed interpreter, or was grossly deceived
W him, in the fact that scarcely one of his native names of


localities in tins colony have been verified.* My own ouserva-
tion among these people, during a period of fourteen years,
convinces me that the range of their migrations is ordinarily very
limited. Very few of the natives of the Upper Loddon —the
Jajowurrong —have seen the Murray; and only three or four
natives of the Murray could ever be induced to visit the Loddon
Aboriginal Establishment. In 1843, the Bolokepar, or Lake
Boloke tribe, visited that establishment. But though the lake is
not a hundred miles from the Loddon, the tribes had never previ-
ously met. It was with difficulty all parties could be kept in
harmony. One of the most intelligent of the Worngarragerra,
(whose country, by the way, was even nearer to them than the
Loddon,) said to me indignantly, when remonstrated with for his
unfriendliness,- “ Mainmait talle, mainmait mirri-par-gar, mainmait
nalderrun; yurrong ” that is, u they are foreign in speech, they are
foreign in countenance, they are foreign altogether—they are no
good !” On that occasion I witnessed an interesting trait of
native manners. The tribes were formally and ceremoniously
introduced to each other, by an old man of an intermediate tribe,
naming each individual in succession, waving his hand towards
him at the same time, and giving his parentage, and sometimes a
particular incident in the history of his family. Along the main
river lines the communications may be more extended; but lam
satisfied that, ordinarily, a native has been fearful of travelling far
from his own district, except under the protection of the white
man. k
The fact I have just adverted to is of some importance, as
showing the of expecting that a solitary missionary
or two, or a single educational establishment, should exercise any
beneficial influence on tribes remote from their own particular
locality.
The question, What is the probable number of these poor
people within the limits of the colony ? is difficult to ascertain,
and it is a painful subject to pursue. Eor the previous question
should be examined, what was their probable number when the
country was first colonized ? I may reason by analogy, from what
is known to what is unknown. In the year 1843 I endeavoured
# For the sake of example; the true native name of the lake called “Boga,”by
Mitchell is “ Goorm but“boge,” in the Wiembar dialect, spoken in that vicinity,
means “to swim.” When in the vicinity of the Loddon, Sir Thomas had a conference
with some natives, of whom he gives a favourable description ; he supposed that he was
conversing with them about Lake Alexandrine, by its native name “ Kaymga. I have
long been in communication with most of these natives, and related to them what the
gallant colonel has published respecting them, Their version was totally and ludicrously
at variance with the account given by him. lam thoroughly certain not one of them
had either seen or heard of a place so remote from them as Lake Alexandnnh.


to take a nominal census of the aboriginal population, in the
district extending from the Goulburn on the east, to the Upper
Wirnmera on the west, and from the great dividing range between
the coast rivers and the interior waters on the south, and the
Malle country on the north. I found then, and registered by
name, in their respective families and tribes, about 1100 indivi-
duals.* There were some localities originally more populated
than this. Taking the whole range of the colony of Victoria, I
think 7500 would be a close approximation to the number of the
aboriginal population at the foundation of the colony. I doubt
whether more than one-third of this number exist now. This is a
subject which I would handle with tenderness. Ido not want to
revive bygone exasperations. I can have no pleasure in utter-
ing vague accusations. But the truth must and ought to
be told. In two districts at least of this colony, the extreme
eastern and western,! a fearful sacrifice of human life has un-
* Part of this census is printed in eMenso in the Legislative Council Papers of New
South Wales, for 1845.
+ The statements of ex-protectors on this painful subject have been on several
occasions cavilled at as exaggerations: eg. the i'lustrative reference I felt it necessary
to make in a recent discussion in the Legislative Council, on tire question of admitting
natives to give evidence in courts of justice, to the atrocity perpetrated by an individual
in the western district, at an early period of its settlement by poisoning # number of
natives with arsenic. Notwithstanding the doubts then expressed by some estimable
gentlemen as to the authenticity of the fact, it is unquestionable ; and the truth of the
statement has been acknowledged to tbe writer by several gentlemen who were at the
time resident in the district, who regarded the horrid deed with the execration it
merited. The following statement isTrom an authority which will not be questioned in the
colony of Victoria. It is an extract from ‘‘A Report on the Condition, Capabilities,
and Prospects of the Australian Aborigines,” by William Westgarth, Esq., late M.L C,
for Melbourne, and published in 1846. It is a painful illustration of the dire events
sometimes resulting from ihe occupation of the country—
“To the west and southwest of Mount Rouse, there occur extensive tracts of
those curious formations termed by the settlers * stony rises,’ and consisting of innumer-
able heaps of fragments of rocks, forming hillocks or ranges, in general not exceeding
20 to 50 feet in height, distributed in endless variety, and traversing every possible
direction. Spread almost continuously over hundreds of square miles, these rugged and
dangerous tracts, altogether impervious to horsemen, served as a retreat or hiding place
for the numerous aborigines who occupied that part of the country on the first approach
of the depasturing colonists. The sheep and catde of the settlers were repeated i/at tacked
and carried off to these inaccessible wilds, where the blacks were occasionally descried
by those in pursuit, luxuriating in all the waste of savage and uncontrolled appetite,
with their mangled and half-roasted prey. The provocation of such annoying and
revolting scenes, the privacy and solitude, the absence of all witnesses, were too much
for the infirmity of human nature. The blacks were in their turn followed and
attacked, and repeatedly shot with very little ceremony. The writer had occasion to
visit this part of the country about two years ago (June, 1844). The blacks were then
still very troublesome in spearing cattle and driving away sheep. There was a ‘ native
township,’ as it is termed, on the banks of the Eumaralla Lake or swamp, where the
stony rises in that part of the country commence. The aborigines generally encamped
there during a portion of the year, for the purpose of fishing, with occasional rambling over
the neighbouring country. Mount Eeles, an adjoining volcanic hill, with a large and roman-
tic crater, appears to have been a favourite resort, their repeated visits having worn a
distinct track to the summit. At the period above alluded to, these Eumaralla blacks
were stated to be about two hundred in number ; but two years previously, when this
locality was first taken up for pasturage, the township was said to contain five hundred.
There could be no reasonable doubt but that during these two years at least two hundred
of these blacks had been shot or otherwise deprived of life, in various encounters wills.


questionably taken place, whether necessary or justifiable I will not
now attempt to discuss. Within my own immediate district
[i.e. the Campaspe, Loddon, and Wimmera country, ) I know of
every individual life that lias been sacrificed, from the foundation
of the colony; and I am happy to say the number is compara-
tively small, though still bearing a sevenfold proportion to the
number of colonists slain by the natives. Eor several years past
collisions between the races have been unknown, with the
exception of the Murray country, where unhappily several mur-
ders of white men are believed to have taken place recently,
chiefly of solitary travellers, some of whom are known to have
been wandering about in a state of almost perpetual intoxication.
Among the causes that have been referred to as tending to
the rapid decrease of the aboriginal population is one which I
I must notice as delicately as I can, because it ought to be and
shall be refuted. It has the authority of a distinguished name,
and has been frequently adverted to by various writers on the
aborigines, as a statement - implicitly credited, and by some wri-
ters on the varieties of the human race as an important and
illustrative philosophical fact. Count Strzelecki asserts, that he
has ascertained with reference to various aboriginal tribes, in-
cluding those of New Zealand, New South Wales, Van Diemairis
Land, and North America, that the aboriginal female, after cohab-
iting with Europeans, loses the power of bearing children to the
men of her own race, and is only capable of bearing children to
the white man. I.give to that statement an unqualified and
indignant denial. 1 say indignant, because I have reason to
apprehend that the source of that statement may be found in
certain preconceived noflons, of a sceptical tendency, as to the
origin of the human race, which ignore the Scriptural statement
that man has one common parent, and that God has made of one
blood all nations upon earth. Upon facts which have come under
my own personal observation, not isolated, but of frequent occur-
rence,! base that denial.* I never knew a singleinstance corrobora-
the white settlers. The natural consequence of these aggressions was a state of incur' •
able mutual distrust; the blacks, though generally keeping out of the way, occasionally
mustering in numbers, and attacking the shepherds in charge of the live stock, or even
assailing the huts at the out-stations. One of the settlers in that locality, a man of a
strong and muscular frame, had on one occasion been attacked in his hut by a large
party of blacks ; and after making a desp°rate and destructive defence, had been left to
all appearance dead with nearly a do*en spears in his body. He recovered, however,
and re-ap]Tcaring among his terrified and astonished foes, received from them the appel-
lation of ‘ the devil,’ or as nearly to the etfect of that personage as the aboriginal
language and ideas would permit. It was botterdcnown to the neighbours than to the
civil authorities, that on subsequent opportunities, ‘ the devil’ had very amply revenged •
himself.”
* Soon after the publication of Count Strzelecki’s work in this colony, my attention
was officially directed to this remarkable statement. Although fully satisfied that it
was utterly erroneous, I instituted a full inquiry among the aborigines themselves, and
for years after kept the subject in view, as one requiring careful and accurate observa.
tion. The resnlt of that enquiry and observation is the unqualified contradiction-
given above.


tive of that most objectionable assertion. But, on the contrary, I
have known an aboriginal female to live for months with a white
man, who wished formally to make her his wife, and who actually
did subsequently marry an aboriginal woman in South Australia,
—to leave that man, and become a most debased creature, —to
bear subsequently a half-caste child, now a pupil in the
Loddon Aboriginal School, and then becoming the wife of
one of her own race, and kept faithful by the terror of his arm,
to bear twin children to him before her death, which took place
after the birth of a third native child. Let that fact suffice, on
a subject which 1 would not have noticed, but for the imperative
necessity for denying a statement so fraught with injurious con-
sequences.
There are many causes which have .conspired to keep the abo-
riginal population comparatively small. Intestine wars between
the tribes frequently caused great sacrifice of life. Whole tribes
have been exterminated by sudden attacks and nocturnal surprises,
before the Europeans colonized the country. But one eflect of
colonization, unquestionably, has been the diminution of these wars;
and from this cause only there has not been any great sacrifice of
life, since they came under my observation. In fact, it has been
acknowledged to me by the natives themselves, and that in signi-
ficant terms, that the effect of their association with the colonists,
has been the preservation of life. e( Before you came here/’ said
one man tome, “ the country was strewed with bones, and we
were always at war; but now you say. Do not fight, do not kill;
it is a strange speech.”
There is a dreadful superstition among them, which in its effects
would alone be sufficient to keep the population small. It is well
known to many. I will only briefly refer to it. The native, in
his original state, seems never to have thought it possible that
death could occur from natural causes, except, perhaps, in extreme
old age. If his relatives died, it could only be by occult hostile
influences, brought to bear by the charms and incantations of his
enemies. The deadly influence or messenger came from the
ground, sent by the dread destroyer whom they secretly fear and
sometimes worship. Directly the breath is out of the body, they
set to work to ascertain the authors of the evil. The body is laid
out, and the ground carefully swept around it, two male relations
then dig a small trench of an elliptical form round the body, and
carefully examine the ground till they come to a perforation in the
earth. ‘ This they are almost sure to find from the numerous in-
sects which live in the earth, or burrow in the ground to deposit
their chrysalides. The direction and bearings are carefully ex-
amined, and soon the tribe is fixed upon who are supposed to have
put this deadly witchcraft in practice. Eevenge becomes then a
sacred duty; and it is blindly and cruelly sought. The avengers,


usually the male relatives, go «ut, and treacherously watch an op-
portunity of slaughtering some member of the supposed hostile
tribe, who no sooner falls a victim, than his kidney fat is torn from
his reeking body, and the revenge is complete. Then come re-
prisals, and thus the work of blood and death goes on continually
diminishing the people.
I need not say 1 have combated this dire evil with all my
might, amongst those who have been most under my influence
with complete success. Most of the young men repudiate the
superstition; and I believe it is now by no means frequently
practised in any part of the colony.
The subject of disease is one which cannot with propriety be
dwelt upon on this occasion. I shall therefore dismiss it with only
one or two remarks. The number of diseases which afflicted the
aboriginal race have been much increased since their association
with Europeans, and diseases which unquestionably existed among
them in a mild form, have been by that association rendered viru-
lent and deadly.* The diseases most prevalent are dysentery,
usually the result of chronic disease of the liver, rheumatism,
pulmonary affections, small pustular eruptions extending over the
whole body, caused in the first instance by personal uncleanness,
and occasionally low congestive fever.
And there is one dire evil doing its work of death among them)
as among those who call themselves a superior race; —the evil
which our customs sanction, which our legislation fosters, —and
before which our population are falling almost as thickly as the
slain in battle. It is the deadly spirit-bottle ! If the vast mass
of human life which has been sacrificed in this colony to this
Apollyon of humanity, since the commencement of the gold dis-
coveries, could be collected together, there would be found the
bodies of many of the unfortunate aborigines, who once shrunk
from the agent of evil as poisonous and destructive.
I must not, however, omit to notice one dreaded scourge of the
human race to which the natives are not altogether strangers.
It is mixed up with their darkest and deadliest superstitions. In
the latter end of the year 1840, the aborigines of all the neigh-
bouring districts were in a fearful state of excitement, in conse-
quence of the forcible capture and temporary incarceration of
some hundreds of their number, by the military and police au-
thorities. Two lives were sacrificed on the spot, and several sickly
* The concurrent testimony of the natives has convinced me that prior to the arrival
of the colonists there was a mild eruptive disease prevalent among them, somewhat an-
alogous to the Yaws among the West Indian negroes ; but that the real scourge of man's
sensuality, was not known among them, till the period of their association with the whites.
Its effects were frightful and in many cases deadly, in the ear ier years of colonial history.
1 now rarely hear of its existence.


people subsequently died through the effects of the fright and excite-
ment. On that occasion, several of the natives informed me con-
fidentially that destruction was coming upon the white population,
not even excepting those whom they knew to be their friends. It
was known that they were practising secret incantations with this
object. The effects were described, graphically enough, as pro-
ducing dreadful sores, dysentery, blindness, and death. The
“Mindi” was to come, 1 did not at the time regard the prediction
as of much import. But subsequently, ascertaining that the scars
of the small pox were termed “lillipook mindi, ” the scales of the
Mindi, and the plague itself, which was said to come in the dust,
as “ rnonola mindi, ” the dust of the Mindi, I was able to identify
the threatened agent of destruction as the small pox, of the ravages
of which in former times there are traditions and traces among the
natives of the interior. It is believed to be in the power of the
large serpent "Mindi," the supposed incarnation of the destroying
spirit, to send this plague forth in answer to the appeals and incan-
tations of those who seek the destruction of their foes.
There can be no doubt that this pestilence has, in former periods,
made fearful havoc among the aboriginal population. It has
never been known, however, since the arrival of the whites. The
few individuals who are to be met with, who are marked with the
disease, are not less than thirty years of age.
I shall now direct your attention to the subject of Language.
We have here another of those strange anomalies which mark the
country and the people. The diversity of speech, the number of
dialects, and probably of distinct languages, are amazing. I have
already spoken of the principal tongues or dialects around our im-
mediate neighbourhood, as marking a kind of national existence.
These dialects greatly vary from each other. There are affinities
existing among them which mark the course in which the popula-
ton has migrated. Thus the Wawurrong dialect is closely related
to the Taoungurong on the Goulburn; and along the main river
lines the relationship appears to be closer than exists with the
dialects spoken among the western and coast tribes. The natives
themselves notice a great number of dialects, but some are
only distinguished by variations in pronunciation, the words being
the same. There are, however, languages or dialects so distinct
in some of their most common words, as the pronouns, the most
commonly used adverbs, and particles, that from their peculiar
grammatical construction, a person acquiring the knowledge of one,
would not be able readily to understand the dialect next in locality,
without being acquainted with these distinct words and their com-
binations, although the most familiar nouns and verbs may be
mostly identical. The natives distinguish the different “ tulle
or languages by their negations. Thus there is the “ Burapper "
dialect spoken by the Mallegoondeet; the "Utar" dialect on the


Murray and Lower Goulburn. These words Burapper and Utar
being respectively the negations of each language; and so of others.
The language of the natives appears to be more artificial than
might be expected from a'people sunk so low in civilization. It
abounds with inflections. Tims the persons and cases of nouns
are expressed by terminal inflections, formed by the combination
of the pronouns with the principal word. Lar is the word in the
Jajowrong tongue for house or dwelling: this would be varied
thus ; lar-knak, my house; lar-knen, your house; lar-knook, his
or her house. If a particle or preposition is requisite we find
variations of meaning expressed by a change of position in the in-
dicating letter or syllable: thus “in my house ” would be express-
ed u lar-knak-e“ at or to my house ” “ lar-ye-knak winne
being the. distinct form of the preposition in or inside. So
the persons of the verbs are expressed by the combination of
the personal pronouns with the chief word, and the few moods
and tenses employed by inflections exceedingly irregular in their
construction. And one of the principal difficulties in the acquisi-
tion of any of these dialects, appears to me to be in the number
and variety of their combinations, slight variations in the affixes
expressing important differences of meaning.
1 have carefully examined every vocabulary that has been
published by travellers and others, of the languages spoken in
different parts of this continent, with the view of ascertaining
whether there was any evidence in support of the opinion enter-
tained by many, that all the different languages may be traced to
one common root. Bor the reasons I have just assigned, a mere
enumeration of the most common nouns will not give a correct
idea of the structure of the language, unless the pronouns and
particles are known, the mode of their combination, and the varia-
tions of the verbs. Judging, however, from the great diversity
of the words in the dialects of Western and Southern Australia
for instance, as given by Capt. Grey, and some specimens given
by Sir Thomas Mitchell of dialects spoken in various localities
to the northward, I must express my concurrence in the opinion
of Count Strzelecki that the notion of a common root has been
too hastily entertained.^
The language or dialect to which I have formerly devoted my
attention, is the Jajowurrong, spoken by the Loddon natives.
In endeavouring to reduce it to a written form, I have adopted
the principles laid down, I believe, by the late celebrated philolo-
gist Professor Lee of Cambridge, and recommended b'y him for
adoption by missionaries going among people whose languages
Strzelecki, p. 339.


were merely oral. They are simply these : Ist. to express the
word in the fewest nnmber of letters which will convey the sound :
2nd, to give every vowel and diphthong a definite sound, and on
no account use any quiescent vowels or silent letters ot any kind :
3rd, to form the alphabet upon the principle of rejecting every
superfluous letter and every letter which has no corresponding
sound in the language. Acting on these principles, the Jajowurroug
alphabet contains neither c, f, s, x, or z, the sibilants being wholly
unknown to any of the Australian tongues, and the hard sound of c
being better expressed by k. If these simple rules were adopted by
those who attempt to form native vocabularies, much confusion
and uncertainty would be avoided, and much more facility would be
given to the study of the Australian philology.
I have found the language to be copious in terms expressive
of physical objects and their attributes, but miserably deficient in
psychological or metaphysical designations. Thus the parts of
the body are indicated with a much greater affluence of terms
than in our native tongue. War and its adjuncts; the different
kinds of food; and all natural objects, are copiously designated.
Every flower and plant has its name. Every variation in structure
or appearance in animals gives occasion to the employment of a
different term. Eut if you seek terms expressive of mental
exercises or attributes, you are immediately at fault. For the
sake of example, I have never been able to discover aterrn expressive
of gratitude, and the natives say none exist. And so of other terms
expressive of virtuous emotions. They are unknown. This has
been the greatest obstacle to the conveyance of religious truth
to the aboriginal mind. The facts of revealed religion may be
successfully represented to them; but the doctrines springing from
them are exceedingly difficult of explication, so as to give a clear
and definite idea to the mind of the native.
On this account, I have long inclined to the opinion, that it is
far more desirable to induce the natives to acquire English, than
to depend upon the aboriginal languages for conveying truth.
They may be used as auxiliary, but are utterly inadequate as
the principal medium of religious instruction.
It is a mistake to suppose that the language is harsh and
guttural. I think it, in many of its turns, euphonious. 1 will
read you a short specimen, that you may judge for yourselves.
It is a nearly literal translation of the first part of the cxxxix
Psalm, omitting the sth and 6th verses, which do not admit of
literal translation. I may premise that the term I have used
conventionally for the Supreme Being is “ Marmingorak” i. e.„
Father of alh


1 Marmingorak, warbuu yerkar wanoong, par karkinar wanoong.
2 War narkar naroge booreetnan, par naroge pikiuan : war uarkar
nartinak warredu.
3 War yerkin barkook wangak, par narkinar nalderung kokninak.
4 Nullawan woorakin kiarp tallingingorak talungak, warbun ineel-
roppang kneernar.
* * * *
7 Windyamin yangillau; windya nurillan ; windyamooroopen nulla
narkin wanoong?
8 Gnetoong pikinan woorer woorerye, warbun Marmingorak mirrpar
nua : gnetoong monginan dookum dookumak tarte, mirrpar nua.
9 Gnetoong mootyinan tarrarkook bairpobarrapu, par mirrpin kin-
kowurrunga waarre, warredyu knooraook;
10 Kadjook kommeer munnar karkin wanoong, paryoolpe nauunar
karkin wanoong.
11 Gnetong nartinak, wartin konietyillung par nurinan kiaknak ;
lowurrong, booroin gnoola nowe.
12 Ye, ye, konietyillung mung nulla nurin wanoong; booroin
yapkoitgnin gnoola nowe. Konietyillung par yap mellert turrong belong
ware.
On the subject of Government and Social Condition, not
much remark is necessary. I have already defined a tribe as a
collection of families, nearly or remotely related to each other,
and recognizing a common head or chief. The power of the chief,
who is termed “ Marmar” father, “Wooringarpil,” leader or
commander, “ Kneyern Kneyerneet? } or chief speaker, is very
limited, unless the individual possesses intelligence and exhibits
much prowess. His influence becomes then more extensive, and
his authority respected. The association of the natives with the
colonial population has had the effect of breaking up these rela-
tions to a considerable extent; and the rank of chieftain would
soon be utterly lost, were it not for the egregious folly and
heartless mockery practised by some old colonists, by inflating
the savage pride of these individuals with the title of “ king/''
and giving them, as the badge of their ideal dignity, an engraved
brass plate, and thus rendering them pitiable caricatures of human
pride.
The tribes and nations maintain friendly relations with each
other, by frequent meetings, at appointed times and places.
Peasts are sometimes prepared, but the main business of the
meetings is the yepene or corrobory, the native dance, which has
been so often described.* If the tribes on parting agree to meet
* It is a very great mistake to suppose, as some writers on the aborigines have
done, that there is any kind of religious ceremony connected with the ordinary corrobory,
I have never been able to trace any connection of the kind. There was nothing like
concealment adopted towards me by the natives. I may also remark that the term
corrobory is not a native word.


again, the time as well as the place is duly fixed, and to maintain
the remembrance of the engagement, a very original species of
(calendar is employed. One of the young men is selected, and a
red pigment prepared. The number of days being fixed, each of
these are duly marked on the body of the young man, beginning
with the forefinger on the right hand, passing up the arm and
‘over the head to the forefinger of the left hand; and as every
joint of finger, and every minute division of the human body,
have their distinctive names, thereis space enough for a considerable
number of days. It is the duty of living calendar, so selected
and marked, to keep the tribes informed of the lapse of time and
the day of meeting.
To maintain communications with each other, the natives have
appointed messengers, whose persons were held sacred, even when
they went among their enemies. I have watched formerly with
much anxiety, the return of these messengers from their embassy.
If the result was peace, they carried boughs,—if war, their faces
were painted as if going into battle. When individuals of other
tribes thus arrived on a visit, the etiquette, if I may so term it,
was remarkable. The visitor sat down at a little distance, but
never spoke. He scarcely looked, indeed, at the parties he came
to see. Presently one of the elders would come up to him, bear-
ing a kindled fire stick. Jle sits down before the visitor, and
after some hesitation, begins to speak; but it is not till some
minutes elapse that they get into cordial conversation. If the
parties are very friendly, a singular mark of respect is shown.
They interchange languages, if their speech differ; the visitor
using the tongue spoken by his hosts, the host using that of the
guest.
I shall now proceed to notice the subject of Individual and
Family Life.- One of the darkest features in the aboriginal charac-
ter is its gross sensuality. It is in my view the greatest obstacle to
their improvement. I cannot pourtray, in an assembly like this, all
the appalling details of the dark picture. Suffice it to say, that
St. Paul’s description of the vices of ancient heathens, in the
first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, was but too forcibly
applicable to the moral state of the aborigines, when I first went
among them; and still receives, I fear, frequent and painful
illustration. , Polygamy was and is in existence among them.
The females were betrothed or promised at a very early age; and
one great point of ambition in the Australian native was to get a
number of wives. I have known as many as six appropriated to
one man. Two were common among the middle-aged men. The
unfortunate women had no voice in their own disposal. They
w r ere considered the property of their nearest male relative;. and
so strictly is this carried out, that I have known a mother dis-
posed of in marriage by her own adult son.* The women were put


away at any time by the will of their husbands ; and the strongest
mark of friendship that could be displayed by one man to another,,
was to present him with one of his superliuous wives. This I
have known to have been frequently done. As a contrast to-this
dark picture, let me state that a week since I signed the usual'
certificate authorising marriage, for a fine young man, one ®f mv
earliest acquaintances, who, after erecting a very comfortable
cottage on his own little farm, expressed an earnest wish to be
married under the sanctions of Christianity; and in due form,
and I am sure with a full sense of the sacredness of the obligation,
he was married by a clergyman at the Loddon Aboriginal
School.
The natives arc generally much attached to their children, and
their loss is to the mothers a time of fearful distress and excite-
ment. It has been an occasional custom here, as in other parts of
Australia, for the mother to carry about for weeks the body of her
lost one. And yet there is no doubt that infanticide prevailed to a
fearful extent. Any deformed child was immediately destroyed.
Among some tribes half-caste children were sacrificed. lam happy
to say I succeeded, years since,in checking, if not entirely subduing,
that practice among the natives over whom I had influence, and
there are now several fine half-caste children under instruction at
the Loddon establishment. There were a few debased creatures
who invariably destroyed their children, because they feared to get
prematurely old and unacceptable to their husbands. These, how-
ever, were always pointed out as objects of reproach by the other
women.
I have noticed enpassant several of the peculiar customs of the
aborigines, and there are others I nrght advert to had I time.
But one custom springing from their family relations is so singu-
lar, and apparently unique, that T must notice it. A traveller who
has described the aborigines of Australia, speaks in approving
terms of the extremely modest demeanour of the sexes towards
each other. He describes the women as taking a circuit to avoid
passing where some men were sitting, and carefully screening their
faces that they might not be seen. Had he been familiar with
their customs he would have found that this had another source
than modest feeling. It was the Knalloin, a custom I have never
heard or read of as existing among other people. It is this. As
soon as a female child is promised in marriage to any man, from
that hour he must never look upon his expected wife’s mother, or
hear her name, and the same prohibition was extended to the
mother. She was never to look upon or hear the voice of the
man to whom her daughter was to be given. I have never been
able to trace the origin of this custom; but the ridiculous reason
assigned for this strange institution was, that if they saw or heard
each other, they would become prematurely old and die.


And now let me advert to their Religious Opinions and
Superstitions. It has been a general remark, by all who have
sought to investigate this subject, that little information could be
obtained, because of the fear and aversion manifested by the na-
tives when such topics were introduced; and, under such circum-
stances, an opinion has been commonly entertained, that more has
been concealed than has been as yet ascertained. lam not of
this opinion. I am satisfied, from the minute enquiries I have
made, and from the unrestricted information I have always been
able to obtain from the aborigines, that their religious notions
were very few and very crude. There were certainly some dim
traditions among them of a superior and benevolent Being; but
they seem to have had no idea of his being the Creator and Pre-
server of all things. The most definite information I have been
able to obtain, is, that he is known by the name of Binheal; that
when they die they will be subjected to a sort of trial by him : the
good being rewarded in a better land, the bad driven away, but
where they seemed to have no idea. One rude tradition, prevalent
among the tribes with which I have been associated, was that
originally there was only one huge mountain, occupying the area
of the whole country; that this was inhabitated by a gigantic
eagle and crow, and some other animals; that the eagle ejected
the crow from its nest, and, being the stronger, was able to drive
it away; that the crow being a wise animal, went away and dis-
covered fire, and applying this to the forests where the eagle dwelt,
the result was a vast conflagration, destroying all things, and caus-
ing the disruption of the huge mountain, and the formation of the
present hills and plains from its remains. Another tradition as
to the origin of animals is, that originally there was but one
kanguroo, one emu, one only of every species ; that a being en-
dowed with supernatural wisdom, named Pundyil or Boondyil,
took these, cut them up into a number, of small pieces, and from
these fragments made a large number and thus stocked the world.
Boondyil is now in the sky, and his name is given to the planet
Jupiter, which is said to be the light of his fire. He is said, by
some, to have first taught the manufacture and use of the spear
and other weapons. His name exists in the language as the term
for wisdom or knowledge. I give these only as samples of the
traditions current in the country. There are others which my
limits forbid me to describe.
These crude traditions evidently vary with different localities.
The gne idea, however, which seemed paramount to all others,
and that on which the aboriginal mind dwelt with the deepest
awe and the greatest frequency, was that of the existence of an
evil spirit, whose sole business it was to destroy. This is the
Jliindi, already referred to. It is said to exist in the form of a


mighty serpent, whose body is many miles long.* It is by his
power that death is caused; —to excite the exercise of that power,
for the destruction of their enemies, is the object of certain incan-
tations and occult ceremonies; —and to appease his anger and
avert his destructive influence, was the avowed purpose of the
only ceremonies I have ever witnessed, having any resemblance to
an act of worship. Rude images, consisting of one large and
tw r o small figures, cut in bark and painted, were set up in a
secluded spot; the place was strictly tabooed; the men,' and
afterwards the women, dressed in boughs, and having each a
small wand, with a tuft of feathers tied on it, were made to dance
in single file, and in a very sinuous course, towards the spot, and
after going round it several times, to approach the main figure,
and touch it reverentially with the wand. I believe this to be a
a relic of the ophilatria or serpent worship of India.
The aborigines had a distinct belief of the existence of their
spirits after death. This was obvious from the care they displayed
to inter with the dead body every article that the deceased had
been accustomed to use, or that the affection of survivors could
bestow. Tires were regularly kept up near a new made grave, for
weeks after an interment. There were also well defined traces of
a belief in the transmigration of souls. There were certain ani-
mals that no native would kill or eat when I first went among
them. The crow and the bat were thus particularly distinguished,
and the belief avowed that the souls of their ancestors dwelt in
them. It is well known that, on the first appearance of the
colonists, the opinion was taken up, and long maintained
among them, that they were their deceased progenitors return-
ing to their former haunts. The very term applied to the white
man indicates this belief. Amydeet (Jajowrong), amerjig (Wi-
towurrong), are specimens of the designation applied to the white
race. The same terms designate the separate state of the spirit
when the body is dead.t Hence the opinion, long prevalent, and
* The natives assert that a large kind of snake, from 14 to 18 feet long, resembling in
its habits, according to their desciiption, the Constrictor genus, exists in the immense
thickets of Eucalyptus dumosa, commonly designated the “ Malle ’’ scrub. The existenc e
of this animal has not been, however, verified by actual observation. This they term also
the “Mindi.’’ But this is clearly distinguishable from the mystical ‘ ‘ Mindi ” described
above.
f I witnessed on one occasion a singular dance or ceremony, termed by the natives
Yepene Amydeet, «. e. dance of the separated spirits. It was entirely new to the Loddon,
natives, and the ceremony was dictated by an old man, who stated that he had learnt it
from natives to the northwest. It was never introduced on any other occasion, and is
now almost forgotten. Holding boughs 'in each hand, which were waved in unison
alternately over each shoulder, and dancing for some time in lines and semi-circles, at
length they gradually gathered into a compact circular body ; then slowly sinking on
the ground, and burying their heads under the boughs, they represented, according to
the statement of the old native who was master of the ceremonies, the approach of


fostered by the early settlers, but now I hope utterly exploded,
that when they died they would go to Van Dieman’s Land, and
xe jump up white fellow.”
The natives, in my earlier experience among them, never hesi-
tated to avow their ignorance on religious matters. It was
evidently a subject seldom in their thoughts. And I think it may
be regarded as a hopeful circumstance, that, in seeking to impart
religious knowledge to them, you have not to contend with minds
much pre-occupied with strong prejudices and deeply-rooted
opinions. I have rarely met with instances of avowed rejection
of the truth, however slight may have been its practical influences
on people sunk to such a state of moral debasement.
Let it not for one moment be supposed that there arc any
intellectual obstacles to the Christianization and civilization of
these people. I have always maintained —I still maintain—the
obstacles are purely moral. It is the utter sensuality of their
habits and dispositions that is the main hindrance to be overcome.
They are just as capable of receiving instruction, just as
capable of mental exercises, as any more favoured races. And
it is just because their association with the European has
in so many instances tended to foster and encourage this
sensualism, that so little success has been attained, in the efforts
that have been made to reclaim them. There are now a number
of children and young people at the Loddon Institution, some of
whom have been there for a considerable time, and their progress
is very satisfactory. My personal labours among the natives
closed some time since, except so far as I may avail myself of any op-
portunity I may obtain of giving them religious instruction. The
institution is under the management of a gentleman well fitted to
teach them, who is striving earnestly to maintain its efficiency.
[Much stress has been laid on the apparently inveterate propen-
sity of the aborigines to unsettled and wandering habits, as an
insuperable obstacle to any efforts for their improvement. That
such habits prevail, no one can deny. But the causes which
induce these wandering habits I have never seen adverted to. In
the first place, the native has been accustomed, in his original
condition, to seek supplies of food in different localities, according
to the season of the year, and the source of the aliment. Indo-
lent and improvident, the native went where he could acquire the
most abundant supplies with the least amount of trouble. Hence
death ; and in the perfectly still and motionless posture they maintained for some time
the state of death itself. Then the old man, breaking suddenly into a new dance, and
waving furiously his boughs over the prostrate mass, gave them the word ; and, suddenly
springing to their feet, they joined him in his rejoidtags. This was explained to me as
intended to represent the revival of the soul after death.


he had occasion constantly to migrate to different parts of ids
territory. But the principal exciting cause of their constant
wanderings may be found in the alarms and fears occasioned by
their superstitions. Believing that his enemies could bring sick-
ness and death upon him through the ground, he was always
anxious to be continually changing his locality, under the idea
escaping from the evil influence. Hence the slightest appearance of
sickness led to the fear that the ground was haunted; and, if a
death occurred, every dwelling-place was directly changed. The
only time that the Loddon Aboriginal Establishment was deserted
was after a period of unusual mortality, both among natives and
Europeans. As soon as these superstitions lose their hold on his
mind, the habits of the native become at once changed. It is no
longer a work of difficulty to induce him to remain on. the same
spot; for he is by no means apt to be insensible of the advantage
and comfort derivable from such, a course. There are natives
now on the Loddon Establishment, who have resided there for
the last five or six years, and children about the same age who
have never been away from their native place. The first efforts
of missionaries, therefore, should be directed to the removal of this
excitement to wandering, and they will then find comparatively
little difficulty, if they can provide for their support, in inducing
them to remain.]
[lt may serve to illustrate the difficulties which have to be
encountered, in any efforts to bring the aborigines under the
influence of Christian principles and feelings, if I advert to
a conversation that took place between myself and an intelligent
young native some years since. Having noticed one sabbath
morning rather more than usual attention to the instructions
given, I asked, on coming out of the place appropriated for *
divine worship ; “do you think, , that the blackfellows will
remember and think about what they have heard to-day? —do
they ever talk about God, and what they have been told he has
done for them ?” “0, yes,” was in substance the reply, “ when
they are here, and hear you read the book : but when they go
away in the bush, they never hear the name of God, only when
the white men swear” At an early period of my experience, I
found them much puzzled to understand how it was that I should
be so urgent vit'i them to come to “God’s house, and hear his
book,” when on no other station in the district they ever observed
any prayers or Christian ordinances. (I am now referring to the
state of things in the Colony eleven or twelve years since.) I
was much interested on one occasion by the eagerness they dis-
played in bringing me the news that they had found a man who
‘fwoorakin gnoorarook woiwoip; i. e. “made a great prayer.” It
was a devout catholic hut-keeper, whom they had discovered
several times at his devotions, and listened to his audible wor~


ship, unobserved, with wonder and interest. The information
was brought to me, as something utterly new and surprising.*]
I now come to the question of the Future Prospects of these
unfortunate people, and what ought to be done for their welfare.
Are they to be hopelessly abandoned, and not one effort made to-
promote their religious and social improvement ? The reply of
some will be, every effort has hitherto failed, and it is useless to
make any further attempt to raise them from their voluntary de-
gradation. I demur to that statement, while I have before me
families and individuals permanently civilized, actively industrious,
and anxious to raise themselves in their social position. The in-
stances may be rare, I grant, but they suffice to show that the
work is not hopeless. It is too commonly the case to expect too
much from the native. You expect that he will at your bidding
give up all his native notions, all his preconceived opinions, and
at once fall into your way of thinking and your mode of life. He
will never do it till he has an adequate motive, till he feel the force
of some inducement strong enough to change the whole current
of his thoughts and feelings. Religion alone can supply that
motive—a conviction of its truth, an adoption of its principles,
will at once place the foot of the aborigine on a higher step in the
social scale, and it will require no constraint or persuasion to in-
duce him to become settled, and steady, and self-supporting.
Hence I have invariably found that where any decided attention
has been given to religious instruction, and any desire evinced to
know the truth, it has been accompanied pari passu with improv-
ed personal habits, and rapid strides towards civilization. But,,
say others, you cannot point to a single instance in which the
native has received the truth fully and heartily, and become a
witness of its power. To that" too, I must demur, while I have
the remembrance on my mind of what I have personally witnessed.
Let me place before you a sketch or two. —It is the first year of,
the establishment of an institution for the benefit of the aborigines.,
—There is one individual, pointed out by his own people, as
marked for his savage and beastly propensities. He has been
concerned in several outrages on the settlers. He is known to be
addicted to the vilest crimes. Such is the turpitude of his con-
duct, that the officer at the head of the establishment is at length
compelled to drive him away by force. Who would not have
concurred in the opinion then entertained that this was a case
marked by utter hopelessness? A year or two pass away some
slight impressions fur good are made on the aboriginal mind,,
—and at the earnest entreaty of the other natives, the offender is
permitted to return, and avail himself of the advantages of the
* The paragraphs enclosed in I)rackets were omitted in the lecture as delivered, through,
want of time.


institution. He takes a wife, and from that time becomes a bet-
ter character. Still the improvement is not strongly marked, and
though he is a frequent attendant, on those occasions when religi-
ous instruction is given, his attention is not more remarkable
than that of the rest of his countrymen. Years pass, and he be*
comes to some extent a useful mm. Recommended to a settler
by the Protector, he travels with him in search of unoccupied
country. The settler asks him, what he thinks about the creation,
the future state of man, and other religious topics. He is sur-
prised by the accuracy of his answers, and supposes, at first, he
has made some interesting discoveries as to the religion of the
aborigines; till at length the fact is palpable, that his informant
is simply enunciating the truths he has recently been taught. He
avows his belief in these truths; and from thistime his improvement
is decided. That man, once a brutal lustful savage, has become
tractable, cleanly, industrious, attentive to Divine worship, and
anxious to induce his countrymen to attend. At length disease
attacks him. He repudiates the barbarous superstitious practices-
of his relatives, to deliver him from the witchcraft that is supposed
to afflict him; and appeals to his white friends for help. It is
soon seen that pulmonary consumption has marked him for death..
Every practicable effort is made for the health of the body, and
the salvation of the soul. "Will ‘Marmingorak* take such a
wicked man as I have been to- heaven ?—he will not have meis-
one of his anxious enquiries. He is told again of “ Jesus Christ,
the Good One, the Son of God, who died for the sins of men.”
His mind appears eagerly to fasten upon the truth. The last
hour approaches. He feels that it is come, and sends hastily for
his friend. Seizing his hand with a grasp, which only death re-
laxed, he exclaims, —“ Marmak, deriyenan!—My father, lam
dying.” He joins with apparent earnestness in the prayers offered
both in the native and English languages. He points to Ids two
children, beseeching him at the same time never to let themrove about
like the other natives, but to bring them up like his own children.
His mind is perfectly clear, and his consciousness never leaves-
him until nearly the last gasp. And, under circumstances, afford-
ing well grounded hope that his purified spirit passed to a better
world, the scene closed.
I have described to you scenes which passed under my own eye.
I wish there had been more such. But I have recited these incidents
as the best refutation I can give to the assertion, that the Australian
aborigines are incapable of religious conviction, or, as- some seem
to think, altogether beyond the pale of Christianity.* I adduce
* It is, to say the least, a remarkable coincidence that on the very day when the solanuat


it to show that, even on minds hardened and debased by the
vilest crimes, the gospel can exert a power efficient for its full
emancipation from guilt and sin.
One other opinion as to the destiny of these despised people 1
must remark upon, and I close. It is a common opinion, ex-
pressed, too, often in quarters whence better notions might be
expected, that they are a doomed race—that they must pass away.
Nay, the opinion assumes a more daring form in the assertion that it
is the appointment—the inscrutable decree—of Divine Providence
that uncivilized races should perish before the march of civiliza-
tion. I may admit the probability of the event, as to the Aus-
tralian aborigines, but I deny its inevitable necessity.* I want
to know where that decree is written. Is it on the page of
inspiration, in collocation with the express declaration that God
“hath made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on the
face of the earth?” or can such a decree proceed from the same
Blessed Spirit that enjoined the maxim, “Honour all men?” You
look in vain for it there. The entire spirit and genius of Chris-
tianity is utterly antagonistic to such a deadly principle. Is it
on the page of history ?—that history which tells you, to advert
to no other instance, of the conquest of your own uncivilized
ancestors, and the dwelling among them of a superior race, for
some hundreds of years,—-not destroying and annihilating the
aborigines of ancient Britaifi; —but introducing among them the
appliances of their own civilization, and ultimately the blessed
light of Christianity itself. You may turn, I grant, to another
page, and point me to the history of modern colonization, and
tell me of races that have passed away before the foot of the
Spaniard, the Hollander, and, shame to say it, the Anglo-Saxon
too; but do you not see it is a miserable logic,—an argument
utterly unworthy of a Christian mind, —to conclude, that because
Divine Providence has suffered the crime, that, therefore, it has
given its sanction t>it ? Do you not te ‘ that if the argument be
worth anything, that, if followed out to its ultimate consequences,
and interesting scene depicted above was witnessed, the walla of the Legislative Council
Chamber in Sydney, were resounding with indignant denunciations of the Protectorate
system, of the Protectors themselves, and indeed of any effort or expense to ameliorate
the condition of a people who were described as utterly unimproveable. The description
given above might have been much amplified, i ad I not wished to keep far within the
truth, and to allude only to marked and illustrative incidents.
* “I should not, without the most extreme reluctance, admit that nothing can bo done
—that with respect to them alone the doctrines of Christianity must be inoperative, and
the advantages of civilization incommunicable. I cannot acquiese in the theory that they
are incapable of improvement, and that their extinction before the advance of the white
settler is a necessity which it is impossible to control.’’—Lord Stanley’s i Earl of Derby):.
Dispatch on the Aborigines, Dec. 20, 1812.


it can be made to justify every outrage, and to palliate every crime ?
—God has suffered it,mud therefore he wills it!
Men and brethren ! I call upon you to denounce this horrid
dogma. It is the duty of that church which Christ bought with
his blood to denounce it. Let men of the world say, if they will,
“ Let the people alone:” — a Let them die, as die they must,” and,
as has been actually said to me, —“ The sooner they perish
the better.” But let every Christian man, and especially every
Christian young man rise, and say with one voice, to the govern-
ment, the legislature, and the nation; —occupy the land, —till its
broad wastes, —extract its riches, —develope its resources, —if
you will; —but, in the name of God and humanity, SAVE THE
PEOPLE.
M'COLL, PRINTER, M BANXRR OFFICE, h\ TROBE STRRrif.


Bl tuo
N com
3 1508 01512538 3




JOHN KNOX XODNG MEN’S ASSOCIATION,
MELBOURNE.
THE FOLLOWING
SI X LECTURES
Are now in course of delivery, in connection with the above Association
IN THE
HALL of THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION.
US.
Wednesday,-v HISTORIC SKETCHES of GIBRALTAR and its NEIGH-
May 3 BOURHOOD— Rev. Db. CAIRNS.
' Chairman—Ret. James Clow.
10j The ABORIGINES of AUSTRALIA.—E. STONE PARKER
Esq,, M. L. C., (late Protector of the Aborigines.)
Chairman—Jas. Heniy, Esq., M. L. G.
17) The CHEMISTRY of the ATMOSPHERE, a DEMON-
STRATION of NATURAL THEOLOGY.— Rev. W. B
LANDELLS.
Chairman— Henry Langlands, Esq,
24 POETRY of ALEXANDER SMITH —DAVID BLAIR, Esq-
Chairman—Thomas Dickson, Esq.
31 The ANTI - CHRIST.— The Very Rev. DEAN MACARTNEY.
Chairman—Archd. Bonar, Esq
JuNE 7 The LIFE and CHARACTER of WILBERFORCE. -Rev. R.
FLETCHER, late of Manchester.
Chairman—Ret. Wm, Miller, President of the Association.
The Chair ivill he taken at HALF- PAST SEVEN o'Clock precisely.
TICKETS for the COURSE, price FIVE SHILLINGS;.
