

r THE 1
SENTIMENTAL
BLOKE
_ ' ■> . <■ 1
WmSeMSmsmi 1 #., 1, Lx * .* «• ?'.‘v;' * *L, .■ SJa 4i
- •: 1
1
■'-,*■') / , 1&H
TjEFiyA'''" '>;/ ■’ Mra
»f u . . i f I
t [ r , > . , <. 1
»' IRw Jm
.v' ~ 1
r**' ■■ |
•—* .
"" - - * - — j
{ I
AUSTRALIA’S CLASSIC SCREEN
P1CTURISATION OF THE FAMOUS
VERSES WRITTEN BY
C. J. DENNIS
L - Jk


i...i:i;l.: | 'l "l:'’:i:;::l I.:J: I I I I I I li
►
nd tKe Press upon
o word of eulogy
'as an Australian
jits distinctiveness
[human story, full
scinating. It tells
pugh the love of
tiore sweetness or
lOKE” has been
Inscription arouses
lat never fails to
jeeling that they
thing which they
wou iiisewnefe“in J this booklet are
reproduced various "reviews of both the picture and the book from
which it was taken. They will speak for themselves. We would, in
conclusion, like to draw attention to a letter written by C. J. Dennis,
the Author of the story, giving his opinion of the picture. He says:
“ They were very solid doubts, indeed, that I took along with me to the private
“screening of the picture; I went expecting, at best, a burlesque, at worst a
“fiasco. I came away almost believing in miracles. The fidelity with which
. “ the written story has been converted into what may be termed a visual
“narrative is amazing to me. The difficulties that I had foreseen have been
“overcome admirably, and turned into picture triumphs. No liberties have
r “ been taken with the theme, and the easy expedient of vulgar burlesque has
“been entirely avoided, I wish you every success with the production, and
“when the picture is screened publicly, I intend to see it as often as I can,
“ not to pander to the swollen vanity of a flattered author, but to see a
■“rattling good show, for which your producer and artists are mainly responsible
(signed) C. J. DENNIS.
The Sentimental Bloke - - - ARTHUR TAUCHERT
Ginger Mick GILBERT EMERY
Doreen - LOTTIE LYELL
The- .Bloke
STANLEY-ROBIN SON
The Stror ’at Coot
HARRY YOUNG
LENGTH
6 Reels
5,899 feet


II 111 i li 1 1 1 lIiII I I I I lip 0 0 ’y^.i!:;ii:i:ii!:::i'i!:i:ii;i : !i!iii!ii:ii- , :iv:ii 1111 I I la
So much praise has been bestowed by the critics and the Press upon
“THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE," that it needs no word of eulogy
from us. -It hasr been ‘described as a masterpiece, as an Australian
screen classic, and in various other terms denoting its distinctiveness
in a plane elevated far above the ordinary. It is a human story, full
of heart interest and humour, which is particularly fascinating. It tells
the old, old story of the ne’er-do-well reformed through the love of
a woman, but never has the story been told with more sweetness or
more exquisite charm. “THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE" has been
described as the Australian “My Old Dutch”; this description arouses
expectations of plenty of that wholesome sentiment that never fails to
grip the public, and send audiences away with a feeling that they
have seen something grand and ennobling, and something which they
would not have missed for anything. Elsewhere in this booklet are
reproduced various reviews of both the picture and the book from
which it was taken. They will speak for themselves. We would, in
conclusion, like to draw attention to a letter written by C. J. Dennis,
the Author of the story, giving his opinion of the picture. He says:
" They were very solid doubts, indeed , that I took along with me to the private
“screening of the picture; I went expecting, at best , a burlesque, at worst a
“ fiasco. I came away almost believing in miracles. The fidelity with, which
“ the written story has been converted into what may be termed a visual
“ narrative is amazing to me. The difficulties that I had foreseen have been
“overcome admirably, and turned into picture triumphs. No liberties have
“been taken with the theme, and the easy expedient of vulgar burlesque has
“been entirely avoided. I wish you every success with the production, and
“when the picture is screened publicly, I intend to see it as often as I can,
“not to pander to the swollen vanity of a flattered author, but to see a
“ rattling good show, for which your producer and artists are mainly respojisible."
(signed) C. J. DENNIS.
CAST* * -
The Sentimental Bloke
ARTHUR TAUCHERT
Ginger Mick - GILBERT EMERY
Doreen - LOTTIE LYELL
The -Bloke
STANLE YJiOBIN SON
The Stror ’at Coot
HARRY YOUNG
LENGTH
6 Reels
5,899 feet




THE
SENTIMENTAL
BLOKE
Australia’s First Great Screen Classic
A Picturisation of the
famous verses written by
C. J. DENNIS
Presented
By arrangement with E, J. CARROLL & BARRINGTON MILLER
THE GAUMONT COMPANY, LTD.
6, DENMAN STREET :: :: :: :: :: LONDON, W.l
AND BRANCHES
i


The Bloke
THE world 'as got me snouted jist a treat
Crool Forchin’s dirty left 'as smote me soul;
An’ all them joys o’ life I ’eld so sweet
Is up the pole.”
I’m crook ; me name is Mud ; I’ve done me dash ;
Me flamin' spirit’s got the flamin’ ’ump!”
I tells meself some day I’ll take a pull
An’ look eround fer some good stiddy job,
An’ cut the push fer good an' all; I’m full
Uv that crook mob!
The Intro.
ER name’s Doreen,
I found 'er lurk
Wus pastin’ labels in a pickle joint.
'e pal 'e trots 'er up an’ does the toff —
’E alius was a bloke fer showin’ off.
“ This ’ere’s Doreen ”’e sez. “ This ’ere’s the Kid.”
I dips me lid.
A squarer tom, I swear, I never seen,
In all me natchril, than this ’ere Doreen.
The way she torks! ’Erlips! ’Ereyes! ’Erhair!
Oh, gimme air!


MR. C. j. DENNIS" Famous Verses first appeared in the
Sydney Bulletin; since then they have been published in
book form as follows :
First Edition ~, Sydn :;y,
Second. Impression ...
Third
Eighth
Pocket Edition
Tenth Impression ...
Eleventh
Twelfth
Thirteenth
Fourteenth London
Fifteenth ... Sydney.
Sixteefit’i ... London
S» s<nh > nth ~ ... ~
'n'Vfiui earn ~ ... ~
/i- htt'i'nth .. ... Sydney
\ n- U i nth
25 ih >l6 5.000
22nd . 916 7.000
Ist A 5.500
30th Mav, 1910 11,000
Isfh July. 1916 5.000
25th September, 1916 10.000
7th October, 1916 8,000
24-fh October. 1916 5,000
17th November, 1916 5.000
2nd Mav, 1917 5,000
Ist July, 1917 5,000
Ist August. 1917 5.000
21 sf May, 19IS 5.000
14th June, 1919 3,000
31 sf August, 1919 3.000
20th April. 1920 3.000
9th October 1915 2,500 copies.
2nd h 915 5.000
6th n 915 5,000
Over 50,000 copies have already been sold
in Britain.
WHAT SOME FAMOUS BRITISH AUTHORS
;; HAVE WRITTEN ABOUT THE STORY ::
Mr, H. A. Vachell,
I have to thank you very sincerely and gratefully for ‘ The
Sentimental Bloke. 1 simply wallowed in it, and have commended,
it to my friends, although I am glad to add that, most of them, had
heard of him and delighted in him. Certain books stand out vwidly
in my memory as something absolutely fresh and striking. ‘ Moby
Dick was one, Plain Tales from the Hills' another. It seems to
me that Mr. Dennis had jumped, like Minerva, into the literary
world in full armour in which I can find no flaw. . . . Pray convey
to him my warmest congratulations upon a very big achievement/’
Mr. Jeffrey Farnol.
I have read them with the greatest possible enjoyment, and
shall certainly read them again more than once. . . . The book is a
book, and a true book is worth reading many times. . . . /’
Mr. Wm. Canton.
Oh, gimme air/ but isn't it a fresh, daring, delightful piece
of work ! Quite unique too (so far as 1 know) in conception and
treatment; and star-pricked, like a clear night sky, with real genius.
And it is the genius which includes all the qualities almost that one
likes to see in genius—beauty, humour, tenderness, gaiety, keenness
of observation, truth to character; and beneath these qualities a sure
vision of the goodness in man and the wisdom in woman which need
but the coming of love for their awakening. 1 like the book, and
admire it from cover to cover, ...”
Mr. Anthony Hope.
My thanks are by no means formal or merely by way
of politeness. I have enjoyed the Blok*- \er\ sneath . the work
is very human, very attractive, and much more skilful and dexterous
than it tries to look ”
Me, Wm. De Morgan.
. - - . I owe you hearty thanks for writing it. I have seldom
had more reason to be grateful to the chance that has placed my
name among those of living authors, and won for me a stray pre-
sentation of ‘The Sentimental Bloke/ .... I shall leave the book
lying about as I did * Uncle Remus ’ and pick some new phrase from
it every day. Thank you again, very much !
” P.S. —I should have said how keenly alive lam to the tender-
ness and dramatic force of the story/'
Mr. H. G. Wells.
’’Very many thanks for ‘The Sentimental Bloke’ and many
congratulations to its publishers. C. J. Dennis is a big swell. We
could do with him over here when you have done with him down
under . . . /’
Mr. Basil Thomson.
The Sentimental Bloke ’ has given me real pleasure. . .
The book is great for what it is and greater for what it promises.”
Mr, W. J. Locke.
” You have given me a new and ever-to-be re-tasted joy. The
Songs ' are so fresh, so spontaneous, so full of laughter and
humanity, that they make the eternal appeal/'


Other People's Opinions of the Film
THE FILM RENTER & MOVING PICTURE NEWS, September 25. 1920.
A WONDERFUL AUSTRALIAN PICTURE.
_4 - -




Doreen
0^“ LDIN’ in me own 'er little 'and
An’ 'ow she blushed ! O, strike ! it was divine
The way she raised ’er shinin' eyes to mine.
An’ when she looked at me I sort o’ felt
That bosker feelin’ that comes o’er a bloke
An’ makes ’im melt.
I promised 'er I’ll chuck the pubs and schools
that leery game.
I tell yeh, square an’ all, me 'eart stood still
To ’ear ’er say, “I wish’t yeh meant it, Bill.”
’Oo would a’ thort it could ’a’ been
My luck to strike the likes uv ’er ? . . . Doreen !
The Play
an’ me, we bin to see a show—
I The swell two-dollar touch. Bong tong, yeh
know.
The drarmer’s writ by Shakespeare, years ago,
About a barmy goat called Romeo.
“ Lady, be yonder moon I swear” sez ’e
An’ then ’e climbs up on the balkiney;
An’ there they smooge a treat, wiv pretty words
Like two love-birds.
I nudge Doreen. She whispers “Ain’t it grand ! ”
’Er eyes is shinin’; an’ I squeeze ’er ’and.


The Stror ’at Coot
TOOK a derry on this stror'at coot
I First time I seen ’im dodgin’ round Doreen.
But don't I keep me temper when we meet ?
An’ don’t I raise me lid an’ act perlite ?
I only jerks me elbow in 'is ribs,
To give the gentle office to 'is nibs.
An’ now Doreen she sez I've broke me vow
An’ mags about this coot’s pore “wounded pride,
She sez I done it out o’ jealousy.
Me jealous ? Jealous of that cross-eyed cow !
An’ so, we parts fer ever —’er 'an me.
Oh, I ain’t much to look at, I admit.
But 'im! The knock-kneed, swivel-eyed misfit!
Hitched
E -RE’S me 'oo never took no 'eed o’ life,
Investin’ in a mar-in-lor an’ wife.
Doreen an’ me is gittin’ hitched, all straight
the square,
An’—wilt— yeh—take—this—woman—fer— to —be
Yer—wedded—wife ?
Aw, take a pull!
Wot in the 'ell’s 'e think I come there for?
An’ Ginger Mick,
’Go’s my best-man, 'e ups an’ beefs it out
“I will! ” 'e ’owls ; an’ fetches me a kick
“Your turn to chin! " ’e tips me wiv a shout.
“Righto!” I sez, “I will.”
But my Doreen she never turns a 'air
Nor misses once when it’s ’er turn to speak.


The Kid
O NE day, Doreen was took so ill
I fairly lorst me block.
First, it was ’ell-fer-leather to the doc.
An’ then I sprints like mad ter git the nurse.
She took it all so calm she made me curse.
“A boy ! ” she sez, “ an’ bofe is doin’ well! ”
I drops into a chair, an’ jist sez, “ ’ell! ”
It wus a pray’r. I feels bofe crook an’ glad
An' that's the strength uv bein' made a dad.
I thinks uv church, when in that room I goes,
’Oldin’ me breaf an’ walkin’ on me toes.
“ Look, Kid,” she smiles at me. “Ain’t 'e a size ?
“ ’e is,” I sez, and smiles back at Doreen,
“ The biggest nipper fer ’is age I’ve seen.”
TKe MoocK of Life
HIS ev’nin’ I was siltin’ wiv Doreen
Peaceful an’ ’appy wiv the day’s work done.
Watchin’ be’ind the orchard’s bonzer green,
The flamin’ wonder uv the settin’ sun.
Siltin’ at ev’nin’ in this sunset-land,
Wiv’ ’er in all the world to ’old me ’and,
A son, to bear me name when I am gone
Livin’ an’ lovin' —so life mooches on.


EXPLOITATION MATERIAL
Glossary of Terms Used in tKe Titles
This Glossary, used in your programme, will
be appreciated by patrons. If also printed in
previous week's programme, It will stimulate
interest in the picture.
Back the Barter— To intervene without invite-
tion.
Block —The head. To lose or to do in the
block —To become flustered or excited.
Bonier, boshter, bosker— Adjectives expressing
the superlative of excellence.
Boot, to put in the —To kick a prostrate foe.
Cliner—K young married female.
Cobber —A boon companion.
Coot —A person of no account (used contemp-
tuously).
Crack a boo— To divulge a secret, to betray
emotion.
Crook —Unwell, dishonest, spurious, fraudulent.
Crool (cruel) the pitch —To frustrate, to Inter-
fere with one’s schemes or welfare.
Dashi to do one's —To reach one’s Waterloo.
Dawe (dog). To put on dawg —To behave in an
arrogant manner.
Derry —An aversion, a dislike.
DUly —Foolish, half-witted.
'Eadin' —“ Heading browns,” tossing pennies.
Kip —A small chip used for tossing pennies in
the game of two-up.
Lash— Violence.
Leery —Vulgar, low.
Lid —The hat. To dip the lid —To raise the bat.
Orfis (office) —A warning, a hint.
Pull, to take a— To desist, to discontinue.
Ribuck —Correct, genuine, an interjection sig-
nifying assent.
Shick —lntoxicated.
Sky the wipe —To throw a towel into the air
in token of surrender (pugilism).
Skirt or bit of skirt —A female.
Skite —To boast.
Smooge —To flatter or fawn, to bill and coo.
Snouted —Treated with disfavour.
Shush —To punch with the fist.
Tom —A girl.
Two-up school —A gambling den.
Stereo No- 3, 3/9


2 KINDS OF 6-SHEET POSTERS. 1 KIND OF 12-SHEET POSTER.
2 KINDS OF COLOURED ANNOUNCEMENT SLIDES.
SETS OF 8 LOBBY DISPLAY SKETCHES ON HIRE.
Australia’s First Screen Classic Arrives
For over ten veers they have been experi-
menting with film productions in Australia, but
like every other part ot the British Empire,
tor five years they were handicapped by war.
This did not. however, entirely prevent them
Irom continuing their work, and at last vs
have from Australia a picture which the lead-
ing critics have described as “ a screen clas-
sic.*’ 14 Australia’s My Old Dutch.” and In
various other terms of eulogy.
44 THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE” Is noth-
ing more nor less than simple illustration of
the idyllic poetry of C. J. Dennis, which, like
the film, arrived unexpectedly in Britain and
sent ill the critics off into s pson of praise,
which made them forget that critics are sup-
posed to be staid, austere people who may
not deviate from the dignified prose which
labels them as critics. Such eminent British
authors as Mr. H. A. Vachel, Mr. W. J.
Locke. Mr. Jeffrey Farnol, Mr. Anthony Hope
sod Mr. H. G. Weils, supported by all the
leading newspapers, went into raptures over
the book, which hss now gone through four-
teen editions, and of which 50.000 copies have
been cold in this country. The film Is going
lo have s simitar success, just because it is s
simple illustrated idyll. A play of unvarnished
everyday history, of very human people who
have faults as well as virtues, who have
hearts made bare to touch the vein of human
sympathy which is more or less developed In
alt of us. and of which the sentiment Is genuine
and wholesome and not in any way maudlin.
The film will embark upon its career of tears
and smiles next week at the
Theatre. For every heart-throb it has a laugh,
and for every weakness of human nature It
has an antidote. C. J. Dennis’s poetry used
as sub-titles for the film are a most -Inter-
esting feature of the picture, and the Intro-
duction of Australian slang provides much
amusement. The most extraordinary thing of
Stereo No. 5, 2/6
all Is that the people who portray Dennis’s
characters never seem like actors at all, they
are so natural. In fact, the whole thing does
not give the impression of being s film pro-
duction of t story, but rather of being just
a slice of life lifted bodily from the world
of everyday and put upon the screen. Hence
its success.
Trying Not to Smash Ideals on tKe Screen
C. J. Dennis, the Australian writer, once Arthur Tsuchert and Lottie Lyell have been
wrote a scries of verses under the title of taken to the hearts of the public as perfectly
••THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE” for the typical of the beloved ne’er-do-well and his
Sydney 44 Bulletin.” The story they told was loyal little wife. This Is Mr. Tsuchert’s first
•o fascinating, so Idyllic, and so human that appearance as a screen actor: formerly he
they captured every heart in Australia. Later, was an Australian vaudeville performer doing
it was decided to picture this story upon the a 44 CO9O ” turn. Miss Lottie Lyell has been
screen, but there was a problem to be faced. playing In Australian pictures for ten years.
but 44 THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE” has
So many thousands of people, both here provided her with her first big chance. The
and lo Australis, have smiled and wept over beauty of these two artistes* performances la
44 THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE ” and bis thst. In the picture, they never look like
41 Doreen.” and have Invested these characters setors at all. They lust, as it were, stroll
with Individually aelected personalities, that through the picture with perfect naturalness,
the utmost difficulty was encountered in try- It Is this naturalness, combined with the aim-
ing to find two people who could play 44 The pllcity of the picture, the beautiful poetry of
Bloke ” and 44 Doreen ” on the screen with- C. J. Dennis, the wholesome sentiment and
out destroying the ideals of the book. But the unforced humour, which makes the com-
the task was successfully overcome, and plete success of the film.
Stereo No. 6, 3/3
/»rw in uenms; and every compeiem )uage 01 pic-
( o+nhliriae W Hoan inPC lures has eulogised the amazing way in which
O the story haB been transferred to the screen
with absolute fidelity and without the smallest
Australia’s first great screen classic, with sacrifice of sentiment, charm or character!-
s great big human story adapted from the sation.
world-famous verses of C. J. Dennis. C. J. Dennis’s wonderful character of 4I THB
A picture thst will make you smile through SENTIMENTAL BLOKE ” captured every
your teare. A wonderful story of human love heart in Australia. On the first night that
and kindness, faults and virtues, that is not “ The Bloke ” was visualised on the screen at
a matter of play-acting, but s complete chap- the Theatre Royal, Sydney, 20,000 people tried
ter from life. to get in. The 5.000 who were successful lo
Unfolding in proper dramatic sequence the getting seats spread the glad news that Den-
life story of Bill and Doreen—the real life oia’e characters and story had been trans-
characters immortalized in C. J. Dennis’s von- (erred perfectly to the screen, end from that
derful verses. moment the film rode upon an unprecedented
A picture without a villain, without • mur- wave of popularity that ultimately engulfed all
der. without a divorce, and without any trace Australia.
of auggeativeneas or vulgarity. A picture that Often one sees a picture In which the act-
every member of the family can see and eo- Ing is really brilliant, but seldom does one
ioy from mother to the baby: a picture that see acting such as there Is in 44 THE SENTI-
is full of love and kindness, of humour and MENTAL BLOKE.” The setors are not mere
sentiment, of charming scenes and ennobling puppets, enacting scenes that never happen;
thoughts. they are real human beings. When you see
The life history of a happy family which this picture, you will find It hard to believe
had its troubles and trials, its dark days and that 44 Bill ” and 44 Doreen ” are actors, they
Its bright days. Because this family is iust are so natural.
a gathering of human beings such ts you Harry Lauder says: 44 My dear public,—
meet and know, you will share its loys and 4 The Sentimental Bloke * is the cleanest and
sorrows, and find happiness in its company. healthiest and sweetest domestic love story 1
44 THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE” Is rich In have seen depicted upon the screen. 1 ken
the most delightful humour snd tender you’ll like it.”
pathos, that will make you smile through 41 THE SENTIMENTAL BLOKE ” Is one of
your tears and thank God that there still Is the pictures which the Prince of Wales saw
in the heart of humanity g deep well of love on board the 41 Renown ” on his vsy back
and kindness. from Australia.
Pictured just as Dennis wrote It—one of the Praise Indeed I Wilfred Lucas, the big
greatest heart interest stories ever written American producer, creator of 44 Tarzan of the
or screened, s tribute to humble humanity. Apes.” says: 41 No finer picture has ever
The Australian 14 My Old Dutch.” been made.”
MUSICAL SUGGESTIONS, as used at Trade Show at the ALHAMBRA THEATRE, can be obtained on application to
GAUMONT PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT, 6, Denman Street, London, W-l, or nearest Branch,
Mokton & Bust, Ltd-, Paddington, Bayiwater, sod Willeadea.
