

THE
COLONY OP QUEENSLAND
AS A
FIELD FOR COLONISATION,
WITH THE
ADVANTAGES AFFORDED BY THE
NEW LAND ACT.
IN AN APPENDIX WILL BE POUND THE ACT REPERKED TO, TOGETHER
WITH THE REGULATIONS PUBLISHED THEREUNDER.
1868.




THE COLONY OF QUEENSLAND
• AS A
FIELD FOR COLONISATION,
WITH THE
ADVANTAGES AFFORDED
BY THE
NEW LAND ACT.
Public attention lias been directed to Queensland as a field for
colonisation for some years, and few of the colonies under the British
Crown have established a more rapid progress in the same length of time
—dating from the separation from New South Wales. In England, and
indeed in the southern provinces of Australia, the growth of the youngest
of the family of states, expanding under the influences of an independent
government, was viewed with much interest, more especially as the
climate and the varied character of her resources, differing in many
respects from her older sisters, only allowed of conjecture being arrived
at in contemplating her future career. Eight years have now elapsed
since Queensland undertook the responsibilities of self-government; and
though all the anticipations that were current at that time as to her
future advancement have been more than fulfilled, yet her success has not
been won without effort and in the face of difficulties; but no one can
doubt the ultimate result of the energies of her population when turned
into those channels which lead to new sources of wealth, either previously
unknown, or, at the best, considered doubtful. Many advantages enjoyed
by Queensland are of a substantial character, and possessed by herself
alone. Her capabilities for production are almost unlimited. Her
pastoral resources are unequalled in these colonies. Her mineral wealth
is now establishing its importance on a firm basis; and when it is added
that a liberal land law offers inducements to settle, on principles entirely
new in the Australian Colonies, and on terms that have nojihrallel
except in America, it does not appear requisite to advance any further


" Crowd LJlTras Office,
Brisbane, 19tb May, 1868.
Sie,
My attention Laving been directed to tbe difficulties experienced
by tbe public, and especially by tbe residents in tbe other colonies, in
acquainting tbemselves with tbe principles of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868, and in understanding its practical working in relation to appli-
cations for tbe purchase of land under its provisions, I have tbe honor to
submit, for such use as you may deem expedient, a paper containing a digest
of tbe above-mentioned measure, together with some information of a general
character respecting tbe Colony of Queensland.
I have, &c.,
W. ALCOCK TTTLLY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Tbe Honorable tbe Secretary for Public Lands.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 20th May, 1868.
Sie,
I have perused your paper, including, amongst other interesting
subjects, a digest of tbe Crown Lands Alienation Act o/’ISbS ; and as it con-
tains a clear and lucid statement as to tbe mode of acquiring land under tbe
provisions of that Act, I have caused it to be printed in a form to render it
available to tbe general public.
I have, &c.,
E. W. LAMB,
Secretary for Public Lands.
To tbe Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.




reason for expressing an assurance that all who desire to share in Queens-
land’s progress will have no ground of complaint if they devote them-
selves to those pursuits for which they are themselves fitted, and which
are also suitable to the special characteristics of the colony.
In the following pages it is proposed to give a brief but general
account of the Colony of Queensland in those aspects which are likely to
be interesting to intending settlers. The information to be furnished
may be relied on as being procured from the best authorities and up to the
latest date. The concluding branch of this paper is the most important
one, dealing as it does with the subject of the land laws, and giving a
popular digest of the new Land Act, which affords not only a promise of
promoting and developing the interests of the colony, but of being the
basis of future legislation in Australia generally; but it was considered
desirable that the reader should be led up to the consideration of the
land policy after acquiring in the first place some knowledge of the
colony in relation to its population, features, and present position. With
this view, the paper has been divided into the following heads, which it is
to be hoped will yield sufficient information of a practical character to
enable a proper estimate to be formed of the capacity of Queensland to
attain a high position in the scale of nations yet to come.
1. Area and General Remarks.
2. Climate.
3. Eesources.
4. Population.
5. Digest of New Land Act.
6. Conclusion.
1. Area and General Remarks.
It is not an idle boast to state that Queensland is the largest of the
British colonies, possessing, as it does, an area nearly double that of Canada,
and equal to about one-fifth of the whole of Europe and its dependencies.
It will thus be seen that there is ample room for a considerable increase
to her population, without their proving in each other’s way. The colony
comprises the whole north-eastern portion of the Australian continent.
Its seaboard commences at Point Danger, on the eastern coast, and extends
northerly to Cape York, a distance of 1,550 miles, and thence westerly
along the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria to a point where the 138th
meridian of east longitude intersects the same. It is not necessary to
furnish a description of the southern and western boundaries, as without
a plan they would be unintelligible; but it may be remarked that some of
the settlements in the interior are fully 600 miles from Brisbane, which
will give the reader some idea of the extent of country contained within
her limits. The area of Queensland is about 678,500 square miles, which
at present gives an average of six and three-quarter square miles to each
member of the population. A very large proportion of the country is
of first-elass character, and equal to any that is found in the southern


portion of the continent, but it is to be expected that some time must
elapse before the boundless tracts which are now devoted to sheep and
cattle will present the appearance of being occupied in any other way.
Considering the immense area of Queensland, and the inaccessibility,
owing to distance from the seaboard of a large proportion of her territory,
it is a subject of surprise that so much of it should be occupied; but
settlement had extended in an unprecedented way up to the year 1866,
until, in fact, the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria were reached.
The general features of the country are favorable to pasturage,
especially in the interior, where the atmosphere is dry and the rains
infrequent. This does not apply to the coast, so far as sheep are con-
cerned, where the wet seasons are more constant and the climate more
equable during the year. The soil of the interior is, as a rule, superior
to that found in the coast district, but the other disadvantages of carriage
and climate more than counterbalance this, and have, to some extent,
tended to retard the progress of agriculture on the richest lands of the
colony. The general character of the country and rivers differ little from
that generally observed in New South Wales or Victoria. The latter
are seldom navigable for any great distance from the coast; though in
the case of the Brisbane a distance of forty miles in a direct line from
its mouth can be attained by steamer. The range dividing the waters
flowing to the east from those flowing to the west defines, in a very
decided way, the line of demarcation between two classes of country; one
of which, that on the western waters, is considered superior to the
other. This is unquestionably true of the Darling Downs dictriet,
which is unequalled in any of the colonies for its excellent pasturage and
beauty, and which, it is to be hoped, will one day provide homes for a
numerous and thriving population. That district gives quite a distinctive
character to the southern portion of the colony, and has been for the last
four years the battle-field of land legislation. There are many parts of
Queensland equally of excellent quality, but none so conveniently
situated. And now, that a railway connects this valuable district with
Ipswich, and thence by water to Brisbane, the Darling Downs promises to
become the main centre of settlement, and in time the garden of
Queensland.
At intervals along the coast northwards from Brisbane there are
several thriving settlements, amongst which may be noticed Rockhamp-
ton, Maryborough, and Bowen. These, with others, form commercial
dep6ts for the trade of the interior, and are likely to become, in after
years, towns of the first rank. In a new colony, the difficulty of estab-
lishing a proper system of road communication is one of the drawbacks
incidental to early settlement, and can only be surmounted by energetic
action and at considerable expenditure. In fine weather the ordinary
bush tracks, or roads, are sufficiently good for all purposes; but, after
rain, the traffic is almost entirely suspended for a time, until the surface
becomes dry again. Regard to this matter, and to the erection of
bridges, has occupied public attention, and with good results; as, in
many parts of the colony, the roads will vie with those in the older


provinces, though opci-ations may he only said to have commenced a few
years hack. The importance of providing a better mode of communica-
tion with the interior than the ordinary roads was brought prominently
before the public some time ago, and the result has been the construc-
tion of a railway from Ipswich to Dal by, a distance of 130 miles, and
another from Rockhampton to Westwood, about thirty miles in length.
Roth of these lines are now open for traffic, and will unquestionably
prove a vast accommodation to the settlers of the remote interior, for the
distance from the coast towns to their stations is practically reduced by
the length of the above lines.
There is also a branch line to Warwick in course of construction.
This latter will traverse one of the most valuable districts of the colony,
being the one in which farming operations may be presumed to be capable
of being conducted with more certain success, owing to the suitability of
its climate and soil. Along this line of railway there is an abundance
of land now ready for selection, on any of which a man who has sufficient
capital and a knowledge of his pursuit may surround himself with
comforts and possessions which he could scarcely hope to attain in the
home country.
2. Climate.
The climate of Queensland, though hot, is salubrious, and is not found
to be unsuitable for the English constitution. The dryness of the
atmosphere is its distinguishing feature, rendering it more healthy than
it would be in similar latitudes where there is greater humidity. In all
ranks and conditions of life there are to be found persons who have resided
for many years in the colony exhibiting a vigor and health equal to that
enjoyed in any other part of the world. Where attention is paid to a
proper system of living, coupled with pure air and cleanliness, health can
be secured with less risks than are attendant on a residence in colder
climates. In the summer months the days are unquestionably warm and
the rays of the sun powerful; but, at the same time, the temperature
seldom attains that extreme height that is experienced in Yictoria and
South Australia during the hot winds, to which those colonies are liable.
The nights are, as a rule, cool, which is a great source of revival after
the heat of the day. The winter season, however, is the perfection
of weather. During the three months of June, July, and August, there
is generally an absence of rain, and the days are consequently bright and
cloudless. Nothing can be imagined more delightful than the temperature
during this period of the year, which is not too warm to preclude active
exercise, whilst the nights are absolutely cold. Everyone is invigorated
by the bracing effect of the season, and lays in a new stock of health and
strength to withstand the summer heats. Much could be added to show
that Queensland posseses a climate not inferior, though differing in some
respects from those of the other provinces of Australia; but enough has
been advanced to give a general idea of its character. The mean annual
temperature of Brisbane, from observations taken during the last few
years, is found to be about 67°, which nearly agrees with that of Funchal,
in Madeira; only in the lattef case the climate is more equable* and not


subject to such a great range of temperature. The Cape of Good Hope
has also a climate resembling Queensland, with the exception of being
slightly warmer.
3. Resources.
In dealing with this branch of the subject it is only proposed to
furnish an outline of the many sources from which enterprise and capital
conjoined may derive successful results, as it would be manifestly imprac-
ticable within the limits of this paper to give more than a cursory
account of the varied character of the resources of a colony that contains
all the natural elements of a great future. The adaptation of the country
for all the profitable uses that engage the attention of the southern
colonists now rests on the best assurance that experience can establish;
and though success has not invariably crowned the labors of the pioneers,
the failure may, perhaps, be attributed to other causes than the unsuit-
ableness of the soil or climate for the operations in which they have been
engaged. With all the disadvantages which accompany early settlement,
especially in the interior, where carriage and labor have been so
extravagantly high, the progress of the pastoral interests has been most
conspicuous ; but at the same time the fact is beginning to be well estab-
lished, that a boundless territory of first-class land does not in itself
provide all that conduces to success, whilst the value of wool and stock
remain at their present low rates. In one respect this depreciation,
which may be considered as being only of temporary duration, will prove
advantageous by directing attention to a better system of working stations,
which will more than repay the holders of stock for the losses and
anxieties they have suffered during the late hard times. In these remarks
reference has been made more to those runs that have been taken up and
stocked during the last six years than to those which may be deemed old
stations, of which many are in a thriving condition; but the necessity of
an alteration in the management is especially cogent in each instance;
for until recently the system of sheep farming in Queensland
was inferior in every respect to that adopted in the other
colonies. At present, however, there is every prospect of a change
for the better ; for wherever the improved method of washing has
been tried, coupled with the practice of paddocking the sheep, there has
been nothing to regret in the expenditure of the necessary capital.
There are many stations which would yield a handsome return by a
proper outlay in fencing, which now do little more than pay the working
expenses. This development is, therefore, only a question of time; but
the exigencies of low prices and high rates of labor will prove the most
energetic stimulant to its progress. The encouragement offered to free-
hold settlement under the new Land Act will also tend to encourage sheep
farming on sounder principles, by introducing the practice of confining the
pursuit to smaller areas, and thus obliging the owner to work his land in
a more economical manner.
The number of sheep in the colony at the present time may be
estimated at 8,557,755. This, considering the severe drought which
the colony suffered from in 1866) and other drawbacks consequent on the


large number of flocks travelling northwards, represent a very fair increase
on the number set down in the return for 1862, viz., 4,845,901.
As wool is the principal export from Queensland as yet, the first
place in this paper has been devoted to its production; but cattle also
deserve more than a passing notice ; and now that the preservation of meat
for European consumption is attracting the attention of capitalists, that
source of wealth ought not to be lost sight of, whilst the colony possesses
such an extent of fattening pastures, especially on the coast, which is
superior to anything found to exist in New South Wales. The extension
of the cattle trade is dependent more on improvements in breeding than
on any other condition of working; but there is also an abundance of
room for an expansion that promises a great success to those that engage
in the pursuit.
Agriculture next demands attention, and it would be a subject of
congratulation if some important results could be indicated as distinguish-
ing that branch of industry. In this direction, however, the colony ha 3
only lately made a commencement, and anything that has been previously
done, having been only on a small scale, is scarcely appreciable in its
influence on the general welfare. It is to be hoped, therefore, that a new
era has opened, and with the important fact of sugar cultivation having
proved a success, it is scarcely possible to be sceptical any longer. What-
ever may be the suitability of Queensland for ordinary farming, it is
unquestionably unfortunate that in most cases the pursuit has been in the
hands of a small proprietory, who had generally neither capital nor
experience to enable them to surmount the difficulties that are usually
attendant on the first years of settlement. Owing to this mainly, the
farming interest has not enjoyed that success which many anticipated;
but, on the other hand, it is conceded, that the expectations of the
majority of those who sought to obtain a livelihood on the land were too
extravagant for realization, except during years when produce attained
high rates of value. To any person who has had the advantage of expe-
rience, it must be obvious that the profits to be derived from agricul-
ture solely cannot for any length of time continue to be more than
moderate. The laws of supply and demand govern this rule, and
those who commence on a small scale cannot look forward, except
under exceptional circumstances, to making more than a living on
the land; but as this comprises an independence, and the comforts of a
home, there ought to be no disappointment in viewing the result. The
fact is that during a long series of years, money was made so easily in
these colonies, that any pursuit that did not fulfil that condition was
deemed a failure; but it is discovered in most instances that when the
return to the farmer is .small, the investment of capital and labor have
been small also. Under the former land laws, many of the settlers on
farms, no doubt, crippled themselves in being obliged to pay the full price
of the land at the outset. That source of difficulty is now done away
with, and anyone who is disposed, can occupy land on terms so advan-
tageous that a living can be procured if a proper use be made
of it.


The climatic conditions of Queensland favor in a most remarkable
degree her powers of production. Owing to her great range of territory,
and some peculiarities of climate, she possesses the capacity of
maturing many of those crops that are generally supposed to belong to
cooler latitudes, whilst at the same time tropical products can be grown
with a success that has only lately received attention. Sugar, cotton, and
coffee, three important staples, can be raised from the soil that will also
grow most of the English vegetables and fruit trees. This scope of
production is always interesting to the new arrivals, and encourages the
formation of gardens, which after a few mQnths will attain an appearance
of luxuriance that would require years in England to produce the same
result.
The mineral resources of Queensland are now attracting an attention
which was denied to her during the last few years, and few can doubt but
that a profitable field both for the individual labor of the miner and also
for the capitalist is now opening. The recent discoveries of gold at
Gympie Creek, the Cape River, and in the vicinity of Rockhampton, are
assuming a permanent character; and, judging from what has been done
up to the present date, and of the reasonable expectations that the
development of the gold-mining interest promises for the future, the
colony will yet be numbered amongst those whose career has been stimu-
lated in an unexampled manner by the realisation of their mineral wealth.
In addition to gold, there are also the strongest evidences of the existence
of other metals. Silver, lead, and copper have been found at consider-
able distances apart, which is a reasonable presumption of their wide-
spread existence. The latter mineral has been discovered in one or two
places under such favorable circumstances, that mining operations have
been undertaken with successful results. During the past year, a valu-
able copper lode was discovered on the Cloncurry, a tributary of
the Flinders River, flowing into the Gulf of Carpentaria, which exhibited
solid masses of the pure metal, on a scale of magnitude not usually met
with out of America, whilst its suitableness for working was not dimi-
nished by its own richness. The coal measures are also observed in
portions of Queensland, especially in the southern districts; but this
may be mainly attributable to the closer observation which that part of
the colony has been exposed to. The coal is worked in several places,
and is found suitable for furnace and domestic uses. The steamers from
the ports of Brisbane and Maryborough invariably obtain their supplies
of fuel from the mines in the vicinity of these towns.
A great variety of colonial woods and building stone can be procured
in the colony ; the former is eminently suitable for every purpose, whether
for strength or ornamentation, and furniture is now made from it that
will bear a favorable comparison with the best samples of European
manufacture.
4. Population.
The number of persons in the colony, so far as it can be computed
up to the latest date, is about 100,000. This shows a great increase


compared with the population seven or eight years ago. For the purpose
of showing the annual increase, the following statement has been pre-
pared :
Population on 31st December, 1861 ... 34,367
„ „ 1862 ... 45,077
„ „ 1863 ... 61,467
„ „ 1864 ... 74,036
„ „ 1865 ... 87,775
„ „ 1866 ... 96,172
„ „ 1867 ... 100,000
5. Digest op New Land Act.
The new Land Act comprehends many principles which are entirely
new in Australian legislation, and on that account may he looked upon
as a subject of interest in relation to its future operation. The colony,
generally, has, owing to the unsuitable character of the late laws relating
to the alienation of Crown laud, been almost unanimous in demanding
a reform, and has also exhibited a most creditable desire to introduce
such a liberality into the land policy as would enable the highest induce-
ments to be held out to all who were disposed to settle on the soil, at the
same time protecting, so far as it was possible to do so, existing interests.
Whether this has been accomplished or not cannot be a subject for dis-
cussion in this paper; but it has been mentioned in order that the intro-
duction of provisions affecting the pastoral lessees into an Act, relating
more particularly to the sale and freehold occupation of the Crown lands,
should be fully understood. The practical working of a measure so
fraught with power, according as it is administered, to improve the
condition of the colony, attracts, at the outset, considerable attention,
affecting, as it does, the interest of almost every colonist; for no
description of property has so many charms as land. Its possession is a
source of pleasure in itself, and it is well known that persons are
willing to purchase land on a slender hope of its proving a remunerative
investment. The land policy of a colony is therefore always the one on
which there appears to be the largest amount of interest taken. It is
certainly the one in which most of the population are concerned; and
whether it is the laborer or shepherd, with his few pounds in the savings
bank, or the owner of flocks without number, each of them looks to the
land question as one on which their labors depend for providing, in after
years, the njeans which should enable them to retire from the battle of
life, or leave their families in the enjoyment of competence. It is, there-
fore, with no small feelings of pride that Queensland has now launched
into her little community a new land law, offering to each of her
industrious sons a means of securing a home, and something more than
that; for the possession of such blessings as a home give 3, confers, also,
many other advantages which will prove of the best service to the state,
namely, self-respect and contentment. To those outside her boundaries
she offers the same inducements to settle on her territory; and when it is
shewn what are the terms oh which land cart be secured) and the bound*


less area open to selection, each of which will probably offer some special
advantage suitable to the tastes or circumstances of the selector, nothing
more need be added to prove that in no other part of Australia have
such advantages been offered to the man of moderate capital as may be
obtained within the boundaries of Queensland. The Land Act, con-
sidered in its relation to the public, apd apart from those principles
which more immediately concern the pastoral tenant, is one which is
exceedingly simple in principle. It is the intention in this paper only to
deal with the Act in the above-mentioned way, as it is not deemed
necessary to introduce into a digest what has no connection with the sale
of land further than as a means of opening it up to the community
generally. Adopting this plan, therefore, it may be stated the colony
has been divided into the settled and unsettled districts. The former are
the districts which are principally affected by the Crown Lands Alienation
Act, and may be estimated as containing 51,488,000 acres The lands
comprised in the settled districts include most of the valuable lands of
the colony—certainly all that possess any particular advantage for other
use than pastoral purposes. They are situated in the following districts,
viz :
Acres.
Moreton, containing ... ... ... 4,480,000
Darling Downs, ditto ... ... ... 3,840,000
Wide Hay and Burnett, ditto ... ... 4,512,000
Port Curtis, ditto ... ... ... 8,960,000
Kennedy, ditto ... ... ... ... 6,528,000
Cook, ditto ... .. ... ... 16,320,000
North Cook, ditto ... ... ... 2,048,000
Burke ... ... ... ... .. 4,800,000
The three first contain the largest proportion of the population, and,
therefore, a greater quantity of land may be expected to be sold within
their boundaries; but it has been found that the northern districts
possess some material advantages in the formation of farms for tropical
produce, which capitalists and others will not be slow to turn to account
when the subject is brought more prominently before them.
The Act, as has been stated, applies to the settled districts; but, as
there are one or two exceptions, it would not be out of place to allude to
them now, before entering into its details. They are the following:—
Land may be purchased in any township reserves, where the areas are
large-enough to allow it, on the same terms as in the settled districts;
and under the sixteenth clause of the Act selections are allowed on land
that has never been under pastoral lease and is not at the time of
application under license, at the price of second-class pastoral land, viz.,
five shillings per acre.
In the settled districts, most of the land has been, up to the present
time, under lease for pastoral purposes. Each division or block of
country is called a run, bearing a distinctive name, which the holder
occupies with sheep or cattle> and pays a rent assessed on its capabilities


for grazing. These leases have been renewed from time to time on the
terms contained in the several Acts of Parliament in force at the expira-
tion of the leases. Under the present Act, it is proposed to resume the
whole of each run at the expiration of twelve months; hut in the event
of the lessee being willing to come under the provisions of the Act, he
will he allowed a lease for ten years of half his run, and a license for the
resumed half, which is open to selection before survey in the manner
prescribed by the Act. These leases cannot be taken away by the
Government of the day, as the Act provides that a joint resolution of
both Houses of Parliament is necessary before any part of the leased half
of a run can be resumed. The selections must, therefore, be made on the
resumed half, and as soon as the runs are divided—a work which is now
proceeding as fast as circumstances will admit of—a description of the
land open to the public will be furnished for general guidance. In each
settled district of the colony there is a Land Commissioner, and in each
of the towns a land agent, who is authorised to receive applications
within the sub-district assigned to him. The machinery in working the
Act will, therefore, on a proper explanation being given, appear very
plain and simple. In dealing with this branch of the subject, it is
proposed to treat the following divisions of the Land Act seriatim, which
include all the clauses in which the public are generally interested:—
Conditional Purchases.
Homesteads.
Sugar and Coffee Leases.
Mineral Lands.
Gold Fields.
Commonages.
General Provisions.
Conditional Purchases.
The portion of the Act referring to conditional purchases contains
some of its most important provisions, and embodies principles that are
at any rate new in the legislation of Queensland or the other colonies.
In the first place, land can be purchased at lower rates and on easier
terms of payment. Larger areas can also be secured, by which means
both agricultural and pastoral farming may be combined in one selection.
Secondly, the land is classified with the view of making the rate of
purchase-money proportionate to the value of the land in connection with
its capabilities for either of the above uses.
The foregoing are the principal features in the Act relating to
conditional purchases, with the exception of certain conditions which the
selector has to comply with, and which have been introduced into the
Act in order to prevent undue monopoly of land, or its being selected
solely with a view for speculative purposes. These conditions also impart
to the measure a practical character, as whatever encouragement is
afforded to purchase land on the liberal terms offered, that land must be


turned to useful account, and a certain expenditure laid out on it as a
guarantee of its being devoted to settlement.
The lands open to settlement are—
Firstly. —The Crown lands in the settled districts not under lease
or license.
Secondly. —The lands on the resumed halves of runs, inclusive of
the railway reserves, which extend three miles on each side of the railway
lines throughout their entire length.
Thirdly. —The lands in large township reserves, not less than two
miles in a direct line from the nearest town lot olfered for sale.
These lands constitute the area available for selection under the Act,
an area which, in the gross, is twice as large as Ireland.
The areas allowed to be selected by any one person, and the rates of
purchase-money per acre, are as follows :
Agricultural land not less than 40, nor more than 640, at 15s.
per acre.
First-class pastoral land, not less than 80, nor more than 2,560,
at 10s. per acre.
Second-class pastoral land, not less than 80, nor more than 7,680,
at ss. per acre.
These are the maximum areas allowed for each class which it is not
permitted to exceed. The selection may be in one or not more than
three blocks; but provision is made for adjacent lands being selected,
provided the boundaries are conterminous, and the maximum area of each
class is not exceeded. On town and railway reserves, no application com-
prising second-class pastoral land can be received at any time.
The form and mode of taking up land is in this way:—The appli-
cant attends at a land agent’s office, and having ascertained that the land
which he wishes to select is available—if he has not previously deter-
mined this—lodges an application (form F in the regulations appended)
in triplicate, accompanied with the amount of the first year’s rent and
survey fee. This application sufficiently explains itself. It contains a
declaration that the applicant is above the age of 21 years, and that he
applies for the land in his own behalf and use, and not as agent or trustee
for any other person whatever. He further declares that he intends to
use the. same, and that he has not entered into any agreement to sell,
demise, or mortgage it. These specific declarations are required in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, being portion of the conditions
under which the land is held. The application should also contain a
clear description of the boundaries, with reference to some known feature
or previous survey. The area, and the particulars, of the first year’s rent,
being one-tenth of the whole purchase-money, whether in cash or land
orders,* are also to be furnished. With respect to the area, it may be
* Non-transferable land orders are available for selection, if issued in favor of the
selector. Transferable orders are available for all persons selecting. These land
orders have been issued to immigrants paying their own passages to the colony.


remarked that each class of land may he included in one application.
For example:—
Acres. At per acre. First year’s rent.
s. d. £ 8. d.
Agricultural land ... 50 ... 1 6 ... 3 15 0
First-class pastoral land... 100 ... 1 0 ... 5 0 0
Second-class pastoral land 200 ... 0 6 ... 5 0 0
Total ... ... 350 Annual Fent £l3 15 0
On receipt by the land agent of this application, an entry is made in
a book, called the “ Application Book,” which the applicant signs. This
entry governs the priority of the selection at the time the Commissioner
deals with it, as hereafter described; and on the land agent giving the
applicant a receipt for his rent, no further proceedings are to be taken
until the next Commissioner’s Court Sitting, which occurs about
once a fortnight, at which the a plicant or his agent must attend,
when the acceptance or the rejection of the application is publicly
declared to the applicant or his agent. After such declaration, the
deposit of rent previously paid on the rejected applications is then refunded
to the applicants by the Commissioner, and, in the case of those provisionally
approved, instructions are sent to a surveyor to effect a survey of the
selection. At the time the survey is being carried out, means are taken to
verify the classification estimated by the selector ; and if the Commis-
sioner, through such surveyor, or a competent witness, or his own personal
knowledge, considers that a higher classification existed, he is empowered
to call upon the selector to pay a sufficient sum to cover the balance due
on such higher classification ; and if the demand be not attended to
within three months, the land becomes forfeited. After the boundaries
are surveyed and the rents adjusted, the Government will issue a lease
for ten years at a yearly rent of one-tenth of the purchase-money. This
lease will contain certain provisions, of which the following are the
principal ones:—
1. The lease shall date from the nearest first day of January or
July to date of application.
2. The annual rent to be received for every acre, or fraction of an
acre, shall be :
Agricultural land, Is. 6d. per acre.
First-class pastoral, Is.
Second-class pastoral, 6d.
And such rent should be paid in cash to the land agent of
the district in which the selection is situated, on or before the
31st day of March in each year.
3. The lessee shall within six months from completion of survey
erect substantial boundary posts along the measured
boundaries of the land, at distances not exceeding five chains
apart, or shall erect a good and subtantial fence along such
boundary. If the posts fall into decay the Commissioner of
the district can require the lessee to replace them, and if this
is not done may inflict a fine for the neglect.


4. During the currency of such lease the Governor, ol* atoy person
authorised in that behalf, may make entry to dig and remove
gold or other metals, &c., provided that any damage done to
lessee shall be made good to him, by paying an amount
to be determined by arbitration.
5. Residence in person, or by bailiff, is necessary during the
currency of the lease.
6. In the case of pastoral land, — if dhe lessee *shall prove within
three years from date of selection, by two credible wit-
nesses, to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, that he has
resided in person, or by bailiff, on the said land for a period
of two years, and that a sum at the rate of not less than ten
shillings per acre for first-class pastoral land, and five shillings
an acre for second-class pastoral land, has been expended in
substantial improvements, or that he has fenced in the said
land with a substantial fence, then the Commissioner shall
issue a certificate that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
performed, and the lessee shall be entitled to a deed of grant
in fee-simple on the payment of the balance of the ten years’
rent.
7. In the case of agricultural land, —if the lessee shall similarly
prove, within three years from date of selection, that he has
resided in person, or by bailiff, for a period of not less than
two years, and that he has expended a sum equal to ten
shillings per acre, or that he has fenced in the land with a
substantial fence, he shall be entitled to a certificate from
the Commissioner that the conditions have been performed,
and to a grant of the land on payment of the balance of the ten
years’ rent; but if at any time during the currency of the
lease he shall prove that one-tenth part of the land has been
cultivated, he shall be absolved from the conditions of resi-
dence, and a grant shall issue on payment of the balance of
rent as aforesaid.
8. No transfer or assignment of any lease can be allowed until the
lessee has obtained a certificate, as above described, from the
Commissioner; but after the issue of such certificate, transfer
may proceed with the sanction of the Government, on pay-
ment of ten shillings for the registration thereof.
9. After the certificate is obtained, balance of purchase-money
may be paid up in one sum in cash.
10. The Government reserves a right to resume land for road
purposes during ten years, on payment of twice the amount
which should have been paid as rent or purchase-money on
such land, and when the land is enclosed, the Government
will be required to fence off the road from adjacent land.
The above are the conditions on which the leases are issued. They
are given in detail and at greater length than was at first deemed


necessary; but they are so important in conveying a perfect knowledge
of the principles of the Act, that it was found requisite to introduce
them. It will be observed that a lessee must, sometime during the third
year of his lease, be m a position to prove that he has performed the
prescribed conditions. A failure in this respect, or in paying the rent,
will involve forfeiture, and the (rovernor is empowered either to proclaim
the land again open to selection, or direct it to be sold by auction.
The general rules applicable to conditional purchases include certain
restrictions respecting the shape of the selections, and the proportion of
frontage allowed on rivers or roads; also, with respect to monopoly of
water, or other privileges, which it is not necessary to enter upon, further
than to state that they are required for the protection of public conve-
nience. It may, however, be added, that conditional purchasers are
restricted, under a penalty, from depasturing more than twenty head of
cattle, or fifty sheep, for every hundred acres of land, until their selec-
tions are securely fenced. This provision is rendered necessary, as the
pastoral lessee is entitled to a license to depasture stock, under certain
limitations, on the resumed half of the run, and, therefore, his interest
has to be protected. With this view, the cattle and sheep of the
conditional purchasers and pastoral licensees must have a distinctive
brand, to be registered at the Commissioner’s Office.
Homesteads.
The introduction of the clauses referring to homesteads in the Act
is one of its distinctive features; and being to a certain extent derived
from America, the result of its operation is looked upon with some degree
of anxiety. In the earlier stages of passing the Act through the
Legislature, it was proposed to adopt the principle of giving the land
gratuitously, provided that residence for five years was complied with;
but, amongst the more prudent of the members, it was deemed that a too
great liberality, under the peculiar circumstances of the colony, which
are not at all analogous to those of the United States, would prove
prejudicial to the best interests of the community. It was, therefore,
wisely determined that a small annual rental should be charged, together
with the cost of survey, which cannot be considered as an oppressive
impost upon any one who is in a position to settle, and at the same time
it provides a guarantee that the occupation of the land is carried out in
good faith for the purposes of settlement.
The Act allows any person who is the head of a family, or who is of
the age of twenty-one years, to enter upon eighty acres of agricultural
land, or one hundred and sixty acres of pastoral land, open to selection,
on payment annually for five years at the rate of ninepence an acre
for the former, and sixpence for the latter description of land. There
are also the following conditions to be observed in applying for a home-
stead, and in occupying it afterwards. In the first place, the applicant
must lodge with the land agent the form K in the regulations, together
with the first year’s rent and survey fee, having previously made the
declaration appearing on the said form, that he or she is head of a family,


or is twenty-one years of age, that such application is made for his or her
exclusive use, and that he or she has not on any former occasion exercised
such right or homestead selection, and that such entry is made for the use
of the applicant, &c. Residence is required during the five years, and also,
in addition, either that one-tenth of the land should be cultivated, or
that the portion should be securely fenced. On proof being furnished to
the Commissioner of the conditions being fulfilled, a Crown grant shall
issue to the holder. Lands acquired under the homestead clauses of the
Act do not become liable to the satisfaction of any debts contracted prior
to the issuing of the Crown grant. There" is also a provision to the effect
that after affording proof of two years’ residence, and the prescribed
extent of cultivation, the selector may obtain a grant on paying the
upset price of the land.
Sugar and Coffee Leases.
Any applicant for selection of land within ten miles from the coast
or a navigable river, not included in the leased half of a pastoral run,
who states in his application that he intends to use the land for the cul-
tivation of sugar or coffee, shall be allowed to select a block of agricultural
land not less than 320 acres, nor more than 1,280 acres; and on proof
of his having cultivated one-tenth of the land in either sugar or coffee
within three years, he shall be relieved from the obligation of residence,
but in all other respects he shall be liable to the same conditions as any
other conditional purchaser.
Mineral Lands.
The following are the conditions on which land can be purchased for
mining purposes other than gold :
Ist. The area of land to be sold not to exceed 640 acres, nor
less than 40 acres.
2nd. The price in no case to be less than £1 per acre.
3rd. The application is to be made to the Minister for Lands in
the form F in the regulations, and- a deposit of five shillings
per acre is to be lodged at the same time; the balance of
purchase-money to be paid within twelve months—except
in the remote districts of the colony, when the period is to
be eighteen months. Before the grant for the land is issued,
satisfactory evidence of the applicant having expended a
sum equal to one pound per acre in bond jide working the
minerals must be adduced.
Under these regulations, the applicant is protected in his operations
for a period of twelve or eighteen months, as the case may be, by a pay-
ment of five shillings per acre. The principle is virtually an authorised
license for mining purposes, with a right of purchase at the expiration of
the above-mentioned periods.
Gold Fields and Commons.
The lands in gold fields are commonages under the Act, and power is
.also given to proclaim unsold land on township reserves as a common, on
B


a petition signed by not less than thirty freeholders resident within such
township. Land may be sold on commons, and regulations made for the
purpose of giving effect to commonage rights, subject to certain restric-
tions, amongst which it appears that the depasturing of sheep is prohibited,
and that a charge is to be made for each head of cattle depastured
thereon.
General Provisions.
In addition to the provisions above described, there are other
important ones which deserve a passing allusion, in order to shew that
almost everything that tends to the development of settlement on the
soundest principles is included in the measure. The Government have
power to proclaim township reserves on suitable sites, and also to grant
as reserves land for a number of public purposes too numerous to men-
tion, but which may be generally understood as having reference to the
industrial, scholastic, recreational, and charitable wants of the community.
Power is also granted to close roads that may be reserved for communica-
tion—but for which no use is afterwards found; also to sell by private
contract lands on townships where improvements have been effected
previous to survey. This provision is rendered necessary, as on several
occasions it is found that settlement precedes the arrangements made by
the Government.
An important portion of the Act comprises the rules in which
auction sales are conducted. It is scarcely necessary to do more than
to refer to them in a general way, as the purchaser is absolved from all
conditions after the purchase-money is paid, which requires to be lodged
with the land agent within one month from date of sale. All lands
submitted to auction require to be proclaimed for at least one month pre-
vious to . day of sale. The portions offered are put up at the following
upset prices, viz. :
Town lots not less than eight pounds per acre.
Suburban lands not less than one pound per acre, when within
one mile from town lands, and fifteen shillings per acre when
beyond one mile from town lands.
Agricultural land not less than fifteen shillings per acre.
First-class pastoral lands not less than ten shillings per acre.
Second-class pastoral lands not less than five shillings per acre.
The town lands average from one rood to one acre j the suburban
from one to one hundred and sixty acres; the country lands from forty
to six hundred and forty acres. A deposit of twenty per cent, on the
amount bid has to be paid in cash to the land agent or auctioneer at
the time of sale, and' the balance within one month as above stated-
failing which the land is forfeited and open to the next selector. It may
also be remarked that all unsold lots are open to sale on the following
day at the. upset price, and continue open to selection until they are
again submitted to sale by auction, when, if the previous classification is
ouna to be too high, the upasfc price will be reduced accordingly.


All improved lands forfeited for any failure, in compliance with the
condition of the Act, will be sold by public auction; but the value of
the improvements will be added to the upset price, and the amount
received thereon returned to the person whose land became subject to
forfeiture.
For the purpose of encouraging the Volunteer movement in the
Colony, grants are authorised to Volunteers, not on the paid staff, to the
extent of ten acres of suburban land, or fifty acres of country land, on
the terms of efficient and continuous service of five years from the pass-
ing of the Act. This public acknowledgment of the importance of main-
taining a body of trained men for colonial defence is likely to be produc-
tive of much benefit by giving a permanent standing to the force, and
furnishing an object to the members in maintaining their position as
Volunteers, after the novelty of the pursuit has been weakened by
practice and experience of its duties, and thus preventing the dispersion
of the older members, whilst new blood is being constantly introduced.
There are a large number of clauses referring purely to technical
arrangements in connection with working the measure, such as appraise-
ments, arbitration, and the like ; also, with respect to the issue of
licenses for cutting timber on, and removing gravel and earth from Crown
lands. A severe punishment is also provided for .any attempt to evade
the Act or its provisions, including also the forfeiture of the land, and
the improvements effected thereon.
In thus hastily sketching the general provisions of a measure so
important, it may be useful to refer to its general aspects, and to its
suitability to the character of the Colony of Queensland, which comprises
an area so vast, that no hopes of freehold settlement extending to any
great extent, under the legislation of previous years, could ever have
been anticipated. There is every assurance that the alienation of the
land will be productive of benefit, as it may be presumed that the
purchaser will turn his property to the best advantage. There is certainly
a guarantee to a partial extent in that; and though an improvement may
not be observed at the outset, there can be no reasonable doubt that the
productive power of the land will be materially increased, and a demand
spring up for capital investments in furthering that object. Under the
Act, it will be observed that 10,880 acres, inclusive of the three classes
of land, may be obtained by one selector; and though, perhaps, he may
have a difficulty of securing such a large area in the most convenient
situation, there can be no question of his ability to purchase that extent
in some suitable locality, where his operations can be conducted advan-
tageously. It is scarcely necessary to point out that a lease of 10,880
acres for ten years, at an annual rent of £B6B, which is the rent charge-
able for that extent of land, is not a bad investment. The area
allowed also, is sufficiently large to enable sheep-farming to pay, when
paddocking is resorted to, or to combine that class of farming with
agriculture. With the prospect of securing land on such easy terms, and
being enabled to turn it to profitable account in the several ways open in
the colony, it will not be surprising if many from the adjoining ones avail


themselves of the facilities to purchase, and thus by their example tend
to the introduction of somewhat similar principles in the land policy of
the other Australian provinces. But it may be conceded that peculiar
circumstances fitted Queensland, especially, for the reforms introduced
in the new Act, and that it would be difficult for legislation on the same
basis to be adopted out of her territory. The reduction in the price of
land is unquestionably one of the most important principles of the
measure ; still, it is one which is not quite realised to its fullest extent,
at the first glance. To the ordinary observer, 155., 10s., and ss. for the
respective classes per acre represent a considerable decrease, as compared
with the former price of land; but when it is taken into consideration
that the payments extend over ten years, and that the unpaid balance
stands as a debt to the Crown decreasing every year by a tenth, and that
for this unpaid balance interest may justly be considered chargeable as a
deduction from the full upset price of the land, it will be seen that the
residue left is very small to represent the actual price at which it is sold.
Assuming, therefore, that ten per cent, is a fair rate of interest to
allow, the payments would arrange themselves in this manner, taking the
case of agricultural land for an example, viz. :
100 acres agricultural land, upset price 15s. per acre, for which a yearly
rental is charged of £7 10s.
Unpaid Balance Interest
due to the Crown. 10 per Cent.
Ist year ... £67 10 0 ... £6 15 0
2 „ ... 60 0 0 ... 6 0 0
3 „ ... 52 10 0 ... 6 5 0
4 „ ... 45 0 0 ... 4 10 0
5 „ ... 37 10 0 ... 3 15 0
6 „ ... 30 0 0 ... , 3 0 0
7 „ ... 22 10 0 ... 2 5 0
8 „ ... 15 0 0 ... 1 10 0
9 „ ... 7 10 0 ... 0 15 0
10 „
Total Interest £33 15 0
This gives a total of interest amounting to £B3 155., which, being
deducted from £75 (the full price of the land at the rate of 15s. per acre),
leaves £4l 55., which represents Bs. 3d. as the actual price of the land.
By the same process, first-class pastoral land is shown to be sold at ss. 6d.,
and second-class pastoral at half that rate. By this practical test the
cheapness of the land is exhibited more conspicuously; and when other
advantages are taken into account there are few portions of Her Majesty’s
dominions that hold out stronger inducements than Queensland to persons
to settle on her soil.
6. Conclusion.
In addition to the information contained in the preceding pages, it
has been also deemed desirable to append a copy of the Grown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868, and of the Regulations and Instructions issued
subject to its provisions, by which means any reader who is disposed to


acquaint himself with the specific details of the measure may be in a
position to do so. It is scarcely necessary to make any further allusion
to the subject of this paper, which, it is to be hoped, includes all that
is required, within a moderate scope, for conveying a general idea of the
colony in its relation to the new land laws. If it has accomplished t is,
the aim of the'writer has been fulfilled.
In future years, perhaps, under the wise and merciful dispensation of
Providence, the increased prosperity and importance of the polony will
be the best justification of the reforms which are now being introduced.
Those who live to see that period will be surprised that any were found
to doubt the success of a policy that was based on the principle ot
affording to all who desired it an opportunity of acquiring a tree hold,
provided it was turned to some useful account. Until the day of wealth
and prosperity is attained, it only remains for those who have the
interest of their adopted country at heart to do. what they can to forward
her onward progress, and by attention to their own interests, advance
those of Queensland also.


APPENDIX.
l&ueenslantii.
ANNO TRICESIMO PRIMO VICTORIAS REGINA.
No. 46.
An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws relating to the Alienation of Crown
Lands. •
[Assented to 28th February, 1868.
Preamble.
Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the
alienation of Crown lands Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent
Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same as follows —
PAET I.
Introductory.
Repeal of existing Acts Sfc.
1. At and from the time of the commencement of this Act the Orders
in Council and several Acts mentioned in the schedule A hereto annexed and
all rules and regulations made thereunder respectively concerning the sale
or other disposal of the waste lands of the Crown and all other Acts laws
and regulations if any inconsistent with the provisions or spirit of this Act in
force in the Colony of Queensland at the time of the passing of this Act
shall he and are hereby repealed saving always all rights claims penalties and
liabilities already accrued or incurred and in existence Hut nothing herein
contained shall alter or repeal the Act of the Parliament of New South
Wales twenty Victoria number twenty-nine Provided always that the satis-
faction of all such rights and claims as aforesaid shall be carried out accord-
ing to the modes of procedure and subject to the provisions of this Act and
that no action suit or proceeding civil or criminal in any court of law or
equity already commenced or hereafter to be commenced under or by virtue
of any existing Aet law or regulation in respect of any matter or contract
already done suffered or entered into nor any penalty forfeiture or liability
incurred or to be incurred under any existing Act law or regulation in respect
of any contract alread} r entered into or any act or matter already done or
suffered shall abate or be waived prejudiced or hindered by anything herein
contained but all such rights liabilities actions suits and proceedings shall be
enforced and continue to their lawful termination as if this Act had not been
passed.


I. —Interpretation Clause.
Interpretation of Words.
2. The following terms within inverted commas shall for the purposes
of this Act hear the meanings set against them respectively unless where the
context implies otherwise —
Croton Lands.
“ Crown Lands”—All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not
been dedicated to any public purpose or which have not been
granted or lawfully contracted to be granted to any person in fee-
simple and all lands which at the time of the passing of this Act
may have become or which after the passing of this Act may
become forfeited by reason of any breach in the conditions on
which the same have been granted or contracted to be granted.
Town Lands.
“ Town lands”—All Crown lands in any city town or village already
proclaimed or to be hereafter proclaimed as a site for the same
respectively.
Suburban Lands.
“ Suburban lands” —All Crown lands within a distance of two miles
from any town lands.
Country Land.
“ Country land”—All lands not being town or suburban lands.
Mining Purposes.
“ Mining purposes”—The searching and working of land for and
removal therefrom of any natural mineral body or liquid other
than gold or water.
Agricultural Land.
“ Agricultural land”—All the rich scrub forest and open lands
suitable for cultivation 'whether such be found near rivers creeks
the sea or inland.
First-class Pastoral Land.
“ First-class pastoral land”—All good open or lightly timbered country
which though unfit for cultivation is well adapted for grazing
purposes.
Second-class Pastoral Land.
“ Second-class pastoral land”—All country lands not agricultural or
first-class pastoral.
Runs.
“ Buns”—All Crown lands held by lessees under any existing law fdr
pastoral purposes and not divided by intermediate runs or distinct
natural boundaries.
Settled Districts.
“ Settled districts”—All lands described in schedule B to this Act
together with any lands which may be hereafter proclaimed as
such as hereinafter provided.
Unsettled Districts.
“ Unsettled districts” —All Crown lands which at the time of the
passing of this Act or at any time hereafter shall not have been
brought within the settled districts.


Township Reserves.
“ Township reserves” —All lands within the limits described by pro-
clamation of the Governor as forming a township reserve.
Railivay Reserves.
“ Railway reserves” —All lands within three miles on either side of
any railway at present constructed or the line for which has
been surveyed and approved by Parliament with a view to future
construction.
Governor shall mean Governor in Council.
“ Governor” and “ Governor in Council” —shall be held indifferently
to mean the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council.
Minister.
“ Minister ” —The Secretary for Lands.
Gazette.
“ Gazette ” —The Queensland Government Gazette.
Rastoral Lease.
“ Pastoral lease and license ” shall respectively include every lease or
license of Crown lands for pastoral purposes issued under the
provisions of any laws now in force.
Pastoral Tenant.
“ Pastoral tenant” shall mean the lawful holder of any such lease or
license whether as original lessee or licensee or the lawful
assignee of any such lessee or licensee.
Agricultural Lessee.
“ Agricultural lessee ” shall mean any person who at the commence-
ment of this Act shall have acquired any conditional right to
become the purchaser of land in fee-simple under any Act now
in force relating to agricultural reserves or under any laws or
regulations for encouraging the growth of cotton coffee sugar or
any other special production or under the Leasing Act of 1866.
Conditional Purchaser — Lessees.
“Conditional purchaser” “lessee” or “ homestead lessee ” shall
mean any person selecting land under this Act with a right of
acquiring the freehold of such land on fulfilling the conditions
attached to the occupation thereof.
Depositor.
“ Depositor ” shall mean any person paying any money to any land
agent for the purposes of this Act.
Selector.
“ Selector ” shall mean the individual person who shall be named as
such in any selector’s certificate under the provisions of this Act.
Licensed Surveyor.
“ Licensed surveyor ” —Any person holding a certificate from the
Surveyor-General that he is competent to act as a surveyor under
this Act.
Office Days and Sours.
“ Office days and hours ” —Such days and such hours as shall be
notified as the days and hours respectively upon which the land
agent for any particular district county area or portion thereof
respectively shall have his office open for the transaction of
business under this Act.


Appraisement.
“ Appraisement ” —Settlement of price value or damage by appraisers
appointed in manner prescribed by this Act.
Arbitration.
“ Arbitration” —Settlement in like manner by arbitrators of bounda-
ries or of any question or matter in dispute not coming under tbe
head of appraisement.
Frontage.
“ Frontage ” —Frontage to the sea or to any road river stream or
watercourse which according to the regulations to be made under
the provisions of this Act ought to form a boundary between
different blocks or allotments of land.
Improvements.
“Improvements”—Any head station homestead store stable hut
woolshed sheep pen drafting yard barn stockyard fencing well
dam reservoir tank trough fencing of sheep paddocks artificial
watercourse or watering-place garden clearing cultivation or
plantation of trees shrubs or artificial grasses or any other build-
ing erection construction or appliance being a fixture for the
working or management of a run farm grazing-farm or plantation
and of any sheep cattle or horses depastured thereon and for
maintaining or increasing the pastoral or agricultural capabilities
thereof Provided that such improvements be upon land belong-
ing to the Crown.
District Commissioners to be appointed. —Regulations to be made. —Regulations to be
laid before Parliament.
3. There shall be appointed in different convenient districts within the
settled districts of the colony Commissioners of Crown lands who shall have
power to exercise the provisions of this Act Provided that the Governor
shall define and declare the duties of such commissioners in regulations to be
made by him for that purpose All such regulations shall within fourteen
days of the issue thereof be laid before Parliament if then sitting and if
not within fourteen days of the commencement of the next session.
Governor in Council to determine the time of Sitting of the Commissioner.
4. Each commissioner shall sit at the land offices of his district at certain
stated times to be determined by the Governor in Council.
Commissioner's Decisions to be confirmed bg Governor in Council.
6. All questions shall be decided by the commissioner who shall give his
decision in open court subject to confirmation by the Governor in Council.
Application Book to be kept. —Priority of Right to be heard how determined.
6. A book to be called the “ Application Book ” shall be kept open dur-
ing office hours and at all land offices in which the name of every person
desiring to make any application to the commissioner shall be written in
order by himself or any person duly authorised in his behalf and such appli-
cant shall lodge a written statement of the subject of his application and the
commissioner shall consider and determine all applications in the order in
which they shall appear in the application book Provided that if any person
shall not appear himself or by any person duly authorised on liis behalf
before the commissioner when called in his turn his application shall be dis-
missed until his name shall appear again in the book in order Provided also
that if two or more persons shall apply at the same time for the same portion


to write their names in the application book the land agent or his clerk shall
bracket their names and shall initial the bracket and when they shall appear
before the commissioner the commissioner shall determine the priority of
right to be heard by lot and it shall not be lawful for the commissioner to
hear any application except such as shall be made in accordance with this
regulation.
Commissioner to keep Minutes of Proceedings.
7. The commissioner shall cause to be kept true and detailed minutes of
all applications made and all decisions therein and of all sums of moneys paid
to the land agent and of all proceedings and such minutes shall be signed by
him and shall be open to the inspection of all persons desiring to inspect the
same during office hours.
Notice of Resumption to he given to Holders of Runs. —Holders of Runs may have
their Runs brought under operation of this Act.
8. Within four weeks of the passing of this Act notice of resumption to
the holders of runs within the settled districts as required by the forty-fourth
clause of the Act twenty-seven Victoria number seventeen and not already
resumed under the Agricultural Reserves Act of 1863 shall be given by the
Minister for Lands and on the expiration of the period fixed by said Act of
twelve months from the date of such notices such lands shall be open to
selection by conditional purchasers or for sale by public auction or subse-
quent selection as hereinafter provided Provided always that should any
pastoral tenant, within the said settled districts signify in writing to the
Minister for Lands within six months from the date of the aforesaid notice
his desire to have his run at once brought under the operation of this Act
the commissioner for the district in which such run is situated shall indicate
to the Minister for Lands such portions of such run as may probably be
needed for townships or railway reserves and it shall be lawful for the com-
missioner to call on the pastoral tenant to divide the remainder of the run
into two parts as nearly as may be by a right line or natural feature and the
commissioner shall then recommend to the Minister for Lands which portion
shall be resumed by the Government and, that a lease be granted in favor of
such pastoral tenant for a term of ten years of the part of the run least likely
to be required for selection or sale by auction not exceeding one half of the
entire run.
Runs may he consolidated.
9. In cases where one proprietor holds two or more runs adjoining each
other it shall be lawful for him within three months from the passing of this
Act to apply to the Minister for Lands to have such runs consolidated into
one and thereafter they shall be considered for the purposes of this Act as
one run.
Leased Lands in Settled Districts to he resumed hy Resolution of both Houses of
Parliament.
10. No land within the part so leased to any pastoral tenants shall be
resumable during the term of the lease except by a resolution of both Houses
of Parliament when it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to resume
any tracts of land not less than eight square miles in area in one block and in
respect of such land so resumed to make a proportionate reduction of the
yearly rents paid by such pastoral tenants.
Feature Survey of Run to be made.
11. Any applicant for a lease as aforesaid shall furnish within six months
after being called on to do so by the commissioner for the district in which
such run may be situated a feature survey of the same by a licensed surveyor


to enable tbe said commissioner to proceed to a subdivision of tbe said run
and shall further cause to be surveyed and marked out without delay by
proper boundary marks as the commissioner may direct the division lines or
boundaries between that portion of the run intended to be held by him under
lease and those portions resumed for public uses as aforesaid the cost of such
survey shall be borne in equal proportions by the Government and the
lessee Provided that such cost shall not exceed the usual Government scale
Provided also that if the lessee is unable to comply with the aforesaid condi-
tions he may within two months of receiving the notice as aforesaid apply to
the Government to survey the run the cost of the same to be defrayed as
hereinbefore mentioned Provided further that the ten years’ lease of the
unresumed half of the run shall date not later than thirteen months from the
notice of resumption.
Pastoral Tenant to have Right of Depasture on Portion of Run open for
Selection.
12. The rent payable by a pastoral tenant under the foregoing pro-
visions for that part of the original run leased to him as aforesaid shall be the
same as that paid by way of rent and assessment for the run prior to such
division as hereinbefore provided Provided always that any pastoral tenant
to whom a lease of any portion of any run so divided as aforesaid shall be
granted shall have during" the continuance of the term of such lease a right of
depasture over the portion of the run not,, included in the lease granted under
this Act until such portion may be by selection auction or otherwise required
for public purposes and on application to the Minister for Lands shall •
receive a grazing license to that effect but such grazing license shall not be
deemed to interfere with any grazing rights which may be accorded to
selectors or purchasers of land under this Act as may in that behalf be
provided.
Pastoral Tenants may in certain cases hold their Runs subject to after Selection.
13. Any pastoral tenant in the settled districts who shall not have
signified his desire to take advantage of the foregoing provisions of this Act
may hold his run or runs at the same rates as at present for rent and assess-
ment till the end of the present term of his lease subject at the expiration of
twelve months’ notice as before mentioned to free selection by conditional
purchasers or to sales by auction or selection of the whole or any part of his
run or runs allowance in the rent being made at the end of each year in pro-
portion to the quantity of land selected or sold during the year Provided
always that not less than twelve months before the expiration of his present
term and from time to time afterwards leases for periods of five years at the
upset price of one pound per square mile in one or more lots of those portions
of the runs still unoccupied or unsold subject always to immediate free selec-
tion or sale as hereinafter provided may be offered lor sale by public auction
at the land office of the district after at least one month’s notice in the
Government Gazette with proviso for allowance in rent for any land selected
or sold during each year of the terms of such leases.
Right of Purchase of Pastoral Tenants for Improvements.
14. Pastoral tenants in settled districts may previous to the expiration of
the twelve months’ notice of resumption make pre-emptive selections to the
extent of one acre for every ten shillings value of improvements at the same
rates as those demanded from conditional purchasers to secure their home-
steads and improvements in lieu of compensation thereof Provided always
that such pre-emptive selections shall not in all contain more than two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres nor be in more than three separate


portions Provided also that in the case of any runs that may be brought
under the operation of this Act pre-emptive selections to the above extent
and with the like restrictions and conditions may also be made at any time
during the currency of the ten years’ lease in the lands included in the said
lease Provided further that the boundaries of all such selections shall bear
the same proportion of frontage to depth as required in the case of any other
lands selected under the provisions of this Act and that they shall in no case
be so measured as to secure to such selector exclusive control over any
valuable permanent water In consideration of the above pre-emptive
privileges or either of them being exercised all claims on the Government for
compensation for resumed improvements shall be relinquished.
Country Lands open to Selection in certain cases.
15. Any country lands in the settled districts which are not included in
any lease or license for pastoral purposes shall be open for selection from and
after the passing of this Act.
Crown Lands in Unsettled Districts open to Selection as Second-class Pastoral
Lands.
16. Any country lands in the unsettled districts which have not at any
time been leased and which are not under license for pastoral purposes shall
be open to selection as second-class pastoral lands and should such lands so
selected be within twelve months after such selection included within the
limits of any run taken up by the s3me person such person shall be entitled
. for the space of two years to select any additional portion of such run
provided that such further purchase shall be in one portion and shall adjoin
the original purchase and the maximum area shall not be restricted by the
provisions of this Act.
“ Fencing Act ” to apply to Lands held on Leases.
17. The provisions of the Fencing Act twenty-five Victoria number
twelve shall apply to all land held on leases for ten years by pastoral tenants
and to the conditional purchases or selections made under this Act.
General Provisions.
Proclamation of Toion and other Deserves.
18. It shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice of the Executive
Council by proclamation in the Gazette to declare what portions of Crown
lands shall be set apart as the sites of new cities towns or villages and also to
declare what lands shall be reserved from sale for any public purpose
Provided that the Governor with the advice aforesaid may by proclamation in
the Gazette rescind either in whole or in part any such proclamation as
aforesaid in all cases in which sales of town lots shall not have taken place
pursuant thereto.
Railway Deserves.
19. All Crown lands within three miles in a direct straight line from any
railway already constructed or in course of construction or of which for the
time being the plans shall have been approved by the Parliament shall be
deemed and taken as railway reserves subject to be dealt with as hereinafter
directed.
Division of Land into Counties and Parishes.
20. The Governor may divide into counties any Crown lands not already
included in any county and divide any county already existing or so to be
created into parishes where such parishes are not already defined and may
distinguish such counties and parishes respectively by names and proclaim


the same and the boundaries thereof respectively and after such proclamation
the lands comprised with such counties and parishes respectively shall thence-
forward be recognised by such names as counties and parishes respectively.
Power to reserve Lands from Sale for Public Purposes.
21. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to grant in trust
or by proclamation to reserve either temporarily or permanently any Crown
lands which in his opinion are or may be required for quays landing places
tramways railways railway stations roads bridges ferries canals or other
internal communications or for the approaches or other purposes necessarily
appertaining to any such works or for reservoirs aqueducts or w'ater-courses
or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants or for the sites of
markets abattoirs public baths or washhouses schools or colleges established
under the supervision of the Government according to any Acts for the time
being in force mechanics’ institutes libraries museums or other institutions
for public non-scholastic instruction public gardens or experimental farms
and parks agricultural and horticultural societies hospitals asylums in-
firmaries establishments for the relief of indigent persons lock-ups police
stations or paddocks gaols places for the interment of the dead or for the
recreation convenience health or amusement of the people or for any other
purpose of public defence safety utility convenience or enjoyment or for
otherwise facilitating the improvement and settlement of the colony.
Any previous promise to Grant for Public Purposes to be carried out.
22. Where before the commencement of this Act any Crown lands have
been promised and set apart for any of the purposes hereinbefore mentioned
if possession thereof have been given or if trustees thereof have been
appointed or if a written promise to grant the same have been given by the
Government and if such promise be established to the satisfaction of the
Governor and the fulfilment thereof be claimed within twelve months from
the commencement of this Act and if notice of such claim has been pro-
claimed for four successive weeks the Governor, on behalf of Her Majesty
may lawfully grant such lands in fee to trustees for such purposes.
Lands Reserved permanently not to be sold.
23. After any land has been temporarily reserved the same shall not be
sold until such temporary reservation be revoked by the Governor and after
any land has been permanently reserved every conveyance or alienation
thereof except for the purpose for which such reservation has been made
shall be absolutely void against all persons whomsoever except as against the
Crown.
Notice of Reservation by Croivn to be inserted in Gazette.
24. When any land shall be temporarily reserved by virtue of the pro-
visions of this Act notice of such reservation shall be inserted for a period of
not less than four consecutive weeks and not more than thirteen con-
secutive weeks as circumstances may require in the Government Gazette
and before any such temporary reservation is revoked notice of such
revocation shall be in like manner inserted as aforesaid.
Notice prior to Permanent Reservation.
25. Before any land is permanently reserved under the powers of this
Act notice of the intention of such reservation shall be inserted in the
Government Gazette for thirteen consecutive weeks and in every such notice
the land proposed to be reserved and the purpose for which it is to be
reserved shall be fully described and stated.


Powers to grant in case of Escheat Sfc.
26. When Her Majesty has become or may hereafter become entitled to
any lands either by escheat for want of heirs or by reason of any forfeiture
for treason felony or otherwise or by reason that the same has upon inquisi-
tion been found to have been granted or otherwise vested into the use of or
or in trust for any alien or aliens it shall be lawful for the Governor on
behalf of Her Majesty and according to the forms of this Act to grant such
lands in fee-simple tc any person for the purpose of restoring the same to
any of the family of the person in whom or for whose benefit the same had
been vested or of carrying into effect any intended grant conveyance or
devise of such last-mentioned person in relation to such or of rewarding any
person making discovery of such escheat or forfeiture or of Her Majesty’s
right and title thereto Provided that before any land under escheat is re-con-
veyed by the Crown such shall be advertised for two consecutive months in
the Government Gazette.
Application for closing unnecessary Roads.
27. It shall be lawful for the owner or owners of any purchased land
adjoining a road which is required for access to such lands only and not
otherwise for public use or convenience to make application in writing to the
Minister that such road may he closed.
Application to he Advertised.
28. On the receipt of such application the Minister shall cause notice
thereof to be inserted in the Gazette and in such local newspapers if any as
he may think advisable and for such period not less than two nor more than
six calendar months consecutively as he may think right.
Consequent Alienation.
29. At the expiration of such period as last aforesaid if the Governor
approves of such application he may order the closing of such road and upon
payment of such price as he may think reasonable (not being less than the
original upset price of such adjoining lands) together with all deed fees under
this Act a grant in fee of the soil of such road shall be issued to the owner
or rateably to the various owners of such adjoining land or as they may
request in the same manner as if such road had been purchased by him or
them at auction under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Sale in consideration of Improvements.
30. Upon application made within twelve months after the passing of
this Act by any person who may prior thereto have made improvements of
not less value than twenty pounds upon lands comprised within the boun-
daries of any city town or village or upon application within twelve months
after the proclamation in the Government Gazette of the first sale of town
lots situated within any new city town or village reserve wfithin which
improvements may be situated it shall be lawful for the Governor to sell and
grant the allotment or allotments containing such improvements to the owner
of such improvements without competition at its fair value in an unimproved
state not being less than the minimum upset price of such lands.
Sales without Competition in special cases.
31. In cases in which there may be no convenient way of access to any
portion of Crown land or in which any portion may be insufficient in area
for public sale or in which a portion of Crown land may lie between land
already granted and a street or road which forms or should form the way of
approach to such granted land or in which buildings erected on lands already
granted may hare extended over Crown lands or in any other cases of a like


kind the Governor may sell and grant such lands to the holder or holders of
adjacent lands without competition and at a price to be determined by the
Minister or other officer duly authorised in that behalf.
Mining Pukchases.
Limitation of Area thereof.
32. In cases where persons or companies shall be desirous of purchasing
lands for mining purposes other than for gold it shall be lawful for the Gov-
ernor to sell the same to such person or company subject to the following
conditions—
(l.) The area to be sold to any one person or company shall in no
case exceed six hundred and forty acres nor less than forty
acres except where the land may have been previously surveyed
for sale in which case the application may be restricted to the
boundaries already marked not being in any case less than forty
acres.
(2.) The price shall in no case be less than one pound per acre and
the Governor may affix any higher price which he may deem to
be the market value of the land without regard to the minerals
therein contained.
(3.) A deposit of five shillings per acre shall be paid at the time of
application and the balance of the purchase money within twelve
months (but if the land is situated in either the pastoral districts
of the Kennedy Burke Cook Mitchell Warrego or Gregory
within eighteen months) from the date of the application being
approved and the applicant shall also produce satisfactory evi-
dence that he has expended a sum equal to one pound per acre in
land fide working the minerals on said land.
Land Agents.
Lower to appoint.
33. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from time to time to
appoint persons to act on behalf of the Government for the sale selection
leasing and otherwise dealing with the various descriptions of Crown lands
according to the several provisions of this Act and such persons shall be
styled “land agents” with the duties powers and liabilities as hereinafter
provided.
Government may require Security.
34. The Governor in Council shall require a fidelity bond issued by a
public company from each land agent in a sum of not less than five hundred
pounds sterling.
Receipts to he given by Land Agent.
35. On receipt of any moneys payable under the provisions of this Act
the land agent shall give the depositor a receipt for the same and shall within
seven days thereafter forward a duplicate of said receipt to the Auditor-
General and every such receipt shall be in such form as the said Auditor-
General shall direct.
Land Agent to he subject to provisions of “ Larceny Act" of 1865.
36. In any case in which any land agent shall upon demand fail to
account for and pay over to the Colonial Treasurer any money which he
shall have received from any depositor whether he shall have given a receipt
for the same or not and whether such receipt be or be not formally accurate
and notwithstanding any error or omission on the part of the depositor or of
the land agent such land agent shall be primd facie deemed guilty of em*


bezzling money under the provisions of the Larceny Act of 1865 relating to
public servants and it shall not be necessary to prove any fraudulent inten-
tion on the part of such land agent.
Prosecution under “ Larceny Act ” not to prejudice any Civil Proceeding against
Land Agent.
37. Provided always that a prosecution under the said Act for any such
default shall not whatever be its result in any way prejudice or interfere
with any civil proceedings or forfeiture against any such land agent with
respect to the money unaccounted for.
Agent to Tceep Pegister.
38. Every land agent shall keep a register in which he shall enter all
applications to select Crown lands which shall be lodged at his office and in
the event of any such application being subsequently rejected shall record
such rejection against the entry of the application and such register shall be
open to public inspection during office hours.
Sales by Selection.
Settled Districts.
39. For the purposes of this Act the settled districts of the colony shall
comprise the area specified in schedule B to this Act with further extensions
that may from time to time be made by proclamation of the Governor in
conformity with resolutions to that effect passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment or by proclamation of township or railway reserves.
Certain Descriptions of Lands to be Agricultural Land open to Selection.
40. At the expiration of two months from the passing of this Act all
lands within railway reserves which as such are to be excluded from the part
leased to the pastoral tenant and counted as part of the resumed half on the
subdivision of any run as also the country land in the township reserves as
well as all land in the reserves made or proclaimed under the Agricultural
IReserves Act o/’ISSS shall till otherwise classified be deemed and taken to be
agricultural land and shall as such be open to selection by conditional pur-
chasers or sale by auction as hereinafter provided Provided always that the
commissioner shall not at any time have the power to classify any land in
such railway or township reserve as second-class pastoral land Provided
also that anything in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding the lessee
shall be entitled to the lease of half his run for ten years under the provisions
of this Act even if the same or any portion of the same shall be included in
any agricultural reserve.
Proclamation of Land open to Selection.
41. Previous to any land being open to selection under this Act except as
mentioned in the preceding clause notification of its boundaries and the day
from and after which it shall be open shall be given at least one month prior
thereto by proclamation in the Government Gazette and nearest local news-
paper Provided that the Governor may withdraw from selection any land
for the purpose of survey with a view to its being brought forward for sale
as surveyed lots.
Division into Classes.
42. All lands within the settled districts that under this Act may be
proclaimed open for selection shall according as they are allotted by the
commissioner of such district to conditional purchasers or homestead lessees
be divided into three classes namely—
Agricultural land
First-class pastoral land
Second-class pastoral land


Limit to Conditional Purchasers.
43. Selections by conditional purchasers of agricultural land except such
selections as come within the provisions of sections seventy and seventy-one
of this Act shall not be less than forty nor more than six hundred and forty
acres.
Limit to Conditional Purchasers.
44. Selections by conditional purchasers of first-class pastoral land shall
not be less than eighty nor more than two thousand five hundred and sixty
acres.
Limit to Conditional Purchasers.
45. Selections by conditional purchasers of second-class pastoral land
shall not be less than eighty nor more than seven thousand six hundred and
eighty acres.
Form and Notice of Application.
46. The mode and terms of selection shall be as follows*—Any person
(except as hereinafter excepted) may on any office day during office hours
tender to the commissioner or land agent for the district an application in the
form contained in schedule E of this Act for selection of land within any
area proclaimed as open for selection as aforesaid accompanied by a deposit
in cash or land orders equal to the first instalment payable on the land to be
selected at the price of —
Prices.
Fifteen shillings per acre payable in ten annual instalments of one
shilling and sixpence per acre for agricultural land
Ten shillings per acre payable in ten annual instalments of one shilling
per acre for first-class pastoral land
Five shillings per acre payable in ten annual instalments of sixpence
per acre for second-class pastoral land
Together with the survey fees payable respectively in each case.
Applications to he received hy Land Agent.
47. Applications for the conditional purchase of agricultural land shall be
received by the land agent and the land at once allotted subject to such
general regulations concerning survey roads or the prevention of a monopoly
of permanent water or otherwise as may be made pursuant to the provisions
of this Act.
Applications to he registered.
48. Previous to survey applications for first and second class pastoral
land shall only be provisionally registered by the land agent and after survey
the evidence of the surveyor or other credible witness or witnesses and his or
their solemn declaration of its quality to the best of his or their judgment
shall be obtained and should any doubts exist the matter shall be determined
by personal inspection of the commissioner subject to such general
regulations concerning survey roads or the prevention of a monopoly of
permanent water or otherwise as may be made pursuant to the provisions of
this Act.
Cost of Survey lodged or Survey made hy Applicant.'
49. Any person making application to select land under this Act shall at
the time of delivering such application to the land agent deposit the amount
of the survey fees payable according to schedule H of this Act Provided
that if the Government shall not have surveyed the land within three
months of the date of such application the applicant shall be at liberty to
have the land surveyed by a licensed surveyor and the survey fees paid by
him shall be returned.


Proportion of Frontage in respect to such Poundaries.
50. Crown lands selected by lease before survey and having frontage to
any watercourse or main road shall not have a greater breadth of frontage
thereto than equal to half the depth of said portion where the area does not
exceed one hundred and sixty acres or two-thirds of the depth where the area
exceeds one hundred and sixty acres but is not greater than three hundred
and twenty acres or equal to the whole depth where the area exceeds three
hundred and twenty acres and the boundaries not having frontage to roads
or natural features shall be rectangular and be directed to the cardinal points
unless the commissioner shall deem it desirable to direct that any other
general bearing shall be adopted for that portion of country.
Governor to issue Lease.
51. When any land selected as aforesaid shall have been surveyed and
approved by the Minister for Lands the Governor shall issue to the selector a
lease of said land subject to the conditions and provisions hereinafter
contained —
Term of Lease to he Ten Years.
(1.) The term of every such lease shall be for ten years computed
from the first day of January or July nearest to the date of
application to select.
Pent. —Forfeiture may he defeated hy Payment of Pent and Fine within Ninety
Lays of original Pent Lay.
(2.) The annual rent to be reserved under every such lease shall be
as follows for every acre or fraction of an acre comprised
therein—
For agricultural lands one shilling and sixpence
For first-class pastoral lands one shilling
For second-class pastoral lands sixpence
and the second and all subsequent years annual rents shall be
paid to the land agent on or before the thirty-first day of March
in each year of the term of lease for which the rent is due and in
default of such payment the lease shall be forfeited and the land
selected and all improvements thereon shall revert to the Crown
Provided that the lessee may defeat such forfeiture for non-
payment of rent by paying to the land agent in cash within ninety
days of the day on which the rent shall have fallen due a sum
equal to the annual rent together with an additional sum equal to
one-fourth part thereof by way of penalty but in default of such
payment of rent and penalty within such ninety days the lease
shall be absolutely forfeited and the said lessee and any person
claiming under him shall be deemed a trespasser upon Crown
land and liable to be removed therefrom as such under the
provisions of this Act.
Selector to erect and maintain Poundary Maries.
(3.) The lessee of any lands shall within six months from the date of
selection if the land be previously surveyed or within six months
from the completion of the survey if selected before survey erect
boundary posts along those boundary lines of said land which
shall not be defined by a watercourse or clearly defined natural
feature such posts to be not less than six inches in diameter and
sunk two feet into the ground and be at least two feet above the
surface and in no case shall the distance between the posts exceed


five chains or the lessee shall erect a good and substantial fence along
such boundary and if such lessee shall allow such said boundary
posts to fall into decay the commissioner shall cause a notice to
be served on such lessee requiring him to replace or renew such
boundary posts within three months and if the lessee shall fail or
refuse to replace the same accordingly the commissioner shall on
proof thereof inflict such fine as he shall see fit not exceeding
sixpence for each post and in default of payment of such fine into
the hands of the land agent within one month from the date of
notification thereof the lease may be cancelled by the Governor.
Right of entry to worlc Minerals.
(4.) During the currency of such lease the Governor or any person
authorised in that behalf may enter on any part of the lands
included in such lease and dig and remove therefrom any gold or
other metal or metallic ore provided that any person so entering
the land and removing any such minerals shall pay to the lessee
a sum equal to the amount of the actual damage which the lessee
shall sustain therefrom and the amount of such damage shall be
determined by arbitration as provided by this Act.
Residence necessary.
(o.) The lessee of any agricultural or pastoral land his agent or bailiff
shall reside on such selection continuously and bond fide during
the term of his lease Provided that if at any time during the
currency of a lease it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that the lessee has abandoned his selection and
failed in regard to the performance of the conditions of residence
during a period of six months it shall be lawful for the Governor
to declare the lease absolutely forfeited and vacated.
Grant in Fee on proof of fulfilment of Conditions of Improvement.
(6.) If within three years from the date of selection by lease of any
pastoral land the lessee shall prove by two credible witnesses to
the satisfaction of the commissioner that he has resided in person
or by bailiff on the said land for a period of two years and that
a sum at the rate of not less than ten shillings per acre for first-
class pastoral land and five shillings per acre for second-class
pastoral land has been expended in substantial improvements on
the said land or that he has fenced in the whole of the said land
with a good and substantial fence then the commissioner shall
issue a certificate that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
performed and the said lessee shall be entitled to a deed of grant
in fee-simple on the payment of the balance of the ten years’ rent.
Grant in Fee on Fulfilment of Conditions.
(7.) If within three years from the date of selection of any agricultural
land the lessee shall prove by two credible witnesses to the satis-
faction of the commissioner that he or his bailiff has resided on
the land for a period of not less than two years and that he has
expended a sum equal to ten shillings per acre on the land
comprised in such lease or if at any time during the currency of
any such lease the lessee shall prove by two credible witnesses to
the satisfaction of the said commissioner that ho has cultivated
one-tenth part of the land or if within three years from the date


of selection the lessee shall prove by two credible witnesses to the
satisfaction of the said commissioner that he or his bailiff has
resided two years on the said land and fenced in the whole with
a good and substantial fence then the said commissioner shall
issue to such lessee a certificate that he has duly complied with
the conditions of this Act and the said lessee shall be entitled to
a grant of the land in fee-simple on the payment of the balance of
the ten years’ rent.
Conditions under which Transfer may be effected.
(8.) No lease shall be transferred or assigned until the original selector
has obtained a certificate from the commissioner that he has duly
performed the conditions entitling him to a deed of grant in fee-
simple on the due payment of the tenth year’s rent But after the
issue of such certificate the lessee may transfer his lease by
application to the Minister for Lands in the form contained in the
schedule G to this Act and the payment of a fee of ten shillings
for the registration of every such transfer.
Lessee may acquire Fee-simple on Payment of Balance of Rents.
(9.) If after a lessee has obtained a certificate by the commissioner
that he has duly completed the conditions of cultivation or
improvement and residence required by this Act he shall pay
into the hands of the land agent a sum equal to the aggregate
amount of the annual rents which would become due during the
. unexpired portion of the term of ten years’ lease together with
the amount of the deed fee such lessee shall be entitled to a
deed of grant in fee-simple of the lands comprised in such lease
If during the currency of any such lease the lessee shall not have
duly fulfilled the conditions hereinbefore specified then on the
expiration of the term of lease it shall absolutely cease and
determine and the lessee shall not have any claim whatsoever to
any renewed lease or priority of claim to either lease or to
purchase the land comprised therein or the improvements or to
compensation for any part thereof.
Resumption of Roads.
(10.) If within ten years from the date of selection of any land as
aforesaid it shall be deemed necessary to open any public road
through the same it shall be lawful for the Governor to proclaim
a public road one chain wide through said land and the lessee or
owner of such land shall only be entitled to compensation for the
land taken for such road at the rate of twice the sum which shall
have been paid either as rent or purchase money to the Govern-
ment for the area so resumed together with the value of the
improvements or cultivation thereon such value to be determined
by arbitration Provided that where such road shall be proclaimed
through any enclosed lands the Government shall fence off the
said road from the adjacent enclosed lands with a fence equally
serviceable with the fence within which the land is otherwise
enclosed but such fence shall after its erection be maintained at
the cost of the owner or occupant of the adjacent land.


Limit to Conditional Purchaser.
52. No conditional purchaser shall hold as such at any one time within
the entire colony more of the different classes of land than the maximum
quantity of—
Six hundred and forty acres of agricultural land
Two thousand five hundred and sixty acres of first-class pastoral
land
Seven thousand six hundred and eighty acres of second-class pastoral
land
exclusive of lands held by the selector as a lessee under the provisions of the
Alienation of Crown Lands Act of 1860 or the Agricultural Reserves Act of
1863 or the Leasing Act of 1866 or any of said Acts at the time of the passing
of this Act or of land selected for the growth of sugar and coffee under the
provisions hereinafter contained.
Conditional Purchaser to make Declaration.
53. On making application for any land under the foregoing clauses of this
Act a conditional purchaser shall be required to make a solemn declaration
to the effect contained in schedule E Provided always that this shall not
apply to conditional purchases or selections of land made by a pastoral
tenant to secure his homestead or improvements on the resumed half of his
original run or to secure his improvements on the leased half as provided by
this Act.
No Minor or Married Woman to he Lessee or Assignee.—Proviso in case of breach
of Conditions.
54. No person shall become the lessee or assignee of any of such land who
is an infant or a married woman not having obtained a decree for judicial
separation or an order protecting her separate property binding in Queens-
land or who is not a natural born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty or
who is in respect of the land which he applies to select or any part thereof
an agent or a servant of or a trustee for any other person or who at the time
of his application has entered into any agreement expressed or implied to
permit any other person to acquire by purchase or otherwise the land for
which he applies And all land applied for under this part of 'this Act shall
be so applied for the bond fide use and benefit of the applicant in his own
proper person and not as the agent servant or trustee of ‘any other person
Provided always that if any person shall in violation of any of the provisions
of this section become the lessee or assignee of any land under the above
provisions the Governor may declare the lease of such land to be forfeited
And on proclamation of such forfeiture the term created by such lease shall
cease and determine and all the right title and interest of the lessee and of
every assignee in and to such lease or the land to which it refers and all
moneys paid in respect of the land comprised therein and the said land itself
with all improvements thereon shall be absolutely forfeited and the said land
shall revert to the Crown to be dealt with as herein provided Provided also
that all contracts agreements and securities made entered into or given with
the intent or which (if the same were valid) would have the effect of violating
all or any of the provisions of this part of the Act or of any covenant or con-
dition of a lease granted under this part of the Act and all contracts and
agreements relating to land selected under the foregoing provisions made
and entered into before at or after the execution of a lease and to take effect
wholly or in part at or after the termination of the lease on completion of
conditions shall be and are hereby declared to be illegal and absolutely void
whether at law or in equity.


Power to select Lands adjoining Selections.
55. It shall be lawful for any selector of any piece of land or his legal
alienee to make additional selection of lands adjoining to his first selection or
to each other but not otherwise and not exceeding in the aggregate including
such first selection six hundred and forty acres of agricultural land two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres of first-class pastoral land and seven
thousand six hundred and eighty acres of second-class pastoral land and
subject to all the conditions applicable to such first selection except residence
Provided that in the measurement of such aggregate the proportion of front-
age to depth shall not exceed the proportion required by the provisions of
this Act in the case of an original selection Provided also that nothing
herein contained shall prevent the sale of the adjoining lands to any other
person before such additional selection shall have been applied for.
Power to select Lands adjoining Lands granted.
56. It shall be lawful for the Crown grantee of any lands within the
settled districts bona fide residing on some part of such land to select adjoin-
ing Crown lands open for selection the area of which shall not exceed the
maximum quantity allowed which selected lands shall be subject to all the
conditions other than that of residence Provided that nothing herein
contained shall prevent the sale of such adjoining lands to any other person
before selection shall have been applied for by such grantee.
Right to grant.
57. So soon as a lessee shall have made the last payment of instalments
as hereinbefore provided he shall be entitled to a grant in fee-simple of the
land leased to him subject however to the payment of the fees chargeable on
the issue of deeds of grant and provided that he shall prove to the Governor
in Council that he has faithfully complied with all the covenants and condi-
tions contained in or implied by his lease under the provisions of this Act.
Transfer Sfc. to be registered.
58. It shall not be lawful for the lessee of any land under the provisions
of this Act or any person claiming through or under him to transfer or assign
the same without the consent of the Minister for Lands and registering the
transfer or assignment in the district land office and any transfer or
assignment made or attempted to be made shall be absolutely void and
of no effect until such registration and a fee of ten shillings shall be
paid for every such registration.
Transmission by Death Sfc.
59. A transmission of interest by death or marriage shall not be deemed
a tradsfer under the provisions of this Act.
Judgments not to attach.
60. No judgment of the Supreme Court or of any district court or court
of petty sessions nor any writ of fieri facias or warrant of execution issued
upon any such judgment shall have any effect upon land selected under the
provisions of this part of this Act unless and until a grant of such land in
fee-simple shall have been issued.
Forfeiture to be proclaimed by Governor.
61. If the Governor shall make or cause to be made on behalf of the
Crown entry upon any land selected and leased as above for breach of any
of the provisions of this Act or for non-payment of instalments or breach of
any condition or covenant contained m any such lease as aforesaid such
forfeiture shall be proclaimed and the Governor may cause the same to be
notified as again open for selection or direct it to be sold by auction in fee-
simple.


Proportion of Pasturage allowed to Purchasers.
62. It shall not be lawful for any conditional or other purchaser of land
under this Act to depasture upon his land so conditionally or otherwise
purchased until such land is securely fenced more than in the proportion
of twenty head of cattle or horses or fifty sheep for every hundred acres of
land And the branas of all such sheep cattle or horses shall be registered
at the office of the commissioner of the district.
Penalty for over Pasturage.
63. Upon proof being given to the satisfaction of the commissioner for
the district that any conditional or other purchaser of land or pastoral lessee
under this Act has broken the conditions of this Act either by not registering
the brands of his sheep cattle or horses or by running a greater number of
spch sheep cattle or horses on his land than allowed in clauses sixty-two and
sixty-four of this Act such conditional or other purchaser or pastoral lessee
shall be liable to a fine of not more than two shillings and sixpence per head
of cattle or horses and threepence per head of sheep in excess of the number
allowed to be depastured under the conditions of this Act.
Right of Pastoral Tenant to depasture.
64. The right of the pastoral tenant to depasture on the unleased portion
of his run during the unexpired period of the lease originally granted as set
forth in clause seven of this Act shall be limited to not more than one-third
of the number of sheep cattle and horses actually depastured on the Crown
lands of the run at the time of its subdivision or as many less as the commis-
sioner may direct and the license as renewed from time to time shall be still
further limited in proportion to the land alienated on such run to any condi-
tional or other purchaser Provided that it shall not be lawful for the pastoral
tenant holding such grazing license as aforesaid to impound any cattle or
horses belonging to any conditional or other purchaser of land on such run
found on the land held by him under such grazing license or any sheep
belonging to any conditional or other purchaser as aforesaid found less than
one quarter of a mile from the boundary of the land of such purchaser.
Selections foe Sugar and Coefee Plantations.
Selection for Sugar and Coffee.
65. Whenever any applicant for selection of land within ten miles from
the coast or any navigable river not being included in lands leased to the
pastoral tenant for ten years as hereinbefore provided shall state in his appli-
cation that he intends to use the land applied for in the cultivation of sugar
or coffee he shall be allowed to select a block of agricultural land in area not
less than three hundred and twenty nor more than one thousand two hundred
and eighty acres the boundaries of which shall bear the same proportion of
frontage to depth as required in the case of any other lands selected under
the provisions of this Act and provided such selector shall within three years
from the date of his application prove to the satisfaction of the Governor that
one-tenth part of the land selected is under cultivation in either sugar or
coffee he shall he relieved on applying for his grant from proof of residence
or of further or other cultivation but in all other respects he shall be liable
to the same conditions and covenants as any other selector under the provi-
sions of this Act.
Lessees in Agricultural Areas or under Coffee or Sugar Regulations may 'purchase by
Selection.
66. It shall be lawful for any person who shall at the commencement of
this Act hold land under a lease issued under the sugar and coffee regulations


hitherto existing to apply to the Minister for leave to bring the same under
the provisions for selection of agricultural land by conditional purchasers
contained in this Act and if such lessee shall have at the time of his applica-
tion fully complied with all the conditions binding upon him in respect of
such land such application shall be granted Provided that for the money
already paid as rent credit shall be given the holder as instalments of the
purchase money and that in such case no covenants shall apply except those
having reference to the regular payment of the instalments of purchase
money still due.
Lands in some cases may be held under provisions of this Act.
67. Any person who shall at the commencement of this Act be the lessee
under the twelfth section of the Alienation of Crown Lands Act of 1860 of
any lands within an agricultural reserve may apply within six months after
the passing of this Act to the Minister for leave to hold the same as agricul-
tural lands as hereinbefore provided under the provisions of this Act Pro-
vided always that payments of rent already made shall be credited as instal-
ments of the purchase money And provided further that in the case of
leases under the twelfth section of the Alienation of Crown Lands Act of
1860 which leases expired on the thirty-first day of December one thousand
eight hundred and sixty-six the lessee may apply for renewed leases under
this Act within six months from the passing of the same And that in both
such cases no covenants shall apply except those having reference to the
regular payment of the instalments of purchase money still due.
Leases eor Special Purposes.
Selector may substitute Improvements in lieu of Cultivation.
68. Any selector who before the passing of this Act shall have selected
land in any agricultural reserve under the fourth and fifth sections of the
Agricultural Reserves Act of 1863 or Leasing Act of 1866 and who shall have
proved by two credible witnesses to the satisfaction of the commissioner that
he his heirs assigns or lessees is or at the time of selection was a resident
within the district over which such commissioner may have jurisdiction is
hereby empowered at his option to substitute improvements in lieu of culti-
vation the fencing of the said land to be deemed and taken to be part of the
said improvements Provided that such improvements shall in the aggregate
be equal to the sum of five shillings per acre on the total number of acres so
selected by him as aforesaid and upon the said selector proving by two
credible witnesses to the satisfaction of the commissioner of the district that
he has performed the conditions aforesaid then the said commissioner shall
issue a certificate accordingly and the said selector shall thereupon be entitled
to a deed of grant in fee-simple subject however to the payment of the fees
chargeable in the issue of the said deed of grant and balance of rent due.
Governor may grant Leases for Five Years for Special Purposes.
69. It shall be lawful for the Governor to lease any portion of land not
exceeding five acres to any one person or company for any special purpose
such as for the erection of wharves storehouses slips for building or repairing
vessels baths works for supplying water or gas to any town Provided that
the term of lease shall not in any case exceed five years and that it shall be
a condition that such lease may at any time be cancelled on giving six
months’ notice and payment of the value of the improvements and that the
annual rent shall in no case be less than one pound per acre.
Provision for Abandonment of Land.
70. If at any time after the filing of the affidavit required in clause
seventy-three and before the expiration of the five years aforesaid it shall be


proven to the satisfaction of the commissioner subject however to appeal to
the Governor in Council that the person having filed such affidavit his family
or his or her heirs shall not have actually resided continuously on the said
land then and in that event the land so entered shall revert to the Crown.
Homesteads.
Homesteads.
71. It shall he lawful for any person who is the head of a family or who
has arrived at the age of twenty-one years and who would be enabled under
clause fifty-four to make a selection of land to enter upon one hundred and
sixty acres or a less quantity of unappropriated public lands which may be
open for selection Provided that any person owning and residing on land
may under the provisions of this Act enter other land lying contiguous to his
or her said land which shall not with the land so already owned and occupied
exceed in the aggregate one hundred and sixty acres Provided that any
person who shall hereafter arrive in the colony at the public expense either
wholly or in part shall not be entitled to the benefit of this section of the Act
until he shall have resided in the colony continuously for the period of three
years.
Homesteads must be in One Bloch.
72. 'Selections by homestead lessees shall be in one block and not exceed
eighty acres of agricultural or one hundred and sixty acres of first or second
class pastoral lands subject to the yearly payment in advance for five years
from the date of entry of a quit-rent of ninepence per acre in agricultural
land and sixpence per acre on first and second class pastoral land.
Applicant to malce Affidavit.
73. The person applying for a homestead shall upon application to the land
agent in the district in which he is about to make such entry make affidavits
before the said land agent that he or she is the head of a family or is twenty-
one or more years of age and that such application is made for his or her
exclusive use and benefit that he or she has not on any former occasion
exercised such right or homestead selection and that said entry is made for
the purpose of actual settlement or cultivation and not either directly or
indirectly for the use or benefit of any other person or persons whomsoever
and upon filing the said affidavit and on payment of the survey fees he or she
shall thereupon be permitted to enter the quantity of land specified
Provided however that no grant shall be given or title issued therefor until
the expiration of five years from the date of such entry and if at the expira-
tion of such time or of any time within two years thereafter the person
making such entry or if he be dead his widow or in case of her death his
heirs or devisees or in case of a widow making such entry her heirs or
devisees in case of her death shall prove to the satisfaction of the
commissioner of the district by two credible witnesses that he she or they
have resided continuously upon the land and cultivated one-tenth part
of the same or that in addition to residence as aforesaid he she or they shall
prove to the satisfaction of the said commissioner that the said land has been
fenced in with a good and substantial fence during the time of five years
immediately succeeding the time of filing the affidavit aforesaid and shall
make affidavit that no part of said land has been alienated and then in such
such case he she or they shall be entitled to a Crown grant And provided
further that in case of the death of both father and mother having an infant
child or children under twenty-one years of age the right or fee shall ensue
to the benefit of said infant child or children and the executors adminis-
trators or guardians may at any time within two years after the death of the


surviving parent sell said lands for the benefit of said infants but for no other
purpose and the purchaser shall acquire the absolute title by the purchase
and be entitled to a Crowrn grant on payment of the deed fees.
Lands not liable to Debt.
74. No lands acquired under the foregoing provisions shall in any event
become liable to the satisfaction of any debt or debts contracted prior to the
issuing of the Crown grant thereof.
Limits to Applicants.
75. No individual shall be permitted to acquire title to more than one
hundred and sixty acres # under the provisions of the foregoing sections and
the Minister for Lands is hereby required to prepare and issue such rules
and regulations consistent with this portion of this Act as shall be necessary
and proper to carry its provisions into effect.
May in some cases purchase at Upset Price.
76. Nothing in this portion of this Act shall be so construed as to
prevent any person who has availed himself of the benefits of the foregoing
sections of this portion of this Act from paying the upset price for the
quantity of land so entered at any time after two years and before the
expiration of the five years and obtaining a grant therefor from the Governor
on making proof of residence and cultivation as required by this Act.
Gold Field and Township Commons.
Gold Field Reserves to be Commons.
77. All existing gold field reserves or any hereafter to be proclaimed
shall he deemed to be commons subject to the provisions herein set forth.
Conditions upon which Commons may be proclaimed.
78. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to proclaim any
unsold land as a township common upon the following conditions—
(l.) That a petition signed hy not less than thirty freeholders resident
within such township praying for the proclamation of a common
adjoining thereto shall have been presented to the Governor in
Council.
(2.) That after the said petition shall have been notified in the
Government Gazette for a period of sixty days no counter petition
shall have been presented signed by a larger number of free-
holders resident within the said township.
Fxtent of Common.
79. Every such common shall be proportioned to the number and wants
of the freeholders resident in the said township but shall in no case exceed
twenty square miles.
Crown to retain Commonages.—Commonages may be extended.
80. Notwithstanding proclamation the fee-simple of all common lands
shall be deemed to be vested in the Crown and unalienated and nothing
herein contained shall prevent the sale of any land comprised in any
common Provided that it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to
extend such common proportionally to any such sales which may be effected
subsequent to its proclamation.
Minister for Lands to frame Common Regulations.
81. The Minister for Lands shall be empowered to frame regulations
impose fines and constitute the machinery requisite to give effect to com-
monage rights subject however to the following conditions —
That such regulations shall have received the assent of the Governor
in Council.


That commonage rights shall appertain solely to residents in such
townships Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent
bond fide travellers from depasturing their bullocks horses or
other stock Provided also that no person travelling with stock
shall be deemed a bond fide traveller who shall not proceed four
miles in one direction during every twenty-four hours unless
delayed by floods.
That the depasturing of sheep except under special conditions shall
be prohibited.
That payment be made for the depasturing of cattle at a rate not less
than two shillings per head per annum and that in no case any
one freeholder be allowed to run more than twenty head on the
same common.
Definition of “ Cattle.”
82. For the purpose of the foregoing clause “cattle” shall mean and
include mares geldings colts Allies asses mules cows oxen heifers steers and
calves but shall not apply to any entire male animals exceeding six months
old.
Sales by Auction.
Governor may cause Lands to be surveyed.
83. It shall be lawful for the Governor to cause town suburban or
country lands of different classes or any such lands as may have been leased
by selection and thereafter forfeited to be offered for unconditional sale by
public auction and to cause maps of such lands to be prepared showing and
specifying the counties parishes or towns as the case may be in which the
same shall be respectively situated and also showing all intended reserves for
water roads or other purposes in accordance with the provisions of this Act
as also the boundaries and giving the areas of all allotments therein and the
length and bearings of all outside lines comprised in such surveys and such
maps shall be deposited as public maps in the office of the Surveyor-General.
Subdivision.
84. All such lands shall be distinguished into classes as town suburban
and country lots according to their respective positions as the Governor may
deem advisable.
Lands to be allotted.
85. Such lands shall be alloted as nearly as may be in areas according to
the following scale —
Town lands in allotments of from one rood to one acre.
Suburban lands within one mile from town lands in lots of one acre to
eighty acres.
Suburban lands over one mile from town lands in lots of forty acres
to one hundred and sixty acres.
Country lands in lots of from forty to six hundred and forty acres.
Proclamation of Lands for Sale.
86. It shall be lawful for the Governor after such maps as aforesaid
have been deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General to proclaim any of
the lands comprised therein for sale by public auction.
Upset Price.
87. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to fix the upset
price at which any such lands shall be sold Provided always that such upset
price shall not in any case be less than —
For town lands eight pounds per acre


For suburban lands one pound per acre when witbin one mile from
town lands and fifteen shillings per acre when beyond one mile
from town lands
For agricultural lands fifteen shillings per acre
For first-class pastoral lands ten shillings per acre
For second-class pastoral lands five shillings per acre
And such lands shall be so proclaimed for sale as aforesaid for not less than
four consecutive weeks nor more than three calendar months previous to the
intended date of sale.
88. Every proclamation shall specify—
The day and hour of sale
The place of sale
The classes of the land to be sold
The number of the allotments
The respective areas of the same
The upset price thereof respectively with the value as approved of any
improvements thereon as aforesaid
And it shall be lawful for the Governor in selling such lands as aforesaid to
add to the upset prices as hereinbefore provided the value of such improve-
ments as may have been made on such lands the value of such improvements
to be appraised as hereinafter provided and to pay to the lessee or lessees of
such lands or his or their executors or administrators the amount or amounts
which may have been fixed as the value of such improvements as aforesaid
or such portion thereof as may be deemed advisable.
Land Agent to conduct Sale.
89. Every such sale shall be conducted either by a licensed auctioneer
to be appointed by the Governor or by the land agent nearest to the land
offered for sale or such other place as the Minister may appoint and such land
agent shall not require to be licensed as an auctioneer for any such sale nor
incur any penalty on account of not being so licensed.
Poiver to withdraw.
90. It shall be lawful for the Governor or any officer authorised in that
behalf to withdraw any allotment or allotments from sale at any time from
the first proclamation thereof up to the hour of the commencement of such
sale as proclaimed.
Preparation of Conditions of Sale.
91. It shall be lawful for the Governor to prepare or cause to be prepared
for any such sale such conditions as may appear advisable and consistent with
the provisions of this Act.
Conditions to be read.
92. At the time and place of sale the auctioneer or land agent shall read
openly the conditions under which such sale is held and also exhibit openly a
copy of such conditions and all purchasers and bidders at any such sale shall
be bound by such conditions.
Deposit payable at Sale.
93. The highest bidding for each allotment sold together with the name
of the purchaser shall be announced by the auctioneer or land agent at the
time of sale and the purchaser shall thereupon pay to such agent a deposit
at the rate of twenty pounds per centum upon and on account of the purchase
money.


Payment of Residue.
94. The residue of such purchase money together with the deed fees and
survey fees as per schedule shall be paid to such land agent at his office or
into the Treasury within one calendar month from the date of such sale and
upon such payment residue and fees the purchase shall be deemed
complete and a deed of grant in fee-simple shall then issue to the
purchaser.
Forfeiture for Default.
95. In case such residue shall not be so paid such deposit shall be
absolutely forfeited to the Crown and the depositor shall not nor shall any
one claiming through under or in trust for him have any claim whatsoever
against either the land agent the Government or any other person whom-
soever either for the deposit paid or the land intended to be purchased or any
part thereof respectively.
Country Lands offered at Auction and not sold may he purchased hy Selection at an
Advanced Price.
96. Any country lots which may have been offered at auction under the
provisions of this Act and not sold or withdrawn from sale may be purchased
by selection at the same rate as previously offered at auction as hereinafter
specified—
Country lots of agricultural lands fifteen shillings per acre
Country lots of first-class pastoral lands ten shillings per acre
Country lots of second-class pastoral lands five shillings per acre.
Purchasing Country Lots hy Selection.
97. Any person desiring to purchase country lots by selection after the
same shall have been offered at auction and not sold shall apply to the land
agent in the form in the schedule C to this Act and shall at the same time pay
into the hands of the land agent the full price of the land together with the
deed and survey fees and such applicant shall thereupon be deemed to be the
purchaser of such lot.
Grants to Volunteers. —Previous Service of Volunteer to count.
98. Every officer non-commissioned officer and member of the volunteer
force of Queensland not being on the paid staff of or serving for regular pay
in the said force shall be entitled after having served as an efficient member
of such force for a continuous period of five years from the passing of this Act
to receive from the Government in consideration of his efficient service a free
grant often acres of suburban lands or fifty acres of country land subject to
such regulations and conditions as may from time to time be approved of by
the Governor and laid before both Houses of Parliament and the certificate
of the officer commanding the volunteer force shall be sufficient evidence that
any officer non-commissioned officer or volunteer has served as an efficient
volunteer the prescribed term of five years Provided that in the case of
volunteers who have previously served in this colony five years’ service shall
be deemed to count for three years and three years for eighteen months for
the purposes of this Act.
Conditions of Sale of Improved Lands Forfeited by Lessees.
Governor may sell Forfeited Improved Lands at Auction and pay Value of Improve-
ments to Lessee who has forfeited.
99. When any improved lands shall he forfeited by a lessee or licensed
occupant it shall be lawful for the Governor to cause such improved lands to
be offered for sale at auction at the upset price of unimproved lands
similarly situated and if such land shall be sold together with the improve-


ments thereon for a higher price than the upset then such additional sum
not exceeding the value of such improvements may he paid to the person who
forfeited the improved land Provided that if any such improved lands shall
have been offered twice at auction at the upset price of unimproved lands and
shall not he sold the whole of the proceeds of any subsequent sale shall he
paid to the Government and all claims on the part of the persons who effected
the improvements on the land shall absolutely cease.
Licenses to cut Timber Sfc. may be granted.—Provided any reasonable objection may
be entertained by Government.
100. The Governor in Council may (subject to any regulations to he issued
by Government) authorise the commissioners or bench of magistrates to issue
licenses for any term not exceeding one year to enter any Crown lands
whether under pastoral lease or license or not and to cut and take therefrom
any timber and to dig for and remove any gravel stone brick earth shells or
other material but not within two miles of any head station unless by the
consent of the lessee Provided that the fee fixed for such license shall be
paid in advance Provided also that any pastoral lessee or licensee under
this Act may make any reasonable objection to the granting of such license
and the granting or withholding of such license after any objection shall
have been made to the commissioner or bench of magistrates shall be deter-
mined by the Governor with the advice aforesaid Provided that any pastoral
lessee may by notice in writing to that effect given to any such licensee
restrict him or her from exercising his or her rights as such licensee in any
given spot to be mentioned in such notice for a period not exceeding one
month and such licensee shall within such period appeal to the commissioner
or nearest bench of magistrates who shall have power respectively to decide
the matter in issue between the parties and such licensee shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds if after such notice given as aforesaid
or in the event of the matter in issue being decided against him or her he or
she shall exercise the right of a licensee which penalty may be recovered
before any two of Her Majesty’s justices of the peace in petty sessions in
the manner prescribed by law.
Persons authorised by Government not to be obstructed by Pastoral Lessees in
cutting Timber Sfc.
101. Except as provided inthe foregoing clause pastoral lessees or licensees
of runs under this Act shall not have power to restrict other persons duly
authorised by the Government either from cutting or removing timber or
material for building or other purposes or from searching for any metal or
mineral within the run leased.
Appraisement and Arbitration.
Mode of Appraisement or Arbitration.
102. Whenever it shall become necessary under the provisions of this Act
to fix or ascertain any price value or sum of money or to settle any question
or other matter not otherwise provided for by this Act the Minister and the
claimant in matters concerning the rights of the Crown and each of the
respective parties interested in any other case may concur in the appointment
of a single appraiser or arbitrator as the case may require and failing such
concurrence it shall be lawful for each party of his own accord or on the
request of the other to appoint an appraiser or arbitrator as the case may
require and upon such appointment to give notice thereof to the ether party
or parties and the matter in question shall be inquired into- £nd determined
by such single appraiser or arbitrator or such appraisers or arbitrators or
their umpire hereinafter referred to.


Arbitrators to appoint Umpire.
103. If there be more than one appraiser or arbitrator the appraisers or
arbitrators shall before they enter upon the reference appoint by writing
under their respective hands an umpire and if any such umpire die or become
incapable to act the appraisers or arbitrators shall proceed to appoint another
in his place as if they had not already appointed one and in case the appraisers
or arbitrators fail to appoint an umpire within thirty days after being requested
so to do by any party to the appraisement or arbitration the Minister may
appoint an umpire whose powers shall be as ample and complete as if he had
been appointed by all parties but such umpire shall not be a Government
officer.
Costs in Discretion.
104. All costs charges and expenses of and attending any such appraise-
ment or arbitration shall be in the discretion of the appraiser or appraisers
arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire who shall make the final award subject to
appeal in case of dispute to the Governor in Council.
Appointment of Umpires to be under hands of Arbitrator.
105. Every such appointment and notice respectively shall be in writing
under the hand or hands of the party or parties making or giving the same
respectively or if any such party be a corporation with a corporate seal under
such corporate seal and each such appointment shall be delivered to the
appraiser or arbitrator appraisers or arbitrators and by him or them attached
to the award when made and shall be deemed a submission by the parties
signing the same to appraisement or arbitration as the case may be.
Appointments irrevocable.
106. After the making of any such appointment the same shall not bo
revocable without the consent of both or all parties to the dispute nor shall
the death of either or any such party operate as a revocation.
Arbitrator in certain cases to act for both Parties.
107. If for the space of sixty days next after either party shall have
given to the other such notice as above referred to of the appointment of an
appraiser or arbitrator such notice including a statement of the matter in
dispute and a copy of such appointment the party to whom notice is given
shall fail to appoint an appraiser or arbitrator on his own account and to
give similar notice of such appointment the appraiser or arbitrator appointed
by the party giving the notice shall be deemed and taken to be concurrently
appointed by and shall act on behalf of both parties.
Award final.
108. The award under the provisions of this Act of any such single
appraiser or arbitrator concurrently appointed or the joint award of the
appraisers or arbitrators when they can agree and when they cannot the
award of their umpire appointed as above stated shall be binding final and
conclusive upon all persons and to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
Award may be made a Pule of Court.
109. Any submission to appraisement or arbitration under the provisions
of this Act as also any valuation or award made thereupon respectively may
and shall be made a rule of the Supreme Court of Queensland at the instance
of any party thereto respectively.
Appraiser and Arbitrator or Umpire to make Declaration.
110. Before any appraiser arbitrator or umpire shall enter upon the con-
sideration of any matter referred to him as aforesaid he shall make out and


subscribe a declaration before a justice of the peace in the form following
(that is to say)—
I A B do solemnly and sincerely declare that I am not directly or
indirectly interested in the matter referred to me and that I will
faithfully honestly and to the best of my skill and ability hear
and determine the matter referred to me under the provisions of
the “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868.”
Any Breach of Declaration to he a Misdemeanor in addition to Perjury.
111. Such declaration as aforesaid shall be annexed to the appraisement or
award when made and if any appraiser arbitrator or umpire shall wilfully
act contrary to such declaration he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor indepen-
dent of and in addition to any charge of perjury that may be brought
against him in respect of a false declaration.
Appraisment or Award to he in writing.
112. Every appraisement or award under the foregoing provisions shall be
in writing under the hands of the appraiser or appraisers arbitrator or
arbitrators or umpire making the same and together with the papers herein-
before directed to be attached to it shall be forwarded with all convenient
speed to the Minister and deposited as a record in his office.
If Default made in making Award the Umpire shall divide.
113. In case appraisers or arbitrators fail to make their award within sixty
days after the day on which the last of them was appointed or within such
extended time if not exceeding thirty days as shall have been duly appointed
by them for that purpose the matters referred shall be left to the sole
decision of the umpire and the sole decision of the umpire and the pro-
visions of this Act with respect to the time for making the appraisement or
award and with respect to extending the same in the case of a single
arbitrator concurrently appointed shall apply to any umpirage
Appointment of new Arbitrators.
114. If one of two or more appraisers or arbitrators before the making
of their award die or become incapable to act the party by whom such
appraiser or arbitrator was appointed may appoint another in his stead and
if he fail to do so for sixty days next after notice in writing from the other
party in that behalf the remaining appraiser or arbitrator may proceed and
shall be deemed to have been concurrently appointed by both parties.
In case of Death of single Arbitrator Proceedings to commence de novo.
115. If a single appraiser or arbitrator concurrently appointed die or
become incapable to act before the making of his award or fail to make his
award within sixty days after his appointment or within such extended time
if any not exceeding thirty days as shall have been duly appointed by him
for that purpose the matters referred to him shall be again referred to
appraisement or arbitration under the provisions hereinbefore contained as
if no reference had been already made.
Misdemeanor Trespass Penalties and General Clauses.
Power to appoint Crown Bailiffs.
116. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to appoint a
sufficient number of persons as bailiffs of Crown lands and every such bailiff
may and shall during his continuance in office and without prejudice to the
rights and duties of any land agent or commissioner of Crown lands do on


behalf of Her Majesty or on behalf of the Governor or the Minister in
respect of all and any Crown lands or lands selected prior to grant all neces-
sary acts for preventing intrusion encroachment or trespass on such lands or
for levying or recovering the rent or the license fee payable in respect thereof
or for taking and recovering possession of any allotment or lands in case of
forfeiture or for such other purpose as any bailiff lawfully appointed may by
law do in respect of any lands tenements or hereditaments of his employer.
Proceedings against Trespassers.
117. Whenever any person is in the occupation of any Crown lands such
person being unauthorised as a pastoral lessee or licensee or if so authorised
contrary to or in hindrance of the provisions of this Act or under color of
any lease issued under the provisions of this Act which shall have become
forfeited or revoked it shall be lawful for any land agent bailifF of Crown
lands or police constable to prefer to any justice an information in writing
setting forth such occupation and such justice shall thereupon issue his
summons for the appearance before any two justices at a place and time to
be therein specified of the person against whom any such complaint is made
and the justices if on hearing the case they are satisfied of the truth of the
complaint shall issue under their hands a warrant to dispossess and remove
such person from such Crown lands and to take possession of the same on
behalf of Her Majesty and any constable to whom any such warrant shall
be directed shall forthwith execute the same according to the tenor and
exigency thereof.
No Land Agent or Licensed Surveyor may purchase Land in respect of which he
may he employed.
118. If any commissioner land agent or licensed surveyor or any dis-
trict surveyor directly or indirectly purchase any land declared open for
selection in any proclamation in which he is named or being land respecting
which he acts as land agent or in the survey or classification of which lands
he may have been concerned he shall thereby forfeit his office or license as
the case may be and shall also forfeit the sum of one hundred pounds with
full costs of suit which may be recovered by any person who may sue for
the same in the nearest district court or in the Supreme Court of Queens-
land.
jßemoval of Boundary Marie to he a Misdemeanor.
119. If any person shall wilfully obliterate remove or deface any
boundary mark which may have been made or erected by or under the direc-
tion of any licensed surveyor land agent bailiff of Crown lands arbitrator
valuer or other person who shall have lawfully made or erected the same
under or in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act such person so
offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Limitation of Actions.
120. All actions or other proceedings unless undertaken on behalf of the
Crown against any land agent bailiff of Crown lands or other officer acting
under the provisions of this Act for anything wrongfully done under or
against the provisions of this Act shall be commenced within twelve months
after the matter complained of was committed and not otherwise And
notice in writing of any such action or proceeding and of the cause thereof
shall be given to the defendant one month at least before the commencement
of such action or proceeding And in every such action or proceeding the
defendant may plead the general issue and. give this Act and the special
matter in evidence at any trial to be had thereupon And the plaintiff in
any such action shall not recover if tender of sufficient amends shall have
been made before the commencement of such action or if a sufficient sum of


money shall have been paid into court after such commencement by or on
behalf of the defendant together with costs incurred up to that time And
if a verdict shall pass for the defendant or the plaintiff shall become nonsuit
or discontinue his action or proceeding or if upon demurrer or otherwise
judgment shall be given against the plaintiff the defendant shall recover from
the plaintiff his full costs as between attorney and client and have the like
remedy for the same as any defendant has by law against his plaintiff in
similar cases.
Appeal from Justices to the nearest District Court.
121. It shall be lawful for any person who shall feel himself aggrieved
by the conviction or decision of any justice or justices under any of the pro-
visions of this Act to appeal therefrom to the district court nearest to the
place where such conviction or decision shall have been given and the execu-
tion consequent upon the conviction or decision so appealed from shall be
suspended on the appellant with two or more sufficient sureties entering
before such justice or justices into a bond or recognizance to Her Majesty in
the sum of fifty pounds which bond or recognizance the said justice or justices
are hereby authorised to take and the obligee by such bond or recognizance
shall be bound to prosecute such appeal to conclusion and to be forthcoming
to abide the determination of the said court and to pay such costs if any as
the said court shall award against him and such court is hereby authorised
and required to hear and determine the matter of the said appeal and in any
such matter the decision of such court shall be final and conclusive to all
intents and purposes whatsoever.
No Proceedings under this Act to he removable by certiorari.
122. No order or other proceeding made or taken by any justices or any
district court touching or concerning the conviction of any offenders or touch-
ing or concerning any other matter or thing arising out of the provisions of
this Act shall be liable to be quashed or vacated for want of form only or
be removed or removable by certiorari or any writ or process whatsoever
into the Supreme Court.
Lease may be proved by Certified Copy.
123. Any lease or other instrument issued under the provisions of this
Act may in all legal proceedings on proof of the destruction or loss or un-
warrantable detention of the original be proved by the production of a certi-
fied copy thereof signed by the officer who issued the original or any of his
successors in office or by any other officer authorised for that purpose under
or by virtue of any regulation issued under the provisions of this Act.
Governor may malce necessary Regulations.
124. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to make and
alter or rescind all necessary regulations for the due carrying out of the
provisions of this Act and for the care protection and management of all
public parks and reserves and for the preservation of good order and decency
therein and all such regulations shall be proclaimed and be posted in some
conspicuous place in every such park or reserve and every person who shall
knowingly and wilfully offend against any such regulation shall on conviction
before a justice forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding five pounds for each
such offence in addition to any other penalty he may incur for the same action
under any other law and every person who shall knowingly and wilfully
offend against any such regulation and after being warned by an} r bailiff of
Crown lands park keeper or police constable shall not desist from so offending
may be thereupon apprehended by such bailiff park keeper or constable and
taken before some justice of the peace and shall be liable on conviction to
forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding ten pounds,


Forms provided in Schedules.
125. For the purposes of this Act the forms contained in schedules
C D E F and G- shall be so far as practicable the forms to be used in carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
False Declarations under this Act to be deemed Perjury.
126. Any person who shall wilfully make a false statement in any decla-
ration made in pursuance of this Act shall be guilty of perjury.
Punishment for Fraud or Evasion Sfc.
127. Any person who shall fraudulently evade or attempt to evade any
of the provisions of this Act or otherwise commit any fraud thereon for the
acquisition of land or shall aid any such evasion attempt or fraud shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be imprisoned and
kept to hard labor for a period of not more than two years.
Land so acquired to be forfeited to the Crown.
128. Lands acquired by any evasion of or fraud upon the provisions of
this Act shall be forfeited to the Crown and the Crown bailiffs or one of
them shall re-enter such lands on behalf of the Crown and if necessary shall
maintain an action of ejectment for recovery thereof in the name and on
behalf of Her Majesty.
Person conveying Land f raudulently acquired.—Punishment.
129. Any person who shall convey transfer lease or assign any lands
acquired or held by any fraud upon the provisions of this Act knowing the
same to have been so acquired or held shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
on conviction thereof shall be imprisoned and kept to hard labor for not more
than twelve calendar months.
Commencement of Act.
130. This Act shall commence and take effect from the first day of
March one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight.
Short Title.
131. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as the “ Crown Lands
“ Alienation Act of 1868.”
SCHEDUDE A.
Acts Sfc. Repealed.
The Orders in Council and Regulations issued under the Imperial Act of
Parliament 9 and 10 Victoria chapter 104 and the following Colonial enactments —
Date of Act.
Title of Act.
4 Wm. IV. No. 10 ...
An Act for protecting the Crown lands of this colony from
encroachment intrusion and trespass
An Act to amend an Act intituled “ An Act for protecting
the Crown lands of this colony from encroachment
intrusion and trespass”
5 Wm. IV. No. 12 ...
11 Vic. No. 21
An Act to enable trustees of commons in New South Wales
to have perpetual succession and to empower them to
regulate the use of such lands as may be granted as
commons within the said colony and for other purposes
relating thereto
24 Vic. INo. 15
The Alienation of Crown Lands Act of 1860
27 Vic. No. 23
The Agricultural Reserves Act of 1863
30 Vic. No. 12
The Leasing Act of 1866


And all resolutions of both Houses or either House of the Parliament of Queensland
relating to the occupation alienation or other disposal of the Crown lands of the
Colony of Queensland and all regulations made under any of the abovementioned
Acts or any of the resolutions above referred to.
SCHEDULE B.
Settled District.
Commencing at Point Danger and bounded thence by the southern boundary of
the colony westerly to Maryland thence by Herries’ Range and the range separating
the Condamine River from the Mclntyre River Weir River and Moonie River to the
head of Wilkie’s Creek then by the watershed separating the Condamine River from
Wilkie’s Creek to their junction then by the Condamine River to the junction of
G-ooranga Creek then by that creek to its head in the Great Dividing Range then by
said range and the range separating the Brisbane River from the Burnett River
thence by the range separating the Mary River from the Brisbane River thence by
the range separating the Mary River from the Burnett River and hy a spur range
to the junction of the Degilbo Creek with the Burnett River thence by a line north-
west to the watershed separating the Burnett River from the Kolan River thence by
that range and by the range separating the Burnett River from the Boyne River and
Kroombit Creek thence by the range separating the Dawson River from Kroombit
Creek and the Dee River to Mount Spencer thence by the western watershed of
Googanja Creek to the junction of that creek with the Fitzroy River thence by a
line north-west to the range separating the McKenzie River from the streams
tributary to the River Fitzroy below Googanja Creek thence by that range and the
range separating the Isaacs River from water flowing direct to the coast to Long
Hill thence by a line bearing north-west to a point thirty miles in a direct line from
the seacoast thence by a line parallel to the seacoast at a distance of thirty miles to
the 138 degrees meridian of east longitude being the west boundary of the colony
thence by that boundary to the seacoast and by the seacoast to the point of
commencement.
SCHEDULE H.
Schedule of Fees
to be 'paid by Selectors and Purchasers
to
defray the Cost of
Survey.
Area of Land.
Survey
Fee.
£ s.
d.
40 acres and under 60 acres .
3 8
0
60
>> 80 „
3 16
0
80
„ 120 „
4 12
0
120
» 160 „
5 4
0
160
„ 240 „
5 16
0
240
>>
>> 820 ,, ...
6 4
0
320
>» 480 „
7 0
0
480
j)
j) 640 „
7 18
0
640
>>
8 0
0
And for every additional 640 acres or part of 640 acres after the first 640 acres £4.
SCHEDULE I.
Schedule of Deed Fees chargeable on Deeds of Grant in Fee-simple.
£ s.
d.
Not exceeding 50 acres
1 0
0
100 „
1 5
0
>>
500 „
1 10
0
1,000 „
2 0
0
2,000 „
3 0
0
>>
5,000 „
4 0
0
10,000 „
5 0
0
Tbe forms to bo used under the Act are to be found in the appcndod Regulations.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 20th March, 1868.
“ CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OP 1868.”
His Excellency the Acting Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to establish the following Regulations, under the
provisions of the Act of the Legislature, 31 Yictoria, Ho. 46, intituled
“ An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the Alienation of
Crown Lands.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. W. LAMB.
Eegulatioxs.
Duties of Commissioners.
1. The duties of Commissioners in dealing with selections or otherwise,
except as hereinafter provided in these regulations, are sufficiently defined
in the Act; but all important instructions issued to those officers will be
published for general information in the Government Gazette.
Days on which the Commissioners will Sit.
2. As soon as the Commissioners enter on their duties, the days on
which they will attend at the respective land offices of their districts for
the transaction of business will be notified in the Government Gazette
and local papers.
Application by Lessees to Divide Duns.
3. Any pastoral lessee who may have notified to the Minister for Lands
his desire to come under the operation of the Act, will at once signify the
same to the Commissioner for the district in which his run is situated, and
at the same time furnish a clear description of the boundaries by which he
proposes to divide hi 3 run, in order to enable the Commissioner to report
to the Minister what portion it is desirable should be thrown open to
selection.
Paymentsfor Surveys.
_ 4. Pastoral tenants applying to have the boundaries or dividing lines of
their runs surveyed by the Government, shall, at the time of lodging
their application, pay to the land agent such sum as the commissioner may
estimate as the half cost of survey; and any balance that may afterwards
become due within the limits provided by the Act shall be paid within one
month from the date of receiving notification of the same from the Com-
missioner.
Pre-emptive Selections by Pastoral Tenants.
5. Pastoral tenants selecting lands in lieu of compensation for improve-
ments existing on their runs before the expiration of twelve months from
receiving notice of resumption, may select the same within any unalienated
portion of the run; but selections made at any subsequent period will be
restricted to the portion retained under ten years’ lease. Improvements
to be appraised previous to approval of selections.
Pre-emptive Leases.
6. Applications by pastoral lessees, under the pre-emptive clauses of
the Act, will only be conditionally received and registered until the value
of the improvements, in right of which such claim has been lodged, have
been appraised and approved


Rents of Runs.
7. In cases where portions of runs have been alienated since the last
appraisement, the rent will be subject to a corresponding reduction, and
the amended amount will be the rent to he paid on the moiety held under a
ten years’ lease.
Quantity of each Class of Land Allowable in One Selection.
8. The quantities of each class of land comprised in any one application
will, in the first instance, be subject to the provisions of clauses 43, 44, and
45 of the Act; but should it ultimately be found that any one class
exceeds the maximum limit prescribed by the above clauses, the applicant
will have to amend his selection in compliance therewith.
Classing Land in One Selection.
9. Under clause 42 selections may contain all three classes of land, but
the applicant at the time of selection must insert in the form of applica-
tion the quantities of each class of land he estimates to be comprised within
the boundaries of the selection. Each selection will, however, be subject
to revision by the Commissioner before being finally allotted to the appli-
cant, when he will be required to pay any balance contingent on a higher
classification being found to exist.
Payment of second and subsequent years Rent in Cash.
10. The second and all subsequent years’ rents on selections made under
the Act, will require to be paid in cash to the land agents of the districts
within which the selections are situated.
Selection of Lmproved Lands.
11. Where improvements may be included in unsurveyed lands selected
either by lease or as a “ homestead,” the selector must state in his appli-
cation the nature of such improvements, and his estimate of their value,
the amount of which he must at the same time pay to the land agent, and
any further sum which may be finally determined upon by appraisement,
must also be paid within one month after the date of award.
Homesteads.
12. Applications for “ homesteads ” must be made to the local land
agents in the form hereinafter provided, and will be recorded and registered
in like manner with ordinary selections as provided in clause 6, subject to
the conditions contained in clauses 47, 48, and 49 of the Act.
Selectors under the Homestead Clauses.
13. Selectors of homestead areas are not entitled to select any lands that
have either been offered for sale or withdrawn from general selection for the
purpose of being surveyed and offered at auction.
Applications containing two Classes of Land under the Homestead Clauses.
14. Selectors of homestead areas may include the two classes of agri-
cultural and pastoral land in their applications, provided the area of each
class does not exceed the proportionate equivalent of the gross acreage
allowable for each class under the Act.
Payment of Rent on Homesteads.
15. The first year’s rent chargeable on homestead selections may be
paid in either cash or land orders ; but the second and subsequent years’
rent will require to be paid in cash, and shall in all respects, other than
in the amounts therein specified, be subject to the provisions contained in
the second subdivision of the 51st section of the Act.
Mineral Lands.
16. Selections of mineral lands may be made within any areas open
to general selection, or within the unalienated portions of any lands held
under pastoral lease.


Gold Fields.
17. Lands comprised witliin any portion of a proclaimed gold field are
not open to general selection, unless so provided for in any regulation
made in reference thereto.
Auction Sales.
18. All auction sales will be conducted in the manner provided in the
Act. The Land Agent will receive the deposit and balance of purchase
money for transmission to the Treasury, and in each case will give the
prescribed form of receipt for the same.
Registration of Brands.
19. The brands of each head of stock depastured under the conditions
prescribed in clause 62 of the Act must be registered; but in the case of
sheep, the flock will require to have the same brand. A form of registra-
tion will be provided by the Commissioner.
Payment of Survey Fees.
20. All survey fees, chargeable on selections under the Act, must be
paid to the Land Agent in cash.
Forms to be used.
21. The following forms shall be those used for the purposes of the
Act and these Regulations.
Forms.
C.
£
Application by to Select Crown Lands.
Received this day of 186 , at o’clock.
Agent, District of
186 .
I,* off am desirous of purchasing the portion of Crown Lands
hereunder described, which is now open to selection without competition, having
been previously J and I hereby tender the sum of pounds
shillings and pence as the price thereof, including the
survey fee and the fee on the deed.
No of lot at previous sale ...
Date of proclamation
Date when offered for sale ...
No. of acres in the lot ... ...
County
Parish or place
No. of portion
Upset price ...
£
(Applicant’s signature.)
Survey fee
Deeds
The Agent for the Sale of Crown Lands.
Eeceived from the sum of pounds shillings and
pence, as the price of the land above described, together with the survey fee.
Agent for the sale of Crown Lands at
* Insert the Christian and surname at full length,
f Nearest post town.
X Offered for sale and not hid for (or sold and the deposit forfeited, as the case may he),


Application to Lease Lands for Cultivation of Sugar or Coffee,
To the Laud Agent of the district of
Sib,
I hereby apply, in pursuance of the provisions of the sixty-fifth section of the
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868, to be declared and entered as lessee of the
land specified below.
I herewith tender you the sum of as the first year’s rent,
payable in advance for the said land, at the rate of per acre, together with
the survey fee.
And I agree to all the conditions and restrictions of the said Act, so far as the
same apply to the said land.
(Signature.)
Description.
County of parish of
Area.
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
& nd pence, as the rent of the land above described, and survey fee.
E.
Application by to Lease Lands before Survey,
Received this day of 18 ,at o’clock.
Agent, District of
186 .
I> do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without
competition under the provisions of the Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1868, and
I hereby tender the sum of pounds ' shillings and
pence, as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee. I declare that I live in
Queensland, and that I am above the age of twenty-one years, and that I apply for
such portion on my own behalf and for my own use, and not as an agent or trustee
for any other person whatsoever. And I further declare, that I apply for the
said portion in order that I may use the same, and that I have not entered into any
agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said portion.
(Signature.)
Declared before me,
„ J.P.
Area of land applied for—
Acres. £ s. d.
Agricultural land at Is. 6d.
First-class pastoral land at Is. Od.
Second-class pastoral land at Os. 6d.
Survey fee
Total area ... £
Received from the sum of pounds
shillings and pence, as the rent of the land above described, and survey
fee.
Land Agent.
Note. —ln the event of the land comprised in this selection including improvements, the
nature and value of such must be specified, and the amount of said value paid to the hand.
Agent, ns prescribed in clause eleven of tile Regulations.


Schedule to application.
County or District.
Area.
Description,
A.
B,
r.
F.
Application to "Purchase Mineral Lands.
Pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-two of the Act of the Legislature of
Queensland, 31 Victoria, No. 46, and of the regulations established thereunder
(*) of do hereby apply to purchase without competition
acres roods and perches of land in the (f)
of (and which lands are more particularly described in
the Schedule annexed) for the purpose of mining for (J) and hereby
tender the sum of pounds shillings and pence, as the
required deposit upon the purchase of the said land at the rate of five shillings
per acre, together with the survey fee.
Given under hand this day of 18
(Signature)
To the Minister for Lands, Brisbane.
Eeceived from the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, being the amount of the deposit on the purchase as above
proposed, and survey fee.
Treasurer.
Brisbane, 18
Schedule to Application to Purchase Mineral Lands.
County or
District.
Area.
Description of
Mineral.
General Locality and Description of
Boundaries.
A.
R.
P
(Signature of Applicant)
(*) I or we, all names in full,
m County or district.
(i) Description of minerals to be dug for and wotKed


Transjer of Lease under
Sib,
hereby notify to you that haye assigned and transferred to of
all right, title, and interest in and to the Lease of Crown Lands hereunder
described: —
IS T o. of Acres in the lot
County
Parish or place
And now held by under the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 (31 Yietoria,
No. 46), from the Crown, and hereby relinquish in favor of the said all
and any the rights and privileges which may belong or accrue to as the Lessee
of the said land.
As witness hand , at this day of in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-
Signed by the said 1
in the presence of j
[J.P. or Commissioner of the Supreme Court].
To the Minister for Lands, Brisbane.
A fee of ten shillings must be paid on every transfer of a lease.
Separate forms of application must be filled up and duly signed for each lease to be transferred.
The lease must be sent in with the application to transfer, that such transfer may be noted
thereon.
K.
Application by Pastoral Lessee to Lease Land tinder Pre-emption.
Eeceived this day of 18 at o’clock.
(Signed) Land Agent, District of
I do hereby apply to become the lessee of the Crown lands described
in the schedule annexed, and which I claim in virtue of clause fourteen of the
Act 31 Yietoria, No. 46, for improvements (nature and value of which are indorsed
hereon) effected on the run known as in the district of
And I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings and
pence, as the first year’s rent, and survey fee—
Acres. £ s. d.
Agricultural land at Is. 6d.
First-class pastoral at Is. Od.
Second-class pastoral at Os. 6d.
Survey fee ...
Total acres ... £
Eeceived from the sum of pounds shillings and
pence, as first year’s rent of land above described, and survey fee.
Land Agent.
Schedule to Application.
County or District.
Area.
Description.
A.
R.
P.


Schedule.
Nature and value of improvements.
£
s.
d.
L.
Application to Select a Homestead.
Received this day of 186 ,at o’clock.
Land Agent, District of
I do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown Lands
described in the schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without compe-
tition as a “ homestead,” under the provisions of the Croton Lands Alienation Act of
1868, and I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings and
pence as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee* and I do
solemnly declare that I amf that I apply for such portion on my own
behalf and for my own exclusive use and benefit, and not as agent or trustee for
any other person whatever, that I have not on any former occasion exercised my
right to select a “ homestead” under the Act, and" that I apply for the purpose of
actual settlement or cultivation ; that I did not arrive in this colony after the Ist
of March, 1868, at the public expense, either wholly or in part within three (3)
years, and I further declare that I have not entered into any agreement to sell,
demise, or mortgage the said portion.
(Signature.)
Declared before me at this day of 186
J.P.
Acres.
£ s. d.
Agricultural land
at 9d.
Pastoral land
at 6d.
Survey fee
...
Total area ...
£ k
Received from the sum of pounds shillings and
pence as rent of the lease above described, and survey fee.
Land Agent.
Schedule to Application.
County or District,
Area.
Description.
v
A.
E.
P.
,
* When there are improvements insert the estimated value,
f Of the age of 21 years; or the head of a family, i.e., as the case may he.
M.
Declaration made by Surveyor or Witness Classing Land under the Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868.
I) do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have examined the
land hereinafter described, and that I have faithfully and honestly, and to the best


of my skill and ability, classed the said land, in accordance with the provisions of
the Act 31 Victoria, No. 46, as comprising—
Acres.
Agricultural land ...
• ••
First-class pastoral
...
Second-class pastoral
Total
...
Description of Boundaries.
(Signature)
Made and subscribed this day of 186 ,in the presence
of
J.P.
N.
Application by to bring a Lease of Land in an Agricultural Deserve, held
under the 12 th Clause of the “ Alienation of Croton Lands Act of 1860,” under
the provisions of the “ Crown Lands Alienation Act o/’1868.”
I, being lessee under the provisions of the 12th section of the
Alienation of Crown Lands Act of 1860, of the undermentioned portion of land
in the Agricultural Reserve, do hereby apply to bring the said
lease under the provisions of the Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1868, as provided
by the 67th clause of the said Act.
Agricultural Reserve ...
No. of Portion
Area
Date of Selection
Particulars of payments made in accordance with the provisions of Clause 12 of the
“ Alienation of Crown Lands Act of 1860.”
Bate of Payment.
Particulars.
Amount,
Total £
Given under my hand, this day of 186 .
To the Honorable the Secretary for Lands.
Application by Pastoral Lessee for License to Depasture Stock on Crown Lands.
I } being the lessee (or manager for the lessee) of the run known as
in the district of do hereby apply in virtue of clause 12 of the
Act 31 Victoria, No. 46, for a license to depasture stock on the unalienated portions
of the resumed lands out of said run, under the operation of the above recited Act.
The quantity of stock which I claim to depasture, as being one-tliird of the total
quantity of stock originally depastured on the whole run, is
Sheep.
Cattle.
(Signature.)
To the Minister fbr Lands, Brisbane.


P.
License to Depasture Stock by Pastoral Lessee.
This is to certify that the lessee of the run known as in the district
°f is licensed under the provisions of clause 12 of the Act 31 Victoria,
No. 46, to depasture the undermentioned quantity of stock on the unalicnated portion
of the lands resumed from his original run under the operation of the above recited
Number of Cattle
or equivalent in
Sheep.
Period for which
the License is
issued.
Given under my hand this day of 18 ,at Brisbane.
(Signature.)
Minister for Lands.
Note.—2s sheep equivalent to 10 head of cattle.
Application to Register the Brands of Stock depastured by as Selector or
Licensee of Crown Lands under the “ Crown Lands Alienation Act o/’lStfS.”
Cattle.
Horses.
Sheep.
Name of Applicant.
Portion of land in right of which
the Stock is depastured.
Number.
Cattle.
Brand.
Where situated.
Number.
Horses.
Brand.
Where situated.
N umber.
Sheep.
Brand.
Where situated.
The above is a correct account of the Stock depastured by me, in right of *
above mentioned, and I request that the same may be registered in accordance with
Clause 62 of the Act 31 Victoria, No. 46.
(Signature.)
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
* Selection or license u the case may be.


Certificate of fulfilment of Conditions by Selector under the “ Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868.”
District
Reference to No. and portion
Lessee
I, the Commissioner of Crown Lands, under the provisions of
the Act 31 Victoria, No. 46, do hereby certify that the conditions hereunder specified
have been fulfilled by the lessee of as required by the Act, to entitle
him to a deed of grant in fee-simple on payment of the balance of the ten years’
rent.
Particulars of Conditions Complied with.
Given under my hand, at this day of 18
(Signature.)
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
Notk.— Attention is directed to the following errors in this Act. In section 43, reference is
made to sections “ seventy and seventy-one,'’ should be “ seventy-one and seventy-two.”
In section 64, reference is made to section “ seven,” should be “ twelve.”
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 25th March, 1868.
“ CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1868.”
His Excellency the Acting Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to establish the following Regulations relating
to appraisements and arbitrations in cases arising out of the operation of the
Act 31 Victoria, No. 46, intituled “ An Act to Consolidate and Amend the
Laws relating to the Alienation of Croton Lands.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. W. LAMB.
Regulations.
1. When compensation, is claimed for improvements effected on runs
held under the Pastoral Leases Act ofISGS, hut resumed under the provisions
of the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868, the appraisements will require
to be conducted under the former Act, and the Commissioners should be
careful that all proceedings and awards are made and recorded in accordance
with the forms prescribed under the Pastoral Leases ct of 1863.
2. In all cases of arbitration under the Croton Lands Alienation Act of
1868, the arbitrator on the part of the Government must be appointed by the
Minister for Lands. Should any matter, therefore, arise out of the operation
of the Act that requires to be referred to arbitration, the Commissioner shall
submit the matter, accompanied by a report, to the Minister, who will issue
instructions for such further proceedings as may be necessary.


3. The following shall be the forms used in conducting appraisements or
arbitrations under the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 :
Foems.
A.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator on behalf of the Crown, under the Act
31 Victoria No. 46.
Whereas by the 102nd clause of the Crown Lands'Alienation Act of 1868, it is
provided that in all cases of appraisement or arbitration under the said Act the
arbitrator on behalf of the Crown shall be appointed by the Minister: Now, therefore,
I, the said Minister, do hereby appoint to act as arbitrator on behalf
of the Crown in the matter of
Given under my hand at this day of 18
(Signature)
Secretary for Public Lands.
B.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator , under the Act 31 Victoria No. 46.
I in accordance with the provisions of the Croton Lands Alienation
Act of 1868, do hereby appoint to act as arbitrator on my behalf in the
matter of
Given under my hand at this day of 18
(Signature)
Signed by the said f];' this day of 18 in the presence
of
(Signature)
J. P.
C.
Appointment of Umpire under the Act 31 Victoria No. 46.
We, the undersigned acting on behalf of the Crown and
on behalf of under the provisions of the Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868, do hereby certifty that we have appointed
to act as umpire in the matter of
Given under our hands at this day of 18
(Signature)
(Signature)
D.
Appointment of Umpire by Minister, under the Act 31 Victoria No. 46.
Whereas by clause 103 of the Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1868, it 18
provided that in case the appraisers or arbitrators fail to appoint an umpire withi n
thirty days after being requested to do so by any party to the question at issue the
Minister may appoint an umpire whose powers shall be ample and complete, and as
in the matter of the arbitrators have failed to appoint an
umpire within the time specified, I, the said Minister, appoint
to act as umpire in the matter in question.
Given under my hand at this day of 18
(Signature)
Secretary for Public Lands.


Declaration to be made by Arbitrator or Umpire, under the Act 31 Victoria No. 46.
In the Matter of
I do solemnly and sincerely declare that I am not directly or
indirectly interested in the matter referred to me, and that I will faithfully, honestly,
and to the best of my'skill and ability, hear and determine the matter referred to me
under the provisions of the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868.
(Signature)
Made and subscribed this day of 18 , in the presence
of
J.P.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 9th April, 1868.
“ CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1868.”
His Excellency the Acting Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to establish the following additional Regulations,
under the provisions of the Act of the Legislature, 31 Victoria, No. 46,
intituled “An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws relating to the
Alienation of Crown Lands.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. W. LAMB.
Regulations.
Dent on excess of Area to be paid within 90 days.
1. In cases where the Commissioner shall determine on adopting, after
survey, a higher classification than that estimated by a selector, as provided
in the 9th clause of the Regulations under the Act, dated 20th March, 1868,
he shall notify, in writing, the particulars of the amended classification to the
applicant, and shall at the same time demand that an amount sufficient to
cover the excess of area of each or of a superior class of land above that
applied for, within the limits prescribed by the Act, should be paid to the
Land Agent of the District in which the selection is situated, within ninety
days from date of notification ; failing in which the land shall be forfeited,
and all improvements thereon shall revert to the Crown.
Deposit on forfeited Selections available for fresh Application.
2. In cases when an application will be rejected, after the deposit of rent
has been forwarded to the Treasury, the applicant may, after notice of rejec-
tion, carry such deposit to the credit of a fresh selection, by attaching to his
application a written authority to the Colonial Treasurer to transfer the
deposit to the credit of such further selection.
Extension of the provisions of the Act to certain Lessees, under the 12th
Section of the “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1860.”
3. The provisions of the 67th section of the Act applicable to leases of
land in the Agricultural Reserves, held under the 12th section of the “ Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1860,” which have expired on the 31st day of
December, 1866, are extended to leases of the same class which have also
expired on the 31st day of December, 1867.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 20tb March, 1868.
“ CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1868.”
In pursuance of the Rule prescribed in the first clause of the Regulations
established under the provisions of the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868,
the following Letter of Instruction, addressed to the Commissioners of
Crown Lands appointed under the above-recited Act, in relation to their
duties, is published for general information.
E. W. LAMB.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 20th March, 1868.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
Sib,
In carrying out the provisions of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868, the Government deem it of importance that there should
be a uniformity of action amongst the officers appointed to administer it, the
following instructions have, therefore, been prepared for their guidance,
which, with the regulations and forms appended, will, it is to be hoped,
enable the Commissioners and other officers working under the Act to
apply its various provisions in conformity with the intentions of the Legis-
lature, having regard at the same time to the requirements of the public, by
introducing, as far as practicable, simplicity and accuracy into the depart-
mental arrangements.
In the first instance, the Act must be considered as a guide in
matters for which special provision is made, and a careful perusal of its
several clauses will, in most instances, at once point out the course of
procedure under each division of its provisions, which are conveniently
classed under the following heads :
(1.) Subdivision of Pastoral Leases and the Special Rights
of the Lessees.
(2.) Ordinary Selections by Lease before Survey.
(3.) Sales by Auction.
The subdivision of runs, and the adjustment of the claims of pastoral
lessees who come under the operation of the Act, form an important
section of your duties as local Commissioner; it is, therefore, necessary that
each transaction should be dealt with and recorded in its proper order.
Thus, immediately upon the lessee of a run haying given notice of his
intention to surrender half of his holding, it will be requisite that you
should, at your earliest convenience, ascertain what lands ought to be
reserved for the special purposes mentioned in the Act. This will more
especially apply in those portions of the district where but a limited amount
of land has hitherto been sold, and the requirements of the public are not
already ascertained and provided for.
Having made such recommendations to this department as may appear
necessary, in pursuance of the above requirements, the pastoral tenant should
be called upon to divide his run, in accordance with clause 8 of the Act;
and it will be your duty, on such division being effected, to carefully
consider which moiety of the run is best suited for sale or lease—bearing in


mind that one of the most important objects aimed at by the Act is to resume
as large an area as practicable of agricultural land from pastoral lease ; and
also, that in every case the railway reserves must be included in the portion
resumed from the pastoral tenant.
The portion of the run to be resumed having been decided upon, the
pastoral lessee wfill, if there are any improvements on the run, probably at
once lodge his application to exercise right of pre-emption under the 14th
clause of the Act, and should the land so selected comprise within its
boundaries any of the improvements for which he claims compensation, the
same should be noted on the form of application; for although he will not
be charged for them, as in the case of an ordinary selector, yet it will be
necessary that they should be valued, in order to ascertain the amount of
the claim in virtue of which he exercises his pre-emptive right.
The conditions that apply to pre-emptive selections are only those
relating to form and quantity, as provided for in clause 14 of the Act,
together with the payment of rent and survey fee. There is nothing in the
Act to prevent the whole of the land so acquired from being of any one of
the three classes, or any combination of them, and classification will only be
necessary to determine the amount of rent.
In conducting the valuations of improvements surrendered by lessees,
care should be taken to note the locality and value of each portion of the
improvements with as much accuracy as possible, as in case of future
selections it will be of great advantage to be able at once to apportion to
each the amount and the value of improvements comprised within its
boundaries.
As the rights conceded to pastoral tenants by clause 14 refer to each
run separately, the right of pre-emption may be exercised by the lessee in
virtue of each run. The lessee, therefore, of two or more runs is not
debarred from selecting to the full amount of pre-emption on each, but the
consolidation of any two or more runs, as provided by clause 9, will restrict
him to one claim.
Licenses to pastoral lessees issued by the Minister for Lands, in accor-
dance with clauses 12 and 64, will be based upon the amount of stock
previously depastured upon the original run ; but, as in some instances runs
may be overstocked, an undue command of the pasture would thereby be
given to the lessee. The Act has, with the view of meeting this difficulty,
been framed so that the Commissioner may reduce the quantity to such
limits as will place selectors on an equal footing with the original pastoral
lessee—that is, in proportion to their holdings. You will, therefore, in
such cases report the same to this department, in order that a restricted
license only may be issued
A registration of brands has been provided for the purpose of identi-
fying the owners of stock running on unselected lands, and also, as a
check to the over-depasturing of the country, to the detriment of adjoining
claimants. It will, therefore, be necessary to require parties registering to
give a specific description of the cattle or horses to be registered, as well
as their distinctive brands; in the case of sheep the flock should have but
one brand.
The second head of the Act which it is proposed to consider relates to
ordinary selections by lease before survey. This comprehends a large
proportion of its clauses and provisions, and the first duty devolving upon
local officers will be the receipt of applications for lands open to selection


on and after the Bth of April, being the lands referred to in the Proclamation
dated 6th March.
Secondly.—Land in railway reserves, where not specially reserved for
sale by anction or otherwise, which will be open on and after the Ist of
May next.
Thirdly.—All other lands that may be thrown open from time to time
by Proclamation in the Government Gazette (under clause 41), and which
at present are chiefly comprised within pastoral leases.
Fourthly.—All lands in the unsettled districts that have never been held
under lease, and are not under license.
The selections of lands open, under the foregoing conditions, are so
clearly provided for in clauses 6 and 7, and 42 to 50, that it leaves but little
to suggest, beyond the necessity for great regularity in making the entries
in the “ Application Book ” in the first instance, and carrying them on into
the “ Register ” so soon as they have been duly taken into consideration by
the Commissioner, as provided in clauses 4 and 5. In dealing with selections
that comprise improvements, it is desirable to ascertain their true value,
with as little delay as possible; it will also save much time, and facilitate
the acquisition of land by the public, if any irregularities that may occur in
the applications be at once pointed out to the selector, with a view to its
being revised before it is recorded in the “ Application Book.”
With the object of preventing lands of a superior class being under-
rated by unqualified persons, it will be your duty, as Commissioner, if
practicable, in every case of doubt, to inspect the land in person, as otherwise
it is probable that great irregularity of classing will occur, much to the
detriment of the public revenue.
Applications* for lands under clause 16 will be treated in the same
manner as any ordinary selections, with the exception that the Commissioner
must satisfy himself that the land is open, as therein provided, before he
approves and forwards it to the Minister for confirmation.
With reference to the third head, under which the working of the Act
is divided.
Sales by Auction. —It is not necessary to give any definite instruc-
tions to Commissioners, as the administration of this section of the Act will
devolve upon the Surveyor-General and the officers working under his
department; every assistance should, however, be afforded to the agents for
the sale of lands, in all cases where questions may arise out of the collateral
working of the separate portions of the Act.
In addition to the foregoing brief outline of the principles to be observed
in administering the provisions of the Grown Lands Alienation Act, it may
be desirable to point out that the greatest accuracy should be maintained in
the mode of keeping the official records ; the principal of which will be the
“ Application Book,” the “ Register,” and the Commissioner’s “ Minute
Book.” The two first will be kept by the Land Agent, under your imme-
diate direction and supervision ; and care should also be taken that entries
in the first of these books should in no case be altered or erased, as all
necessary revisions will be duly recorded when under consideration by the
Commissioner, at which stage they will be carried forward into the
“Register,” and all subsequent transactions connected with the same entry
will be brought forward in like manner. This will prevent confusion and
* This relates only to the unsettled districts.


irregular entries in tlie “ Register,” which forms one of the most important
records of the office.
As the Commissioner’s minute books are open to public inspection in
the several land offices to which they refer, they should, during your absence,
be left in charge of the Land Agents ; but as they will contain important
matter in regard to official decisions, it is requisite that every precaution
should be taken to prevent their defacement when under inspection.
A copy of this instruction will be furnished to each Land Agent for his
information and guidance. You will, however, in minor details not specially
alluded to herein, make the most convenient arrangements with those
officers for facilitating the transaction of business in connection with the
selection of land ; and it is to be trusted that no exertions will be spared on
your part in carrying out to a successful issue the provisions of the Act
you are appointed to administer in the district assigned to you.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. W. LAMB,
Secretary for Public Lands.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 3rd April, 1868.
Sir,
I have the honor to acquaint you that it will be requisite to use
every dispatch in forwarding the arrangements in connection with the
working of the land offices in your district, so that no delay or inconvenience
will ensue in carrying out the provisions of the New Land Act. As, how-
ever, your general duties have been defined in the letter from the department
on the 20th ult., I have only, on the present occasion, to confine myself to the
details in connection with the office routine, and the mode of dealing with
applications for conditional purchases of land received by the Land Agents.
Ist. The Land Agent’s offices will require to be kept open for the trans-
action of business, under the Act, on the first five office days of the week,
except in the case of holidays, from 9 a.m. to 4 r.M., and on Saturdays from
9 a.m. to noon.
2nd. All applications for conditional purchases will be received, in tripli-
cate, on the forms prescribed by the Regulations under the Act, by the Land
Agent,* who will require to check the payments, and see that the amount
corresponds with the area applied for. They will then be duly numbered in
consecutive order, and, at the same time, the general particulars, such as the
name of applicant, area, and short description, in accordance with the
appended form A, entered in the application book, which must be signed by
the applicant or his duly authorised agent. The application is then to be put
away amongst those cases awaiting your decision.
3rd. On the application being placed before you for consideration, it will
be your duty to examine the same in the order in which it is entered in the
application book, and ascertain, by careful comparison with the plans of the
district, whether sufficient waste land exists to satisfy the application, or if it
interferes with any existing claim. A reference is then to be made to the
* In the case of applications for Homesteads, the declaration referred to in the 73rd section of the
Act as being required to be made before the Land Agent is unnecessary, the forms under the regu-
lations providing that the declarations should be made before a magistrate.


application book, in the event of the selection contained therein not being
charted, for the purpose of determining whether it clashes with any unsur-
veyed selection. After such examination as above, your decision on the
selection is to be noted-, with the view of future entry in the minute book
attached to the Land Office; and this decision should afterwards be read out
in a public manner, in the presence of the applicants or their agents, on the
next day of sitting, as provided in the 4th, sth, and 6th clauses of the Act.
4th. After the application has been received or rejected, the following shall
be the mode of procedure One copy is to be forwarded to the Treasury,
one to the Auditor-General, and the other to this office, causing a copy to be
retained in the Land Office for your own information. On the face of each
a note should be inserted in red ink, whether the selection is received pro-
visionally or rejected, so that in the latter case steps may be taken to have
the money or land orders with which the rent was paid refunded to the
applicant.*
sth. All moneys and land orders received in payment of rent and selec-
tions under the Act are to be forwarded direct to the Treasury, by the Land
Agents, accompanied with the forms prescribed by that department. The
Audit Office will, probably, require returns also, which should be prepared
with care, and forwarded regularly, as requested. Copies of the returns of
remittances, and also a schedule showing the number of selections received
during each week, in the form marked C should be furnished to this office.
6th. As cases may, probably, occur, in which applications will be rejected
after the deposit of rent has been forwarded to the Treasury, the applicant,
after notice of rejection, may carry such deposit to the credit of a fresh
selection, by attaching to his application a written authority to the Colonial
Treasurer to transfer the deposit to the credit of such further selection.
7th. After the applications have been dealt with up to the stage of their
provisional acceptance or otherwise, pending survey, you will then take
measures for forwarding a copy of the description, together with particulars
of the area, and name of the applicant, to the District Surveyor (or, in case
of there being no officer of that standing, to a licensed surveyor to be
approved of by the Surveyor-General), requesting him in the form appended
to this letter, and marked B, to have the boundaries surveyed, and to furnish
a report on the completion of the same, as to the general character of the
selection, and a declaration of the estimate of the several classes of land he
believes to exist within its boundaries. The surveyor, on marking the
boundaries, will furnish a duplicate plan of the survey for your information ;
and on receiving from you an intimation that the mode of marking the
boundaries is approved, he will then transmit his plans, together with the
instructions issued from your office, to the Surveyor-General, who will be
authorised to prepare the description for insertion in the lease.
Bth. Should the survey, on being submitted, not appear to have been
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Act, especially in con-
nection with the proper reservation of roads and water, so as to provide for
the future requirements of settlement, you are to return the same to the
surveyor, for revision.
9th. In cases where any dispute shall arise with respect to the
boundaries, it will be requisite that immediate notice should be given to the
surveyor, that he may not proceed with the survey until some decision is
arrived at with respect to the same. It will, of course, devolve on you to
* Arrangements are now made to return to the applicant deposits on rejected applications after
the official decision of the Commissioner on the day of sitting.


make such arrangements as will enable each case of the sort to be settled as
soon as practicable, by causing the arbitration, if necessity for such should
arise, and the survey to proceed at one and the same time, so that the
professional services of the surveyor, who will have a perfect knowledge of
the extent of land available, may be turned to account in carrying out the
adjustment of the boundaries.
10th. After each selection has been surveyed, and approval of the
boundaries has been notified to the Surveyor, it will be your duty to com-
pare the classification estimated by the applicant with that submitted by the
Surveyor at the time of furnishing the plan, and especially to verify the
latter’s report, by either obtaining further evidence in support of it, or of
visiting the ground for the purpose of obtaining a more perfect knowledge of
its character. I need scarcely point out that this will prove a most important
portion of your duties, and will also demand great activity and promptitude
on your part, so that the time spent in the field will not interfere with the
other functions of your office.
11th. Having determined on the classification by the best means at your
disposal, you will then adjust the annual rent to be charged on the selection,
and will at once take measures to certify to the applicant that he should
pay within ninety days to the Land Agent an amount sufficient to cover the
higher classification, if such should be found to exist.
12th. The books you will require to have kept in the several Land
Offices will be the following
Application Book,
Register of Applications,
Minute Book,
Letter Book, and
Cash Book.
With respect to the three first, the names and the provisions contained in the
6th and 7th clauses of the Act sufficiently define their use. I may, however,
mention that no time should be lost in making the necessary entries in the
Register, and that particular care should be taken that the same should be in
their proper order according to number, as it is proposed to have a similar
book kept at this office, and it will facilitate reference to deal with applica-
tions by the number they bear in each Land Office.
13th. As no transfer of any interest in conditional purchases can be
allowed until the conditions of expenditure and residence, or otherwise, are
complied with, it is unnecessary to make any allusion to such transactions at
the present time, further than to suggest that a sufficient space be left
between each entry in the Register to enable a succession of names to be
recorded in the event of subsequent transfers taking place.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
E. W. LAMB,
Secretary for Public Lands.
To the Commissioner of Crown Lands.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 26th March, 1868.
“CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1868.”
The following descriptions of the boundaries of the districts assigned to the
Land Agents, whom all applications for conditional purchases of land within
their respective districts, under the provisions of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868, will require to be made, are published for general information.
E. W. LAMB.
Settled District of Moreton.
Brisbane Land Agent’s District.
Commencing at Point Danger, and bounded thence on the south by the
range dividing the Logan River and other waters from the Tweed, Richmond
and Clarence Rivers ; on the west by the range dividing the Logan River
from the Bremer River and the Mount Flinders Range to the head of
Woogaroo Creek, thence by that creekto the Brisbane River and the Brisbane
River upwards to the junction of Kholo Creek, thence by a line bearing
north to D’Aguilar 8 Range, and by that range northerly to the range
forming the northern watershed of the Mooroocliydore River ; on the north
by that watershed easterly to the seacoast; and on the east by the seacoast
southerly to Point Danger, the point of commencement.
Ipswich Land Agent’s District.
j ® oun ded on nort h by the range dividing the waters of the Burnett
and Mary Rivers from those of the Brisbane River from the Great Dividing
R ange to D Aguilar s Range ; on the east by said range southerly, and by a
line bearing south to the confluence of Kholo Creek with the Brisbane Biver,
then by that river downwards to the confluence of Woogaroo Creek, and by
that creek upwards to its head, thence by Mount Flinders Range and the
range separating the Bremer River from the Logan River ; on the south by
the range separating the Bremer River from other waters to the Great
Dividing Range ; on the east by the Great Dividing Range northerly to
Mount Hay, then by the east boundary of the Drayton Town Reserve, and
the east and part of the north boundaries of the Toowoomba Agricultural
Reserve, and again by the Great Dividing Range northerly to the point of
commencement.
Settled District of Darling Downs.
Toowoomba Land Agent’s District.
Commencing on the Main Range, and bounded on the north-west and
west by the north-western and western boundaries of Rosalie Plains Run
thence by part of the southern boundary of the same run, by the eastern
boundary of Jondaryan Run, the northern boundary of Prairie East Run,
part of the western boundary of the same run; thence by a line west to
the confluence of the north branch with the Condamine River, by the Con-
damine River upwards, and by the southern boundary of the Cecil Plains Run
westerly to the range separating the Condamine River waters from those
falling into the Macintyre River, by that range southerly to Mount Domville
or Milmerren; thence by a spur range and by a line easterly to the con-


fluence of Canal Creek with Condamine River ; on the south by the Con-
damine River upwards to Ring’s Creek, by Ring’s Creek upwards to the
Warwick Railway Line ; thence by that railway line southerly, and by a line
bearing east along the northern boundary of the original Table-top Agri-
cultural Reserve to the southern watershed of Ring’s Creek, by that watershed
easterly to the Main Range; on the east by the Main Range northerly by
the eastern boundary of the Drayton Town Reserve, the southern, eastern,
and northern boundaries of the Toowoomba Agricultural Reserve easterly,
northerly, and westerly to the Main Range ; and again by the Main Range
northerly to the point of commencement.
Dalby Land Agent’s District.
Commencing at the head of Goorangah Creek, and bounded thence on
the north-east and north by the Main Range northerly and westerly to the
range dividing Charley’s Creek from Dogwood Creek; on the west by that
range southerly to the junction of Charley’s Creek with the Condamine River,
thence by a line south-easterly to the head of Rogan Creek; thence by the
range dividing the Condamine waters from the Moonie and Weir River waters
southerly to the southern boundary of Cecil Plains Run, by that boundary
easterly to the Condamine River; thence by that river downwards to the
confluence of the North Branch ; on the south by a line bearing east to the
boundary between East and West Prairie Runs, by that boundary bearing
north by the northern boundary of East Prairie Run south-easterly, thence
on the east by the eastern boundary of Jondaryan Run northerly, thence
by part of the southern boundary of Rosalie Plains Run westerly by the
western and north-western boundaries of the same run northerly and
north-easterly to the Main Range ; and on the remainder of the east by the
Main Range northerly to the head of Goorangah Creek, the point of com-
mencement.
Warwick Land Agent’s District.
Commencing on the Main Range at Maryland, and bounded on the
south by Herries’ Range and the range separating the Condamine River
waters from those falling into the Macintyre River westerly and northerly
to Mount Domville or Milmerren ; thence by a spur and a line easterly
to the confluence of Canal Creek with the Condamine River ; on the north
by the Condamine River upwards to Ring’s Creek, by Ring’s Creek upwards
to the Warwick Railway line ; thence by that railway line southerly and by
a line bearing east along the northern boundary of the original Table-top
Agricultural Reserve to the southern watershed of Ring’s Creek, by that
watershed easterly to the Main Range ; and on the east and south-east by
the Main Range southerly and south-westerly to Maryland, the point of
commencement.
Settled District of Wide Bay and Burnett.
Maryborough Land Agent's District.
Commencing on the seacoast at the mouth of the Mooroochydore River,
and bounded thence on the south by the northern watershed of the Mooroo-
chydore River westerly ; on the west by the range separating the Mary
River from the Burnett River, and by a spur range to the junction of
Degilbo Creek with the Burnett River, then by a line hearing north-west to
the watershed separating the Rolan River from the Burnett River, and by
that range northerly; on the north by the range separating the Rolan River


from the Boyne River and Baffle Creek easterly to the seacoast; and on the
east by the seacoast southerly to the Mooroochydore Eiver, the point of
commencement.
Settled District of Port Curtis.
Rockhanipton Land, Agent’s District.
Bounded on the south from the seacoast by a line bearing west to
Mount Larcom, thence by the Mount Larcom Eange to the range dividing
the Calliope and Boyne Biver waters from those flowing to the Dawson
Biver; on the east by that range southerly, thence by the range separating
the Burnett Biver from the Boyne Biver and Kroombit Creek, thence on the
west by the range separating the Dawson Biver from Kroombit Creek and
the Dee Biver to Mount Spencer, thence by the western watershed of
Goganjo Creek to the junction of that creek with the Eitzroy Biver, thence
by a line north-west to the range separating the Mackenzie Biver from the
streams tributary to the Fitzroy Biver below Goganjo Creek, thence by
that range and the range separating the Isaacs Biver from waters flowing
direct to the coast to Long Hill, thence by a spur range easterly to Cape
Palmerston; and on the east by the seacoast southerly to the point of
commencement, together with Curtis Island.
Gladstone Land Agent’s District.
Bounded on the south by the range dividing the waters of the Kolan
Biver from those of Baffle Creek; on the west by the range dividing the
waters of the Boyne and Calliope Bivers from those flowing to the Dawson
Biver; on the north by the Mount Larcom Bange to Mount Larcom, and
thence by a line bearing east to the seacoast; and on the east by the sea-
coast southerly to the watershed between the Kolan Biver and Baifle Creek
at the point of commencement.
Settled District of Kennedy.
Bowen Land Agent's District.
Commencing on the seacoast between Cape Bowling Green and Cape
Cleveland, and bounded.thence on the north-west by a line bearing south-
west passing through the summit of Mount Elliot; on the west by a line
parallel to and distant from the seacoast thirty miles southerly ; on the
south-east by a line bearing north-east to the north-west extreme of
Bepulse Bay; and on the east by the seacoast northerly to the point of
commencement.
Maclcay Land Agent’s District.
Commencing at Cape Palmerston, and bounded thence on the south by
a spur range westerly to Long Hill, thence by a line bearing north-west to
a point thirty miles in a direct line from the seacoast, thence by a line parallel
to the seacoast at a distance of thirty miles ; on the north by a line bearing
north-east to the north-west extreme of Bepulse Bay; and on the east by
the seacoast southerly to the point of commencement.
Townsville Land Agent’s District.
Commencing on the seacoast between Cape Bowling Green and Cape
Cleveland, and bounded thence on the south-east by a line bearing south-
west, passing through the summit of Mount Elliot; on the west by a line*


parallel to and distant from the seacoast thirty miles northerly; on the
north by the northern watershed of the Mackay River easterly to the sea-
coast at Tam O’Shanter’s Point; and on the east by the seacoast southerly
to the point of commencement.
Phe Settled District dp Burke.
BurTcetown Land Agent's District.
Commencing on the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria at Point Fitz-
inaurice, and bounded thence on the north by a line east to the south-
western watershed of the Gilbert River, and by that watershed to a point
thirty miles in a direct line from the nearest part of the said shore; on the
east and south by a line parallel to the shore, and distant thirty miles
therefrom, to the 138th parallel of east longitude, which is also the
boundary of the Colony of Queensland, and by that parallel to the shore
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, thence by the shore to the point of commence-
ment.




BY AUTHORITY, _ Engraved A Printed at the Government Engraving & Lithographic Branch.
Brisbane_Q.ueensi.and .
