

* *
CRUCEM AD LUCE>i-
The Australian Church
M«»urt
MDOCCLXXXVII. :
is c r ra o u 9
PREACHED BY
Rev. Chas. Strong, d.d., & Rev. Francis Anderson, m.a.
ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE NEW BUILDING
FLINDERS STREET EAST. MELBOURNE,
SUNDAY-, 4th DECEMBER. 1887.
"’ATI' AMU < '’l'.i.HAl )’NK. vflA'-jv




f lfo3S^
p ER CRUCEM AD LEGEM*
The Australian Church
Tv e p o r t
MDCCCLXXXYII.:
PREACHED BY
Rev, Chas. Strong, d,d„ k Rev, Francis Anderson, m.a.
ON THE OCCASION OP THE OPENING OP THE NEW BUILDING
FLINDERS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
SUNDAY, 4th DECEMBER, 1887.
WATT AND CO., MELBOURNE,




Australian Church
THIS Church is founded on principles of religious liberty
and comprehensiveness. Believing that theology
is a progressive science, that genuine religion is confined
to no one form of belief, and that to fetter the minds and
bind the consciences of ministers or people by the tradi-
tions and commandments of men, is not only a ridi-
culous folly, but a sin, in this 19th Century—and
having seen the unnecessary divisions, heart burnings,
wasted energy, and grievous hurt to the Truth and
Charity, which have sprung from sectarianism—the
promoters of The Australian Church have sought to
found a Society which, while reverencing whatever is
venerable in the past, will ever be avowedly open to
any neiv light of God, and ivhich may unite men of
many shades of opinion in the unity of the religious
Spirit and of practical Christianity. The general basis
of Union, not intended to fetter, but simply indicating
the general aim of The Australian Church, is as fol-
lows: “The Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth;
The Breaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and the
Promotion and Practice of the Religious Life of Faith,
Hope, and. Love. The form of Church Government to be
Representative and Elective, due regard being bad fa
Liberty of Conscience and Congregational Freedom.”
All in sympathy with such aims interpreted in the
light of Modern Life and Duty, are welcomed as mem-
bers of the Church.
Lest amy should feel that poverty excludes from
membership, each one enrolling his name, is only ashed
to promise to contribute weekly, or otherwise, to the
funds of the Church, according to his means. All so
contributing will have seats allotted to them.




The Australian Church
MELBOURITE.
1887x88.
Minister:
Key. CHARLES STRONG, D.D., Lansdowne Road,
off Dandenong Road, East St. Kilda.
assistant Minister:
Rev. FRANCIS ANDERSON, M.A., 29 Dandenong Road, Windsor.
Committee of Management:
ANDREW AGNEW
GAVIN G. BROWN
A. D. BUTCHER
CHARLES CAMPBELL
JOHN FALCONER
ALFRED FELTON
J. R. Y. GOLDSTEIN
G. M. HENDERSON
L. HENDERSON
T. P. HUSBAND
MATTHEW LANG
A. C. MACDONALD
JOHN MACPHERSON
Wm. M'CRBA, m.d.
Hon. Wm. M'CULLOCH. M.L.C.
JAMES M'CULLOCH
ALEXANDER MORRISON, M.B.
JOHN MORRIS
JOHN SAWERS
Wm. LAMB SMITH
WILLIAM TEMPLETON
G. P. WILSON
A. G. YOUNG
WILLIAM YULE
toon. {Treasurer:
WM. YULE, 47 William Street, Melbourne.
toon. Secretaries
J. R. Y. GOLDSTEIN, Titles Office, Queen Street, Melbourne.
THOS. P. HUSBAND, 25 Queen Street, Melbourne.
©rganist anb Cboir Master;
P. C. PLAISTED, William Street, Box Hill.
Cburcb Officer;
RICHARD STAFFORD, 5 Oban Street, Hawksburn.


PREFACE,.
The Annual General Meeting of the congregation of The Australian
Church, was held in the Church on the evening of Wednesday, 14th
December, 1887, at eight o’clock, the Rev. Dr. Charles Strong presiding.
The proceedings having been opened by the singing of the 100th Psalm,
the following report and Pastoral letter were read, and’ copies of Balance-
sheet distributed. The Report and Balance-sheet having'been adopted, it
was resolved to print them along with the Pastoral letter, and the two
sermons preached at the opening of the new building.
The thanks of the congregation were heartily given to the Committee
of Management, and specially to the honorary Secretary and Treasurer-
Nominations for the Board of Management were made, and the election of
new members fixed for Sunday, the Sth January,


from ai JEanagimmtt.
Committee of Management of The Australian Church
h ave now the pleasure to submit their Second Annual
Report, with Financial Statement to 30th November,
jV 1887, which has been duly audited and certified as
correct.
Reference to these accounts will show that the revenue for the
past year has been thoroughly satisfactory, notwithstanding the
disadvantages under which the congregation has laboured while
waiting for the erection of our new building.
The sura of £2,374 16s. lOd. was received for the support
of ordinances, while the ordinary expenditure amounted to
<£2,259 Os. 4d., and arrears from last year to £227 13s. sd.
Against the debit balance of £144 2s. Bd. shown in the
accounts, there are some contributions to collect, which will
materially reduce the amount.
The hon. Treasurer has received £4O ss. on account of the
Organ Fund, the proceeds of the recent sale of gifts will amount
to about £360, and the proceeds of a concert, kindly tendered by
the choir of “ The Clarke Lodge ” of Freemasons, will further
augment the amount at credit of this special fund. Subscriptions
to the extent of £6OO additional have been promised; so that
there is upwards of £lOOO available for commencement of a grand
organ. The warmest thanks of the congregation are due to the
ladies and gentlemen who entered so heartily into the Sale of Gifts,
and to the choir of “The Clarke Lodge,” for their spontaneous
offer to assist in securing a suitable organ.
By the kindness and courtesy of His Worship the Mayor
(Councillor Cain), the use of the Town Hall was granted to the
Rev. Hr. Strong, on the occasions of special collections for “ The
Bulli Fund,” and “ Hospital Sunday.”


In January last the Committee felt constrained, by the incon-
venience and expense involved in occupying different halls on the
morning and evening of every Sunday, to give up the Temperance
Hall. From 16th January to 28th November, both morning
and evening services were held in the Athenaeum Hall. Since then
public worship has been conducted in the new church, where the
congregation has secured a beautiful home, with perfect acoustic
properties, and where ample room for expansion has been provided.
The Committee were able to state in hist report that the
contract for the new church had been accepted. Mr. Lavers, the
contractor, went to work with a will, and on the 19th March last
the foundation stone was laid by the Hon. Sir W. J. Clarke, with
Masonic honors. The contract time for completion expired on the
30th November, and by the kindness of Mr. Lavers, though the
building was not fully completed, we were enabled to hold the
opening services on 4th December.
The cost of land and building will be about £23,000. Towards
this amount the sum of £10,141 14s. 6d. has been received to date.
Lor the liquidation of balance the Committee have invited the
congregation and friends to unite in a four year’s subscription,
and the proposal has been well received, though as yet only a
small number of returns have come in.
Sitting accommodation is provided for between 1400 and 1500
persons, and at the earliest possible opportunity, sittings will be
allotted to those who have attached themselves to the Church and
made the necessary application.
During the past year the Social Least of the Lord’s Supper was
partaken of by about 160 adherents. Baptism has been admin-
istered in public and in private to a large number of children.
An Interim Hymn and Service Book has been prepared and
brought into use recently, and the service sheets which were
very costly, are now discontinued. The cost of printing 1500
copies of this book was £B9 10s. As yet only £55 16s. lid,
has been collected towards defraying this necessary expense.


The Musical Services of the Church are of a superior order, and
the Committee desire to assure the Ministers, Organist, and Choir,
that their efforts for the improvement of the Church-Service are
highly appreciated.
The Committee have great pleasure in referring to the fact
that the University of Glasgow recently conferred upon our
Minister the degree of Doctor of Divinity.
From accompanying abridged reports, the congregation will ob-
serve that the various philanthropic schemes of the Church,
have been carried on with the greatest vigour, and with increasing
success.
The Committee of Management retire at this time, and pro-
posals for the regulation of the election of a new committee will be
submitted to the congregation.
J. R. Y. GOLDSTEIN,
Wik December, 1887.
Hon. Secretary.
Mortal Improtnmmtt
The Committee of the Social Improvement Society report
that the work of the Society continues to be carried on with
considerable success. The ladies of the Dorcas Society have
met regularly during the winter months, and, through their
efforts, clothing has been provided for many of the deserving poor
in Collingwood, and also for children sent to homes in the country.
In addition to the regular work, the ladies also promoted a Sale
of Gifts, on behalf of the Organ Fund. The sale was held in
November, and in spite of unfavourable weather, was very
successful. After paying expenses, a sum of £361 2s, 3d. was
placed to the credit of the Organ Fund,
During the past year 26 boys and girls have been sent to
various homes throughout the colony, but this part of the work
requires to be more fully organised and extended. Sewing meet-
ings, a children’s choral class, and district social meetings have been


conducted regularly in Collingwood, and Mrs. Edwards has been
assisted in her work'by many ladies of the congregation. There is.
great need of a hall or central offices, in which the work of the
Society could be concentrated. The Society does not aim at
being a benefit or indiscriminate relief society, but seeks, by every
means in its power, to improve the condition of the people
of the district. It is hoped that during the coming year still
greater efforts will be made in this direction. At the close of the
financial year, there was a balance to the credit of the Society of
£l2l 6s. 7d., the receipts for the year being £267 7s. lid., and
the expenditure £156 Is. 4d.
In connection with the Social Improvement Society, the
Minister has started a monthly paper, entitled “ Our Good
Words,” containing notes and suggestions on social subjects, and
giving an account of methods of social improvement adopted or
proposed in different parts of the world. Should this publication
meet with support and approval, it may be enlarged next year,
and made to embrace a larger range of subjects.
%\)t C£ollhtgto00& Cteljt
The Creche, or Day Nursery, carried on under the auspices of
the Social Improvement Society, has increased largely in numbers
and popularity, during the past year, under the matronship
of Mrs. Edwards, who also acts as lady-visitor for the Society.
The attendance has more than doubled since the close of last year.
Average monthly attendance, Ist quarter, 135; 2nd quarter,
205; 3rd quarter, 286 ; 4th quarter, 403 ; total attendance for
year ending Ist December, 3078.
The receipts for the year have been £3OO 17s. 3d., and the ex-
penditure £253 13s. 4d. If the Society owned premises of its
own, the expenditure could be reduced by nearly one-third. At
present, operations are limited from want of room, and the Society
is prevented from engaging in other schemes for the benefit of the
children in Collingwood.


1C THOOOOOII
eo o^ooio
t'- 05C00501 ®<• S
Cl IOMOOffI S Og
Cl (M CO 02 C 'g
S
ICO oOOWW •; : '■** 3 P
00 '-I ■ •
°0 mo ot"icicci - os
I'*-) ’—! CZ2 >2j
• s» |§S2- : = • g g
. 1C <M O ■># CO I-H '■# • • • C£j
m 1 „■ « "
P I S ;; : : :: ; & f,
rn a p qo m w
O £ g 2 c 6 ~ g
/-yS i 0 :: ; :: : „ Q £ 0
’ S 5 I <1
S “ d !o
§ g if I■g :: i M : § 1
H»ft S g : is . 1 \ *
p] 5 W -gg a-g :*& g:| 5 j■§
Qs §3 || Ig. a n, s
, '3 r 2 r S.S:S r rs M §
~ & 5,6 -3 g -2 o -a 1 Z a
»7 h is i*| i| jsi; | l H
,Zj £-« *<a * *0 O g. 2 ini
f I s-<
J *S 5,2 5-2 ©«3 I
o n ® ® a -S o .2 r
g Jg gg,S.sS g>§ 1 R
He ,5? X£ £ £ &o o I
g SOP 2 Ph O co cz2(s
£
•I co CO HotH CO 1C f-| 0|
S K I I—l O O l>-<M 1C 1C
fli ? OJSJ micooiM'# ® ,• O [ -*
LJJ 0- CO tH CO 1C O r* t- S _l_
Fn 8 o; ci co rn o m «« e
—-Jr Cl <M S I J s
RS** I o I
Tf) $ I 000 ; • wio ; : ; : : • ; : S f>j H : • >
s, Ot-nc O |-| g - s -
PJj K 3 ico® r-oic on (mo •:•: : • • : t§ • t§
n 1C CO (M ; (Mi —i
J r>i K K
8 S ;: §Ial; '? ;8 s : : D S : • 0 S
ffi |ud nS | I> a
H I s•-| o| | §2 :-3 :.3
H « M »1 -gSI : 1 g I 1 g
H 111 |lk| 51® i I §
LIbJ h* s> f H a 3 'OC^
S I w Cc a 2 «
S m rt I CO a I-I jo l - 1
§ .2 ® : a" I w“
■» -2 -grt s- • !zi §^s
S "®„„_o-2 „<2 -P 2 , ® os
® - £-g £ u p
Co E 3 J- £ 2 .S O ! mO
o 22-2 Co- pq icpo
O ro g'g ro .2 +3 2£ : J a ! *43 12^ a
u 22 .& r*. ® a i .&> a
iJ c o
= = S 8 || -S
!-r &• &l ES "S e 3 C
O 0T302 OO hW ’ 50


Hotter to tlje Congregation.
Dear Friends, —
The Deport which is laid before you by the Board of
Management is gratifying to us all, and should give us good heart
for the future.
I beg to acknowledge warmly the co-operation of everyone who
has helped us in the past# year, whether by contributing to the
funds, by personal effort with the various branches
of the Church’s work, or fc by forbearance and friendly sympathy.
The secret of a true Church-lifeGs hearty co-operation on the part
of every member, each bound to do what he can , even
though ability be limited to speaking a kind word, or suppressing
an ill-natured one. And you will find, also, that the more your
co-operation is in work, not for purely personal, or even for con-
gregational ends, but for those larger ends which embrace the best
interests of our fellow-citizens and our fellow-men, the stronger,
and more living will* be our union. “Seek first the Kingdom of
God,” is the motto in which lies strength and unity for us.
I trust that whatever "may have been the defects of the pulpit
during the past year, you'have found some edification in the
sermons and services of the Church. Both Mr. Anderson and
myself have felt it pleasure, and a privilege to speak to an
attentive and interestedmongregation, many of whom come from
great distances and in all sorts of weather. Our sincere wish is that
we may be able to minister to your minds and hearts, and that
some veritable “ God ” may be given to us to utter in
these days of religious inquiry, doubt, and perplexity, and in this
busy city where the higher voices of religion are so often drowned
in the hurly burly offpleasure, fashion, and the struggle for gold.
We have tried to make the Service of Prayer and Song as true a
channel of devout and elevated feeling as possible, but are con-
scious that it still comes short of the ideal. By-and-bye it may
be possible to make improvements as experience shall suggest.


The prayers and hymns of a Church must not become stereotyped.
Variety, and adaptation to the special wants and feelings of
changing times and circumstances, are necessary to make them
living. The Choir and Organist have assisted us much, and we
look to them to aid us in the endeavour to make the musical part
of the Service all that it should be. We look also to you, to
make our worship hearty, reverent, and inspiring. Ido not think
you yet altogether realise the idea of social worship, and how
beautiful and impressive our Service might be, if those who have
ear and voice would join audibly in prayer and song, and if all
were to enter into the spirit of it. Nor do you yet, perhaps,
altogether realise the influence upon the preaching , of congrega-
tional heartiness and liveliness. A dull People makes a dull
Preacher.
We have tried to make our discourses on Sunday more varied,
by the introduction of lectures on the religious teachers and
writers of the present day, with apparent success. I would remind
you how much a minister may be encouraged in his often long
and anxious preparation of a discourse, by the presence of a good
audience, and how he may be discouraged by thoughtless irregu-
larity and absence, on the part of his people.
You have not been forgetful of good works, I am proud to say,
and the liberality and personal efforts of many in the congregation,
have been a great encouragement to your ministers. We need
still more interest, however, on the part of the congregation as a
whole, in the practical schemes of the Church. Our Social Im-
provement Society has done good work, but it is capable of large
development, as it is not confined simply to relieving poverty,
or to the merely traditional and conventional methods of “doing
good.” Whatever tends to the improvement of social conditions,
or towards the realisation of that reign of justice, enlightenment,
and unselfishness, which is “ the Kingdom of God,” should com-
mend itself to the hearts of a Christian Congregation.


The experiment of a monthly Pamphlet, treating briefly, and more
by way of suggestion than otherwise, of Social Improvement, seems
to have been successful. This also is capable of development, and
may by-and-bye assume larger proportions. Meanwhile, it may
help to quicken our thought and interest, and to remind rich and
poor that we are members one of another.
The Ladies’ Class for Religious Knowledge has been well
attended, about fifty names having been on the roll. The subject
studied during the session was “ Christianity in the Pirst Cen-
tury.” In addition to this, some time was given to chapters on
“ The Origin and Growth of Religion.” The ladies wrote essays,
and had written examinations. I have seldom had so diligent and
appreciative a class.
The Class on Sunday morning, for Boys and Girls, has been very
fairly attended. The introduction of the first of a short series
of printed lessons from the Gospels, has helped us much. I have
prepared a short examination paper for all the children of the
Church who have been following this printed series, either in the
class or at home; and I trust that the parents will do all in their
power to help me in this endeavour to give the boys and girls some
simple systematic religious teaching.
I have to thank those ladies and gentlemen who have so kindly
painted illustrations of religious subjects for the children’s class,
aud those who have promised to do so at a future time. In no
way can you better help the Church and the minister, than by
striving to develop the moral and spiritual nature of the young,
so woefully, often, neglected.
A useful adjunct to the Church has been the Literary Society,
which has a large membership, and has shown considerable life
during the past year. It does not receive, however, all the sup-
port which might be expected from such a large congregation as ours.
I am extremely sorry that I have not been able to show that
hospitality to, and interest in, the young men of the congregation,
which I had hoped to be able to show. Constant evening engage-
ments, often in connection with the Church, and sickness in my


family, must be the excuse. Next year I hope to have the
pleasure of seeing more of the younger members of the Church.
I hope, too, that it may be possible to have meetings of a
social kind, in the hall and church, which may help to weld the
congregation more firmly together.
In conclusion, let me congratulate you on the past, and urge
you to make the future of our Church even better than the past
has been. You will have to stand criticism, sometimes unfriendly,
and even perhaps carping, unjust, and bitter; but it is good for
us to be criticised —(we are not conceited enough to believe ourselves
to be perfect, or to think that we have all the truth) —and until
those who do criticise are prepared to show us a better way, or a
Church more living than our own, and to give us something more
than mere assertions and reiteration of words , you may possess
your souls in peace. You must expect to be sneered at, and to be
told that you are no Church of Christ. Happily, to our own
Master we stand or fall, and those who thus deal out hard words
should remember that it is written, “Judge not that ye be not
judged.” When those who deride us can show that they faithfully
hold the creeds which they idolise, and that these creeds can
stand the light of reason, the light of faith and love which shine
in Christ, and the light of practical life and experience, without
having recourse to insinuation, vituperation, and an appeal to
people’s fears, it will be time enough for us to reconsider our posi-
tion. There are many, and an increasing number, doubtless, in
the older Churches, who covet our “ liberty in Christ,” and many
who think very much as we do, though they “follow not with
us.” At the same time, let me exhort you to cultivate the
kindest feelings towards all who differ honestly from you, or who
unwittingly judge you wrongfully. Strive against Sectarianism,,
and seek to be a Church Catholic —broad and wide, not because
indifferent to, but because afraid to exclude any of God’s Truth
and Love, or to offend against “the least of these My brethren.”—
Believe me, Yours affectionately,
December, 1887. CHARLES STRONG.


INAUGURAL SERMONS
Treached on the occasion of the opening of the New Building
Flinders-street East , J+th December , 1887.
)t dljttrrlj's JFomtftattfln attfr tlje dlntrrb's
THE
REY. CHARLES STRONG, D.D
“The fire shall prove each man’s work, of what sort it is.” 1 Corinthians
iii. 13.
WE are sometimes disposed to think that the first Christians
must have formed a very happy family, as yet uninvaded
by the divisions and heart-burnings which have so often
■characterised the churches of later times. We thus imagine a
golden age and a garden of Eden watered by the dews of peace
and rivers of the Spirit.
Closer scrutiny of the facts, however, hardly justifies this con-
ception of primitive Christianity. The ideal state of which we
dream belongs to the future, rather than to the past. From the
first there were differences and contentions, as can be readily per-
ceived from the narratives and epistles of the New Testament
itself. Had they not inspired Apostles and Teachers you ask, to
guide them infallibly in the narrow way? Inspiration, we reply,
they certainly had amongst them, for what was Christianity at
first but a new Breath of God, breathing in human souls, and
waking Man to a new moral and spiritual springtime, with buds,
and germs, and vernal impulses prophesying of a warmer summer
than the world had yet known, of richer harvests than husband-
men had yet gathered, and of a fuller harvest-song than the reapers
of former ages had ever sung!
All light and wisdom, all movements of the heart and mind
towards a higher stage of human life, are inspired. They are the
work of the Spirit of God—the God who in man, and through


man, lives and works. To think otherwise is—let us speak
plainly —Atheism. And of that new and richer life in God and
Man, which breathed in Jesus and in those who caught the infec-
tion of His creative soul—
“ The rushing of the mighty wind,
The brooding of the gentle dove”—
most truly we must say, “ It was inspired of God.”
But though, like a spring morning, early Christianity was thus
inspired, we do not look to find in it final and infallible perfection,
and that unity of thought and feeling which can be reached only
through long struggle, and sweat of heart and brain and brow.
The spring-time of a religion is no time of rest and completeness,
any more than is the spring-time of the year. Rather is it a
period of fermentation, and of life which cannot rest. We are
not suprised, therefore, to find controversy and division in the
early Church. There were differing teachers and different types
of thought. There was conflict and ferment, for a new chemical
element of the Spirit had been dropped into the religious cisterns.
There was a “new and living” Idea at work in the minds and
hearts of men, groaning and travailing to be born, and to be
•clothed Avith some fitting form. Paul, James, Cephas, Apollos,
John—men whose minds had been moulded in HebreAv moulds,
and men whose minds had been moulded in Greek or Roman
moulds—were inspired in different degrees with this divine Idea,
which, through them, sought expression. And the multitude, less
inspired, often totally lacking inspiration, attached themselves
now to one, and now to another teacher, as the embodiment and
exponent of the whole truth. So arose parties and party-spirit,
and the party-cries, I am of Paul the Apostle of universalism ; I
am of Cephas the Apostle of nationalism ; I am of Apollos the
■eloquent Greek ; I am of the true Messiah, or Christ party.
Now the Apostle Paul was evidently a strong controversialist,
and held very firmly to his view of Christianity, but he Avas more
than a mere party-man, and sought something far nobler than the
triumph of himself. He had faith in the new movement of which
he Avas a herald, as being the Avork of a Divine Spirit breathing
in Man. He believed that this neAv movement Avas grounded in a
principle, that there might be varieties of structure raised upon
that principle, and also that sooner or later the DiAdne Order
would make itself manifest in judgment, like a searching fire burn-
ing up the structures of perishable material—wood, hay,
and stubble—and leaving only the indestructible gold, silver, and
precious stones. The important thing, therefore, was not what he
or Cephas said, or to Avhat party people belonged, but Avhether
they Avere building an enduring house on a sound foundation,


whether they were working with God, and God with them, and SO'
had the Divine Order of the Universe on their side, or whether
they were building a house of straw, which the day of trial would
consume. As a master-builder, he says, he laid the foundation of
a JSTew Society. That foundation was Jesus Messiah —End of the
old legal regime —Lord of a new spiritual righteousness springing
out of faith and love—Messiah, not after the nationalistic flesh,
but after the universal Spirit—Spirit of liberty, Spirit of recon-
ciliation with God as Father, and of reconciliation with Man as
Brother. “ Other foundation could no man lay/’ Others came
after him, and sought to build superstructures on this “Jesus-
Messiah ” foundation. Let them be careful how they built. He
would not iudge them. He had done his work ; let them do
theirs. But there was a day of judgment coming, and then truth
would be sifted as wheat, and chaff would be consumed in fire.
“The fire itself shall prove each man’s work, of what sort it is.”
It may not be possible for us to conceive of a day of judgment
exactly as the Apostle conceived of it. Paul's inspiration did not
prevent the form of his faith from being coloured by the general
conceptions of his country and times. One may be full of the in-
spiration of a great spiritual movement, and yet be unable to
picture with scientific accuracy the ultimate forms which that
movement is to take. It may not be possible for us to believe in
judgment as conceived of by many in the Christian Church, with
its eternal torments and avenging tyrant. Our moral sense
trained in the school of Jesus, our larger knowledge, forbid us so
to think of the Eternal Righteousness and Love. But all the
same, faith in judgment and a day of judgment—yes, in many
days of judgment, in daily judgment —lies in the essence of the re-
ligious Idea, just as the faith in the next eclipse of the sun lies in
the essence of the scientific Idea of the solar system, and the order
of the physical universe. Believe, as the religious mind must,
that there is a moral order for Man, as there is a physical order
for suns and stars, and the faith in judgment follows as does
faith in the seasons, or in the development of the seed. And
when this faith takes possession of the reason and the heart, it
raises men still, as it raised Paul, above the party spirit. They
then seek to work with God, to link themselves to the Divine
Order, and to desire Truth rather than victory, saying with Jesus,
“ Every plant which my Heavenly Father hath not planted shall
be rooted up; he that doeth these sayings, I will liken him unto a
wise man who built his house upon a rock;” or with Paul, “ The
fire shall prove each man’s work, of what sort it is.” Of what
matter is it that my opinion or yours, my work or yours, should
prevail, save as they are a part of the great World-Order? Of
what importance is it to us that the world goes right, or that the-


world goes wrong, save as we have faith in God as working in us,
and faith in ourselves as “fellow-labourers together with God,” a
God of Reason and of Love, who “fulfils Himself in many ways,”
and shapes the world’s destinies “ rough hew them how we may.”
Only when we can thus with Paul cast anchor in God’s judgment,
as judgment of eternal truth, judgment founded on the growth
and prevalence of principle, can we be or do anything —resting in
God, and waiting patiently, not for the confusion and torment of
error, but for the establishment and recognition of whatever is
True and Beautiful and Good. For our hope is this, not merely
that the fire shall prove one right and another wrong, or burn ten
in hell while one harps in glory, but that it shall burn up the
tares of wrong and error, and so make possible a better harvest of
God’s truth and love, or that it shall show truth more clearly to
be truth, and gold to be gold, and silver and precious stones to be
what they are. It is a poor thing for a man to plant hismelf
doggedly on his opinion, merely because his. It is a grand thing
for him to catch sight of God’s inner law, and, embracing it, to
feel, “This leads to light, truth, victory, and peace, and so, because
God’s , I cleave to it.”
Apply these principles to the Church and to the Church’s work
in the present.
I In the first place, the Church has a foundation. What is
that foundation 1 ? Some say it is a book, some a succession of
.clergy, some a form of belief. The answer does not satisfy; such
foundations will not bear the weight of the superstructures. It
seems impossible to us, on these, to rear a building of God, a Divine-
Human Society. Even those who answer thus, may be found on
.closer inspection, to be building on a deeper basis than they know,
on a rock deeper in the ocean than their logiccd eye has seen.
Every devout Roman Catholic, and every devout Protestant, of
what shade soever of doctrine he may be, has an inner chamber
and a holy of holies in his soul, outside of which lie book, and
clergy, and forms of belief, and in that sanctuary they meet
before God, although they cannot always see each other through
the mist.
It is always difficult to put the roots, or rdtimate grounds of
thought and feeling, in words. We may truly say that the
highest or deepest truth, like the fact of ourselves , cannot, from
the very nature of the case, be proved. We can easily dissect a dead
body and analyse its component elements; but when we try to
write the story of a human life which looked through the eyes,
expressed itself in word and gesture, and in all the work
and change of years from babyhood to the grave, we find it a
different matter. To analyse the chords of music may be easy ;
.but to tap the fountain of inspiration and reveal the hidden


source of beauty, and clothe all in words, is another task. W ere
we asked, however, to put in few words the foundation of a Chris-
tian Church or Society, we would say something like this:—(i) Other
foundation can no man lay than faith in, reverence and devotion
towards, the Power, the Reason, the Will, in all, through all, and
above all, whose presence, perhaps, our logical forms ai~e useless
to prove or disprove, as they are useless to prove or disprove our
own invisible and sef-conscious selves. No society worthy of the
name can be held together without this “ God-consciousness.”
Without it, is disintegration as of crumbling rocks, weakness as
of water spilt upon the ground. Further we should say:—(ii) Other
foundation can no man lay than faith in Jesus. I do not mean
beliefs about Jesus, but the grasp of the reason, the will, and the
affections, with which the manifestation of the Divine and the
Human in J esus, is laid hold of as the bread of Man’s life. Ido not
mean weak and sentimental talk about Jesus —I mean trust and
fidelity of soul towards Him—the clear-sighted perception by
mind and heart, of the principle, the truth, the beauty of God’s
nature and of Man’s, which dawned upon the world in J esus—
not merely the historical person (of whom our knowledge is
how fragmentary!)—but Jesus the Spirit of anew life lived in
God and in Man, the Word of the Eternal uttered in Humanity,
the Spirit of liberty, sonship, and friendship with God as our
Father, and of brotherhood, charity, goodwill towards Man.
The Church which acknowledges as its Christ or Messiah, nay
as the Christ or Messiah of Humanity, this Jesus after the
Spirit, who sought nob His own personal glory, but the glory of
the Eternal, seems to us to be building on a sure foundation.
And, lastly, we should say:—(iii) Other foundation can no man
lay, than that of the prayer springing out of such faith, and shap-
ing itself not in words merely, but in life and effort, too: —“Our
Father, Father of our human reason, our human hearts, our better
selves, Thy Kingdom come.” The Church or Christian Society
has a foundation, and that foundation, if we are right, is faith,
meaning by the word both trust and fidelity of the soul towards
God, and towards the spiritual Christ of Humanity—faith whose
natural fruit is a life individual and social; a life in God, and a
life in Man; a life whose moving spring is not personal honour or
reward, but the love of the true, the beautiful, and the good. On
this Foundation all spiritually-minded persons, no matter what
their creed, do, in reality, build, and on this foundation they are
one spirit, though they may be many bodies, and be called by
many names.
11. In the second place, the Church has a judgment wherewith
it is judged. On what principle is it judged? Some say there
shall come a great moment at the end of the ages, when in literal


truth, an assize shall be held, like that which our judges hold;
some, that at death the naked soul goes into an awful Presence
and there hears its doom, “To heaven,” or, “To hell.” Such
speculations and representations do not satisfy, and often savour
of mythology and superstition rather than of sober thought.
Were we asked on what principle the Church is judged, and the
wheat distinguished from the chaff', we should say something like
this: —The Church’s work—worship, doctrine, practice —has been,
is, and. shall be judged according as it has been in harmony
with the foundation of which we have just been speaking. On
this foundation superstructures have been, and still are being
raised—superstructures which are not of God, and not of Christ,
the Spirit.of newborn Man. Teacher-worship, mythology, senti-
mentalism, unchristian fear and bondage, unreason and cold logic,
a rationalistic theology calling itself “orthodox,” and a thoroughly
worldly, though “respectable,” spirit baptising itself into the name
of self-sacrificing and humble Love, build upon this foundation.
But they cannot stand, for they are not in harmony with the
World-Order; the spiritual laws of the universe are working
against them; and the day of judgment comes revealed in the fire
which proves each man’s work of what sort it is. And what is
this fire? It is the fire of advancing knowledge and experience—
the fire of a quickened reason, the tire of a quickened
spiritual faith and love, the fire of insulted laws, which breaks
forth in reaction, or in wild revolution and revolt, (i) New know-
ledge dawns. The child goes out into the world and meets experi-
ence face to face. Now is the judgment day for parentsand teachers.
Will their training stand the test, or must their work be undone,
and the man unlearn all he has learned from them as a child? Will
ripe, rich fruit grow from the seeds of principle which they planted,
or only apples of Sodom? New knowledge dawns; new experience
meets the Church. Now is the judgment day. Will the Church’s
teaching save Society; will it guide men, will it elevate them;
will it lead the way through the waves of change to the harbour
of God; will it keep a blue rift in the clouds, and point like a
compass to the better day? Or must its teaching be pronounced to
be dead bones, its bread stones, its leaders “ blind leaders of the
blind,” its theology a superstructure of mythological, superstitious
wood, hay, and stubble? Can the Church adapt itself to all
change and spring up ever afresh, like the Phoenix from its ashes,
or must it roll like a sailless ship on a tumbling sea? (ii) Moments
come when the rational life is quickened. The light-hearted sailor
turns now with darkened brow to charts and compasses, and
heaves the lead continually. From shells and pebbles, limpid
pools and sea-anemones, and castles on the sand, the sporting child
'ifts now his eyes, to gaze over the waves at the setting sun and.


the evening star, and listens to “the mighty waters rolling ever-
more”—no more a child. The awakened mind can sleep no more,
but, borne on by an irresistible impulse, searches heaven and earth
for Truth, as its only resting place and home. Then is a judgment
day. The Church’s work and life are then tested and tried
in the fire of searching thought, and it maybe, of insulted reason,
(iii) The fire of spiritual faith and love is lighted in the heart
of the reformer, and the burdens of teacher-worship, superstitious
fear, soulless logic are cast off. When Christ all aglow with a
fresh inspiration of religion, attacked the teaching of His day,
and kindled an “unquenchable fire,” which burned up traditional
chaff, respectable hypocrisy, and empty ceremony, was it not
faith and love which animated Him? When he spoke indig-
nantly of the ritualism which said “ Oorban,” and suffered
men to neglect their family duties, when he withstood the
prejudice and slavery connected with the observance of the Sab-
bath, when he broke through the laws about washing of hands,
or deliberately preferred the society of publicans and sinners to
that of the religious, and shook to its foundations the
venerable religion of Israel, was not the moving spring of all that
He said and did, a pure and glowing fire of faith and love towards
the Heavenly Father, and towards Man as called to be a free-born
Son of the Highest? Was it not the son’s heart rebelling against
the hollow legalism which was obscuring the light of
God’s righteousness? And so in every true man’s heart there is a
spark of this same faith and love which, fanned into a flame by
the winds of God, searches and tries the superstructures of religious
teaching. Have dogmas been propounded which contradict the
Fatherhood of God, making Him less just and loving than His
children? Has religion been turned into a burdensome and unreal
system of doctrine or of ritual? Have judgment, mercy, and the
love of God been assigned, at best, but a secondary place? Have
the heavens been darkened by the commandments and traditions
of men? The filial heart must rise in rebellion, even when such
superstructures are raised in the sacred name of Christ; time-
honoured systems even, must then melt with fervent heat, and the
old religious heavens must pass away as a scroll. Then is God’s
judgment day. The wood and hay and stubble are consumed in
the fire of Christ-like faith and love. Experience, knowledge,
quickened reason, faith and love, revolt against the irrational,
unreal, and unspiritual. Such are the fires which try every man’s
work of what sort it is, and only that work—worship, doctrine,
practice—which is in harmony with the rational and spiritual
foundation, shall stand the test. The Church has a foundation
and the Church has a judgment. Such, as we at least conceive
of them, are the foundation and the judgment. Let us now bring
these thoughts still nearer home.


Most heartily, would I congratulate you, the members
of this congregation, on the erection of this graceful and comfort-
able home. May it he to you a veritable “house of God,” —the
centre of a spiritual family’s life—a school of wisdom and virtue—
a fountain of social sympathy between man and man, class and
class—a fountain of devotion to the common weal! Fight for your
church, work for it, pray for it. But let your weapons be those
of the Spirit, your tools those of Reason and Love, and your
prayer, “Our Father, Thy kingdom come; Thy will, not ours, be
done on earth.” We have got a workshop, let us set to work and
build up a spiritual house in ourselves, our families, wherever we
can find stones with which to build, cementing the walls, not with
crumbling and decaying mortar, but with the overliving bonds of
the Spirit; and let us leave the rest in God’s hands. Do not
suppose the work is ended. It is only beginning. We have had,
in some respects, an uphill battle to fight. How that we have got
a foothold, we must tight all the more effectively. In convers-
ing lately with a clerical friend, I was complaining of the dis-
couraging difficulty to get people to forget themselves and work
for the real principle and aim of Christian Religion and Society.
“ If you wish to do good work,” said he, “you will find that you
must tighten the traces.” Well, I know that if a minister is to
do good work, he must do as my friend recommended. I know
that he must not preach smooth things, and that he must give
offence to some. In the words of the old Hebrew king, he must
sometimes say, “My father chastised you with whips, but I
will chastise you with scorpions.” Prejudice, indolence, super-
stition, petty selfishness, ignorance, respectability, envy, mammon-
worship, cant, and the prevailing spirit of modern social life, will
all be against him. Never was a truer word spoken to religious
teachers than this, “Woe unto you when all men speak well of
you.” But it is not a minister alone who should have to “tighten
the traces.” He is but the captain of a band, and the band
must tight. We want a Church militant, and not a sleeping-
carriage for the night.
I don’t know what the future of our Church is to be, whether
we are to “have our day and cease to be,” or whether as we sin-
cerely hope, we are the first fruits of a larger Catholic Australian
Church; but of this be sure, there is a judgment, and if you found
on the rock of a spiritual and rational faith in God, and in the
Christ as the Spirit of a life in God, and in Man, you may reasonably
hope to weather the storms of change. If, in the strength of this
faith, you band yourselves resolutely together as an army, and,
laying aside petty personal and sectarian glory, seek, by every
means at your command, to advance the cause of God’s Kingdom
and Righteousness—if, in the strength of this faith, you demand


of your teachers to speak the truth as far as they know it, with-
out fear, though that truth should offend and rouse the prejudices
of many, and even alienate for a season the respectable, the falsely
conservative or the rich, then you may hope to do work for your-
selves, your children, your city, and your country, which, what-
ever changes supervene, will be found “after many days.”
May God help you and your ministers to build on a true founda-
tion, and to build not with wood, or hay, or stubble, but with the
silver, gold, and precious stones of the Spirit, which alone can
endure the searching fire of modern knowledge and experience,
of quickened rational life, of spiritual faith and love. We live in
strange times, and perhaps we shall see stranger, for the air is
full of change, ecclesiastical, social and political. “Who among
us,” we ask with the Hebrew prophet, “shall dwell with the ever-
lasting burnings'?” He that doeth the will of God, Ave must
reply, and followeth Truth in Love.
11.
t an& tljf spirit
THE
REV. ERANCIS ANDERSON, M.A.
“ The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.” 2 Corinthians iii. 6.
IT is impossible to determine all that Paul had in his mind in
using these words. Doubtless, at the very core of his meaning
there is the idea that the law is death, that its rules hold us
like iron and cut usl ike cords. It comes to us with a demand that
can never be fulfilled, the demand of an inexorable and infinite
righteousness, that pierces like a sword betAveen joint and marrow.
Opposite to this letter, Paul places the spirit, the SAveet spirit of
the Son of Man, in which duty is swalloAved up in love. Love is
the fulfilling of the laAv.
Christian thought, hoAveA T er, has Avidened and generalised this
Pauline opposition of the letter and the spirit, just as it has
given‘a new rendering to the old theological antithesis of the
spirit and the flesh. The letter is the accidental, the outward, the
temporal, the material; the spirit is the essential, the inward, the
universal, the eternal, the truth which passeth not aAvay. We
can trace this opposition throughout the Avhole sphere of life and
thought. We can discern it in politics, in literature, in social
life, in religion. It is the problem Avhieh is being continually
presented to mankind in ever varying forms, the riddle of the
Sphinx, ever old, ever neAv, which each generation has to answer


for itself. This evening I ask you to consider with me one special
form of this opposition, the one in which we as a congregation are
specially interested. Although we have adopted no formal creed,
we are bound to give some account of our position, and by
choosing as our motto, the “ worship of God in spirit and in
truth,” we virtually take our stand on the side of the spirit
against the letter; we desire, that is to say, the basis of our
union to be a spiritual one, we seek a worship in spirit and in
truth. This position has been forced upon us by the circum-
stances of our time, in which the opposition between tradition
and progress, the letter and the spirit, has become more acute
than ever before. There are those who cling to all that has been
presented to them, all that goes under the name of religion, who
answer every question and resist every attack by adhering to the
Church’s word, the written word, the letter, and who reject as
impious any effort to test or rationalise religions, beliefs, customs,
institutions. The result is that religion is made to carry a large
amount of camp baggage, the lumber of tradition, convention and
superstition. On the other hand there are those, Avho unable to
discriminate between the essential and the accidental, reject both—
the kernel as well as the husk. Blinded by the letter, they reject
the life-giving spirit.
(a.) Let us in the first place try to distinguish between the
letter and the spirit of the Old Testament. The world can never
forget its indebtedness to the Hebrews, as it never can get rid of
its obligations to the Greeks. But that is no reason why we
should be enslaved by their creeds or customs. The key-note of
the Old Testament is Righteousness. This was the spirit of the
law, and Jesus’ teaching is full of it. But in the Old Testament
there is much besides this spirit. The books of the Old Testament
are the records of a nation’s history, its weakness as well as its
greatness, its follies and cruelties as well as its wisdom and its
piety. Jesus’ teaching struck against the formalism and unreality
that marked its decadence. Half of His teaching is negative.
But He also said that He was come to fulfil not to destroy the law, to
fulfil it in establishing it on principle, in finding the command-
ment on which hung all the law and the prophets. That is to say,
Jesus’ attitude towards the law was a rational attitude, the
attitude of rational and spiritual insight. His ‘Christianity’ in
this sense is a further devlopment of the religion of the Old
Testament in so far as he brought to light the principles on which
it was based, the principles of love, of righteousness, and obed-
ience, and carried those principles from the temple, the synagogue
and the school, into the family and into the market place, into the
common life of men wherever he found it. Jesus, said Paul,
brought life and immortality to light. He did not create them—


He brought them to light. He neglected the husk of doctrine,
of tradition, and presented the kernel to the waiting world.
That was the attitude of Jesus to the Old Testament but with
the growth of Christianity has been substituted for that ra-
tional attitude an irrational one. The Old Testament has
been taken in its entirety as a standard of truth. The spirit has
once more been cloaked and hidden in the letter. The songs and
imaginings of its wise men have been elevated into infallible
utterances of truth. The primitive conceptions of the universe,
of heaven and earth, and sea and sky, and sun and stars, have
been made the tests of how far we should trust the discoveries of
modern science. Geology must not contradict Genesis, and if it
seem to do so, we must get rid of the contradiction by stretching
nut days into ages and interpreting literal statements in some
metaphorical or poetic manner. “Of man’s first disobedience and
the fall,” sang Milton, and the simple myth by which a simple
people tried to account for the great mystery of sin becomes part
of a theology which weighs like a millstone heavy on men’s hearts.
Attack conceptions like these, admit the investigations of science,
and history, and physiology, and you will be told that you are
attacking Christianity and destroying its bulwarks. Why?
Because "people indentify this Old Testament theology, mythology,
and literature, with Christianity as Christ taught it, or place them
in so close a relation that an attack on the one is thought to be
an attack on the other. Puritanism, or at any rate much of
Puritanism, is a return to the letter of the Old Testament. It
has built up again what has been destroyed. It has gained no
doubt in strength, for it has clung to that righteousness which
was the glory and the strength of Israel. But with the strength
it has put on also weakness. It has clad itself in the garments of
an eastern race, whose thoughts and ways and civilisation were
not as ours. The old intolerant spirit which made Jews hew their
enemies in pieces before the Lord, the old superstitious spirit of
slavish observance of times and seasons—these and many others
which were but accidents in the growth of a people towards light
and freedom, have been made permanent, and transferred from
east to west, from Judaism to Christianity. But true spiritual
religion is not to be indentified with Old Testaments religion
or history. “Ye search the scriptures ” said Jesus, “but ye will
not come to me.”
( h ). In the second place we must distinguish between the letter
and the spirit of the Hew Testament. As the Old Testametn
recounts the progress of the Jewish race in its strivings after
righteousness, righteousness in the individual, in the family, in
the nation, so the New Testament records not merely the life and
teaching of Jesus, but the progress of the infant Church, in its


efforts to realise that life and teaching. Jesus is the Son who is
one with the Father, one in soul and spirit and will, He is the
Divine in human flesh, hone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, not
an abstract goodness, but a living loving Son whose spirit is to
live after Him although He Himself ascends to the Father. But
Paul and James and the other writers of the New Testament
follow after Jesus. They are the leaders, the thinkers who
interpret to their fellows the teaching and life of the Master.
The Lord who is the Spirit lives in them and inspires them, but
each of them has his own standpoint, his own way of interpreting
that life, his own limitations of mind and training which colour
the interpretation. We have the mystical, loving, spiritualising
John, the practical James, the bold,argumentative,aggressive Paul.
What we have to do is to interpret their interpretations—interpret
them through the spirit and the words of Jesus. But what
theologians have done is to interpret the Christianity of Christ
through the theology of Paul or James or John. The disciple is
not greater than his Master, but by theology Paul is really
made greater than Jesus. More than half of the theological
dogmas of mediaeval and modern growth are based, not on the
sayings of Jesus, but on the arguments and illustrations of Paul.
Take such words as grace, faith, election, righteousness, and
resurrection, as used by Paul, and take them as used by theology,
and you will find that whereas they are used by Paul spiritually,
in constant reference to the living Spirit, the Christ that is alive,
by theology they are taken detached, made absolute, become
dogmas, not living truths, dead bones without the enlivening
Spirit. Paul is a Jew speaking to Jews. He has to preach the
new life of the Spirit to those to whom the Cross is a stumbling-
block. He therefore uses illustrations and arguments drawn from
his Jewish training. When he addresses the Greeks at Athens,
his arguments are different. His arguments and illustrations,
i.e., are used with direct reference to his audience and to his sub-
ject. Jewish laws and customs, the law which is death, the flesh,
and many illustrations of a like kind, are all brought in by Paul
to make clear and plain the truth he has to teach—that only
through Christ the Lord, only by putting on the garments of
peace, joy, faith, love, can man be man and rise from the dead to
the life of loving Sonship. But we have taken these arguments
and illustrations which are the letter, and set them above the
Spirit, which to Paul himself was the essential thing. Let us
take an example:—Jesus says not a word about original sin,
nothing that can be tortured into a reference to it. Paul has only
two passages which refer to it; and in these two passages it is
not stated as a dogma, but as an illustration—a parallel or con-
trast is drawn between Adam and Christ, just as elsewhere a


-contrast is drawn between the flesh and the Spirit, the two wills
warring together in the soul of man. Now, just consider how
large a place this doctrine of original sin occupies in modern
Christianity, how on it depends other doctrines, regarding Hell,
vicarious atonement, and the like—all of which are based, like it,
not on the teaching and life of Christ, but on the illustrations
and the arguments of Paul. The intellectual framework, the
theology, if you like to call it so, into which Paul tries, for his
own sake and the sake of his hearers, to set the truth of Christ,
is identified by many of us with that truth of Christ itself. The
letter of the New Testament must not hide from us the Spirit.
(c.) In the third place, we must distinguish between the letter
and the spirit of all theologies. The theology of the early lathers,
of the Roman Church, the theologies of Luther, and Ualvin, and
Arminius, and Theodore Parker, the theology of any sect or of all
sects. Why so? you may ask. Simply because these theologies
are but the intellectual frameworks or settings of the Christian
truth. Each thinker, each generation of thinkers, each Church,
is forced, as Paul was forced, to build up an intellectual frame-
work. Sometimes it is called a philosophy, sometimes a theology.
The writer of the Book of Proverbs had such a framework or
rational theory of the universe, when he spoke of wisdom as the
servant of God, with Him in the beginning as a Master builder,
by whom God’s plans in earth and among men were carried out.
The writer of the Gospel according to J->hn had such a framework,
when he conceived of Christ, in the spirit of early Christian
philosophy, as the Logos, the visible manifestation of the Divine.
The early Fathers had intellectual theories or theologies framed ac-
cording to the knowledge, the science, the philosophy they possessed.
And from their time until now men have been compelled to advance,
forming new theologies as their thoughts were widened by the
process of the suns. The danger is lest the theology of the day
or generation become identified with the truth of Jesus, the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever ; lest the intellectual conceptions,
which are ever changing and widening, take the place of the life,
the truth itself. The Athanasian creed, e.g., is a series of dog-
matic statements representing the limited standpoint of an age at
least four centuries after Christ. Why should we be bound by
the Athanasian creed? The theology of Calvin represents a theory
of God, and man, and nature, based partly on Old Testament
theology, partly on Pauline theology, and partly on a mediaeval
philosophy now supplanted. Why should we be bound by the
theology of Calvin? AVesley and Newman were both great and
good men. Each of them did a great and good work in his time.
But each of them was limited, hampered by intellectual one-
sidedness. AA 7 hy should we be bound by either one or the other?


True, all these men, all these theologies have had their place in.
the past. They lived and lasted because of the truth that was in
them, because they called attention to a side or part of the
truth hitherto neglected. But what I say is, that we take
their theories, their theologies, their systems, not as relative
attempts to roach truth, but as absolute. We identify them in
their entirety with the Christianity of Christ; and, as in days of
old, men said, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, I am of Paul—
now they say, I am of Calvin, of Wesley, of Newman; and
Christianity becomes a thing of shreds and patches, a mystery
w hich troubles the hearts and minds of Christians, a scorn and a
by-word to outsiders. What is Christianity to-day but a mass of
conflicting theologies, each with its own merits, each too with its
own falsehoods ?
“ Our little systems have their day,
They have their day and cease to be.
They are but broken lights of Thee,
And Thou, 0 Lord, art more than they.”
What then ? you may say. Are we to reject then the Old
Testament 1 Are we to reject the Pauline theologies, and all
theologies 1 Of a truth, no ! God forbid ! But we are not to
become slaves of the letter, and miss the spirit We are not to
search the Scriptures and lose the life. We are not to follow the
theologies of Christianity, and fail to find the Christianity which
is of Christ. The root-idea of the Old Testament was righteous-
ness, and in the Spirit and teaching of the Son of man—righteous-
ness is gathered up, lived, fulfilled. Let us read the Old Testament
then as the record of a people, in truth an elect race, in their
strivings after righteousness, with all their fallings and failings,
and blindness and sin. What are the Jews to us, but an example
of righteousness—witnesses and torch-bearers of the spiritual life,
as the Greeks were of the intellectual life. The songs of the sweet
Psalmist of Israel, the high imaginings of the noble Israel, will
endure as long as there is a life of the spirit to which they apply,
and by which they may be interpreted. The strength of the New
Testament is that it presents us with the varied, many-sided
aspects of that life and faith which are the essence of religion,
as they appeared to the men of that early time. The form, the
arguments, the illustrations, we may outgrow, nay, we have out-
grown; but the sweet reasonableness, the inspiring faith, the ever
living truth, never ! The theology of Paul differs from that of
James, as the theology of James does from that of John. Yet the
world may grow old, and change theology after theology, without
ceasing to turn for instruction and healing and life to those early
settings of a life beyond decay, and a love without end. For it is
the spirit of Christ which gives strength to the moral fervour of
James, which lends wings to the spiritual aspirings of Paul, and


tenderness to the sweet vox Jutmana of John. The strength of
Christian theologies, lastly, lies not in their being complete com-
pendiums of truth, absolute and infallible transcripts of the mind
of God. They are but fragments of the truth. The light that is
in them streams from the light; but they are but broken lights of
Thee, and Thou, O Lord, art more than they. _
Granting, however, that the spirit of religion can not be con-
fined with the limits of any Church, still is it not necessary, some
one may say, to have; a creed, a statement of the doctrines in
which we believe, in order to give us some unity as a religious
body having a visible existence 1 But apart from the difficulty of
framing a creed which would satisfy all or even the majority of
us, would it be possible for any doctrinal statement to remain for
any time unaltered if it were to be in touch, in line with our ad-
vancing life and thought 'I Even in the darkest period of the
middle ages, when life seemed stereotyped, and thought remained
apparently unchanged for centuries, the earlier creeds soon grew
out of harmony with men’s real beliefs. Their knowledge
gradually widened and deepened, their thoughts advanced, but
the creeds remained hard and fixed, relics of an earlier time,
which the world had out-grown. And how much more certain
would such a result be in our time, with its swifter movements,
and its deeper and more widespread changes in life and thought %
There is the inrush of new ideas and the fuller application of old
ones. Our ancestors, as they looked at the sky, deemed it a solid
dome, star-spangled by the Deity to light the ways of men on
earth. But science rose, and saw in that dim vast of heaven a
universe of rolling sun and star, in which our little earth w r as
but a grain of sand. Our ancestors likewise imagined that they
had their little world of knowledge and reality close at hand,
whose limits they could fix, and w-hose fulness they could
measure out into thirty-nine or some other number of articles.
But now, swifter than ever in the past, thought is widening its
horizon, and star after star in the ever-expanding firmament of
knowledge is swimming into our ken. Construct your creed to-
day, and to-morrow it is left behind in the onward march of the
Spirit. Valuable, creeds no doubt are, as all attempts at intel-
tellectual transcripts of the truth are valuable ; but a Church
with an antiquated creed is as little fit to cope with com-
plexities of modern thought and life, as the mail-clad w-arrior of
the past would be to withstand the w-eapons of modern warfare.
The test of the Church is not in its creed, but in its spirit and the
fruits of the spirit; and w T here the Spirit of the Lord is there is
liberty—the liberty of the man to seek truth and pursue it ; the
liberty of the Son to come ever nearer to the Father; the liberty
of the Church of God, in which dwelleth the Spirit of the Son of
Man.


To-day, my brethren, we are met in what we trust may long be
the home of this congregation. You have not, as a Church, a
long line of anointed priests to look back upon. You are not
bound by any “ body ” of tradition in your efforts in the pursuit
of truth. You have no Ecclesiastical masters to fetter your free-
dom, or to limit your aspirations. But you have a heritage more
sublime ; you have a fellowship more glorious ; you are heirs of a
past which is not dead, of a truth which shall never die. You
are, if yon live and work together in the Spirit of the Son of Man—
the Spirit of Him who is Light and Love and Truth—the fellow-
heirs of all humble, loyal souls who have spoken the truth in love,
and followed it with patience. May the same light which guided
their path be a lamp unto your feet! May the same Spirit which
lived in them dwell richly in you! So may your eyes ever turn
hopefully to the future, while you look for that city which hath
foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. Amen.
IVait Co. , Printers, 14Q Little Collins-street West, Melbourne


ZAff
616L10
ms
1508
01784665


