

THE
CASE OF MR. W. H. BARBER,
CONTAINING
COPIES OF THE DOCUMENTS
SUBMITTED TO THE GOVERNMENT, RESULTING IN
HER MAJESTY’S ROYAL PARDON.
Eighth Edition,
WITH A
DECLARATION BY THE JURY, RETRACTING VERDICT,
OBSERVATIONS ON THE REFUSAL OF HIS ATTORNEY’S CERTIFICATE,
A NARRATIVE OF HIS CONDITION AND
TREATMENT IN NORFOLK ISLAND,
AND
Petition to the House of Commons for Inquiry & Redress.




THE CASE
OF
MR. W. H. BARBER.


“ In the month of August last, a friend at the Bar put into my hands the printed
statement of Mr. Barber’s case. I took it up with reluctance, not only because I was
much occupied at the time, but because my general recollection of the trial in 1844 had
left on my mind an impression unfavourable to Mr. Barber, and that impression had been
strengthened by the confidence which I placed in the Council of the Incorporated Law
Society. Nor had I any personal interest in the matter, as I had never seen him in my
life, nor in any way crossed his path in business, though I knew his firm was considered
to be respectable. I avowed my doubts of his innocence, but, nevertheless, I was induced,
as an act of justice to a member of my former profession, to read his papers. On perusing
the first ten or twelve pages, I detected, as I considered, some inconsistencies which
tended to confirm my prejudices, and I marked them, with the intention of vindicating'
the adverse opinion which I feared I should be compelled to express. As I proceeded,
however, I began to suspect that I was mistaken ; and when I rose from the task, it was
with the thorough conviction that Mr. Barber was wholly innocent, and therefore a much
injured man.” —“ The Royal Pardon Vindicated,” by Sir George Stephen.— Crockford,
Essex Street, Strand.
“ lam certain, that if there were any mode of appeal, I could establish Barber’s
innocence ; and so painfully do I feel the misery of his condition, that I would in that case
make a voyage to England for the purpose of doing so; for the thought perpetually
haunts me, that Barber is undeservedly undergoing the fate of a convict at Norfolk Island,
and I cannot shake off the distress it occasions me.” — Letter from the Rev. T. B. Naylor,
late chaplain of Norfolk Island, to Lord Stanley (the present Earl Derby), p. 25.


THE
CASE OF MR. W. H. BARBER,
CONTAINING
COPIES OF THE DOCUMENTS
SUBMITTED TO THE GOVERNMENT, RESULTING IN
HER MAJESTY’S ROYAL PARDON.
lE&ttton,
WITH A
DECLARATION BY THE JURY, RETRACTING VERDICT,
OBSERVATIONS ON THE REFUSAL OF HIS ATTORNEY’S CERTIFICATE,
A NARRATIVE OF HIS CONDITION AND
TREATMENT IN NORFOLK ISLAND,
AND
petition to tfje souse of (ftommong for Enrjutrg fte&rcgg*
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
LIVERPOOL: ROCKLIFF & SONS.
1853.




THE
PUBLIC OPINION UPON MY CASE,
As expressed principally by leading Articles in the Law Journals,
and the various London and Provincial Newspapers.
THE LAW JOURNALS.
Page
The Law Times .. .. .. .. 18th November, 1848 .. 156
„ „ .. .. .. .. 10th March, 1849 .. 157
„ „ 17th March, 1849*..
„ „ .. .. .. .. 2nd February, 1850 ..
~ t , .. .. .. .. 3rd August, 1850 ..
~ „ .. .. .. .. 18th January, 1851 ..
Legal Observer .. .. .. .. 25th November, 1848 .. 158
Jurist .. .. .. .. .. 20th January, 1849 .. ib.
Law Magazine (No. XXV.) .. .. November, 1850 ..
THE LONDON DAILY NEWSPAPERS.
The Times (on the confession of Fletcher) Ist July, 1844 .. 159
Morning Advertiser .. .. .. 2nd December, 1848 .. ib.
~ ~ .. .. 6th December, 1848 .. 160
~ ~ .. .. .. 18th July, 1850 ..
~ ~ .. .. .. 23rd January, 1851 ..
Daily News .. ~ .. .. 10th January, 1849 .. 161
~ ~ .. .. .. .. 24th March 1849 ..
~ „ .. .. .. .. 26th January, 1850 ..
Morning Herald .. .. .. .. 23rd June, 1852 ..
The Sun .. .. .. .. .. 18th January, 1850 ..
~ .. .. .. .. .. 4th February, 1850 ..
b
* The articles for which no pages are given are published in a companion
pamphlet containing the Judgment of the Court of Queen’s Bench, refusing
my certificate,—analysed, with my observations thereon, and the remarks of
the legal and public press in review of the Judgment, and generally upon the
opposition of the Incorporated Law Society. —Effingham Wilson, Royal
Exchange; and Croekford, 29, Essex-slreet, Strand.


THE LONDON WEEKLY JOURNALS.
Page
The Examiner .. .. .. .. 18th November, 1848 .. 167
Spectator .. .. .. .. 13th January, 1849 .. ib.
f> • • .. .. .. .. 3rd August 1850 ..
John Bull .. .. .. .. 3rd February, 1849 .. 169
Economist.. .. .. . .. 15th February, 1851 ..
Sunday Times .. .. .. .. 28th January, 1849 .. 183
tt tt •• .. .. .. 15th February, 1850 ..
tt ft .. .. .. .. 25th April, 1852 ..
English Churchman .. .. .. March, 1851 ..
The Tablet March, 1851 ..
Weekly Times .. .. .. .. 2nd December, 1848 .. 191
tt tt •• .. .. .. 25th February, 1849 .. ib.
Weekly Chronicle.. .. .. .. 4th February, 1849 ..
ft tt .. .. .. .. 18th January, 1851 ..
Dispatch .. .. .. .. .. 4th February, 1849 .. 174
tt •• •• .. .. .. 18th March, 1849 ..
•» •• .. .. .. .. 15th August, 1852 .. 177
Bell’s Life.. .. .. .. .. 11th February, 1849 .. 183
Leigh Hunt’s Journal .. .. .. 25th January, 1851 ..
Critic .. .. .. .. .. 15th February, 1851 ..
Douglas Jerrold’s Weekly News .. .. 27th January, 1849 .. 178
Punch .. .. .. .. .. 26th February, 1848 ..
British Army Dispatch 2nd May, 1851 ..
ft tt .. .. .. 4th July, 1851 ..
tt tt .. .. .. 18th July, 1851 ..
Standard of Freedom 20th January, 1849 .. 187
tt •* •• .. .. 17th March, 1849 ..
tt tt .. .. .. 26th January, 1850 ..
rt tt .. .. .. 16th February, 1850 ..
n tt . • .. .. 13th July, 1850 ..
The Leader July, 1850..
The Looker-On July, 1850 ..
The Working Man’s Friend .. .. July, 1850 ..
La Belle Assemblee .. .. ‘ .. Ist February, 1851 ..
The Athenaeum 28th February, 1852
THE PROVINCIAL JOURNALS.
The Plymouth Herald .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Dublin Press
The Stockport Advertiser.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 196
Newcastle Advertiser .. .. .. February, 1851,.


Pag*
Nottingham Mercury .. .. .. .. . • • • ■ • I®*
Nottingham Review .. .. /.
Nottingham Guardian .. .. •• 24th February, 1851 ..
Northampton Mercury .. .. .. 22nd February, 1851 ..
The Blackburn Standard J. .. • • • • • • • • * • 196
The Liverpool Albion .. ... • • • • • • 1852 ..
The Liverpool Mercury .. .. .. November, 1850 ..
The Liverpool Chronicle 10th February, 1849.. 192
The Liverpool Mail November, 1850 ..
Wakefield Journal.. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• 195
Doncaster Gazette.. .. .. ... May, 1850 ..
Somerset Herald .. .. .. .. •. .. .. • • 196
Somerset County Gazette ». .. 21st February, 1852 ..
Leeds Mercury .. .. .. .. 29th March, 1851 .. 196
Banff Journal .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Cheltenham Journal .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 193
ii »i •» •• •• •• • • •• ••
Newcastle Guardian .. .. .. ..
Devonshire Chronicle .. .. .. .. . <
Western Luminary .. .. .. .. . • • • • •
Leicester Mercury .. .. .. .. May, 1850 ..
From Hepworth Dixon’s “ London Prisons" .. .. .. .. 193
Lincolnshire Times .. .. .. May, 1850 ..
~ 10th February, 1852 ..
The Ipswich Express .. .. .. July , 1852 ..
Note.—The foregoing are not selections of favourable articles or passages
excluding adverse remarks. The public opinion upon my case, as expressed
through the ordinary channels, has been, as far as I know, quite unanimous,
since the facts which have come to light subsequent to my trial have been
published.


BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE CASE.
In September, 1842, there was standing in the Three
per Cent. Consols, a sum of <£3,500, in the name of
“ Anne Slack, of Smith-street, Chelsea.” The divi-
dends of this fund not having been received for ten years,
the stock was transferred to the Commissioners for the
Reduction of the National Debt. This fact, as appeared
at the trial, was communicated by Christmas, an old clerk
in the Unclaimed Dividend Office, to Joshua Fletcher, a
retired surgeon, and a man of opulence, who was then, and
for many years had been, residing at Camberwell. Fletcher
accordingly commenced inquiries for the owners of the
property, and having learned that there was a lady of
the same name residing with Captain Foskett, at Abbott’s
Langley, he instructed Messrs. Barber and Bircham, who
had for years been his ordinary solicitors, to take such
steps as in their judgment should seem best, for ascertain-
ing whether Captain Foskett’s sister was the identical
owner of the stock.
From the facts stated, both by Captain Foskett and by
Fletcher , and which are detailed at length in the Memorial,
Messrs. Barber and Bircham arrived at the conclusion that
the captain’s sister was not the owner *
Three months after the communications with Captain
Foskett and his solicitor terminated, Fletcher reported to
* The serious mis-statement by Captain Foskett was not denied by that
gentleman on his cross-examination at the trial; and the misrepresentation
by Fletcher has since been fully confessed by him.


his solicitors, that after inquiries in all parts of the
country, he had met with the party entitled, in the person
of Miss Emma Slack, the niece of an old lady who had
recently died at Pimlico. In a day or two afterwards, he
introduced this individual (who was, in fact, a Mrs. San-
ders), under circumstances the best calculated to avoid
suspicion, and Mr. Barber unhesitatingly accompanied the
fictitious executrix to Doctors’ Commons, where she proved
the will. This was the particular act, “ the uttering,” as it
is technically called, upon which his subsequent convic-
tion rested, supported by circumstances which led a jury
to believe he had a guilty knowledge of the forgery.
These circumstances it was impossible for him fully to
rebut without a separate trial, which the prosecutors
denied him.
The Memorial to the Secretary of State was written whilst
the Memorialist lay stretched upon the prisoner’s pallet,
surrounded by the miseries of the hospital in Norfolk
Island; but all the material features of the case, as proved
in evidence, will be found to be fully and correctly set
forth, accompanied by an explanation, to which the atten-
tion of the reader is earnestly invited.


CONTENTS.
Pag#
INTRODUCTION 1
PART I.
MY MEMORIAL to the Secretary of State, from Norfolk Island .. 47
ANALYSIS THEREOF—
Fletcher’s introduction to my office .. .. .. .. ib.
Outline of Slack’s case .. .. .. .. .. ..49
Mr. Freshfield’s interview with me .. .. •• •• 56
My apprehension.. .. .. . • • • • • .. 57
The negligence imputed to me contrasted with that of others.. 59
Receiving the 600 sovereigns .. .. .. • • .. 64
Employment of different proctors .. . • • • • • 67
Fletcher’s assistance to rightful owners of unclaimed stock .. 69
My supposed “connivance!”.. .. •• •• •• 71
My withholding Fletcher’s name .. .. • • • • 72
My conduct from Mr. Freshfield’s visit to my apprehension .. 75
My exculpation by all the other prisoners .. ■ • • • 79
My personal history .. .. .. • • • • .. 83
EXCULPATORY EVIDENCE SINCE THE TRIAL.
CONFESSIONS—
Of Fletcher, from on board the Agincourt .. .. • • 84
Ditto, further confession .. .. •. • • .. ib.
Of Wm. Sanders, on his apprehension (see Memorial, p. 80) 86
Ditto, after his conviction, on board the Lord Auckland .. ib.
Ditto, statement taken by the Registrar at Hobart Town .. 87
REPORTS and NOTES of EXAMINATIONS of FLETCHER and
MYSELF, and of legal investigations instituted—
Report of an investigation at Norfolk Island, by the Rev. T. B.
Naylor, J.P., and D. A. Commissary General Smith, J.P. 88
Further statement of Mr. Naylor, on leaving Norfolk Island.. 90
Report of his successor, the Rev.T. Rogers, J. P. .. .. 91
Report of his Honour Fielding Browne, Esq., Judge of Assize
of Norfolk Island .. .. .. • • • • .. 93
Report of Dr. Browning, R.N. .. .. • • • • • • 95
Statement of John Smith, a friend and fellow-prisoner of both
Sanders and Fletcher .. .. • • • • .. 98
Further statement by the same, made before the chaplain and
surgeon, on his death-bed .. .. • • • • .. io.
Report of the Sydney Law Society, after ten days’ investigation 100


Page
VERIFICATIONS of the PRECEDING DOCUMENTS—
By the Surgeon Superintendent of the Agincourt .. ..105
By William McCallum, who committed Fletcher’s second state-
ment to writing .. .. • • • • • • .. ib.
By Lieut. Lloyd, R.M. .. .. •• •• •• •• 106
By the Civil Commandant of Norfolk Island, who succeeded
Major Child .. .. .. .. •• «• 107
By the Secretary of the Sydney Law Society .. .. .. 108
By his Honour Sir A. Stephen, Chief Justice of New South Wales ib.
By his Honour Sir William Burton, Judge of the Supreme
Court at Madras .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS AND PAPERS-
Extract from the Times on the confession of Fletcher.. .. 110
Extract from a letter by my late partner Mr. M. B. Bircham.. ib.
Extract from the Legal Observer .. .. .. .. ib.
A letter from the Senior Superintendent of Norfolk Island to
his Honour the Judge of Assize of the Island .. .. 11l
Notes for an examination of Sanders in Van Diemen’s Land.. 112
Statements by F. Browne, Esq., and the Rev. T. Rogers,
relative thereto .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Letter from the Registrar of New South Wales .. .. 115
Letter from the Rev. T. B. Naylor to the late Sir Robert Peel,
Bart., suppressed .. .. .. .. .. .. 116
CERTIFICATES OF MY CONDUCT IN NORFOLK ISLAND, 117
The Civil Commandant who succeeded Major Child .. .. 107
• The Rev. T. B. Naylor, chaplain .. .. .. .. 90
Gilbert Robertson, Esq., Superintendent of Agriculture .. 117
His successor, Henry Wade, Esq. .. .. .. ..119
George Horne, Esq., in charge of the Commissariat .. .. ib.
The Rev. R. Elliott .. .. .. .. .. .. 120
The Rev. T. Rogers .. .. .. .. .. ..91
The Rev. J. L. Ison .. .. .. .. .. .. 120
Dr. Browning, R.N. .. .. .. .. .. .. 121
The INVIDIOUS and SYSTEMATIC CRUELTY to which I was
subjected .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 122
Statement by the Rev. T. B. Naylor .. - .. .. .. 90
~ ~ ditto .. .. .. .. 122
~ ~ Rev. T. Rogers .. .. .. ..91
~ ~ Rev. J. L. Ison .. .. .. .. 120
~ Gilbert Robertson, Esq. .. .. ..117
Protest of Dr. Graham, Medical Officer, recorded in the Visiting Book.. 136
CONDITIONAL PARDON 123
Extracts from the Diaries of Myself and my late Partner .. 124 to 127


Page
FREE PARDON 127
Letter from the Secretary of State accompanying same .. 128
DECLARATION by the JURY, RETRACTING VERDICT .. 129
MY CONDITION and TREATMENT in NORFOLK ISLAND * 131
Examination of the Evidence and Review of Slack’s Case by Archibald
Michie, Esq., Barrister-at-Law .. .. .. .. .. 145
The PUBLIC OPINION UPON MY CASE .. pages v & 156
PAET 11.
OBSERVATIONS on the JUDGMENT of the COURT of QUEEN’S
BENCH refusing my certificate .. .. .. .. ..199
Resolutions of a meeting of the solicitors of Liverpool .. 208
The legal and public journals on the judgment of the Court and
the opposition by the Incorporated Law Society .. .. 210
SUBSCRIPTIONS by which my struggle has been supported:—
At Hobart Town, by his Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
and others .. .. .. ~ .. ' .. .. 24
At Sydney, by the Bench and Bar .. .. .. .. 27
At Madras, by the Bench and Bar .. .. .. .. 32
In England .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 224
EPITOME OF FACTS, chronologically arranged .. .. .. 229
COMPARISON OF THE EVIDENCE 234
PART 111.
MY PETITION TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, PRAYING
INQUIRY AND REDRESS
* An account of my voyage to Norfolk Island and detention there will
be found in two papers in “ Dickens’s Household Words,” July 31 and
August 7, 1852, entitled “ Transported for Life.”—W. H. B.


INTRODUCTION.
Eew persons, I presume, will doubt that the
decision at which her Majesty’s Government
have ultimately arrived, with respect to my case,
has been the result of the most minute and care-
ful investigation, or that it was based upon evi-
dence of the most conclusive character. I am,
however, anxious that every person who takes an
interest in the subject may have the opportunity
of forming his own judgment upon it. This is the
object of the present publication; and I entreat
my readers to peruse the entire pamphlet with
patience and candour. If that be done, I shall
certainly indulge a very sanguine hope, that they
will not only pronounce me guiltless, but blame-
less.
At the period of my trial, the public mind had
been greatly prejudiced against me by the manner
in which the prosecution was conducted, —by the
garbled, ex parte , and, in many instances, entirely
false statements that were put forth. Upon the
various examinations at the Mansion House,
assertions were unhesitatingly made that facts
would be proved, of which no proof was ever
B


attempted. The evidence was brought out so as
to blend my name with Fletcher’s, in a manner
that rendered it almost impossible for the public
to disentangle the one from the other, or clearly
to distinguish the facts which affected him from
those which affected me. My readers will pro-
bably remember an article appearing in a morn-
ing paper, stating that my guilt was now clear, for
that a bank clerk had confessed that he had com-
municated the information about the fraudulently
obtained funds to me. The next day this was
corrected, and it was admitted that it was to
Fletcher alone that such information was commu-
nicated. Many persons, however, read the asser-
tion, and not the refutation : long after the trial,
a gentleman avowed himself much prejudiced
against me, and declared, as a reason, the com-
munication I have mentioned. When the contra-
diction was pointed out, he said, —“ Oh l I never
saw that.” The public mind was also greatly
prejudiced by the statement of a Mr. Hyatt, an
innkeeper at Great Marlow. Having been ac-
quitted in the case in which his evidence was
given, I did not advert to it in the papers sub-
mitted to her Majesty’s Government; but as I
find that many persons still labour under an
erroneous impression on that point, it may be
useful briefly to explain it.
Hyatt deposed that I gave my name to him
as “ Clarence Peckham, Esquire.” That the
“ Esquire,” as Mr. Serjeant Wilkins, in his bril-
liant speech, remarked, must have been the


“ creation of a vulgar mind,” I imagine few per-
sons will doubt. Hyatt stated, that upon his
saying he was likely to be in town soon, I replied,
I should be glad if he would give me a call, and
bring any further intelligence about the deceased
John Stewart and his property; that I gave him
my address, 52, Nelson-square, and that he did
call and see me there a few days afterwards. If
my readers will refer to the report of the trial, they
will find that there was a brass plate on my house
door, with “ Mu. W. H. Barber, Solicitor,” in
large letters. This fact must, I think, be sufficient
of itself to show the great improbability, to say
the least, of my having given the name he alleged.
But the inaccuracy of Hyatt’s evidence was de-
monstrated upon another most important point.
He proved that Eletcher visited him at Marlow,
in May, 1840, and he swore most positively that
I went down a fortnight after : my diary was
produced in which there was no entry whatever
of a journey to Marlow until the month of Octo-
ber ; and my managing clerk proved his distinct
recollection, from coincident circumstances, of my
going to Marlow in October; and that if I had
been previously absent from the office on such a
journey, he must have known it. But the most
conclusive refutation of Mr. Hyatt’s evidence on
this point was afforded by himself, in his tavern
bill. My counsel handed this to him, turning
down the top where the date was written, and when
he was asked if that was his writing, he said, yes,
and that the items there charged were correct,
b 2


one of them being for a horse to the railway sta-
tion, a few miles distant. Mr. Wilkins then
taking back the bill, said, —“ Did Mr. Barber
visit you more than once?”—“No,” he replied.
“ Now,” said Mr. Wilkins, “ are you quite sure
that Barber’s visit was within a fortnight after
Pletcher’s ?”—“ Yes,” replied Hyatt, “of that I
am quite certain.” “ Now,” said Mr. Wilkins,
“ recollect yourself. You say Barber was never
at your house but once: you are quite sure that
it was not in October ?”—“ Yes,” said Hyatt, “ I
am positive of that.” Mr. Wilkins then returned
him the bill with the top turned up, saying,—
“ Look at the date of that.” It was the 13 th of
October , 1840, the very day recorded in my diary ,
and four months after the time so pertinaciously
sworn to by this obstinate witness !
This damning refutation came like a spectre
upon Hyatt, who stood for some time confounded;
at length he stammered out, that the bill must
relate to an occasion when he never saw me.
That this was a very desperate attempt to set
himself right with the jury, I think my readers
will clearly perceive. He had just before sworn
positively that I was not at his house at all in
October: he admitted that the identical things
charged in the bill of the 13th of October, were
furnished to me by himself; my clerk proved that
it was on the 13th of October, that I went down
and examined Hyatt and the other witnesses,
and there stands the entry in my diary, recording
my examination of llyatt and seven other wit


nesses on that very day ; and on tlie following
day is charged an attendance uponTTetcher, report-
ing to him the particulars I had gleaned from
these several persons. The following is an entire
copy of the tavern bill:—
“ Greyhound Inn , Great Marlow ,
13 tli of October , 1840.
Wine Negus Is. o d.
Gin - -- -- -16
Tea - -- -- - 13
Horse to lioydcn Head - - - 5 0
8 9
The negus was handed to me by the witness him-
self ; the gin with water was delivered to the wit-
nesses, whose written depositions I took in his pre-
sence. The tea I drank whilst he was in conver-
sation with me, and he personally took leave of me
when I left for Roy don Head.
From the summing up of Mr. Baron Gurney, it
is quite evident that his lordship disbelieved the
statement of this witness. One of the jury upon
the first trial afterwards visited me at Wool-
wich, and assured me he felt the deepest interest
in my fate, for that every one of his fellow jurors
concurred with him in a belief of my perfect inno-
cence ; and entertaining that opinion, that the
majority of them had attended the court during
the whole of the second trial, and would certainly
have acquitted me in that case also, with the
same unhesitating readiness with which they


did in the first, liad they continued to be my
judges.*
The only solution of Mr. Hyatt’s misrepresent-
ation about the name is that which was sug-
gested at the trial.
I remember mentioning my clerk , JPeckham ,
as a person to whom he might communicate his
information, if I should happen to be out, and of
that he appears to have compounded “ Clarence
Peckham, Esquire !” I would not have it sup-
posed that I attribute to Mr. Hyatt any intention
wilfully to misrepresent; but my readers will, I
think, agree with Mr. Serjeant Wilkins, that a
more wrong-headed man never came into a wit-
ness-box. The lamentable mistakes of which he
was proved guilty, will, I hope, operate as a cau-
tion to him as well as others, when the lives or
liberties of their fellow-creatures may depend on
their statements. A candid avowal of an imper-
fect recollection of occurrences in which he had
no personal interest, and which had happened
four years previously, would have been more
creditable to Mr. Hyatt, and more conducive to
the ends of justice. lam afraid his vanity was a
little excited wfith the idea of being an important
witness in a Government prosecution, towards
which, at the time, all eyes were directed.
Upon looking over the few papers which I have
been able to recover relating to Stewart’s matter,
since my return, I found the following letter from
Eletcher to myself, and as it is an excellent spe-
* See retractation of their verdict by the other jury, post, p. 12ih


cimen of the cunning plausibility of that hypo-
critical scoundrel, I submit a literal copy of it: —
“ Southampton Place, July 20th, 1842.
“ Dear Sir,
“ During my absence this day, a Mr. Griffin , who is living
at the west end of the toicn, called at my house to say that an
application has been made to him from Somerset House, for the
payment of the legacy duty in the case of Mrs. Stewart, who
made a claim to some money in the Bank of England belonging
to her late brother, who died (if I recollect rightly') at Great
Marlow. You may recollect, I recommended to you her case
when you resided in Tokenhouse Yard, which money, after a
good deal of trouble, you obtained for her. The legacy duty, in
that case, I perfectly recollect was to be paid by you, she having
left, by my request and in my presence, the money for that pur-
pose with you ; but it appears, by some means, the payment has
been neglected. I did not see this Mr. Griffin , but I perfectly
recollect that he was one of the bail for Mrs. Stewart at the
Commons— how he came to make me out in place of you is a
mystery, as I really know nothing of him: perhaps you will
have the kindness to see to this matter, as it appears that
Mr. Griffin is threatened with legal proceedings. I believe that
the old lady (Stewart) died almost directly afterwards, viz., soon
after obtaining the money; but I cannot, at the present moment,
inform you how I obtained the information, but I certainly did
hear that she died.
“ I am, d r - Sir,
“Your ob 1 servant,
“ Jos A - Fletcher.”
When my readers remember that Griffin was
the identical person produced by Fletcher, to
prove by an affidavit (which it was afterwards
discovered had actually been prepared by Fletcher
himself) that Mrs. Richards was the sister of the
deceased John Stewart, that Fletcher knew Grif


fin’s precise address full well; that he must have
had a very distinct recollection about Great Mar-
low ; that he knew all about Mr. Griffin, and that
he must have perfectly well remembered who
communicated to him so important a fact as the
death of the principal actor in the drama of which
he was the author; my readers will he amused,
if not too much disgusted, at the vagueness of
the expressions, which I have italicised.
Many persons, who are quite satisfied of my
innocence, have expressed great surprise that I
had not more carefully examined into the truth
of the statements made to me by Fletcher and his
well-trained accomplices, and thus have prevented
their frauds. If my readers will peruse that part
of my Memorial referred to in the index under
the head of “ imputed negligence,” I think they
will he satisfied that it was not my fault that the
fraud passed undetected. One of the most emi-
nent lawyers in this country, to whom I lately
spoke on this subject, and who has attentively
read and considered the whole case, thus expressed
himself:—“ It is by no means the duty of a soli-
citor to question the truth of a statement made
by a client, whom he believes to he respectable ;
on the contrary, such a proceeding would be ex-
traordinary and highly improper. Unless there
had been something very glaring indeed, you and
your partner were fully justified in submitting
the case laid before you, leaving it to those whose
especial duty it was to investigate it. After atten-
tively considering the circumstances, I see nothing


that was calculated to awaken suspicion in your
mind.”
This eminent person, whose opinion I have
ventured to quote, will, I have reason to believe,
take an early opportunity of openly express-
ing it.
By Sanders’s examination at Ilohart Town, it
will be seen that Eletcher had been engaged in
these Bank frauds for fifteen years; i. e. ten years
before his dark shadow crossed my path, and
whilst I was serving my clerkship at Tonbridge;
with what frequency he may have imposed upon
the Bank and their legal advisers during that
period, or what may he the extent to which the
public treasury has been plundered, I am unac-
quainted; hut the following case will show the
audacity and profound subtlety of Eletcher, as
well as the liability of the most skilful and expe-
rienced professional men to he occasionally de-
ceived.
Eletcher having (as he afterwards did with
myself) established a confidence in the mind of
Mr. (I suppress the name from motives that
will he appreciated), a professional man of twenty
years’ experience, by making him his ordinary
attorney in business of the most respectable de-
scription, proceeded to introduce a young lady as
Miss Mary Hunt, the claimant to £4,250 stock
and dividends unreceived. The solicitors of
the Bank of England disputed her right, and
Eletcher immediately piled a bill in Chan-
cery TO ENFORCE PAYMENT ! TllC hill Was Sup


ported by a body of affidavits, there being five de-
ponents, of which Fletcher was the chief.
The whole thing was a fabrication ! The whole
gang were perjurers ! But the legal advisers of
the Bank, even though their suspicions appear to
have been actually awakened , were ultimately
satisfied, and the money was paid. Mr. ,
though he must have had repeated interviews
with, and examinations of this band of impostors,
men and women, had no suspicion. The solicitors
for the Bank, men whose lives are chiefly spent in
the detection and prosecution of fraudulent cha-
racters, and whose minds must, therefore, neces-
sarily be in a constant attitude of suspicion,
critically examined the depositions; but they de-
tected no flaw.
In the instructions delivered to counsel upon
my trial, my attorney stated: “ I never, in my
life, saw a set of affidavits more vague, or bearing
more the outward and glaring stamp of suspicion
upon them, than those, upon the reading of
which,” he says, “ the solicitors for the Bank
withdrew all opposition.”
The Bank, after my apprehension, acquired a
full knowledge of all the circumstances of this
fraud ; and Mr. Parry, one of my counsel, called
upon them to prosecute the thieves ; but, to this
hour, it has not been done. Is it apprehended
that the prosecution of this gang would serve as
an advertisement for the real owners of their pro-
perty to come forward and claim their own ? or
was it feared that, to show how effectually the


former solicitor of Fletcher, as well as those of
the Bank, had been deceived, would strengthen
the probability that I had been so likewise ? *
One, at least, of the confederates in that barefaced
robbery is, I am informed, permitted to enjoy
his liberty unmolested, although the facts are
now well known to the Bank authorities.
My readers will remember that it was urged
against me, with great plausibility and power, as
one of the arguments in proof of my assumed
guilt, that I refused, when Mr. Freshfield called
upon me, to give up the name of the client who
introduced Slack’s business to me. Whilst there
are, I believe, few persons now who will recog-
nize the justice of this argument, so ingeniously
pressed by the learned counsel upon my prosecu-
tion, there are yet some who think my refusal to
give up Fletcher’s name at once was injudicious.
No doubt that refusal proved most disastrous to
me; hut a dispassionate review of the whole cir-
cumstances will, I humbly trust, lead my readers
rather to approve than to condemn my professional
conduct in that instance. From my Memorial
(corroborated by the entries, in both my partner
Bircham’s diary and my own, now furnished, see
* It is said I ought to have suspected Fletcher: yet this
glaring case was not detected by the gentleman who then acted as
Fletcher’s solicitor, nor even by the Bank solicitors, notwithstand-
ing their suspicions were aroused. This case occurred long before
my introduction to Fletcher, and that it passed muster under
the close scrutiny of the Bank, is merely strong evidence of the
plausibility and apparent bona Jides of Fletcher and his ac-
complices.


p. 126), it will be perceived that Fletcher had told
us, severally, and on the same day, i. e. the 3rd of
April, 1843, that the Bank had created confusion
in their books by marking both the Miss Slacks
dead. Mr. Ereshfield’s visit, I firmly believed,
arose from that supposed blunder; nevertheless,
I received him, though busy preparing for post,
the instant he was announced, and with all the
courtesy due to the solicitor of the Bank of Eng-
land. I showed him all the papers, and gave him
all the information I possessed, except the name
of the person who originally introduced the busi-
ness; and I expressly assigned as a reason for
that reservation, that I did not believe that a
forgery had been committed, and that the person
whose name and address he demanded was a
respectable client. Upon this, he assumed a tone
and manner at once supercilious and dictatorial,
wdiicli, instead of intimidating me, only excited
my indignation, and I then said, “ I decline, Sir,
most positively, to give you the name of my client
at present; but if you think proper to repeat your
application in a day or two, I may then feel at
liberty to comply with it.”*'
In his cross-examination, he admitted the indig-
nation I evinced, as well as what I have said
about giving him the information in a day or
two. Nobody, I imagine, will believe, that if
there had not been something extremely irritating
* If Mr. Freshfield had examined my diary as offered him, he
would have seen Fletcher’s name frequently recurring in con-
nection with the business.


in Mr. Breshfield’s language or manner, I should
have been warmed into a degree of anger. But,
if any of my readers should think him incapable
of such behaviour as I have described, I refer
them to Mr. Wills, the proctor, for its corrobora-
tion. That gentleman will tell them that, when
Mr. Ereshfield called upon him, his words and
manner were so offensive, that he was constrained
to refuse all further information until the Queen’s
proctor had been sent for, and Mr. Breshfield had
declared, before that gentleman, that he did not
attribute to Mr. W ills any guilty connection with
the business. “It seemed to me,” said Mr. Wills,
“ from Mr. Ereshfield’s language and manner,
that he regarded me as a culprit, but as one whose
evidence was necessary to make good the charge
against those already selected for prosecution.”
In the Morning Herald of the 13th December,
1847, is the report of a case in which application
was made to a Mr. Mulhall, an attorney, for in-
formation respecting a client, named Nolan, who
had employed him to sue upon certain I. O. U.’s,
which, it was alleged, were forgeries. “ I don’t
believe they are forgeries,” said Mr. Mulhall:
“ first prove that they are what you assert, before
I give you any information about my client,
or the business which he has placed in my
hands.”
The prosecutors thought this only reasonable.
They proved, by the oaths of several witnesses,
that the documents really were forgeries; and
then, and not before, Mr. Mulhall felt justified in


giving the information required. But the means
which my prosecutors thought most fitted to open
my eyes, were to send me to a gaol, and obsti-
nately to oppose my being admitted to bail.
Upon one occasion, when Mr. Montagu Cham-
bers* offered, in my behalf, bail to any amount,
Mr. Clarkson said, “ Perhaps the ends of truth
and justice might he'promoted by the acceptance
of bail; but lam instructed to oppose it.”
The Bank solicitors could have proved in an
instant, beyond the possibility of doubt, by the
production of the power of attorney which Miss
Slack, of Abbott’s Langley, had executed twelve
years before, that the property in question was
really hers, and of which I may take the oppor-
tunity of observing, she would undoubtedly have
been placed in possession, through my direct instru-
mentality, but for the gross and fatal misrepre-
sentation (unintentional, I am bound to believe) of
her age, by her brother-in-law, Captain Poskett.
The prosecutors, however, kept back this docu-
ment until after I was in custody, when, as my
readers are aware, I immediately placed Pletcher
before the Lord Mayor, for examination. After
my conviction, a gentleman, w r ho visited me in
Newgate, in company with Mr. Sheriff Musgrove,
* Mr. Chambers made a most eloquent appeal to the justice of
the Lord Mayor, but who appeared entirely under the influence
of my powerful prosecutors, in which the learned counsel said,
“ I have thoroughly sifted and weighed all the circumstances of
this case, and am satisfied that every step in the elucidation
of the matter will be a step in proof of Mr. Barber’s entire
innocence.”


remarked, “ I think you would never have been
prosecuted, had you not withheld [Fletcher’s
name.” “I don’t blame you for that, Barber,”
said the sheriff; “on the contrary, I should con-
sider, if my attorney did not do the same under
similar circumstances, he would be breaking a
confidence which should be inviolate.”
[Fletcher had been for some years my client—a
wealthy one, I knew —a respectable one, I had
good reason to believe. I thought Mr. [Freshfield
in error; but that, at all events, [Fletcher could
not possibly be implicated in so fraudulent a
transaction. My partner, Mr. Bircham, even
after [Fletcher’s examination at the Mansion
House, said to me, “ I can’t, even now, believe
Fletcher guilty.” It has been said, that if not
he was safe—who can say that, after what has
occurred to myself? Nor is mine a solitary
instance: some malicious persons once gave in-
formation to the Mint, that Morland, the cele-
brated landscape painter, was connected with a
gang of coiners. His house was ransacked, but
nothing was found, and the Government sent him
£2O for the annoyance he had suffered; hut the
circumstances becoming known, drew attention
upon him in such a way, that he was compelled to
leave the neighbourhood, in which he had many
years resided.
It will be seen that the Sydney Law Society,
after devoting ten days to an attentive considera-
tion of every circumstance, unanimously approved
of my conduct: and so I confidently trust will my


readers, when they have calmly considered the
facts now laid before them.*
I had not intended, upon the present occa-
sion, to address myself to any of the numerous
grounds of complaint which I have to make of
the manner in which the prosecution was con-
ducted against me, hut I have this very day heard
that an eminent barrister recently remarked, that
a circumstance which had much influenced his
mind against me was, that I “ advanced the pro-
bate duty for an entire stranger.” I never
advanced one farthing of it. It was, as stated in
my Memorial, lent by Fletcher, and paid by a
check drawn by him upon the London and West-
minster Bank, which very check was handed to the
proctor, Mr. Wills. That gentleman acquainted
Mr. Freshf eld with this fact; nevertheless it was
stated to the jury, and pressed as an argument
against me by the prosecution, that I paid it,
and there sat Mr. Freshfield beside the learned
counsel , who had doubtless been instructed to make
this statement , and who urged this argument , the
* At a recent public meeting (convened by public advertise-
ment) of the solicitors of Liverpool, this point was fully
and resolutions (see Part II.) in my favour were passed unani-
mously. The chairman, Sir George Stephen, now at the bar,
after twenty-five years’ experience as an eminent solicitor, and
who was formerly president of the Metropolitan and Provincial
Law Association, said, “If Mr. Barber had answered Mr. Fresh-
field’s inquiry at the time and in the circumstances under which
it was made, he would have betrayed his professional honour.”
Yet my not having so answered is the only part of my conduct
which has ever been pointed out as exposing me to suspicion.


former perfectly icell knowing that it was con-
trary to the truth *
The observation of the gentleman I have just
alluded to having led me to refer to the few scat-
tered papers which I have recovered from the
wreck, I am induced to quote the following pas-
sages from the brief delivered to Mr. Chambers
by my solicitor, preparatory to the hearing at the
Mansion House, on the 28th of December, 1843,
to show the condition in which I was placed by
the refusal of bail. I should premise that, in a
previous brief, after complaining of the way in
which I had been stripped of papers and other
means of showing my innocence, he observes, —
“ However, Mr. Breslifield will, no doubt, act with
a proper feeling of right and justice, and on the
next hearing, whatever is reasonable will he
directed without strong opposition.”
Between this hearing, the 16th of December,
and the 28th, he had much communication with
Mr. Dreshfield, and with evident pain he was
driven to form a very different opinion of the
spirit of the prosecution, and the motives of those
who conducted it. He says,—
“ The powerful and eloquent application for bail, though
c
* It was also urged against me that I did not produce my
partner for examination, although the prosecutors well knew that
I had made the utmost exertions to subpoena him without success,
and it has lately come to light that he had purposely kept out of
my reach, and that the prosecutors had him in the neighbourhood
under their own control, and that they purposely withheld his
evidence from the court. See Part 11.


unanswered, was, nevertheless, refused, and this unfortunate
gentlemen still remains branded most falsely with a heinous
crime, and is suffering the degrading punishment, as well as the
incurable consequences of anticipatory guilt. For instance, his
solicitor has been obliged frequently to confer with him for an
hour at a time in a sort of dismal scullery, with its dangerously
damp stone floor, without fire, unceremoniously interrupted
every instant by gaolers and other officers, who pass to and fro
for twenty different purposes. It is a most cruel and tyrannous
procedure. Here is a solicitor with no one piece of evidence to
establish his guilt, pent up in a dungeon week after week, since
he was hurried away from his business and his home, on the
9th of December, merely biding the time of his certain deliver-
ance, whilst his unrelenting persecutors are ransacking the pri-
vacies of his business transactions, gleaning the entire scope of his
clients' affairs, circumstances, and position, and despatching their
minions over the country to question those clients upon the
honesty and fair dealing with them of this unhappy gentleman !
Finding, as they do, that their bellowed charge of forgery and
uttering a will is not propped by a rush, instead of releasing him
on bail, or, to act more justly, to honourably acquit him of
any charge, they are moving every vile instrument to detect
some sorry act of omission or commission—some petty pecca-
dillo—some paltry misunderstanding with some cast-off client
to compensate for the want of actual crime and absolute guilt.
“Why, it is insufferable. Heaven preserve the gentleman
who is now instructing counsel, from ever again engaging in
so heart-rending a task as now falls to his lot. Oh! this
outrageous violation of your oft-vaunted British axiom, that
every man is esteemed innocent until he is proved to be guilty.
“ This gentleman, from mere suspicion of his guilty know-
ledge in a foul crime, which guilty knowledge he never
had, and of which he will never be convicted, is a ruined
and broken-hearted man ! His prospects are withered, be he
released to-morrow or to-morrow week ! Why ? Not because
he has been falsely accused of a wicked crime: this might have
been perhaps without injury,—not because he has been branded
with the forgery of this will, —for even this too could, by pos


sibility, have been wiped away, —but because somebody lias
committed this atrocious offence ; and this wretched man must
be he! and, therefore, bail has been most unmercifully and
most unrighteously denied him.”
Further on, after narrating the pains which
had been taken by my directions to discover the
fictitious Emma Slack, and mentioning that he
had fully reported the result to Mr. Ereshfield, he
says:
“ I have communicated several times with Mr. Freshfield;
indeed, opened to him the same explanations of the answers to
what was put forward by them as the strongest part of their
case, as have been here or otherwise given to counsel.
“ The fact, however, is, that they will receive any explanation
with a totally different view to that which actuates the giving
of it. Their inclination seems to be see bow distorted cir-
cumstances MAY BE MADE TO TELL AGAINST Mr. BARBER,
AS THOUGH THEY HAD SOME FEELING BEYOND THE CALM
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE TO GRATIFY.
“ It would be better, perhaps, that our case should be op'en
and undisguised as the day. AVe have nothing to conceal; our
defence is our facts; our innocence, is our letters, our accounts,
our attendance books.
“ But surely something will be done as to bail. Can it be
possible that Newgate is to be the doom of this distressed gen-
tleman, for a further remand must be opposed : if the crisis must
come, let it come at once ; if bail is rejected still, yet his com-
mital or discharge must be required. They do not want that we
should have ample time to prepare for his acquittal on this trial,
and hence they will seek to lull us on to the very day when the
sessions commence.”
I now proceed to state, as briefly as possible,
what has befallen me since my conviction, and the
progressive steps by which my deliverance has
been effected.
c 2


My readers are aware that my whole conduct
since my apprehension has been a continued pro-
test against the injustice and fallacy of the pro-
ceedings adopted against me, and my address to
the judges, published in The Times of the 23rd
of April, 1844, will he in their recollection.
Shortly afterwards I addressed a letter to the go-
vern er of Newgate, expressing my anxious desire
that Fletcher and his three confederates should
be officially , separately, and fully examined as to
my supposed complicity in these monstrous frauds.
After some days, Mr. Sheriff Musgrove and the
chaplain visited me, and the former observed, —
“If there is anything, Barber, you desire
Fletcher and the others to sign, get it ready, and
I’ll ask them if they will do it.” I replied, that
my desire was that they should undergo a detailed
and official examination; for that their signing
any paper that I might draw up, even if they
were willing, could not be entitled to much
weight, but that a searching examination would,
in all probability, wring from them the truth,
despite their contumacy. The sheriff said, —
“ That examination cannot be permitted, but if
you like to draw up anything, I’ll ask them if
they like to sign it.” This was in the afternoon,
but early the following morning I was suddenly
sent off in chains to Millbank. Whilst in that
gloomy dungeon, I addressed a memorial to Sir
James Graham, repeating the desire expressed in
my letter to Mr. Cope, and that I should be per-
mitted personally to submit my books and papers


to some official person, to be appointed by him-
self. I received no answer. When I anxiously
inquired of Mr. Russell, the prison inspector,
about the fate of my appeal, he said, “ I called at
the Home Office about you, and the answer is,
you are to go” I urged the hardship of my being
sent out of the country until all reasonable means
had been exhausted to clear up a doubt, the ex-
istence of which was not denied. He mentioned
a circumstance which had much prejudiced his
own mind against me; and when I explained the
actual particulars to which he had referred, he
confessed himself satisfied, but said with an ab-
stracted air, “ Well, Barber, I’d rather suffer as
an innocent man than a guilty one; and you’ll
do well ( well!) in the colonies.”
When on board the ship Agincourt, at Wool-
wich, I met Fletcher on deck, and looked him
full in the face; but he turned his head, and
slunk away. One of the convicts, named Smith,
formerly a stockbroker, had been a fellow-prisoner
with Sanders, by whose statements he had be-
come persuaded that I was suffering undeservedly,
and remonstrated with Fletcher on the subject,
and drew from him the admissions embodied in
his published confessions.
At Norfolk Island the investigation by Messrs.
Naylor and Smith took place, the particulars of
which are given in their report of it, which, with
the Memorial now published, was then trans-
mitted to Sir James Graham. About fourteen
months afterwards I received a formal communi


cation, that the Secretary of State saw no reason
to advise her Majesty to mitigate my sentence !
Nor I, either; nor did I ever stoop to such an
application: I asked a reversal oe the sen-
tence ; and the reply shows, that neither the
prayer of the Memorial, nor the grounds upon
which it was based, could have been read.
The horrors I was suffering all this time on the
island will be seen from the letter republished in
this pamphlet.*' Mr. Naylor having exposed the
demonizing system in operation there, the present
Government ordered the establishment to be
broken up. Under this order, I was, with Pletclier
and 300 other prisoners, in March, 1847, con-
veyed to Tasman’s Peninsula, in the charge of
that enlightened and most exemplary Christian,
Dr. Browning, whose report of an investigation
into my case will be found in the Appendix.
I was landed at a retired nook in Tasman’s
beautiful peninsula, called Impression Bay.
Scarcely a week had elapsed, after my arrival at
that station, when I received the conditional par-
don. Joyful was this news to my suffering mind.
I was, nevertheless, in an awkward dilemma.
The superintendent accompanied the intelligence
by saying, “You must give in your prison cloth-
ing, and proceed to Hobart Town, where you will
receive the necessary document.”—“ With what
clothes,” said I, “ shall I be furnished to travel
in ?”—(for not one article had I of my own). —
“ I have no orders ,” said he, “ about that .” The
* Page


principal communication between Hobart Town
and Impression Bay was by water; but as the
conditional pardon came unaccompanied by any
authority for a free passage, I was unable to
obtain one. By land it was about ninety miles,
through an almost untrodden region,—a gum-tree
wilderness, without, for the greater part, any
roads, except a slight kind of sheep track, at
many places quite effaced by heavy rains—but go,
I must; and for aught that the Goverment pro-
vided for me, under such extraordinary circum-
stances, I might have wandered to Hobart Town
naked and without food. My miserable fellow
prisoners, however, had more compassion upon
me, and clubbed together such few odd articles
of wearing apparel as they happened to possess ;
and I gladly do the superintendent and the reli-
gious instructor the justice to say, that they eked
out the charity of those whose fellow captive I
had so long been, sufficiently to enable me to set
out upon my journey,—a wandering mendicant
round the earth —having the fixed resolve to pro-
ceed, by the blessing of Providence, to Paris (a
distance of twenty thousand miles), there to renew
my never-ceasing struggle for justice. I some-
times travelled thirty miles of that weary though
welcome journey without seeing a person from
whom I could inquire the way. Knowing, how-
ever, the geographical position of Hobart Town,
the sun served as my compass by day, and the
stars by night. My course sometimes lay by the
sea-coast, but oftcner “ deep in the wood’s em


braceas I emerged from which the scenery
was often sublimely beautiful. After crossing
mountains and fording streams, I, in three days
and three nights, reached Tasmania’s capital.
Had a stage harlequin suddenly made his appear-
ance, he could scarcely have attracted more atten-
tion than I did in my motley, ill-fitting suit. I
was, however, soon metamorphosed. I there
found the Rev. Mr. Rogers, the late chaplain of
Norfolk Island, who generously received and
maintained me at his own house for two months,
and as soon as my case had been fully inquired
into, the following subscription was generously
entered into to enable me to provide some little
outfit for a voyage to Sydney.
HOBART TOWN SUBSCRIPTION LIST.
£. 8. d.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor Sir Wm. T. Denison.... 3 3 0
Charles Machlachlan, Esq., banker 5 0 0
The Rev. T. Rogers, late chaplain at Norfolk Island 3 3 0
The Rev. J. L. Ison, Norfolk Island 2 2 0
The Rev. R. Elliot, Norfolk Island 2 2 0
The Venerable the Archdeacon of Tasmania 110
His Honour Mr. Justice Montagu 2 2 0
A. O. Montagu, Esq., solicitor 1 1 0
C. Perry, Esq., solicitor, Crown prosecutor 2 2 0
Assistant Commissary-General J. W. Smith 2 2 0
The late Attorney-General, Edward Macdowall, Esq 1 1 0
His Honour Fielding Browne, Esq., judge of assize of Norfolk
Island 1 1 0
T. D. Chapman, Esq. J. P 1 1 0
The Rural Dean 1 1 0
Rev. T. Lillie 1 1 0
Rev. Mr. Hesketh 1 1 0
Capt. Moriarty, her Majesty’s Harbour Master 1 1 0
Captain Austin (of the ship Pestonjee Bomanjee, in which I sailed
from Norfolk Island) 1 1 0
Henry Hopkins, Esq., J.P 1 1 0
Mr. Young, the captain of the Tory, upon the
introduction of Captain Moriarty, and upon hear-
ing the facts of my case, kindly gave me a passage


to Sydney, a voyage which was performed in ten
days. On my arrival there, I learned, for the
first time, what had immediately led to my de-
liverance. By a letter from my unwearied advo-
cate, the Bev. Mr. Naylor, now of Carcoar, New
South Wales, I was informed, that shortly after
he had resigned his chaplaincy at Norfolk Island
(after five years’ service, and receiving the thanks
of the Government), he had despatched Mrs. Nay-
lor, with her infant child and one maid-servant,
to England with my papers,—that then , and not
before , the Memorial that I had sent from Norfolk
Island, with the documents supporting it, were
read; that an investigation was instituted, and
Mrs. Naylor returned with a letter from the Secre-
tary of State, acquainting the rev. gentleman that
the result of the inquiry was satisfactory, and
that* a pardon would he accordingly sent out. In
a letter, addressed to Lord Stanley, Mr. Naylor
says, “ I am certain, that if there were any mode
of appeal, I could establish Barber’s innocence;
and so painfully do I feel the misery of his con-
dition, that I would in that case make a voyage to
England for the purpose of doing so; for the
thought perpetually haunts me, that Barber is
undeservedly undergoing the fate of a convict at
Norfolk Island, and I cannot shake off the dis-
tress it occasions me.” 1
* This inestimable clergyman, to whom I am under such deep
obligations, is, I lament to state, no more. lie died, as Mrs. Nay-
lor informed me, on his passage to England about two years since.
It was not only when stimulated by witnessing my sufferings


Having a letter of introduction from Dr. Brown-
ing to the Bev. Mr. Saunders (lately returned to
this country), I was received by that gentleman
with the utmost kindness: and it is to his per-
sonal influence in New South Wales that I am,
in a great measure, indebted for the thorough
investigation of my case, and the generous sup-
in Norfolk Island that his exertions for my deliverance were
made, but when a thousand miles away, despite ill-health and the
anxieties of a numerous family, lie persevered until his benevo-
lent labours were crowned with success.
In adverting to his lamented decease, the Sydney Morning
Herald of April 15, 1850, says, “In all positions of trust in
which he was placed, he seems to have shown himself a man of
exemplary zeal, of sound judgment, and of high talent. In Van
Diemen’s Land, where he had charge of the Orphan Schools at
New Town, he raised them from a state of neglect and inefficiency
to one of perfect order and discipline. On some disagreement
arising with the Lieutenant Governor of the day, he retired, and
remained unemployed in any public capacity until his appoint-
ment to the chaplaincy of Norfolk Island, which he accepted at
the urgent and special request of Captain Maconochie. There
his services were invaluable, both to those amongst whom he
ministered and sojourned, and also to the Home Government, to
whom his communications and suggestions on the subject of penal
discipline were the means of affording very important information.
His departure from Norfolk Island, which took place when it was
severed from this diocese and annexed to that of Tasmania, was
the subject of very general regret there. It will be remembered,
that in the case of Mr. Barber, it was through Mr. Naylor’s
philanthropic exertions while at Norfolk Island and subsequently,
that the innocence of Mr. Barber of the crime for which he had
been transported was ascertained and established; the strong
representations made by Mr. Naylor having induced those further
inquiries in England, which ended in Mr. Barber’s receiving his
pardon from the Queen.”


port and cordial hospitality with which I was so
bountifully favoured in that splendid colony.
The report of the Sydney Law Society is given
in the Appendix, and the following is the munifi-
cent subscription which emanated from it:
SYDNEY SUBSCRIPTION LIST.
The Judges.
His Honour Sir Alfred Ste-
phen, Chief Justice of
New South Wales .... £2 2 0
His Honour Mr. Justice
Dickinson 2 2 0
Ditto (second subscription) 3 3 0
His Honour Mr. Justice a
Beckett 2 2 0
Barristers and Solicitors.
Archibald Michie, Esq. ..500
Ditto (further subscription) 2 2 0
W. C. Wentworth, Esq.,
M.L.C 5 0 0
W. A. Purefoy, Esq 1 1 0
G. P. F. Gregory, Esq.,
Prothtmotary and Regis-
trar of the Supreme Court 2 2 0
James Norton, Esq 5 0 0
G. K. Holden, Esq 5 0 0
W. G. McCarty, Esq 1 0 0
Messrs. Allen and Son .. 5 0 0
R. J. Want, Esq 5 0 0
Messrs. Carr and Co 5 0 0
J. F. Josephson, Esq 5 0 0
A. Longmore, Esq 1 1 0
J. Smith, Esq 5 0 0
C. H. Chambers, Esq. ..200
David Chambers, Esq. .. 2 2 0
Hugh Chambers. Esq 1 0 0
G. Cooper Turner, Esq.,
Civil Crown Solicitor .. 2 2 0
James Martin, Esq 2 0 0
Messrs. Stenhouse & Hardy 2 0 0
William Thurlow, Esq. .. 2 0 0
John Williams, Esq 2 0 0
Edward Sandwell, Esq. .. 2 2 0
J. Yeomans, Esq 1 1 0
William Russell, Esq 1 1 0
George Want, Esq 1 1 0
Messrs. Westmore & Dain-
try 1 1 0
Gilbert Wright, Esq 1 1 0
Thomas Iceton, Esq 1 1 0
Archibald Little, Esq 1 1 0
David Bruce Hutchinson,
Esq 1 0 0
John Gurnen, Esq 2 2 0
Robert Johnson, Esq 2 2 0
James Johnson, Esq 1 1 0
John Ryan Brennan, Esq.,
City Coroner 1 1 0
G. R. Nichols, Esq 2 0 0
John Dunsmure, Esq 2 2 0
R. H. Way, Esq 1 1 0
B. C. Rodd, Esq 1 0 0
W. Carter, Esq., Registrar
General.. 5 0 0
A. H. McCulloch, Esq. ...110
The Clergy, Merchants, and other
Gentlemen.
The Bishop of New South
Wales 3 3 0
The Rev. W. H. Walsh ..100
The Rev. J. Saunders .... 1 0 0
The Rev. Dr. Ross 1 0 0
The Hon. the Speaker of the
Legislative Council .... 3 3 0
Chas. Cowper, Esq.,M.L.C. 110
Dr. A’Beckett 2 2 0
The Editors of the Sydney
Morning Herald 2 2 0
Mr. Alderman McDermott 10 0
G. Nathan, Esq 1 1 0
Clarke Irving, Esq 1 0 0
William Walker, Esq 5 0 0
Ditto (second subscription) 3 0 0
Wm. Walker, Jun., Esq... 2 0 0
J. J. Walker, Esq 2 0 0
Captain Moriarty, R.N. ..1 0 0
Dr. Wallace s 1 0 0
A Lady 3 3 0
Mrs. Reiby 1 0 0
Charles Windeyer, Esq.,
C.P.M 1 0 0
Arthur Savage, Esq., R.N. 110
John Morris, Esq 1 1 0


J. McLaren, Esq 2 2 0
J. H. Challis, Esq 1 1 0
G. Rowley, Esq 1 1 0
J. Chisholm, Esq 1 0 0
Wm. Fanning, Esq 2 2 0
Lewis Samuel, Esq 1 0 0
J. Chalder, Esq 1 1 0
Mr. Taunton 1 0 0
Mr. Thomas Trood 1 0 0
M. Penny, Esq 1 0 0
Mr. C. Newton 1 1 0
Mr. McEvoy 1 0 0
Mr. J. J. Cohen 1 1 0
Mr. Moses Joseph 1 0 0
Mr. John Brown 1 0 0
Mr. Isaac Titterton 1 0 0
Mr. W. Roberts 1 1 0
Mr. T. Woolley 2 2 0
Mr. White ....» 0 10 0
Mr. C. Newton & Brother 10 0
Mr. Matthew Young .... 1 0 0
Mr. Andrew Melville .... 1 1 0
Mr. G. S. Hill 2 0 0
Mr. Thomas Stubbs .... 1 0 0
Mr. Williams 2 0 0
Messrs. Thompson and Co. 2 0 0
Equity 1 0 0
A Friend (by F. Mitchell,
Esq.) 1 0 0
Mr. Ford (in books and sta-
tionery)...* 3 3 0
Mr. McCormick (in books) 10 0
Mr. T. H. Way 0 10 6
Mr. Richard Peek 1 0 0
H. H. Brown, E5q....... 0 10 0
Mr. Ormsby 0 5 0
Mr. Jones 0 10 0
Messrs. Ray and Co. .... 1 1 0
Mr. Roby 2 2 0
Michael Metcalf, Esq 2 2 0
Messrs. Mitchell and Co. 10 0
Mr. S. Lyons 1 0 0
Mr. J. P. Robinson 1 0 0
Mr. T. Aspinwall 1 1 0
Mr. R. Porter 1 0 0
Mr. S. Peek 1 0 0
Mr. D. Jones 2 0 0
Mr. W. Deane 1 0 0
Mr. H. Dixon 2 0 0
L. Miles, Esq., J.P 1 0 0
Mr. G. A. Lloyd 2 2 0
A Friend 1 1 0
A Friend in Need ........ 2 0 0
Mr. G. Wilkie 1 0 0
Mr. S. H. Smith 1 0 0
Two Friends 1 0 0
Mr. George King 1 0 0
Mr. George Jarman 1 0 0
T. W. Smart, Esq 1 1 0
Mr. Birnstingl 1 1 0
Mr. W. Knight 1 1 0
Mr. L. Coupland 1 1 0
Mr. Alexander Hart .... 1 1 0
Five Friends 1 5 0
Mr. W. Perry 1 0 0
Mr. Barrington 0 10 0
Mr. Jones 0 10 0
Mr. Thornton 0 10 0
Dr. McKellar 0 10 0
J. B. Metcalfe, Esq 0 10 0
Captain Hanson 0 10 0
Mr. Kelly 0 10 0
Mr. Tucker 0 10 6
Mr. James Goldsmith .... 1 0 0
Mr. Peter Favenc 1 1 0
Justice 5 0 0
Friends, per N. S. Wales
Bank, after departure ..500
Thus* bountifully supplied, I took ship for
China, being driven to that circuitous route to
avoid the British coast, and, favoured by the
north-east monsoon, arrived at Hong Kong in
* At Sydney a committee of the Law Society was appointed
to examine into my case. To possess themselves with the evi-
dence as fully as possible in the form presented to the jury on the
trial, the committee had before them the entire report of the trial
and of all the previous examinations at the Mansion House, as
well as the certificates, the statements of examinations at Norfolk


forty-nine days. After a brief survey of that now
handsome town, the capital of our Chinese pos-
sessions, which has shot up with a rapidity that
must have astounded the primitive Chinese, I
proceeded to Canton to get a ship for India; hut
no opportunity presented itself for nearly a month,
so that I filled up the interval by making myself
acquainted as fully as possible with the Chinese,
their country, and character. I had an escape
from assassination that seems quite providential.
Having been introduced to several merchants and
their clerks at Canton, I frequently accompanied
them in such rambles, in the neighbourhood of
the factories, as the recent treaty with the Chinese
permitted. One Saturday afternoon (4th Decem-
ber, 1847), I received an invitation to join a party
that was going to visit one or two of the adjacent
villages on the following day. Owing to a pre-
vious engagement at Whampoa, the Gravesend of
Canton, I was obliged to decline the proposed
excursion. Every one of the party were mur-
dered ! Their names were McCartney, Balkwill,
Brown, Butter, Bellamy, and Small.
It appeared that they went armed, and the
Chinese obstructing their progress, one of them
fired. The village population was up in a mo-
ment; they cut off the retreat to their boat of
these ill-fated gentlemen, who fought desperately,
Island, the confessions, and other subsequently acquired evidence,
and I was personally interrogated by the committee upon every
point that appeared to require explanation. This elaborate inves-
tigation extended over ten consecutive days, and the judgment of
the society on my case is given in their report.—See p. 100.


but overpowered by numbers, they were captured
and put to death with that lingering cruelty for
which the Chinese are too well known.
At length I got a passage in the Greyhound ,
for Madras, where I arrived on the 20th of Ja-
nuary, after narrowly escaping shipwreck in a
dead calm ! the current setting for a long time
direct towards that dangerous sunken rock over
which the surf breaks at high water, and is so
well known to mariners as Pedro Branca, at the
entrance to Singapore. There not being a breath
of wind, the captain had not the least control
over his ship.
Having a letter of introduction from a valued
friend to Colonel Browne, the military secretary
to the Government, I was received and most
splendidly entertained by that gentleman during
my three weeks’ stay at this superb presidency,
in the course of which I was received by the heads
of my profession with a cordiality which I shall
ever remember with the deepest gratitude. The
warmth with which my cause w as there espoused
w ill be seen by the following extract from the
leading Madras journal: —
“ It now remains for the press, in the exercise of its proper
vocation as the great court of appeal, to force upon the reluctant
executive power the justice of Mr. Barber’s claim to unconditional
liberation. Of what avail to him is the permission to reside in
Madras, and mingle, as we are happy to hear he does, in the best
society, so long as the ban of exile from home, and consequent
imputation of guilt, is allowed to rest on him ? The happiness of
a sensitive mind consists in the enjoyment of the good opinion of
those by whom it is surrounded. It is better to live amongst


thieves with the reputation of honesty, than to dwell amongst
honourable men with the character of a knave. Either Mr. Bar-
ber is guilty, or innocent. If the former, no punishment short of
death was too severe for him; if the latter, the Government
which still leaves him in actual slavery, perpetrates an odious
wrong. The Athenaeum adopts the hypothesis of his innocence,
and will do its utmost to render the belief universal.” —Madras
Athenaeum , 8 th February.
A most princely subscription was raised for me
by Colonel Browne and Mr. Norton, son of the
late judge there, and other professional gentlemen,
which was the more gratifying to my feelings as
it was set on foot without the slightest effort on
my own part.
HEADING OF MADRAS SUBSCRIPTION LIST.
WRITTEN BY HIS HONOUR SIR W. W. BURTON,
Judge of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Barber, an attorney of her Majesty’s Su-
preme Court at Westminster, is now at Madras,
seeking his way to Europe, having been assisted
thus far by the Judges of the Supreme Court at
New South Wales, by the gentlemen of the legal
profession, and by others, to whom his singular
claims upon the sense of justice of English gentle-
men were made known. Mr. Barber has suffered
under one of those occasional errors which, in the
administration of justice, the most upright minds
do sometimes fall into, and was transported for
life for a crime of which all those who have ex-
amined his case with care and attention in New
South Wales, and who are competent to judge,
declare their conviction that he was entirely in


nocent,—that of uttering a will, knowing it to
have been forged. The guilty parties were his
clients, but he had no participation in their guilt;
he was, however, indiscriminately involved in
their ruin. Her Majesty’s principal Secretary of
State for the Home Department has forwarded to
New South Wales a conditional pardon; that is,
a pardon upon condition that he does not return
to England. The pardon itself involves the ac-
knowledgment of his innocence, or it could not
have been granted, and Mr. Barber, reasonably
discontented without full justice, is on his way to
the nearest port to England which he may legi-
timately approach, for the purpose of procuring
the remainder. He is strongly recommended to
the assistance of the charitably disposed at Madras
by persons well known and highly respected in
New South Wales.
W. W. B.
23 rd January, 1848.
Names of the Gentlemen at Madras, by whom my case was investigated
there, and who generously provided me with the means of paying the heavy
expenses of a passage from India to France by the overland route :—
Rupees.
The Hon. Sir Edward John Gambier, Knt., Chief Justice of Madras .. 150
The Hon. Sir W. W. Burton, Knt., Puisne Justice 100
John Bruce Norton, Esq., Barrister at Law, Clerk of the Crown 100
William Abrose Serle, Esq., Registrar of the Supreme Court 50
George Norton, Esq., Barrister at Law, and Advocate General of
Madras 100
Thomas Sydney Smyth, Esq., Barrister at Law, and Chief Clerk to the
Insolvent Court 100
James William Branson, Esq., Attorney at Law 100
The Hon. Henry Dickenson, Esq., Member of Council 50
John Bonny Key, Esq
R. R. Bell, Esq
R. O. Campbell, Esq
f Members of the firm "|
s of Messrs. Binny >
(_ and Co J
30
20
20
Charles Martin Teed, Esq., Master of the Supreme Court 15


Donald McKenzie, Esq.
George Walker, Esq.
T. M. Biggs, Esq ,
{Members of the firm J 15
of Messrs. Bain- > 10
bridge and Co. .. j 10
Rupees.
George Arbuthnot, Esq
William U. Arbuthnot, Esq (
John Vans Agnew, Esq [
William McTaggart, Esq J
Members of the firm
of Messrs. Ar-
buthnot and Co.
f 50
I 30
} 10
[ 35
Guy Lushington Prendergast, Esq., Deputy Accountant-General 10
Lieutenant-Colonel Orlando Felix, Private Sec. to the Most Noble the
Governor 20
Sir Henry C. Montgomery, Bart., Acting Chief Secretary to Govern-
ment 15
Frederick Orme, Esq., Deputy Clerk of the Crown 30
William Henry Rose, Esq., Attorney at Law and Commissioner 30
John B. Jauncey, Esq., Attorney at Law 30
David Pugh, Esq
Henry Nelson, Esq
John Goolden, Esq
{Members of the firm "1
of Messrs. Parry L
and Co J
50
15
20
Robert Hunter, Esq., Treasurer and Secretary, Bank of Madras 30
Edward Elliott, Chief Magistrate and Superintendent of Police 35
Clement Dale, Esq., Attorney at Law, and Hon. Company’s Solicitor.. 50
Alexander Bain, Esq., Barrister at Law 10
Captain C. Biden, Master Attendant 50
R. H. Williamson, Esq., Deputy Collector, Sea Customs 10
A. M. Ritchie, Esq., Common Assignee 10
Lieut.-Col. Commandant S. W. Steel, C. 8., Military Auditor-General.. 35
John Robert Boyson, Esq., Attorney at Law 30
Major Clerk, Police Magistrate 20
J. H. Davidson, Esq., Register to the Court of Sudder Adawlut, &c... 100
Edward Salmon, Esq., Barrister at Law 20
Thomas Pycroft, Esq., Secretary to the Board of Revenue 15
John Henry Wilkins, Esq., Attorney at Law 30
W. Morehead, Esq., Third Puisne Judge of the Sudder Court 50
G. S. Hooper, Esq., First Puisne Judge of the Sudder Court 50
E. P. Thompson, Esq., Second Puisne Judge of the Sudder Court .... 50
F. Lushington, Esq., Deputy Register to the Sudder Court 30
J. L. Lushington, Esq., Second Assistant to the Accountant-General.. 20
J. Wyllie, Esq., Inspector General of Hospitals 30
Henry Crampton, Esq., Attorney at Law 25
Walter Elliot, Esq., First Member of the Board of Revenue 50
T. Key, Esq., Professor of Chemistry 10
The following Subscribers were personal friends of Colonel Browne
(Military Secretary to the Government), who hospitably received me
as his guest during my stay at Madras :—
A. F. Bruce, Esq., Civil Auditor* 100
Lieutenant-Colonel R. Alexander 50
Captain Lavie 20
D
* Copy memorandum from Mr. Bruce, returning the papers submitted to
him by Colonel Browne :
“ I have attentively gone through the case detailed in the pamphlet, and
am thoroughly persuaded of Mr. Barber’s innocence, and would gladly concur
in anything that may be suggested.”
26 th January , 1848. A. F. B.


Rupees.
Lieutenant Hope 10
Honourable J. F. Thomas 100
Captain J. H. Bell 20
Captain Stafford 15
Brigadier Ketchen 100
Lieutenant-Colonel Whinyates 20
Lieutenant-Colonel Moberley 20
Major H. S. Rowan 25
Lieutenant-Colonel Browne 100
LETTER from JOHN BRUCE NORTON, ESQ., Clerk of the Crown.
Madras, Feb. 10, 1848.
My Dear Sir, —In returning you the accompanying subscrip-
tion list, headed by Sir W. Burton, together with the amount of
the subscriptions collected, I have thought that a description of
the gentlemen whose names therein appear may not prove alto-
gether unacceptable, inasmuch as it appears to me that the pecu-
niary aid afforded you is by no means the most valuable point
of view in which to regard the act of your supporters in stepping
forward to assist you.
I may safely say that, with one or two exceptions, all who
have subscribed have done so, not from simple charity or mere
motives of sympathy for your personal misfortunes, but from a
strong moral persuasion of your entire innocence.
The legal proofs of many statements in your case are neces-
sarily wanting; but it is because they believe, from your whole
conduct, that these proofs do exist, and exist in England, that
they have stepped forward to assist you in seeking out and esta-
blishing them.
To give the subscription list this additional weight, I sent, in
every instance, your pamphlet to the gentlemen to whom I ap-
plied, with a request not to subscribe until after he had perused
it , and made himself master of the facts , and then only to give
his aid if he felt convinced or persuaded of the injustice of your
verdict.
Many returned me the list with a private letter, expressly
stating their conviction of your innocence; and, after the steps


taken by me, even those who subscribed in silence must, I think,
in fairness, be taken to have subscribed on the same principle.
Considerable time was necessarily consumed in this process;
but, I make no doubt, the list might have been doubled, had your
limited stay here permitted more extensive circulation. In one
instance only has it been returned without a donation.
It is thus that this paper becomes of far more importance to
you than it otherwise would, for I think it may be regarded as a
testimonial from men of high station, ability, and independence,
to the truthfulness of the case made by you for relief from an
unjust verdict.—l am, yours faithfully,
John Bruce Norton.
W. H. Barber, Esq.
Nothing but the settled purpose of my mind to
prosecute the work of my deliverance, undaunted
by difficulties on the one hand, and unallured by
such flattering attractions on the other, could have
made me resist the hospitable invitation to pro-
long. my stay, in every way so delightful, with my
generous and distinguished friends in India.
On the 14th of February last I resumed my
journey, embarking in the splendid steam-ship
The Precursor. Pressed for time, and limited in
space, I must not on the present occasion suffer
myself to linger, by giving any detailed account
of my travels; suffice it to say, that by the route
of Egypt and Trieste I reached Paris on the 4th
May, at which place I received proofs of the un-
wearied exertions of my friends in England, who
only awaited the arrival of the documents referred
to in the Appendix, to renew my application to
the Government authorities for a fuller investiga-
tion of my case.
d 2


My first step was to lay my papers before the
marquis of Normanby, who, after a few weeks,
sent for me, and admitted that the facts laid
before him had made a powerful impression upon
his mind. His Excellency observed, that as
Secretary for the Home Department for several
years, and subsequently as Lord-Lieutenant of
Ireland, he had had considerable experience in
investigations of this kind, but he certainly did
not remember a case so remarkable as mine.
The documents given in Part I. having, by the
kindness of his Excellency, been transmitted to
the Government, several of the leading mem-
bers of my profession, and other gentlemen in
England, to the majority of whom I was per-
sonally unknown, but who had made themselves
thoroughly acquainted with my case, solicited
an interview with the Secretary of State, who
thereupon required them to state in writing
their reasons for believing me innocent. I had
intended to publish the document in which such
reasons were detailed; but the gentlemen by
whom it was drawn up considered that as all the
facts set forth, and the arguments advanced, are
to be found in the other papers which the pam-
phlet contains, it might not be necessary. I beg,
however, to give the following extract:—“ If any
further proof of Mr. Barber’s conscious innocence
be necessary, we respectfully submit it is fur-
nished by his turning aside from the eligible
opportunity presented to him in New South Wales
for establishing himself in that colony, where


there is every reason to believe he might have
practised his profession with great success.” To
this communication the following answer was
received:—
“Whitehall, 24 th October , 1848.
“ Sib, —I am directed by the secretary, Sir George Grey, to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd instant, in
which you have stated the grounds on which you and the other
gentleman named, as adverted to in your previous letter of the
13th instant, are convinced of Mr. Barber’s innocence of the
crime of which he was convicted. I am to inform you, that all
the documents in Sir George Grey’s possession, relating to this
case, will receive the most careful and attentive consideration;
and that, as Sir George Grey presumes that these documents
comprise the whole of the facts relating to it, he does not see that
any advantage can result from an interview with you and the
other gentlemen, on whose behalf you addressed him. He would
not feel it right to enter into any discussion on the subject,
and he would think it essential that any additional fact which
could influence the ultimate decision should be communicated to
him in writing. If, after this intimation, you should still wish
for an interview, Sir George Grey will receive you on Thursday
next, at half-past one o’clock, but he will not feel himself at
liberty upon that occasion to express any opinion upon the
case.—l am, &c.,
“ G. CoRNEAVALL LEWIS.
“ A. Stevenson, Esq.,
19, Essex-street , Strand.”
The audience was accordingly not pressed fur-
ther, but my friends obtained the extracts from
the diaries of Bircham and myself, and sent them
to Sir George Grey. On the 15th of November I
received, at Paris, from my zealous friend Mr.
Stevenson (of the firm of Pollock and Stevenson),


copies of the free pardon and letter given in the
Appendix.
It would be embarrassing were I to endeavour
to name those to whom I am indebted for much
valuable assistance in effecting my deliverance.
I am sincerely grateful to all who have moved a
finger to polish the mirror of truth. There is,
however, one gentleman who has such peculiar
claims upon my gratitude, that I should not do
justice to my own feelings were I to omit any
fitting occasion for expressing it, —I mean Mr.
Serjeant Wilkins.
It is not so much for the exercise of his intel-
lectual powers in my defence upon the trial, as
for the generous, persevering, and at length suc-
cessful efforts for my extrication, which he has
subsequently made. My readers have not for-
gotten, that when his professional duty as my
advocate ceased, —when his forensic robes were
laid aside, —he stepped forward as my sympathiz-
ing fellow and sought to snatch me from
the abyss of misery to which he saw me relent-
lessly hurried, and which he so well knew was
undeserved. It was with unspeakable pain that
I heard of the attacks to which his philanthropy
and his pure love of justice exposed him.
“ What a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!”
But his motives were then misconstrued. That
they will now he better appreciated, I think
the following remarks from the Law Times of


the 18th November last, are a satisfactory
proof:—
“ Our readers will remember also the reproaches that were cast
upon his eloquent defender, Mr. Serjeant Wilkins, for having
dared publicly to declare his solemn conviction of his client’s
innocence, and to ask information which might enable him to
vindicate it. To the learned Serjeant it must be a source of
great and just congratulation, that the result has proved the
soundness of his judgment, as his generous exertions at the time
proved the excellence of his heart.”
As I have already stated, the object of the
present publication is to enable every person to
have the opportunity of forming his own unbiassed
judgment on a subject which has received so
much of the public attention. So soon as circum-
stances will permit, I propose, in compliance with
the wishes of my friends, to publish, not a pam-
phlet, but a book, containing a full account of my
captivity, with a history of Norfolk Island, and of
the extraordinary scenes and occurrences of which
that remote but very beautiful spot has been the
theatre; together with some portions of my
homeward journey, via China and India. The
illustrations of convict life which I shall be able
to furnish, will, I earnestly trust, lead to some
improvement in penal discipline. I propose to
add some memoirs of the most notorious and
remarkable convicts of the last twenty years, col-
lected from authentic sources, which may furnish
food for useful reflection to the philanthropist and
the legislator.*
* When this introduction was written, I little anticipated the


It may not be out of place to explain the object
of the application which counsel had been in-
structed to make to the Court of Queen’s Bench
during the last term. It will strike the unpro-
fessional reader as a curious fact, that during the
whole time I was serving as a convict in Norfolk
Island, I was still, as I now am, on the roll of
attorneys and solicitors; but, by 6& 7 Yict. cap.
73, s. 25, it is necessary, when an attorney has
not taken out his certificate for twelve months,
that he should apply to the Court for permission
to renew his annual licence. It was believed,
that under the special circumstances of my case,
the Court would dispense with the usual notice of
such an application. Upon reflection, however, I
resolved not to ask for a departure from what is
doubtless a very salutary rule, especially as I
could not do full justice to the affairs of clients
until my own were first set completely in order.
In drawing this Introduction to a close, I again
earnestly entreat that every individual into whose
new persecution that awaited me, the particulars of which are
given in Part 11.
With my mind thus engrossed and harassed, and my slender
means absorbed, the reader will understand how I have been
prevented from publishing the work promised in the text; but as
soon as my personal anxieties shall have somewhat abated, I fully
propose not only to lay before the public a detailed narrative of
my captivity, but hints for the improvement of prison discipline,
and suggestions for the amendment of the criminal law ; showing,
as I hope to do, how the escape of the guilty as well as the con-
viction of the innocent may be rendered almost a moral impossi-
bility, and how the costs of prosecutions may be reduced to ono-
fourth of their present amount.


hands the pamphlet may he placed, will read it
with attention and candour. He will, probably,
not then withhold from me that cordial welcome
back to my country, and that generous sympathy
which, I am grateful to say, has been extended to
me by all to whom the real merits of my case
have already become known. Though I have
received my restoration to society, I have not re-
ceived restitution. My home, my offices, my
library, my hard-earned professional connections,
are all sacrificed upon the altar of mistaken jus-
tice, which, in my instance, may most properly
be typified as blind. I have regained my per-
sonal liberty, indeed, hut lam destitute. To re-
gain my former position is my cherished design,
and, to accomplish, this, I appeal to the justice
and the generosity of the British nation. I have,
since my release, ascertained the most absurd and
erroneous accounts of my personal history to have
been put into circulation, which, hut that I think
it would be regarded as ill-spent time, I would
here set right. The account of my death of the
yellow fever! and of my concession !! ! which
went the round of all the papers, will be fresh in
the public recollection; but the following anec-
dote furnishes such a curious proof of the false
impressions which have occasionally existed re-
specting me, that I am induced to give it to the
reader, and with that I shall close this, I fear,
rather tedious Introduction.
In the coffee-room of the “ Goldene Lamm,”
at Vienna, Major C , who had recently arrived


from India, had read, in Galignani’s Messenger ,
a long article relating to me, extracted from the
Madras Spectator , which gave rise to the follow-
ing conversation between him and Mr. H ,
then on his route to Madras.
Major 0., addressing his friend on this subject,
said, “Do you recollect that case of Barber’s,
some years ago?”—“Oh yes,” said Mr. H.,
“ perfectly : he was hanged for forgery.” “ No,”
said the major, “ not hanged, only transported for
life: you know, they don’t hang for forgery now-
a-days.”—“Ah! but he was though,” replied
Mr. H., “because he forged a will, which, till
quite lately, was a capital offence.” “ I assure
you,” said the major, rather amused, “ you are in
error.” “But,” said Mr. H., waxing a little
warm, “ I know I am right; for I have a most
distinct recollection of the fact of his being
hanged; but he is the last man that will suffer
death for forgery, for the forgery of a will, even,
is no longer a capital offence.” “ What will you
bet,” said the major, “that you are right?”—
“ Whatever you please,” replied Mr. H.; “but
who is to prove it ?” “ I’ll take the onus pro-
handi upon myself,” rejoined Major C., to the
astonishment of his apparently well-informed
friend. The bet was arranged to be a supper for
three. The major produced Galignani’s Messen-
ger, which not a little amazed Mr. H. “ That,”
said the major, “is, I believe, what the lawyers
call documentary evidence; but my next is a
living witness. Do you see that tall man


in conversation by the fireplace?—that’s Bar-
ber ! ”
The astonishment of Mr. H. may be imagined.
I was invited to make np the party of “three,”
and spent a most delightful evening, in the course
of which my case was fully discussed. Mr. H.,
whom I found to have been a great traveller, and
a very intelligent gentleman, frankly admitted
that he had received a most salutary lesson
against a too pertinacious reliance on the accuracy
of his memory.
W. HENRY BARBER.
9, Hoicard-street , Norfolk-street , Strand.
Ist January , 1849.




PREFACE
TO THE
PUBLICATION AT SYDNEY.
BY ARCHIBALD MICHIE
Esa.,
BARRISTER AT LAW.
The following pages disclose, perhaps, as affect-
ing a case of personal misfortune as can he found
in the annals of human history. The subject of
it, Mr. William Henry Barber, having arrived in
Sydney from Van Diemen’s Land —under a con-
ditional pardon, permitting him to proceed to any
other part of the world except England—being
absolutely destitute in a strange land, has, in
the first instance, sought the sympathy and assist-
ance of the members of his own profession, and
not in vain. The Sydney Law Society, consisting
exclusively of respectable solicitors, having care-
fully investigated, and favourably reported upon
his case, in the terms set forth in the present
publication, and having with others subscribed
towards paying the expense of his intended voyage
to Erance, —it is considered by some of Mr. Bar-
ber’s well-wishers here expedient to publish, as
completely as may be practicable with reference


to their means and objects, the whole circum-
stances of his most melancholy case, in order that
every one who may be disposed to attend to it
may, as expeditiously as possible, be made ac-
quainted with the facts upon which Mr. Barber
grounds his appeal to the benevolent feelings of
his fellow creatures. Concurring in this view, I
have gladly employed such leisure as I could
obtain for the purpose, from my ordinary pursuits,
in superintending these pages through the press;
trusting that all who may sit down to their
perusal, with the ability, will rise up with the
determination to contribute their mite towards
the relief of one who has borne peculiar and un-
merited suffering with equal dignity and patience.
Archibald Michie.
Sydney,
2 5th August , 1847.


PART I.
MEMORIAL.
To the Right Honourable Sir J. R. G. Graham, Baronet,
Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Home Department,
&c. &c. &c.
Sir, —I once more crave leave to address to you my humble
petition. It is scarcely necessary to remind you that lam the
Solicitor who was convicted on a charge of uttering a will of one
Anne Slack, knowing the same to he a forgery. Of such guilty
knowledge, as of all participation in or criminal connection with
the fraud effected by such forgery, I most solemnly assure you,
Sir, I am wholly innocent.
Whilst a prisoner at Millbank, I had the honour to transmit to
you a Memorial, embodying the circumstances of my unfortunate
case; but, from the distracted state of my mind at that period,
the statement was, I fear, exceedingly imperfect. Permit me,
therefore, now to submit a narrative, which I trust will be found
to embrace every material feature, and to which, as well as to
the subjoined declarations and confessions made since my trial ,
I humbly but most earnestly entreat the favour of your patient
attention.
I was articled to those eminent and most respectable Solicitors,
Messrs. Scoones, of Tonbridge, with whom I continued seventeen
years , when I left to practise on my own account, having received
from those gentlemen a highly commendatory testimonial. After
a few months’ residence at Brighton, devoted to study and prepa-
ration, I (in 1837) established myself in London. About eighteen
months afterwards, Fletcher called at my office, inquiring into the
validity of a claim which a client of mine had preferred to a por-


Fletcher’s
wealth and ap-
tabdUy. reSp6C '
Employs me
on ordinary so-
ness° r S bUSI ’
afterwards to
aid in tracing
owners to un-
claimed divi-
dends.
Many true
owners found,
and property re-
stored to them.
tion of the Angel Estates, and who had applied to him to advance
the necessary funds.
I told him I considered the case hopeless, and dissuaded him
from the loan which he had contemplated. Upon inquiry of a
client, who called at my office a few days afterwards, I learned
that he was a retired surgeon, and that he was living in a house
of his own, and was, besides, possessed of considerable landed pro-
perty ; in fact, an affluent and, ostensibly, most respectable man.
A few months afterwards he consulted me upon a dispute with
one of his tenants; and from that time to the moment of my
apprehension, I continued to be his ordinary solicitor. His busi-
ness consisted of the preparation of agreements with his tenants,
the adjustment of differences between them, and the occasional
investment and transfer of his capital. In deportment, he was
reserved but gentlemanlike.
When I had been concerned for him about a year, he intro-
duced to me an old and infirm, but respectable-looking woman,
as “ Miss Stewart,” who represented herself as the sister of one
John Stewart, who had died, leaving some money in the funds.
Administration had been applied for, but finding the aid of a
solicitor necessary, Fletcher introduced the claimant to me.
The Commons being convinced of her identity, administration was
granted, and the Bank, being also satisfied, she obtained the
fund. About this period, Fletcher told me that he had the
means of obtaining information at the Bank as to the amount of
stock and dividends unclaimed, and that he devoted a portion of
his time to tracing out the owners, with a view to a liberal
remuneration for his trouble ; but, in order to secure such remu-
neration, an agreement was necessary, which he should some-
times require me to prepare. I continued his solicitor about five
years, in the course of which he traced out several of the true
owners of this kind of property, and through my professional
instrumentality placed them in possession of it. But, during
the same period, he also introduced four different persons,
apparently having no connection with each other, and at inter-
vals of about a year, who claimed and procured a large amount
of property (by means of false personations), to which they had
no real title.
These cases were brought into the office precisely in the same


tear/ as the genuine cases ; and as appearances were preserved,
and every precaution was taken with consummate subtlety,—and,
above all, as I placed implicit reliance on Fletcher’s integrity,—
not the slightest suspicion of fraud ever occurred to my mind.
In speaking and writing to me about them, Fletcher affected to
regard them as the most ordinary and legitimate business, fre-
quently writing a long letter on different matters of his own and
genuine bank cases, and in the same communication referring to
and giving me directions in these fraudulent transactions. The
first fraud was Stewart's; the second was a case of Burchard’s ;
the third, Hunt's; and the fourth, Slack’s. It was in the last
that detection occurred, and which led to the discovery of the
rest. The circumstances of Slack’s case are as remarkable, as
the means adopted were crafty and iniquitous. They require far
more attention than I believe has ever yet been paid to them, in
order truly to understand the part which I have taken, and the
means by which my faith and confidence were obtained, and
whereby I was so effectually and fatally misled. I will state
them as perspicuously as my enfeebled energies will permit.
In the autumn of 1842, I first received Fletcher’s instructions
in this matter. He said there was a sum of £3,500 stock in the
name of “Anne Slack, of Smith Street, Chelsea;” that he had
ascertained there was a lady of the same name living with Cap-
tain Foskett, of Abbott’s Langley, and he requested me to com-
municate with the captain, to ascertain whether she was the
party , and if so, if she was aware of her rights ; but on no
account to disclose the nature of the property without his express
authority; —hence the correspondence of myself and partner
with that gentleman, and my subsequent interviews with him
and his solicitor. In the course of this negotiation, I learned
that the lady had once lodged in Smith Street, Chelsea, —a cir-
cumstance which raised a strong presumption of her identity ;
but, unfortunately for me, the statement as to the residence was
accompanied with another, which raised a much stronger pre-
sumption that she was not the party; namely, her age. The
captain, either from some delicacy (a most unjustifiable and
calamitous one) about the age of an unmarried lady, or some
other motive, represented her as only twenty-seven years old,
whilst, in truth, she was six or seven and thirty . I made some
E


Slack’s case
( continued).
Misrepresen-
tations of Flet-
cher.
Claim rejected.
other inquiries of the captain, but without eliciting any fact
which raised the least presumption of his sister-in-law’s identity,
beyond her temporary lodging in Smith-street.
The particulars thus collected, I fully reported to Fletcher,
especially the two facts as to the residence and age. He said,
“ It is hardly possible she can be the party, as the owner of the
stock had executed a power of attorney twelve years before,
which Miss Slack, of Abbott’s Langley, could not then have
legally done, she being then a minor ; but,” continued he, “ if you
can obtain her handwriting, I will have it compared with the
signature at the Bank, which will effectually determine the
question.” I accordingly applied by letter to Captain Foskett
for it, and his solicitor subsequently brought me a letter written
by the lady. This I enclosed in a letter to Fletcher; and it was
in this important stage of the inquiry where he grossly deceived
me. In a few days he brought the letter back, stating, “It is
now quite clear that this lady is not the party entitled , as the
oicner of the stock writes a large stiff hand, like an elderly per-
son, whilst this lady writes the usual fine running hand of a
young lady.” He added, “ that Miss Slack, of Abbott’s Langley,
held a sum of £6,000 stock, but that the signature to that and
the £3,500 were totally dissimilar ; —in fact, that the writing of
this young lady was as unlike the writing of the owner of the
unclaimed stock, as ordinary writing was unlike print.” At the
same time he made this report, he handed me what he said
was an extract from the letter of his friend at the Bank, but
without leaving me the letter itself, which confirmed his report.
I therefore concluded, without doubt, that although it was cer-
tainly a remarkable coincidence that two ladies of the same name,
and both holders of funded property, should have resided in
the same street, yet that the statement of Captain Foskett as to
the age, and the report of Fletcher upon the writing, united in
satisfactorily proving that the sister-in-law of the former had no
connection whatever with the unclaimed fund. I accordingly
wrote to Captain Foskett’s solicitor to that effect, returning his
client’s letter. I remarked to Fletcher on the singular coinci-
dence of two separate holders of stock of one name and who had
resided in the same street. He said, “It is not so very extraor-
dinary, as Smith-street is one in which many persons live for


a season only, and then remove; and Slack is by no means so
uncommon a name as you suppose, there being a great many in
the Bank books ” I most implicitly believed his report, not only
from pre-established confidence in himself, but because I was in
some measure prepared for a result unfavourable to the lady’s
identity, from her brother-in-law’s statement as to her age.
Moreover, I believed that Fletcher was, as he affected to be,
chagrined and disappointed, that after so much trouble, he had
failed to discover the true owner.
My partner and I talked over this business as of the other mat-
ters in the office, and particularly the result of this inquiry, and
we both thought that the presumption which had been raised in
Miss Slack s favour by the fact of former residence merely, was
completely rebutted by the apparently conclusive facts as to age
and writing. All idea, therefore, of this lady being entitled was
wholly dismissed from both our minds.
Fletcher expressed himself exceedingly disappointed, but said
he should resume his inquiries for the right party. A few days
afterwards he wrote us a letter, expressing his intention of going
to Bath, as he had reason to suppose, from the death of a lady
of the name there, that the owner might be heard of in that
quarter.
After his return, he called in my absence at our office, and left
a copy of the “ Bath and Cheltenham Gazette,” in which he had
inserted an advertisement for the representative of “ Anne Slack,
formerly of Smith-street, Chelsea,” and referring parties to
Barber and Bircham.* In answer to this advertisement we re-
ceived a letter from a Jane Slack, of Bath, stating that she was
the niece of Anne Slack, and pretending to have a claim. This
we answered. Shortly afterwards we received a further letter,
in which the writer stated that she was satisfied she could not be
the party inquired for. Upon a careful consideration of this
correspondence, after my apprehension, a suspicion arose in my
mind that it was fictitious, and my solicitor accordingly went to
Bath and inquired for the writer, when he discovered that she
was no other than the identical Emma Slack ! and that she
E 2
* This Memorial was prepared in the absence of all my books and papers,
but its accuracy is now verified by affidavit filed in the Court of Queen’s Bench.
The entries in my diary are now given at p. 124.


Slack’s case
(i continued .)
Why the Bath
claim was aban-
doned.
Advertisement
for claimants.
Fletcher pro-
fesses to have
discovered the
true owner.
had taken lodgings merely to have our answers to her letters re-
ceived there. The villanous subtlety of Fletcher thus became
evident. Instead of Bath being the object of his journey, it was
Bristol , the residence of Sanders and his wife, where the re-
mainder of the plot, and the details by which my eyes were to bo
blinded, were doubtless arranged. If, Sir, you will take the
trouble to refer to the “Times," of the 23rd April last, containing
my address to the Court, or to my memorial addressed to you
from Millbank, it will be seen that the letters of this pretended
Jane Slack were regularly sent to Fletcher, and that at the same
time he affected to me to have no knowledge of her whatever. One
of the numerous and extraordinary unfortunate circumstances to
which I became the victim, was the illness of my solicitor at the
time of my trial, whereby I not only lost his important services,
but his evidence of the result of his inquiries at Bath. From
Sanders’ information since the trial, it appears that he had, by
agreement with Fletcher, registered the death of one Anne Slack?
at Bath, some time before the taking of the lodgings there, but
when a certificate was applied for, there appeared to have been
an error in the entry, and that Fletcher and he then determined
to register a death at Pimlico, which accounts for Jane Slack’s
somewhat abruptly breaking ofi her correspondence with our firm.
From the middle of January, when the communications with
Captain Foskett terminated, to the early part of March, Fletcher
pretended to be exerting himself to trace out the true owner of the
stock. It was then I suggested than an advertisement in the
“ Times” might produce the party. lie assented to this, and one
of our clerks prepared such an advertisement and got it inserted.
Several persons applied in consequence, but Miss Slack’s (of
Abbott’s Langley) friends took no notice of it. A letter was,
however, sent us by a Mr. Offley, intimating that there was a
lady at Abbott’s Langley of the name. Mr. Bircham wrote in
reply , that we had ascertained she was not entitled* A few
days afterwards, i. e. on the 15th, Fletcher called, and said,
that after failing in all his previous exertions, he had at last met
with the real owner by the merest accident. lie said, that
whilst superintending some repairs of a house he had recently
purchased at Westminster (the conveyance of which we had
* See Copies of the Entries in my Partner’s Diary.—P. 126.


prepared), lie got into conversation with one of the workmen,
and finding that he was a Chelsea man, he inquired if he knew
anybody of the name of Slack there; that the man then referred
him to a house at Chelsea; that upon inquiry there he was re-
ferred to No. 7, Francis-street, Tottenham Court Road, where
he found a highly respectable woman, who was the niece of the
owner of the stock. lie said he was quite satisfied of the identity
of her aunt, as he had procured a fac-simile of the signature to
the will, and had it compared with the Bank books, and they
tallied exactly. I congratulated him upon the lucky incident
which had led him to the owner; but he said, with a shrug of
well-feigned disappointment, “ Yes, but I shall gain nothing by
it, as she does not require my information.” I said she may not
be aware of her right to this particular stock. He said “ Oh, yes
she does, as it is expressly named in the will. But,” said he,
“ she does not appear to be particularly connected with a solicitor,
and I will recommend to her your firm.” I thanked him; and
the next morning he introduced her as “ Miss Slack.” She was
dressed in black, and was very respectable in appearance. She
produced the will, and I particularly noticed that the signature
exactly corresponded with the description Fletcher had originally
given me of that in the Bank books, being like an old lady’s, and
the very opposite of Miss Slack, of Abbott’s Langley. At the
same time she produced an official copy of the registration of
her aunt’s death at Pimlico, by which it appeared she had died in
the previous February, of gout in the stomach, aged GB. I made
some inquiries about the deceased, which this arch imposter
answered with great readiness. She said she should have proved
the will before, but she had been ill; which statement seemed
quite borne out by her delicate appearance. She was studiously
disguised, wearing light ringlets (her natural hair being black),
and complained of gout in her hands and feet, so that she could
only walk with difficulty. From the precision of dress and stiff-
ness of her air and manner, she had all the appearance of being,
as she represented herself, an unmarried lady, and was about
five-and-thirty years of age. She professed to treat my services
as somewhat superfluous, observing that it was rather a proctor’s
business. I said it certainly was, and that the aid of an attorney
was not absolutely necessary. Fletcher then remarked, that as


Slack’s case
{continued).
She employs
us to obtain
probate.
The usual pro-
ceedings there-
upon taken.
My partner
sometimes as-
sisting.
the dividends of tlie £3,500 had been transferred to the Com-
missioners for the Reduction of the National Debt, he would
recommend her to avail herself of my professional assistance.
She asked what our charges would probably amount to ? I an-
swered, about £lO. She said, if they were not likely to exceed
that, she would be glad if I would attend to the matter for her,
as she was not accustomed to business. I told her that she would
have to advance the probate duty, which would amount to £BO.
She said she was not immediately prepared with this, but had
no doubt she could borrow it. Fletcher then said that aj the
business would now be in my hands, and I was his solicitor, he
would advance it, if she would authorize me to retain the money
for him. To this she assented, and he gave me a check for the
money. I then accompanied her to Doctors’ Commons, where
she proved the will in the usual way. It was attentively perused
by our proctor, who administered the customary oath, without
making any remark upon it. I remember saying to Fletcher, he
might as well accompany us to Doctors’ Commons, but he said
that as his presence was not required, he must attend to some
business of his own. After the will had been proved, the sham
executrix took a cab, directing the driver to conduct her to
7, Francis-street. Upon receipt of the probate from our proc-
tor, Mr. Bircham 'prepared tlie application to the Bank for the
stock. This being signed by the pretended executrix, he lodged
it with the probate at the Bank; and, after several inquiries,
sometimes made by himself, and at others by a clerk, he learnt
that the stock had been transferred into the name of the execu-
trix. He accordingly apprised her of this by letter, as well as
Fletcher. Whilst this part of the business was in progress, I
was much engrossed by the business of the Spring Assizes, and
was absent on the Home Circuit about ten days, during which
Bircham superintended the business. On my return I found that
Fletcher and the pretended Miss Slack had severally called at
the office complaining of delay. Accordingly, upon learning from
Bircham that the matter was ready for settlement, I directed a
clerk to make an appointment for Miss Slack to attend and settle,
and for Mr. Fletcher to attend and receive his £BO. She came
on the 7th of April, when I accompanied her to the Bank. After


passing through the usual routine, and her signing all the neces-
sary books, she received the stock and dividends, amounting to
about £4,600. In the course of this, a circumstance occurred
which I think you will allow, Sir, was most unfairly pressed
against me at the trial to prejudice the jury, namely, that £6OO
of the fund was obtained in gold , and that it was delivered to
me. The simple fact was, that being with the executrix, and
she having, or professing to have, the gout in her hands, I carried
this weight of gold for her till she got to a cab. JCletcher met us
in the rotunda of the Bank, and afterwards attended our office
to receive his £BO. When this was done, she paid him £5 for
the use of it and his trouble, which he received with a well-
feigned appearance of dissatisfaction. Our law bill was £l3, for
which she handed me £l5. All the mone}' —the £4,600 —was
counted over, and she signed the usual receipt for the whole
amount, in a cash account entered into the office ledger. In
signing her assumed name, “ Emma Slack,” she appeared to have
great difficulty in writing, but w'hich it has since occurred to me
was probably affected, lest I should recognize the writing of the
Jane Slack, of Bath. This being settled, and Fletcher having
offered to accompany her to a cab, they left our office, the exe-
cutrix having the funds in a bag. From that moment I never
saw or heard of her until some time after my apprehension,
when I was told that she was a Mrs. Sanders , a name that
was never breathed by Fletcher or herself during the whole of
the business.
I think, Sir, you will perceive how easily any solicitor might
be deceived by such conduct as I have described, especially
placing, as I did, implicit reliance on Fletcher’s integrity.
Throughout the transaction, Fletcher affected much mortification
that he should have lost the benefit of communicating the secret
of the unclaimed stock to the proprietor. lie had ample means
of obtaining confidential information from the Bank, and in the
course of this business he called and told my partner, and after-
wards myself (as appears from our respective diaries), that the
Bank had in error entered the two Miss Slacks “ deceased ” in
their books— i. e., Miss Slack, of Abbott’s Langley, who was the
owner of the £6,000 stock, and the old lady of Pimlico, Emma


Slack’s case
{continued).
Probable de-
tection of the
fraud.
Fletcher’s re-
serve the same
in genuine cases.
Mr. Fresh-
field’s interview
with me.
Slack’s aunt, so that when the former went to receive her divi-
dends, she would find herself so entered, and some difficulty or
confusion might arise. I observed to him, as our knowledge of
this error is only through you, we cannot set them right. “ Oh,
no,” said he, “my friend will see to that; lam surprised they
should have made both parties ‘ deceased,’ even though they
consider them to be one, it is not their usual practice.” Whe-
ther he endeavoured to get Christmas to alter the books and
failed, or whether Christmas promised to do so, and either forgot
it or found it impracticable, I have no means of judging; but,
unless he supposed the books to have been altered by Christmas,
he must certainly have been in great anxiety—seeing that the
Bank had, contrary to his expectations, made Captain Foskett’s
sister-in-law “ deceased.” From his admission to Smith, and his
whole conduct, it is now evident that he calculated, that if the
fraud were detected (and which it was almost certain to be), lie
should escape by becoming “ evidence for the Crown’’ as he had
throughout acted with extreme caution, and had studiously
avoided any overt act. This caution, though very apparent upon
a review of his conduct, did not particularly strike me at the time,
as there was no necessity for his attending at Doctors’ Commons,
or before the authorities at the Bank ; and there was a very good
reason, or rather plausible pretext, assigned for some precaution,
namely, that his appearing in Bank matters might lead to the
disclosure of his connection with his friend there. He was
equally reserved and guarded in Robins’, Smith’s, and other
genuine cases.
After the settlement on the 7th of April, the business had en-
tirely passed from my mind, until the 15th of November follow-
ing, when Mr. James Freslifield called and inquired about it. I
immediately showed him all the papers, and gave him every
information I possessed, except the name of the client who had
introduced the executrix. I told him that I was under a strong
impression that his inquiry arose from some error in the Bank
books, and therefore declined to furnish the name of a client
who might be exposed to annoyance erroneously: at the same
time I said, if he would communicate with me again in a day or
two, I might feel at liberty to give the information he pressed


for. He then left, and I wrote Fletcher a letter, of which I
think the following is a literal copy
“ 1 5th November, 1848.
( Wednesday.')
“ Dear Sir, I have received a communication from the
Bank, in reference to which I shall be glad to see you. To-
morrow I have a cause to try, but on Saturday, if you will call,
I shall be at the office.—Yours faithfully,
“ J. Fletcher, Esq.” “ W. H. Barber.”
He came on Friday, when I acquainted him with the particulars
of Mr. Freslifield’s visit. He said, “ You ought not to be sur-
prised at that, after my having apprised you of the mistake
which had been made in the Bank books—the inquiry is pre-
cisely what I expected—but the error will be put right, and you
will hear no more of it.” I said I had no doubt that it was so,
but it would be satisfactory to know that the mistake had been
found out and corrected, and I would ask Mr. Fresbfield if it had
been done. He, however, dissuaded me from this, observing,
“ It will only afford him another opportunity of probing you, to
learn, if possible, from whom the information was originally
obtained about the stock; but I know all that is doing at the
Bank as well as Mr. Freslifield does, and that the error will be
soon corrected—depend upon it, you will hear no more of the mat-
ter.” I certainly felt no anxiety, believing that if the mistake
(which I firmly believe had been made) were not corrected, that
further inquiry would be made by Mr. Freslifield or the autho-
rities at the Treasury. Unfortunately, no further inquiry was
ever made, and becoming engrossed with the multifarious con-
cerns in the office, the matter quite passed from my recollection
until the Otli of December (twenty-four days after Mr. Freshfield’s
visit), when I was apprehended on my way to my office, shortly
after nine o’clock in the morning. I was taken direct to the
Mansion House, when I was immediately searched ; my pocket-
book and other papers, with the keys of my office desks and
* I have since compared it with the copy given in the brief to counsel, and
find it verbatim.


Slack’s case
( continued ).
My partner’s
disbelief in guilt
and confidence
in Fletcher’s in-
tegrity.
Examination
at the Mansion
House.
drawers, were taken from me. I wrote notes for my partner and
managing clerk, Mr. Price, which I delivered to Forrester. I
was kept close prisoner until one, and my urgent request to he
allowed to send again for my partner or counsel was refused.
About half-past one, Forrester returned with my partner and
Price—the notes having been kept back until my office had been
thoroughly ransacked. Bircham, knowing all about the business,
naturally expressed his astonishment at the position in which I
was placed, observing, “if you are guilty, I am guilty, but of
course you will soon be discharged, Fletcher will at once explain
it.” We determined he should instantly fetch Fletcher. He had
no sooner left for this purpose than I was ushered into the pre-
sence of the Lord Mayor, without counsel or other assistance,
although Mr. Clarkson, Mr. Freshfield, with his clerks, and a
body of witnesses, were all arrayed for the prepared attack. Mr.
Clarkson suggested that I should be remanded, without examina-
tion, till Thursday ; but as I must remain in custody (bail being
refused) meanwhile, which would very seriously have prejudiced
my clients, and conceiving that no case could possibly be made
out to justify my detention for a single hour, I preferred that the
case should be gone into, unaided though I was. In the course
of the examination, Bircham arrived in the room with Fletcher,
and I then retired with the former, and conferred on the pro-
priety of calling the latter, when we determined that, however
unpleasant it might be for him to be so suddenly placed under
examination, yet, that as he was the only person who could
explain the business, he must be called. We then beckoned to
Fletcher, who was standing at some distance. We told him that
he must really explain the matter. He said, “ I shall be pressed
to divulge the name of my informant at the Bank.” I replied,
“ I conceive you are not bound to do that.” He said, “Will
you protect me if lam asked the question ?” I replied, “ I will
certainly submit that it is a question you v.e not bound to
answer.” He then said, “ Had I not better account for my
connection with the executrix by meeting her at the Bank ?” I
said, “By no means ; on the contrary, state the precise truth in
every particular!' He again urged, that he was afraid they
would press him as to his informant at the Bank, and suggested
that before he appeared as a witness we ought to have some


further conference. I replied, with some warmth at his hesita-
tion, “ Even if you should be pressed to reveal the name of your
Bank friend, I can’t help it; you know liow you accounted to
me for meeting with Emma Slack, and I have no alternative but
calling you; my detention in custody, even for twenty-four hours,
would do me irreparable mischief. Refuse, if you please, to
disclose your friend’s name, but, for God’s sake, don’t build up a
particle of fiction.”* My partner also urged him in a similar
manner, reminding him that he was in duty bound to state what
he knew, after the serious aspect which the matter had assumed,
and that such information must at once release me. Without
receiving or waiting for any direct answer, I called him before
the Lord Mayor. I have set this out with some particularity, as
the prosecution, with that exquisite skill (but as I humbly think
not with equal fairness) which has characterized the entire pro-
secution against me, proved the fact of my being in conference
with Fletcher prior to calling him, but suppressed the fact of its
being in the presence and hearing of my partner, and without
putting in Fletcher’s deposition, which, however prejudicial to
him, would have shown the deception he had practised upon me.
I have now, Sir, narrated as perspicuously as my enfeebled
energies will enable me—for I am now in hospital on the bed of
sickness—the entire history of this to me most melancholy busi-
ness. In the absence of all my books and papers, I can only
rely upon my memory for dates and other particulars, but I
believe that no material inaccuracy will be found. As the
perusal of the naked detail, upon which I have entered, will of
itself occupy a sufficient portion of your valuable time, I could
have wished to stop here, leaving you to draw your own con-
clusions—aided by the confessions, declarations, and certificates
appended hereto. There are, however, some points upon which I
feel constrained to address to you a few observations.
It has been said, that if innocent, I have at least betrayed gross
negligence in not detecting the fraudulent character of the busi-
ness introduced to my office. Whatever credit for candour I
might obtain for admitting such a charge, it would be insincere
were Ito do so. It may be that I did not in all things exercise
* See his Confession to Dr. Browning, of what passed at this conversa-
tion.—P. 97.


a perfect judgment; yet, after well weighing the circumstances,
considering how appearances were preserved, and especially the
implicit confidence I placed in Fletcher, I am persuaded that any
solicitor, similarly placed, would, in the ordinary dispatch of
business, have acted as I did. Whether I should not have
detected fraud, if the business had been introduced by a stranger,
or had it been my duty to sift and investigate the claim as a pur-
chaser’s solicitor would an abstract of title, and the evidences by
which it was supported, is a widely different question. True,
indeed, had any salient fact creating suspicion shown itself, I
conceive it would have been my duty to have paused and got it
cleared up before proceeding further in the business, but none such
presented itself to my mind. On the contrary, there was every-
thing to create confidence. But even if a degree of negligence
be attributable to me, does that establish my guilt ?If it does,
then every one of the men of business through whose hands Slack’s
case passed are guilty. There are few transactions, which
afterwards reviewed with scrupulous severity, that would not
exhibit features of real or supposed negligence, or error of judg-
ment ; and, although I am far from disposed to make illiberal
remarks upon the conduct of others, yet, when my own conduct
lias not only been animadverted upon in a narrow and ungenerous
spirit, but I have been pronounced guilty upon the strength of
alleged negligence, I trust I shall be pardoned for pointing out
acts of others, of at least equal inadvertence.
The first person officially employed was Mr. Jordan, the local
registrar: he records the death of a person, said to have died in
his immediate locality, although no such place as that assigned,
namely, “ South Terrace, Pimlico,” was known; and, although
the account given him of the death was extremely suspicious,
nevertheless, when applied to some time afterwards for a certifi-
cate of the death, he gave it without hesitation. This entry
was the very foundation-stone of the fraud, and his certificate
was the chief evidence of the bona fde character of the business,
and prevented those inquiries which I might otherwise have
conceived necessary; yet Mr. Jordan was an educated surgeon,
and may be presumed, therefore, to be a man of intelligence, and
fully aware of the importance of such entries.
Then we have our own proctor, Mr. Wills, a man of undoubted


respectability and talent. He, shortly after the will was, proved,
applied to my partner for the parish in which the deceased died ;*
we neither of us knew, and accordingly instructed a man named
Cranbrook, who was acquainted with the neighbourhood, to make
inquiry. He did so, and reported that he ‘could not distinctly
ascertain ; and before we could have further inquiry made, we
received the probate from Mr. Wills. After my apprehension,
my solicitor inquired of that gentleman how he had ascertained
the parish. He replied, “ I really can’t tell whether we guessed
at it, or how it was.” Then the probate was lodged at the Bank
by my partner ; and, notwithstanding it is said that the will, from
no address of the witnesses being given, and one or two other cir-
cumstances, bore internal marks of suspicion, these were entirely
overlooked by the solictor to the Bank, as well as by the autho-
rities at Doctors’ Commons, although it was the bounden duty of
those high authorities to scrutinize the will. The conduct of the
Bank Authorities is, however, the most remarkable: they, it
appears, received the probate as of the will of Anne Slack, of
Abbott's Langley, who owned and regularly received the divi-
dends of the £6,000 stock, although no mention of it was made
in the will, which specifically bequ6athed the £3,500 only, and
the entire effects were sworn under £5,000 ; yet, if she were the
owner of both the amounts, she must have been worth at least
£10,500. Still no inquiry was made, as appears by my partner’s
letter to Fletcher. Had a single question been put to my partner,
or either of our clerks, when they from time to time called to
inquire what progress was making, the mistake must have been
at once detected, and the fraud exposed ; or had the signature in
the Bank books been compared with that to the will , the error
would have been palpable, and the nefarious design certainly
frustrated. It is far indeed from my intention unnecessarily to
impute to the Bank or their solicitors a want of skill or caution :
but when such oversights are observable in those whose dutg it
was to investigate the claim , surely some allowance may be made
for the retained agent and advocate of the claimant. Every
lawyer knows how insensibly his mind becomes biassed in favour
of his own client’s case.
It may here be proper to point out a most important error,
* See Extracts from Diaries.—Pp. 124—126.


under which many intelligent persons, and, it is quite possible,
some of the jury, laboured, namely, that the executrix, and I, as
her solicitor, represented the will as that of Anne Slack , of
Abbott’s Langley!
That is a very serious error; because, under such an impres-
sion as this, I must appear a guilty person, inasmuch as I had no
reason to doubt that she was still living. But there is no pre-
tence whatever for such a charge, and the error only arises from
an inattentive perusal of the case. One of the public journals
states, that Emma Slack had represented herself “as the niece of
Anne Slack, of Abbott's Langley, sister-in-law of Captain Fos-
kett!” Not only did Emma Slack never make any such repre-
sentation—at all events, to my knowledge—but there is nothing
either in the will—the certificate of death—the affidavit at the
Commons —the application to the Bank, or in any part of the
proceedings, about Abbott’s Langley, or which in any way con-
nects the will with Captain Foskett’s sister-in-law—save only the
fact of the deceased having once lodged in the same street. On
the contrary, the certificate describes the testatrix as of the age
of sixty-eight, Miss Slack, of Abbott’s Langley, being but thirty-
seven ; and the signature to the will corresponds with that of an
old lady, and was totally dissimilar from Miss Anne Slack’s:
besides which, the will made no mention of the stock in respect of
which Miss Slack regularly received her dividends, nor was any
claim made for that fund. My partner, or either of our clerks,
would at once have dispelled the illusion, had the Bank asked a
single question in explanation of the remarkable discrepancy in
the property being sworn under <£5,000 ; whilst, if the pretended
deceased were the owner of both stocks, her personal property
would have exceeded £IO,OOO. In addition to this, a Mr. Offley
wrote to us in answer to our advertisement in the “ Times,” that
“ there was a Miss Slack at Abbott’s Langley.” Bircham wrote
at once in reply, that we “were quite aware of that, but she
was not the person entitled.” When also Mr. Freshfield referred
to my communication with Captain Foskett, I at once said that
we had clearly ascertained that she was not the party entitled.
But although a large portion of the public has certainly laboured
under the error I have pointed out, as well as other very great
ones, I am under no apprehension but that you, Sir, will perceive


that the only question in the case is—Whether I really believed
that the presumption which had been raised in favour of Captain
Foskett’s sister-in-law, by the isolated fact of her having occu-
pied a temporary lodging in Smith-street, had not been com-
pletely rebutted by the positive and apparently conclusive facts
as to age and handwriting : and whether I did not really and
truly believe that the case of Emma Slack, introduced to me two
months afterwards by Fletcher, was genuine.
To return to the negligence and oversights of the other men of
business employed, and through whose hands the transaction
passed. Christmas, the Bank clerk , proved that he compared
the handwriting of Miss Slack, of Abbott's Langley, with the
owner of the stock, and returned it to Fletcher, stating it agreed,
“ with a slight variation only, the letter being in rather a lighter
handin other words, that it appeared she was the owner.
About two months afterwards he was told by Fletcher that she
was not , but that he had found and produced the person who
was. From Christmas’s position in the Unclaimed Dividend
Office, in which he was the senior clerk, he must have been privy
to every step taken in Emma Slack’s behalf, and to her receiving
the fund; yet he caused no inquiry to he made , nor offered the
slightest obstruction. He received, he says, from Fletcher £IOO
for his information. How could he consider himself entitled to
receive £IOO for information, when he must have seen from the
will, even if Fletcher had not communicated the fact, that the
claimant knew of the existence of the fund, and if legitimately
entitled, could have required no information from him. The
Bank, discovering that he had received this and other large bribes
from Fletcher and other persons for information of this nature,
suspended him; but the prosecutors at the trial most strenuously
denied that he was in any way an accomplice. He may, indeed,
have been an innocent man; but I submit to you, Sir, very con-
fidently, that both from the bribe which was traced to and con-
fessed by him, and the other circumstances I have mentioned,
there were more tangible grounds for suspecting him of a guilty
knowledge than myself.
The last person employed was Mr. Piiilpot, the broker, a
respectable man, as I have always believed. I applied to him to
identify me , proposing to identify the executrix myself; but he


Imputed neg-
ligence.
My partner,
Mr. Bircham.
The chang-
m te the
Receiving the
COO sovereigns.
said, “ Oh, I suppose you know she is the executrix ?” I replied,
“ Certainly, there was no doubt of that, for I was present when
she proved the will.” “ Oh, then,” said he, “ I will identify
the lady —I do it constantly, and it’s the shortest way.” ITe
accordingly identified her, and signed the usual declaration. I
confess I thought it rather a loose practice; but he said it was
quite customary, and was regarded as a mere form. There is no
doubt that Mr. Philpot relied entirely upon me, and, heaven
knows, I did not mislead him ; but such reliance must have been
based upon his confidence in Fletcher, who originally introduced
me to him, and through whom alone I was known to him. In
the course of the three years he knew me, we had never met in
business more than three times, and he was never at my house or
office in his life. If he, an experienced stock-broker, could with-
out impropriety place so implicit a confidence in a comparative
stranger, surely I might well do so in Fletcher.
To these instances, I must add that of my partner, Mr.
Birchain, a shrewd and Intelligent man, against whom no impu-
tation has been raised, and who, having placed himself under the
protection of the prosecutors , and given them every assistance,
is pronounced to be above suspicion. But if it can be said that
I ought to have known of the fraud—nay, must have done so—
so ought he; he knew as much as I did of every circumstance,
lie knew the grounds upon which I rejected Miss Anne Slack’s
previously supposed identity, and entirely concurred with me in
opinion. With a perfect knowledge of all these facts, he lodged
the probate of the fictitious deceased at the Bank with the claim,
and took an active part in advancing it; indeed, I never once
attended to support it, being absent at the Kingston Assizes
nearly the whole time the business was in progress.
It was proved at the trial that there was some conversation
with Fletcher and the executrix about changing some op the
£l,OOO notes. There may have been something said about this
—I have, however, no recollection of it; but if it was talked
about, the parties evidently thought it better to get this done
when I was not present , for not a note was changed until I
had done with the business.
The pertinacity with which the proof that I v 7 as present when
the six hundred sovereigns were received, and that they were


taken by me out of the office with the executrix, was adduced,
and the elaborate pains taken to support it, demonstrates, I
respectfully submit, the absence of any real evidence against me.
I was indeed astonished to find such a point made of this, and
that every exertion was strained (and perhaps successfully) to
persuade the jury that X received this for my own use, theie
being no other evidence to ground such a suspicion than that I
received it, and simply carried it out of the office for a lady who
had, or pretended to have, the gout in her hands. As well might
it have been imputed to me that I received any given portion of
the remainder for my own benefit, having received, as is quite
usual for solicitors, the entire fund,—a fact fully recorded in my
diary of that day. But if any presumption could fairly arise
that I received this money for my own use (and the possibility of
it was, I have no doubt, one of the facts which influenced the
verdict of the jury), I submit, that the facts which have trans-
pired since my trial fairly outweigh such a presumption, if they
do not entirely disprove it. These are the confessions of Sanders,
the husband of Emma Slack, —the admission of Mrs. Sanders
herself, and the confessions of Fletcher —all three declaring
that I received only my regular professional charges,—and the
fact which a gentleman has lately come forward to attest, namely,
that I borrowed of him £lOO, at high interest, shortly after this
business was settled. There is also the receipt for the entire fund
entered in the office cash ledger, and signed by the executrix.
Besides which, I submit to you, Sir, whether my receipt of this
money, and allowing myself to be seen to take it away, was not,
fairly considered, an argument of my innocence ? for had I really
known that, instead of being engaged in an honest and legitimate
business, I was party to an extensive and most dangerous rob-
bery, I should hardly have received into my possession 600
sovereigns in this open manner, when nothing would have been
easier than to let the whole amount have been first received by the
executrix in notes, which might have been afterwards converted
and divided with the utmost facility.
It has also been urged against me, that I narrowly scruti-
nized THE TITLE OF MISS SLACK, OF ABBOTT S LaNGLEY, BUT
ADOPTED THAT OF EiMMA SLACK WITHOUT INQUIRT. The
latter assertion is not quite correct; but I invite you, Sir, to con-
F


sider the difference in the cases. In Miss Anne Slack’s case
I was instructed by Fletcher to ascertain, Ist, If she was the
party entitled; 2nd, If she knew it; but on no account to dis-
close the nature or amount of the property without his express
permission. This required caution, secresy, and tact; an air of
mystery and reserve necessarily, therefore, pervaded my corre -
spondence ; and but too well did I succeed in accomplishing the
object of my deceitful and perfidious client. With regard to
Emma Slack, her case presented itself in so conclusive a shape,
that there seemed no room for doubt. No inquiry was necessary,
and tbe making of any by me, under such circumstances, would
have been extraordinary indeed. Fletcher plausibly explained
how he had met with the legatee (not at all wonderful as he had,
or rather pretended to have, devoted two months to that object) ;
there was the will naming the very stock; she produced a
genuine certificate of her aunt’s death ; she was personally most
respectable, and answered my inquiries without the slightest
appearance of embarrassment; —not dreaming that so awful a
crime as the forgery of a will had been committed, I regarded
the matter as one of the clearest and simplest cases in the office.
Having, therefore, introduced the executrix to our proctor, which
I did from politeness to a new client and a lady, I left the business
to be attended to by my junior partner and clerks, devoting my
own attention to other business which required more especial
care and experience. Every step in the negotiation with Cap-
tain Foskett is recorded in my diary, and regularly charged to
Fletcher’s account ; whilst the proceedings taken for Emma Slack
are all as regularly charged to her in the respective diaries of
myself and partner.
In the previous narrative, I have confined myself to the case
of Slack, not only to avoid unnecessary prolixity, but because, in
the first, Stewart’s, I received a prompt and unhesitating ac-
quittal, in which I trust I may assume, from the summing up of
Mr. Baron Gurney, the three learned Judges who presided
throughout that trial fully concurred, and that the points which
had created a prejudice against me in that case were fully and
satisfactorily met and explained. But were it not from a fear of
becoming tedious, I could adduce more additional matter to prove
the correctness of that verdict. Burchard’s and Hunt’s cases


were abandoned by the prosecution. I think lam justified in
saying, that they were “ abandoned,” not only because they
preceded Slack’s in order of date; but the prosecutors will, I
think, not deny their previous avowal that there were but two
cases in which they had a chance of convicting me, and that if I
were acquitted in those, the prosecution against me must fail. It
was matter of sincere regret to me, as is well known to my
counsel and solicitor, that these two cases, Burchard’s and
Hunt’s, were not taken in their order, as they would have
developed my innocence in a remarkable manner. This was
well known to the prosecutors ; and their passing them over was
only another instance of the subtle and studious calculation by
which I was overwhelmed. My counsel were, therefore, per-
fectly sincere when, after the trial of Slack’s, they urged the
prosecution to try the other cases. There is, however, a circum-
stance which, though it could not appear at either of the trials,
being separate, has, nevertheless, been much commented upon to
my prejudice, and which it may therefore be proper to explain.
I allude to the fact, that A different proctor was employed in
each of the four fraudulent cases. In the first, Stewart’s, Mr.
Potts was employed by Fletcher, some weeks before my profes-
sional assistance was obtained. In the second, Burchard’s, I
employed Messrs. Jennings and Cox, at the request, and upon
the introduction of the brother of the latter, who at that time
was my client. Having had some disagreement with those gen-
tlemen about their bill in this and other matters, I in the next
case, employed Messrs. Iggulden and Puckle, the proctors of
Messrs. Scoones, during my seventeen years’ clerkship. Shortly
after this, our firm became connected with Mr. Wills, from his
being the proctor in an important suit, which had been before
the Privy Council, arising out of the will of the Rev. George
Gordon Smythe, in which we had been retained as the soli-
citors. We then employed Mr. Wills in all the cases that sub-
sequently arose in the office, of which Slack’s was one. Nothing,
however, could more fully show what unjust and irrational infer-
ences are drawn from particular facts, when the mind has been
saturated with prejudice, than the conclusions which have been
deduced from this change of proctors. Surely it would have
been the course of a guilty attorney, engaged in such hazardous
F 2
The cases
abandoned by
theprosecution,
if tried, would
have shown my
innocence.
Employment
of different
proctors ex-
plained.


Change of
proctors would
not facilitate
fraud.
Nature of
property un-
known to them.
The brokers
knew the pre-
cise stock, yet
were employed
in consecutive
cases.
proceedings, to have established a confidence with one respect-
able proctor, and to have continued with him, because he would
naturally receive successive introductions of business with con-
fidence, whilst comparative strangers would be more likely to
scrutinize both the business and the parties introduced. "W hen 1
retained Messrs. Iggulden and Co., they had a perfect confidence
in me, from my long clerkship with Messrs. Scoones; far easier,
therefore, would it have been to palm off a suspicious transaction
upon them. Besides which, it may be observed, that it was only
necessary to state to the proctors what was the amount of the
property, not what it consisted of. I did indeed, as was proved
by Messrs. Iggulden and Puckle’s clerk, mention to him, in the
course of conversation, that the property consisted entirely of un-
claimed stock and dividends—a communication wholly gratuitous,
and showing, as I submit, my ignorance of any reason for con-
cealment.* I may here also be permitted to mention a similar
frank and unnecessary communication. A lady, named Wilkson,
the wife of an old client, called at my office the day Fletcher
introduced Sanders as 44 Thomas Hunt. She called on Mr.
Wilkson’s business, but I said, 44 1 am sorry I can t stop now,
for I am just going, by appointment, to Doctors Commons, to
prove a will for a man named Hunt —a lucky fellow, too, for
having been at sea half his life, the first thing he learnt after his
return was, that his grandmother had left him quite a little for-
tune in the Funds, and the will was providentially found in the
care of a woman, a friend and neighbour of the deceased. I
had forgotten this casual conversation, until long after my ap-
prehension, when Mrs. Wdlkson named it to one of our clerks.
With reference to the illiberal and hasty inference which was
drawn from the change of proctors, I would beg to submit,
that there might have been some reason to suspect a guilty
motive, if a different broker had been employed to sell the stock
in each of the four cases, because they of necessity knew precisely
what the property was, but no such precaution was taken. In
the two consecutive cases of Stewart and Burcliard, I employed
* A leading City official, who heard the whole of both trials, visited me
afterwards in Newgate, and said, “ My mind has not been influenced against
you by any facts proved at the trial, hut because you did not employ the same
proctor in the different cases.”


Mr. Hill. I did so from my temporary connection with him as
a colleague on the Committee of the Southwark Literary Insti-
tution. Prior to Hunt’s case, he had withdrawn from the
Institution, and my connection with him had ceased. Fletcher
then introduced me to Mr. Philpott, and I accordingly employed
him in both Hunt’s and Slack s cases.
It would, Sir, occupy too much of your time, were I to detail
the particulars of all the cases in which Fletcher traced out the
true owners of unclaimed stock and dividends, and through my
professional instrumentality placed them in possession of their
rights; but as many persons, who have since my trial been made
acquainted with the way in which Fletcher dovetailed his fraudu-
lent introductions with legitimate ones, have considered that they
go very far to explain what has appeared mysterious and sus-
picious in Slack’s case, I beg leave to quote two of these, which
I will do as concisely as possible. The first is that of u David
Smith.” It was some time in the year 1840 he told me he had
found a poor man, who was the eldest son of one David Smith,
who had died possessed of a considerable amount of stock, and
which, with the dividends, had been transferred to the Commis-
sioners as unclaimed. A few days after he introduced this per-
son to me, when it appeared that his father had died, leaving a
will, and he referred me to the executor. I accordingly wrote
to that gentleman, and afterwards saw him at my office. He
said that all the property known to himself and co-executor
had long since been administered. I acquainted him that the
party who had brought David Smith to me was a client of mine,
and had authorised me to state that he could put the executor in
possession of a considerable sum to which the family was entitled,
but that he would require to be guaranteed the payment of a
certain per centage as a remuneration for the trouble he had taken
in tracing out the owner, and as a douceur for his information,
but which would not be required until the property was actually
realized. To this the executor said there could be no objection,
but that he w r ould rather the terms should be negotiated by his
own solicitors. To this I readily assented, and he referred me
to Messrs. Lawrence and Blenkhorne, of Bucklersbury. With
those gentlemen I accordingly negotiated terms—the property was
recovered—the per centage was paid to me, and handed to


Bona fibe
Cases.
Smith.
Robins’ case,
£1,500.
The secrecy
commented on
in Slack’s case
necessary to a
bona fide nego-
tiation.
Fletcher, who paid my ordinary bill of charges and no more.
I was present when the fund was distributed amongst the different
members of Smith’s family, to whom this money was indeed a
blessing, for they were in the utmost povert} l- , and each paid into
my hand his own quota of the per centage agreed upon with ex-
pressions of gratitude. I only wish those who have censured me
for being concerned even in the most legitimate cases of un-
claimed stock and dividends as unworthy a respectable solicitor,
had been present at this settlement, and witnessed the good which
was done by transferring from the national funds that which be-
longed to these poor people.*
The other case, and which more resembled Slack’s, was that of
“ George Robins, of Warwick House, Regent-street.” About
the end of 1840, or beginning of 1841, Fletcher instructed me
to communicate with Mr. Reid, of Ripley (the uncle of Mr.
Bramall, my late solicitor), who was one of the executors of the
deceased, to learn if he knew of a sum of about £1,500 stock in
the deceased’s name, and which had gone to the Commissioners.
I accordingly commenced a correspondence with him, which was
continued at intervals for several months—Mr. Reid being
unwell, and I only wrote occasionally, as Fletcher reminded me
of this when he saw me on other business. At length Mr. Reid
called at my office, and although I entirely concealed from him
the nature and extent of the property, he was so far satisfied as
to refer me to his solicitors, Messrs. Smedley and Rogers, of
Jermyn-street. With them I accordingly negotiated terms. An
agreement was prepared, in which I inserted the name of a friend
of mine as a trustee for Fletcher (who desired not to appear in
it). The money was afterwards realized by the executors, who
paid me a hundred guineas for the information, trouble, law
charges, and some outlay. I consumed much time in this busi-
ness, besides being at some expense; and Fletcher paid me £55
for my law bill, and I gave him a check for the remaining £5O.
* It has been supposed that Fletcher exacted a large sum for information to
the owners of unclaimed dividends. This is quite a mistake. He never, to
my knowledge, received more than a moderate quantum meruit for his labour
and outlay in tracing them out. In two or three cases he expended con-
siderable labour and money, in seeking out claimants, to large amounts,
without success, and those matters were abandoned, and I heard no more of
them. In five cases the true owners were found and property restored.


The letters and interviews herein were characterised by the same
secresy and mystery which had been noticed in Slack’s case, until
terms to Fletcher’s satisfaction were arranged.
Since my trial I have heard with astonishment that there are
those who have supposed that I may not have been a direct
participator in the extensive frauds, or a sharer in the plunder ,
but that I may have connived at them. Merciful God! what
suspicions and surmises obtain entrance to the mind when warped
prejudice! For this is to suppose that I became an accom-
plice in a fearful robbery, openly performing a series of the
most dangerous acts, which I might so easily have avoided, for
the common professional remuneration, my share of which was
but £7. 10s., whilst Fletcher and his adept confederates, who
had less at stake, and who, for aught I knew, might soon place
themselves beyond the probable reach of justice, realized in
Slack’s case alone four thousand five hundred pounds. But
unreasonable, not to say monstrous, as such a supposition appears
to me, it may be proper to show what my position was at this
period—the comparative small value of Fletcher’s business—
and what my conduct was from the time of Mr. Freshfield s
visit to the day of my apprehension.
I had then been seven years in practice. By no ordinary
labour, anxiety, and self-denial, I had formed a connection with
about 150 respectable clients. Our bills of costs for the year
1842-3 amounted to £3,350. I had a partner of wealthy con-
nections, and with whom not a word of misunderstanding had
arisen since our connection. I may truly say, it was the exem-
plification of a successful and happy partnership. The good
uuderstanding between us is proved, not only by his letter to
the “ Times” of the 11th of December, 1843, in which he declares
his “perfect knowledge of my innocence , and that a more
honourable man or a better partner could not exist,” but also
by his various letters to my private friends. We had five sti-
pendiary and two articled clerks, and our connections were
extending daily. Fletcher’s business, —though as a capitalist
Bircham and myself considered him as one of a useful class of
clients, —was by no means considerable, his average annual
business, introductions and all, not being more than a fortieth of
our entire income. I was as happy as a successful practitioner


could desire, contemplating and watching over the business I had
formed with no common solicitude. The difficulties of a com-
mencement having been surmounted, I indulged a sanguine hope
that the object of my ambition, namely, to be the founder of a
permanent and respectable firm, was in a fair way of being ac-
complished. Is it then a suspicion that a reasonable mind could
for a moment entertain, that for the trifling remuneration I re-
ceived, or to promote the villanous designs of an individual client
from whom I never received a favour in my life , I should have
risked, nay, have exposed myself to the certain forfeiture of a
position so valuable, much more to the unspeakable horrors of its
penal consequences ? Fletcher was not a man with whom I had
the slightest private acquaintance; I never ate or drank with
him ; I never was at his house in my life, or he at mine, except
in my office on business. Our connection was purely professional,
and that rather of a cold and formal than a familiar character, as,
indeed, is clearly indicated by our correspondence, and was
proved by more than one of our clerks at the trial.
One of the facts most strongly pressed against me at the trial
was that I refused to give up when first applied to (for it will be
observed that I only declined to give it up on the instant) the
NAME OF THE CLIENT WHO INTRODUCED EMMA SLACK to OUr
office. But I submit to you, Sir, whether, if I had possessed a
guilty knowledge, I should not, seeing that the fraud was dis-
covered, have secured my own protection by pointing out the
only guilty party I knew. My firmness, obstinacy perhaps it
may be termed, on this point, so far from protecting me, neces-
sarily brought on me the very first attack. That my prosecution
was owing to this unfortunate fidelity to a client I had every
reason to believe a man of integrity, Mr. Freshfield has himself
declared. Some time after my apprehension, my solicitor
having thoroughly investigated my case, and satisfied himself that
I was as innocent as the proctor, the broker, or either of the other
professional men through whose hands the business had passed,
waited upon Mr. Freshfield, and inquired if it was really intended
to persist in prosecuting me, urging that I was willing to give
every information in my power, indeed that I had done so when
first applied to, except the name of Fletcher, which had been
withheld from a belief that it would have been a violation of


professional duty then to disclose it. “Yes,” said Mr. Fresh-
field, “ that’s all very well; and I confess that the strong con-
viction you evidently have of Barber’s innocence goes very far to
make me believe it, but he would not give me Fletchers name;
had he done so he would not have been where he is.” There is
indeed but little question that I should have been more fortunate
had I really possessed a guilty knowledge, for in that case it
cannot be fairly doubted that any man in such a situation would
at once have secured himself by becoming a witness for the
Crown.
Fletcher has, I am told, endeavoured to make it appear that I
was under obligations to him for having sometimes lent me money,
but he took care to suppress the terms upon which he did so ; he
exacted from me interest varying from 10 to 60 per cent, for such
occasional loans, according to circumstances. I have sometimes
got him to discount a bill which I had received for costs, and for
which he charged me 60 per cent.* A few months after
Stewart’s business was settled, I with great difficulty prevailed
upon him to advance me £2OO ; but before he would consent, he
put me to the expense of insuring my life as a collateral security,
which I accordingly did, for his benefit, in the Sun Insurance
Office, besides which he made me pay him £ls per cent. : this I
continued to do until Bircham purchased a share of my business
in December, 1841. Shortly after this I gave Fletcher a check
for£so, with notice that I should payoff the remaining £l5O,
unless he would allow it to remain at 10 per cent., and dispense
with my keeping up the life insurance. After a good deal of
hesitation, and finding that I was in earnest, and doubtless well
knowing he could not have made more or so much of his
money, he assented to my proposal. At the period of my
apprehension I was still indebted to him in that sum, subject,
however, to the bill of our firm upon him of £4O, for the con-
veyance of the property he had purchased a few months before
in Market-street, Westminster, and also subject to my general
bill upon him; so that upon a proper adjustment of accounts
the balance would probably have been in my favour. These
are facts which he must have admitted if properly examined, and
which I should have proved if permitted personally to submit
* I. e. at that rate per annum for a few days, to meet sudden emergencies.


my books and papers. By one of his letters to me, handed to
the judges in the course of my address to them when brought
up for sentence on the 22nd of April, it will be seen that I
had applied to him to allow the payment of the balance due
on my note to him to stand over; and that by such letter,
written about a fortnight after Mr. Freshfield’s visit , he declined
to accede to my proposal , and gave me notice that he should
require payment in January, alleging that he was quite short of
cash, a falsehood which was clearly proved by the subsequent
examination of his banking account, which showed that he had
to the credit of his deposit account a sum certainly exceeding
£I,OOO, for which he was only receiving 2 per cent. At the
foot of this letter he says, “ I have heard no more of the Bank
business , and I suppose you have not.” As this perfidious man
must have been expecting to hear of my apprehension every
hour, and watching his opportunity to become “ evidence for the
Crown,” as he since confessed to Smith he anticipated, this letter
appears to have had two objects —Ist, to allay any misgivings
that might have arisen in my mind, by boldly requiring pay-
ment of a debt; and, 2ndly, to get some information about the
“ Bank business,” which he must indeed have been anxious
about. In reply I wrote him that the amount should be paid as
he desired, and that in regard to Mr. Freshfield’s inquiry I had
heard no more, and supposed they had discovered their error.
As I understand Fletcher’s letters are in the hands of the prose-
cution, my letters will probably be found with them. When
Fletcher by his inquiry reminded me of Mr. Freshfield’s visit, I
congratulated myself on my firmness in preserving a client’s con-
fidence inviolate, fully believing I should hear no more of the
business, little dreaming that that client was deliberately awaiting
the ruin which he must so well have known would speedily over-
take his victim, or that the officers of justice were (as transpired
from the cross-examination of Forrester) dogging my steps day
after day from morning till night. I need scarcely ask you, Sir,
whether if I had known that Fletcher was making his thousands
by systematic robberies, instead of a moderate remuneration for
information and assistance to legitimate claimants, I should not
have commanded such pecuniary accommodation as the exigen-
cies of my business required, without paying such extravagant


interest, and without being driven to such a troublesome and
expensive security as a life insurance ? Some explanation of my
necessity for borrowing money at high interest may be neces-
sary. At the period when I had the £2OO of Fletcher, X had
been disappointed in the receipt of a larger sum from a gen-
tleman in the country, for whom I was town agent, who un-
fortunately failed. I had also some other losses ; and the rapid
increase of my practice required great additional outlay, and I
deemed it wiser to borrow money, even at high interest, than
to displease valuable clients by sending in their bills unasked
for.
Fletcher used to require his in any particular matter—the set-
tlement of a purchase —or the like; but although he exacted such
interest from me, I had a general bill upon him of several years’
growth.
Very elaborate pains were taken at the trial to prove that I
had made an endorsement in pencil upon the order for
payment of the dividends to the executrix, showing how the
amount was to be paid. The learned judge remarked, that this
was the only act which had been proved to be done by me that
did not fall within the regular province of a solicitor. This is
one of those acts from which different minds have drawn con-
clusions diametrically opposite \ but I confidently submit, Sir, to
your enlightened and candid mind, whether this was like the
act of a guilty or an innocent man. My client was a lady—
from the gout in her hands she could only write with difficulty,
as her various signatures indicate—l inquired how she would
prefer to receive the money, and endorsed the order accord-
ingly. Is not this just what an ordinary person in common
politeness, still more her solicitor transacting the entire business,
would do, perfectly confiding in the legitimate character of the
business, and precisely what he would cautiously abstain from
doing if he entertained the remotest suspicion to the contrary ?
But, Sir, if anything further be necessary to demonstrate my
implicit faith in Fletcher’s integrity, and in the proper character
of the business he had introduced, it must surely be considered as
conclusively furnished by my conduct from the time of Mr. Fresh-
field’s visit to that of my apprehension, a period of twenty-four
days. Day by day I was laboriously occupied in the multifarious


My conduct
from Mr.Fresh-
field’s visit to
my apprehen-
sion.
Mr. Bircham
duties of an extensive practice.* The prosecution know well
that no attempt was made to escape , and it must be almost as
evident to them that not the slightest preparation was made for
defence. For the latter, two things were indispensable, viz.—
the papers in the different matters, with the books in which the
letters and other entries were made, and an adequate supply of
funds. I neither secured the one, nor made the least effort to
provide myself with the other. At this period there was due to
our firm not less than £2,000 for book debts, and about <£1,500
to myself prior to the partnership. To the firm there was due
in one sum £330 for principal, interest, and costs, and which
was about to be paid off. I took no steps to hasten its payment
or secure the receipt of it by myself: it therefore fell into
Bircliam’s hands a short time after my apprehension, who refused
to apply a shilling of it in my defence, being advised, he said, by
“ his friends,” to retain it, to meet claims “ that might be made
upon the firm.” My personal credit, at this time, was good, and
that of our firm was high; but, during the interval of twenty-
four days, when I might so easily have raised £5OO or £l,OOO
to resist the fearful attack that was preparing against me, I
neither applied for a single debt due to myself or the firm, or
attempted to borrow a single pound, although the balance at my
bankers’t was at the lowest ebb, there being but £3O due to me
when apprehended. As to the papers, they were not so much as
referred to since I submitted those of Slack to Mr. Freshfield—
they all continued in the places where they were severally
deposited tchen the respective mutters were settled; the conse-
quence was, that the prosecution selected whatever they pleased
for the support of the charge against me, suppressing those which
would have proved my innocence; and my partner and his
friends (as they assumed to be) carried off the remainder. I
was thus put to the greatest possible inconvenience. When my
Solicitor applied for them to Mr. Freshfield, he referred him to
Mr. Bircham. Bircham was never to be seen by ray solicitor—
* It is known to my clerks that, upon the very day Mr. Freshfield called,
I was engaged in my office, from nine in the morning till midnight, pre-
paring for the trial of a cause, which occupied me in court the next day, from
nine in the morning till half-past seven in the evening.
f I banked with the Bank of England, so that the prosecutors had abund-
ant facilities for investigating my pecuniary affairs.


in vain did lie inquire for him, in vain did he write for an
appointment with him. He was not to be seen by any person
concerned for the defence, although he was in constant personal
communication with the prosecutors. After great difficulty and
endless applications, my solicitor did get some books and papers
from the hands of Mr. Bircham’s friends, but the most important
were either withheld, lost, or mislaid ; and here I am constrained
to advert to Bircham’s conduct, although, heaven knows, I have
no vindictive feeling towards him or any man living. Full well
he knew my innocence—most solemnly had he declared it; and
with equal solemnity did he pledge himself to assist me to the
last in my cruel position. But in the face of all this—under
the influence (as he himself declared) of “friends,” who had no
personal knowledge of me or my character, and who, I will take
the liberty to say, gave him advice as impolitic as ungenerous,
he not only deserted me, but became the facile instrument of
the prosecution. His evidence, however, did not answer their
purpose, for they not only kept him out of the witness-box, but
(acting under their instructions, as I have every reason to believe),
he kept entirely out of reach until the trial was over. His heart-
less advisers appear to have conceived the notion, that by my
destruction, and his securing, as he did, all the books and papers,
he would also secure the entire practice. I was shocked to hear
that he said, “ he had no doubt I should be acquitted, but that it
would be better for him if I were transported !” His better feel-
ings will, however, I am persuaded, sooner or later, be aroused,
when he will sincerely regret his ungenerous conduct towards me.
Of course, when I was in prison my credit was stopped, and
those indebted to me, not knowing what course affairs would
take, demurred to paying me. I was unwilling to sacrifice my
books and furniture by a sale, believing that as the facts became
better known to the prosecutors, I should be released : they thus
fell a prey to my panic-stricken landlord and other creditors—
not a single article was saved to me—my books, scientific instru-
ments, and articles upon which I set an especial value, were all
swept away;—in a short time the small sum at my command was
exhausted. I became literally penniless, and, but for the gene-
rosity of a few steadfast friends, I should have been driven upon
the gaol allowance long before my trial. I lost my counsel, Mr.


My necessi-
ties in prison
while awaiting
trial.
Evidence lost
to me for want
of funds,
though I might
ample
Chambers, because I could no longer pay him his five guineas
per day for attending the almost endless hearings. My solicitor
next declared that, in justice to his family, he could no longer
devote his time to my service without suitable advances. In
this deplorable condition, another gentleman (with a generosity,
for which I shall ever be grateful) came forward and offered to
devote his personal labour, but naturally observing that he could
not undertake to provide the outlay. He mentioned my con-
dition to Mr. Parry, a talented gentleman, just called to the bar,
and who, recollecting me as the secretary of “ The Legal Dis-
cussion Society,” and more recently as an active member of the
Committee of the “ Southwark Literary Institution,” at once
offered to attend for me before the Lord Mayor. I was then
reduced to the most humiliating appeals for the means of exist-
ence, and to provide for the indispensable current outlay; but
such was the prejudice which false, distorted, and ex-parte re-
presentations created in the public mind, that even my friends
became lukewarm, and the subscription was less than I had many
a time procured for a distressed family in a few hours, and from
entire strangers. The consequence was, that much important
evidence from Bath, Bristol, and other places, was not obtained
—the procuring of subpoenas was delayed so late, that some wit-
nesses were not secured, and even the copies of the depositions
were not had in sufficient time to obtain full and proper advice
upon the evidence.
I had retained Mr. Thesiger, but the payment of his fee was
impossible. Mr. Wilkins was made acquainted with my forlorn
situation, and most magnanimously consented to receive my
papers, with a very inadequate fee. Most unfortunately, too,
my solicitor was prevented by illness from attending the trial,
and thus I lost the great value of his superintendence, as well as
his very important evidence.
These, Sir, are facts, which, if not already known to you, may
be distinctly ascertained, and can you or any rational man believe
that I should have left myself thus destitute, with ample means
of preparation prior to my apprehension, if I had believed that a
forgery had really been committed.*
* Only two days before my apprehension I had paid away a large sum of
money to a client of the excellent gentleman who now gratuitously acts as my


It only remains for me to advert to tlie confessions and
DECLARATIONS OF THE FOUR OTHER PRISONERS. Fletcher ,
who projected the frauds, and under whose superintendence and
direction they were executed, has done me the niggardly justice
to declare my perfect innocence j the genuine character of that
declaration is better proved by the documents accompanying this
memorial than by any assertions of my own. Mrs. Dorey , when
first apprehended, unreservedly declared my innocence to her
medical attendant, Dr. M’Murdock, at the Compter. In her
subsequent confession, however, in which she was seeking im-
munity for herself by assisting the prosecution, she evidently
seeks by insinuation to implicate me, but her inability to do this
is equally clear from the entire absence of a single fact tending
to do so; and this, although she was not only Fletcher’s active
confederate in all these frauds, but had been most intimately
acquainted with him for years before it was my misfortune to
know him. It will be remembered, too, that she originally in-
structed Mr. Wilkins, as her counsel, and who attended before
the Lord Mayor for her, until he became indignant at the mis-
representations she made to him (through her solicitor) in refer-
ence to his lordship. With a full knowledge of all Mrs. Dorey’s
disclosures, Mr. Wilkins accepted my defence, purely from a
belief of my innocence, a belief which he not only solemnly de-
clared in court, but which, since the trial, he has publicly repeated,
and has by a series of acts abundantly proved the sincerity of
his declarations. Mrs. Sanders (Emma Slack) has always
avowed my innocence. The declarations of her husband,
William Sanders , have been made with a consistency, and
other circumstances, to which I would beg, Sir, to draw your
particular attention. It will be seen by his and Fletcher’s con-
fessions, and more particularly from Mrs. Dorey’s, that he was
an active accomplice of Fletcher’s ; that he personated the claim-
ant in Hunt’s case; and that in Slack’s, in which his wife repre-
sented Emma Slack, he was an active though secret confederate.
When the news of my apprehension was first published, he and
solicitor. He was led to watch my case from the belief that I could not have
known danger was before me, or I should never have left myself in neces-
sitous circumstances.


his wife immediately took flight together; he communicated,
however, with his solicitor, Mr. Harmar, of Bristol, instructing
that gentleman to endeavour to negotiate terms for his surrender,
ADMITTING HIS OWN GUILT, AND DECLARING IN THE MOST
unqualified terms my innocence. When brought to the
Compter, he was in an agony of distress; he then said to Dr.
M‘Murdock, in the presence of a turnkey, “ I am a guilty man,
but there is one here, though almost a stranger to me, I know to
be as innocent as a child unborn, and that is Mr. Barber.”
“ But,” said Dr. M‘Murdock, “ he received your wife as Emma
Slack.” “ Yes,” replied Sanders, “ and he knew no other.” To
this the doctor replied, “ Well, Mrs. Dorey told me he was inno-
cent.” After his committal to Newgate, Sanders repeated this
declaration to the chaplain, and subsequently to many of the
officers of the gaol. Whilst confined at Millbank, he repeated
this declaration to the chaplain, and to other persons there,
communicating many circumstances in verification of his state-
ment; finally, on board the Lord Auckland, he made the full
and written declaration subjoined hereto : this was entirely with-
out any concert with me, for although the Agincourt and Lord
Auckland lay side by side for ten days, neither I, nor, to the
best of my knowledge, had any of my friends any communica-
tion with him, direct or indirect.* Of the genuine character of
his declarations I do not suppose any doubt can be entertained,
and considering that he is the husband of the pretended Emma
Slack, and was acting with Fletcher in that matter even before it
was introduced to me, I do not think any reasonable mind will
doubt that he must be a competent judge of my guilt or inno-
cence. I think I am, therefore, justified in saying, that all
the four parties who designed and executed these
FRAUDS, WHOSE INSTRUCTIONS I RECEIVED, AND BY WHOSE
EVIDENCE ALONE THE PRESUMPTION RAISED AGAINST ME COULD
BE COMPLETELY REBUTTED, HAVE, WITIfOUT CONCERT WITH ME,
OR WITH EACH OTHER, AND WITHOUT A VIEW TO THEIR OWN
BENEFIT, BUT IF ANYTHING TO THEIR PREJUDICE, AT DIFFERENT
TIMES, AND UNDER DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES, SOME BEFORE
AND OTHERS AFTER THE TRIAL, EXONERATED ME FROM ALL
GUILTY KNOWLEDGE WHATEVER.
* See also his official examination at Hobart Town. —P. 87.


This prosecution has driven me from honour, happiness, and
the brightest prospects, to ruin, disgrace, and misery, almost
insupportable ; still it may, in some measure, have been brought
upon myself by my reliance upon the integrity and veracity of
the deceitful and hypocritical Fletcher, and the unflinching firm-
ness, contumacy perhaps, with which I withheld his name. The
verdict too may be justified by the ex parte evidence upon which
it was founded ; but I humbly submit, that although I have no
legal remedy by which I can extricate myself from the horrible
situation in which a train of unfortunate circumstances, almost
unparalleled, have placed me, that the facts which have transpired
since my trial have so materially altered the complexion of my
case, that I may fairly and reasonably approach her Most Gracious
Majesty, and pray for the speedy exercise of her beneficent
prerogative. Permit me to remind you, Sir, that not a single
fact incompatible with my innocence was proved. I was con-
victed upon suspicion only , and undoubtedly circumstances were
proved, which, unexplained, formed a case of grave suspicion ;
but you will at the same time perceive, Sir, that they were of a
nature which it was scarcely possible to rebut or explain, except
by those for whom I acted. That at least some of the jury must
have felt considerable hesitation in pronouncing me guilty, I
think must be inferred from the delay of an hour and a half before
they could agree upon their verdict; and, without imputing to
those gentlemen any peculiar prejudices, I may venture to observe,
that no person was less likely to receive the benefit of a doubt
than an attorney.*
One fact of great importance, as accounting for, if not wholly
justifying, my withholding Fletcher’s name, is the fact that he was
my client. Although this was admitted by Mr. Erie, in his opening,
the learned judge held that I was not entitled to the benefit of the
admission, as it was not formally proved. It is, however, sufficiently
manifest, not only by his confession, but by the correspondence
which I set out in the Memorial I had the honour to transmit to
you from Millbank, in May last. The confession of Mrs. Dorey
I never saw until it was handed to me by a prisoner on board,
shortly before my arrival on this island. Although, as I have
observed, that document was framed in no friendly spirit towards
G
* See the retractation of their verdict, p. 129.


me,* it will be found to confirm, as far as it goes, every fact set
forth in my Millbank petition.
In this Memorial I have endeavoured to address myself to
every point urged against me at the trial, and which may seem
to require explanation; and I humbly hope, Sir, that, precious
as your time is, that you will favour my statement, and the docu-
ments by which it is supported, with your patient consideration.
If this be done, I do feel a sanguine hope, that you will be
satisfied that I am indeed innocent of the charge for which I
am suffering. When at Millbank I earnestly prayed to be
allowed personally to submit my books and papers to the prose-
cutors, and to explain not only the circumstances which had been
urged against me, but any others that might have influenced
the minds of those by whom the prosecution was conducted. I
trust, therefore, that no new ex parte statements, which I have
now no opportunity of answering (although I am totally ignorant
of any such) will be permitted to influence your mind.
If it should still appear to you, Sir, that I have betrayed
in this unhappy business any degree of negligence, or error of
judgment, allow me to remind you, that not one of the parties
innocently connected with it can he wholly absolved from a
similar charge , and that I have already paid a fearful penalty
for it —not only in the wreck of property, connection, and a
position of honour and happiness, but by mental and bodily suf-
ferings of no ordinary kind. For four months I was a prisoner
at the Compter, for three weeks at Newgate, for two months in
the gloomy abode at Millbank, for four months in that horrible
dungeon, a convict prison ship, and here I am doomed to the most
degrading and loathsome labour, with food that scarcely sustains
nature. lam now in the hospital, and in so reduced a condition,
that it is extremely doubtful if I shall be alive when the result of
this appeal shall be brought to this scene of misery; but if my
life should be spared, I shall then have endured two years of im-
prisonment, illness, degradation, and wretchedness in every form.f
* It was made in the presence of the solicitor for the prosecution, whose
recommendation to mercy was her only hope.
f The miserable circumstances under which this Memorial was prepared, and
the wretchedness of my condition in Norfolk Island, will be seen by a paper
in Dickens’s Household Words, No. 124, entitled “Transported for Life.”


In praying for the restoration of my liberty, it will perhaps
not be regarded as impertinent, if I show that whilst by un-
wearied industry I acquired for myself an honourable position,
and one of still greater promise, I was not indifferent to the
welfare of others and the general progress of society. Imme-
diately prior to my leaving Tonbridge, I projected and esta-
blished a popular Literary and Scientific Institution there. In
London, I projected and established “The Legal Discussion
Society,” of which I was afterwards elected honorary secretary
and treasurer. For the six years prior to my apprehension I
had been an active member of the committee of the “ Southwark
Literary Institution.” I had also the honour to co-operate with
Lord Brougham and the late Dr. Birkbeck in founding the
“ Adult Instruction Society.” At the suggestion of some benevo-
lent persons I became the honorary secretary to “ The Builders’
Benevolent Institution,” to which, upon my personal application,
the Marquis of Westminster became the patron. I prepared a
code of laws for its government, and performed a mass of initia-
tory labour for this infant charity. Those who know me can
also bear witness to my prompt co-operation in every philan-
thropic object, to the utmost of my slender means and humble
abilities. The respectable gentleman to whom I served a con-
tinued clerkship of seventeen years attended my trial, and proved
that during the whole of that period my conduct was most exem-
plary. The unblemished character which I have since borne, both
as a member of society and of my profession, was proved upon
the oaths of numerous witnesses—barristers, solicitors, merchants,
and other gentlemen of rank and character.
In the earnest hope that you will be pleased to submit my case
to the favourable consideration of her Most Gracious Majesty, as
one deserving the exercise of her blessed prerogative, and that I
shall be restored to that society whose laws I have never in the
slightest degree offended, and of which, though a humble, I have
not been altogether a useless member, —I have the honour to
remain, with profound respect, Sir, your most obedient and very
humble servant,
William Henry Barber.
To the Right Honourable Sir J. R. G. Graham, Baronet, &c. &c.
Norfolk Island, 10 th December , 1844.
G 2


EXCULPATORY EVIDENCE SINCE THE TRIAL.
CONFESSIONS.
FIRST CONFESSION OF JOSHUA FLETCHER.
On board the Agincourt.
28 th June , 1844.
I solemnly declare that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, William Henry Barber had no guilty knowledge that the
will of Anne Slack was a forgery, or that it was otherwise than a
legitimate and proper matter of business. As such, it was intro-
duced by me to him, as stated in my first examination at the
Mansion House. And I further declare, that to my knowledge
and belief, he had no guilty knowledge of either of the cases
which have recently formed the subject of indictment. I make
this declaration with no other motive than to do an act of justice
to Mr. Barber as far as lies in my power.
Joshua Fletcher.
Witness— Mathew Hall Cuttress.
SECOND CONFESSION AND DECLARATION OF FLETCHER.
PUBLISHED IN THE “ TIMES,” 4TII JULY, 1844.
It may be proper that I should state, in furtherance of the
declaration I made on the 28th June last, that, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, William Henry Barber had no knowledge
whatever of Mrs. Richards than as Miss Stewart, of Mrs. Dorey
than as Miss Burchard, of William Sanders than as Thomas
Hunt, or of Lydia Sanders than as Emma Slack, —they having
respectively represented themselves to him as Elizabeth Stewart,


Eliza Burchard, Thomas Hunt, and Emma Slack, in my pre-
sence.
With regard to the will of Anne Slack, he could have no
knowledge whatever of it, until Mrs. Sanders, personating Emma
Slack, produced such to him, which she did in my presence. And
from the manner in which the several matters were introduced to
him, and in which appearances were observed, there was nothing
to excite the suspicion of any prudent solicitor.
I was a client of Barber’s of some years’ standing, and of
independent property. As such, he had known me from the
time he first became my solicitor. He read the will in question
with attention, and asked several questions, which Mrs. Sanders
answered without appearance of embarrassment; andTo satisfy
his inquiries, she produced to him a certificate of the registry of
the aunt’s death at Pimlico. And I feel further bound to state,
that Mrs. Sanders presented herself to Mr. Barber disguised,
wearing light hair, and affecting to have the gout in her hands
and feet, which seemed to support her alleged relationship to the
assumed testatrix. The certificate set forth that the deceased
died of gout in the stomach.
And to the best of my knowledge and belief, Mr. Barber had
no share or participation in the proceeds of the above transac-
tions, or either of them, beyond his professional remuneration. I
should also state, that he has been concerned for me as my soli-
citor generally, and that I had employed him to nogotiate terms
with several parties whom I had traced out as the true owners
of unclaimed dividends, and who were put into possession of
such property. He had therefore no reason to suspect, as far as
I know, that the cases for which he has been prosecuted were in
the slightest degree irregular or improper. It was under my
instructions that he wrote to Captain Foskett, and the object
of which was to ascertain if his sister-in-law was the owner of
the stock. I reported to Barber that she was not, as her
handwriting was wholly dissimilar , and as the owner of the
stock had executed a power of attorney upwards of ten years
before , which Captain Foskett’s sister-in-law would have been
incompetent to have done, she being at that time, from Captain
Foskett’s own statement, a minor. The report I so made to
Mr. Barber was formed upon that I received from Christmas,


the Bank clerk. If the application made by Barber to be tried
separately (so that he might have elicited the whole truth, by
calling myself and the other parties accused) had not been re-
sisted by the prosecution, he must have been not only acquitted,
but exonerated from the slightest culpability.
As I understand, it has been stated that I have refused to
admit Mr. Barber s innocence: I feel called upon to contradict
this, and to state that I have only objected to sign or declare
that which might have a tendency to prejudice myself.
Joshua Fletcher.
Signed and declared before me, on board the Agincourt , at
W oolwich.
Chas. Hy. Fuller, R.N., Surgeon Superintendent.
CONFESSIONS OF WILLIAM SANDERS.
First :—On ms Apprehension. —See Memorial , p. 80.
SECOND CONFESSION AND REITERATED DECLARATION OF
WILLIAM SANDERS,
MADE SUBSEQUENTLY TO HIS TRIAL.
I, William Sanders, now under sentence of transportation for
seven years, and about to leave my country, am desirous of
reiterating all my former statements * of my firm belief and con-
viction of the complete innocence of William Henry Barber of
any participation or guilty knowledge whatever of the late
transactions in which I or my wife, Lydia Sanders, were con-
cerned, or that he received one farthing more than his profes-
sional remuneration. William Henry Barber was an utter
stranger to me until introduced to him by Fletcher as Thomas
Hunt, nor did I after see him or have any subsequent commu-
nication with him until my first examination at the Mansion
House. I make this declaration from an unfeigned desire of
* Sanders, from the first moment of his apprehension, always declared my
innocence: his statements were invariably consistent, even to the acknow-
ledgment of his own guilt, for he pleaded guilty on his trial.


doing all the justice that in my power lies to a person whom I
have been instrumental in placing in a situation, of the horrors of
which I am now too painfully acquainted.
William Sanders.
Signed and declared in my presence this 9th day of July, 1844,
John L. Lancaster,
#
Surgeon Superintendent on board the Lord Auckland , Woolwich.*
* I sailed for Norfolk Island in the Agincourt on the Bth.
STATEMENT OF SANDERS AT HOBART TOWN.
OFFICIAL EXTRACT FROM THE CONVICT REGISTER OF VAN
diemen's land.
Statement on Arrival of 14,612, Sanders, William, per Lord
Auckland. Transported for “ Forging a Will.”
I represented Thomas Hunt, to get £1,210, Three per Cent.
Consols; tried with Barber and Fletcher; they went to Nor-
folk Island; I was concerned in two other similar cases; I
knew that Fletcher had been concerned in these matters for
several years before I consented to take a part in it; it was dis-
covered in consequence of a correspondence with a Miss Slack;
they were all unclaimed dividends, and we represented fictitious
persons, who were supposed to be relatives to the parties leaving
the money; Fletcher has been concerned in it for upwards of
fifteen years; prosecuted by the Government; Barber knew
nothing about the matter ; a Mrs. Dorey got two years’ impri-
sonment ; and my wife, who personated Miss Slack, received the
same sentence (two years’ imprisonment).
Extracted from the indent of the Lord Auckland.
JAMES THOMSON
Registrar, Convict Department.
28 th June , 1847.


REPORTS AND NOTES OF EXAMINATIONS
OF FLETCHER AND MYSELF, AND OF LEGAL
INVESTIGATIONS INSTITUTED.
REPORT OP AN INVESTIGATION AT NORFOLK ISLAND BY THE
REV. T. B. NAYLOR (CHAPLAIN AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE),
AND DEPUTY ASSISTANT COMMISSARY GENERAL SMITH.
We, the undersigned, Thomas Beagly Naylor (Chaplain of
Norfolk Island and J.P.), and Deputy Assistant Commissary
General John William Smith, in charge of the Commissariat at
Norfolk Island, having, on the arrival of the ship A (/incourt , had
peculiar reasons for taking a deep interest in the case of William
Henry Barber, who was transported by that vessel as an accom-
plice in the crime of forging a will, have, during a period of
several weeks, devoted ourselves voluntarily to an anxious in-
quiry into the subject, and the result is, a strong conviction in
our minds of his innocence; a conviction which we beg with
great deference and submission thus to record, in the hope that,
coupled with other testimony adduced since the trial, it may lead
to a favourable reconsideration of his case, as prayed for in a
memorial addressed by him to her Majesty’s Government.
Our view of the case has been greatly influenced by the expla-
nations elicited at different times from Barber himself, when
pressed very closely upon those points, which, according to the
published reports of the trials, seemed in our opinion to weigh
most heavily against him. The candour and apparent sincerity
with which he has answered us can, of course, only be duly esti-
mated by personal observation like that we have had. We feel
perfectly satisfied with the result, and accordingly venture to
recommend to serious attention these explanations as embodied
in his present statement.
But the strongest point in his favour is, perhaps, the confes-
sions of Fletcher, who may be regarded as the principal party to
the forgery in question. This man has been strictly examined by
us, both separately and in Barber’s presence. Ilis testimony and


answers, though given reluctantty, as well as with a feeling of
decided hostility towards Barber, go fully to establish the entire
innocence of the latter. That Fletcher originated the several
cases of fraud cannot, we imagine, be doubted. He admits dis-
tinctly that they were introduced by him to Barber, when so far
completed as to enable Barber in his professional capacity to pass
them at both Doctors’ Commons and the Bank; that he himself
had a previous knowledge of the parties who personated the
claimants, while Barber had not j that, in each of the four fic-
titious cases, a different member of the same family was thus
employed, with a view to blind Barber as well as others j that
the preliminary correspondence in the case of Miss Slack was
conducted by Barber under his instructions, and, as his solicitor,
that Barber placed full reliance upon him as a man of wealth
and respectability ; that Barber derived no other advantage from
these cases but fair professional fees ; that, in the case of the six
hundred sovereigns, viewed as involving so much suspicion
against Barber, he (Fletcher) took them away from Barber s
office, in company with and for the false claimant, Mrs. Sanders;
and, in short, there never was, directly or indirectly, the re-
motest degree of collusion between Barber and himself, or between
Barber and Fletcher’s accomplices, in a guilty knowledge and
perpetration of these frauds.
This confession, though more detailed, is, in fact, only a reiter-
ation of that made on board the Agincourt , and might perhaps
be somewhat superfluous, were we not able, from close personal
observation, to confirm the opinion of the surgeon superintendent,
that it may be relied upon so far as Barber is concerned; and that
there is not, nor does there appear to have been at any time,
a secret combination between Barber and Fletcher to defeat the
ends of justice; but, on the contrary, there is in Fletchers
manner, in his statements, and in his apparent motives, such a
mixture of selfishness and duplicity, as to leave no doubt on our
minds, both of his capability to originate these frauds, and to
sacrifice one who might either oppose his interest, or, by an im-
perfect, because unintentional concurrence in the nefarious plans,
be the means of leading to their detection.
From the supposition that Barber, being under pecuniary
obligation to Fletcher, might have been induced, without directly


participating in, nevertheless to have connived at the frauds, we
have taken pains to ascertain the exact amount and nature of
such obligations, and the result, so far from being prejudicial to
Barber, has contributed almost more than anything else to con-
firm our opinion of his innocence. It is most improbable that
Barber would have allowed himself to have been pressed for pay-
ment of the small sum we have ascertained he borrowed from
Fletcher, at a high rate of interest, if he had been cognizant of
schemes which would have placed Fletcher so completely within
his power.
In thus recording our humble opinion of Barber’s innocence,
we must disclaim any intention of impugning the verdict of the
jury before whom he was tried,—a verdict which, we doubt not,
was a most conscientious one, as far as the legal evidence went.
We have, as before stated, derived our impression from circum-
stances of subsequent occurrence, and unavailable to the court at
the time, and may add our belief that if Fletcher had been ex-
amined as a witness, the result of the trial would have been favour-
able to Barber: for, notwithstanding the corruptness of Fletcher’s
character, he must have been not only compelled to admit, as he
has to us, a mass of facts incompatible with Barbers guilt , as
shown in the Memorial; but at the same time detected in a
course of prevarication sufficient to remove all idea of collusion,
and thus to stamp his reluctant testimony with authenticity.
Given under our hands, at Norfolk Island, this 28 th day of
January, 1845.
T. BEAGLY NAYLOR
Chaplain.
J. W. SMITH
D.A.C.G.
FURTHER STATEMENT OF THE REV. T. B. NAYLOR.
Norfolk Island , 3rd Sept. 1845.
In leaving the island of which I have now been for some
years the chaplain, I owe it to public justice the duty of
recording my full conviction of the perfect innocence of William
Henry Barber, now suffering on it as a prisoner under a sen-
tence of transportation. I have, with unceasing interest, fol-
lowed up a series of inquiries into circumstances connected
with his case inaccessible to the court by which he was tried,


and many of which have subsequently occurred. In addition,
I have heard the reluctant acknowledgments of Fletcher , the
guilty originator of the frauds , establishing beyond the possi-
bility of doubt the innocence of Barber. My efforts shall con-
tinue for his extrication. I deeply lament his truly wretched
condition here, and would gladly have seen it ameliorated. I
have never known a prisoner of the Crown who has been sub-
jected to greater wretchedness: I rejoice to he able to add, I
have never seen an instance of more dignified suffering, accom-
panied by invariably consistent conduct. It will afford me real
pleasure to continue his acquaintance under happier circum-
stances.
(Signed) T. Beagly Naylor.
STATEMENT OF THE REV. T. ROGERS,
Late Chaplain of Norfolk Island.
In the month of August, 1845, I arrived as chaplain in Norfolk
Island, and became acquainted with Mr. Barber, there detained
as a prisoner of the Crown.
Mr. Barber’s trial had taken place while I was in England;
but having no particular reason to charge my memory with the
history of that event, I had only the most indistinct recollection
of the precise nature of the offence with which he had been
charged.
Shortly before my arrival, I was informed that an inquiry had
been made by two of the superior officers of the island concerning
the probabilities of the truth of Mr. Barber’s assertion of his own
innocence, which inquiry was chiefly suggested as proper to be
instituted, from the fact of Fletcher and Sanders having made
separate and explicit confessions that Mr. Barber was altogether
uninformed of their fraudulent proceedings.
The result of this inquiry upon the minds of its conductors, as
one of them stated to me, was, that Mr. Barber was suffering
undeservedly.
This declaration, from a clergyman and a magistrate of the
colony, who had assisted in the investigation, excited my interest
in behalf of the injured sufferer, and having procured the reports


of the trial —a copy of his memorial to Sir James Graham—and
various other supplemental documents, I carefully arranged them
so as to form a complete precis of the whole case : I then at dif-
ferent intervals examined Mr. Barber on any point that seemed
obscure or doubtful —having all the while daily access to Fletcher,
and thereby possessing the amplest opportunity of hearing from
him his own account of the transactions in which he and Barber
were involved.
The consequence was, that in a few weeks I found it impos-
sible to entertain any doubt of Mr. Barber s entire innocence , and
have ever since looked upon his perfect vindication and return to
society as a matter of course.
I might here, perhaps, also state, that I know ten or more men
in whose presence {as they informed me') Fletcher had made the
most unqualified admission of Barber s innocence; and I can
further affirm, that every gentleman with whom I am acquainted,
and who has given his attention to the case, has invariably been
conducted to the same conviction of Mr. Barber s innocence , to
which I myself had attained.
I regret to say, that the course pursued towards Mr. Barber ,
on the part of the chief officer of the island, was one of the most
galling severity. He (Barber) was restricted to the Barrack-
yard, while hundreds of the vilest desperadoes might roam from
station to station under cover of a “ pass he was singled out
for special contumely : he was addressed in the most exasperating
language : he was ordered to perform the most loathsome labour:
he was deprived of indulgence granted him by the medical officer
for the recovery of his health : he was the only prisoner inter-
dicted writing materials: he wished to be useful, but for nineteen
months he was perversely refused the opportunity of being
so. In short, his life was reduced to a wearisome condition
of mental torture and of physical toil disproportioned to his
strength, and which his former habits rendered peculiarly
grievous.
Yet I can with all truth affirm, that I never knew his self-
command overcome by provocation, however gross, nor his sense
of injustice to betray him into any unseemliness of resentment.
On the contrary, he submitted to every indignity, no matter how
gratuitous, with all meekness. He complied with every rule of


discipline, no matter how vexatiously imposed. He yielded all
obedience to every officer, no matter how unqualified to com-
mand. He endured every privation with the calm fortitude in-
spired by conscious innocence. For eighteen months I watched
his demeanour under the accumulated wretchedness of convict
slavery and degradation; and while observing the invincible
patience with which he encountered the trials of his exile lot, I
have often said to myself, “ If this man be not innocent, he de-
serves to be, from the magnanimity evinced in this fearful
struggle with misfortune.”
I need only add that I have the highest esteem for Mr. Barber,
as a man of honourable principles, uncorrupted integrity, and
extensive information. I have been often cheered by his society;
and I trust that his calamities have been sanctified to his spiritual
profiting.
THOMAS ROGERS
late Chaplain at Norfolk Island.
New Norfolk, Van Diemen’s Land,
June 30th, 1847.
STATEMENT OF FIELDING BROWNE, ESQ. ,
Judge of Assize of Norfolk Island.
I, Fielding Browne, of Hobart Town, Barrister-at-Law, for-
merly Attorney-General of Grenada in the West Indies, having
during my visits to Norfolk Island in the years 1845 and 1846,
in the capacity of Judge of the Criminal Court of that place, had
my attention called to the case of William Henry Barber, I was
led by the peculiarity of the circumstances of it, although not
within the sphere of my official duties, to bestow much attention
on it, and am induced, by a sense of duty, respectfully to make
the following statement.
I have very attentively perused and considered the evidence
upon which Mr. Barber was convicted; also his Memorial trans-
mitted through the Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s Land
to Sir James Graham, together with the Report of the Reverend
Thomas Beagly Naylor, and Deputy Assistant Commissary-
General Smith; and the several confessions of Fletcher, Sanders
and his wife, and of Mrs. Dorey.


I consider the evidence of Fletcher, owing to the acrimonious
feeling which I have ascertained from various indisputable sources,
to have all along invariably existed on his part towards Mr. Bar-
ber, which removes all ground of suspicion of concert between
them, as of the highest importance. I have likewise ascertained
that Sanders has, since his arrival in Yan Diemen’s Land, reite-
rated the statement originally made by him of Mr. Barber’s
innocence; and I have had frequent opportunity of close interro-
gation of Mr. Barber upon every point which the perusal of the
report of his trial and the documents connected with it suggested.
I must disclaim all intention of impugning the verdict of the
jury before whom Mr. Barber was tried and convicted. In the
first place, owing to the circumstance of his being tried on the
same indictment with Fletcher and Sanders, he had not the benefit
of their evidence ; and, in the next place, even if Fletcher had
been a witness, the jury could not have had his evidence before
them in the unvarying, conclusive, and satisfactory manner in
which it now appears, after three years of minute and searching
scrutiny.
Could the jury have had the advantage of such an investiga-
tion as that to which I have alluded, I cannot doubt for a
moment that they would have been of opinion that Mr. Barber
must have been as unconscious of the fraudulent character of the
business in which he was professionally engaged, as the proctor,
or the stock-broker, or any of the other gentlemen through whose
hands the matter successively passed.
The result of a minute and long-continued investigation, and
observation in this case, which I have thus had the opportunities
of making, is a decided and unqualified opinion of the perfect
innocence of Mr. Barber.
I cannot conclude without very respectfully expressing my most
earnest hope, that Mr. Barber may be fully restored to his former
position of respectability and happiness, as well as of usefulness
as an honourable and intelligent member of society: a wish in
which every legal and other gentleman in this colony with whom
I have conversed on this subject most cordially unites.
F. Browne.
Hobart Town,
2 5th June , 1847.


NOTE BY DR. BROWNING, OF AN EXAMINATION OF
BARBER AND FLETCHER.
On board the Convict ship Pestongee Bomangee ,
Tasman s Peninsula , April 8th, 1847.
In consequence of the belief which I found to be generally en-
tertained by intelligent persons in Norfolk Island, that the pri-
soner William Henry Barber is wholly innocent of the crime
for which he has for a period of nearly three years been suffering;
I was induced upon his coming, together with Joshua Fletcher
and other three hundred and forty-four persons, under my charge
during the passage from Norfolk Island to Tasman’s Peninsula,
Van Diemen’s Land, to make some inquiry into the matter.
With this view I interrogated Barber, and read with careful
and minute attention the history of the transaction which has led
to his present most deplorable degradation and sufferings. I
questioned him particularly upon every point which the perusal
of the history of his case and of his various documents suggested,
and I am bound to say that his answers and explanations were
frank, consistent, and to my mind completely satisfactory, being
such as characterize the undissembling and straightforward, the
honest and honourable man.
I had also a private interview with Fletcher, the alleged author
of the frauds; I found him in a very unfavourable mood towards
Barber. He complained that Barber had uniformly treated him
with hauteur , not even speaking to him ; and more particularly
that Barber had brought him forward against his inclination as a
witness, when he (Barber) was apprehended. He did not deny
Barber’s innocence, but asserted that the fictitious claimant,
“ Emma Slack,” came forward in pursuance of an advertisement
inserted in the Times by Barber. He also intimated that Barber
had been under some obligations to him for the occasional loan of
money.
As the assertion regarding the advertisement not only disa-
greed with Barber’s narrative in the Memorial, but was incon-
sistent also with Fletcher’s previous admissions that he had
himself introduced Mrs. Sanders as “Emma Slack,” and as a
legitimate claimant, I confronted Barber and Fletcher. Fletcher


was then compelled to admit that the only communication to
Barber by Mrs. Sanders that he could point out, was that which
was made from Bath , under the assumed name of “ Jane Slack,”
and which was in consequence, or rather, it may be said, under
colour of an advertisement inserted by Fletcher, as he admitted,
in the Bath and Cheltenham Gazette.
The important, searching, and straightforward questions put by
Barber to Fletcher, the latter sought constantly to evade by an
alleged forgetfulness, although his memory appeared most reten-
tive on points which he seemed to think might perplex Barber,
or which seemed to relieve himself from any degree of criminality.
From what was elicited, however, it seemed that Mrs. Sanders
had been his instrument throughout, and that the advertisement
in the Bath papers, and the letters from that place, were all a
groundwork for imposing on Barber.
With regard to his loans to Barber, Fletcher appeared to con-
found the advances of some small sums to Barber with advances
to his clients. With reference to the former , he did not deny
that Barber always gave him good security, and paid him high
interest; and with reference to the latter he admitted, that both
in point of interest and security his investments to Barber’s
clients were highly advantageous to himself, although, in conse-
quence of Barber’s imprisonment and the desire of'Fletchers
friends to realize his securities suddenly, great sacrifices may
have been made. I made closer inquiries into these points as to
the advertisement and the loans to Barber and his clients, fiom
an apprehension that Fletcher, in a written statement, which he
says he placed in the hands of the Government after his trial,
has represented these points in a manner calculated to raise an
impression wholly unwarranted by truth or justice. I went over
with great patience all the leading points set forth in Barbers
Memorial, and which Fletchers admissions seemed abundantly
to confirm. One point I should particularly notice. He had, at
the early part of the interview, denied his previous knowledge of
any of the false claimants prior to their advancing their claims.
Subsequently Barber asked him how long it was before he knew
Barber that he had been a witness for Mrs. Dorey in an action
for breach of promise of marriage ? He replied, “ Oh, years
before.” Barber then said, “Having that knowledge of her, do


you still say you had no knowledge of her sister, Mrs. Sanders,
the pretended ‘ Emma Slack ?' ” He appeared to perceive the
dilemma, and said, “ I do not believe they are sisters—they are
not at all like each other.”
Fletcher declared that he had never authorised any one to say
he imputed a guilty knowledge of the forgery to Barber. On
the contrary, he said, “ I declared my belief of his innocence at
Woolwich, and also before Mr. Naylor and Mr. Smith on Nor-
folk Islandand that at Newgate, after Barber’s conviction,
Mr. Sheriff Musgrove said, “ Fletcher, if you can say that Barber
is entirely innocent, I think something may be done for him.”
Upon which another gentleman made an observation to the effect,
that such a declaration would be useless.
Fletcher admitted that all the proceeds of the fraud were paid
over in his presence to the false executrix, at Barber’s office, where
he attended, he said, to receive the eighty pounds he had lent
the executrix to pay the probate duty, and for which loan she
then paid him interest about Jive pounds.
With reference to the hearing at the Mansion House, Fletcher
complained that Barber placed him in the box without prepara-
tion, and without his acquiescence, as well as without instruc-
tions. To this Barber said, “ The only instruction I gave you
was in these words : You have nothing to do but to tell the simple
truth ; this surely cannot prejudice you, whilst it is the only
thing that can exonerate me. Do this literally and faithfully,
and, for God’s sake,* don’t build up one particle of fiction.”
Fletcher admitted that those were the only instructions Barber
had given him.
This report is, to the best of my recollection and belief,
substantially , and, I doubt not, minutely , correct.
COLIN ARROTT BROWNING
M.D.,
Surgeon Royal Navy, and Surgeon Superintendent on
board the Convict Ship Pestongee Bomangee.
H
* I write this expression as having been used by Barber. —C. A. B.


STATEMENT OF JOHN SMITH, A FRIEND AND
FELLOW-PRISONER WITH BOTH SANDERS AND
FLETCHER.
I was a fellow-prisoner with William Sanders after his trial,
and feeling some interest about the case of Mr. Barber, although I
had no personal knowledge of him, I asked Sanders privately
if Barber was innocent or guilty. He solemnly assured me
Barber was entirely innocent; that every thing was so arranged
that Barber could have no reason to suspect any fraud ; that
Fletcher had always declared to him that Barber had no guilty
knowledge whatever; and from the precautions taken by
Fletcher, Sanders said he was quite certain the real truth had
been carefully concealed from Barber. I had more than one
conversation with Sanders on this subject ; and he was always
consistent in declaring Barber’s innocence, adding, that neither
he, his wife, or Mrs. Dorey, were known to Barber except in
the fictitious characters in which they were introduced to him by
Fletcher.
I have observed the conduct and demeanour of Barber and
Fletcher towards each other since they came on board the Agin-
court, and it has decidedly been of the most unsocial character,
Barber studiously avoiding all intercourse with him from the first
moment of their embarkation. With regard to myself, I may
say, that I was at one time a member of the Stock Exchange,
but having got into pecuniary difficulties, I forged the accept-
ance of my brother (secretary to the Bishop of Lincoln) for the
sum of five pounds, and the forgery being discovered, I was sen-
tenced to seven years’ transportation.
JOHN SMITH.
September 2nd, 1844.
SECOND STATEMENT OF JOHN SMITH, MADE A FEW
DAYS BEFORE HIS DEATH.
I, John Smith, a prisoner on board the ship Agincourt, being
now on a bed of sickness, from which it is very doubtful if it


will please God to raise me, am desirous of stating wliat has
come to my knowledge in the case of William Henry Barber,
through my intercourse with William Sanders and Joshua
Fletcher.
From my former statement it will be seen that I was a fellow-
prisoner of Sanders after his trial, and had repeated conversa-
tions with him, in reference to which I have only to repeat that
Sanders declared in the most positive manner Barber’s entire
innocence; and from the circumstances named by Sanders lam
persuaded that the business was introduced to Barber by Fletcher,
who appears to have been a regular client, as strictly legitimate,
and that from the precautions taken there was nothing by which
any solicitor would be induced to suspect the contrary. I have
been on friendly terms with Fletcher ever since we have been on
board the Agincourt, and have had several conversations with
him about Barber’s case; and although there is, and has been
throughout, an evident hostility between them, he never denied
Barber was entirely innocent. All that I have seen and heard
of Barber has convinced me that such is indeed the fact; and as
the voyage is now nearly terminated, I have been induced to
speak seriously to Fletcher on the subject, and have urged him
to enter into a detailed narrative of the circumstances of the
case ; but his unfriendly feeling towards Barber seems rather to
have increased, Barber having, as he says, behaved throughout
the voyage in so distant and uncourteous a manner to him, as to
become the subject of general remark. Besides which, he has
complained of Barber’s having placed him in the lion’s mouth, by
bringing him forward when Barber was first apprehended ; but
for which, he says, he should have escaped by being evidence for
the Grown. He declared, therefore, that he would neither add to
nor detract from what he had already said ; and although he ad-
mitted the perfect innocence of Barber, said he must help him-
self as he best might.
JOHN SMITH.
Signed and declared in our presence on board the Agincourt.
Charles ll y. Fuller, R.N., Surgeon Superintendent.
John L. Ison, Minister.
Off Norfolk Island , Nov. 6th, 1844.
H 2


REPORT OF THE SYDNEY LAW SOCIETY,
AFTER TEN DAYS’ INVESTIGATION.
Pursuant to the resolution by which, in compliance with Mr.
Barber’s request, the Society undertook the investigation of his
case, and formed itself for that purpose into committee, it has held
daily meetings from the 29th ultimo to the 9th instant, inclusive.
At these meetings the entire report of the trial of Mr. Barber,
which ended in his conviction and transportation, has been care-
fully read through, as published in the London daily papers.
Also, the report of the previous examination at the Mansion
House, and various contemporary correspondence and editorial
comments relating to the subject.
The Society having thus possessed themselves of the case as
fully as possible, in the form in which it was presented to the
jury, and the English public at the time of the conviction, they
proceeded carefully to investigate the subsequently acquired evi-
dence, and heard the explanation by means of which Mr. Barber
had already succeeded in possessing the minds of so many com-
petent judges with a full persuasion of his innocence.
The result of such investigation has been to establish the same
persuasion in the minds of the Society; nor can they have any
doubt that far less exculpatory evidence than has been laid before
them, would have rendered it impossible for the jury to bring in
a verdict of guilty against Mr. Barber.
None of the circumstances on which Mr. Barber’s prosecution
chiefly relied as evidence of guilt, were in fact incompatible with
his innocence. Great stress was laid on the tracing to him of a
bag of six hundred sovereigns, which he carried away for, or
with, Mrs. Sanders, when she received the money at the Bank
of England. The Society cannot see how an attorney’s know-
ledge of his client's fraud can be inferred from an act, which, if
innocent, he would have -been equally, and for some reasons
more, likely to have performed, namely, the carrying a heavy bag
of coin for a lady who either had, or appeared to have, the gout
in her hands.
Again, great stress was laid upon the circumstances which
pointed out the identity of Captain Foskett’s sister-in-law with
the true owner of the stock, and which it is argued must have


convinced Mr. Barber of such identity, and so proved his bad
faith in lending himself to any other claimant. When, however,
Captain Foskett cannot deny that he represented his sister s age
as twenty-seven, and the nature of Messrs. Barber and Bircham s
impressions of her age, derived from this source, are evident from
their alluding to her as “ the young lady” in a contemporary
letter of business; and when it is evident that no person of such
an age could possibly have been owner of the stock, it is surely
too much to take it for granted against JMr. Barber, that because
other strong indications of identity existed, he must necessarily
have solved the mystery in favour of Miss Slack, by disbelieving
what her brother-in-law, Captain Foskett, had stated upon this
material fact, inventing for a lady he had never seen the different
age of thirty-seven. On many other points, the peculiar position
of an attorney in conducting the affairs of his client was con-
ducive to fallacious inferences against Mr. Barber. It was
assumed by the prosecution that whatever was stated as fact in
Mr. Barber’s correspondence, or otherwise acted on by him, such
as the result of a comparison of handwriting, was a fact he had
personally investigated, and of which he must himself have
known the truth or falsehood; whereas every attorney, and
almost every client, well knows that facts resting on clients bare
instructions are necessarily blended and confounded with those
resting on personal knowledge in the common course of profes-
sional business.
This general consideration, although above applied only to one
circumstance, will be found to clear away a large part of what
appears, on a superficial glance at the evidence, to raise suspicion
against Mr. Barber.
With respect to Mr. Barbers concealment of the name of his
client, Fletcher, at his interview with Mr. Freshfield, it is to be
observed that a reason for this concealment existed, irrespective
altogether of any question of the crime of forgery; namely, the
desire of Fletcher to avoid inquiry into the source of his informa-
tion regarding unclaimed dividends, a source which he does not
seem, judging from the testimony of Mr. Christmas, to have
ever revealed even to Mr. Barber himself ; nor were this separate
motive absent, is it clear that an attorney should be justified in
disclosing the name of a client in connection with a prima facie


case of guilt, without first availing himself of all the means in
his power to clear up the facts and accompany the disclosure
with an explanation by way of antidote. A conscientious attor-
ney might even from very scrupulosity feel bound to pause and
consider before making such a revelation.
To judge of the propriety of all that fell from Mr. Barber in
this conversation is not the task which the Society has under-
taken, and were it so, they would have first to consider whether
Mr. Freshfield’s statement be sufficiently accurate or complete to
enable them to form an opinion. Mr. Barber solemnly denies its
accuracy, in many important respects, while Mr. Freshfield on
the trial himself more than admits its incompleteness; nor could
it be fairly judged of, without a knowledge even of the tone of
voice and manner assumed by both parties. On the whole, it is
a relief to the Society to be freed from all obligation to disen-
tangle the perplexities in which this piece of evidence is involved,
inasmuch as with the light now thrown by other means on the
case, the conversation between Mr. Barber and Mr. Freshfield is
in no imaginable point of view material to a decision upon the
main question of Mr. Barber’s innocence of the crime imputed to
him.
So weak was, indeed, the case proved against him, that if the
prosecutors had not resisted his application for a separate trial,
the Society cannot conceive it possible that any jury could have
found him guilty. The Society cannot conceive any case which
more peculiarly required a separate trial. From the very nature
of the case, it was scarcely possible that any one individual be-
sides the other accused parties could possess actual knowledge
whether Barber had been really the confederate or the victim of
their fraud ; and a sifting examination of those persons, whatever
their character, was at least a safer channel to the truth, than the
vague case of suspicion and remote inference, which, so far as
Barber was concerned, was presented to the jury on the joint
indictment. When it is also considered that the prosecution had
access to Mr. Barber’s diary, and had followed in vain several
tracks of inquiry which might have been naturally expected to
afford proof of guilt, had guilt existed; also, that in a compli-
cated transaction of this nature, the concurrent and consistent
testimony of the four other accused persons in any story excul


pating Barber, so as to stand cross-examination, would have been
next to a miracle, unless such story were true, and this particu-
larly when all intercourse between them appears to have been
carefully prevented from the moment of their apprehension, the
refusal appears still more extraordinary, and the Society cannot
but regard it as the main cause of Mr. Barber’s unmerited suffer-
ings, and a fearful exception to the usual tenderness and caution
of English justice.
The Society also think, if the trials had been separate, the
examination of Mr. Barber in like manner on the trial of the
other parties could hardly have failed of itself effectually to have
removed all doubts of his own guilt, had it existed, —a thing of
infinitely greater importance in giving useful effect to exem-
plary punishment than the mere fact of the conviction of
a supposed criminal, especially on doubtful or unsatisfactory
evidence.
The soundness of these views is manifest from the conduct of
the whole of the parties after their conviction, from which, under
less favourable circumstances than separate trials would have
afforded, more real light has been cast on the transaction than
by the judicial investigation in which a jury was called on to
grope after the truth in the comparative darkness, resulting from
the exclusion of the only direct testimony accessible. The Society
are not indeed blind to the general worthlessness of exculpatory
statements made by accused persons in favour of each other, yet
they cannot but perceive that in this case the conduct of Barber
and Fletcher, and the statements of the latter, stand on peculiar
grounds, and are therefore entitled, especially when other cir-
cumstances concur, to peculiar weight. It is evident from the
testimony of the present civil commandant of Norfolk Island,
Mr. Fuller, the Rev. T. B. Naylor, and Assistant Commissary
General J. W. Smith, the Rev. Thomas Rogers, Dr. Browning,
and others, that Fletcher painfully felt, that but for the state-
ments of Barber, the part he took in the transaction might have
been kept out of sight, or an opportunity of escape at least
have been afforded him. He, too, could not be unconscious that
the admission of Barber’s innocence would, by adding to the
crime of which he had been convicted, that of having occasioned
the ruin and conviction of a highly respectable man, expose him


to the just abhorrence of every honest man, and take away all
hope of mitigation.
The Society conceive the sum of Mr. Barber’s offence to be that
of allowing himself to be employed by a very wealthy and appa-
rently respectable man in tracing out the owners of unclaimed
dividends, a course of practice which unavoidably subjects the
parties concerned to be made the dupes of artful and unprin-
cipled persons. They do not feel entitled to express disapproba-
tion of a course which has been adopted by men of undoubted
honour and integrity, and still less to admit that it ought of itself
for a moment to subject the party to the imputation of fraud, or
even improper motives. It may be said that the perpetrator of
such a fraud was not likely to select an honest attorney; but it
is often of the greatest importance to persons engaged in nefarious
practices to employ upright and honourable men, the character
of whom cannot fail to avert suspicion, but who must of course
be kept in profound ignorance of the evil character of the acts to
be accomplished; and in this consideration may be found a suf-
ficient motive for the various arts which were employed to blind
Mr. Barber, and effectually impose upon his judgment.
On the whole, the society feel an unanimous persuasion that
Mr. Barber was entirely innocent of the fraud practised by
Fletcher; that it is chiefly, if not wholly, in consequence of his
being shut out by a joint indictment from the most obvious and
certain means of eliciting the truth , that he has endured the dis-
grace and misery of conviction and unmerited punishment, and
that he is entitled to every assistance in his endeavour to resume
his position in society, not to speak of reparation, could any repa-
ration be possible, or if possible, sufficient in such a case.
(Signed) James Norton, President.
Sydney,
16*A August , 1847. *


VERIFICATIONS OF THE PRECEDING DOCUMENTS.
CERTIFICATE OF C. H. FULLER, ESQ., R.N.
Her Majesty’s hired Convict Ship Agincourt.
23rd September , 1844.
I do hereby certify, that, as far as my observation has ex-
tended, there has been no intimacy subsisting between Barber
and Fletcher, since their arrival on board the Agincourt. On
the contrary, I feel convinced there is a feeling of decided hos-
tility existing between them , and that any testimony of the latter
in favour of the former may be received as genuine.
I feel myself bound further to certify, that from the apparently
straightforward statement of Barber, from his sincerity of air and
manner, and from the way in which he has put questions to
Fletcher in my presence—entirely exonerating himself from any
guilty knowledge of the transactions for which he is suffering—
he has produced on my mind the most favourable impression of
his innocence ; only subject to the doubt created by his having
been found guilty by an intelligent jury, under the direction of
an able and impartial judge.
Given under my hand on board the Agincourt , Symons Bay,
Cape of Good Hope.
CHAS. HY. FULLER
R.N., Surgeon Superintendent.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM M'CALLUM, WHO COM-
MITTED FLETCHER'S SECOND STATEMENT TO
WRITING.
Being desired to set forth the circumstances under which the
statement of Joshua Fletcher, dated the 4th July last, was made,
I beg to state, that having seen in the newspapers his first decla-
ration, I was induced to speak to Barber on the subject, and the
strong impression of his innocence, which I received from his
own frank and clear explanation, being entirely confirmed by
subsequent conversations with Fletcher, I urged upon the latter


the duty of explaining the details of the business in verification
of his statement. He seemed extremely reluctant to say any-
thing that might possibly increase public prejudice against him-
self, and it was clear to me that he was far from disposed to do
Barber more than the most meagre justice. I however com-
mitted his statement to writing, and he afterwards read it with
scrupulous attention. Having made some corrections, I accom-
panied him to the surgeon superintendent, who, when he had
perused it, asked Fletcher, in a serious manner, “ If it was
really true ?” Fletcher said, “ Yes, Sir, it is quite true.” “ Why,
then,” said the surgeon, “ did you not declare this at the trial ? ”
Fletcher said, “ I had no opportunity, being jointly indicted
with Barber.”
The scorn and abhorrence with which Barber has always ex-
pressed himself in reference to Fletcher has been quite in keeping
with his manner towards him. As a natural consequence, a
feeling of marked hostility manifested itself throughout the voyage,
and which evidently continues to this moment. I myself have
been upon terms of civil intercourse with Fletcher, and I solemnly
declare that every circumstance which I could elicit from him in
reference to the business for which Barber is suffering, tended to
confirm and illustrate the perfect innocence of the latter.
WILLIAM M'CALLUM.
Norfolk Island,
January 10 th, 1845.
CERTIFICATE OF LIEUTENANT LLOYD, R.M.
I certify that William Henry Barber and Joshua Fletcher
came out in the ship Agincourt , in which ship I was a passenger,
and that since their arrival in this island, Barber has belonged to
the division of which I have been superintendent: that neither
during the passage, nor upon this island, has there been, to the
best of my belief, any intimacy between them. On the contrary,
I have noticed a decided hostility.
I have found Barber a mild and intelligent man, and his con-
duct has been very superior to that of the men with whom it has


been his lot to be associated. Nothing will give me greater
pleasure than to hear that the proofs of his innocence now in
course of submission to her Majesty’s Government have restored
him to liberty.
SAMUEL LLOYD
R.M., Superintendent of Convicts.
Norfolk Island,
September 2nd, 1845.
CERTIFICATE OF THE COMMANDANT OF NORFOLK
ISLAND WHO SUCCEEDED MAJOR CHILD.
Since my arrival on this island, William Henry Barber has
conducted himself entirely to my satisfaction. He has been most
assiduous to the duties devolving on him, and his general bearing
has led me to form a favourable opinion of his character.
I have observed that he has associated with none of the other
prisoners, keeping himself entirely aloof from them.
With Fletcher he holds no communication, and, indeed, I
gather from Fletcher, that he looks upon the fact of Barber’s
having called on him at the Mansion House to give evidence, as
the cause of his own apprehension ; as he tells me, had Barber
not done so, he should have given evidence for the Crown. He
speaks with great acrimony against Barber, yet does not say
that Barber had a guilty knowledge of the transaction for which
he suffers. I state this in justice to Barber, who still asserts his
entire innocence of being a participator in the crime for which he
is transported.
I have not the slightest doubt as to the hostility existing be-
tween Barber and Fletcher being genuine.
JOHN PRICE
Civil Commandant.
Norfolk Island,
March 17 th, 1847.


LETTER ACCOMPANYING REPORT OF THE SYDNEY
LAW SOCIETY.*
Sydney , 17 th August, 1847.
Sir, —With reference to your application to the Sydney Law
Society to undertake an investigation of the evidence by which
you sought to establish your innocence of the crime for which you
are suffering a sentence, hitherto only partially remitted, —I
have great pleasure in following up the intimation already
given you of compliance with your request, by transmitting
to you a copy of the report resulting thereupon; which has
been framed under an equal sense of the Society’s responsi-
bility to public opinion if found intermeddling in such a case
on weak or insufficient grounds—and of the duty owing to a
member of their own profession, if really guiltless of an offence
so terribly avenged upon him.
Fully concurring in the persuasion of your innocence conveyed
by the accompanying report, I cannot forward it without express-
ing my sincere hope that it may afford its measure of aid in
placing your conduct in this unhappy affair in that clear light
which is, I believe, all you desire, and which can prove a
boon only to the innocent.—l have the honour to be, Sir, your
most obedient servant,
G. K. HOLDEN
Hon. Sec. Sydney Law Society.
W. H. Barber, Esq.
LETTER FROM HIS HONOUR SIR ALFRED STEPHEN,
Chief Justice of New South Wales.
Supreme Court , Sydney.
Sir, — My attention has been called to your case by my friend
Mr. Charles Cowper, the member of council for Cumberland,
with a view to my accession to the subscription list, set on foot
in this city, to procure funds for your voyage to Europe, and to
enable you there to prosecute your claim to a free pardon, and
the restoration of your former character, and of yourself to
society.
* See Report, p. 100.


It is obvious that I could not with propriety give my name to
such a subscription without inquiry and examination ; and I have
felt that I could not properly express a decided opinion of your
innocence, without ampler materials than are in this colony acces-
sible to me. But, upon the whole, I arrive at two conclusions,
which induce me to comply with Mr. Cowper’s request, and to
write to you this letter, which you are at liberty to make use of
in any way that you may think proper. First, lam of opinion
that the case, as it now stands, would secure your acquittal at
the hands of any jury. Secondly, I think that it is more than
a hare case of reasonable, or grave doubt; but that, notwith-
standing the verdict of guilty, you have established a strong
prima facie case of innocence.
With such impressions, I have no difficulty in adding my
mite to your subscription list ; that you may have the means
nearer the spot where the evidence of your guilt exists, if you
really were guilty of effecting the same, or a still more decided
result in your favour, in the minds of those in whose hands your
fate And I persuade myself, and do very sincerely trust,
that you will fully succeed.
I ought to add, that the conclusions which I have expressed
are arrived at from the facts and statements contained in your
pamphlet. But I will confess that, without an examination of
them, I should, as an individual , have been content to rest on
the strongly-expressed opinions of the Rev. Mr. Naylor, and of
the Sydney Law Society. I have known Mr. Naylor intimately
many years. He has had great experience in these colonies, and
no small acquaintance with the history of criminals, and of crime.
His opinion on your case is, therefore, entitled to much weight.
The same may be said of the conclusion arrived at by the Sydney
Law Society. I have a personal knowledge of its leading
members. They are solicitors of high character ; of extensive
practice and experience j and without a motive to pronounce
favourably on your case , except such as might and ought to in-
fluence benevolent and upright men. I am, Sir, your obedient
servant,
ALFRED STEPHEN.
Mr. W. H. Barber,
September 1 6th, 1847.


MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS AND PAPERS.
Extract from the “ Times ” of Ist July, 1844.
THE CONVICTS BARBER AND FLETCHER.
The document, forming a declaration of the innocence of
Barber by his fellow-convict Fletcher, has been submitted to us
for publication by the solicitors on the part of Barber in the
late trials. It appears to be a complete and apparently truthful
exculpation on behalf of Fletcher of Barber’s supposed participa-
tion in the will forgeries, and their attendant frauds, and is made
at a time when disguise or falsehood would be vain and addi-
tionally iniquitous.
EXTRACT FROM A LETTER OF MR. MERRICK BIRCHAM JiIRCIIAM,
MY LATE PARTNER, TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES.”
After adverting to some points in the report of the hearing at
the Mansion House, when I was apprehended, on the 9th of
December, he writes as follows :
“ To my certain knowledge there never was a more cruel or
unfounded charge preferred.
“ I believe it will ultimately appear that no forgery at all
has been committed ; but if there has, it will be impossible for
any impartial mind to believe, after a correct statement shall
have been given, that Mr. Barber could have or even for
a moment suspected that there was anything improper connected
with the document in question.
“ I have now been connected with Mr. Barber two years, and
a more upright or honourable partner could not exist.”— From
the Times, of 12th December, 1843.
Extract from the “ Legal Observerof the 13 th July, 1844 :
THE CASE OF WILLIAM HENRY BARBER.
A zealous member of the profession has called our attention
to the Will Forgery Cases, in which Mr. W. 11. Barber, a soli


citor, was implicated. Actuated as well by a humane feeling, as
by an honourable desire to remove the disgrace which partially
falls on the profession by the misconduct of one of its members,
our correspondent has given much attention to the subject. He
is a solicitor, of considerable standing and experience, and we
feel warranted in placing much reliance on his intelligence and
judgment. TVe extract the following from his statement:—
“ I have devoted no little time to investigating and inquiring
into the circumstances of the cases against Mr. Barber. I have
been to his solicitor’s chambers, and there examined Mr. Barber’s
letter-book, diary, and other papers relating to the matters in
which he is charged; and I have no hesitation in declaring, as
the result of my labours, that I firmly believe Barber to be en-
tirely innocent, and to have acted bond fide as a solicitor in the
business. I have no doubt that if the declarations of the
several prisoners freeing him from any guilty knowledge had
been in the first instance made, Barber would never have been
convicted.”
COPY OF A LETTER FROM GILBERT ROBERTSON, ESQ. ,
SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT OF NORFOLK ISLAND,
To Fielding Browne, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, Hobart Town,
late Attorney-General of Grenada, and now Judge 91" Assize
of Norfolk Island.
Longridge , 2nd September , 1845.
My dear Sir, —In compliance with the request of the Rev.
Mr. Naylor, I have carefully perused the papers submitted to
me by Barber relating to his case, and examined him on every
point that did not appear clear from those papers. The result is,
a thorough conviction on my mind that Barber is, as he asserts,
innocent of any guilty knowledge of or participation in the frauds
committed by Fletcher and his accomplices; in which Barber
was an unsuspecting instrument, as much (and, I should say, as
innocently) deceived and imposed upon as was Mr. Freshfield,
the solicitor to the Bank of England, who was more required to
look with zealous caution on the documents by which Fletcher
supported the claims of his accomplices or instruments than Bar


ber, who could see nothing on the face of the transaction, as it
was made to appear to him, to justify a suspicion of fraud on the
part of his own clients. I was much prejudiced against Barber,
until, on the urgent request of Mr. Naylor, I looked closely into
his case. I now look upon him as an innocent victim, and would
rejoice in any opportunity to assist in obtaining his release from
the consequences of his conviction.—I am, &c.
(Signed) Gilbert Robertson.
NOTES FOR AN EXAMINATION OF WILLIAM SAN-
DEBS, IN VAN DIEMEN’s LAND,
Which I, whilst a prisoner in Norfolk Island, desired migﬁt be
lead, but which the authorities refuse.
A consideration of the circumstances of the case will suggest
the line of examination of Sanders; but, in order to assist, as far
as possible, I respectfully submit the following brief hints:—
1. Explain the history of your connection with Joshua Fletcher
and Mrs. Dorey.
2. State the Bank transactions, in which you were directly or
indirectly concerned with Fletcher.
3. Explain what you know of Barber, and how you were
introduced to him.
4. State the particulars of Hunt’s case.
5. The like of Slack’s.
6. Do you believe that Barber was cognizant of their being
fraudulent claims, or that he had the slightest suspicion that
either of them was so ?
7. Did Fletcher tell you that Barber was, or was not in the
secret ?
8. Were not every pains taken by Fletcher, as well as by your-
self and wife, under his instructions, to prevent any suspicion in
Barber’s mind ?
9. Were not lodgings taken at Bath for Mrs. Sanders, under
the name of Jane Slack ?
10. Was not a correspondence opened by Mrs. Sanders with
Barber and Bircham, in the name of Jane Slack, purporting to


he in answer to an advertisement, which had been inserted
by Fletcher, in the Bath and Cheltenham, Gazette ?
11. Was not an entry made in the Bath Register of the death
of a fictitious Anne Slack ?
12. State why that was abandoned, and an entry made at
Pimlico.
13. Were not the lodgings taken at Bath, the fictitious cor-
respondence from thence, the entry in the Bath Register , and the
subsequent entry at Pimlico, all for the purpose of forming a
groundwork for Barber’s confidence, and to induce him to believe
the claim a genuine one ?
14. From what you know of Fletcher, do you not think that
Barber had every reason to regard him as a respectable client,
and as one from whom he might receive any introduction with
implicit confidence ?
15. Did you ever understand that Barber and Fletcher were
known to each other, beyond their relation of attorney and
client ?
16. State what particulars you can relative to Slack’s case ;
especially what your wife told you at the time.
17. How were the proceeds divided ?
18. Had you any knowledge of Barber, except in your cha-
racter of “ Thomas Hunt ?” Did you ever see him, or commu-
nicate with him, from the time that business was settled, until
you saw him at the Mansion House, in custody ?
19. Have you had any communication with him since ?
20. Did Barber attend to your business exclusively, or did
his partner Bircham attend quite as much or more to it; and
had you not several interviews with the latter ?
21. Did you not produce to Barber and Bircham an appa-
rently respectable person, who made an affidavit, proving the
facts as to the finding of your grandmother’s will; and do you
not believe that both Barber and Bircham fully believed the
facts as deposed to ?
22. When you were first brought to the Compter prison, did
you not confess your guilt, and declare Barber’s complete inno-
cence ?
23. Did not Dr. M’Murdock thereupon remark, “ Well, Mrs.
Dorey assured me Barber was innocent ?”
I


24. State any other facts which appear to you likely to
throw any further light upon the question, whether Barber was
an accomplice, or an innocent and unsuspecting professional agent ?
25. Is it not, in fact, your firm belief, that Barber, from his
confidence in Fletcher, and from the manner in which the
fraudulent cases were introduced to him, fully believed them to
he genuine ?
CERTIFICATE OF FIELDING BROWNE, ESQ.
Upon the occasion of my first visit to Norfolk Island, in the
year 1845, in the capacity of judge of the Criminal Court of that
place, Mr. Barber, then a prisoner there, expressed to me his
anxiety that William Sanders, then a prisoner in “ Tasman’s
Peninsula,” should undergo a minute official examination, touch-
ing his (Barber’s) guilt or innocence, to the purport and effect of
the foregoing questions.
On my arrival in Van Diemen’s Land, from Norfolk Island,
I communicated Mr. Barber’s wish to the late Comptroller-
General ; but he declined complying with his desire, as I under-
stood, in consequence of the want of authority to institute such
an inquiry.
F. BROWNE.
Hobart Town,
June 29 th, 1847.
CERTIFICATE OE THE REV. T. ROGERS.
Hobart Town , Van Diemens Land , June 29 th, 1847.
I was chaplain at Norfolk Island from August, 1845, until
February last, during which period Mr. Barber was a prisoner
there. Upon my leaving, he expressed his anxiety that William
Sanders, then in “ Tasman’s Peninsula,” should be examined in
the presence of some Government officer, agreeably to the tenor
of the questions contained in the paper hereunto annexed ; or in
any manner that might appear best calculated to obtain a full
disclosure of the truth.
THOMAS ROGERS
Colonial Chaplain.


LETTER FROM G. P. F. GREGORY, ESQ.,
Prothonotary and Registrar of the Supreme Court , New South
Wales.
Supreme Court Office, 24th July , 1847.
Sir, —Having very carefully read over the evidence in the two
cases of indictment against you, for being accessory before the
fact to giving utterance to forgeries, in one of which you were
acquitted, and in the other convicted, and having also gone
through all the other papers connected with the cases, I feel
bound to state that my solemn conviction is that you were en-
tirely innocent, though there were circumstances adduced in the
case which, unexplained, might have warranted the jury in
coming to the conclusion which they appear to have done on the
second trial. I have also applied to several gentlemen who were
resident in London at the time the trials took place, and who
have informed me that the general opinion of the public at the
time was in favour of your innocence.—I remain, Sir, your
obedient servant,
G. P. F. GREGORY
Protlionotary and Registrar, S. C.
MR. W. H. BARBER.
TO WILLIAM HENRY BARBER, ESQ.
Dear Sir, —ln transmitting to you the undermentioned sub-
scriptions in aid of the expenses of your journey to Europe, I
cannot refrain from expressing the deep commiseration I feel for
the unparalleled sufferings you have so unjustly and so heroically
undergone.
Having, as a member of our Law Society, thoroughly investi-
gated every circumstance connected with your extraordinary
case,—as far as such circumstances can be investigated here, —
I am performing an act more of duty to our profession generally
than to you in particular, in thus separately expressing my firm
conviction of your total innocence of the crime imputed, and of
all impropriety of conduct in reference to the nefarious transac-
tions in which you and your late partner were inveigled by
I 2


Fletcher to act as the attorneys of the parties introduced by
him.
With every wish that you may speedily obtain that justice to
which you have so strong a claim, and that your future career
may compensate, as far as possible, for the unmerited disasters
you have undergone, I remain, dear Sir, yours very sincerely,
ROB. JOHNSON.
312, PITT-STREET, SYDNEY,
September IQth, 1847.
LETTER FROM THE REV. T. BEAGLY NAYLOR TO
SIR ROBERT PEEL, BART.
Sir,—Having a full persuasion of the entire innocency of Wil-
liam Henry Barber, whose letter entreating your attention to his
case has just been shown me, I feel that no apology is necessary
for the intrusion of this letter upon your time.
I am bound in justice to declare that I have not ceased,
during the whole period Barber and Fletcher have been here, to
sift the transaction with which they stand charged, with minute
and jealous scrutiny, and that the result has been to render me
uneasy until I have made every effort in my humble power to-
wards the extrication of Barber. From Fletcher’s reluctant
confessions and explanations, given under the worst possible feel-
ing towards Barber, I cannot for one instant have a doubt either
of the deep treachery of Fletcher, or the entire absence of any
guilty collusion or knowledge on the part of Barber. He is suf-
fering so much, and so undeservedly, that I should be ashamed
were I to fail in my duty towards him, or in urging upon you,
Sir, as a matter of simple justice, a further investigation of this
most singular case. I feel certain that any such inquiry would
end in an acquittal of this unhappy victim of a most cunning
conspiracy.
Ido not enter into any of the details. They are contained in
a memorial of Barber’s, already transmitted through the authority
here, and I would not trespass unnecessarily one moment upon
the time of the prime minister of Great Britain, but I entreat


him as such not to allow any consideration to prevent the rescue
of an innocent man from unmerited suffering and degradation.—
I have, &c. &c.,
T. BEAGLY NAYLOR
Chaplain.
Norfolk Island,
September Bth , 1845.
[This letter was suppressed by the Colonial Government. On
my arrival at Hobart Town in May last, nineteen months after
the letter was sent from Norfolk Island, I found it still in the
office of the Comptroller-General of Convicts.]]
CERTIFICATES OF MY CONDUCT IN NORFOLK
ISLAND.
THE CIVIL COMMANDANT WHO SUCCEEDED MAJOR
CHILD, p. 107.
THE REV. T. B. NAYLOR, p. 90.
CERTIFICATE OF GILBERT ROBERTSON, ESQ.,
Superintendent of Agriculture.
Agricultural Office, Norfolk Island , Oct. 12, 1846.
Being about to remove for a time from Norfolk Island, and
contemplating the possibility of not returning, I it to be my
duty, as an act of justice, to leave with William Henry Barber,
whose conduct I have had opportunity of observing for nearly two
years, a testimonial of the very favourable opinion which I have
formed of his character, in the hope that it maybe advantageous to
him at some future period. I have observed Barber’s conduct in
the most trying and humiliating circumstances of what I am
convinced (without any reference to the question of his innocence
of the offence of which he stands convicted) was unmerited
suffering; and while I deeply pitied the man, I could but
admire his submissive demeanour, patient resignation, and inva


riable rectitude of conduct; whilst his health was visibly suffering,
and Ms frame wasting atcay, under the mental torture inflicted
upon him by the degrading and polluting association into which
he was forced, and the unmerited and unaccountable persecution
of which he was the object for many months, by which the
suffering inseparable from his unhappy condition was deeply
aggravated beyond that of even' the worst conducted convict,
tchile his enemies could not produce even a colourable charge
against him. My position as the second civil officer in the
island enabled ine at length to procure an alleviation of his
sufferings, by getting him removed from gang labour to be
assistant clerk in the Agricultural Office, under my own im-
mediate control; in which situation the undeviating rectitude
of his conduct, and a general demeanour in every respect
worthy of the respectable position which he formerly occu-
pied in society, gained for him my confidence, and on the
removal of my principal clerk from the island I obtained the
situation for Barber. Considering his former occupation and
business habits as a respectable solicitor, it is superfluous to
say that he performed his duties ably and correctly. He
worked hard from daylight in the morning until a late hour
on most nights, performing the duties of two men without any
remuneration or indulgence, except what to his mind was a
most important relief, —separation from the other convicts.
And the rigid rules of discipline prevented me from furnishing
him, from my private resources, with even the trifling comfort
of a basin of tea, or a bit of fresh meat, which I would gladly
have done. I have great pleasure in certifying that he has
kept himself entirely free from the contaminating influence of
his unhappy dlndition, both in habits and sentiments, as well as
principles. And I can with great confidence recommend him as
a man whose conduct fully entitles him to the earliest ameliora-
tion of which the law admits in his condition, and qualifies him
to fill, with credit to himself and benefit to society, a place in
every respect equal to that from which his conviction removed
him.
(Signed) Gilbert Robertson,
Superintendent of Agriculture.


CERTIFICATE OF HENRY WADE, ESQ.
Agricultural Office, Norfolk Island, 16th March, 1847.
I have read the testimonial of Mr. Robertson, the late super-
intendent of agriculture, dated 12th October last; and I entirely
concur in the favourable opinion he has expressed of William
Henry Barber. I have had charge of the agricultural depart-
ment for the last five months, during which period Barber has
been the principal writer; and I have great pleasure in stating
that he has discharged the duties with great efficiency and
unswerving fidelity. I have the most perfect confidence in his
integrity; and consider him, both by attainments and disposition,
qualified to be a valuable member of society.
(Signed) Henry Wade.
LIEUTENANT LLOYD, P. 106.
CERTIFICATE OF GEORGE HORNE, ESQ., D.A.C.G.j
In charge of the Commissariat , Norfolk Island.
Commissariat , Norfolk Island , Y]th March , 1847.
1 have had charge of the commissariat at Norfolk Island for
the last nine months, in the course of which period I have had
abundant opportunity of estimating the character of William
Henry Barber, the principal writer to the agricultural establish-
ment ; and the result is a very high opinion of his integrity and
industry. His general conduct and demeanour also entitled
to the highest praise. His favourable reputation as a prisoner
of the Crown has certainly not been exceeded by that of any man
in the island.
I recommend him with great confidence to the most favourable
consideration of the Government.
(Signed) George Horne,
In charge of the Commissariat, Norfolk Island.


CERTIFICATE OF REY. R. ELLIOTT.
Norfolk Island, 16th March , 1847.
When I took charge of Longridge Probation Station, as religious
instructor, William Henry Barber, per Agincourt, was monitor
of the first class in the evening school. This duty he constantly
attended to every evening after the most severe field labour during
the day, till he became clerk in the agricultural superintendent’s
office; and I have great pleasure in saying, that his whole con-
duct has been not only strictly proper, but characterised by
exemplary fidelity and industry.
(Signed) R. Elliott.
THE REY. T. ROGERS, P. 91.
CERTIFICATE OF THE REV. J. L. ISON.
Parsonage , Norfolk Island , March \6th , 1847.
I came from England to Norfolk Island in the same ship as
William Henry Barber. He acted as my clerk on the passage
in the Sunday and daily service.
During the period of his detention here, he has rendered
voluntarily and unremittingly every assistance in his power in
the schools.
Under all the circumstances of his case, I have been un-
able to resist the impression of his entire innocence of
any guilty knowledge of the crime for which he has been
punished. •
However, be this as it may, I can give a most unqualified tes-
timony that, both on the passage out and since his arrival here,
his conduct has been entirely that which might be supposed of
a gentleman, a good citizen, a man of integrity and honour, suf-
fering innocently.
I have, nevertheless, been much pained in seeing that his
punishment has been very disproportionate to that of his fellow-
prisoners of similar education and charge, which he has correctly
specified in his Memorial.


I have sometimes feared that he was sinking under the hard-
ship and misery of his condition : he has, however, hitherto sur-
vived it, and I am fully assured that his health and constitution
have been greatly benefited by the animating hope he has ever
indulged of his innocence being established, and, consequently,
of a future restoration of character.
JOHN L. ISON
Chaplain.
CERTIFICATE OF DR. BROWNING, R.N.
These are to certify, that William Henry Barber embarked
in this vessel under my superintendence for conveyance from
Norfolk Island to Van Diemen’s Land ; that his conduct during
the passage was uniformly and in the highest degree satisfactory ;
that the duties intrusted to him were ever performed with ala-
crity, fidelity, and exactness; that I have been always delighted
with his manners and deportment, the temper and disposition he
has invariably manifested, and the happy influence he endeavours
with great propriety and prudence to send forth on the minds of
his fellow-prisoners; that I have especially had great cause to
admire the meek resignation with which he meets and encounters
the trying severity of the punishment to which he has been sub-
jected, and the more so, that he most evidently bears all under
the consciousness of his innocence of the crime with which he is
charged, and on account of which he has been exiled from his
native land ; that I have examined the documents by which he
has openly endeavoured to prove his innocence. I have had
sifting interviews with Barber and Fletcher, alone and
confronted, and the result is a conviction in my mind that
Barber is an innocent man, and wholly free from all guilty
knowledge of the crime for which he is now suffering.
Given under my hand, on board the Pestongee Bomangee ,
Impression Bay, Tasman’s Peninsula, this Bth day of April,
1847.
COLIN ARROTT BROWNING
m.d.,
Surgeon Superintendent.


CRUEL AND INVIDIOUS TREATMENT IN
NORFOLK ISLAND.
STATEMENT OF THE REV. T. B. NAYLOR, P. 90.
FURTHER STATEMENT OF THE REV. T. B. NAYLOR.
Carcoar , New South Wales , 21 st July 1847.
Most heartily do I recommend the case of Mr. 'William Henry
Barber to the sympathies of the community. I do not believe
any man ever suffered torments of the worst kind more innocently ,
or in a better spirit. I have had ample proofs of his entire inno-
cence of the crime with which he was charged. They have
satisfied the Home Government, and a pardon, conditional upon
his not returning to England, has been the result. After three
years of degradation and suffering, he is thrown upon the world
again, penniless. His appeal to the public will not, I trust, be
in vain. I am glad of another opportunity of declaring the com-
miseration I feel for his misfortunes, as well as the respect his
conduct under them inspired.
(Signed) T. Beagly Naylor.
FURTHER STATEMENT OF THE REY. T. B. NAYLOR,
In a letter to the Editor of the “ Sydney Morning Herald."
I shall never remember, without shame and horror the
WANTONNESS OF THE INSULTS, and the REFINEMENTS OF CRU-
ELTY practised him at Norfolk Island, from the worst
possible motives. I must add, that his manly endurance of these
enormities excited my admiration and esteem for him. Never did
any man appeal with more justice to the community for assistance.
THE REV. T. ROGERS, p. 91.
THE REV. J. L. ISON, p. 120.
GILBERT ROBERTSON, ESQ., p. 117.


CONDITIONAL PARDON.
Island of Van Diemens Land.
To all to whom these presents shall come, I, Sir William
Thomas Denison, Knight, Captain in the Corps of Royal
Engineers, Lieutenant-Governor of the Island of Van Die-
men’s Land and its Dependencies, send greeting:
Whereas, by her Majesty’s Royal Warrant, under the sign
manual, bearing date at the Court at St. James’s, the twelfth day
of November, 1846, countersigned by one of her Majesty’s
Secretaries of State, and addressed to the Lieutenant-Governor
of the Island of Van Diemen’s Land for the time being—her said
Majesty was graciously pleased, in consideration of some circum-
stances humbly represented to her, to extend her grace and
mercy unto William Henry Barber, who was tried at the Central
Criminal Court, in April, 1844, and convicted of forgery, and
sentenced to be transported for life, and to grant unto him her
pardon for his said crime, on condition of his not returning to the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Now, know ye,
that I, the said Sir William Thomas Denison, Knight, Lieute-
nant-Governor of the Island of Van Diemen’s Land and its
Dependencies, have received her Majesty’s said warrant, and do
hereby certify and declare the said William Henry Barber hath
and ought to enjoy her Majesty’s pardon for the said crime
whereof he was convicted as aforesaid.
In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused
the seal of the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land to be hereunto
affixed.
Dated at Hobart Town this sixteenth day of April, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-seven.
W. DENISON
Lieutenant-Governor.
By his Excellency’s command,
(Signed) J. S. Hampton, Comptroller-General.


EXTRACTS FROM THE DIARIES OF MYSELF AND
PARTNER.
FROM MY DIARY.
1842.
Oct. 3. Re Slack.—Attend Fletcher, £4,000, &c., in funds,
and conferring on pedigree, and instructions to
write Captain Joseph Foskett, of the 50th Foot, at
Abbott’s Langley, Herts.
„ 4. Re Slack.—Letter to Captain Foskett de personal
representatives.
„ 14. Re Slack.—Letter to Mr. Fletcher with copy Captain
Foskett’s, and proposing to see him, and clerk’s
attendance therewith.
„ 18. Attend Mr. Fletcher conferring on Captain Foskett’s
letter, when it was determined I should write the
captain again with further particulars.
„ 22. Attend at Captain Foskett’s, at Brighton, to see him,
but he was from home.
„ 25. Re Slack.—Letter to Foskett for further particulars
as to identity.
„ 28. Re Slack.—Submitted Captain Foskett’s letter to
Mr. Fletcher : determined I should see him.
„ 29. Re Slack.—Further letter to Captain Foskett, sug-
gested his calling on us to communicate further par-
ticulars.
Nov. 21. Re Slack. — Captain Foskett, 39, Smith-street.
„ 22. Re Slack.—Attend Mr. Fletcher as to identity.
„ 26. Re Slack.—Mr. Fletcher as to identity. Letter to
Captain Foskett for names of trustees.
~ 28. Re Slack.—Mr. Fletcher de identity, and names of
trustees. Letter to Captain Foskett for such
names.
Dec. 3. Slack. — Fletcher de identity.
„ 12. Re Slack.—To Captain Foskett for names of trustees
and autograph of Miss Slack.
Attend Mr. Fletcher, determined to advertise if pre-
sent party not identified.
Letter to Captain Foskett urging answers to our
inquiries.


1842.
Dec. 14. Attend Captain Foskett and Mr. Baxter, and they
promised to furnish Miss Slack’s autograph.
„ 17. Attend Fletcher, submitted the captain's letter.
„ 22. lie Slack.—Baxter brought letter from Miss Slack.
„ 23. Re Slack.—Letter to Fletcher with Miss Slack’s letter,
to get writing compared.
„ 28. Re Slack.—Attending Mr. Baxter, reporting, &c.
1843.
Jan. 4. Re Slack.—Mr. Fletcher, handwriting not the same.
Letter to Mr. Baxter, returning Miss Slack’s letter;
long conference de future measures, and advising de
advertisement.
~ 18. Slack.— Took Mr.Fletchers report from Bath, and
conferred thereon.
„ 24. Slack.—Letter to Mr. Fletcher in answer to his. Letter
to Miss Slack* thereon, and suggesting her seeing us.
„ 27. Attend Mr. Fletcher, conferring and taking particu-
lars de Stock.
Feb. 7. Slack.—Letter to Miss Slack to name day.
„ 23. Re Slack.—Copy her letter, and letter to Fletcher
therewith.
March 4. Re Slack.— The lady at Bath had no claim to the
£4,000, not being the same.
Instructions not to advertise for legal representatives.
~ 6. Slack.— Prepared advertisement.
„ 15. Slack.—Mr. Fletcher had found the party, appointed
12 o’clock to-morrow.
~ 16. Slack, Miss Emma.—3rd June, 1842 (date of will) ;
died 17tli February, 1843.
Attend her; perused will and certificate of death of
her aunt. Attend her at the Commons proving
same; paid duty £BO.
~ 17. Fletcher de the advance, and parish at South Terrace,
and money in the Funds.
„ 18. Slack, Miss.— Attend at Pimlico to ascertain parish.
Letter to Mr. Wills with result.
* This was Mrs. Sanders, who, under the directions of Fletcher and her
husband, took lodgings of Mrs. Rivers, at Bath, and opened a corre-
spondence with us, in the name of “Jane Slack.” —See my Memorial.—
P. 51.


1843.
Mar. 21. Slack.—Fletcher de evidence to support application,
and de any conflicting claims.
„ 23. Letter to her that probate obtained, and with appli-
cation for her signature.
Preparing the same; letter to Fletcher thereon.
„ 25. Slack, Miss.—Attend her signing application.
April 3. Slack.— Mr. Fletcher, they had made both Miss
Slacks dead.
„ 6. Slack, Miss.—Attend Mr. Fletcher appointing to-
morrow : attend her also.
„ 7. Slack,Miss. —Attend Bank, received £4,533.165. 4d.
PAID SAME OVER TO HER, AND FINALLY SETTLED.
«
FROM MY PARTNER’S DIARY.
1843.
Mar. 10. Re Slack.—Writing Mr. Offley, Ilenrietta-street,
Covent-garden, in reply to his letter of the Bth in-
stant.
Writing Mr. Hutchinson, Sidmouth, on same subject.
Writing Mr. Tanner, Speenhamland, near Newbury,
on same subject.
Re Slack.—Attending Mr. Slack, of 336, Strand, who
called relative to our advertisement de Slack.
16. Re Slack.—Attending Mr. Wills, who called to ascer-
tain the parish in which Anne Slack died, and pro-
mising to inform him by 11 o’clock to-morrow.
„ 17. Re Slack.—Attending a person who called in refer-
ence to the advertisement.
„ 18. Attending Mr. Wills’s clerk, who called to ascertain
the parish in which deceased died, and promising to
inform him on Monday.
„ 20. Answering Mr. Slack, Ellington, near Huntingdon.
„ 27. Attend Mr. Fletcher reporting progress.
Attending at the Bank presenting probate, and appli-
cation, when we were directed to call in three days.
„ 29. Slack, Miss.—Attending Mr. Fletcher de the settle-
ment of your matter.


1843.
Mar. 30. Slack, Miss.—Attending at Bank by appointment,
when they required to be furnished with your ad-
dress, to enable them to transfer the stock into your
name, and directed us to call to-morrow or Saturday.
„ 31. Slack, Miss.—Attending the Bank for a reply to your
application to have stock transferred into your
name, when they stated that it would be so in a
few days. Writing Mr. Fletcher to that effect,
and writing you to that effect.
Apr. 3. Slack, Miss.— Long attendance on Mr. Fletcher
ON THE SUBJECT OP SOME CONFUSION WHICH HAD
BEEN CREATED BY THE BANK RELATIVE TO YOUR
STOCK AND THAT OF A LADY OF THE SAME NAME
AND ADDRESS AS YOUR LATE AUNT.
„ 5. Re Slack.—Attending Mr. Fletcher de settlement.
FREE PARDON.
(Victoria R., L.S.)
Whereas William Henry Barber was, at a Sessions of the
Central Criminal Court, liolden in April, 1844, convicted upon
a certain indictment then and there preferred against him, of
divers felonies in the several counts of the said indictment par-
ticularly mentioned, and sentenced to be transported for life for
the same, but afterwards received our pardon, on condition of not
returning to our United Kingdom during the residue of his said
sentence: We, in consideration of some circumstances humbly
represented unto us, are graciously pleased to extend our further
grace and mercy unto him, and to grant him our free pardon for
the felonies of which he so stands convicted upon such indict-
ment as aforesaid.
Given at our court at St. James's, the third day of November,
1848, in the twelfth year of our reign.
By Her Majesty’s
command,
G. GREY.
To our trusty and well-beloved our
Justices of the Central Criminal
Court, and all others whom it
may concern.


LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE
ACCOMPANYING PARDON.
Whitehall , 10 th November , 1848.
Sir, — I am directed by Secretary Sir George Grey to acknow-
ledge the receipt of the several documents which you have trans-
mitted to him on behalf of Mr. W. H. Barber, who was convicted
at the Central Criminal Court, in April, 1844, of being accessory
before the fact to forgery, and sentenced to be transported for life.
Sir George Grey desires me to inform you, that these papers
have received his full and anxious consideration, and that he has
satisfied himself that there is sufficient ground to justify his
advising her Majesty to grant Mr. Barber a free pardon, which
is herewith enclosed.
But while he has arrived at this conclusion, from a consider
ation of all the documents in his possession, comprising very
material circumstances which have transpired since the convic-
tion, Sir George Grey feels bound to add that he sees no reason
to doubt that the verdict of the jury was warranted by the facts
proved at his trial; and although he now believes Mr. Barber to
have been free from any guilty participation in the frauds of
which he was made the instrument , he thinks that greater pru-
dence and caution on his part would have exempted him from
the suspicion to which his conduct in the transactions in question
naturally exposed him.—l am, Sir, your obedient servant,
G. CORNEWALL LEWIS.
A. Stevenson, Esq., 19, Essex Street , Strand.*
* Her Majesty’s gracious pardon, which I had the happiness to receive irv
Paris, recited a conviction of being “ accessory before the fact to forgery,”
and concluded with a “ pardon for the said crime.”
Remembering the huge indictment which diversified the charge in every
form that the ingenuity of Old Bailey lawyers could devise, and that the jury
returned a general verdict, I inquired of the Clerk of Arraigns on my return
to England, what was recorded in such cases, and he informed me that it was
usual to take a verdict on the first count. I was, however, not quite satisfied
with the limited form of words employed in the pardon, and respectfully returned
it to the Secretary of State, when I was assured that it was fully intended
to give me as complete an exculpation as it was in the power of the Crown
to do, and in a few days after I received the amended free pardon in lieu of and
of the same date as the first, of which amended pardon the foregoing is a copy.


DECLARATION BY THE JURY WHICH
CONVICTED ME.
We, the undersigned members of the jury, before whom Mr.
William Henry Barber, with Joshua Fletcher, William Sanders,
Lydia Sanders, and Georgiana Dorey, was tried for will for-
gery, in the case of Anne. Slack, in April, 1844, having learnt
that he has experienced some opposition to the grant of his certi-
ficate to practise as an attorney and solicitor, in consequence of
the verdict of Guilty which we found against him upon the evi-
dence then laid before us, now feel called upon by a sense of jus-
tice to declare that if the evidence contained in the confessions of
the said Joshua Fletcher, William Sanders, Georgiana Dorey,
and Lydia Sanders, and the other facts which have transpired
since the conviction of the said William Henry Barber, had been
presented to us at the trial, and if the explanation of apparently
suspicious circumstances could have been given before our ver-
dict was returned, which has since been afforded, we have no
doubt whatever that we should have acquitted Mr. Barber. The
failure of justice, so far as concerns him, arose in our judgment
mainly from the fact of his not having had a separate trial , and
having been thereby precluded from availing himself of the tes-
timony of the other prisoners.
Dated February, 1850,
William Thompson, Greenwich.
Thomas Iley, late of 115, Whitechapel, now 240, Boro’.
Edward Withers, late of 52, Blackfriar’s Road, now
* 31, Coventry Street, Piccadilly.
John Nicholls, late of 17, Market Row, corn-dealer, now
of Murray Arms, Camden New Town.
Francis Owen, 63, Berners Street.
Charles Schooling, late of 3, Barge Yard, Bucklersbury,
now of 9, Stepney Green.
Ebenezer Mannering, late of 10, Charles Street, Middle-
sex Hospital, now of 33, Argyll Street, Regent Street.
John Milton, 10, Great Marylebone Street.
One of the jury (Mr. Rawlings) is since deceased; another
K


juror admitted that a declaration of Mr. Barber’s innocence, by
Fletcher and Saunders, at the trial, would have had material
weight with him, but declined to sign any document; another
gentleman could not be prevailed upon to re-enter upon the
inquiry ; the twelfth member of the jury has been long absent
from London.


(From, the “ Sydney Morning Herald ,” 26th August , 1847.)
MOST EXTRAORDINARY TREATMENT OF
MR. BARBER IN NORFOLK ISLAND*
Shall indignation, or shall pity gain ascendancy?
Each strives for the mastery in reading the
following narrative of Mr. Barber’s suffering.
Such a tale of sorrow and magnanimity rarely
occurs in modern times. Eor the sake of huma-
nity we trust his case is unparalleled : if not,
how many men have been driven to desperation,
or have sunk down broken-hearted to the grave,
their blood alone appealing to just heaven against
their tormentors! But Mr. Barber survives to
tell, by his tongue and pen, some of the enormi-
ties which are perpetrated under the name of
penal discipline. The singularity of his case, the
singularity of his endurance, and of the favour of
Providence which has carried him through such
bitter cruelties, entitle him to a hearing, and is a
sufficient reason for the space we appropriate to
his narrative, and the patient sympathizing atten-
tion we solicit on his behalf. It is a story worth
reading. It comes to us in the form of a letter,
which he transmitted through a private channel,
from Norfolk Island, at the time it bears date. This
K 2
* An account of my voyage to Norfolk Island, and of my detention there,
will be found in two papers in Dickens’s Household Words, July 31st, and
August 7th, 1852, entitled “ Transported for Life,” referred to in a leading
article of the Times, of 17th August.


letter, however, was not posted till March last, so
that its contents will probably transpire at oppo-
site ends of the earth at the same moment.* And
what a revelation!
(EXTRACT FROM a LETTER TO a FRIEND IN ENGLAND.)
Norfolk Island , 2 6th May, 1846.
From the first moment of my landing here, every thing that
was calculated to destroy my mind and body, to drive me to
some desperate act, or to break my heart, has been inflicted upon
me. The most insulting and exasperating language was ad-
dressed to me. I was put to the most laborious, degrading, and
unwholesome employment that could be found on the island; nor
could the most obedient submission to every order, the most exact
observance of every regulation, the most constant endeavours to
render myself useful, nor repeated sickness, obtain for me the
least consideration from those in whose power my extraordinary
fate has placed me.
Two or three enlightened gentlemen, holding high and respon-
sible Government appointments on the island, having by a minute
and attentive consideration of all the circumstances of my case,
in connection with the disclosures made here by Joshua Fletcher,
convinced themselves that I was suffering innocently, humanely
interceded with the ruling authority in order to obtain for me
treatment, at least as mild as that which other prisoners were
receiving, some of whom were doubly and trebly transported
criminals, but in vain. The authorities of “ Government House”
were inexorable : not only so, but they were exasperated at what
they regarded as an irregular interference with the course which
had evidently been pre-determined upon ; and, accordingly, the
intercession so humanely designed, only rendered those who
made it obnoxious to the civil commandant, and drew upon me
increased oppression and personal malignity. I will only trouble
you with one or two facts in illustration of the statement I have
advanced, and of the rancorous 'persecution of which I have
been the victim.
* It appeared in the Britannia, 19th June, 1847.


Upon my landing at Norfolk Island, Mr. Fuller, the surgeon
superintendent of the Agincourt , reported his opinion of me in
very favourable terms; accordingly, Captain Lavers, a superin-
tendent of convicts, applied for me to be bis clerk; this was
refused, while another prisoner, by the same ship , was appro-
priated to his service, and I was sent to clean the prisoners
wards ! A second application was made for me by Lieutenant
Lloyd, to be bis clerk, but with a similar result, another pri-
soner, by the same ship , and a second transported convict , was
appointed to perform the duties, which, compared with the
loathsome drudgery allotted to me, was an agreeable pastime.
For sixteen months I was kept to this disgusting labour, in-
terrupted only by the frequent and severe illnesses which it pro-
duced. I was then sent to the fields, placed in one of the hea-
viest gangs (with a second transported felon for my overseex-,
notorious for his severity), and compelled to perform a quantum
of work equal to men having three times my physical strength,
and who had been accustomed to manual labour all their lives.
At this time there were, at every station on the island, pri-
soners (chiefly second transported offenders, and some of whom
had arrived much more recently than myself) employed as
clerks, schoolmasters, and in other similar light and intellectual
occupations. Several of these had been convicted of serious
crimes, even on the island , whilst undergoing their original
punishments. Of the latter class I will mention two instances :
John Swainston, who, at the assizes held here in 1845, received an
additional sentence of fourteen years’ transportation, was employed
in the chief office at the settlement as a clerk. William Burgess,*
the Bank of England clerk, who, you will remember, by a
Fletcher-like imposition, robbed the Bank of .£7,000, and ab-
sconded to America, was convicted here of conspiring with some
of the military for effecting the escape of himself and others
from the island. For this he was sentenced to work in chains
for eighteen months. Whilst under this sentence he was regu-
larly employed as clerk in the office at Longridge station ; whilst
I, who have never been accused even of a single infraction of the
regulations, and who had been ten months longer on the island ,
* Burgess was, shortly before I left the island, accidentally drowned.


was up to my knees in mud in the field, exposed to the seve-
rities of a most changeable climate—one hour exhausted by
heat almost tropical, and the next deluged with torrents of rain
—and associated with the veriest ruffians that ever disgraced
humanity.
And how—l think I hear you ask—has JosnuA Fletcher
been dealt with ? You shall hear.
It has been the pleasure of “ the powers that be ” to treat him
with the utmost indulgence. With the exception of a few days
when he was placed in a light gang, for some insolence to his
superintendent, he has neither performed, nor been required to per-
form, any manual labour whatever, although for the last twelve
months at least he has been in robust health. He, the proved and
confessed author of the whole plot in which I was so unwittingly
involved, has been “ medical dispenser ” —with an apartment ap-
propriated to his private use—superior rations —superior bedding
—and enjoying the privilege of sending his fellow-prisoners to
light work, heavy work, or no work at all, at his discretion or
caprice ! Contrast this with mg situation : herded with hundreds
of my fellow-prisoners—sleeping in a kind of barn, crowded with
two hundred inmates, with a single blanket to cover me, sometimes
fairly washed out of my hammock by a torrent of rain through
the sieve-like roof—pacing the floor in the dark at the peril of
life and limb, my duty being to watch and preserve order in the
ward by night , and to clean it by day, —the perilous character of
the watching and peace-preserving department amongst two
hundred convicts, many of whom had been convicted of murder,
and nearly all of crimes of the deepest dye, you may in some
measure conceive. The cleansing of a dozen stables would have
been a wholesome and agreeable recreation compared with the
daily purification of this huge dormitory. In vain will your
imagination try to realize my wretched plight.
To render my misery complete, a special order was issued to
confine me to the “ camp ” —a small area in which the barracks
are situated; whilst other prisoners were permitted to go from
station to station, interchanging visits with relatives or shipmates
who might happen to be on the island.
In my letter from the Cape, you may remember my naming
one high-minded and excellent fellow-prisoner, with whom I had


formed some intimacy. It was no sooner discovered that he
occasionally communicated with me in the camp, than he was
strictly forbidden to hold any intercourse whatever with me.
Thus, without even a shadow of imputation against either of us,
I was denied the one drop of sweetness which I had enjoyed from
the conversation of a well-educated, enlightened, and sympathis-
ing friend—a privilege not withheld from the worst-conducted
villains on the island.
The police (and a viler set of miscreants than the Norfolk
Island police could scarcely be collected from the regions of
darkness) were instructed to have their eyes constantly upon me,
in the hope, as I conscientiously believe, that some pretext
might be afforded for the persecution .which I had endured.
These facile instruments of cruelty seeing me thus a marked man ,
a proscribed being, harassed and annoyed me under every conceiv-
able pretext; and it is almost a miracle that I have so far escaped
their fangs that, to this day, they have been unable to trump up
a single accusation against me.
In September last (1845), one of the chaplains (the Rev. T.
Rogers), struck with my emaciated appearance, conceived the
idea of engaging me as his domestic servant. This humane appli-
cation was refused on the pretext that I was ineligible, not
having served “ two-thirds of my detention on the island.” A
few days after, this gentleman applied for a prisoner by the same
ship as myself, named Ball ( a second convicted man). This
application was at once complied with !
But to expose still further the heartless mockery of this tech-
nical opposition to the claims of justice and humanity, I must
select one more case out of very many. It is that of the late
hospital clerk. He was a London solictor, convicted upon his
own confession of a forgery on the Bank of England, whereby
he defrauded the proprietors of about £2,000, which he applied
to his own purposes. He was brought to this island by the
Maitland , in which the present civil commandant came out to
succeed Captain Maconochie. Immediately upon this prisoner’s
arrival he was made hospital clerk. In that situation he served
the whole of his two years and a half’s detention. Not one
hour’s manual labour did he perform ; his employment being
in a comfortable office, and having a private apartment for


living and sleeping. From the alternate extremes of heat and
cold, and wet, and hunger and thirst, and the revolted feelings
to which my position constantly exposed me, this proved and
confessed offender was permitted to enjoy a complete exemp-
tion.
About a month after the application of the Rev. T. Rogers
for me, I was taken to the hospital with a dangerous attack of
dysentery, mainly superinduced, as Dr. Graham considered, by
the nature of my employment. Upon my being discharged,
the doctor recommended my removal to Cascade, the opposite
extremity of the island, as a locality better suited to my constitu-
tion, and that I should be employed in some lighter and healthier
occupation. This recommendation was doggedly resisted,
although another prisoner, named Clarke, had been removed to
the same station, with the like object, shortly before, without
the slightest objection being raised. I was ordered back to Long-
ridge ; and when Dr. Graham next visited the station, and
found that I was returned to my old duties, and was in conse-
quence suffering a relapse, he entered in the visiting book a most
indignant protest, and ordered me back to hospital.
Still my oppressors were obdurate. It was not until the chap-
lain, Mr. Rogers (Mr. R. succeeded Mr. Naylor), visited my bed-
side, and was constrained to wait upon the commandant, and
express his opinion that if something were not speedily done to
promote my recovery the grave would soon close over my sor-
rows, that he yielded to the recommendation and the remon-
strances of the medical officer.
How I have borne all this, and how little I have deserved it,
you will see by the accompanying certificates of the Rev. T. B.
Naylor, the chaplain of the island, and other gentlemen (all
Government officers), who have been eye-witnesses of my con-
duct and sufferings. Well may Mr. Naylor—who, as a clergyman
and a magistrate, has had ten years’ experience of convicts
in these colonies, and four on this island—say, he “ had
never known a prisoner of the Crown exposed to greater wretch-
edness.”
I cannot make this statement without acknowledging, which
I do with heartfelt gratitude, the humane exertions of several
gentlemen to obtain for me a participation in the privileges


enjoyed by other prisoners, whose claims (quite irrespective of
my innocence) were indisputably inferior to my own. These
benevolent persons remonstrated; but they only jeopardised
their own appointments without benefiting me. One of them
(the superintendent of agriculture), whilst I was at work in the
field, covered with dirt, drenched with rain, and half-starved,
said, “ Barber, I am really sorry to see you so long continued
in this wretched situation, especially as your services would
be so valuable to the Government in a more suitable employ-
ment; but it seems, though I cannot conceive why it should
be, a crime for any one to attempt to ameliorate your condition.
You see how Mr. Rogers has been treated.”
The reason assigned for thus singling me out as an object upon
whom to inflict, in a concentrated and aggravated form, all
the horrors of Norfolk Island, was, that I am a prisoner of
“ great notoriety.” But had not Joshua Fletcher acquired
“ notoriety ? ” Surely if a wretched policy could have afforded
a colour of justification for making me an advertisement of the
miseries of penal discipline, consistency would have required a
similar course towards that treacherous and heartless man!
But to this enlightened “ reason ” another was added, namely,
that my treatment was in pursuance of “ instructions!! ”
To show further the hollowness of this pretext for cruelty,
as cowardly as it is tyrannical, I may, to the cases of “ Bur-
gess ” and “Fletcher,” add those of “ Winterbottom ” and
“ Dalmas.” The former was the eminent solicitor, twice Mayor
of Stockport, and he, though in robust health, has, ever since
his arrival, been employed as a clerk. “ Augustus Dalmas,”
to whose crime I will not advert, has, though perfectly sound in
mind and body, never performed but one day and a half of
real manual labour; his task has been to make chymical expe-
riments ; men being placed under his directions to perform
whatever might be irksome to himself. He was also allowed,
from the first , the indulgence so obstinately denied me of sleep-
ing apart from the mass of the prisoners.
For nineteen months my occupation continued of the noisome,
laborious, and unhealthy character I have described. My daily
food being salt meat and Indian-corn bread: the former so
execrable that the dogs would not eat it, and, compared with


the latter, the coarsest wheaten bread I ever saw were a choice
delicacy. Vegetables for months I had none; and the water
(for there was nothing else to drink) drawn from a muddy
well, and afterwards permitted to become tepid by exposure to
the sun, was very bad.
Such has been my condition and treatment at Norfolk Island.
I should have endeavoured to drink the bitter cup without a
murmur, if obtacles had not been thrown in the way of vindi-
cating my innocence; but the mere assertion of it has exas-
perated the representatives of the Government here, who seem
to have imagined that to stifle truth, and persecute the victim
of treachery and error, would gratify the enlightened members of
her Majesty’s Government!
The chief authority here did, indeed, upon the very urgent
solicitation of the Rev. T. B. Naylor, J.P., and Deputy-Assistant
Commissary-General Smith, consent to transmit my Memorial,
with the report of their investigations annexed, about two
months after my arrival; but since that time many most impor-
tant circumstances have come to light, of which I have not
been permitted to avail myself. In March, 1845, I prepared,
with considerable labour and much suffering, for I was severely
ill, nine long letters to influential persons in England, expla-
natory of my case, and imploring their attention to it. Mr.
Naylor also wrote to Lord Brougham and other persons of
distinction, reporting the result of his investigation, and the
disclosures which he had elicited from Fletcher, as well during
his (Fletcher’s) dangerous illness as after his recovery. All
these letters I placed in the hands of the authorities; but
instead of forwarding them to the parties direct, as those of
all the other prisoners were , they were transmitted to my
prosecutors l in whose hands I have reason to fear they still
remain.
In September last, 1845, Mr. Naylor wrote a very important
letter to Sir Robert Peel, urging the right honourable baronet’s
attention to my case, and communicating the result of his own
personal inquiries. Being desirous of proceeding in strict con-
formity with the regulations (notwithstanding the treatment of
my former letters in the previous March), I transmitted this
valuable letter through the official channel; but it got no fur


ther than Hobart Town, where it has been detained by the au-
thorities to this hour.*
Upon its becoming known that I was occupying my very brief
intervals of leisure in preparing a further statement of the facts
of my case, the few remaining papers I had were suddenly
seized , including various original statements and certificates of
vital importance to my vindication. After sufficient time had
been given for a searching examination of them, and when it
was admitted there was nothing to ground any complaint of
misconduct against me, and when I supplicated for their resto-
ration, a deaf ear was turned to my entreaty, and I was told
to be “ quiet,” and “ hold my tongueA
Everything was done to prevent the possibility of my writing.
For some months I was in the habit of acting as teacher of a
class in the convict night-school (after the performance of a day’s
manual labour in the field), and while here a rigid surveillance
was established to prevent my using pen or paper in any shape
whatever! although every other prisoner on the island might
write whenever he had leisure , without the slightest restraint.
This narrative, I declare to you, is in no respect inaccurate or
exaggerated. On the contrary, I have purposely avoided many
painful details, which would only harrow your feelings.
The civil commandant may, for the sake of his administra-
tion,'!' should these particulars transpire, seek to weaken their
force by some miserable equivocation ; but if any contradiction
should be attempted, you may rest assured, that so soon as the
distance can be traversed, my tale will receive such a confirma-
tion as must effectually silence all who may have sought to im-
pugn my veracity.
Surely this is fiction—the malignant broodings
of wretchedness, or the hideous distortions of a
distempered fancy. Not so. Calm observers
* I found it there after the receipt of my conditional pardon in April, 1847,
nineteen months after it was sent. —See Copy of it, p. 116.
f Such was the “administration” of affairs in Norfolk Island by this
gentleman, that the Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s Land found it
necessary to suspend him two months after the date of this letter. He is
now, I believe, in England.


confirm his statements. The Rev. T. B. Naylor, on
leaving the island, in September, 1845, writes:—
“I deeply lament his truly wretched condition here, and would
gladly have seen it ameliorated. I have never known a prisoner
of the Crown who had been subjected to greater wretchedness. I
rejoice to be able to add, I have never seen an instance of more
dignified suffering, accompanied by invariably consistent conduct.
It will afford me real pleasure to continue his acquaintance under
happier circumstances.”
The Rev. T. Rogers, who succeeded Mr. Naylor,
certifies, under date of the 30th June last:—
“ I regret to say, that the course pursued towards Mr. Barber,
on the part of the chief officer of the island, was one of the most
galling severity. He (Barber) was restricted to the barrack-
yard, while hundreds of the vilest desperadoes might roam from
station to station, under cover of a ‘ pass.’ He was singled out
for special contumely; —he was addressed in the most exaspe-
rating language ; —he was ordered to perform the most loathsome
labour; —he was deprived of indulgence granted him, by the
medical officer, for the recovery of his health ; he was the only
prisoner interdicted from writing materialshe wished to be
useful, but for nineteen months he was perversely refused the
opportunity of being so. In short, his life was reduced to a
wearisome condition of mental torture and of physical toil, dis-
proportioned to his strength, and which his former habits ren-
dered peculiarly grievous.
“ Yet I can with all truth affirm, that I never knew his self-
command overcome by provocation, however gross ; nor his sense
of injustice to betray him into any unseemliness of resentment.
On the contrary, he submitted to every indignity, no matter
how gratuitous, with all meekness. He complied with every rule
of discipline, no matter how vexatiously enforced. He yielded
all obedience to every officer, no matter how unqualified to com-
mand. He endured every privation with the calm fortitude
inspired by conscious innocence. For eighteen months I watched
his demeanour, under the accumulated wretchedness of convict
slavery and degradation ; and, while observing the invincible


patience with which he encountered the trials of his exile lot, I
have often said to myself, ‘ If this man be not innocent, he de-
serves to be, from the magnanimity evinced in this fearful struggle
with misfortune.’
« I need only add, that I have the highest esteem for Mr.
Barber, as a man of honourable principles, uncorrupted integrity,
and extensive information. I have been often cheered by his
society, and I trust that his calamities have been sanctified to his
spiritual profiting.”
And to these corroborations of Mr. Barber’s
accuracy, may be added, the certificate of the
superintendent of agriculture, dated last Octo-
ber :
“ I could not but admire his submissive demeanour, patient
resignation, and invariable rectitude of conduct, while his health
was visibly suffering, and his frame wasting away under the
mental torture inflicted upon him by the degrading and polluting
association into which he was forced, and the unmerited and
unaccountable persecution of which he was the object for many
months, by which the sufferings, inseparable from his unhappy
condition, were deeply aggravated beyond that of even the worst-'
conducted convict, while his enemies could not produce even a
colourable charge against him.”
This is Mr. Barber’s narrative; these are the
proofs of its unexaggerated truth. Then be is to
be trusted. He is also worthy of help. We
answer the question as to the prevalence of indig-
nation or pity in favour of the milder virtue.
The cheek may well tingle with abhorrence at the
recital of oppression, but let the heart be moved
to compassion, and the hand be stretched forth
to relieve the sufferer. Our emotions should be
relevant to time and circumstance. Leaving the
persecutor to another tribunal, the victim solicits


our aid. The Good Samaritan did not so far for-
get his duty as to chase the robbers while the
wounded lay bleeding to death. He bound up
his wounds. TJp to this period Mr. Barber was
a stranger to us, and we were strangers to him:
but, by the common bond of humanity, he is our
neighbour. He needs assistance to carry him to
the point at which he may most effectually obtain
restitution, and he deserves the generous sym-
pathy of the public. This was not withheld in
Tasmania, it cannot, it will not, be refused or
neglected here. His compeers in the law have
issued a report as honourable to themselves and
their profession as it is to him; and they have not
forgotten to add to this pleasing act of justice the
benevolence which is twice blessed. The subscrip-
tions received have not yet amounted to the sum
which will carry him to Europe, but if the public
will make common cause with him in a case which
ought to secure prompt and ample assistance, he
will be enabled to leave the colony within a week,
bearing a grateful recollection of New South
Wales. We are happy to learn that a warm
interest has been awakened on his behalf, and
entertain the hope that it will be proved by sub-
stantial acts of kindness. We have been called
to this appeal by a firm conviction of his inno-
cence, by a reasonable pity for his woes, and are
supported by the ready testimony and persuasion
of the most respectable and intelligent of men.
Surely the appeal will not be made in vain. One
such intercession with us will avouch for others,


it is from the Rev. T. B. Naylor; it pleads with
the genuine eloquence of nature and the power of
truth. We therefore leave it without comment,
to make its due impression:—
“ I shall never remember, without shame and horror, the
WANTONNESS OF THE INSULTS, and the REFINEMENTS OF CRUELTY
practised towards him at Norfolk Island, from the worst possible
motives. I must add, that his manly endurance of these enor-
mities excited my admiration and esteem for him. Never did
any man appeal with more justice to the community for assist-
ance.”
How liberally this appeal was responded to by
the inhabitants of New South Wales, will have
been seen by the subscription list, given in the
Introduction.
The account of my condition and treatment in
Norfolk Island was withheld until after the inves-
tigation into my case by the Sydney Law Society
had been concluded, as will be seen by the fol-
lowing extract from the Hon. Secretary’s let-
ter : —
Pitt Street , Sydney , 27th August, 1847.
My dear Sir, —
*****
I have read your letter in yesterday’s paper with horror , and
cannot hut admire your self-restraint in abstaining from disturb-
ing our judicial calmness during the investigation, either with
these details, or the expression of excited feeling which it would
have been natural to expect from any one escaping from such
savage injustice. —Yours, my dear Sir, very faithfully,
(Signed) G. Kenyon Holden.
W. H. BARBER
Esq.


LETTER FROM LIEUT. BUTLER, R.N., LATE SUPERINTENDENT OF
CONVICTS IN NORFOLK ISLAND.
Alnwick , April 6th , 1849.
My dear Sir, —I have read with deep and melancholy in-
terest your pamphlet, and having been an eye-witness of your
sufferings in Norfolk Island, I am enabled to say that your narra-
tive of them is but too correct.
That you may speedily receive compensation from the Govern-
ment of the country in whose name you were erroneously prose-
cuted, is the earnest hope of yours, very sincerely,
F. A. Butler.
W. H. BARBER
Esq.


EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE
AND
REVIEW OE SLACK’S CASE.
BY ARCHIBALD MICHIE
Esa.,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
“ The whole question hangs,” said the learned counsel for the
prisoner, “ upon the question, whether Mr. Barber acted through-
out merely in the capacity of attorney, and so it does.” —See
Mr. Erie’s speech,* as reported in the Times of the 20th April,
1844.
In this very remarkable and interesting case, it must be
obvious to almost every legal, and, it is hoped, to almost every
reflecting mind, that the relation of attorney and client existing
between Barber and Fletcher , at the time of the transactions out
of which the prosecution arose, cannot be excluded from our con-
sideration, if we are conscientiously bent on arriving at conclu-
sions which will satisfy us that we have given to every suspi-
cious circumstance against Mr. Barber, its proper, and yet, no
more than its proper weight. Ostensibly, at any rate, Barber
was acting merely as Fletcher’s attorney. But he might have
been only ostensibly the attorney, and really a conspirator. If
he were the attorney only, justice could not be done to him, but
by a separate trial, in the course of which he might have called
the other parties as witnesses. If he were a conspirator, it might
be proper to try him with the others, as was done. Whether,
however, he was attorney only, or conspirator only, was the very
question to be determined; and it was the very question, pre-
judged by the prosecutors against him. They set out by as-
suming that Mr. Barber was a criminal, —they put him in the
dock with Fletcher and the others, —and thus they shut out the
only evidence which in Mr. Barber’s case, could by possibility
have cleared him. Thus, also, they not only ruined, as I believe,
L
* For the prosecution.


an innocent man, but consigned him to a fate of misery and suf-
fering, which in England is scarcely ever heard of, and the
description of which will, perhaps, scarcely be believed.
We propose shortly to examine the case, first as it was pre-
sented at the trial, as reported in the Times newspaper of the
17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th April, 1844 ; and, secondly, with the
new light thrown upon it, by subsequent events (also reported in
the Times'), and by the investigations at Norfolk Island, together
with the confessions of the other prisoners.
All tiie facts, as proved at the trial, were con-
sistent with Mr. Barber’s innocence, —all were, so far as
he was concerned, —perfectly accordant with the ordinary and
regular course of an attorney’s actings for his client. Some of
them, on the other hand, if we assume his guilt, seem to be
scarcely intelligible, upon any reasonable view of human conduct.
In the first place, it is very remarkable, that Mr. Barber, —
although carefully dogged and watched by the Forresters (the old
Mansion House Officers), during the three weeks’ interval be-
tween Mr. Freslifield’s first visit to Mr. Barber, which to a guilty
man would have been the first alarm, —is never seen in commu-
nication with Fletcher, nor is he found to be, during that time,
in any, the slightest degree, departing from his accustomed habits
and pursuits. It is scarcely possible to account for this very
extraordinary circumstance, in any other way than by concluding
that Barber must have been utterly unconscious alike of the
fraud which had been committed, and of the danger which threat-
ened him. That this unvarying and regular adherence to his old
pursuits, was a striking and remarkable circumstance, even Mr.
Erie himself impliedly admitted, by contending, that there were
many ways of communication between Barber and Fletcher,
besides personal interviews. No doubt there were. Go-betweens
and messengers might have been employed, with all the conse-
quent accumulated risks of treachery and detection. Or letters
might have been sent through a post-office, subject to similar
risks. These, and possibly other modes of communication were
open to the parties, but not any of them, it is submitted, were so
well calculated as personal conference, to enable conspirators to
confer at once, with the least possible risk, and the greatest
mutual advantage. Besides, had any correspondence, in fact,


been carried on between Fletcher and Barber, we may feel sure
the Forresters would have detected, and brought it to light.
2ndly. Barber’s conduct at the first hearing at the
Mansion House, is altogether inconsistent with the idea of his
guilt. It was proved at the trial that he, alone and unassisted,
Resisted a postponement of the case when such postponement was
proposed by the prosecutors ranged before him, with counsel and
witnesses. He said, he had nothing to fear: he insisted upon
proceeding with the case, and said a remand would do him the
greatest injury with his clients. His deportment throughout is
that of a man who cannot be made to feel that in reality he can
have anything to fear. In short, he speaks and acts just as an
innocent man might be expected to speak and act. He puts
Fletcher in the witness-box; an act which, in an innocent man,
would appear to be a natural and a prudent course. In a guilty
man, however, such an act must have been in the highest degree
rash and silly; for, how could he, as a reasonable being,—not to
speak of the legal habits of the attorney,—expect or hope, that
his partner in guilt, could on the spur of the moment, conceive,
construct, and at all points make good, through cross-examina-
tion of counsel, a merely fictitious story ? But it is objected that
Barber spoke for some minutes to Fletcher in the court-room,
before the latter was put into the box. To this very small objec-
tion it seems to be sufficient to observe, that people generally do
ascertain before they call a witness, as nearly as possible, what
the witness can prove; and let any candid person put himself in
imagination in Mr. Barber’s then situation, and ask himself if he
would have been likely to have done otherwise.*
3rdly. If Barber and Fletcher were conspiring together to forge,
and utter a forged will, where the necessity of registering
a pretended death of a Miss Anne Slack? or of procuring a
copy of such register ? The pretended executrix, Emma Slack,
did not require any such document to enable her to procure
probate of the will. The production of the will itself at Doc-
tors’ Commons was sufficient for the purpose of getting pro-
bate. Fletcher, being an old and practised will-prover, knew
this well: and he also knew, that the production of the pro-
L 2
* See Fletcher’s Confession, of what passed at this conversation, in
Dr. Browning’s note.— P. 97.


Fletcher’s la-
borious devices
only necessary
to deceive Bar-
ber.
If accomplices,
the certificate
was an action
without a mo-
tive.
Guilt irrecon-
cileable with the
openness of
Barber’s acts.
bate at the Bank was sufficient to enable the parties to get
possession of the stock. What then could have been Fletcher’s
object in resorting to these devices, if not to deceive Barber
into the belief, that an Anne Slack was dead, and that Mrs. San-
ders, the so-called Emma Slack, was the executrix ? As
Fletcher and Barber might—if they had been carrying out in
concert a common purpose of fraud—have begun at the will,
why should they unnecessarily have involved themselves in this
gratuitous and additional piece of forgery ; in no wise demanded,
nor of the least use, for the purpose of completing the main
object? Taking, then, Barber and Fletcher at this point, to
have been acting in guilty concert, here appears to be an action
without a motive. If, however, we assume Barber’s innocence,
all this machinery has an object, which plainly was to deceive
Barber into acting as an attorney, and to keep him ignorant of
the actual plot, so that his professional services might be secured,
at no more than their usual cost.
4thly. The openness and directness of all Barber’s
actings rebut the idea of his guilt. His correspondence with
Captain Foskett —his open dealings in the office with the pre-
tended executrix, Emma Slack—the usual entries in the books
of the firm—the equal participation in the business by the partner
Bircham —the visit to Doctors' Commons with Emma Slack (at
which the alleged uttering for which Barber was found guilty
took place, and for which his partner might have been tried if he
had performed this particular act, as well as the other acts which
he really did perform)—the subsequent visit to the Bank —the
drawing of the money, first unnecessarily writing down in pencil
the instructions to the Bank clerk as to the shape in which the
amount was desired, are all circumstances affording the strongest
presumption of Barber’s innocence. Mr. Erie argued, and Mr.
Justice Williams adopted the argument, that such actings in such
places must be public; and that therefore Mr. Barber bad no
choice but publicity in this part of the business. This seems
scarcely ingenuous. It is.suggested thereby, that there was no
more publicity in the transaction, than the parties were obliged
by its very nature to admit into it. Now, is this so ? Cer-
tainly not. Where was the necessity for Barber writing down
instructions, as to the form in which the money was to be received,


when the same instructions by word of mouth would have
been sufficient ? A guilty man, especially a lawyer, would not
have done one act more than was necessary to effect his object.
Again, if it is to be said that appearances were kept up in the
office as part of the original scheme, why did not Barber—with
a view to his future safety in the event of discovery —pay over
all the money to the sham executrix, in his own office, and before
some of his own clerks as witnesses? In assuming Barber's
guilt, we shall always find in the different parts of the case, that
either too much or too little has been pre-arranged, if we examine
it upon the assumption that it has been so pre-arranged with
reference to future safety. And this peculiarity discernible in
the different portions of the evidence throughout the case, of
itself, furnishes one of the very strongest presumptions of Bar-
ber’s innocence.
sthly. Christmas, the Bank clerk, admitted that he and
Fletcher were on intimate terms, and, in answer to a question
from Mr. Justice Williams, he stated that he never made any
communication to any other than Fletcher , respecting the stock
in the Bank, standing in the name of Miss Slack. It follows
from this that Barber could have known of Christmas’s agency
in the matter only through Fletcher; and when Fletcher could
so easily, by means of the little extra machinery of the certifi-
cate of the pretended death of Anne Slack, in addition to the pre-
paration of the spurious will, and the putting forward of the pre-
tended executrix Emma Slack, get the bond fide services of a
respectable attorney for the ordinary costs and charges of such
aid, what sufficient motive appears for Fletcher voluntarily and
unnecessarily consenting to such a further sub-division of the
plunder as must result from taking in a further partner in the
fraudulent transaction ? Fletcher, for the purpose of effectually
carrying out his scheme to a successful issue, required only the
ordinary professional assistance, such as Barber was proved to
have rendered on the occasion in question. Plotting for so
large a stake, he would probably think that such assistance
was a very trifling return for admitting Barber into a propor-
tionate share of the spoil: and it is only reasonable to sup-
pose that Fletcher would be reconciled to so large a surrender of
the plunder, only by a conviction that success could not otherwise


The attorney
might easily
have been de-
ceived.
The false Anne
Slack must be
admitted to the
conspiracy.
Misrepresen-
tation as to Miss
Slack’s age.
be secured. But it is clear success could otherwise be secured.
In the first place, Fletcher being an old and apparently respect-
able client of Barber’s, would scarcely require the pretended
registration of Anne t Slack’s death, to lay asleep all suspicion
in the mind of his ordinary attorney. The production of such
certificate by Fletcher, to Barber, would, together with the
well got-up executrix, satisfy Barber at once. All the rest
would be easy. The attorney, thus set in motion, would, in
the ordinary course of business, unwittingly carry out the
scheme of Fletcher, who would thus be enabled to fall into
the back ground and watch the working out of his plot by
the puppets he had set in motion. It may be said why —if
the smallness of the actual service rendered by Barber is to
furnish an argument against the probability of his having been
admitted to a partnership in the fraud by Fletcher should
not the same argument prevail equally against the pretended
executrix Emma Slack, who in reality takes no greater
part in the business than Barber ? The answer is easy. Bar-
ber could be blinded in the part he was to play, and, therefore,
could be confined to his ordinary character of attorney; but
Mrs. Sanders, alias Emma Slack, could not be blinded, could not
be shut out of the conspiracy. As she was to personate another,
or rather to act an imaginary character, Fletcher had no choice
but to admit her to a full privity in his scheme, and, consequently,
to a participation in its fruits. But, more than this, are we
altogether to leave out of consideration the embarrassment and
fear which would probably altogether prevent Fletcher from
inviting Barber to his schemes, when the latter might have
kicked his very rascally client out of the office, or exposed him
to the public, or both ? *
6thly. Mr. Erie says, “ It is further argued that the identity
had not been made out, as Captain Foskett had stated Miss
Slack’s age to be about twenty-seven. Now it is clear that that
was only an afterthought , to eke out the case ! Indeed. How
is it, then, that in one of the very letters of Barber and Bircham,
* In a conversation with a fellow-prisoner named Roberts, in ISorfolk
Island, Fletcher said, “ I was afraid of opening my mind to Barber, lest he
should have done me an injury .” This conversation was reported to, and is
certified by, the Rev. Mr. Rogers.


to Captain Fosfcett, put forward by Mr. Erie himself, in stating
the case for the prosecution, Miss Anne Slack is spoken of in
that early letter as the young lady ? Why should she be thus
mentioned, especially in a letter to Captain Foskett, had he not
described her to Mr. Barber as a young lady, whether twenty-
seven, or younger, or older ? Does this look like an after-
thought ?
7thly. No money was traced to Barber, further than the
proof that he was seen openly carrying the bag of 600 sove-
reigns for the pretended executrix, Miss Emma Slack. Would
he have been likely to have done even this trifling act if he had
been guilty ? This was no more than the pencilled directions to
the Bank clerk. The judge spoke of this latter act as the only
one performed by Barber that did not seem incidental to his
character of attorney. Surely as the executrix either was, or
appeared to be, a cripple in the hands, from the effect of gout,
there was nothing in what Mr. Barber did here inconsistent
with the natural conduct of a gentleman in such a situation;
and if not, then one would think not inconsistent with the
conduct of an attorney who had any civility at all in his com-
position.
The above are a few of the considerations that presented them-
selves to my mind in the course of perusing the case as reported
in the Times ; considerations which, I confess, I think would have
fully warranted his acquittal at the hands of a jury who had duly
reflected upon the peculiar facility with which an attorney may
be imposed upon by his client, and upon the absolute impossibility,
in such a case, of his effectually clearing himself from suspicion,
unless he is allowed to examine the person who has deceived
him. If .this case were taken as a precedent, attorneys would be
a class devoted by the law to the scheming machinations of all
the Fletchers and Sanderses in the land. Deceived by a client
into acting with him, the law would impose upon, the attorney
the necessity of proving his own innocence, first excluding from
the witness-box the only individual who could furnish the proof.
The usual presumption of law is, that every man is innocent
until he is proved to be guilty ; but in Mr. Barber’s case the
converse of this presumption prevailed. His prosecutors pre-
sumed his guilt, and put him to prove his innocence, having


Tactics of the
prosecution.
The evidence
that might have
been had at the
trial.
The confes-
sions.
Examinations
at Norfolk Is-
land.
Reluctant
admission by
Fletcher when
called up for
judgment.
previously taken the precaution of depriving him of all means
of doing so. This is no exaggeration of the tactics of the prose-
cution, examine them as favourably as you may.
Let ns now turn the case over. Let us look at it, as it ought
to have been seen by a jury; and let us moreover shortly
refer to what ought to have been Mr. Barber’s evidence on his
trial.
The several confessions of Fletcher, of Mr. and Mrs. Sanders,
and of Mrs. Dorey, show how far those persons would have
proved exculpatory witnesses for Barber, had they been exa-
mined. Mrs. Dorey declared Barber’s innocence at the very
first. Sanders and his wife the same. Fletcher, being a calm,
calculating, passionless wretch, was more cautious. His subse-
quent full confession, however, before the Reverend T. B. Nay-
lor, and Deputy Commissary-General Smith, at Norfolk Island,
when Barber and Fletcher were brought face to face, as described
by Mr. Naylor, will carry home the conviction of Barber’s en-
tire innocence to the most sceptical minds. To those who know
Mr. Naylor, as I do, as one of the most conscientious, as well as
one of the most benevolent of men, his narrative alone, of what
transpired at this singular meeting, will be sufficient; but we
have other evidence besides this. If the reader turns to the
Times newspaper of date 23rd April, 1844, he will read a
report of the address delivered by Mr. Barber to the court when
brought up for judgment. On that occasion Mr. Barber detailed
at length the different arts by which he had been deceived by
Fletcher. Among others, Barber said that Fletcher, on one
occasion, had produced to him (Barber) an extract of a letter
from Christmas to Fletcher, to the tenor and effect following:—
“ I beg to observe that there is other stock standing in the name
of Anne Slack , formerly of Smith-street , Chelsea , but now of
Abbott's Langley, Herts; but she is not the same person."
When Mr. Barber first alluded to this extract, Fletcher, who
WAS STANDING BY HIS SIDE IN THE DOCK, DENIED IT; but upon
Barber showing him the memorandum in his own hand-writing,
he was compelled to admit it. Now, seeing how much the counsel
for the prosecution dwelt upon the point that Mr. Barber must
have known that Miss Anne Slack, of Abbot’s Langley, was
entitled to the stock, this piece of false information from


Fletcher, if the jury could have known of it, would have been
sufficient for the acquittal of Barber. Whatsoever strong pre-
sumptions there might have been before, that Miss Slack of
Abbott’s Langley was entitled, this alleged extract of Christmas’s
letter was decisive. It was equivalent to an assertion that all
requisite inquiries had been made by the Bank, and that they
had terminated in the discovery that there had been two Miss
Anne Slacks, of Smith-street, Chelsea, and both of them enti-
tled to stock. I have heard it asked, why did not Barber
demand to see Christmas’s letter ? Why did Fletcher merely
produce an extract ? The answer to such a question is this :
Christmas was Fletcher’s secret friend, and Barber could feel no
surprise at his client not producing a letter which might have
.disclosed the name of this friend, which Fletcher had always
kept a profound secret.
The reader may naturally demand, at this point, how it was,
then, if such evidence as the above could have been given, that
Barber was not tried alone? No satisfactory answer can be
given to such a question. It was suggested at the trial, by the
counsel for the prosecution, that if the prisoners were tried
separately, each might be able to complain that he or she was
deceived by some others of them.
This was a very poor justification of the course pursued. The
utmost that could result from a separate trial of Barber, if even
the worst fears of the prosecutors were realized, would have been
the escape of a guilty man. And would not this have been
better than a course which might lead, and has led, to the con-
viction of an innocent man ? But there was in reality no rea-
sonable foundation for this fear of a guilty man escaping through
false testimony. False testimony of whom ? Of Fletcher, of
Mr. and Mrs. Sanders, and of Mrs. l)orey. Is it reasonable, in
the first place, to suppose that these people would all have com-
bined together in falsehood to procure the acquittal of one of
their own gang, if Barber had been thus connected with them ?
And next, if such combinations can be imagined, is it within
possibility that four different persons, with different powers, and
differently connected with Fletcher in the business, could through
their several cross-examinations have told a consistent and truth-
ful story, exculpatory of Mr. Barber, if he had been really guilty?


his accomplices
musthave prov-
ed Mr. Barber’s
guilt beyond
doubt, or have
secured his ho-
nourable ac-
quittal.
Other emi-
nent profes-
sional men also
deceived.
Mr. Wills.
Mr. Fresh-
field.
Concluding re-
marks.
Cruel treat-
ment ultra the
offence, even if
guilty.
It is not reconcileable with ordinary human experience to expect
that four different minds thus situated, could have told a ficti-
tious story so consistently as that it would have been believed.
No : their examinations, if their story were true, would either
have secured the honourable acquittal of Mr. Barber, or it would
have placed his guilt beyond the shadow of a doubt. *
The above are some, but by no means all the circumstances,
which have convinced me of Mr. Barber’s entire innocence in
this case. The utmost, as it appears to me, after examining the
evidence, —the excluded as well as the admitted evidence, —that
can be alleged against him is, that he was the dupe of a design-
ing man. No doubt he was so. But the most sagacious, as well
as the most silly man, may be deceived by a well-conceived and
well-executed plot, that resembles what it is intended to resemble,
—a common business transaction—so well as to require some
faculty akin to divination to penetrate and detect its real cha-
racter. Barber was not the only dupe. The will which was
imposed upon him, was also imposed upon Mr. Wills, the proctor,
and upon Mr. Freshfield, the well-paid guardian of the Bank
interests.
This, then, is the case upon which a respectable attorney, in re-
spectable practice in London—built up with years of anxious and
arduous toil, which only young and laborious professional men
can properly estimate—is apprehended—taken before the Lord
Mayor—examined—refused bail—remanded over and over again
for four months—tried—convicted—sent to Norfolk Island—
clothed in felon’s garb, and notoriously treated with much worse
than ordinary felon treatment; denied the slightest indulgence
accorded to others in his situation ; his papers seized; his life
nearly destroyed by a system of—even for Norfolk Island—
peculiar and savage, and horrifying barbarity. We have not
room for the particulars here; but they have been described by
Mr. Barber, and he has been confirmed by the Rev. T. B. Naylor,
formerly chaplain of Norfolk Island, whose name is sufficient
authority to all who know him in support of any statement he
may make, or to the truth of which he may certify. Other
respectable officials have also testified to the revolting cruelties to
* See the remarks of the Morning Herald on the late case of Mellish,
23rd June, 1852.


which Mr. Barber was subjected,—cruelties for which it may be
hoped that the original authors may yet be called to account.
Admitting, even, that Mr. Barber was guilty of the offence for
which he was tried, why should he, because he was a gentleman
and an attorney, suffer indignities from which doubly and trebly
convicted felons were exempt? Was it not enough that he was
a gentleman, and cast among the murderers, and other felon mon-
sters, of Norfolk Island ? To expose a refined and educated man
to such a fate, is to be as ingenious in torturing as if we were to
drop lunar caustic upon a nerve.
The hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.
But how must the mind , not yet steeped in crime, wince and
recoil at daily and hourly contact with the devils incarnate of
Norfolk Island ?
The English people are the most generous and noble, and
powerful people in the world. Injustice they have never endured,
and will never endure in any form, let them only see that it is
injustice. They cannot, it is true, make Mr. Barber what he
was. They cannot un-convict; they cannot un-persecute ; they
cannot un-torture him. They cannot restore to him his lost
health, his wasted strength, or those years of his prime, blotted
out of his life, or rather changed into dark misery and woe un-
utterable, by this sad sentence, —a sentence that has at once
thrown him so far back in the race of life, and yet brought him so
much nearer to the grave. But they can confer on him some
measure of tardy justice for the alleviation of his future worldly
condition, and will do so when they really understand his most
lamentable and unprecedented case.


THE
PUBLIC OPINION
UPON MY CASE,
AS EXPRESSED PRINCIPALLY BY LEADING ARTICLES IN
THE LAW JOURNALS, AND THE VARIOUS LONDON
AND PROVINCIAL NEWSPAPERS.
“ The Law Times,” 18 th November , 1848.
« Sir George Grey lias at length thought fit to grant a free
pardon to Mr. Barber, who was convicted of the will forgery, in
the famous case of Fletcher and his companions; and the inti-
mation of pardon is accompanied with a candid admission that,
upon a further investigation of the case, the Home Secretary was
satisfied that Mr. Barber was, in fact, innocent of the crime of
which he had been convicted, and for which he had endured so
terrible a punishment.
“ We heartily congratulate Mr. Barber and his friends on this
ample though tardy acknowledgment. We were of those, who,
from the first, had believed that he had been wrongly convicted,
and that belief we did not hesitate to avow; it is, therefore,
pleasing to find the same belief at last received and admitted by
others, especially by those who have had the best opportunities
for forming an opinion, and have the power to redress the wrong
they acknowledge.
******
“ But what compensation is to be made to Mr. Barber for
all the sufferings he has undergone —for the ruin of his fortunes,
the mental torture, the bodily restraints, the trial, the unjust
conviction, the title of felon affixed to him, the prison, the con-
vict-ship, the companionship of the vilest of mankind, to which
he has been, as it is now admitted, unjustly and wrongly con


demned ? And even now, although pronounced to be innocent,
his freedom can only be obtained by the form of a free pardon
—the insult added to injury of pardoning innocence ! Such is
the Criminal Law of England.
******
“ One such a case as that of Mr. Barber occurring in a cen-
tury is sufficient to sustain a demand for a right of appeal.”
“Law Times,” 10 th March , 1849.
COURT OF APPEAL.
“ The most remarkable proof of the necessity for an appeal
upon the facts has been afforded by the case of Mr. Barber. That
gentleman was convicted, upon very conflicting and doubtful
testimony, guilty of participation in certain frauds committed by
his clients. At tlie time of his trial, the public mind was divided
upon the question of his guilt. Those who heard, and those who
read the evidence, came to different conclusions, and, if their
votes could have been taken, it is doubtful on which side the
majority would have inclined. Subsequent reflection strengthened
the doubt and changed the opinions of many who were first
inclined to believe him guilty. This alone ought to have
been enough to have entitled him to a new trial, fqr the rule of
our law is, that the prisoner shall have the benefit of a reasonable
doubt. But our law, which would have given to Mr. Barber a
new trial if upon the same evidence twenty pounds had been in
dispute, denied it to him when his liberty and character were at
stake, and he was transported.
“ The narrative of his treatment has been lately published in
a very temperate pamphlet, and has excited one universal burst
of indignation from all who have read it, and we are surprised
that its allegations have not been made the subject of parlia-
mentary inquiry. That, however, is no part of our present topic,
and therefore we pass it by for another opportunity. Suffice it
to say, that Mr. Barber succeeded in satisfying the chaplain of
his innocence. He obtained a conditional pardon, and, going
to Sydney, there induced the whole legal profession to examine
into his case, and, after a careful sifting, they unanimously


signed a certificate of their belief in liis innocence. From Sydney
he went to the East Indies, and after a similar hearing from the
profession there, obtained a similar certificate, and finally a free
pardon was conceded to him by the Government at home.
“ This pardon is not given as a mitigation of punishment in
consequence of extenuating circumstances, but avowedly on the
ground of innocence of the crime of which he had been con-
victed. Thus has an innocent man suffered the most terrible of
punishments for a series of years by an error of the law, and
there is no redress, no compensation, for him. He returns home
a ruined man, with his constitution shattered, his life shortened,
and all his hopes blasted. The law that had done him this great
wrong, and sent him to the other side of the world as a slave,
would not so much as give him a free passage back to the home
from which it had unjustly torn him!”
“ The Legal Observer ,” 2 5th November , 1.848.
“ We noticed so long ago as the 13th of July, 1844, the inves-
tigation which had been made by a very respectable and intel-
ligent solicitor, now a member of the bar, and which resulted in
his entire conviction of Mr. Barber’s innocence.
* . * * * * *
“We are now truly glad to add that the Secretary of State
for the Home Department has fully and anxiously considered the
documents submitted to him, and has expressed his belief that
Mr. Barber was free from any guilty participation in the frauds
in question.
“ What reparation will the Bank of England make for their
mistaken prosecution ?”
“ The Jurist ,” 20th January , 1849.
“ For the details of this very singular case, we refer our
readers to the well and most temperately written pamphlet
itself.”


“ The Times” on the Confession of Fletcher , lsf July, 1844.
THE CONVICTS BARBER AND FLETCHER.
The foregoing document, forming a declaration of the innocence
of Barber, by his fellow-convict, Fletcher, has been submitted
to us for publication by the solicitor on behalf of Barber in
the late trials. It appears to be a complete and apparently truth-
ful exculpation, on behalf of Fletcher, of Barber’s supposed parti-
cipation in the will forgeries, and their attendant frauds, and is
made at a time when disguise or falsehood would be vain and
additionally iniquitous.
“ Morning Advertiser2nd December, 1848.
“ A case is just now before the public, which is creating a
deep impression on the national mind. We allude to the restora-
tion to his liberty and his native land, of Mr. Barber, the solici-
tor, who, in April, 1844, was convicted at the Old Bailey, of
being guilty, along with Fletcher and others, of committing
forgery, in the celebrated will cases, which then attracted so much
attention. Sir George Grey, Secretary for the Home Depart-
ment, has not only granted a free pardon to Mr. Barber, but has
published, under his own hand, a letter in which be admits, in
the most explicit manner, the entire innocence of that gentleman
of the crime of which he was found guilty, and for which he has
suffered four years of the severe and degrading punishment
to which a fellow-creature was ever subjected,—a punishment so
terrible, that were we to recount its horrors, it would make the
blood of our readers curdle in their veins.
“ The question comes to be, now that Mr. Barber is publicly
proclaimed by Sir George Grey to be an innocent man, what
reparation is to be made to him for the injuries which have been
done to him ? This question does not seem to have occurred to
ministers. There is, at any rate, no evidence to show that it
has yet occupied their thoughts. That injury is incalculable
No compensation which could be made to him would meet the
necessities of the case. The injuries done Mr. Barber are irre


parable. Still that is no reason why he should receive no repa-
ration. If ministers, at whose instance he was so grievously'
wronged, cannot make him all the atonement to which he is
entitled, let them, at least, make him what they can. As yet,
we do not hear of their taking any step with this view. This
must not always be. If Government will do nothing of its own
accord, to render the gentleman some reparation, the case must
be taken up by Parliament. It is to be remembered, that Mr.
Barber’s punishment has not ceased with his penal exile. He is
not, it is true, now experiencing the bodily pains, and the men-
tal anguish which he was doomed to endure in Norfolk Island;
but he is still a severe sufferer in his professional prospects,
and in his position in society. He had, at the time of his ap-
prehension on a groundless charge, an income of about £1,200 a
year, as an attorney. At present he is not earning a penny.
And though his name may be again entered on the Rolls as a
practising attorney, that circumstance will neither make up for
his past loss of upwards of £5,000, through this unjust convic-
tion, nor insure the return of the business he has lost. The case
is, in every point of view, one of unexampled hardship. Though
the victim of an erroneous verdict of a jury be incapable, from
the circumstances of the case, of receiving adequate reparation
for the injustice he has suffered, he has a right to demand such
compensation as it is possible to render him.
“No one can mistake the object of these remarks. It is, in
the first place, to establish the fact, that Government are bound
by every consideration of morality and justice , to make Mr.
Barber such reparation as his casgwill admit of; and, secondly,
to induce future juries to be exceedingly cautious as to the
evidence on which they return verdicts of guilty, and thus
sacrifice the life, liberty, character, and circumstances of the
accused.”
“ Morning Advertiser ,” 6th December, 1848.
The pamphlet contains a mass of interesting information.
M e do not mean to recur at present to what we have before
urged. TV hat we are now anxious about is, that whatever-repar


ation can be made to a man so grievously injured at the instance
of the Crown , should be forthwith made to him by Government.
It is true that no compensation can meet the hardships of Mr.
Barber’s case, but that is no reason why whatever reparation
is possible, should not be made to him. It is rather a reason
why it should be made, and that, too, without an hour s unneces-
sary delay.
“ We call attention to Mr. Barber’s case, not for his own sake
only, but for the sake of society. has been his case may
be the case of other innocent men. It is now ascertained, beyond
all question, that but for the peculiar position in which he and
Fletcher stood, both being indicted together, Mr. Barber could
have furnished to the judge and jury, at the Central Criminal
Court, documentary and oral proofs of his innocence, which no
judge or jury could have withstood. In this fact there lies an
unanswerable argument in favour of a Court of Appeal. It is a
fearful thing that an innocent man should have been doomed
to endure the ignominy and misery which Mr. Barber had to
encounter, for four years, in Norfolk Island. But the matter
before the amendment of our criminal code would have been still
worse. He would have been executed, and his memory would
never have been purged from the stain attaching to it for none
but himself could have established his innocence. As, therefore,
juries are equally liable to return a verdict of guilty in capital
cases where the prisoner is innocent, the necessity for instituting
a Court of Appeal is, by this one consideration, demonstrably
established. When Parliament assembles, we shall return to the
subject. It is one of very great importance.”
“ Daily News ” 10 th January , 1849.
“ Most of our readers, we dare say, have some recollection of
the trial of Mr. William Henry Barber, a solicitor of some stand-
ing and considerable practice, who was, in the spring of 1844,
convicted of forgery and sentenced to transportation for life.
Mr. Barber’s private and professional character had been pre-
viously altogether unimpeached, and from the first there were
very strong doubts whether ho could have been guilty of the
M


crime for which he suffered, the grounds for which opinion have
been at different times, and in a variety of shapes, brought before
the public. The recent return of Mr. Barber to this country,
after receiving a full pardon from the crown, is likely to call re-
newed attention to all the circumstances of this very remarkable
case. Mr. Barber naturally feels that, though the Government
have, after a most unwarrantable delay, thought proper to ac-
knowledge his innocence, yet that the unfavourable impressions
which many of his countrymen conceived of him at the time of
his trial continue unabated, and that he has still to solicit that
reversal of his condemnation at the tribunal of public opinion
which the Government, after a most searching inquiry, found it
impossible to refuse. There is no conceivable position in which a
man more requires the aid and countenance of his fellow-men
than in an attempt of this description.
“ It is true, indeed, that two of the worst abuses of the sys-
tem, under which imperfections, as well as its mal-administration,
Mr. Barber suffered, have since been partially removed. A court
of appeal in criminal cases has been established; and the worst
atrocities of Norfolk Island have been abolished. But the im-
portance of Mr. Barber’s case does not depend on its being an
unusually striking illustration of the imperfections of our criminal
code. It is one which has a very extensive bearing on the rela-
tions that exist between solicitors and their clients, particularly
as regards the maintaining inviolate by the former the con-
fidence reposed in them by the latter. The profession are not
likely, for their own sake, to let an inquiry drop, in which their
own interests are so widely involved. There is no man among
them, let him be ever so scrupulous and suspicious, who is not
liable to the misfortune of having for his clients persons secretly
engaged in nefarious transactions, but whose true character is
indiscernible beneath the mask of respectability, and often of
actual wealth, which they assume. The number of such indivi-
duals, prowling about and preying on society, and yet maintaining
an unblemished character before the world, is greater perhaps
than society in general has any suspicion of. Solicitors of the
highest respectability are sometimes purposely sought out by
clients of this class, with the view of placing above suspicion
the transactions in which the latter propose to employ them.


It may bo that of the risks thus run the law can take no
cognisance. It may be that the protection of society requires
that solicitors so employed should always be liable to be tried
for conspiracy in conjunction with their dishonest clients. If
so, it is only the more necessary to secure to them all those
opportunities of proving their innocence, the refusal of which
inflicted on Mr. Barber so much unmerited suffering.
“The person principally instrumental in Mr. Barber’s ruin,
and for a participation in whose offence he was tried, was
one Joshua Fletcher, a soi-disant retired surgeon, who resided at
Camberwell. This Fletcher occupied his leisure time, and added
to his wealth, which was considerable, by tracing out the per-
sons entitled to unclaimed Bank of England stock and divi-
dends : obtaining for them the property to which they were
entitled, and pocketing a handsome douceur for the service he
had rendered. Whether Fletcher entered on this pursuit under
the influence of dishonest motives, does not appear; but even-
tually he made it a practice, when he could not discover the
right heirs to such property, and thought the ground was clear,
to substitute false ones, pocketing the principal part of the
proceeds, and remunerating the instruments of his frauds with
the remainder. In the legal proceedings necessary in such
cases he employed, among other firms, that of Messrs. Barber
and Bircham, who came in process of time to be his ordinary
solicitors. In his dealings with them, and other solicitors
whom he employed, Fletcher, who appears to be a man of
much ability, took care to give all his proceedings an appear-
ance of perfect legality, if not of a certain disinterestedness.
The caution, which for selfish motives, and with a view to
ascertaining where he might safely get up a case of fraudulent
heirship, required to be exercised in the search for the owners
of unclaimed dividends, naturally assumed to his solicitors the
appearance of a solicitude to obtain the greatest certainty as to
the right heirs, before he interfered for the purpose of forwarding
their claims.
“ In how many cases of this description Fletcher succeded in
imposing on the solicitors whom he employed, as well as on the
proctors at Doctors’ Commons, and on the officials of the Bank,
will never be known. But he appears to have carried on the
M 2


practice successfully for some fifteen years, and probably the
greater part, if not the whole of his wealth, was derived from this
source, for the profits of a single fraud were often very large,
amounting to thousands of pounds. The magistrate before whom
he was brought had refused, in a very hard and arbitrary way,
to accept any bail for his appearance. His defence was imper-
fectly conducted, owing principally to the want of funds, which,
if admitted to bail, he could have procured. The various frauds
of Fletcher, which came to light, gave rise to a host of rumours
and misrepresentations, by which Barber’s cause was immensely
prejudiced, both in the eyes of the public generally and still
more in those of the Bank directors and their solicitor, who
looked upon him as an old confederate and hardened accomplice
of Fletcher’s, and proceeded against him in consequence with an
animosity still greater than that which they manifested towards
Fletcher himself. This severity appears to have been per-
sisted in the more on account of Barber’s refusal, when first
arrested, to disclose Fletcher’s name and connection with the
transaction, on the ground that it would be a violation of the
confidence reposed in him by a client, whose integrity he had as
yet no sufficient grounds for distrusting. Had Barber, indeed,
waived this punctilio, and at once given up Fletcher as his
employer, the probability is that he would either have escaped trial
altogether, or, at all events, he would have got out on bail, and
had an opportunity of properly preparing his defence. The trial,
as reported, and with the prima facie evidence against Barber,
which, to a certain extent, warranted the judge and jury in the
course they took, will be found in the London morning papers of
the 17th to the 20th April, 1844.
“ Immense efforts were made by Barber and his friends to
procure a reinvestigation of his case both before and after his
departure from England. Fletcher and Sanders both made decla-
rations of Barber’s innocence, which were corroborated by the
statements of other convicts, who had in private conversation
endeavoured to elicit from Fletcher an acknowledgment of the
truth.
“ But all these testimonies were attributed to collusion between
the parties, and to Fletcher’s wish to screen his supposed old
accomplice from the consequences of the nefarious transactions in


which he had himself involved him. This suspicion continued
to act against Barber during the voyage, and on his arrival at
his place of destination.; and no outward enmity between
Fletcher and Barber could satisfy those who were prejudiced
against the latter, that the whole disagreement was not got up
for show. What private influences were employed against him
it is impossible to say; but neither the declarations of his fellow-
prisoners, nor the striking facts which transpired after his convic-
tion, could procure either a reconsideration of his case, or even a
trifling mitigation of the severities of his sentence.
“ Whatever influence was exerted had directly the contrary
effect. Barber came to Norfolk Island a marked man, and
during the greater part of his stay there was subjected to the
most cruel treatment, of which the pamphlet which he has just
published contains a harrowing detail. The poignancy of his
sufferings was aggravated by his beholding other persons of his
previous station in society, and amongst them Fletcher himself,
treated with a mildness and consideration, which formed the
greatest possible contrast with the galling indignities, unwar-
ranted either by his offence or by any misconduct since he had
been a convict, of which he was selected as the object. His suf-
ferings in this condition excited the compassion, as his conduct
and demeanour had previously won the respect and esteem, of the
chaplains and some of the superintendents at Norfolk Island.
But their efforts to ameliorate his condition were for a long time
unsuccessful. Even the request of one of the chaplains to have
him for a servant was refused; and these, and the other officials
who showed him any favour, were made to feel that they bad
committed an imprudence. Barber was a marked man—palpa-
bly in bad odour with some one or other at head-quarters—and
it was a crime even in the ministers of religion to show
any sympathy with his sufferings. Though the establishment
under which this occurred has been broken up, we think these
circumstances demand inquiry from Parliament. The facilities
for practising this sort of oppression are so great, that when a
case like this does come to light, it ought not to be passed over
without investigation.
“ The gentlemen who had inquired into Barber s case, and
who had formed a conviction of his innocence, as strong as their


compassion for his sufferings, did not relax their efforts on their
removal from Norfolk Island. One of them especially, the
Rev. Mr. Naylor, made unheard-of efforts to bring his case
before the Home Government. And we may mention, as a
specimen of the influence that was exerted against Barber, that
a letter of Mr. Naylor’s on the subject, which he addressed to
Sir Robert Peel, was suppressed by the Colonial Government,
and found in the office of the Comptroller-General of Convicts,
nineteen months after its date. Other letters of Mr. Naylor
were transmitted, not to the persons to whom they were
addressed, but to Barber’s prosecutors. It being reported among
the convicts that Barber was preparing another statement of
his case, the few remaining papers he had were seized, and
he was debarred all use of writing materials. It was only
when the Rev. Mr. Naylor, baffled in every other way,
sent Airs. Naylor , his oxen icife , to England with Barber s
papers , that a hearing was got for him, the result of which
was—first, a conditional pardon (dated the 12th of November,
1846), on condition of his not returning to the United King-
dom ; and, subsequently, after Barber’s arrival in Paris, where
he could with ease communicate with his friends, and point out
the mode of completing the proofs of his innocence, a free par-
don, dated 3rd November, 1848. Mr. Barber’s innocence of the
crime for which he was convicted is now acknowledged by the
Government. But who shall restore him to the position he
enjoyed before that sentence, or compensate him for the unmerited
sufferings—and the penal horrors of Norfolk Island, even when
unaggravated by official malignity, exceed all description
which he has since endured?
“We have now recapitulated, as minutely as our space would
permit us, the facts of this very extraordinary case. But we
have necessarily, and with great regret, omitted the chain of
testimonies which go to substantiate Mr. Barber’s innocence, and
which produced a long-delayed and reluctant admission thereof
from the Home Office itself. This surely is a case—or, let us
rather say—a type of a whole class of cases which demands a
searching inquiry from Parliament , as well as a careful inves-
tigation by the profession to which Mr. Barber belongs, of
the liabilities to which the present imperfection either of the


law or of its administration exposes them. One of the main
objections to the punishment of death, viz. the impossibility of
its revisal, would apply equally to transportation and imprison-
ment, if officials were at liberty, as they found themselves at
Hobart Town and Norfolk Island, to suppress at their own arbi-
trament the appeals of persons unjustly convicted, and thus nip
in the bud all their chances of obtaining redress. But for the
noble and most disinterested conduct of the Rev. Mr. Naylor,
there is no reason to suppose that Mr. Barber would not be at
this moment still undergoing his punishment; if the persecution
to which he was subjected had not, indeed, by this time, brought
him to his grave. The magnitude of the sacrifice Mr. Naylor
made shows the despair he was in of otherwise obtaining the
redress of an injustice, the sight of which weighed upon his con-
science, almost as if he had been the cause of it. Really it is
time that this matter should he looked into.”
“ The Examiner ” 18 th November, 1848.
“ What compensation is this ruined man to receive ? Govern-
ment should give men so placed, appointments suited to their
former position and talents. The right of appeal in criminal
cases, compensation for judicial error, and the reversal of the
record of guilt, in cases of innocence, are measures which, I am
satisfied, will no longer be allowed to be deferred.”
“ The Spectator” 13 th January , 1849.
“Is Barber innocent ? He has spent four years in exile, two
in a place abhorrent to humanity.
“ The facts of this case are now patent to the public, and are
recapitulated by the Daily News. One Joshua Fletcher, who
described himself as a retired surgeon, filled up his leisure and
his coffers by tracing the heirs to unclaimed dividends, and ex-
acting from them a not unmerited reward. That employment he
varied, when he found that true heirs were not forthcoming, by
procuring false personation of the missing heirs. Such lucrative


and hazardous practice he carried on for fifteen years, until 1844,
the date of his detection. He had employed Messrs. Barber and
Bircliam as his solicitors; they, apparently, having acted regu-
larly enough, and being deceived as much as any other persons.
In the fatal case of ‘ Anne Slack,’ Barber acted; and when the
accusation was first made, he very naturally, if not properly,
shrunk from inculpating a regular client. He was included in
the charge, tried, and convicted on very doubtful evidence. Bail
was refused ; by which he was prevented from obtaining the evi-
dence which has since established his innocence. He was trans-
ported to the most shocking of our penal settlements —Norfolk
Island. lie seemed to be followed by some malevolent persecu-
tion : any one who expressed belief in his innocence was looked
at askance ; a letter representing his case, and addressed to the
Home Secretary, was found unnoticed in the department of the
Comptroller-General of Convicts; and attention was only paid
to his condition, when the Reverend Mr. Naylor, one of the
chaplains of Norfolk Island, sent his own wife to England on the
charitable mission of urging Barber’s suit! The excellent couple
so far succeeded, that Barber received a 4 pardon,’ on condition
of his not returning to his native country. He went to Paris,
and there was able to institute such communications with home
as completed the proof of his innocence, and at last he was un-
conditionally ‘ pardoned.’ The lawyers in the colony, the law-
yers at home, the public, had anticipated the conviction of his
innocence ; his previous character had thrown the utmost discre-
dit on the charges against him ; his demeanour under punish-
ment accords with the possession of a clear conscience.
“What a preposterous and stupid result is this 4 pardon ! ’
The whole affair, presents the injured man in a position of dig-
nity ; the Government of the nation in one of meanness. Is it
to remain so ? Is this great nation to be retained in the meanest
of all positions, that of refusing frank reparation for flagrant
wrong?—lt can hardly be. If there is no present law or ma-
chinery by which Mr. Barber can be formally and solemnly
restored to that social position of which he has been oppressively
deprived, his case, the most flagrant, ought to be the last in
which an innocent man is insulted with ‘pardon,’ the first pro-
vided for byji new law to bring such cases within the domain ot


justice. Indeed, no general law can fairly meet the wrong that
has been heaped upon him through the obstinate neglect of the
responsible authorities. Let them inquire, if they please, into
any remaining doubt; but, having inquired, let full reparation
for the injury to fortune and station he compensated with a
generous usance.”
The “ John Bull” 3rd February, 1849.
“ The ‘ presumption of law ’ is, ‘ that every man is innocent
until he is proved to be guilty.’ Such is the theory of our con-
stitution ; but, like most theories, it is liable to deviations in
practice. A strong case of suspicion, founded upon circumstan-
tial evidence, may produce, instead of the ‘ presumption of inno-
cence,’ to which the law declares even the guilty man entitled
until he be convicted, a ‘ presumption of guilt ’ which in its prac-
tical effects may debar a guiltless man from establishing his inno-
cence. This is, certainly, bad enough ; but it is one of the
imperfections to which the administration of justice in the hands
of fallible men must necessarily be liable, and when examples do
occur, —unless a case of actual malice, or palpable disregard of
the claims of justice, be established, —it is not fair to lay blame
on the unconscious and unintentional agents in what substantially
may be a crying injustice. But when a man innocently convicted,
through the infirmities incident to human tribunals, eventually
succeeds in establishing his innocence, it is rather too bad, that
society, which owes ’him not only reparation for wrong, but com-
pensation for losses and injuries sustained, should refuse to
acknowledge his innocence as a matter of justice, but pretend to
pardon guilt which has been distinctly disproved.
“ These and other absurd and grievous anomalies in our legal
system are placed in a striking light by the case of Mr. William
Henry Barber, who was, as our readers will doubtless recollect,
convicted, sentenced, and transported, in the year 1844, for his
alleged guilty participation in the forgeries by which large
amounts of unclaimed stock and dividends were obtained by fic-
titious claimants. The cases in which this fraud had been com-
mitted were altogether four in number. In one of them Mr.


Barber was acquitted; in two others the Crown abandoned the
prosecution; but in the fourth case a conviction was obtained,
not only against the parties actually implicated in the forgery,
but against Mr. Barber, who had acted as their solicitor, and who
was, erroneously, as it now appears, considered as an accomplice.
Several years having elapsed since the trial, which, at the time,
engrossed public attention in a most extraordinary degree, it may
not be amiss to place before our readers a succinct narrative of
the facts, as detailed in a statement drawn up by Mr. Barber
since his return to this country; including both the circumstances
elicited on the trial, and those which have since been brought to
light, and by which Mr. Barber’s innocence of the charge of
knowingly uttering a forged will for a fraudulent purpose is
conclusively established.
“ Mr. Barber was, at the time of his apprehension on this
charge, an attorney of seven years’ standing, after having served
a clerkship of seventeen years to a respectable firm, which bore
witness to his exemplary conduct during the whole of that period.
For two years he had been in partnership with another respect-
able member of the profession, who gave like testimony to the
uprightness of his character and conduct. His own firm em-
ployed five stipendiary and two articled clerks ; it had established
a connection of about one hundred and fifty respectable clients ;
and its bills of costs amounted, in the year preceding the prose-
cution, to upwards of three thousand pounds. Among the clients
of Mr. Barber was a Mr. Fletcher, a retired surgeon, living in
apparent respectability in a house of his own at Camberwell, and
possessed of considerable landed property. The origin of his
connection with this man, which was throughout strictly confined
to professional business, was an inquiry made of Mr. Barber by
Fletcher, in the year 1838, at the instance of a third party,
who had applied to the latter to advance the necessary funds for
the prosecution of a doubtful claim. The case being, in Mr.
Barber’s opinion, a hopeless one, he frankly said as much to
Fletcher, who was thus prevented from investing his money in
an unprofitable manner. This legitimate introduction led, not
unnaturally, to other business transactions, the first of which was
a dispute between Fletcher and one of his tenants; various mat-
ters of a similar nature, such as agreements and disputes with


tenants, investments and transfers of property, followed—in point
of fact, Mr. Barber became Fletcher’s regular solicitor ; and, as
his increasing business required a greater command of ready
money than lie bad at his disposal, Mr. Barber obtained occasional
accommodation from his client, but always at a high rate of
interest.
“ In the course of time Fletcher introduced to Mr. Barber
several parties entitled, or alleged to be entitled, to unclaimed stock
and dividends, informing Mr. Barber that he had access to infor-
mation at the Bank, and that he devoted a portion of his time to
tracing out the owners of such funds, with a view to his ob-
taining a liberal remuneration for his trouble. Mr. Barber was
employed in negotiating the terms of remuneration, in assisting
the claimants in the prosecution of their rights, and, occasionally,
in making preliminary inquiries. Some of the cases in which
property was thus discovered by its owners were genuine ; others,
four in number, proved subsequently to have been fraudulently
concocted. The acquittal of Mr. Barber in one, and the nolle
■ prosequi in the two others, render it unnecessary to advert to
these. The fourth was the famous, and, to Mr. Barber, so cala-
mitous case of Emma Slack.
“ In this case Fletcher first informed Mr. Barber, in the autumn
of 1842, of the existence of a sum of £3,500 stock, with dividends
unclaimed for ten years, standing in the Bank books in the name
of Anne Slack, of Smith-street, Chelsea, and directed him to
make inquiries of Captain Foskett, at Abbott’s Langley, with
whom a lady of that name, his sister-in-law, was residing. In
obedience to these instructions, Mr. Barber communicated with
Captain Foskett, and obtained from him a specimen of the lady’s
handwriting, and an account of her age, which, most unfortunately
for Mr. Barber, was understated by ten years, the lady being in
fact thirty-seven, but represented by her brother-in-law as
twenty-seven. Fletcher returned the specimen of her hand-
writing to Mr. Barber, with tlie information that it was wholly
dissimilar to that of the owner of the stock, and that the latter
having executed a power of attorney twelve years before, could
not be Captain Foskett’s sister-in-law, who at that time must
have been a minor.
“ Fletcher next informed Mr. Barber that he had reason to


suppose a person of that name had recently died at Bath, that
he had inserted an advertisement in a local paper, and given
reference to Mr. Barber’s firm. A correspondence ensued with
a Miss ‘ Jane Slack,’ which was communicated to Fletcher, and
which terminated in her declaring that she could not be the party
inquired for.
“ By Fletcher’s direction Mr. Barber’s firm now advertised in
the Times , but without success. Fletcher, however, shortly
after mentioned that he had met with the real owner by accident,
but, with a shrug of disappointment, expressed his regret that
he should get nothing by the case, as the party was already
aware of her rights. He subsequently introduced Miss ‘ Emma
Slack,’ as a client, whom he had recommended to Mr. Barber.
She produced a certificate of the death of her aunt, ‘ Anne
Slack,’ and a will, in obtaining probate of which Mr. Barber was
asked to assist her ; but not till the lady had ascertained that his
charge would not exceed about .£lO. A difficulty arising about
the advance of the probate duty, Fletcher volunteered to do so,
on an understanding that the advance should be returned out of
the money to be received at the Bank. The will passed through
all the regular stages of scrutiny at Doctors’ Commons and at
the Bank, and escaped detection. The amount of the stock and
dividends, £4,600 in all, was accordingly obtained from the Bank
by Miss * Emma Slack,’ who, in Mr. Barber’s presence, refunded
the advance of £BO for probate duty, with £5 for the accommo-
dation, and handed oyer £ls to Mr. Barber in discharge of his
bill, which amounted to £l3.
“This settlement took place in April, 1843. The real owner
of the stock was Captain Foskett’s sister-in-law, who had, be-
sides, £6,000 in the funds, on which she had regularly received
the dividends. In consequence of the will produced by Miss
‘ Emma Slack,’ she had been entered as ‘ deceased,’ not only
against the unclaimed £3,500, but against the £6,000. This
led to inquiry, to the discovery of her right to the £3,500
stock, and to the consequent suspicion of a forgery having been
committed. Mr. Barber, on being applied to, in November of the
Same year, readily gave all the information required of him, ex-
cept, without his permission, the name of his client who had
introduced the fictitious ‘ Emma Slack.’ This refusal, the result


of a sense of professional delicacy, tlie discovery of three other
cases of forgery, in which Mr. Barber had been professionally
engaged, and a combination of other untoward circumstances of
suspicion, weighed so heavily against Mr. Barber in the minds of
the authorities on whom the prosecution devolved, and of the
judge and jury, that he was indicted along with Fletcher and his
accomplices in the fraud, convicted, sentenced, and transported.
From the confessions of the latter, and the light thrown upon the
case by subsequent inquiries, it is, however, now evident that
Mr. Barber was imposed upon by the same documents which
escaped detection by parties whose official duty it was to scru-
tinise them narrowly; and that in his case the additional decep-
tion of the register of death was practised, which was first
attempted to be procured from Bath, and afterwards was pro-
cured from Pimlico, for no other purpose than to blind Mr.
Barber against the real character of the transaction in which his
professional services were to be employed.
“ Whilst contributing our share, as public journalists, towards
the tardy justice, which, we trust, will be fully and amply ren-
dered to Mr. Barber, by drawing public attention to his case, we
cannot concur in the censure which Mr. Barber attempts to cast
upon those who had to conduct the prosecution, and especially
upon the Bank solicitor. That Mr. Barber should feel consi-
derable personal exasperation, we can easily understand; but an
impartial consideration of the duties of the responsible position
of that public officer will be sufficient to exonerate him from the
imputation of oppressive conduct, even if Mr. Freshfield’s high
personal character were not, as it is, a sufficient guarantee for the
perfect uprightness of his intentions. We cannot speak with the
same confidence as to the conduct of the authorities both in Nor-
folk Island and at home. Mr. Barber’s efforts to obtain a recon-
sideration of his case, and to produce exculpating evidence,
appear to have been unwarrantably obstructed, and his powerful
representations for a time wholly disregarded. Nor can we un-
derstand upon what principle a conditional pardon, clogged with
a sentence of perpetual banishment from his native land, was
granted to a man whose innocence of the matters laid to his
charge was no longer doubtful. Mr. Barber’s perseverance has
at length procured for him a ‘ free pardon,’ and he is now trying


to be restored to his professional practice, courting, at the same
time, the fullest inquiry into hiy case. But who and what shall
compensate him for the years of suffering, moral and physical,
which he has undergone ; for this gap in his existence, during
which an honourable man has been compelled, by a mistake of
the law, to enact the part of a felon; for the ruin of his health
and the destruction of all his property and prospects ? Is it meet,
that in the place of all compensation so justly due, he should be
put off with the insulting boon of a ‘ free pardon,’ for a crime of
which he has proved himself to have been unjustly suspected
and innocently convicted ?”
“ Weekly Dispatch,” 4 th February , 1849.
“ AVe perceive that Mr. Barber has made an application to the
Court of Queen s Bench, through his very able advocate, Ser-
jeant Wilkins, for an order to obtain his annual certificate as an
attorney. The Incorporated Law Society, represented by Sir
F. Thesiger, asks for time to investigate one or two points, not
touching Mr. Barber’s innocence in the Will Forgery Cases, and
the decision is referred to one of the Masters of the Court. This
is a case in which the public is bound to take the deepest interest.
It comes to us recommended to special consideration by a highly
honourable man, the late editor of the Australian, now editor of
the New Zealander, who had visited Norfolk Island, and became
convinced of Mr. Barber’s innocence, while he was undergoing
his unmerited punishment there. We confess to have been
greatly prejudiced against Mr. Barber. We participated in the
idea of the general public, that the lawyer, in the case of the
Will Forgers, must have been behind the scenes. We took up
the pamphlet with the expectation of detecting a bad cause, not-
withstanding the recommendation with which it came to us. A
CAREFUL, THOUGH ALMOST AN UNWILLING PERUSAL, CONVINCED
THE WRITER OF THIS ARTICLE OF MR. BARBER’S ENTIRE FREE-
DOM FROM BLAME. The narration which the pamphlet contains
is one of the most affecting romances of real life ever penned, to
all who can sympathise with a man unjustly accused, convicted,
and punished. But the writer of this notice was not content to


act upon his own persuasion. It was clue to the character of the
Weekly Dispatch , as well as the great interests of truth which it
seeks unflinchingly to maintain, to investigate with all care,
calmness, and patience. Accordingly, the opinion of a most
valued and able coadjutor was sought, one whose life is mainly
passed in similar investigations. His impression, founded on the
facts and reasoning of the pamphlet, fully coincides with that of
the first investigation. A letter was also addressed to an old
acquaintance of Mr. Barber, a fellow committee-man of the
Southwark Literary Institution, asking him to read the pam-
phlet, and, from his own knowledge, to corroborate or to impeach
it. His reply was, that the pamphlet had not changed his opi-
nion, because that had always been in favour of Mr. Barber’s
innocence, and he tendered personal evidence to a very main fact,
that Mr. Barber having been aware a month before, that there
had arisen a circumstance at the Bank which would call for some
investigation in the real Miss Slack’s case, —viz., the note of her
death* which would prevent the payment of those dividends
which she had always received, had accumulated no fund, either
for defence or for flight, but was acting just as usual, in the
knowledge of his own propriety of conduct throughout the trans-
action. When the editorial ‘We,’ therefore, is used here, it is
not as indicating a tacit, but an active concurrence. The story
related in the pamphlet, Mr. Barber’s magnanimous conduct
under his afflictions; his constant hope, which nothing but inno-
cence could have prompted; the testimony of the chaplain of
Norfolk Island; the unanimous assertion of those really guilty,
his exasperated enemy, Fletcher, among them, that hehadno
criminal share in the transactions; the fact, that any managing
clerk would have done all that was asked, in the absence of his
principal, for any known client; the investigation and most en-
thusiastic testimony of the Sydney Law Society and of the
principal legal authorities at Madras, backed by handsome sub-
scriptions of money to enable him to return to Europe to resume
the position of which he had been unjustly deprived; his own
determination not to rest content with that conditional pardon,
under which he might have settled freely and honourably among
those who thus sympathized with him, but to give a full, uncon-
ditional, avowal that he was ‘ not guilty;’ the unconditional par


don itself ; liis publication of facts, which must be liable to the
search and criticism of all here—these form a chain of circum-
stances which, in our opinion, entitled Mr. Barber to a most
honourable verdict of acquittal in the minds of his fellow-
countrymen. But there is much more to be done than this.
What compensation can be offered for sufferings imposed with
extreme severity, as against an especially culpable man ? It is a
terrible tie on the means, character, health, and life of an inno-
cent individual, merely to be put upon his defence in a Criminal
Court. The public ought to find some great and adequate repa-
ration for this agony and loss. Beyond all this, Mr. Barber has
been convicted, and has undergone all the worst part of his
sentence. First, then, a word to the Incorporated Law Society.
No doubt they are a very useful body ; decency would run more
riot than it does without them. But as they stand in the place
of grand jury and public prosecutor, let them see that their own
hands are clean. Investigate to the utmost, but most scrupu-
lously. If Mr. Barber’s statements are true, one very influential
solicitor’s firm at least has been grossly negligent. Mr. Barber’s
honourable restoration can hardly be with the consent of the Bank
of England attorneys. Are they, or are they not, represented or
influential in this Law Society ? If they are, let the Society, for
its own reputation, act with a very careful conscience. And we
would urge upon all who have before known Mr. Barber, their
especial duty, after all the inquiry they can make, if that inquiry
end in his favour, publicly to rally round him. What has hap-
pened in his case may, alas ! not impossibly happen again. All
men have a deep interest in the remedy of injustice, and the more
so, if it is unwittingly inflicted. We call on the gentlemen of
the Literary Society to come forward in this work of charity and
right. Men learn little from ‘ good letters,’ if they are not taught
by them these most imperative and generous duties. We write
all this with the full understanding that Mr. Barber courts in-
quiry. He cannot be both innocent and guilty, and, if innocent,
as we believe him to be, no man ever had so clear a case for
commiseration and manly aid of all his fellow-citizens.”


“ Weekly Dispatch ,” Aug. 1 5th, 1852.
“ Transportation. —Some few years ago, when had men left
the country for their country’s good, they were consigned to the
care of keepers, who compelled them to work like horses, and so
treated them into the bargain, with a cudgel or whip, as to make
them wish that some kind hand would deprive them of existence,
and thereby put an end to their extreme misery. In those days,
transportation was no joke ; but if some people think differently,
we advise them to peruse two articles on the subject, evidently
from the pen of Mr. Barber, the solicitor, who was transported
some few years since, to a penal settlement, for alleged participa-
tion in the great Will Forgeries, but whose entire innocence of
the charge was afterwards established. The articles to which we
allude appear in Dickens’s Household Words (Nos. 123 & 124),
and a more harrowing picture of convict life on board ship and
on land, we never before perused. Mr. Barber says :— ‘ On my
arrival at Norfolk Island, I had the misfortune to be appointed
wardsman. Its duties were to preserve order in a dormitory of
200 criminals, many of whom, as subsequent events showed,
would not scruple to take the life of an individual who, like
myself, was at once their drudge and their overseer. Locked in
with these ruffians, from seven o’clock in the evening until six
o’clock the following morning, my task was then to cleanse and
purify their dormitory for their reception the next night. I con-
tinued at my disgusting employment of wardsman for sixteen
months , only interrupted by the frequent illnesses and returns to
hospital which it produced. It was not until the good chaplain,
who was at my pallet-side every day, believed me to be dying,
that the doctor’s recommendation was partially complied with.
I was removed to the Cascades, a more salubrious part of the
island; though even there I was ordered to perform the very
duties which had so repeatedly brought me to the brink of the
grave. The change of air, however, had a beneficial effect; but
I had no sooner recovered my strength than I was ordered back,
and sent to field-labour in a heavy gang, with a doubly-convicted
felon for my overseer —notorious for his severity, and for the
irritating and frivolous accusations he constantly made against
the twenty-four men committed to his control, either of whom he
N


could, at any moment, get flogged or imprisoned upon his unsup-
ported testimony. Fortunately, I did not incur his displeasure.
Covered with dirt, weakened from insufficient food; sometimes
drenched with rain, at others, standing up to my knees in slush,
and under a broiling sun that made the mud steam around me, I
continued at this horrible labour for three months, when a vacancy
occurred in a writership, which it was found difficult to fill up,
and the commandant was at length compelled to yield to a press-
ing application for my services. I was therefore at length per-
mitted to lay aside the hoe for the pen ; but even in this improved
condition, I had the same rations, and was at the desk from five
in the morning until nine at night; and when my appetite for the
coarse food which I had been able to eat while toiling in the open
air was destroyed by the close sedentary confinement, and my
superintendent asked for me the indulgence of a little milk daily,
in lieu of the salt meat, which I could not eat, it was refused.
We had prisoners from every part of the British dominions, and,
indeed, from almost every part of the world. Besides English,
Irish, Scotch, Frenchmen, Italians, and Germans, there were
Chinamen from Hong Kong, Aborigines from New Holland,
West Indian Blacks, Greeks, Kaffirs, and Malays. Among
these were soldiers, for desertion, idiots, madmen, boys of seven-
teen and old men of eighty. All these were indiscriminately
herded together, without reference to age, crime, nation, or any
other distinction. This, as we have just said, is the picture of
convict life sketched by Mr. Barber.”
“ Jerrold’s Weekly Newspaper ,” 27 th January , 1849.
“‘ It i s necessary to the lawyer’s reputation that the man
should be hanged,’ said Sydney Smith, when urging that counsel
should be allowed to prisoners in criminal cases. A lawyer, he
maintained, would put the case against a prisoner on a capital
charge temperately enough, but he must guard against it being
said, ‘ Silvertongue lost that causethe lawyer’s reputation
demanded that the prisoner should hang. The Bank of England
has also found it necessary that men should be hanged; now that
men should be transported (the law being more humane) —at any


rate, that men charged with offences against their powerful cor-
poration must be convicted , and the character of the Bank to
something like a monetary popedom, a reputation for an infalli-
bility of management, must be upheld.
“The law has done heavy wrong to Mr. William Henry
Barber: the law provides no remedy. In inflicting that wrong
the Bank was an active party—active when punishment was
afoot, passive and easily duped when fraud was transacting—and
the Bank vouchsafes no compensation. There remained only one
course for Mr. Barber—to appeal to the public—and that he has
done, and so effectively, that of his innocence in the matter of the
will forgeries there can be no doubt at all.
“Joshua Fletcher, a retired surgeon of ample means, employed
his leisure in hunting out parties entitled to unclaimed stock or
dividends; in several instances he found the true owners , and
through his agency, for a consideration, property was rightfully
appropriated. Thus Fletcher laboured for fifteen years, Christ-
mas, a Bank clerk, supplying information from the Bank books,
which greatly facilitated Fletcher’s plans. Mr. Barber was his
solicitor for about five years. When, however, Fletcher could
not find a claimant, he created one. Ilis own demeanour was
the same in every case, whether a true thing or an imposture.
He was distant and reserved, kept aloof from active participation,
and seemed anxious only for one thing—in that seeming he was
no hypocrite—to make money. Detection came at last. Stock
and dividends amounting to about £4,600 was paid to Emma
Slack, but Emma was a Mrs. Lydia Sanders, of Bristol, and the
whole thing a cheat and a forgery. For this offence Mr. Barber
was indicted, along with Fletcher and Mrs. Sanders, and con-
victed. It appeared on the trial that Mr. Barber had acted
merely as a solicitor, receiving nothing more than an attorney’s
regular fees, but circumstances seemed so to mix him up with the
matter that we do not blame the jury. They believed he had a
guilty knowledge, at least, of the fraud. Fletcher, we may here
remark, was master of his craft, and evinced it in his selection
of accomplices. Mrs. Sanders, a married woman, dark-haired,
and comparatively young, having played Emma Slack (an elderly
spinster, with light brown ringlets, and the gout in her hands) to
perfection ! Jurymen, and men generally, are apt to reverse the
N 2-


maxim of law—every accused man, with them, is guilty until
proved to be innocent.
“We do not blame the jury. There are circumstances before
which innocence, and ability to defend that innocence, are as
bootless as an attempt to stem the sea with sand. But the autho-
rities —how did they act ? Mr. Barber urgently and repeatedly
demanded a separate trial—it was refused. He offered bail—
bail was refused. Now, when the authorities refused a separate
trial—refused a man the advantage of being at large to prepare
his defence—were they not bound to institute the most rigid
inquiry, to be satisfied that the jury were not deceived in pro-
nouncing Mr. Barber guilty ? Did they institute it ? Hardly,
or Mr. Barber’s innocence must have appeared. If instituted,
there is but one other alternative, the prosecutors (the Bank)
were incompetent to conduct such inquiry (small is their fitness
for office, then!), or too prejudiced, or too improperly interested,
to be impartial. The path was straight before them, but they
stumbled or turned aside ; or was it that the reputation of the
Bank for infallibility of management or certainty of detection
must be preserved ? Mr. Barber must be transported, and
transported he was. The demeanour of Mr. Freshfield, the Bank
solicitor, is represented as uncourteous, ungentlemanly, and—we
are sorry we cannot say, in consequence —unprofessional. Now
a word as to fair play :
“‘ I had not intended upon the present occasion,’ says Mr.
Barber, ‘ to address myself to any of the numerous grounds of
complaint wliieh I have to make of the manner in which the
prosecution was conducted against me, but I have this very day
heard that an eminent barrister recently remarked that a circum-
stance which had much influenced his mind against me was, that
I “advanced the probate duty for an entire stranger.” I never
advanced one farthing of it. It was, as stated in my Memorial,
lent by Fletcher, and paid by a check drawn by him upon the
London and Westminster Bank, which very check was handed
to the proctor, Mr. Wills. That gentleman acquainted Mr.
Freshfield with this fact; nevertheless it was stated to the jury,
and pressed as an argument against me by the prosecution, that
I paid it; and there sat Mr. Freshfield beside the learned counsel,
who had doubtless been instructed to make this statement, and


who urged this argument, the former perfectly well knowing that
it was contrary to truth.’
“ Here is matter suggestive of what ought to be urged and
urged again until a remedy be found —the laxity of lawyer-
morals. Trials on which life, liberty, or property may depend
are often a mere conflict of advocates’ wits—a wordy gladia-
torial contest, its deadliness or agony being for others than the
gladiators.
“ Mr. Barber was transported. The horrors of Norfolk Island,
more than those of Cold Bath Fields, fitted Southey s description
as to the fiend’s chuckle :
* Oh, oh !’ said the devil, * I’ve gained a hint
For improving the prisons of hell.’
The transport was appointed to clean the prisoners wards. lie
slept in a place where were 200 convicts, murderers many oi
them, whom he was expected to keep in order, and play the scul-
lion to. Chaplains applied for his services; officers asked him
as a clerk ; all refused. He was ill (how he survived is a mar-
vel), and the doctor recommended his removal to another part of
the island; the doctor’s recommendation was disregarded. All
this time Fletcher had a comfortable sort of situation as a ‘ medical
dispenser.’ Winterbottom, the Stockport mayor and forger, was a
clerk ; Dalmas, the murderer, was employed in chemical experi-
ments ; but Barber’s treatment, he was told, was in pursuance of
instructions —of instructions —we say instructions.
“ The establishment at Norfolk Island was at last broken up.
Mr. Barber, with 300 other convicts, was removed to Tasman’s
Peninsula. There he received a conditional pardon ; but he was
required to give in his prison clothing, and had none of his own.
His fellow-prisoners, however —how often is there a soul of good
in men as well as things evil! —clubbed for him some motley
attire. He had to walk through the pathless wilds, guided by
sun or stars, from Impression Bay to Hobart Town; thence he
procured a passage to Sydney ; liberal subscriptions—men of all
classes, bishop, clergymen, judges, merchants, lawyers, contri-
buting—were raised in his behalf. From Sydney he reached
Paris, where that acute nobleman, Lord Norman by, examined
his papers and was convinced of his innoceuce. A ‘ free pardon


was the consequence—that is, Mr. Barber was forgiven for
having been improperly condemned and savagely punished ; and
turned into the wide world, without one word of apology or one
mite of compensation, naked and a begger. Even in Mr. Corne-
wall Lewis’s letter announcing the free pardon {free pardon /)
there is a passage which looks marvellously like a plaister for
the sore feelings of the Bank prosecutors :
“ ‘ Sir G. Grey, although he now believes Mr. Barber to have
been free from any guilty participation in the frauds of which he
was made the instrument, thinks that greater prudence and cau-
tion on his part would have exempted him from the suspicion to
which his conduct in the transactions in question naturally ex -
posed him.’
“ All the parties concerned in the fraud, when on board the
hulks, on the voyage out, or at the penal settlement, declared
Mr. Barber’s perfect innocence, Fletcher being a very reluctant
witness, as he considered himself ill-used in not being allowed to
give evidence for the Crown ! Between him and Barber there
was never anything like friendship—nothing more than the
limited intercourse of a rising attorney with a wealthy client.
“We might dilate at much greater length on this subject.
We might ask many questions, such as, Why was Mr. Bircham,
Mr. Barber’s partner, who transacted part of the Slack business,
not prosecuted ? Why were not Bank officials and grave proc-
tors snubbed for being so repeatedly duped by Fletcher ? To
one class we most gladly give unqualified praise—to the Rev.
Mr. Naylor, and the other chaplains whom Mr. Barber met in
his banishment—earnest, laborious, fearless men, an honour to
the Church which ranks them among her ministers.
“We have thus given a plain narrative. Is it wise to allow
such influence, such power, such prestige, to the ‘ bloated and
unwholesome wealth’of a trading corporation? Shall there be
no improvement in the administration of the law ? No compensa-
tion to a ruined man ?—to a man innocent in a hell of the
guilty ? Who shall restore to Mr. Barber the many months so
miserably wasted ? Are we for ever to blink before wealth, and,
like dazzled owls, attempt no progress.”


“ Bell’s Life in London ,” 11 th February , 1849.
“ The public will recollect the celebrated trial of Fletcher and
others, with respect to forging a will, to obtain £3,500, stand-
ing in the Three per Cent. Consols, in the name of Anne Slack.
All the circumstances antecedent to that trial, and flowing from it
afterwards, are clearly narrated in the pamphlet before us, and
any unprejudiced person perusing and digesting them, will
come to the conclusion that one of the parties tried and sen-
tenced to expatriation in a penal settlement—we mean Mr. Bar-
ber, the solicitor—was innocent of the charge, and a victim of
an incorrect verdict and an unjust sentence. This is proved
most satisfactorily by the authenticated statements he has caused
to be laid before the public ; and as all know the spirit by which
the English public is ever actuated, particularly towards persons
that have suffered from legal error or injustice, we feel convinced
that that spirit will now be enlisted in his favour, and that the
result will be the placing of him in the honourable position he
held before he became the dupe of parties so cunning in their de-
signs as to deceive his professional perspicacity. For ourselves,
we have no doubt of Mr. Barber’s innocence, and we think the
public ought to aid him in every way to re-attain that profes-
sional rank and reputation forfeited for so long a time by no cri-
minality on his part. Those in authority, from whose erroneous
judgment he has suffered, ought to be the first to step for-
ward to repair the unintentional injury done to his fortune and
reputation.”
“ The Sunday Times” 28 th January , 1849.
“ We have already, on several occasions, pointed out the fla-
gitious impertinence of the law in affecting to pardon the inno-
cent man whom its own blunders and imperfections had caused
to be confounded with the guilty. But the monstrous injustice
of this practice was never, perhaps, more evident than in the
case of Mr. Barber. Owing to a combination of circumstances,
over which he had no control, a man gets suspected of forging a
will. These suspicions, in the minds of many persons, are mis


taken for proofs. The man is tried, and, suspicions being still
confounded with testimony, is found guilty, and transported for
life. But, though judges and juries are satisfied of his guilt,
many persons not professionally connected with the law are not ;
nay, several lawyers, as the able and excellent Serjeant Wilkins,
still venture to doubt of the justice of his sentence, or, to speak
more plainly, believe it to be altogether unjust.
“ However, the innocent man is, meanwhile, treated as a felon,
locked up with a large section of the general mass of thievery
and dishonesty, put on board a convict-ship, and actually trans-
ported to Norfolk Island. There, his criminality being still
believed by the authorities, he is subjected to the most igno-
minious treatment, is huddled indiscriminately with real felons,
and compelled to perform the degrading tasks imposed on them
by way of punishment. Nevertheless, a suspicion of his innocence
gradually springs up in the minds of several of those around him.
They inquire into the circumstances of his case—the whole truth
flashes upon them—they become convinced that he is the victim
of injustice—and, with a sort of heroic self-devotion, of which
there are numerous examples in English history, they make
great sacrifices, and expose themselves and their families to many
hardships, in order, if possible, to restore the injured man to his
place in society.
“ Their efforts, after the lapse of years, are successful. Mr.
Barber’s innocence is recognised by the proper authorities, and it
is determined that Government, which has wronged and oppressed
him, shall at length make reparation. But what then does Go-
vernment do ? Does it fully admit its own offence against the
eternal laws of justice, and endeavour, by all the means in its
power, to obliterate the consequences of its iniquity ? Does it
make an estimate of Mr. Barber’s losses ? Does it enter into a
proper -consideration of his sufferings ? Does it labour in the
only practicable way to make compensation for the crime of
which it has been guilty, by restoring to him his rank in society,
by rebuilding his shattered fortunes, and by proclaiming at the
same time, to all the world, that it is grieved for its unintentional
committal of wrong, and therefore invites the public to sympa-
thise with the unfortunate sufferer, and assist it in doing away
with the fruits of the law’s defects ?


w Government adopts a very different course of proceeding, for
which the present ministers are no way answerable, it being the
practice established from time immemorial. Out of a sort of
morbid jealousy of the character of the law, and with a view to
create in the minds of men an idea of its infallibility, at the ex-
pense of an individual, it concocts a thing called a conditional
pardon, which permits Mr. Barber to run over the whole surface
of the earth, with the exception of the only point on that surface
which he particularly cares to visit. Being an Englishman, and,
what is more, a cockney, he wishes, very properly and very na-
turally, to replant himself here in the midst of us—cockneys like
himself, and likewise wonderfully attached to this particular spot
of earth. But the law has an objection to this, and says to Mr.
Barber, 4 You may go to Hong-Kong, or Madras, or Venice, but
you must not, positively, come to London. Judges and juries
have mistaken you for a felon, and though the mistake has been
discovered, such is our regard for appearances, that we had much
rather you, an innocent man, should be treated as, at least, semi-
guilty, and be exposed to the penalty of ostracism, than recognise
the fact that you were originally condemned, not only upon in-
sufficient evidence, but against such evidence as might have been
obtained by searching for it.’
« But this does not by any means satisfy Mr. Barber. Being
innocent, he would like the world to look on him as such. His
friends, therefore, go on agitating; government is pestered with
applications, and the admirer of feudal law feels, at length, that
it is time to give in. But, in giving in, the law has still a cun-
ning trick or two, by which to conceal the rents in its garments.
It will not suffer Mr. Barber to be treated as one unjustly con-
demned, but, trembling and shivering for its own character,
consents to cease persecuting him, and grants him a free paidon !
Thus, the law forgives Mr. Barber for having been, during whole
years, the victim of the law’s delinquency ! And this is what we
call civilisation—this is what we especially pride ourselves upon—
this is what we invite the struggling and revolutionising nations
of the earth to imitate ! God forbid that they should accept the
invitation. Their own laws, no doubt, have been more barbarous
than ours; but, while they are in the humour, they had better
get rid of them altogether—abjure the principles of feudalism,


and establish laws in conformity with the spirit of the age. Our
laws and institutions are old-fashioned—adapted to times gone
by—tottering, crumbling, oligarchical. But we shut our eyes to
their deformity, and pronounce them boldly to be the envy of
surrounding nations, the admiration of the world.
“ Meanwhile, Mr. Barber has, by his unjust sentence, been
reduced to ruin. His pamphlet, in which he details his case, may
produce him friends, and, to a certain extent, interest the public
in his behalf; but something more is requisite to reinstate him in
his former position in society. Nor will even that be sufficient.
The public ought to take into consideration the progress he would
have made in his profession during the years of his iniquitous
punishment, and to offer him all the reparation in its power, not
in the spirit of a free pardon, but from the conviction, deep and
honest, that when an innocent man has been treated as a felon,
the whole community to which he belongs is interested in seeing
him righted.
“ Mr. Barber speaks of his intention to publish a book detailing
all the circumstances which attended his voyage to Norfolk Island,
his residence there, his melancholy experience of convict life,
biographies of the principal criminals, and describing the countries
he visited in his return home. A work such as he projects will,
no doubt, be exceedingly valuable, full of interest, and highly
instructive to government and people. But it will not, and
cannot, effect what is wanted—the restoration of Mr. Barber to
his position in society. That ought to be done by a parliamentary
grant, and a distinct act of law ; and the occasion ought to be
seized upon for doing away with the foolish and absurd system of
free pardon. Society should be made answerable for the wrongs
it commits against individuals, otherwise it is impossible to pre-
tend that we are associated together upon principles of justice.
If the powerful may injure the weak with impunity, our system
of civilisation is that of pirates and robbers, who oppress and
pillage all who are weaker than themselves, simply because they
have the power.
“We cannot, without shuddering, reflect on what would have
been the consequence of Mr. Barber’s sentence, had not the bar-
barity of our feudal laws been somewhat mitigated. He would
have been hanged, indubitably, and his blood would therefore


have lain at the door of the law. It may be doubted, however,
whether, in that case, his innocence would ever have appeared.
Men would not have made the same exertions to clear his name
from the foul stain cast upon it, as they have made to deliver his
person from thraldom, and he would probably have been ranked
for ever among criminals, though his case might have excited in
the minds of legal casuists certain doubts or suspicions of inno-
cence. We invite the country to reflect seriously on this subject.
There is not a man in the three kingdoms who is not in his own
person liable to the same misfortune. A chain of circumstances
may be extended around him, calculated to inspire an opinion of
his innocence. He may be apprehended—he may be tried—he
may be found guilty—he may be sentenced to transportation—
and he may die in some penal settlement under the heavy charge
of crime. It is possible, also, that he may be found to have been
unjustly dealt with, but in that case the utmost he can expect, as
the law now stands, is a free pardon for having been the victim
of injustice, the baseness of witnesses, or the blind incapacity of
the law. Nearly all reforms have arisen out of cases of individual
oppression. Let Mr. Barbers be turned to account, and let his
sufferings protect other men from similar inflictions.”
“ Standard of Freedom," 20 th January , 1849.
“ We have seldom perused a more deeply interesting docu-
ment; and we regard it as not only fully establishing Mr. Barber’s
innocence, but as exonerating him from those appearances
OF INDISCRETION AND WANT OF PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT, OF
WHICH SOME, EVEN OF HIS FRIENDS, HAVE BEEN TOO READY
TO ACCUSE HIM.
“ If in this case Mr. Barber became implicated, it will be seen
from his narrative that be had to deal with a subtle, practised,
artful villain, and his equally artful accomplices ; that there was
everything to create confidence in the parties applying to him ;
and that if there was any want of due caution on his part, there
was, at least, an equal want of caution on. the part of the local
registrar, who gave a certificate of the death as having occurred
in his locality, though no such place existed ; on the part of the


proctor, who furnished the probate without due inquiry; on the
part of the Bank authorities, who failed to exercise the usual
skill and caution ; on the part of the broker, who signed the
usual declaration, ‘as a mere matter of formand, finally, on
the part of his own partner, Mr. Bircham, a shrewd and intelli-
gent man, who suspected nothing wrong, and took an active part
in advancing the fictitious claims on the Bank.
“We feel it our imperative duty to assist in vindicating the
character of this deeply injured man. The details of his suffer-
ings, furnished, not by himself merely, but by sympathising ob-
servers, is most heart-rending. To say nothing of the unrelent-
ing persecution with which he was assailed up to the moment of
his conviction, he was sent to Norfolk Island, clothed in felon’s
garb, and notoriously treated with much worse than ordinary felon
treatment; denied the slightest indulgence accorded to others in
his situation ; his papers seized; his life nearly destroyed by a
system of peculiarly horrid barbarity; and his lot cast with the
murderers and other felon monsters of Norfolk Island.
“We commend the case of Mr. Barber to the serious consider-
ation of the legal profession and the public.
“ On this subject we have received the following remarks from
a professional gentleman of eminence in the metropolis, who hap-
pened to be present on the occasion of both trials:—
“ ‘A tardy act of justice has at last been done in the case of
Mr. W. H. Barber, by the grant of a free pardon, not by way of
condonation of any offence committed, but as an acknowledgment
that he was not guilty of the crime alleged against him. Re-
flections which this remarkable circumstance is calculated to
suggest at the present time (when the expediency and legality
of capital punishments are so much questioned), are of a most
depressing character, when we recollect that but a few years
back, Mr. Barber would have been hanged for —doing nothing!
“ ‘The pamphlet which Mr. Barber has just published is
worthy of the perusal of every individual who is not prejudiced
by the result of his trial, and even to this class of persons it
must carry conviction with it. Amongst the members of the
profession to which Mr. Barber belonged, there has ever been a
great difference of opinion as to his conduct in the transaction,


in which the jury considered he took a guilty part; but we ven-
ture to assert that amongst those members of the profession who
allowed themselves calmly and dispassionately to consider the
facts of the case, there was but one opinion,—Mr. Barber was
an innocent man. No one out of the profession can appreciate
the delicate and difficult duties of an attorney, and the rules of
action which guide him in any specific case are most likely to be
misunderstood by persons not acquainted with the routine of the
profession. Had Mr. Barber indeed been tried by his 'peers (i. e.
members of his own profession), we venture to assert there would
have been none of the twelve who would have considered five
minutes before acquitting him of the charge. Every fact proved
against him was consistent with his innocence, and many circum-
stances connected with the case afforded the strongest presump-
tion that he had not even guilty knowledge, much less participa-
tion. Had he really been guilty, he might have shrouded his crime
beyond the possibility of detection.
“ ‘ There is, however, a feeling in the minds of some per-
sons, that, admitting Mr. Barber was innocent, he was not
sufficiently circumspect in his dealings with the really guilty
parties. But we venture to predict that such a notion will be
entirely dissipated on reading his pamphlet, as well as the pro-
ceedings at the trial.
“ ‘ As it is, Mr. Barber has suffered five years of torture, some
period of which was passed in that very worst of penal settle-
ments—Norfolk Island. He has lost property, practice, and
profession, together with the enjoyment of an unimpaired fame;
he has been transported as a convict, and endured the endless,
inconceivable miseries of a convict’s life; and one of the first
Ministers of the Crown is compelled at last to admit him to be
an innocent man. Where is the recompense for him ? "W hat
can restore to him his former position, or who make up for the
loss of years, reputation and affluence ? These reflections are of
a most distressing character, and tend to show most clearly how
fallible is the human mind in its best estate, even when applied
with all its purity of motive, which we believe exists generally
in judges and juries, to the administration of justice. We fer-
vently hope that something will be done by the Government , as


well as the public, to recompense Mr. Barber somewhat in this
matter. Above all, it rests with his brethren in the profession
to lend him a helping hand.
“ ‘We cannot conclude without saying a word or two with
reference to some of the parties who were instrumental in his
conviction. We do not doubt that the jury did their duty to
the best of their ability under the direction of the judge who
presided.
“ ‘ We believe that the counsel for the prosecution did not
strain or press the case harshly against Mr. Barber ; but the
judges who refused him a separate trial—the result of which must
have been his acquittal—are surely by this time convinced that
if a separate trial would have involved double trouble, it would
have been followed by double justice. To the gentlemen who
conducted the prosecution, Messrs. Freshfield, Mr. Barber’s
proved and admitted innocence must, we fain hope, cause the
greatest pain. Without imputing improper motives to gentle-
men of their standing and reputation, we have all along held a
strong opinion not only that they were themselves extremely
negligent in the mode of transacting the business in which the
fraud was committed, but that they treated Mr. Barber in a
spirit savouring of the greatest bitterness and persecution. They,
as attorneys, must have known how liable an attorney is to be
deceived by clients. We should like to know how often they have
found themselves misled by their clients, even after the most
minute probing and examination. It is an oft-told tale, that de-
spite the closest scrutiny of the professional man, he frequently
finds himself deceived by his client, even where the disclosure of
the whole facts of the case will save the client’s money.
“ ‘ How much more likely is he to be deceived when the
direct interest of the client is not to inform, but to withhold
the truth; not to explain, but to deceive; not to treat the attor-
ney fairly, but to trick him ; to make him appear guilty when
innocent!
“ ‘We rejoice that we have ever been amongst those members
of the profession who, from the first, considered Mr. Barber not
guilty. Much more do we rejoice that he is now admitted to be
so, and we earnestly commend his pamphlet to the attentive
perusal of our readers, for there they will see innocence


punished, the most dignified endurance and forbearance under
the greatest trials, and at the same time a clear exculpation of
the accused. The last shadow op doubt as to Mr. Bar-
ber’s WANT OP CAUTION IN THE MATTER HAS CEASED TO FLIT
ACROSS OUR MINDS.’ ”
“ The Weekly Times" 2nd December, 1848.
“ A free pardon ! For what ? Pardon is for the guilty. It
seems that Barber is innocent. Instead of being forgiven, he has
very much to forgive. He is the wronged, the injured party.
What reparation will society make him for his dreadful suffer-
ings? Years of enforced exile as a convict, —association with
the scum of society, who have been transported for their crimes :
character ruined —the finger of scorn pointed at him—a brand
upon his name—the long agony of mind during his absence from
this country —and the wreck and ruin of his property and pros-
pects by the breaking-up of his lucrative and extensive profes-
sional business. A 4 free pardon,’ indeed!
“ We remember, when Mr. Serjeant Wilkins was defending
Barber, that he confidently anticipated that, some time or other,
truth would prevail. The anticipation has been fulfilled. But
what argument have we in this case for a Court of Appeal in
criminal cases ? Ten years ago, before Lord Denman’s Act altered
the law, Barber would have been hanged if convicted of the
forgery with which he was charged. Thank God, that great crime
has been avoided ; it would have been murder by the law.
Barber’s life was saved. But what will be reparation for the
wrongs which have been done him ? Money can scarcely re-
pair the wrong, but Government should do something for him.
This is clearly a case which public opinion ought to manifest itself
upon.”
“ The Weekly Times" 2 5th February , 1849.
“ The attention of the reader is earnestly invited by Mr. Bar-
ber to this explanation of his case, in which he gives all the
material features ; the documents submitted to the Home Secre


tary; the cruelties to which he was exposed during his residence
in Norfolk Island ; the curious incidents and passages in his
extraordinary history; and the diligence and perseverance with
which he persisted in maintaining his innocence, until he esta-
blished it even to the unwilling minds of‘the powers that be’
and procured his pardon. We who have listened to Mr. Barber,
and perused the entire pamphlet with patience and candour,
entreat our readers, injustice to him, also to do the same. For
ourselves, we have already pronounced Mr. Barber ‘ not only
guiltless, BUT blameless.’ His story is worth reading, as one
of the most singular events and unparalleled misfortunes.”
“ Liverpool Chronicle ,” 10 th February , 1840.
“ Our readers cannot have forgotten how often, from the very
day of his trial and unjust conviction, we have returned, again
and again, to the charge in behalf of that cruelly-used gentleman,
Mr. Barber, the solicitor. At first we were almost alone in the
good work. But magna est veritas , et prcevalebit. Our convic-
tions gradually became admitted in high quarters. Inquiries
were made. His case was thoroughly sifted, and the end has
been, that he has been allowed to return home, and is now in
London, restored to freedom, given back to his friends, and with
a character untarnished and unblemished by the more than fiery
ordeal through which he has been made to pass. We were de-
lighted with an article which appeared, in connection with the
case of this gentleman, in the columns of the John Bull of last
week.
* * * *
“ With every word, every syllable, there written, we most
sincerely and cordially agree. That Mr. Barber was as innocent
of the offence imputed to him as the jury who convicted him and
the judge who sentenced him, we never doubted, and never hesi-
tated to affirm, from the first moment when we read the evidence
adduced against him. And now this is universally acknowledged.
But society surely owes its victim some compensation more sub-
stantial than a mere confession that it has been in error. What
is to be done for him ? ”


From “ The Cheltenham Journal.”
Ill’s case is one of the most heart-rending description, and we
sincerely hope Mr. Barber will meet with the commiseration of
the profession and the public at large.”
“ Nottingham Mercury.”
“ The substance of this pamphlet consists of a deeply interesting
recital of the circumstances attending the conviction of the author,
a respectable London attorney, for forgery, in the generally well-
known case of Anne Slack. It is altogether a romance of real
life; in many parts deeply affecting, in others. highly interesting
from the strange combinations of circumstances; as a whole,
almost without parallel, as a chapter of human life.”
From Hepicorth Dixons “ London Prisons."
“William Henry Barber (transported April, 1844), Georgiana
Dorey (imprisoned April, 1844), for the forging of several wills.
After passing four years in the penal colony, Mr. Barber was
pardoned, his innocence being fully established. He is now in
England, and has published an interesting statement of his case.
Fifteen years earlier he would have been hanged for the same
offence. The reparation for unjust sufferings is even now
unworthy of the nation; then, there could have been no repara-
tion at all, so far as the innocent man was himself concerned.”—
Newgate, p. 219.
“ Lancaster Gazette.”
“ It will be remembered that Mr. Barber is an attorney, and
that he was convicted of a participation in a will-forgery case,
and transported for his supposed offence in 1844 : his innocence
having been established to the satisfaction of Sir George Grey,
he last year received a free pardon, and is now seeking re-
O


admission to liis profession. The pamphlet before us is very
temperately written, and it is impossible to rise from its perusal
without a conviction that Mr. Barber is a much-injured man;
nor can we avoid the reflection that there may be unhappy beings
in our penal settlements at this moment innocently suffering for
the crimes of others, and that every hinderance is thrown in the
way of making their innocence apparent! This is a feature of
the transaction which, in our opinion, reflects indelible disgrace
on all concerned in it. Mr. Barber, in 1845, wrote nine long
letters to influential persons in England, explanatory of his
case, and imploring their attention ; these letters, instead of being
sent as addressed, were handed over to his prosecutors, and sup-
pressed ! The Rev. Mr. Naylor, chaplain of Norfolk Island,
wrote a letter in 1845 to Sir Robert Peel, in which these striking
words are to be found (see page 71).
“ This letter was suppressed ! It was found by Mr. Barber
in the office of the Comptroller-General of Convicts at Hobart
Town, nineteen months after it had been sent from Norfolk
Island. Is it too much to say that those who so cruelly acted to-
wards an innocent man are unworthy to hold office for another
hour under her Majesty ?
“ The pamphlet is exceedingly interesting, and will engender on
the part of the public a warmth of sympathy which may in some
degree make up to Mr. Barber the unmerited suffering and degra-
dation he has undergone.”
“ The Exeter Times.”
“ If, as the Home Secretary thinks, Mr. Barber was merely
imprudent, he has paid a terrible price for it, and is entitled in
justice to compensation, and to an honourable restitution of his
character We do not pronounce on the question of fact, but it is
the duty of Government to do one thing or other—either to
continue his punishment, or to restore him to character and for-
tune. Whether he be innocent or not, justice has not been done,
and can never be done by half measures.”


“ Wakefield Journal.”
“ This pamphlet would certainly confirm the opinion we have
always held, that this gentleman was innocent of the grave crime
with which he was charged and convicted. The free pardon
granted by Government confirms that opinion. It appears he
was most harshly treated while submitting to the sentence of the
court.”
“ Plymouth Herald .”
“We do not hesitate to say that it is our opinion that Mr.
Barber has made out his case, and the result of his returning a
free person is a proof that the Government authorities must
have been similarly satisfied. The pamphlet contains matter of
much interest, and will well repay a perusal. His description of
Norfolk Island, and the ill usage to which he was subject, form a
principal feature in the work.
“ Mr. Barber’s case is one of great hardship, and wo feel he
will have the sympathy of his countrymen.”
“ The Hampshire Advertiser.”
“ This is indeed a narrative of fearful interest. From its
perusal the reader will be perfectly convinced of Mr. Barber’s
innocence of any guilty knowledge of Fletcher’s criminality in
the celebrated will-forgery case of Emma Slack. When trans-
ported, though Fletcher had declared Barber’s ignorance of the
frauds and personations concocted by him, and though the chap-
lains and other persons were convinced of his innocence, he was
treated with the most terrific and horrible barbarity, and though
bearing his frightful sufferings with meekness, he was condemned
to the most loathsome employments, the heaviest drudgery, and
made the very cleanser of the wards occupied by wretches who
had been guilty of every sort of violence and crime; while the
arch-fiend who had worked his ruin—Fletcher—was treated
with every indulgence, and freedom from labour! His letters
o 2


and memorials were unheeded, or not allowed to leave the colony,
and it was at last only by the kind exertions of the chaplain,
whose lady came to England on purpose to deposit his case in the
hands of the Home Secretary, that his innocence was established
and his pardon (!) obtained.”
“Stockport Advertiser"
“ Such is the name of a thick pamphlet forwarded to us. It
has been prepared for the purposes of justifying the opinion en-
tertained by the public that the free pardon by the Government
of Mr. Barber, in the celebrated forgery case, was only an act of
justice towards an innocent gentleman ; and as far as the state-
ments go, the case has been fully made out. By the bye, his
sufferings and punishments in Norfolk Island appear not only to
have been unjust, but even harsh and excessive.”
“ Somerset Herald
“ Every page is replete with interest.”
“ Blackburn Standard."
“ The whole history of this case is a romance of life; and
the spirit in which the extraordinary wrongs inflicted on Mr.
Barber have been endured, speak strongly for the mingled for-
titude and benevolence of that gentleman’s disposition. Will
it ever cross the mind of Sir George Grey, that something more
than a ‘ free pardon’ of perfect innocence is required?”
“ Leeds Mercury .”
“ This case, which has excited so much discussion, is now, we
think, set at rest, by an able argumentative pamphlet by Sir
George Stephen, proving beyond all question, the entire innocence


of the gentleman accused. The facts are so numerous and intri-
cate, that to give an abstract of the work is almost impossible in
our space; yet some explanation of the leading circumstances
may show our readers, if they have not already seen the pam-
phlet, how slight were the grounds on which Mr. Barber was
convicted, how clear is the demonstration of his innocence, and
how great, therefore, is the injustice he has suffered.”
Note. —The foregoing are not selections of favourable articles or passages,
excluding adverse remarks. The public opinion upon my case, as expressed
through the ordinary channels, has been, as far as I know, quite unani-
mous, since the facts which have come to light subsequent to my trial have
been published.




PART II.
APPLICATION FOR MY CERTIFICATE.
I have already (at page 40) explained the circumstances
under which it became necessary for me to apply to the
Court of Queen’s Bench for permission to take out my
annual certificate to practise as an attorney. After a
previous term’s notice, my application was made on the
31st January, 1849, and to the surprise of my counsel and
all my legal friends, it was opposed by the Incorporated
Law Society. A reference was directed to a Master of the
Court, to inquire into the circumstances under which I had
discontinued practice; so long a time was occupied in the
fruitless investigation of charges of alleged malpractice,
afterwards declared unfounded, that it was not until Janu-
ary, 1850, that the case was argued before the Court, when,
on a technical objection, the whole of the exculpatory
evidence transpired since the trial, was excluded from the
consideration of the judges. In May, 1850, the argument
was resumed; and on the 6th of July following, more than
a year and a half after my notice of application, judgment
was given. My certificate was refused on the ground of
my supposed “complicity” with Fletcher in the will
frauds, from which I had been in express terms wholly
absolved by my prosecutors, her Majesty’s government.
The adverse view of the Court was, in my belief, mainly
attributable to the exclusion of the important evidence


objected to upon technical grounds by my opponents. The
course pursued by the Society in the conduct of the
reference to the Master, and my explanations of some
of the principal points of misconception in the judgment,
are stated in the following letter, which was published in
the Daily News and some other of the principal newspapers
immediately after the delivery of the judgment. Not one
of the statements therein advanced or of the explanations
given, have, to my knowledge, been denied or controverted
by my opponents :
To the Editor of the “ Daily News.”*
Sir, —The great ability and earnestness with which you have
advocated my cause induce me to hope you will oblige me by the
insertion of this letter.
The judgment of the Court of Queen’s Bench, delivered on
Saturday last, was, I doubt not, the result of much consideration;
and I sincerely believe that their lordships had no other desire
than to do perfect justice between me and my opponents. I say
between me and my opponents , because I have every reason to
think that the public, with the exception of a very small mino-
rity indeed, desires that I may, afe far as possible, be replaced in
the position from which my prosecutors, her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, have admitted I was undeservedly torn.
But with every desire to do justice, the Court has, I must take
the liberty to say, participated in that misapprehension and over-
sight which have been betrayed by almost every person who has
been jirofessioually occupied in the transaction as well as in the
investigation of this business, but from which oversights I have
been the only sufferer.
I cannot hope to be allowed space to point out all that lam
prepared to prove is wholly fallacious in their lordships’ judg-
ment, but I entreat that I may be permitted to quote one very
striking example:—
In Hunt’s case, the Court remarked that the dividends had not
been received for twenty-three years prior to the date of the will,
and that this was a circumstance so striking that it ought to have
* Published 17th July, 1850.


attracted my attention, and that I ought to have made inquiries
upon it. Doubtless, the non-receipt of the dividends for twenty-
three years previously to the date of the forged will was a fact
as striking and important as the judges assert it to be ; but their
lordships have assumed as a truth that which was totally without
foundation. They assume that I was aware of the fact: but it
was one of which I was totally ignorant , and without the
means of knowledge. The Bank, however, did know, but
they made no inquiry whatever. The fictitious will was dated
14th December, 1829, and the deceased was represented to have
died in the same month. All the dividends that were claimed or
received by the executor were from the date of the forged will,
although the judges have erroneously assumed that the whole
thirty-five years’ were obtained. Believing my client’s case to be
genuine, there could be no reason upon earth why I should have
applied for and received only £4OO for dividends when upwards
of £ 1,200 were actually due ; and upon the assumption of a dif-
ferent belief, such a course would have been perfectly suicidal,
since nothing could have been more calculated to attract atten-
tion and provoke inquiry, than to present a claim so widely at
variance with the account in the Bank books. Of course, the
Bank must have seen, by the first glance at their books, that the
dividends had ceased to be received since 1806; but they paid
the twelve years’ demanded, and retained the twenty-three years’,
without the slightest question or observation. The first time I
ever heard of the true date of the deceased’s death (i. e. in 1806)
was at the Mansion- House after my apprehension , when the real
executor of the deceased Mary Hunt there gave his evidence. It
is obvious that if the Bank, the special guardians of this pro-
perty, had done their duty, the fraud in Hunt’s case, and conse-
quently in Slack’s, which followed, must have been prevented ;
for it is utterly impossible for them not to have been struck with
so startling a fact as the applicant only demanding the dividends
from 1829, when they had actually accrued since 1806. The
judges, as it appears to me, have laid greater stress upon my sup-
posed knowledge of the actual time when these dividends ceased
to be received, than on any other point in the whole case; for
Mr. Justice Patteson read that part of the judgment with
marked emphasis, and it was dwelt upon even to repetition ;


and it is manifest that this mistake materially influenced the
decision.
It was most unfortunate that their lordships did not, in the
course of the four days' argument, or at some time previously
to drawing up their judgment, call the attention of my counsel
to these and similar points which have influenced their decision,
as the misapprehension, of which I am now suffering the grievous
consequences, would have been thereby prevented.
Upon the effect of the pardon the Court observed : “ A person
so pardoned is released from all consequences of the conviction.
The applicant must, therefore, be treated as if he had not been
convicted , otherwise the Court would act contrary to the autho-
rities, and would question the propriety of the exercise of the
Crown’s prerogative.” But I respectfully ask, is not the Court
acting in violation of the principles they themselves have thus
recognised ? Does not their decision, in effect, question, and to
a certain extent neutralize, the exercise of the Crown’s prero-
gative ? Are they not continuing to inflict upon me the conse-
quences of the conviction ? "What else has occasioned the pain-
ful struggle of the last eighteen months ? What else has im-
peded the enjoyment of my professional rights ? But for that
conviction I should have renewed my certificate in November,
1843, as a matter of course; and, indeed, if the pardon had
been granted in that year, I should have had a right to my
certificate, as in former years, without the necessity of any ap-
plication to the Court whatever.
The Court admits there is no reason to suppose that I derived
anything from these transactions beyond my proper professional
fees; yet entertains the idea that I may have, for so paltry a
consideration, knowingly jeopardized all that was dear to me on
earth !
The jury by which I was convicted, having noticed the argu-
ment upon the rule in Hilary Term last, had several conferences
on my case, which resulted in a declaration, on the part of eight
out of ten, who were alive and accessible, that they considered
my conviction attributable to my having been denied a separate
trial , and that they would undoubtedly have acquitted me upon
the facts which have since come to light.
This declaration not having been received until after the argu


rnents had been commenced, my counsel considered it could not
be added to the evidence laid before their lordships.
The main cause of the decision of Saturday was the unfair
course pursued by my powerful, and, I must add, unscrupulous
opponents. Pretending to desire only that the real facts should
be before the Court, they have done everything in their power
to exclude important evidence, and even to mislead the Court by
direct mis-statements.
At one of the earliest meetings before the master, they ex-
pressly disavowed any imputation of guilt , proposing to in-
quire into my supposed culpability for negligence, to which the
master replied :—“ No, it cannot be expected that I should be
called upon to try a question of felony." In the whole course of
the inquiry before him, extending over several months, the above
disclaimer was never withdrawn. My answer was, therefore,
prepared to explain the points of supposed negligence only ; yet,
notwithstanding this, when the case came on for argument, they
suddenly turned round, and called upon me to justify the deci-
sion of the Government in my favour, although they did not
pretend that they had succeeded in bringing forward one tittle
of new evidence to disparage such decision.
Soon after the inquiry commenced, Mr. Maugham applied to
see the originals of the documents which had been laid before
Sir George Grey, and which are published in my pamphlet ;
these were accordingly produced to him, when, having compared
them, with minute and careful attention, he said he was satisfied
of their authenticity, and that he was acquainted with the sig-
natures of many of them. At the next meeting before the mas-
ter, he handed in one of my pamphlets, marking the copies
which he had examined, and striking out the merely narrative
portions, which latter the master, he said, could not receive as
evidence ; but it was distinctly understood that the documents
themselves, of the genuineness of which he had satisfied him-
self, were admitted; and it was quite clear that this was the
understanding of the master, for he has more than once referred
to them in his report. In the face of this, my opponents, when
the case came on for argument, took a technical objection
(although it had been distinctly agreed that no technical objec-
tion should be taken on either side), to the reading of the above-


mentioned documents, and I was thereby shut out from a mate-
rial branch of evidence, not merely as to my conduct in circum-
stances of great trial, but as to the important facts of the case,
especially as to the credit and weight to which Fletcher’s confes-
sions were entitled.
To enable the Society to get up their charges against me with
every possible effect, they applied to the Treasury for all the
papers connected with the original prosecution; which applica-
tion I did not oppose. The papers were accordingly handed to
the master by a clerk from Mr. Freshfield’s office, when Mr.
Maugham proposed that, for the convenience of the Society, they
should be intrusted to him, and kept at their hall, where, he said,
Mr. Stevenson or myself could at all times have access to them.
To this arrangement Mr. Stevenson assented. At the end of
about a month, Mr. Maugham having intimated that the charge
of the Society was completed, Mr. Stevenson and I applied to
inspect the documents, to enable me to prepare my answer, when,
to our astonishment, Mr. Maugham said he was instructed to
ref use any inspection! The indignation of Mr. Stevenson may
be imagined, and he did not hesitate to point out to Mr.
Maugham, both personally and by letter, and to protest against
the clear breach of faith of which the Society had been guilty;
but they persisted in shutting me out from this inspection, and I
was compelled to complete my answer from the very slender
materials in my possession, nearly all my books and papers being
scattered and lost, a very small portion of them only having
been found in a hatter’s shop in New Bond-street, which had
been purchased with office furniture at an auction sale after my
trial. The Society picked and culled from a voluminous statement
of the whole of the forgery cases, which had doubtless been, in
great part, compiled from the books and papers taken from me
by the prosecution, and which I have never seen since they left
my office; and they well knew that the only means by which I
could fully answer such queries would be supplied by the papers
to which they denied me access. My opponents not only sought
by every artifice which their counsel could devise to shut out all
the material evidence in my favour, but they went the length of
stating to the Court that which cannot otherwise be designated


than as a deliberate untruth, as will he clearly seen by the fol-
lowing correspondence:—
“1, Victoria-street , Holborn-bridge , March 8, 1850.
“ Sir,— l take the liberty of recalling your attention to the fact,
that I had the honour to receive a letter dated the 10th of No-
vember, 1848, written by Mr. G. Cornewall Lewis, under your
authority and direction, enclosing her Most Gracious Majesty’s
free pardon for Mr. William Henry Barber, upon a full and
anxious consideration of all the documents in your possession. In
the Hilary Term following (1849), an application was made on
behalf of Mr. Barber to the Court of Queen’s Bench for the usual
rule to enable him to obtain his certificate, so as to resume the
practice of his profession of an attorney ; which application was
opposed by the Incorporated Law Society, who have endeavoured
to impugn the decision of her Majesty’s Government. I have
great satisfaction, however, in stating that after a most tedious, and,
to Mr. Barber, most harassing investigation, already occupying
upwards of thirteen months, not a tittle of evidence has been
produced which tends to weaken his case.
“In the course of the recent argument before the Court,
it was stated by Sir Frederick Thesiger, that ‘ Inquiry had
been anxiously made as to what had become of the supposed
confessions of Joshua Fletcher and William Sanders , made in
the year 1844; what was done with them , how they were pro-
cured, aud how they were used, and no satisfactory ansicer has
been given! This statement I heard with inexpressible surprise,
because so long ago as the 19th February, 1849, I produced to
Mr. Maugham, the secretary of the Incorporated Law Society, for
his examination, the originals of the various documents set out in
Mr. Barber’s pamphlet, excepting those which had been for-
warded to her Majesty’s Government: and with regard to the
original confessions of Fletcher and Sanders, I referred Mr.
Maugham to the Home-office ; where I acquainted him they had
been deposited immediately after they had been made ; and not
the slightest additional inquiry has ever been made of Mr. Bar-
ber or myself respecting them. As the solicitor to the Treasury,
doubtless under the authority of her Majesty’s Government, has


afforded the Incorporated Law Society all possible facilities for
obtaining the fullest information upon Mr. Barber’s case, by an
inspection of the various books and papers connected with the
original prosecutions, I cannot doubt that if application bad been
made to you on behalf of the Incorporated Law Society for that
purpose, the original confessions (the very existence of
WniCH IS NOW FOR THE FIRST TIME DISPUTED) Would have
been also produced for their examination.
“In the inquiry before the master no doubt as to the exis-
tence or genuine character of these confessions was ever for one
moment expressed; and I confess I heard them alluded to as
‘ supposed ' with something more than astonishment.
“ I shall feel, Sir, extremely obliged if you will direct inquiry
to be made, whether the original confessions of Fletcher and
Sanders, dated respectively the 28th of June, the 4th of July,
and the 9th of July, 1844, are still in the custody of the Home
Department, and whether any application has at any time been
made for their production or examination, or otherwise respecting
them, on behalf of the Incorporated Law Society, and, if so, with
what result.
“ Entreating the favour of your early attention.—l have the
honour to be, Sir, your very obedient servant,
“ A. Stevenson.”
“ The Right Hon. Sir George Grey, Bart., M.P.”
“ Whitehall , March 21, 1850.
“ Sir, —I am directed by Secretary Sir George Grey to
acquaint you, in reply to your letters of the Bth and 20th instant,
that the confessions of Fletcher, in reference to Mr. Barber, are
still at the Home-office, and probably that of Sanders also,
though the latter has been mislaid, and cannot for the moment be
found. No application has been made by the Incorporated Law
Society with reference to these documents. I am, Sir, your
obedient servant,
“ H. Waddington.”
“A. Stevenson, Esq., Victoria-street , Holborn-bridge.”
I leave your readers to say whether such conduct indicates a
desire to promote the honour of the profession, or a determina


tion to crush a particular member of it. Look, Sir, at the posi-
tion of my case. I was convicted upon circumstances of unex-
plained suspicion, because I was denied the means of explaining
them—a separate trial. I have suffered four years of misery,
exceeding, I verily believe, that which has fallen to the lot of
even the guiltiest man living, much more of any innocent one.
All the confederates in the fraud have separately, and at different
times, declared my innocence. Investigations were instituted at
Norfolk Island, at Hobart Town, at Sydney, at Madras, and at
Paris, by the most eminent men, legal and otherwise, and all of
which resulted in my complete vindication. Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment, after two successive and patient investigations, issued
a free pardon, accompanied by an acknowledgment of my perfect
innocence, and all this has been confirmed by the declaration of
the jury who convicted me; and yet lam denied the poor privi-
lege of once more resuming my profession, having been stripped
of a valuable practice, and of almost everything that could
render life an enjoyment.
The decision of the Court has bitterly aggravated my injuries,
and has cast a weight of suffering and difficulty upon me, which
nothing but the consciousness of a righteous cause, and a perfect
confidence in its ultimate success, could enable me to sustain.
My certificate is my just right; and as it involves a question
of character, not of money merely, my struggle for it shall never
cease but with my life.
Apologising for unavoidably trespassing upon your columns at
so much length, I have the honour to be, Sir, your very obedient
servant,
W. Henry Barber.
9, Howard-street, Norfolk-street, Strand , 9 th July , 1850.
The above letter appeared in several other newspapers,
and the substance of it was reprinted in the Law Magazine
of November, 1850.


MEETING OE BARRISTERS AND SOLICITORS
At Liverpool , convened by public Advertisement.
At a public meeting of the solicitors of Liverpool, held at the
Clarendon Rooms, and very numerously attended, on the 26tli
day of November, 1850, Sir George Stephen in the chair, the
following resolutions were passed unanimously:—
First—Moved by J. B. Aspinall, Esq., Barrister-at-Law,
and Seconded by David Evans, Esq., solicitor to tbe Liver-
pool Guardian Society for the Protection of Trade,
“ That this meeting is of opinion that the innocence of Mr.
W. H. Barber, of the offences with which he was charged, and
on one of which he was convicted, in 1844, has been clearly
established, not simply by the pardon which he has received from
the Crown, but by the evidence which has been before the public
since his conviction.
“ That, independently of the restoration of character and civil
rights effected by the Royal pardon, the conclusive nature of this
evidence ought to have secured to him the sympathy and confi-
fidence of the profession; and it is greatly to be regretted that
any attempt should have been made to impede his full reinstate-
ment in his position as a solicitor.”
4
Second—Moved by J. C. Grocott, Esq., Seconded by
Edward Bretherton, Esq.,
“ That, while it is not within the province of this meeting to
consider the compensation to which he is entitled for the injury
he has sustained, it is the unquestionable duty of his professional
brethren to protest against the doctrine that solicitor's are to be
suspected of complicity with the offences of their clients, without
evidence of guilty knowledge, and only because they may happen
to be professionally employed.”
Third—Moved by John Yates, jun. Esq., and Seconded
by H. Alexander, Esq.,
“ That the chairman be requested to communicate to Mr. Bar-
ber the earnest hope of this meeting that he may experience no


further difficulty in obtaining his certificate, and such redress for
his unmerited sufferings as may be deemed just.
“ That these resolutions be published in the London daily
journals, and a copy of them transmitted to the Incorporated Law-
Society.”
(Signed) George Stephen.
A vote of thanks was then moved to the Chair, and carried
with acclamation.
“ A very numerous and enthusiastic meeting of the attorneys of
Liverpool has pronounced an emphatic opinion upon the injustice
of the treatment which Mr. Barber has received, and in their
resolutions they express that which we believe to be the general
feeling of the profession upon the unparalleled persecution to
which he has been subjected, and the extraordinary judgment
of the Court of Queen’s Bench.
“We are privately assured, by the chairman, that the meeting
was most influential, comprising more than sixty of the attorneys
of the town—the largest number ever brought together there by
any subject of professional interest.” —Law Times , November 30.
“ I have read again and again the statement and the papers
of Mr. Barber; I have noted, and underlined, and fully weighed
every syllable of it; I have examined and cross-examined him
upon the whole case; I spent last night in twice perusing the
judgment of their lordships; I am faint with my exertions in
endeavouring to discover any substantial ground upon which
that judgment proceeds, or any real distinction that can be
made between the manner in which Mr. Barber performed his
professional duty and that in which, under the same circum-
stances, I should have performed mine. After twenty-five
years’ experience as a solicitor, I can see nothing in the case
to take it out of the strict line of professional duty, and therefore
I arrive at the conclusion, that, if those facts were sufficient
to implicate Mr. Barber, they would have been sufficient to impli-
cate myself or you.” (Loud cheers.) —Extract from the Speech
of Sir George Stephen .
P


THE JUDGMENT REVIEWED
BY THE LEGAL AND PUBLIC JOURNALS.
“ The Law Times ,” August 3, 1850.
“The judges have refused Mr. Barber’s application to be re-
admitted as an attorney.
“ Has good reason been shown for this decision ? Let us see.
“ When, on a former occasion, we commented upon the oppo-
sition offered to him by the Law Institution, we remarked,
that there were two grounds of opposition—one fair, the other
unfair and unjust. It was asserted, first, that he was, in fact,
guilty of the charge for which he had received that mockery of
justice which is called a pardon ; secondly, that he had been
guilty of other improper practices in his profession.
“We asserted that the first ground was utterly untenable.
That the Government having, after due investigation, declared
him to be innocent, he had a right to be treated as such, and that
to re-assert his guilt now was to put him again upon his trial.
“ As to the second ground of opposition, we admitted that it
was perfectly permissible, and that, if proved, the Court would
and ought to refuse the application.
“ It seemed to us that these were the only issues to be tried.
We were satisfied that the Court would scout the first, and we
felt that the Law Institution should never have put it forward.
The other was simply a question of fact, to be proved.
“To our astonishment, the judges have taken a third view of
the case, and on that they have based their decision.
“ They did repudiate the first objection, with something like
indignation, and repeated the assertion, that having been pro-
nounced innocent of the crime by the highest authority in the
realm, all Courts and persons were bound to treat him as such.
“ They also acquitted him of all the charges of mal-practice
which the Law Institution had, with unusual zeal, accumulated
against him. These were found to be no better than libels.
“ So, the two grounds of objection put forth by the Law Insti-
tution were negatived. Nevertheless, the Court refused to
re-admit Mr. Barber upon the rolls. Pronouncing him to be


not guilty of the crime for which he was wrongly condemned, —
not guilty of other malpractices in his profession, they yet
refused his application.
“ Wherefore so ?
“It was decided that he had been incautious in his dealings
with the criminals. ~ He ought to have discovered Fletcher s
design; he was bound to have seen a felonious look in his face ;
he was too confiding.
“ This decision, therefore, introduces quite a new element into
the qualification of an attorney. The Court says that he must
be suspicious of his clients ; that he must not be too confident in
the honest intentions of those with whom he is dealing. Hence-
forth it is to be a ground of exclusion from the profession that a
man is unsuspicious and not wide enough awake! We recom-
mend our readers carefully to note this in the proper page in
Pulling’s Law of Attorneys let the articled clerk be careful
to make a study of the art of suspecting his clients, and the
wealthier and more respectable their apparent station, to keep
the sharper eye upon them, lest they be felons in disguise. The
examination papers also should contain a new set of questions,
directed to the ascertaining of these now essential qualifications
for the roll. Such, for instance, as—
“ Decribe a felonious look.
“ State the degrees of suspicion with which you should treat
your clients, according to their wealth and position in the world.
“ In what manner would you proceed to ascertain whether
the documents you draw for your clients are intended to be used
honestly ?
“ Show, by instances, what amount of incautiousness in believ-
ing your client’s assertions, and unsuspiciousness of their being
felons, will disqualify you from being an attorney.
“ This may appear ridiculous, but it is true: Mr. Barber has
been refused re-admission because, when he was in practice, he
did not suspect his clients, of respectable position in the world,
of being felons. The judges say he ought to have suspected. But
they say, also, with the same breath, that this is the only fault
they have to find with him. He was not criminal, he was not
guilty of misconduct ; he was only incautious and too confiding.
Granting that he was so, are these faults for which a man is to be
p 2


consigned to beggary—to be deprived of bis subsistence ? They
are certainly rare faults in the profession, who are usually
accused of leaning rather too much to the virtues of suspicious-
ness and sharpness; they are, at least, faults which age and
experience cure. We trust, therefore, that the question, being
reduced to this one issue , and that quite a new one, raised
by the Court itself, and which Mr. Barber was given no oppor-
tunity of answering, he will have the bare justice done to him
of a rehearing , and that a decision founded on reasons so unten-
able will be reconsidered and reversed. A very little reflection
will suffice to show their weakness.”
The Law Magazine of November, 1850, thus concludes
an elaborate analysis and masterly exposition of the
judgment:—
“We have striven hard after the truth, and in doing so, we
have borne in mind what both our books and our experience have
alike taught us, viz. that not the worst evidence for or against
any man is his own life. We have, therefore, not forgotten this
unfortunate man’s seventeen years’ character with Messrs.
Scoones, of Tonbridge ; his steady toil when he started for him-
self ; his partner’s published testimony as to his honour and in-
tegrity; his fortitude under almost unexampled misery and
oppression ; his constant avoidance of Fletcher at all times on
the voyage out, and at Norfolk Island, and under circumstances
which precluded disguise. These are all testimonies in favour of
Barber. ‘ Nemo repente fuit turpissimus ,’ said a bitter satirist,
who was no mean judge of human nature. Habits of patient
toil, of moderate desires, and of intellectual recreation, are not
often, still less suddenly, broken through for a career of gra-
tuitous crime. Still less frequently do we see guilty men striving
against the truth, after it has received the final sanction of ver-
dict and judgment, and therefore we have been not a little inter-
ested at Barber’s wonderful perseverance and unflagging confi-
dence in his own case. When from his sick bed at the hospital
of Norfolk Island he wrote his simple and pathetic narrative of
wrong and suffering; when he grew faint with hard toil under a


tropical sun ; when he paced through those dismal nights in the
dormitory of some 200 poor wretches fallen to a vileness at which
the heart sickens; still his mind seems to have been sustained by
the one thought of the liberty to come. How like truth seems
this falsehood, if falsehood it be ! He is either an innocent man,
or he is at once the most brazen-hrowed, and the most stupid
villain, that ever hoped, or expected, to deceive the press and
the judges of England.”
From the “ Morning Advertiser ,” \%th July, 1850.
“We received, eight or ten days ago, a letter from Mr. W. H.
Barber, in reference to the decision in his case in the Court of
Queen’s Bench. A press of matter of urgent importance is the
only reason why this communication has not been inserted. It
is a very able document, and details with an affecting fidelity
the continued injustice, and even absolute inhumanity, of which
that gentleman has been the victim, ever since the moment
he was arraigned at the Mansion House in consequence of his
connection with Fletcher. But the decision of the Court of
Queen’s Bench, which prevents his restoration to the professional
position which he originally occupied, must be felt by him to be
the heaviest blow which has yet descended on his devoted head ;
for he, like everybody else, must have entertained the notion that
the prejudices and misinformation which prevailed in other
quarters, could have no place on the judicial seat. Of course,
we do not say they had; but this we will say, that the country
was perfectly astounded at the decision to which the learned
judges came in Mr. Barber's case. To men who take a common-
sense practical view of matters, it is altogether incomprehensible
how a man could receive, as Mr. Barber did, a free pardon from
the Crown—not, be it remembered, as an act of favour or cle-
mency, but as an act of justice, on the acknowledged ground that
he was innocent of the charge of which he had been convicted—
it is, we say, utterly incomprehensible to ordinary men, how a
man could thus be declared innocent by an act of the Govern-
ment, and yet that he should not be restored to the professional
position which he occupied before he was arraigned in a court of
criminal jurisprudence.


“ To make the matter still more incomprehensible the Court,
in delivering its judgment, made use of these remarkable words :
—‘ A person so pardoned (as Mr. Barber has been) is released
from all the consequences of conviction. The applicant must,
therefore, be treated as if he had not been convicted , otherwise
the Court would act contrary to the authorities, and would ques-
tion the propriety of the exercise of the Crown’s prerogative.’
“This is law, justice, and common sense. Every one will
acquiesce in the soundness of the principle which is here affirmed.
But, unfortunately for Mr. Barber, the Court did not act in ac-
cordance with this construction of the law, though laid down by
itself. The learned judges came to a decision which entirely
nullified all that they had here laid down. Their decision debars
Mr. Barber from re-entering on his professional career. The free
pardon, therefore, which he received, is, in some respects, no
better than a mockery. He is, it is true, released from the degra-
dation and slavery of a convict’s life ; but that is only a partial
relief from the consequences of a conviction which the Crown
now acknowledges to have been unjust. Justice will not be done
to him until he is restored to the professional position in which
he stood before he was arraigned on a groundless charge. The
decision of the Queen’s Bench is in manifest violation of the prin-
ciples laid down by the Court, while in the act of delivering its
judgment. In laying down a principle, the soundness of which
commends itself to every mind, but in direct opposition to which
they have given their decision, the Court have gratuitously,
though of course unconsciously, trifled with the feelings of a gen-
tleman whose previous sufferings for an offence of which he was
as innocent as the unborn child, were beyond the power of lan-
guage to describe. Had the Court taken a different view of the
matter; had it laid down the opposite principle, and given it as
its dictum that Mr. Barber was not released from the conse-
quences of his conviction by the free pardon of the Crown, then
their judgment would have been at least intelligible, whatever we
may have thought of the soundness of their law, or of the justice
of the view which they had taken. But to lay down in the
broadest terms of which language would admit, that Mr. Barber
was to be treated in the same way as if he had never been con-
victed, and then to give a decision in direct opposition to the


principles so laid down—is an anomaly which, happily for the
law of the land and the character of the bench, is very rarely wit-
nessed in this country.
“It is impossible that the matter can remain where it is. As
the thing stands, the judicial character of the learned judges is
affected. The law, too, will cease to be regarded with that
respect which has always been accorded to it in this country.
The dictum and the decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench, in
Mr. Barber’s case, are at drawn daggers. They fiercely clash
together. Either the one or the other must be wrong. The prin-
ciple laid down by the Court was right: the decision which it
pronounced was altogether wrong.
“ We have said that the matter cannot rest where it now is.
Why does the Government not interfere ? Sir George Grey,
the Home Secretary, on whose advice a free pardon was granted
to Mr. Barber, is bound, both as a minister and a man, to see
that full justice be done to that gentleman. The right hon.
baronet does not pretend that the pardon of Mr. Barber was
granted as an act of clemency or of favour. He does not deny
that Mr. Barber was pardoned solely because irresistible evidence
was laid before him, showing that he had been unjustly convicted,
and, consequently, had undergone five years’ severe punishment
for an offence of which he was as innocent as the Home Secre-
tary. The Government is, therefore, bound, by every recognised
principle of right or justice, to see that Mr. Barber be released
from all further sufferings. It does not much redound to the
credit of the Government that they have not before now taken
the requisite steps for this purpose. If they believe the decision
of the judges to be in accordance with the law—which it certainly
is not, as that law is laid down by themselves—then they ought
forthwith to have taken steps for the purpose of having the law
altered.
“ In the meantime, how happens it that no member of the
House of Commons has taken up this matter? Never was a
grosser or more flagrant act of injustice done to an English sub-
ject. We should have thought that before now the walls of the
House of Commons would have rung with Mr. Barber’s wrongs.
We should have thought that, instead of witnessing without one
word of condemnation or remonstrauce, so enormous an act of in


justice as is done to him by the decision of the Court of Queen’s
Bench, there would have been a rivalry among popular members
as to who should be the first to demand, at the hands of Govern-
ment, that all the atonement which it was possible to make to
Mr. Barber, for the injuries done to him, should be made without
delay. The silence which has been preserved in the House of
Commons on Mr. Barber’s case, only proves that that House
does not possess the same public-spirited, noble-hearted men,
which it once did. But this discreditable silence will not always
be preserved. It must be broken. Mr. Barber s case must be
brought before the legislature , and justice, as far as that is now
practicable, must yet be done to this grievously-injured gentle-
man. Public feeling will insist on this, and Parliament must
respond to the demands of the popular will.”
From the “ Spectator ,” 3rd August , 1850.
“ On the face of the documents before us—the judgment of the
Queen’s Bench, and a letter by Mr. W. Henry Barber, —Mr.
Barber has been treated cruelly and unjustly ; and his pertina-
cious demand for justice is a circumstance in favour not only of
his energy, but of his honesty. The case is familiar to the pub-
lic ; the general impression follows the authoritative declara-
tion of the Home Office, that Barber was wrongfully con-
victed, and deserved the full ‘ pardon’—the only form of reversal
recognised by our law—which he at last obtained, but of which
he is deprived by the Court of Queen’s Bench, in refusing to
reinstate him on the roll of attorneys.
“ In delivering judgment on his application, resisted by the
Law Society, the Court laid down the rule that the royal pardon
ought to place Mr. Barber exactly in the same position as if he
had been acquitted at the trial. Now what, in that case, would
have been his position ? He would have gone straight to his
office, and have resumed practice as an attorney. If any one had
thought that his conduct was unprofessional, it would have been
open to such person, in spite of the acquittal, to make an appli-
cation to strike him off the rolls. But notice of that motion
would have found him on the rolls, in his office, surrounded by


his papers, with all the facts fresh in his memory. Such is the
position to which, as the Court allows, the pardon ought to restore
him. But what is his position now ? He is off the rolls,* he is
not in his office, his papers are scattered, the facts are not fresh
in his memory; and, after laying down the sound principle, the
Court stultifies its own axiom, by adjudging that in such position
he is to remain.”
From the “ Standard of Freedom , 13 th July , 1850.
Mr. Barber’s case.
“ In another part of our paper will be found a letter from this
gentleman, upon the subject of a recent decision upon his case.
We earnestly commend it to the attention of our readers. It
proves clearly that the judges have been influenced by a misap-
prehension of the facts, and still more clearly that the “ some
little inquiry” which his opponents asked for has been converted
into a cruel persecution. No one can read the judgment without
being struck with the inconsistency of the principles recognised,
and the decision itself. Their lordships admit that the pardon
entitles Mr. Barber to be regarded as an innocent man, and
“asif he had not been convicted .” Yet they are perpetuating
the consequences of that very conviction in the most afflicting
form. It was the conviction alone which rendered it necessary
for him to apply to the Court. That was the ground upon which
his opponents took their stand, and they presented it to the Court
as a set-off against the decision of her Majesty's Government,
asking their lordships to say that the jury was right, and that
the royal prerogative had been erroneously exercised. We fear,
that Mr. Barber has been in some degree, crucified to party feel-
ing ; for we really cannot otherwise understand the remarkable
bitterness of Sir Frederick Thesiger’s speech. It will be remem-
bered that he was the Attorney-General when Mr. Barber’s ap-
peals from Milbank and from Norfolk Island were so cruelly
disregarded. It has always been our view, and, we believe, that
* I am still on the Rolls, but whilst my Certificate is withheld, I cannot
legally practice. —W. H. B.


of the country at large, that complete effect should be given to
the pardon, and which cannot be until Mr. Barber is replaced
in the same position in which he stood prior to his apprehension,
any obstruction to which is opposed to the doctrine recognised
by their lordships themselves. They say that he “ ought to have
suspected Fletcher but their lordships evidently view this man
as he is—a detected villain; not as he was —an opulent client
of unblemished reputation. But let it be admitted, which we
don’t think at all justified by the facts, that there has been neg-
ligence—nay, culpable negligence—on Mr. Barber’s part, is that
a reason for his being wholly deprived of his professional rights ?
Has he not suffered enough ? Who ever heard of an attorney
being denied his certificate, or struck off the Rolls, for even the
grossest negligence ? Why is Mr. Barber to be the only martyr
for that negligence which, upon a review of the matter, appears
clearly to have been betrayed, in a greater or less degree, by every
one of the men of business through whose hands the transaction
successively passed ?
“ The chief delinquents in negligence are clearly those whose
express business it was to guard the public property against
fraudulent applicants; namely, the authorities at the Bank. It
appears that, after employing agents in town and country, and
a most lavish application of their great resources, and the most
searching scrutiny into the whole of Mr. Barber’s professional
life, and extensive and diversified practice, and after putting
him to a most cruel expense, his opponents have totally failed to
bring to light a single case of mal-practice which could disentitle
him to his certificate. Surely that of itself is a high testimonial
of his fitness. Who was ever before exposed to such an inqui-
sitorial ordeal ? His offence is, not being sufficiently suspicious !
Their lordships say that “a man of Mr. Barber’s undoubted in-
telligence ought to have suspected Fletcher.” We have yet to
learn that suspicion is the ordinary attribute of an intelligent
and honourable mind.
* Oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdom’s gate, and so simplicity
Resigns her charge; while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems.’—Milton.
But we cannot pursue this subject further at present. We will


only add the remarks of an able contemporary, the Law Times ,
published whilst the inquiry was in progress :
“ ‘ It is cruel, after Mr. Barbers many sufferings, and when an
emphatic verdict of acquittal has been pronounced by the autho-
rities, and a free pardon given to him, with the statement that
it was upon the ground that he had been wrongly convicted,
now to re-assert his guilt, and it is most unjust to put him again
upon his trial for the offence of which he has been purged by
the highest tribunal—the ultimate appeal in criminal cases—the
only one, indeed, which is allowed upon questions of fact. The
Crown having pronounced him not guilty , neither individual
nor corporation has a right to come forward and assert his
guilt, and on that account to say that he shall not be ad-
mitted to the privileges of innocence. This branch of the op-
position offered by the Law Institution appears then, to us, to
be utterly indefensible on any principle of justice or humanity,
and gives to the proceeding more of the aspect of persecution by
some personal enemies than the act of a public body discharging
a public duty.'
“Of course, the matter cannot rest here. We understand a
fresh application will be made next term, either to the Court of
Queen’s Bench, with evidence explanatory of the points, the
chief of which were raised, for the first time , in their lordships’
judgment, or to one of the other courts. The misfortune is
that, by the decision being withheld until after Trinity Term,
Mr. Barber must endure the misery and privations consequent
upon four or five months more delay.”
The author of a Judgment Reviewed thus eloquently con-
cludes a minute dissection of the judgment:—
“ With a wearied mind and an anxious heart we have now
concluded our painful task of vindicating Mr. Barber against the
aspersions of his judges. It has not been to us a labour of love,
but of sorrow and self-denial; nevertheless we would be content
to make a greater sacrifice than that of our personal comfort, to
be, in however small a degree, instrumental in reinstating a fel


low-creature under the dominion of justice and humanity. It is
true that Mr. Barber is but an unit in creation, and as an indi-
vidual instance of wrong and suffering he may gain little sym-
pathy or assistance from the public at large, for few will give
themselves the trouble of carefully investigating the immense
mass of evidence which has been laid before us, in order to satisfy
themselves how entirely Mr. Barber is in the right. It is easy
enough to account for the opposition which he has experienced in
some quarters. His opponents having originally depended too
much upon their erroneous impressions and intuition, now strain
every nerve to attempt to prove that they have not mistaken
their man : they will*never submit to the imputation of having
committed a capital error and perpetrated an act of injustice;
so, at all hazards and at any expense, Mr. Barber must be put
down! Law and lawyers must not be allowed to be so grievously
fallible!
“ It has been very far from our aim to cast a stigma upon the
administration of justice in this country; in fact, it is only the
administration of injustice that can ever be brought into contempt.
Law, in the abstract, is like religion—a sublime thing in itself,
but liable to contamination from the channels through which it
flows.
“ We cannot think that we have travelled out of our province
in bringing Mr. Barber’s case prominently before our readers.
We consider that justice is the most paramount principle of
human conduct, and we would rather postpone to a future age
the grandest discoveries of science, than see the humblest of our
fellow subjects doomed to suffer by an unfair and unchristian
exercise of our country’s laws ! ”
Similar views have been taken by the rest of the legal
and public press without, as far as I know, one dissen-
tient voice—unless indeed it be that of the official organ of
my opponents, the Legal Observer —which, after having
expressed itself “ truly glad to find my innocence at
length acknowledged,” and after having demanded, “ what
reparation will the Bank now make for a mistaken prose


cution ?” turned round, upon the opposition of the Law
Society being declared, and, in the language of their con-
temporary the Law Times , has since “ pursued me with a
rancour that savours more of personal bitterness than
dispassionate inquiry.” Not content with publishing a
garbled statement of the evidence adduced in my behalf,
it personally attacked the gentleman, who, for four years
past, has gratuitously performed Herculean labours as my
solicitor, and when he replied to it, the editor denied him
the common justice of inserting his letter. The following
extract will show the spirit of the opposition with which
I have had to contend.
“ As you ‘ venture to say that the inquiry was, throughout,
conducted with the greatest fairness and candour on the part of
the Law Society,’ and in all probability you may be a competent
though not quite a disinterested judge, I feel called upon to
state that I, as the attorney for Mr. Barber, attended every
meeting before the master, and conducted the whole of Mr.
Barber’s case; and, after nearly forty years’ experience in the
profession, accustomed to legal investigations of every class and
character, I am constrained to declare that I cannot call to mind
an instance in which I have had to complain of so much unfair-
ness and bad faith, as I experienced at the hands of Mr. Barber’s
opponents in the recent inquiry. They called upon him to
answer matters, the papers relating to which they knew he had
been stripped of by his prosecutors. They procrastinated the
investigation by every device they could employ, and encum-
bered and confused it by a mass of frivolous and irrelevant
matters. The manager of the inquiry was intrusted with docu-
ments, upon his express undertaking that Mr. Barber and I
should also be allowed to inspect them ; and yet this was after-
wards denied us. They commenced and throughout conducted
the inquiry under an express disavowal of any imputation of
gnilty knowledge in Mr. Barber, declaring that they proposed
to inquire into the question of supposed professional negligence
merely—upon which the master observed, “No; it can’t be
expected that lam to try a question of felony.” Relying upon
this most distinct avowal and understanding, and upon the


honour and good faith of a society to which I had been
accustomed to look as the protector of the profession, and not
as the oppressor of its members, I was led to consent to the
admission of unauthenticated documentary evidence, which I
should otherwise have been bound to resist. It was upon this
unauthenticated documentary evidence (which, under the dis-
avowal of any imputation of guilt, I was entrapped into the
admission of), that the case, such as it was, of the Society solely
rested; and when before the Court, the counsel of the Society
suddenly turned round and put Mr. Barber again on his trial for
felony, calling upon him to prove his innocence, and show that
her Majesty had not erroneously exercised the Royal prerogative
—taking care to shut out from the consideration of the Court the
very evidence upon which the pardon was granted, and which
they had expressly exercised before the master. All this, and
much more, they crowned by instructing their counsel to make
a statement to the Court of Queen's Bench which I cannot but
designate as a positive fabrication. And what was the purpose
of these, most justly termed “ double-dealing tactics ?” To blast
the character, and, if possible, utterly to destroy, a man who, I
will venture to say, had been already more grievously wronged
than any other in her Majesty’s dominions.
“ I cannot, however, conclude this letter without stating, that
in my complaint of the Incorporated Law Society, I speak of
them in their corporate character. For many of its members I
feel unbounded respect, many of them have not only avowed
their warmest sympathy for Mr. Barber, but have assisted him
to resist, and have expressed to me their hope that he will over-
come, the extraordinary persecution against which he has had
to contend.”
Twelve months after this arduous and fruitless struggle,
I returned to the Court, having in the interval procured
from Australia the technical verifications of my documents,
the want of which had served as a pretext for my oppo-
nents to exclude them from the judicial cognizance of the
Court. I had also very important additional and confir-
matory testimony. Thus armed, my counsel repeated my
application, but upon the first mention of the case the


Court seemed to understand the proceeding as an impeach-
ment of its previous decision, and observed that the case
was res judicata. My counsel was however permitted to
move for the rule nisi, but was strictly confined to the new
matter. Thus he was prevented from showing the erro-
neous assumptions on which the judgment was based, or
the bearing of the perfected, and the additional, evidence
upon it. With great difficulty and the most earnest en-
treaty he prevailed on the judges to receive the affidavits.
On a subsequent day the Court refused the rule, laying
great stress on a passage in an affidavit, prepared by my
counsel, the true meaning of which was totally mis-
conceived :* but as their lordships declared that decision
final, all explanation to them is effectually shut out.
Note. — l have taken the very earliest opportunity which my
means and health would permit of laying before the profession
aud the public, in a separate pamphlet, the judgment of the
Court of Queen’s Bench analysed, with my observations thereon,
together with those of the legal and public press.
This pamphlet may now be had of Mr. Effingham Wilson,
Royal Exchange ; or Mr. Crockford, 29, Essex-street, Strand.
* See this fully explained in Sir George Stephen’s Royal Pardon Vin-
dicated.—lntroduction to the Fifth Edition, p. 2.


SUBSCRIPTION IN ENGLAND.*
With the deepest gratitude I subjoin the particulars of a
Subscription by which my struggle has been spontaneously
supported since my return to England:—
£ s. d.
The Marquis of Normanby 10 0 0
The Marquis of Tweeddale 10 0 0
Montagu Chambers, Esq.,
Q.C., M.P 10 10 0
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins .. 10 10 0
W. M. Wilkinson, Esq.,
Solicitor 10 0 0
Ditto (second subscription) 10 0 0
Henry Hughes, Esq., re-
tired Solicitor 20 0 0
Sir Fitzroy Kelly, M.P.. 5 0 0
Charles Pearson, Esq.,
City Solicitor 5 0 0
E. R. Arden, Esq., Bar-
rister 5 0 0
John Wills, Esq., Proctor 5 5 0
The Lord Bishop of Llan-
daff 2 0 0
Ditto (second subscription) 5 0 0
The Lord Bishop of St.
Davids 5 0 0
The Marquis of Bristol.. 5 0 0
The Earl of Ellesmere .. 5 0 0
The Earl of Winchelsea. .500
The Earl of Yarborough.. 5 0 0
Major General Sir George
Arthur, Bart 5 0 0
Charles Lushington, Esq. 5 0 0
Alexander Henry, Esq... 5 0 0
Henry Thomas Hope, Esq. 5 0 0
R. S. Holford, Esq 5 0 0
James Harmer, Esq., So-
< licitor 5 5 0
Samuel W ard Tucker, Esq.,
Solicitor 5 5 0
The Earl of Dartmouth. .300
The Earl of Fortescue .. 3 0 0
£ s. d.
W. Ewart, Esq,, Barrister,
M.P 2 2 0
John Bright, Esq., M.P. 2 2 0
James Kershaw, Esq.,
M.P 2 2 0
W. M. Wilkinson, Esq.,
by Friends 3 0 0
The Earl Manvers 2 2 0
The Earl of Bradford.... 2 0 0
Lord Viscount Melville. .200
Lord Viscount Castlereagh 2 0 0
A distinguished Equity
Judge 2 2 0
J. H. Parry, Esq., Bar-
rister 2 2 0
Mr. Alderman Sydney .. 2 0 0
Joseph Sturge, Esq 2 0 0
The Rev. Thomas Dale. .220
Arthur Mills, Esq., Bar-
rister 2 2 0
John Benbow, Esq., So-
licitor, M.P 2 0 0
Thomas Hornby, Esq.,
Solicitor 2 2 0
Ditto (second subscription) 2 2 0
S. Towgood, Esq., So-
licitor 2 2 0
A. Stevenson, Esq., So-
licitor 2 2 0
W. S. Burton, Esq 2 2 0
E. H. Thomas, Esq 2 2 0
Newton Crosland, Esq... 2 2 0
The Dowager Duchess of
Northumberland 1 0 0
The Archbishop of York.. 10 0
The Earl of Hadding-
ton 1 0 0
* Subscription at Hobart Town by his Excellency the Lieu-
tenant-Governor and others, p. 24.
Ditto by the Bench and Bar at Sydney, p. 27.
Ditto by the Bench and Bar at Madras, p. 32.


£. s. d.
Sir Robert H. Inglis,
Bart., M.P 1 0 0
Sir Benjamin Hall, Bart.,
M.P 1 1 0
Thomas Phinn, Esq., Bar-
rister, M.P 1 1 0
SamuelChristy,Esq., M.P. 110
J. R. Mullings, Esq., So-'
licitor, M.P 1 1 0
The Earl of Eglinton and
Winton 1 1 0
The Earl of Effingham .. 10 0
The Earl of Abergavenny 10 0
The Dowager Countess of
Pembroke 1 1 0
Lord Skelmersdale 1 0 0
Lord Hatherton 1 0 0
The Lord Bishop of Lin-
coln 1 0 0
The Lord Bishop of Salis-
bury 1 0 0
The Lord Bishop of Ox-
ford 1 0 0
The Lord Bishop of Ripon 10 0
The Lord Bishop of Lich-
field 1 0 0
Lord Dudley Coutts Stu-
art, M.P 1 1 0
John Brady, Esq., M.P. 110
John Clark, Esq., Solici-
tor, Clerk of Arraigns,
Central Criminal Court 110
David M. Johnston, Esq.,
Solicitor 1 1 0
Joseph Leech, Esq., So-
licitor 1 1 0
John Becke, Esq., Solicitor 110
Henry Phillips, Esq., So-
licitor 1 1 0
James Beaumont, Esq.,
Solicitor 1 1 0
William Morse Crowdy,
Esq., Solicitor 1 1 0
Alfred Southby Crowdy,
Esq., Solicitor 1 1 0
Henry Crowdy Crowdy,
Esq., Solicitor 1 1 0
J. Saunders, Esq., City
Comptroller 1 1 0
£. s. d.
Robert Baxter, Esq., So-
licitor 1 0 0
Philip Rose, Esq., Solicitor 10 0
A Friend (a Solicitor) .. 10 0
R. Yoss, Esq., Solicitor.. 10 0
W. H. Warton, Esq., So-
licitor 1 1 0
J. T. Lemale, Esq. .... 1 1 0
G. T. Bennett, Esq 1 1 0
John Johson, Esq 1 1 0
Major Charles Agnew .. 110
W. Crampton, Esq 1 1 0
Arthur Pott, Esq 1 0 0
Richard Stuart, Esq 1 1 0
J. Matthews, Esq. # 1 1 0
G. C. Jonson, Esq 1 1 0
John Hutchinson, Esq... 110
C. Ogle, Esq 1 1 0
David Salomons, Esq. .. 110
J. Joseph, Esq 1 1 0
Henry Loveridge, Esq... 110
Mrs. Palmer 1 1 0
Ditto (second subscription) 110
Mrs. Gainsford 1 1 0
Mrs. Hutchinson 1 1 0
Mrs. W. S. Burton .... 1 1 0
Joseph Odling, Esq 1 1 0
J. A. Nicolay, Esq 1 1 0
J. Defries, Esq 1 1 0
Rev. T. H. Siely 1 1 0
W. C. Macready, Esq... 110
John R. Burton, Esq. .. 110
Francis Odling, Esq 1 1 0
Henry Fearncomh, Esq. .110
Archibald Michie, Esq. .. 10 0
J. L. Benham, Esq 1 1 0
C. Haselden, Esq 1 1 0
James Truscott, Esq. .. 110
T. H. S. Sotheron, Esq.,
M.P 0 10 0
James Clift, Esq., Solicitor 0 10 0
S. W. Johnson, Esq.,
Solicitor 0 10 0
J. T. Lee, Esq 0 10 0
Thomas Camplin, Esq... 0 10 0
Dr. R. Elliott {Carlisle).. 0 10 0
Sutton, Esq. ( Scotby ) 0 10 0
Edward Bates, Esq 0 10 0
Francis Watts, Esq 0 10 0
This Subscription was not the result of any general appeal to
the public, but it has for the greater part emanated from persons
previously acquainted with the merits of my case.
In addition to the above I have to add the names of the
Q


following distinguished persons, whose attention was drawn to
my case by an excellent friend, who was Chaplain of Norfolk
Island during my detention there :
Her Majesty the late Queen Dowager £5 0 0
H. R. H. the late Duke of Cambridge, K.G 5 0 0
His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury 5 0 0
Ditto (second subscription) 10 0 0
Most of the contributions were accompanied by letters from
the generous donors, expressing in the kindest terms their sym-
pathy, and their earnest hope that I should receive compensation
for an erroneous prosecution, and also a full restoration of my
professional privileges.
The following letters are from Mr. Hughes, of the late firm
of Hughes and Henslow, of Clement’s-inn, a gentleman whose
opinions were adverse, but who, upon a close examination of
the facts, became convinced of my innocence, and aided
the subscription with the munificent contribution of twenty
pounds :—
Bradbourn, near Sevenoaks, 28th April , 1852.
Sir, —After an attentive perusal of my friend Sir George
Stephen’s pamphlet, certain doubts which I had previously enter-
tained were to my great satisfaction removed, and I am now
persuaded that Mr. Barber was not a guilty participator in the
will forgeries.
Not knowing his address I take the liberty of sending to you
the enclosed for his benefit.—l am, Sir, yours obediently,
Henry Hughes.
A. Stevenson, Es<j.


Bradbourn, Is# May , 1852.
Sir,—From the thankful tenor of your note it should seem
that you consider my remittance more as a donation than I
intended.
I looked upon it in the light of a quid pro quo. I had been
relieved from a wrong and painful impression, and received a
good twenty pounds’ worth of satisfaction and paid accordingly.
And I don’t repent of my bargain.—l am, Sir, yours sincerely,
Henry Hughes.
W. H. BARBER
Esq.




EPITOME OF FACTS,
Thronologically arranged.
A. FROM THE FIRST BANK FRAUD OF FLETCHER (1829), TO HIS
INTRODUCTION TO MR. BARBER, TEN YEARS AFTER, IN
1839, AND THE DISCOVERT AND TRIALS IN 1844.
B. FROM THE TRIAL TO THE FREE PARDON.
C. SINCE THE ROYAL PARDON UNTIL THE JUDGMENT OF THE
QUEEN’S BENCH REFUSING CERTIFICATE.
D. FROM THE JUDGMENT REFUSING CERTIFICATE TO THE
PRESENT DATE. (JANUARY, 1853).
COMPARISON OF EVIDENCE,
ON WHICH
IN 1844, MR. BARBER WAS CONVICTED;
IN 1848, PARDONED, (WITH ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF INNOCENCE);
AND
IN 1850-51, REFUSED CERTIFICATE.
N.B. —This valuable paper was prepared by a Legal Friend, who has with
unwearied pains investigated every fact connected with my Case.—W. H. B.


A.
FROM THE FIRST BANK FRAUD OF FLETCHER (1829) TO HIS INTRODUCTION TO
MR. BARBER, TEN YEARS AFTER, IN 1839; AND THE DISCOVERY AND TRIALS,
1844.
1829 to 1839.
Fletcher.
Before Fletcher’s introduction to Mr.
Barber, he had been for ten years en-
gaged in various bank frauds. In the
fraudulent case of Mary Hunt, Fletcher
obtained £4 250, aided by a Solicitor of
20 years’ experience, whose integrity has
never been called in question. There is
no reason to doubt that this gentleman
was, like Mr. Barber, deceived by the
consummate artifice of Fletcher, the in-
ventor of the frauds.
Me. Barber.
From 1819 to 1836, nearly 17
years, Mr. Barber served as
Clerk in the office of Messrs.
Scoones, of Tonbridge, Solici-
tors, to whom he was articled.
Mr. Scoones attended the trial,
and gave evidence to Mr.
Barber’s exemplary conduct
during this lengthened period.
1839.
1840.
1840, August.
1841, May.
1842, June.
1843, Mar. 16.
April 3.
„ 7.
Nov. 15.
Dec. 9.
1844, April.
Fletcher (a retired Surgeon, of considerable property) was first intro-
duced to Mr. Barber, and employed him during twelve months on
general matters of business connected with his property.
In this year, the recovery of unclaimed dividends for the rightful owners
was first introduced to Mr. Barber as a matter of professional business.
From this period, until 1843, Mr. Barber was engaged for Fletcher in 9
cases, of which 5 were bon& fide, and 4 frauds.
Case No. 1. —Stewart. A fraud. Amount recovered . . .£l3OO
No. 2. —Dd. Smith. A bon& fide case. £l2OO recovered,
and paid over to the true owners.
No. 3. —G. Robins. A bond fide case. £l5OO recovered,
and paid to true owners.
No. 4.—Burchard. A fraud. Amount . . . £l5OO
No. 5. —A bona fide case.
No. 6. —A bon& fide case.
No. 7. —Thos. Hunt. A fraud. Amount . . . £l5OO
1842. July. Application from the Legacy Duty Office for
payment of duty in Stewart's case. The letter of Fletcher
to Mr. Barber, published in page 15 of Sir G. Stephen's
“ Royal Pardon vindicated" shows the impossibility of fraud
on Barber's part before this date.
No. 8. —A bona fide case.
No. 9.—Anne Slack. A fraud. On Oct. 3rd, first instructions
from Fletcher.
Five months’ negociations with various persons claiming to be entitled.
Fletcher introduced the pretended owner, who handed Mr. Barber the
will (forged) and the certificate of death of the deceased.
Mr. Barber proceeds to obtain probate (the “ uttering” of which he was
convicted).
Mr. Bircham, his partner, also assisting, the same as in any other mat-
ter of business.
An entry in the Bank books, communicated by Fletcher to Mr. Barber,
and also to Mr. Bircham, must inevitably lead to the detection of the
fraud, at the next October dividend: they, notwithstanding, proceed
to completion, as usual in a bond fide case.
Fraud completed. Amount received at Bank . . . £4600
The Bank Solicitor, having discovered the fraud, calls on Mr. Barber to
make inquiries.
Mr. Barber is arrested, having continued at his usual office business
during the interval—24 days.
Sanders, who personated Hunt, and Mrs. Dorey, who personated Bur-
chard, being taken to the Compter, separately declare to Dr. Me Mur-
dock, and to the Turnkey, that Mr. Barber is innocent.
A separate trial being refused, Mr. Barber is tried jointly with the real
criminals, and (in Slack’s case) convicted. Sentence—-Transporta-
tion for life.


1844,June28.
July 4.
M 9.
Nov. 9.
Dec. 10.
1845, Jan. 28.
March.
June.
Sept.
1846.
1847, Apr. 16.
August.
1848, Jan.
May to Sept.
October.
November 3.
Solemn declaration of Fletcher as to Barber’s innocence, that he had no
other knowledge of Slack’s case than as “ a legitimate and proper
matter of business.”
lsf July. “ The Times,” publishing Confession, remark that it
is “ a complete and apparently truthful exculpation."
Second confession of Fletcher on board the “Agincourt.”
Confession of William Sanders, on board the “ Lord Auckland,” reiter-
ating Mr. Barber’s complete innocence.
Certificates of officers corroborative of confessions.
Noefolk Island. Arrival of the “Agincourt” at Norfolk Island.
Memorial of Barber to the Home Secretary.
Report of the Rev. Thos. Beagly Naylor, Chaplain, and J. W
Smith, Esq., Assistant-Commissary-General, narrating the parti-
culars of a lengthened examination of the convicts, sometimes
separately, and sometimes confronted with each other, disclosing
“ a mass of facts incompatible with Barbei 's guilt."
Nine letters to influential persons in England all detained and
forwarded to the prosecutors.
Arrival of Wm. Sanders, at Van Diemen’s Land. On the usual
official examination being entered in the Convict Register,
Sanders is recorded as stating—“ Fletcher had been engaged in
the frauds 15 years—Barber knew nothing of the matter.”
The Chaplain’s earnest letter to Sir Robert Peel, Prime Minister,
stopped at Hobart Town, and suppressed.
In his letter to Lord Stanley, the Chaplain writes—
“ The thought perpetually haunts me that Barber is unde-
“ servedly suffering the fate of a convict, and I cannot shake
h off the distress it occasions me.”
Original statements, certificates, and other papers, confirmatory
of Mr. Barber’s innocence seized by order of the Governor
Commandant; pen and ink refused, though permitted to every
other convict, and the severest labour imposed. The indignant
protest recorded in the visiting-book by Dr. Graham, Surgeon,
and the statements of the Rev. Mr. Naylor, and his successor,
Mr. Rogers, and other officers in the island, are set forth in Mr.
Barber’s Pamphlet, Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange.
Mrs. Naylor, the Chaplain’s wife (furnished with memorial, fur-
ther certificates, and statements corroborative) voyages to
England to lay them before the Home Secretary.
Examinations by F. Browne, Esq. Judge of the Criminal Court
at Norfolk Island; and by the Rev, Thomas Rogers, Chaplain.
Unqualified opinion of perfect innocence.
Examination by Colin Arrott Browning, Esq. M.D. Conclusive
as to innocence.
Conditional pardon, dated London, Nov. 12, 1846.
Sydney. Ten days’ investigation by the Sydney Law Society, and
report.
Subscription of Judges and the entire Bench and Bar, with de-
claration of belief in innocence. Amount raised, ,£250.
Madbas. Further investigation at Madras. Subscription of the entire
Bench and Bar, with written heading of the Hon. Mr. Justice
Burton, declaring entire belief in innocence. Amount raised
2555 rupees = ,£255.
Pakis. Lengthened investigation by Lord Normanby,
Re-investigation in London by Sir George Grey, Home Secretary.
Heb Majesty’s Fbee Paedon ! accompanied by letter, stating
“ full and anxious consideration of all the documents,”
and conclusion arrived at of Mr. Barber’s innocence.


On receipt of the Free Pardon, in Paris, Mr. Barber comes at once to England.
1849, Jan. 1.
1850,
Jan. 29 & 30.
May 8, 9,10.
July 6th.
Nov. 26th.
1850, July, to)
1851, March. I
April.
June 4th.
Publication of Mr. Barber’s pamphlet, with copies of the Memorial,
confessions, certificates, and other documents submitted to the
Home Secretary.
Hilary Term. —The usual notice (required by 6 & 7 ¥lO., c. 73) given of
Mr. Barber’s intention to apply for a renewal of his certificate.
Application opposed by Counsel for the Incorporated Law Society, and
“ referred to the Master, to inquire into circumstances.”
The order of reference having been altered so as to embrace an inquiry
into every circumstance of Mr. Barber’s professional life, the
Master is occupied over a period of nearly twelve months chiefly
in the investigation of cases of alleged malpractice, one dated as
far back as 1837, nearly thirteen years prior to the inquiry.
Case argued before Judges Patteson, Coleridge, and Wightman.
Master’s report read; but, on a technical objection, the evidence
on which the Free Pardon vms granted was shut out, of the
consideration of the Court.
Argument continued.
Correspondence in “ The Times” as to the absence of Mr. Bircham on the
trials, disclosing the fact that he was kept out of the way by the
prosecution, though his absence at the time was strongly urged as
evidence of Mr. Barber's guilt.
Declaration of the Jury who convicted in Slack’s case, that they would have
acquitted Mr. Barber if the subsequent facts had then been known.
Judgment in favour of Mr. Barber on the alleged malpractice cases, but
against him on the Will Frauds, the Court remarking on the cir-
cumstances in all four cases, including Stewart’s, of which Mr. Bar-
ber had been put on his trial (1844), and acquitted by the Jury.
Supposed circumstances of suspicion
relied on by the Court on giving
judgment.
Patteson, Judge.—“ And now the
“ means of forgery having been
“ obtained through Barber’s appli-
“ cation for the signature of Miss
“ Slack, the true owner, what fol-
“ lowed must have been foreseen
«*******
“After a convenient interval,
“ the will, and sole legatee and
“ executrix, are produced.
Patteson, Judge.—“ In . Hunt’s case,
“ the non-receipt of the dividends,
“ for 23 years before the date of
“ the will, was a circumstance so
“ striking, that it ought to have
“ attracted attention.”
Explanation.
A complete misapprehension.
The Fraud was not accomplished
by any imitation of signature,
Miss Slack's signature being in
ladies' angular hand — thus:
The fraudulent signature being
a common, uneducated style — thus:
offacs
(See Note *.)
The long arrear of dividends
was known only to the Bank.
Mr. Barber had no means of
ascertaining the fact, though the
contrary is assumed.
Judgment reviewed and condemned by “ The Law Magazine,” “ The
Law Times” and other legal papers, pointing out errors.
Public meeting of solicitors of Liverpool.—See Resolutions, p. 208.
Affidavits obtained from Australia, in verification of certificates of
officers, superintendents, chaplain, &c., which not being proved
on oath, were not received as evidence on last application.
Easter Term. —Application renewed, but counsel’s argument limited by
the Court to the fresh evidence.
Judgment of Lord Campbell on rule nisi, refusing to re-open the case.
Lord Campbell, C. J. —“ Had he (Barber) been merely the dupe
“ of Fletcher, God forbid that he should be debarred from the
“ exercise of his profession, even if he were chargeable with a
“ high degree of indiscretion and supineness. *****
“We consider suspicion, amounting to complicity, must
“ have entered Mr. Barber’s mind.”
* This is, in fact, the strongest possible evidence in Mr. Barber’s favour; for the Bank had the true
signature, and Fletcher perilled his scheme there with no assignable motive but to deceive Barber, who, if
the signature had been imitated, would have detected the resemblance and discovered the fraud.


1852,
January.
April sth.
May.
1853.
January.
Private meetings of Mr. Barber’s friends, and determination*, without
further delay, to submit his whole case to Parliament.
“ The Royal Pardon Vindicated,” a pamphlet, by Sir George Stephen,
favourable to Mr. Barber’s cause, sent to every Member of Par-
liament, also to all the Peers.
The Rev. Thomas Kogers, late chaplain in Norfolk Island, now in
England, having kindly communicated with several of the
Bishops, has letters in terms of encouraging sympathy from
them.
Encouraging letters are also received from very many of the Peers and
Members of the House of Commons, generally expressing belief
that Mr. Barber’s innocence had been clearly established; that
reparation is due to him from the country for his unmerited
sufferings, and recommending him forthwith to submit his
claims to the consideration of Parliament, and promising
support.
Petition for Inquiry and Redress presented to the House of Commons,
by Mr. Wilson Patten, and printed by order of Committee on
Petitions, with 19th Report—sent to each Member, 21st April.
The approaching Dissolution of the House rendering it inexpedient to
proceed with the Motion for a Committee of the expiring Par-
liament—it is determined to suspend proceedings until the new
House assembles.
Re-publication of Mr. Barber’s pamphlet ; and Meetings of Mr. Barber’s
friends, preparatory to presenting new Petition.
Noth. —It had been intended, immediately on Mr. Barber’s return to England, to
petition Parliament for inquiry and redress; but this was delayed by his
harassing struggle for the restoration of his professional rights.


1.
EVIDENCE founding the Verdict on the Trial
in 1844.
For the purpose of this comparison, it may
be assumed that the evidence actually
given on the trial was sufficient (unex-
plained) to justify the verdict of the jury.
N.B.—On a reconsideration of the cir-
cumstances since conviction, the surviving
members of the jury have signed a written
declaration, stating that if the facts which
have subsequently transpired had been be-
fore them, their verdict would have been an
acquittal.
O
EVIDENCE on which the Home Secretary declared
Mr. Barber innocent, and in 184-8,
November 3rd,
Her Majesty granted the Free Pardon.
A review of the previous evidence, contained
in printed Reports of the Trials, and the
depositions in the two Cases abandoned
by the prosecution.
Also, Circumstances since Conviction ; viz.
Confession of Fletcher.
2nd confession of do.
Confession of Wm. Sanders.
Evidence as to verbal confession of Mrs.
Dorey and Mrs. Sanders
Statement of John Smith, fellow-prisoner
both of Sanders and Fletcher, as to
conversations.
2nd statement made by John Smith “ in
articulo mortis .”
Reports and Notes of examination of
Fletcher and Mr. Barber, taken at dif-
ferent intervals, sometimes separately,
and sometimes confronted with each
other, disclosing, in the words of one of
the reports, “ a mass of facts incom-
patible with Barber’s guilt.”
1845. Jan. 28th. Norfolk Island. Re-
port of several examinations by
The Rev. T. B. Naylor, Chaplain.
J. W. Smith, Esq., Asst.-Com.-
General.
1846. Report of several Examinations by
The Rev. Thomas Rogers, Chaplain.
1847. April. Examination by Fielding
Browne, Esq., Judge of the Criminal
Court at Norfolk Island.
Do. Examination by Colin A. Browning,
Esq., M.D.
Extract from Convict Register as to the
statement of Sanders on his arrival at
Van Diemen’s Land.
Various Certificates. Statements and papers
corroborative from Chaplains, Superin-
tendents, Surgeons, and other officers.
N.B.—Mr. Barber’s Memorial to the
Home Secretary is a complete explanation
of the circumstances which, on the trial,
weighed against him. Upon the confes-
sions he observes “ all the four
“ PARTIES WHO DESIGNED AND EXE-
“ CUTED THESE FRAUDS, WHOSE IN-
“ STRUCTIONS I RECEIVED, AND BY
“ WHOSE EVIDENCE Al ONE THE PRE-
“ SUMPTION RAISED AGAINST ME COULD
“BE COMPLETELY REBUTTED, HAVE,
“ WITHOUT CONCERT WITH ME OR WITH
“ EACH OTHER, AND WITHOUT A VIEW
“ TO THEIR OWN BENEFIT, BUT, IF ANY-
“ THING, TO THEIR PREJUDICE, AT DIF-
“ FERENT TIMES AND UNDER DIFFERENT
“ CIRCUMSTANCES, SOME BEFORE AND
“ OTHERS AFTER THE TRIAL, EXONE-
“ RATED ME FROM ALL GUILTY KNOW-
" LEDGE WHATEVER.”


/ 1844, CONVICTED. Column 1.
• 1848, PARDONED, WITH ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF INNOCENCE. Column 2.
, 1850 and 1851, REFUSED CERTIFICATE. Columns 3 and 4.
3.
EVIDENCE on which the Judgment of the
Court of Queen’s Bench was given
refusing Certificate. 1850. July 6th.
A printed report of the evidence given on
the trials, and copies of the depositions,
in the two cases abandoned by the pro-
secutors.
Unfortunately, the evidence on which the
Royal Pardon was granted was sliut out
of the consideration of the Court by a
technical objection taken by the prosecu-
tion, that “ the documents were not
proved.” Mr. Barber’s Counsel having
read the confessions of Fletcher, and in
part the confessions of Sanders, was stop-
ped from further proceedings, and com-
pelled to abandon this part of the case.
The Counsel for the Law Society, found
it necessary to allude to the confessions
which had been read, but as they were
unsupported by other testimony, he
treated them as spurious, saying, that
“ inquiry had been anxiously made as to
“ what had become of the supposed
“ confessions of Joshua Fletcher and
“ William Sanders made in the year
“ 1844; what was done with them , how
“ they were procured, and how they
“ were used, and no satisfactory answer
“ has been given.”
The original confessions were, in fact, at
the Home Office, and Sir George Grey,
being written to on the subject, replied :
“ Whitehall, March 21, 1850.
“ Sir, —I am directed by Secretary Sir
George Grey to acquaint you, in reply to
your letters of the Bth and 20th instant,
that the confessions of Fletcher in reference
to Mr. Barber, are still at the Home Offiee,
and probably that of Sanders also, though
the latter has been mislaid, and cannot for
the moment be found. No application has
been made by the Incorporated Law Society
with reference to these documents.
“ I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
“ H. Waddington.
“A. Stevenson, Esq.,
“ 1, Victoria-street, Holborn-bridge.”
So that the statement of the opposing
Counsel, it is presumed, from instruc-
tions, appears to have been made solely
to deprive these important documents of
credit, and thus to neutralize any favour-
able impression that might have been
created by reading them.
Deprived of this cumulative proof, as well
as of all the other evidence on which the
Home Secretary had advised Her Ma-
jesty to grant the pardon, the Judges
fell into the extraordinary errors, two of
which are pointed out in the “ Epitome
of Facts.”
4.
EVIDENCE on which was founded the
Judgment of Lord Campbell refusing Rule Nisi
for further Inquiry. June 4th, 1851.
Mr. Barber, having procured affidavits con-
firmatory from persons in Australia, re-
newed his application, hut his Counsel
was stopped in limine from any allusion
to the previous evidence, and directed to
confine his observations to the fresh
affidavits.
Thus the importance of the new matter as
perfecting the evidence and exposing the
errors of the previous judgment could not
be shown.
Lord Campbell, who heard the application
for a Rule Nisi for further inquiry, was
not a Judge of the Court when the pre-
vious argument took place; but he stated
that he “ had several times perused the
judgment, and was satisfied with it,”
and thus, Under total misconception, his
Lordship had adopted the errors which
Mr. Barber’s Counsel was imperatively
forbidden to comment on or explain away:
even the rule nisi for a rehearing of the
case was refused, the Judge remarking
that
“ The new evidence made Fletcher’s
‘‘exculpation more distinct and pro-
“ minent, but, from long experience,
“ the Court learned that little weight
“must be given to the statement of
“ such a convict as Fletcher.”
The corroborative statements of Wm.
Sanders and Mrs. Dorey, and all the reports
on the direct testimony obtained by the
Civil Commandant, Chaplains, Judge of
Assize, Superintendents, and others at
Norfolk Island, are unnoticed in the judg-
ment.
The Court, on refusing the rule, relied on
a passage in Mr. Barber’s affidavit, which, it
is clear, was misinterpreted, as is shown by
Sir George Stephen at page 5 of “ The
Royal Pardon Vindicated;”* and although a
very simple statement would have removed
the misconception, as the decision was
pointedly declared “final,” all explanation
is effectually shut out.
In adverting to this Sir George says, “ On
“ my giving the above explanation to one of
“our most distinguished Law Lords, in
“conversation on the subject, he exclaimed,
“as well he might, ‘This unfortunate man
“ ‘ seems destined to be the victim of un-
“ 1 ceasing misconception.’ ”
* stli edition, Crockford, Essex Street.




PART III.
PETITION TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS.
It may be in the recollection of the reader, that upon
my return to England, in November, 1848, I immediately
published a statement of my case, with copies of all the
documents in my possession, which had been submitted to
her Majesty’s Government. My object was to enable the
public to form their own opinion upon the sufficiency
of the grounds upon which her Most Gracious Majesty
had been advised to grant me a free pardon. The pam-
phlet attracted much attention, several thousand copies
having been sold within a month. It was made the sub-
ject of numerous leading articles in both the legal and
public journals, in more than one hundred of which the
exculpatory evidence which has transpired since the trial
was analyzed and discussed in connection with the circum-
stances which, unexplained, had led to my conviction. 1
had the happiness to see that these examinations resulted
in an unanimous and unqualified opinion in my favour. I
had, also, ‘the honour to receive congratulatory letters and
personal visits from members of both Houses of Parlia-
ment, eminent lawyers, distinguished literary men, and
others of the highest consideration in the country, ex-
pressing their sympathy for my unmerited sufferings, and
their hope and belief that, as far as reparation could be
offered for an acknowledged though unintentional wrong,
it would be forthwith made.
It


Further than this, considerations of great importance
connected with the administration of our criminal law, —
the apparent reasonableness of establishing a court of
appeal upon t-he facts in criminal cases, the expediency of a
public prosecutor, the propriety of examining prisoners for
or against each other, of interrogating (as in every other
European nation) the persons most deeply implicated, of
substituting a judicial reversal of sentence in the rare case of
an unjust conviction, instead of the degrading boon, “ a free
pardon,” and of awarding compensation to innocent persons
unjustly convicted—being strongly illustrated by the expe-
rience of my case, were urged as public grounds for a Par-
liamentary inquiry into the circumstances attendant upon
my conviction and punishment; moreover, the bitter aggra-
vation of my sufferings, involving the general question of
the unequal treatment of convicts; * and the fact (without
example) that mine was a Treasury prosecution, directed
by the Government, which subsequently acknowledged
my innocence, were considered to give me peculiar per-
sonal claims upon the attention of the House, and to war-
rant my soliciting a committee of inquiry upon the subject.
I returned to England during the Parliamentary recess,
and in consultation with my friends, it was determined
that my petition should be presented to the House of
Commons during the approaching session of 1849.
* See index of documents for certificates of the various officers in the island
attesting this branch of the case.—P. xi.
“ I shall never remember without shame and horror the wantonness of
the insults and the refinements of cruelty practised towards him.”— The
Rev. Mr. Naylor, p. 122.
“ He was deprived of indulgence granted him by the medical officer for the
recovery of his health * * * * his life was reduced to a wearisome condition
of mental torture and physical toil disproportioned to his strength, and which
his former habits rendered peculiarly grievous.”— The Rev. Thos. Royers,
p. 92.
“ I could not but admire his demeanor under the unmerited and unaccount-
able persecution of which he was the object for many months.”— Gilbert
Robertson, Esq., Senior Superintendent, p. 118.


But my first and immediate object was to procure my
reinstatement in my profession. Apart from the neces-
sity of the case, which compelled me to some honour-
able labour for my bread, the unspeakable desire I have
always felt to be actively and usefully employed came upon
me with increased force, now that my freedom was again
restored,* —I immediately gave notice of my application
for my certificate, with what result has been already seen.
The entire session of 1849 was consumed in the unex-
pected struggle with the Law Society, without the possibility
of my proceeding contemporaneously with the intended
statement of my case to Parliament. The session for 1850
saw no better result, for the struggle for the certificate
was protracted until the 6th of July in that year, and I
had the mortification to find that the authenticity of the
documents, which would have been essential to support
my case in Parliament, was for the first time called in
question, and until these could be verified, it was mani-
festly impossible to proceed.
This verification was procured in 1851, but it was not
until June in that year that I had any cessation from the
labour attending the application for my certificate, and
the session was then too far advanced to get my case stated
to Parliament with any hope of a committee being ap-
pointed.
Thus the petition intended to have been presented in
1849 was by unforeseen events delayed until 1852. On the
it 2
* The habit of my past life is in evidence before the world. At an early
age I entered the office of a very eminent solicitor, of wealthy connections
and of extensive and most respectable practice, with whom I served my
articles. I continued with this gentleman nearly seventeen years, and on my
trial he testified to my undeviating rectitude of conduct. Devoted to books
and to scientific recreations, my leisure hours—in my clerkship and subse-
quently when admitted a member of the profession—were not frittered away
in selfish enjoyments, as the records of the Literary and Scientific Institu-
tion which I projected and founded at Tonbridge, and of the Southwark
Literary Institution, which I aided as an active member of the committee,
will show.


sth of April it was presented to the House by Mr. Wilson
Patten, —the consideration of it was referred to the Select
Committee on Petitions, when it was ordered to be printed
and sent to every member. The events are too recent to
make it necessary for me to say more than that a disso-
lution of Parliament was about this time expected, and
that the progress of the most urgent public business
completely engrossed attention until the close of the
session.
In the approaching session of the new Parliament my
amended petition will be presented. It will be nearly in
every respect a reingrossment of that presented to the
House last year and printed in this part of the pamphlet.
I humbly submit that it will be found to contain matter
entitled to serious consideration, and this I fervently
hope it may obtain, not for myself alone (to whom no
other source of redress is open for the losses entailed by
a confessedly erroneous prosecution), but for the sake of
the public also, and in reference to those general considera-
tions of national policy in the administration of our criminal
law before adverted to, which are forcibly illustrated by my
sad experience.
Never expecting any opposition to my professional rein-
statement, I did not at any time contemplate encumbering
the proposed parliamentary inquiry with any question in
reference to it, nor is it necessary or proper that I should
do so now: it can only affect the inquiry so far as the
deprivation of my professional rights may be considered an
aggravation of the calamities resulting from the prosecu-
tion.
Upon the subject of
COMPENSATION,
I take leave to quote the following passage from the
introduction to Sir George Stephen’s pamphlet, “ The
Royal Pardon Vindicated.”* Having adverted to various
* Fifth Edition.—Crockford, Essex-street.


cases in which Parliament has afforded relief to indivi-
duals suffering from the unforeseen operation of the laws,
Sir George observes :
“ The case of Lord Cochrane may also tend to establish
the principle for which I am contending, that a sufferer
by unjust prosecution is entitled to parliamentary aid in
recovering the status from which it has displaced him,
although the verdict can only be impeached on the ground
of error. Lord Cochrane was restored to his rank of
admiral in the British fleet, and K. 8., and all his arrears
of pay, amounting to a large sum, were paid up. In one
important particular the case of Mr. Barber is stronger
than any that I have mentioned. The prosecution against
him was instituted by the Treasury, and the acknowledg-
ment of his innocence has proceeded officially from the
Government, who alone are in full possession of all the
evidence connected with the case. Thus, in effect, not
only the jury who convicted him, but the prosecutor who
put him on his trial, have both declared his innocence.
The jury have retracted their verdict: the Crown has par-
doned him, —not in mercy, but in justice. Mr. Barber,
then, appeals to Parliament in the character of one who
has suffered injury far beyond pecuniary calculation, in
consequence of a sentence declared to be unmerited by
the very parties who were mainly instrumental in obtain-
ing it. If any wronged subject of the realm can be
entitled to compensation from the public purse, surely it
is one who by the act of the Government —an act con-
fessedly though not intentionally unjust—has been deprived
of ally branded with felonious infamy, and plunged into the
very abyss of human misery.”
After a minute examination and exposition of the whole
case with a patience and industry fcr which I can only
express my heartfelt gratitude, the learned author thus
concludes —
“ But we will conclude, for we feel the real and only


danger of the case to be, that, view it in what light we
may, there is such a mass and such a variety of facts and
arguments —all irresistibly tending to the same conclu-
sion of perfect innocence—and such a volume of absurdity
and inconsistency to be exposed on the hypothesis either
of guilt or culpable negligence, that there is more hazard of
bewildering the reader, and thus diverting his attention
from the merits, than in failing to convince him upon the
merits. We are only too thankful that the responsibility
does not rest upon us to explain either to Parliament or
the public, how it has happened that an innocent man,
a respectable member of an honourable profession, should
have been indicted in the face of facts in the possession
of the prosecutors, which rendered his guilt morally im-
possible ; should have been put upon his trial in a form
that almost precluded the possibility of proving his
innocence; should have been transported, as in former
days he would have been hanged, though innocent; should
have been subjected, by special instructions, to indignity
and punishment beyond the vilest felons; should have
been debarred the relief which medical men prescribed
for the safety of his life; should have had the letters of
himself and of officials in his behalf suppressed, even
when addressed to the First Minister of State; should,
after pardon, have been turned out in actual nudity and
destitution, to make his way unaided and alone through
a hundred miles of wilderness and flood; and finally,
when his case had been thoroughly investigated and his
innocence formally acknowledged by men of every rank
and station —by the wretched criminals with whom he
was associated —by the superintendents, magistrates, and
chaplains—by the very felons who deceived him—by naval
and military officers accustomed to penal settlements —by
the chief justice, judges, and bar of Sydney—by the Law
Society of that city, after ten days’ investigation; men
equal in honour and ability, and far more conversant with
such inquiries than their professional brethren at home —


by the chief justice, judges, and bar of Madras—by the
Marquis of Normanby at Paris—by Sir George Grey at
Whitehall—by the jury which convicted him—and by all
the public press, and nine-tenths of the profession;—when
his innocence had been thus sifted and acknowledged, that
one so unfortunate, so crushed, yet so noble in his suffer-
ing, should have been received by a section of the solici-
tors infinitesimally small in number, though large in
influence, with distrust instead of cordiality—with hostility
instead of sympathy—with persecution instead of aid—
with undissembled eagerness to tread him into dust, instead
of generous pity and frank support in his arduous effort to
retrieve the ruin brought on him by unjust accusation!
“ This explanation must be given, for assuredly it will be
demanded. The Home Minister, by his just decision and
prompt response to the appeal of humanity, worthy of his
high station and yet more exalted character, has laid a
foundation for it. Many members of both Houses, well
known in every cause of benevolence, are prepared with
full possession of the facts. We envy not those with
whom it will rest to solve this complication of mysteries.
“We cannot lay down the pen without adding that the
claims of Mr. Barber to the justice as well as the commise-
ration of the public are not to be disregarded. The liberal
subscriptions at Sydney and Madras only sufficed to land
him in England, penniless, and friendless, and profession-
less. The unrelenting opposition to his recommencing busi-
ness has subjected him to endless liability, for it has been
conducted, as we are informed, at an expense of nearly a
thousand pounds, though professional talent of the highest
order has been kindly and gratuitously devoted to his service.
He lost his books, his papers, his clients, and his property,
in the destructive confusion that followed on his apprehen-
sion. His title to compensation from the public purse,
could money compensate for the loss he has sustained, is
good ; but in these parsimonious days it will long be
deferred, if not evaded. It is right to add, that he is no


party to this appeal ; he does not even know of it, nor has
he hinted it. He has not been consulted on a word that
has been written throughout these pages. This review of
his case has been dictated solely by the motives explained
in the prefatory advertisement, and rests altogether on the
evidence before the world.”
“ Fiat justitia, ruat coelum.”


PETITION OF WILLIAM HENRY BARBER.
[Presented to the House of Commons by Mr. Wilson Patten,
sth April , and printed by order of Committee on Petitions
with 19 th Report , sent to each Member 21 st of April , 1852.]]
App. 447. Mr. Wilson Patten. Sig. 1.
2067. The Petition of William Henry Barber, of No. 25,
Surrey Street, Strand, in the County of Middlesex,
Attorney and Solicitor,
Humbly sheweth,
1. That in the year one thousand eight hundred and
forty-three, and for seven years previously, your Petitioner
was a solicitor in large and respectable practice, enjoying
the confidence of his clients, and an unblemished repu-
tation.
2. That pricr to his admission as an attorney, your Peti-
tioner had served from the year one thousand eight hun-
dred and nineteen to the year one thousand eight hundred
and thirty-six, nearly seventeen years, as clerk in the office
of Messieurs Scoones, of Tonbridge, the eminent solicitors,
tc whom he was articled; and that the senior partner of
that firm has testified on oath to the exemplary conduct of
your Petitioner during the whole of that period..
3. That in the month of December, one thousand eight
hundred and forty-three, your Petitioner was apprehended
and committed to prison, and in the following April was
indicted, as hereinafter more particularly stated, on the
prosecution of the Lords Commissioners of her Majesty’s
Treasury for certain forgeries, to which your Petitioner
was alleged to have been a guilty party, in connection with
matters of business in which your Petitioner had been
professionally employed.
4. That four bills of indictment were preferred against
your Petitioner, all being for alleged offences of a similar


Barber(Wil-
liam Henry)
(Jar Inquiry ).
Previousfrauds
by Fletcher.
Same.
Petitioner em-
ployed in nine
Bank eases, five
of which proved
to be genuine.
character; that is to say, for having, in his capacity of
solicitor, assisted in procuring probate of certain wills and
other instruments, which eventually proved to have been
forged by or at the instigation of one Joshua Fletcher, a
retired surgeon of independent fortune, who had been a
client of your Petitioner for five years immediately pre-
vious to your Petitioner’s apprehension, and by whom your
Petitioner had been retained, among many other matters
of business, to assist in discovering the owners of un-
claimed dividends, and to obtain the re-transfer from the
Bank of England, to the parties supposed to be entitled
under such wills or instruments, of certain funds which had
been transferred for want of claim to the Commissioners
for the Reduction of the National Debt.
5. That before the introduction, in the year one thou-
sand eight hundred and thirty-nine, of Joshua Fletcher to
your Petitioner, he (Fletcher) had been for ten years en-
gaged in various bank frauds, as stated in the confession of
William Sanders, an accomplice, recorded in the convict
register at Hobart Town.
6. That the particulars of these frauds have not come to
the knowledge of your Petitioner, wifti the exception of a
case w r hich, after the apprehension of your Petitioner, was
made public, and wherein it appeared that Fletcher and
an accomplice, falsely personating the representative of one
Mary Hunt, had obtained £4,250. In this fraud Fletcher
was assisted by a solicitor of many years’ professional ex-
perience, whose integrity has never been called in question,
and there is no reason to doubt that this gentleman was
(in the same manner as subsequently your Petitioner was)
deceived by the consummate artifice of Fletcher, the ori-
ginator of the frauds.
7. That your Petitioner was employed by Fletcher in
nine cases to recover stock and unclaimed dividends which
had been transferred to the Commissioners for the Reduc-
tion of the National Debt; that in all these cases the par-
ties were introduced to your petitioner as the true owners,


and nothing occurred to excite your Petitioner’s suspicions
to the contrary; and, in point of fact, it has since appeared
that in five of such cases the parties receiving the money
were the true owners; and, although in the remaining
four cases it afterwards appeared that accomplices of
Fletcher personated the supposed legatees, and fraudu-
lently obtained the fund, yet your Petitioner had no reason
at the time to suspect that those parties were other than
the real owners, and nothing had come under your Peti-
tioner’s observation to lead to the belief that they were in
the habit of acting with Fletcher, or were in concert with
him.
8. That the duties required of your Petitioner were
identical in the fraudulent and bond fide cases, which
Fletcher had artfully interwoven with each other, and
which were not distinguishable by any facts within the
knowledge of your Petitioner.
9. That upon the first of the four charges previously
referred to, your Petitioner was tried and acquitted, and
in the two next in order of date the prosecutors refused to
call evidence, although urgently pressed by your Peti-
tioner’s counsel to do so, and your Petitioner was therefore
in effect acquitted in these two cases also.
10. That on the fourth of the said charges your Peti-
tioner was tried jointly with Joshua Fletcher and other
persons ; and your Petitioner, though entirely guiltless of
this as of all the other offences charged, having failed
(through the disadvantages to which he was exposed in his
defence, as presently to be mentioned) to convince the jury
of his innocence, was convicted.
11. That, prior to the commencement of his trial, your
Petitioner, by and under the advice of his counsel, applied
for a separate trial, in order that he might tender as wit-
nesses for examination the other prisoners indicted jointly
with him ; but, the application being opposed by the pro-
secutors, it was not granted, and your Petitioner was con-
sequently shut out from evidence most material to his


Barber(Wil-
liam Henry)
{for Inquiry ).
Transported
for life.
Confessions of
Fletcher and his
accomplices.
Corroborative
facts transpired
since trial.
defence, and was also greatly prejudiced by the non-pro-
duction for examination of a most important witness, sub-
poenaed by the prosecutors, and whose attendance in the
neighbourhood of the court was known to them, but who
could not be found by your Petitioner or his solicitor, not-
withstanding the most active and diligent efforts were made
on behalf of your Petitioner to discover and produce such
witness for examination.
12. That upon being so convicted, your Petitioner was
sentenced to be transported for life; and in pursuance of
such sentence, he was sent to Norfolk Island, where he was
detained a prisoner for two years and four months.
13. That in each of the four cases of fraud Pletcher was
aided by a different accomplice, and that Fletcher and all his
accomplices who designed and executed the frauds, whose
instructions your Petitioner received, and by whose evi-
dence alone the presumption raised against him could be
completely rebutted, have, without concert with him, or
with each other, and without a view to their own benefit,
but, if anything, to their prejudice, at different times and
under different circumstance, some before and others after
the trial, exonerated your Petitioner from all guilty know-
ledge whatever.
14. That on these facts, and certain other corroborative
statements becoming known, some gentlemen, officers of
the Government, residing at Norfolk Island, namely, the
Reverend Thomas Beagly Naylor, chaplain and justice of
the peace; John William Smith, esquire, assistant-com-
missary-general ; Fielding Browne, esquire, judge of the
Criminal Court; Colin Arrott Browning, esquire, M.D.;
the Reverend Thomas Rogers, succeeding chaplain, and
others, at different times voluntarily devoted themselves
to a searching investigation into the facts connected with
such frauds; and the said Joshua Fletcher being examined
sometimes apart from, and sometimes confronted with, your
Petitioner, a series of inquiries were made into every sup-
posed circumstance of suspicion, which, for want of such


direct testimony, had weighed against your Petitioner on
the trial, and the result of such investigations, as stated
in the words of a report thereon, disclosed “ a mass of
facts wholly incompatible with the guilt ” of your Peti-
tioner.
15. That the several reports and notes of examination,
together with various certificates and corroborative state-
ments, were ultimately forwarded to Sir George Grey, then
the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
16. That upon a full consideration of these papers, and
of all the documents in his possession, comprising very
material circumstances which had transpired since the con-
viction, and upon a review of the facts proved at the trial,
her Majesty’s Secretary of State was pleased to advise her
Majesty to grant to your Petitioner her Majesty’s free
pardon, and on transmitting such pardon, her Majesty’s
Secretary of State was pleased in writing to declare his
belief that your Petitioner “ was free from any guilty par-
ticipation in the frauds of which he was made the instru-
ment.”
17. That, since your Petitioner’s return to this country,
eight of the surviving members of the jury by whom he
was convicted have reviewed the evidence adduced before
them in connection with the additional facts which had
subsequently transpired, and the result is embodied in a
declaration signed by them, that if such facts had been
presented to them at the trial, they have no doubt what-
ever that your Petitioner would have been acquitted.
18. That a period of five years elapsed between your
Petitioner’s apprehension and the receipt of his free par-
don, in the course of which time he endured very aggra-
vated misery and degradation; he was nearly four months
in Giltspur-street, Compter and in the prison of Newgate,
before his trial; he was afterwards sent in chains to Mill-
bank prison, where he was kept in solitary confinement
two months; and he was then conveyed in heavy chains to
the convict ship, in which he endured all the wretchedness


of a voyage of four months, associated day and night with
two hundred of the worst criminals; and for two years
and four months he was a prisoner in Norfolk Island, where
the misery inseparable from convict slavery was in the case
of your Petitioner bitterly aggravated by a systematic, in-
vidious, and revolting cruelty.
applications were made in the usual form by persons of re-
spectability for his services as a clerk; but such applica-
tions were uniformly refused, and other prisoners, and
some on their second transportation, were selected for
these light duties, whilst your Petitioner was appointed to
the filthy office of cleaning the prisoners’ wards, and was
kept at this labour, being the most disgusting that could
be found, for sixteen months, with only casual intervals of
sickness caused by the nature of the work.
20. That at the end of one year and four months, he was
sent to work in the fields in one of the heaviest gangs,
with a twice-transported felon for his overseer—a man no-
torious for his severity. In this position your Petitioner
was compelled to perform the same tasks as men of far
greater physical power, who had been used to severe
labour all their lives : yet at this very time there were em-
ployed as clerks or schoolmasters, or in other light occu-
pations, at every station in the island, convicts who not
only had been transported a second time and had arrived
in the island more recently than your Petitioner, but many
of whom had even been convicted of serious crimes in the
island while undergoing their sentence.
21. That Pletcher, the author of the frauds, was ex-
empted from severe labour, being employed as a medical
dispenser, and was allowed a private apartment, superior
rations, and superior bedding, besides possessing the occa-
sional privilege of sending the prisoners located at his sta-
tion to heavy work, light work, or no work at all, at his
discretion ; whilst your Petitioner was herded with hun


dreds of other convicts, sleeping in a barn crowded by
nearly three hundred inmates, and moreover was obliged
to watch and keep order in this dormitory by night, and
to clean it by day.
22. That upon one occasion, when upon leaving the
hospital, being barely convalescent, he had been ordered
by Dr. Graham to be employed in breaking stones, as a
task less severe and unwholesome than his ordinary em-
ployment, Major Childs, the civil commandant, seeing
him so occupied, demanded of your Petitioner why he was
not cleaning the ward, and insisted that he should imme-
diately return to his former duties.
23. That on the same day the commandant visited the
ward to see that your Petitioner was so employed, and
when your Petitioner respectfully explained his sickly state
of health, arising out of the loathsome nature of the duties,
the commandant derided his complaint, and insisted that
your Petitioner should continue the employment. That
your Petitioner accordingly did so until, in two or three
days, he again sunk under it, and was once more conveyed
to the hospital dangerously ill.
24. That under these sufferings your Petitioner became
dangerously ill, and Dr. Graham, the medical officer, attri-
buted this illness to your Petitioner's disgusting and
painful occupation, which was embittered by every aggra-
vating circumstance, and he recommended the removal of
your Petitioner to another part of the island, but this was
refused in your Petitioner’s case, though permitted in other
instances, and the consequence was, after a partial reco-
very, a serious relapse.
25. That Dr. Graham thereupon entered a strong pro-
test in the visiting book, and ordered your Petitioner back
to the hospital, but still no alleviation in the duties of
your Petitioner could be obtained until the chaplain, see-
ing the hardship and privation to which your Petitioner
was subjected, kindly interposed, and supported the doc-


Barber(Wil-
liam Henry)
{for Inquiry).
Unequal treat-
ment of convicts
in Norfolk Is-
land: invidious,
systematic, and
revolting cruel-
ty to Petitioner.
Reference to
documents.
tor’s remonstrance, and represented that your Petitioner’s
life was endangered by the instructions which the command-
ant had given.
26. That no complaint of insubordination or ill-conduct
was ever preferred against your Petitioner, and he uni-
formly submitted to and obeyed all commands, however
irksome the tasks imposed upon him ; and with the excep-
tion of what has been stated as to the commandant, and
who never complained of the slightest misconduct of your
Petitioner, he believes his general deportment obtained for
him the sympathy and good opinion of all the officers in
the island who had anything to do with your Petitioner.
That your Petitioner on leaving the island not only received
the highest testimonials from almost every officer upon it,
but also an official certificate from Mr. Price, the then and
present civil commandant, that your Petitioner had in all
things conformed to the regulations of the island during
the whole period of his detention there.
27. That when it became known that your Petitioner
employed his few moments of leisure in preparing proofs
of his innocence, to be submitted to her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, he was forbidden the use of writing materials, all
his papers were seized, and amongst them some important
corroborative and elucidatory documents which had never
been returned to him.
28. That letters in your Petitioner’s behalf addressed to
the .late Eight Honourable Sir Eobert Peel and other dis-
tinguished Members of Parliament by the Eev. Mr. Naylor,
the chaplain of the island, were suppressed, and never per-
mitted to reach their destination.
29. That copies, verified by affidavit, of all the docu-
ments before referred to, so far as they have been within
the power of your Petitioner, are published in a pamphlet,
entitled “ The Case of Mr. W. H. Barber,” to which your
Petitioner begs respectfully to refer your Honourable
House; and the facts are also further detailed in a pam-
phlet recently published by Sir George Stephen, entitled


“ The Royal Pardon Vindicated, in reference to the Claims
of Mr. W. H. Barber on the Justice of the Country.”
30. That at the period of his apprehension your Peti-
tioner was in the enjoyment of a very extensive and
improving practice as a solicitor, having upwards of one
hundred clients, and his bills of costs for the previous year
amounting to three thousand four hundred pounds.
31. That he possessed the lease of the house in which
he carried on his business, and also a good law library,
with office furniture and every other requisite for the effi-
cient conduct of an extensive and lucrative business.
32. That he had likewise a private residence suitably
furnished, with a valuable private library; and also had
claims to a considerable amount on parties for book and
other debts, which in consequence of his conviction have
been lost to him by the operation of the Statute of Limi-
tations.
33. That, after sustaining the losses, and enduring the
miseries above set forth, and after his innocence had been
acknowledged by his prosecutors, her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, and after receiving her Majesty’s gracious pardon
avowedly on that ground, your Petitioner has returned to
his country utterly destitute, his valuable professional
practice, and every vestige of the property which belonged
to him at the time of his apprehension, being all swept
away, and he finds himself at the mercy of several former
creditors, whose claims he will yet have to discharge; he
has moreover lost seven years of the prime of his life, and
his constitution has been seriously, and it is feared perma-
nently, injured by the cruelties and privations to which he
has been subjected.
34. That in addition to these calamities your Petitioner
is prevented, by legal impediments arising out of his con-
viction, from earning an independent livelihood in the
profession which he had practised with success for eight
years, and his conduct in which was never impeached,
except by the charges now acknowledged by his pro-
S


Barber(Wil-
Prayer
secutors, her Majesty’s Government, to have been
unfounded.
Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays that your
Honourable House will be pleased to institute due inquiry
into his case and the circumstances now humbly presented,
and to do your Petitioner such justice as may thereupon
seem meet.
And your Petitioner will every pray.
WILLIAM HENRY BARBER.
From the Appendix to the Nineteenth Report on Public Petitions.
PRINTED BY COX (BROTHERS) AND WYMAN, GREAT QUEEN STREET.


Just published, Fifth Edition , Price 1s., by Post 18 Stamps ,
“THE ROYAL PARDON VINDICATED,”
BY SIR GEORGE STEPHEN,
Barrister-at-Law.
LONDON: CROCKFORD, 29, Essex Street, Strand.
“ A powerful pamphlet, proving not only Mr. Barber’s entire innocence,
but that he was much wronged by the implacable hostility of the Law
Society.”—Law Times.
“ An eloquent appeal on Mr. Barber’s behalf.”— Law Magazine.
“ As lamentable a story of legal persecution as ever disgraced the annals of
any country pretending to be civilized.”— Leigh Hunt's Journal.
“ We rejoice to hear that this singular and distressing case will be laid
before Parliament.” —Morning Advertiser. ,
“ Sir George Stephen clearly proves that Mr. Barber has been the victim
of legal chicanery.”— Standard of Freedom.
“ The whole pamphlet is distinguished by strong common sense.”—
English Churchman.
“ A triumphant refutation of malice, mistake, misrepresentation, and
calumny.”— Lincolnshire Times.
“ A calm and able review of the whole case, preparatory to its introduction
to the House of Commons.”— Athenaeum.
“ A model of argument, the conclusion is demonstrated beyond the reach
of cavil.”— Belle Assemble.
“ The learned author commenced his investigation with impressions unfa-
vourable to Mr. Barber, but which resulted in an unhesitating conviction
that his honour was unimpeachable.”— Weekly Chronicle.
“ A more interesting case has not occurred in the administration of the law
in modern times.”— Economist.
“ Exculpating Mr. Barber not only from guilt, but from any charge of
imprudence or neglect.”— The Critic.
“ The pardon is vindicated in a most able manner.”— Nottingham Guardian.
“ The task has been discharged with consummate ability.”— Newcastle
Guardian.
“ An irresistible vindication.”— Northampton Mercury.
“ An unanswerable defence of an injured, innocent man.”— Cheltenham
Journal.
“ We hope measures will be taken to make Mr. Barber reparation.” —
Devonshire Chronicle.
“ We sincerely hope Mr. Barber will obtain justice.”— Western Luminary.
“ Mr. Barber's wrongs must be redressed.”— Stockport Advertizer.
“ This case, which has excited so much discussion, is now, we think, set at
rest, by an able argumentative pamphlet of Sir George Stephen, proving
beyond all question the entire innocence of the gentleman accused. To
give an abstract of the work is almost impossible in our space; yet some
explanation of the leading circumstances may show our readers, if they
have not already seen the pamphlet, how slight were the grounds on which
Mr. Barber was convicted, how clear is the demonstration of his innocence,
and how great therefore is the injustice he has suffered. — Leeds Mercury.






