

THE
PARRAMATTA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Official Handbook.
Sydney: William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.
1910.
•77224


The Parramatta Industrial School.
OFFICIAL HANDBOOK.
The Parramatta Industrial School is designed to deal with neglected
and uncontrollable girls between the ages of 13 and 16 years, more
particularly that type of girl whose companionships or home
associations have resulted in her developing immoral tendencies
or criminal instincts. Experience has shown that, as an institution,
it is especially valuable to parents whose daughters have, much to
their sorrow, got beyond control, and conceived an infatuation for
the society of immoral or dangerous companions.
Its Purpose and Methods.
Though every precaution is taken by means of walls and
locked doors to prevent absconding, the Industrial School is not a
penal establishment, and no effort is spared to make the internal
management of the place as free as possible from even the suggestion
of a gaol. The girls are dressed in neat house dresses, and in all
respects treated in regard to food, recreation, and sleeping accom-
modation as though they were in a good boarding school.
The staff do not wear any uniform, and the dining-rooms,
grounds, and recreation rooms are all exactly as would be found in
any well kept home. It is assumed that girls sent to this institution,
though they may have done much that is wrong, do not realise how
wrong. The manner of life which they have been leading is fraught
with danger to themselves and the community, and as their parents
•77224


or guardians have failed to prevent this happening, the State has
simply been obliged to supersede them, and take over the care and
training of the delinquent.
The methods employed to deal with the girls are such as
all leading educationalists advise. Everything is done that can be
done by kindly advice and moral and religious training to build
up the self-respect of the individual, to arouse the best instincts,
and to cultivate a spirit of true womanliness, and by adding a
suitable domestic training an endeavour is made to ht them to take
their place worthily as future citizens.
Staff.
The institution is under the care and direction of a Superin-
tendent, specially charged with matters of administration, and in
particular with the character of the discipline and training given
in the institution. The present Superintendent, Mr. A. Thompson,
8.A., qualified as a hrst-class teacher, and held several important
teaching positions before being placed in charge of the Industrial
School. In addition, therefore, to many special qualifications for his
present post, he has gained an extensive knowledge of child life
throughout a teaching career extending over a period of 24 years.
Under him as executive officers are a Matron, Assistant
Matron, and a Teacher in charge of the school. Besides these
officers there are hve instructors and an assistant teacher. Great
care is taken in the selection of all officers to appoint only women
of fairly good education, of pleasing and attractive personality, and
possessed of a good knowledge of cooking, sewing, and other domestic
accomplishments. Besides the officers above referred to, the
institution is visited on all ordinary school days by a certificated
Cookery Teacher, who gives the girls the same course of cookery
instruction as that now received in the large public schools of the city.
The junior officers are commonly women between the age of
25 and 35, whose education and refinement enable them to exercise
a powerful influence for good over the girls committed to their
care.


Domestic Training.
Girls are trained in the following occupations:—Making and
mending their clothes, cooking, ordinary housework, kitchenwork,
and aundrywork, garden work, and a limited number —milking.
All the clothes worn by the girls are cut out under the care of
the sewing instructor, and made up in various sewing classes. Three
Singer sewing machines and two Willcox and Gibbs’ are in use. As
already mentioned, the clothing worn is of an ordinary house-dress
pattern, and anything reasonably likely to injure the feelings of
girls avoided. Girls must also carefully mend or darn any articles
requiring repair.
The ordinary cooking of the institution is carried out by
selected girls, under the care of instructors, but special theoretical
and practical cookery instruction is given in turn daily to classes
of girls by a visiting instructor, so that all may be able to gain a
valuable training in this important branch.
In the laundry only the physically stronger girls are
continuously employed, though as far as possible all girls are
given some training. As the whole of the household washing of the
institution and that of the Agricultural Continuation School at
Hurlstone is done here, the girls have every opportunity of instruction
in all kinds of laundry work. This department of industry is under
the direction of a competent laundry instructor, and the only
apparatus employed is such as is to be found in any ordinary home.
Flower-gardening is undertaken under the direction of the
Matron and Teachers, and a vegetable garden, which supplies the
institution with green and root vegetables, is supervised by the
gardener.
An important point in regard to domestic work done here is
that it is principally given as training. Girls only work during
ordinary school-class hours, outside of which they do no more work
in the mornings and evenings than in any well-managed home.
There is no inducement to exploit the services of these girls.


School Lessons.
Newly-admitted girls spend at least three months in the
school-room. Those whose ability to read and write is below a fair
standard, receive special daily instruction in such subjects as reading,
writing, arithmetic, dictation, and composition, and, as time will
permit, a little geography and history are taught. The school-room
also possesses a good library of which the girls may make free use.
Drill.
All girls do some daily drill: breathing exercises, extension
exercises, club or dumb-bell drill, and marching.
Religious Instruction.
The very greatest care is taken in regard to this matter.
Church services by visiting clergymen are held on Friday afternoons
for both Protestants and Roman Catholics ; and on Sundays,
Sunday-school instruction is given in the morning, and Protestants
and Roman Catholics allowed to attend morning services in local
churches on alternate Sundays. Special instruction is also given
on Sundays to the Roman Catholics by visiting Sisters from the
neighbouring convent, and to the Protestants by a number of lady
visitors representing the different Protestant denominations, who
take it in turn. Daily prayers, morning and evening, are held.
Recreations.
The methods adopted recognise the fact that most people
go wrong in their leisure hours, not in their working hours. Every
effort is therefore made to show girls how leisure time may be
profitably and pleasurably spent. All girls learn to knit or do
some form of fancy work. In the day time healthy out-door games
are played, whilst at night, the girls, under the care of one of the
Teachers, read, do fancy-work, play in-door games, and arrange little
concerts or other impromptu entertainments. In their amusements


the whole of the staff of the institution take some part, and
excellent opportunities are thus afforded for an officer to have a
quiet talk with a girl, and get into touch with her inner nature.
On the chief public holidays, little programmes of sport are
arranged, and at Christmas time a special expenditure is incurred
to fitly observe the occasion.
Care of Health.
The institution is visited at least twice a week by the
Government Medical Officer for the district. New girls found
suffering from any sickness receive careful treatment and advice.
The Matron is a trained nurse, and in the hospital any case of
sickness can be properly dealt with. Special cases are sent to the
Parramatta District Hospital, or in cases of eye-diseases, to the
Moorcliff Eye Hospital. All inmates receive continuous attention
in regard to their teeth, and this work is undertaken by an experienced
visiting dentist. No teeth are extracted which can be saved by
filling them.
Period of Detention.
All girls committed are under control until they are 18 years
of age. The time that a girl spends in the institution after committal
depends largely upon her behaviour. Those who conduct them-
selves well, and come from good homes, may be discharged to them
again on condition of good behaviour. Others may be sent to
service as indentured apprentices. The balance stay in the institu-
tion until they attain the age of 18 years, when they are free to leave.
Apprentices.
A number of girls are apprenticed to suitable employers, but
all apprenticeships expire at 18 years of age. Such girls are visited
and care taken that they are not unfairly treated. Fortunately,
owing to the demand for apprentices being very much in excess
of the supply, the Superintendent is enabled to ensure everyone
being placed in a good home.


Discharge on Condition of Good Behaviour.
Where no exception can be taken to the character of the
home or the respectability of the parents, inmates may on petition
being made, be discharged by Executive Authority on condition
of good behaviour. Such girls are regularly visited by an officer
from the institution, who reports to the Superintendent concerning
their conduct. Should they relapse into evil ways, they may at
any time up till 18 years of age be brought back again under the
original warrant.
Visiting Regulations, &c.
Parents may write to their daughters as often as they choose.
Inmates can only reply, however, once each month. Orders to
visit may be obtained from the Head Office, Department of Public
Instruction, Bridge-street, once every three months. The dates of
such visits are by arrangement with the Superintendent.
It is desired to make Magistrates of the Children’s Courts
throughout the State more fully acquainted with the conditions
obtaining in this institution and to dispel any impression that may
exist that harsh or repressive measures are practised in dealing with
inmates. The training given is moral, educative, and technical,
and girls are fitted, on discharge, to undertake useful work as
sempstresses, laundresses, cooks, and general servants. They will
leave the institution better equipped for the duties of life, and will
therefore be less likely, in view of this experience and their moral
training, to revert to their former mode of living.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE INSTITUTION.
This view of the Parramatta Industrial School shows the extensive nature of the accommodation pro-
vided. The grounds comprise some 7 acres, and are laid out in playing fields and flower and vegetable gardens.
A large portion of the time of the inmates is spent in the open air, and much healthy recreation is arranged
for them.


LAWN VIEW.
The Kitchens open on to this lawn, as do also the General Dining Room and School Room.


A VIEW IN THE SCHOOL GROUNDS.
This represents a much frequented portion of the School Grounds, and presents all the features of a well
kept park, with its neatly trimmed lawn, flower beds, g arden seats, and umbrageous trees.


THE COVERED WAY.
This structure not only serves the purpose of a covered way between two wings of the Institution, but
is used as an Exercise Promenade in wet weather.


SUPERINTENDENT’S QUARTERS AND OFFICE, MEDICAL EXAMINATION ROOM, DORMITORIES, &c.
The Superintendent's quarters are in the front gable wine, and the oflice in the central portion of the building,
the dormitories being at the western end.


MEDICAL SUPERINTENDENT’S AND DENTIST’S ROOM.
All girls committed are medically examined on admission, and a Dentist regularly visits the Institution and
attends to the teeth of the inmates in any way required.


GIRLS AT CLUB DRILL.
Physical Drill is taught regularly on the lines followed in State Schools. The physical development of
the girls is greatly improved by a general system of calisthenics and deep-breathing exercises, and the results
obtained are highly satisfactory. This feature of the Institution’s work is a potent factor in arresting the
degeneracy of the girls concerned.


SEWING ROOM.
Most of the garments worn by the inmates are made by themselves under competent superintendence.
This work, together with the repairing, is carefully taught, and in addition the girls are shown how to cut-out.
A valuable element in domestic training is in this way brought within the knowledge of every girl.


FANCY WORK MADE BY INMATES.
This is a display of fancy work made by the inmates, and a large number become expert in this useful
and artistic direction. It has been found that, no matter how coarse and neglected the child may be, a latent
instinct to excel in this useful feminine art is easily aroused, and the refining influence of such dainty work
soon becomes apparent.


DORMITORY.
This is a typical Dormitory. An attendant sleeps in a room at the end, with an observation window
commanding a view of the whole Dormitory. Every provision is made for comfort and cleanliness in all the
sleeping apartments.


“A” LAUNDRY.
This useful part of the Institution cannot be too highly valued. Laundry work in its many phases
is thoroughly taught. The girls are first seen in picture “A” at the tubs and washing-boards. They are
taught how to wash dean, and shown the necessary amount of labour that is to be put into the process to
obtain this end. In the Ironing Room much useful instruction is given, for the articles treated comprise not
only plain pieces such as sheets and towels, but collars, shirts, and wearing apparel for both sexes, entailing
much skill in the use of the iron. Picture “B” shows the Ironing Room, and picture “C” the Folding
and Mangling Room. Girls are made proficient in all three branches.
This description to apply also to “B” and “C” following.


“B”- LAUNDRY.


“C” LAUNDRY.


THE GIRLS AT DINNER.
It will be observed that the children are not dressed in any objectionable uniform, and that they are
allowed to dress their hair in a becoming manner. Much has been accomplished by the abolition of Reformatory
garb and the prison practice of cutting the hair.


INMATES’ DINING ROOM.
It will be seen that the Dining Room of the Institution represents a departure from the old-fashioned
Reformatory methods. Instead of long deal tables arranged in a continuous line, there are a number of small
tables, accommodating six inmates each. Each group of girls by this arrangement becomes a little family
under the presiding influence of one of their number. Crockery usually found in an average home is used,
tin mugs and tin plates being discarded. Each table when laid is typical of home life, and the children arc
encouraged in various ways to live up to this idea. After meals, the Dining Room is still protected from
objectionable formality. The tables are covered with green cloths and adorned with vases of flowers freshly
cut from the garden. The floors are stained, with coir matting in the centre, and the walls are hung with
suitable pictures. The refining influences of these conditions have largely assisted the Superintendent in his
work of building up character in the girls committed to his charge.


“A” COOKERY INSTRUCTION.
Cookery instruction is imparted every day, from Monday to Friday inclusive. The course is that taught in
the State Schools, the same Syllabus being followed. The Teacher is fully trained and holds the necessary certi-
ficates from the Technical College of her ability to teach Plain and Advanced Cooking, Domestic Science, and
Laundry Work. Twelve girls are taught each day, and a perusal of the Syllabus will show that the instruction given
is of a thorough and practical character. Picture “B” shows the ordinary Kitchen of the Institution, where
most of the food used is cooked under the supervision of a competent member of the Staff.
This description to apply also to “B.”


SYLLABUS OF INSTRUCTION FOR COOKERY CLASSES.
Management of Stoves.—How to light and manage a fire; economy in the use of fuel, whether gas or wood
or coal.
Management of Weights and Scales, with their equivalent measurements.
Scullery Work.—The various methods of cleaning. The cleaning of stoves and cookery utensils; washing
tea towels and dish-cloths; care of sinks, and cleaning utensils and materials.
Component Parts of Foods and how best to treat them in order to make them palatable and nourishing.
Choice of Foods.—Rules to guide one in the choice of meat, fish, poultry, vegetables, groceries, and the reasons
for such choice.
The Food-value of the various kinds of Food.
The Management and Care of Household Stores.
The Principles of Cookery.—Boiling, baking, roasting, steaming, frying, grilling.
The Cooking of Joints. —Teaching the comparative price and food-value of the different cuts of meat.
The Management of the Stock Pot and making Plain Family Soups and Broths.
Cooking of Vegetables.
Cooking of Fish.
Economical and Savoury Meat Dishes, as stewed tripe, liver and bacon, stewed rabbit.
Combination Dishes, both savoury and sweet pastry, with other ingredients.
Cold Meat Cookery.
Cold Fish Cookery.
Pastry-making. —Short crust, suet crust, liaky pastry.
Puddings.—Boiled, steamed, and baked. Light puddings suitable for summer.
Plain Sauces.
Batters, as fritters and pancakes.
Cake-making and Baking.
Breakfast Cookery.
Cookery for Infants and Young Children.
Salad-making.
Combination of Various Foods to form Nutritious Meals.
Cooking of Poultry.—Roast and boiled fowl; various dishes of chicken suitable for invalids.
Consideration of various Household Menus; the cost and nutrition of each.
Preparation of Luncheon Baskets.


“B” COOKERY INSTRUCTION.
S/DNFV ' Will IAM ArpLEGATf GULLIGK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
