

| TRACING FOB'BATTLE, )
.5 , * 4
<0
0 fc M
THE RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED BY A
0 PIfOFESSED COCKERS TO BE OBSERVED IN
ALL THE REGULAR COOK-PITS.
: IS ADDED
1 , I
9 AN EXPOSURE OF THE TRICKS PRACTISED BY THE 'A
N UNFAIR COCKER, TO IMPOSE UPON THE f
0 ■
L INEXPERIENCED. AND ROB THEM A
0 OF THEIR MONEY.
% 0
iJF . v *;v .. 7.-. .Ha,
SYDNEY;
PUBLISHER BY ROBERT FISHER. f
J
1859.
*




THE GAME COCK,
WITH
AN ACCOUNT OF HIS ORIGIN,
THE MOST IMPROVED METHOD OP
BREEDING,
AND OF
TRAINING FOR BATTLE
THE RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED BY
PROFESSED COCKERS TO BE OBSERVED IN
ALL THE REGULAR COCK PITS.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
AN EXPOSURE OF THE TRICKS PRACTISED BY THE
UNFAIR COCKER, TO IMPOSE UPON THE
INEXPERIENCED, AND ROB THEM
OF THEIR MONEY.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY ROBERT FISHER.
1859.
fni?


f
*


ft? S6T/ P ?8n
t6~6-rr
THE GAME COCK.
GAME COCK—Phasianus Galina, of Lirmans:
Phasianus Gallinaceus, of Ray, Willoughby, and
other Ornithologists*
The English game cock is vulgarly imagined to be
the offspring of the domesticated fowl and the pheasant.
This idea is, however, not at all assented to by ornitho-
logists, or the amateurs of the art of cocking. On more
sure grounds its origin is referred to the wild cock of
India,* where he is occasionally seen in his wild state nv
the woods, and at the Isles of St. lago, Pulocondore,
Timor, Philippine and Mollucca Islands; Sumatra, Java.
• His original colour was nearly black, with soma rod
feathers towards the head. 1 arn the more inclined to believe
this, as the dark-reds are generally the hardiest when they
oomo to a long battle.


New Guinea, Tinian, and the isles of the South Seas,
At Sumatra and Java they are noticed as being par-
ticularly large. Pliny tells us, that cock-fighting was
annually practised at Pergamus, a city in Asia. Mr.
Pegge assures us, that the Athenians practised it at an
annual festival in the time of the great general Therais-
tocles, who encouraged his soldiers to acts of bravery, by
admonishing them to imitate the example of the cock.
Chalcis and Euboea were famous for. their superior breed
of cocks ; —they were large, and such as our sportsmen
rail shake-bags or turn-outs. At Alexandria in Egypt
they had a breed of bens called Monosorio, which pro-
duced the best fighting-cocks.
The Homans were better acquainted with quails a s
fighting-birds than with cocks. It is considered, how-
ever, that they were the first to introduce the practice
here ; though the bird was here before Caesar’s arrival.
Cocking was much encouraged by Henry VIII., who, it
is supposed, founded the celebrated national cockpit at
Westminster, afterwards renewed and encouraged by
Charles 11., who first introduced the breed of pile cocks,
Which for many years was held in such estimation, and by
many much liked to this day. The institntors of this
establishment enacted certain laws for the better regula-
tion of these sports, which we shall briefly describe.
There are three kinds of mains or matches at present in
use among cockers; the long main, which generally con-
tinues for a week ; the short main, of a day or two f
both regulated by the same laws); and the Welsh main.
In the long main, the cocks are generally the property of


a joint subscript ion, or of only two individuals, and the
cocks thus collected are chosen for the main according to
their weights ; those being preferred, as a medium weight,
Irom three pounds eight ounces to four pounds ten ounces,
giving or taking au ounce on either side, though they
are generally matched to a drachm weight.
The cocks which form the by battles of the main
become the objects of separate bettings, are subject to the
same regulations. Cocks which weigh above four pounds
ten ounces are termed turn-outs, and are never matched
by weight, as when they weigh above that they are
reckoned fit to contend with any one.
The short main lasts only for a day or two, the
cocks being fewer in number, or the numbers are doubled
for each day.
The Welsh main is generally fought for a purse, a
gold or silver cup, a fat hog, or some other prize: in this
main all the fowls are restricted to a certain weight, viz-
about four pounds four ounces; these are matched
according as shall be agreed upon, the winners again
taking the winners till they are reduced to the last pair,
when the winner of the last battle gains the prize. Be-
sides this, there is to be noticed the battle-royal, which
consists of a number of fowls being put down together at
the same timo on the pit, and the last survivor gain the
prize—a practice known nowhere but in this country.
In fighting a regular main they always commence
with the lightest cocks, as they can be first prepared,
and the heaviest ones that have been most reduced by this


means gain time to recover their strength, and be brought
up again.
The following is a copy of the articles of a Match
Articles of agreement, made the
day of , one thousand eight hundred
and , between First,
the said parties have agreed, that each of them shall pro-
duce, show, and weigh, at the , on
the day beginning at the
hour of in the afternoon cocks,
not under 3 lbs. 8 ozs. nor above 4 lbs. 10 ozs. and as
many of each party’s cocks that come within one ounce
of each other shall fight for a battle, that
is, each cock, in as equal divisions us the
battles can be divided into six pits, or days’ play at the
cockpit before-mentioned, and the party's cocks that win
the greatest number of battles, matched out the nnmber
before specified, shall bo entitled to the sum of ,
odd battle money, and the sum to be staked in the
hand of Mr. before any
cocks are pitted, by both parties: and we further agree
to produce, show, and weigh on the said weighing days,
cocks for by battles, subject to the same
weight as the cocks in the main, and these to be added
to the number of cocks unmatched; and as many of them
as come within one ounce of each other shall fight lor
a battle ; the number of cocks so matched
to be equally divided as will permit of, and added to


each day’s play with the main cocks: and it is also
agreed that the balance of the battle money shall be
paid at the end of each day’s play : it is also further
agreed, that the cocks fight in silver spars, and with
fair hackles ; and to be subject to all the usual rules of
cock-fighting as practised at the Cockpit Royal, West-
minster ; and the profits arising from the spectators,
called door-money, to be equally divided between both
parties, after all charges are paid that usually happen on
those occasions. Witness our hands this clay of
It is understood on all occasions, that when the
cocks are once pitted, the setters-to are not allowed to
handle them, unless they get entangled in each other, or
in the mat, or touching the side of the pit; and if they
should be thrown on their back with their feet not
touching the mat, it is fair to tmn them on (heir feet
again. On no pretence are feathers to be removed from
the baek or eyes during the fight. If one of the cocks
is hit down during the battle, and no longer able to fight,
take tho first opportunity (while the other is not fight-
ing him) of telling the short lam, which you do by
counting, distinctly and audibly, “ twice twenty,” when
they may be bandied, and set-to again. If the weakest
then refuses, you begin to tell the long lam of one
hundred, by counting it by tens. At the end of each
time you count ten, set them to, beak to beak, and if
either cock refuse to fight ten times successively, ha
loses ; but should he show fight, by pecking or fighting
at the other, while you are counting the one hundred,


you must begin with your tens again, and at the end of
each ten you must say aloud, “ once refused,” “ twice
refused.” &c., till he refuses ten times, when you may
withdraw your cock, and claim the battle-money.
Should both be disabled, and refuse to fight, before the
long larv begins counting, it is a drawn battle, and neither
wins ; and should both refuse fighting, during telling of
the long law, it is that cock’s battle which fought
last.
If any one wishes to stop (his telling him out, he
may “pound him ” that is, he bets the cock will be
beaten, ten pounds to five shillings. In this case he
lays down his hat, or any thing else on the pit, as a
token of the challenge, when the short law is told by a
person distinctly counting twice twenty, and afterwards
repeating the words, “ will any one take it ? ” three
times : if no one accepts the challenge during this short
law, the cock is beaten. It is necessary, when any one
takes the poundage or bet, that he declares it, and a so,
lays down something on the pit as surety. If so, the
cock must fight till death, though sometimes he un-
expectedly recovers and wins.
Having described the natural origin of this race of
birds, the history of the sport, its laws and regulations,
we now proceed to consider the general form and pro-
perties of the fighting-cock, when in his greatest
perfection, according to the ideas we at present enter-
tain. A good cock has eyes sparkling with fire,
boldness in his demeanor, and freedom in his motions,
and displays force in all his proportions. The general


outline of the finest cock, taken as a whole, approaches
that of a lengthened cone, excluding the 1< gs and tail •
the apex of the cone being the head, and the base the
vent and belly : under such external form may exist the
best properties of the cock. In describing the beautie s
of particular parts, the head should be small, the beak
strong and pointed, the neck long and strong, the girth
of the shoulders, chest, and body, broad, feeling broad
to the grasp, and tapering again to the rump; the
thighs and legs large and strong, and rather long than
short; it is considered a good point if he brings them
close up to his body when held in the hands, instead of
leiting them hang loosely down.
The feathers, to amateurs, also afford a good
criterion for judging of the soundness of the bird ; where
they lie dose to the skin, and compacted together, feel
short and stiff to the touch, and shining and glossy in
their exterior, such is deemed a sound-feathered bird.
1 he colours most admired are the reds and the duck-wings
By the red, among cockers, is understood a cock with
a hackle (that is, the feathers of the head and neck) red.
with the feathers of the rump or saddle to correspond.*
The red cock varies wih a black breast and ginger
wing-j-, that is, of a gingerbread colour, or with a black
breast and dark wing ; such are dark reds. The light
reds are those whose breasts are wholly red, or red
spotted with black, or black streaked with red, and these
receive their names according to these circumstances ;
• That ig, of the game colour, or nearly.
+ Vulgarly called s t-wing reds.


as, ginger-breasted, spotted-breasted, streaky breasted,
&c. The duck-wing cock derives his name from a bar
of steel blue across the greater coverts, like the fascia
across the wild duck’s wing. In this case it is
observed that the secondares are exteriorly white :
the hackle and saddle are also nearly the same colour,
or pale yellow, or cream coloured: their breasts may
be black, streaked, or spotted: the shoulder may be
tawny, dark red or birchen, or silver-shouldered ; from
which colours they receive their distinctions.
The yellow cock is merely a variety of the duck-
wing, from which it differs only in having the secondary
feathers, or those next the flight, dark instead of white :
the blue bar in these cocks sometimes varies to a light
brown. The next colour to be noticed is the dun. These
cocks are in reality of a lead or slate c lour, and may
be wholly so, or duck-wing, with the breast, flight, and
tail dun, or a yellow dun ; that is, a yellow cock with a
dun breast, flight, and tail. By flight feathers are meant
the strongest feathers of the wing farthest from the body
of the cock when the wing is extended. The red duns
are red cocks with dun breast, flight, and tail. White
cocks are either wholly white, and are called smocks, or
with red shoulders, are called piles when these are
streaked with any other colour in the hackle, breast*
rump, or tail, they are termed streaky piles. If the pile
cocks have a mixture of dun on the breast or shoulders*
they are called dun piles. Another variety of t his breed
is the cuckoo, which is rare; he is white, with the fea-
thers variegated promiscuously, or barred with black


yellow, or red. The spangle is also rare; he is red,
tipped with white spots, or white and black. Hen cocks
have the natural propensities of the cock, but are so
called from having the hackle, tail, and wing more like
the hen. When any coloured fowl has the shoulder
mixed with black, he is called beezy shoulders, probably
from the Fjench word bis, black or dusky. The colour
of the legs should also be noticed : these are either yel-
low, black, white, blue, olive, or dark green, willow or
light green, or carp-legged, which is a mixture of black
and yellow. The beaks in general correspond w r ith the
colour of the legs. The colour of the eyes is also
noticed in the match-bill ; the red or ferret eye (the iris
being red) the pale yellow, or daw-eye, the dark brown
or sloe-eye. It is a great property in a cock to be what
is termed corky, that is, a cock which for its size weighs
light, having light flesh, and light in bone, though strong :
they have a great advantage over lumpy cocks, which are
heavy Jlcshed. A sound cock will crow clear, have a
clear shining feather, short, hard, and difficult to pluck
trorn his body ; bis face red ; for if pale, he is unhealthy
A good cock should fight at any part of the body, and
should carry a fatal spur, or in other words, hit well
w ith bis weapons. Their actions should be quick without
hurrying, and rapid, but cautious.
ON BREEDING.
A well-tried breed of cocks being obtained, consider
them ti e stock to breed from: the nearer their colours
the more kindly they will unite. Never breed from two


old fowls ; let one at least be young. Three or four
hens are enough for one cock. The breeding place should
be well aired, and entirely free from other poultry. Clear
water, gravel, grass, and lime rubbish, and an occasions
change of food, is good ; as barley, oats, potatoes, a little
meat, toast and beer, &c. The roosts should be rather
low, as the heavy fowls otherwise would, in descending,
cripple themselves. The perches should be exactly suited
to the grasp of the foot. The keeping of pigs, ducks,
or allowing them access to coal ashes, or soap-suds,
produces the roop. There should be no geese or turkeys
at the walk, as they are always battering the fowls. The
nests should be made of clean dry straw, rubbed soft be-
tween the hands, and put in a basket, earthen pan, or
some such dish, and about a foot and a half from the
ground. Hay is injurious to the eggs, faint in the smell,
and is apt to engender vermin. There should be more
nests than hens, as it will prevent them quarrelling and
breaking the eggs. One egg should always be marked
with ink, and, and left in the nest, for them to lay to,
that you may know it from the others. As the eggs are
laid, take them from the nest, and put them in bran, with
the small end downward. When a hen begins to cluck,
do not save any more of her eggs for setting. If a cock
dislikes any of the hens, she should be removed. About
a dozen eggs are enough for a clutch. As the hen hatches
the young, they may be taken and put in flannel, in a
basket near the fire, till the last is hatched, feeding them
till they rejoin their mother on crumbs of bread,
boiled eggs, chopped raw meat, grits, &c, ; and when
returned to the mother, do it by night when she is on the


nest, otherwise she might fancy them strangers, and
destroy them. They should then be conveyed to a dry
place, where there are neither cats nor vermin, and for
ten or twelve days the hen should be cooped, to prevent
her from wandering and fatiguing the chickens : they
should have clean water fresh every day. At about six
weeks old, when their sexes can be distinguished, select
those which are to be kept, and destroy the rest, that
the remaining ones may thrive the better, by getting the
whole attention of the mother. Cut the young cocks
combs at the age of four months, and about five or six
weeks afterwards, their gills and deaf ears. The young
cocks should be marked with scissors, by slitting part of
the web of the foot, or cutting a small notch in the nostril,
or punching a small hole in the web of the foot with a
shoemaker’s punch. Some do so to the web of the wing
nearest the shoulder: others take a small notch out of
the upper eyelid, by laying the scissors flat to the side of
the head, and cutting out a very small piece of the lid-
A clear air, good food, and pure water, with perfect se-
clusion from other fowls, constitute the best walk, where,
as before-mentioned, they can obtain grass and gravel.
At about a twelvemonth old they are termed stags, and
at two years old they aie called cocks. The worst of
your stags should be tried against a good cock, to enable
you to judge of the qualities of the remaining ones; for
if he should beat the cock, there is every reason to con-
sider the others good. Short silver spurs are best for
this purpose.
TRAINING.
Suppose that the fowl comes from his walk in good


condition, in which case he will be too fat for fighting, he
he must be reduced, to give him wind.
The general method of training is as follows ;
First, cut his tail and spurs khort, and put him in
the pens ; no food the first day.
Second day, give him physic of cream of tartar, or
jalap, or both united, about six or eight grains mixed with
fresh butter and sugar-candy. Immediately after he
get* the physic, tie on the hots, or muffles,* and spar him
with another cock on a straw or grass plat, till he get
fatigued; then return him to his pen ; but if his mouth
has been pecked, rub it with a little vinegar and brandy
mixed, to prevent it from cankering. Then give him a
warm mess, to work off his physic, which you must make
of bread and milk and a little sugar-candy, or ale and
bread and sugar-candy, giving him a large tea-cup full:
when he gets this, shut him up till next morning. If cold
weather, cover him up with a blanket, or keep fire in the
room; if warm, clip him out; also keep him dark, by
shutting the windows always, except at feeding times.
Weigh them the third day when empty, and the moment
they are weighed, let them begin to feed.
• Hots, alias hods, or muffles, are pieces of leather
•tuffed with wool, and about the size of an egg, with a bit of
tape fixed to each end, to tie upon the cut spurs of the cocks,
while so exercising, to prevent injury.


Third day*, clean out his pen from the effects of the
physic, giving clean dry straw; also wash his legs, feet,
and face, before putting him among this clean He
is next to be allowed some cock bread, made of the
following ingredients: about three pounds of fine flour,
and two eggs, and four whites of eggs, and a little yeast,
kneaded with a proper quantity of water, and have it
w r ell baked in an oven ;to which you may add a small
number of aniseeds or a little cinnamon ; cut this in small
pieces ; give one cupful in the morning, and one in the
evening, allowing no water the third day with the above
bread.
Fourth morning, he should receive half a tea-cupful
of good barley and a little water, in which a toast has
been steeped: having eaten this, clean his pea, and give
new straw, leaving his pen uncovered about an hour, to
allow him to scratch himself. The barley should be hard
chaffed, to take away the sharp points : in the afternoon,
the same quantity of barley, but no water.
Fifth day, bread as before, in three quantities, but
no water.
Sixth day, bread early in the morning 1 , and towards
the afternoon a good feed of barley and water. Some
feeders give sheep’s heart cut small, both this and the
succeeding day, mixed with the other food.
• This should he the day of weighing, as the cocks are
now considered as light as their constitution will hear ; for
the less they weigh, the more depends on the judgment of
the feeder to bring them to their original strength, and in
better condition for battle.


Seventh day, a feed of barley early in the morning ;
in the afternoon, bread and the white of an egg boiled
hard, allowing him also a little water.
Eighth day, or day of fighting, allow him about
forty grains of barley, and one or two monthsful of water
from a toast, apple, or cheese, for digesting: hemp-seed,
steeped in brandy, prevents purging. Wheat or millet
seed may be added to his food ; sometimes hemp-seed as
a small mixture. Bread toast, soaked in vinegar, is some-
times given for reducing quickly.
ANOTHER WAY OF MAKING COCK-
BREAD*.
Take of millet seed and rice of each a half-pound i
add thereto four ounces of sprat barley and four ounces
of vetches, mixed and ground to a fine powder, and put
through a fine sieve; mix this flour with some strong
ale, adding also the whites of three eggs, and the white
and yolk of a fourth ; colour the whole with a little
saffron, make it into a loaf, and bake it in a slow oven
about four hours. Whites of eggs boiled hard, with
hemp-seed and barley, are often given for some of his
meal§.
MANNER OP TRIMMING HIS
FEATHERS.
After having tied his legs with a handkerchief or a
piece of soft string, place him on your lap, with his legs
* I have known this bread to have an extraordinary
effect in getting them up, when just damped with a little
pert wine, which stimulates the blood, and warms their
tomaeh.


between your knees, and his head towards yourself ; then,
collecting all his neck feathers together, apply your fore-
finger and thumb in a circular form to that part of the
neck next the shoulder of the cock, and press forward
the whole of his neck feathers as close round his head as
possible ; they will then appear like an erect frill round his
head ; to which apply a long and sharp pair of scissors ;.*s
close to your finger and thumb as possible all round, and
then take off the surface of the remaining ones next the
bead, but not too bare ; in fact, it is performed on the same
principle as hair-cutting; for the feathers are shortened
by being cut when turned the contrary way to that in
which they naturally lie. Next cut about two inches off
the ends of both his wings, at the same time making the
flight leathers decrease in length a quarter of an inch, in
proportion to the others, leaving the flight feathers farthest
from his body the shortest, which should be at least
three inches from its insertion in the wing. Than cut
the tail, leaving it a large hand’s breath from its insertion
in the rump outwards, taking off all the curling feathers
round it, leaving only the vane or fan. When his tail
is perfectly erect apply the scissors (with their point
inclining a little downwards) to the saddle, cutting from
a line with the lower feather of the tail towards the end
of the wing: some in trimming cut out a great quantity
of the soft feathers from under the saddle, to keep the
cocks cool. All the feathers round the vent are cut off
very close from under the tail to three or four inches
towards the breast between the legs*. His spurs are cut
* Homo pull out most of the feathers round the vent,
leaving the skin quite bare.


oj with a thin fine saw, leaving about a quarter of an
inch on the leg, on which is fixed the silver or steal spur :
sometimes, when the spur is so sawed off, blood will
issue from it which mav be stopped immediately by rub-
bing a piece of chalk firmly into it. In tying on the spur,
take a piece of soft thin brown paper, and, having folded
it two or three times, and having damped it a little with
the tongue, wrap it round the remaining quarter of an
inch of his natural heel as often as you think there will
be room in the socket of the silver or steel spur to contain
it, and the natural spur together, pressing the socket close
to the leg, observing at the same time that the curved part
of the spur is next the foot, and the hollow side upwards ;
or, in other words, the point inclini: g upwards : it sl.ouid
stand much in the same direction with a natural spur;
or, if you take a view from the point to the socket, the
point should than appear on a line with the hollow of the
inside of the leg ; then lap the leather ends over each
o;hir, and tie (hem down with a piece of waxed string
about the thickness of a shoemaker’s thread beginning
with the middle of the thread on the socket of the spur
close to the spur, going round the leather close to the
socket on both sides with the string as often as is
necessary for security* ; this should neither be too
tight to cramp him, nor so loose as to come off; for
should it come off, during the battld, or break, it is not
allowed to be replaced. A fair spur shou.d be round
and smooth from the socket to the point ; if flat on any
side, or rough, it is foul and improper.
• the leather round the socket of the spurs should have
as much breadth aa fully to prevent the string from touching
the leg,


COCKERS’ TRICKS EXPOSED.
Ist. The person who seconds, or sets-tothe cock,
may break his thigh with his fingers and thumb in a
moment, or may (by pressing his thumbs hard on his
kidneys, or by gripping him severely by the vent,) cause
him to li.se the battle, though otherwise he could have
won it; this wdl depend on his regard for his employer ,
or the understanding between him and the opposite
party ; for if he thinks he can get more from them as a
bribe to sell the fight, then he expects from the person
who employs him, he will act the above villauous part;
for no cocker is to be trusted ; and for this reason I have
always deemed it the safest way for any person to sec md
his own fowl, except there is a very good understanding
indeed between him ard the person he employs for that
purpose.
2nd. If the employer or his second allow the
cock to go into the hands of any other person previous
to the battle, he may be crippled, in an instant, as the
person so handling him might have an interest in seeing
him beaten.
3rd. If one cock sticks with his spurs into the
other, the seemd of the cock who has received the blow
takes out the spur; for if this be entrusted to the other
second, he has it in his power to wrench the spur in
different directions in taking it out, and do the fowl a
serious injury, and might (with the point) rip a hole in
him that would bleed him to death: this must be guarded
against.


4th. Very often the opposite second pretends not
to know that his cock has struck in the other ; he im-
mediately catches him up as high as he can reach, and
nearly drags the head from the body of the other, or
allows him to fall with great force on the pit.
sth. If a cock has but one eye, he should not be
pitted till the second is convinced that he sees his
antagonist; but if the opposite second can, he will pit
his one on the blind side: beware of that.
6th. Some have a low, blackguard trick of using
foul spurs, called “ steevy ,” according to St, Giles’s
s'ang. These appear round on one s;de, but on the
upper side, or that next the body of the cock, they are
sharpened with an edge like a knife : others are three-
edged or bayonet-pointed, which are also foul; in fact,
one cannot be too particular in examining the opponent’s
bj urs, which, to be fair, should be perfectly round to the
point, and smooth, oi polished ; y; u must also be on
\ our guard, if you agree t) fight with silver spurs, that
platedor.es are not substituted ; —this is also practised.
7th. When both cocks are so distressed that neither
can hold up his head, and perhaps the one can
on longer peck his antagonist, the second of this last,
mentioned one, in setting him to with the other, beak to
beak, raise his head with one hand, and, with the other
by suddenly raising his tail, bobs him on the other cock
and makes it appear as if he had chopped or pecked,
when no such thing took place : —this must be strictly
watched.


Bth. If a cock, after having chopped, becomes so
weak as to be unable to do so again, his second, in
pretending to set him to, beak to beak, with the othi-.i
only puts him near him, and allows his head to drop
under the breast of the other, to prevent him from feel-
ing him, who might chop in return and win the battle :
they should always in the long law be put fairly beak
to beak.
9th. If the opponent’s cock is a good mouthed
cock in distress, that is, one who will readily take hold
and fight, his second will place his back on the neck or
shoulder of the other, which gives him a great advantage,
if permitted, but is unfair, and not admissible.
10th. The same person will sometimes have twm
cocks taken to the pit, one carried by himself, and the
other by his friend, or some other person, who pretend
to know nothing of each other. They then (to appea-
rance) make up a match between the said two cocks, all
the while well knowing which is to win, as the one is
previously known to be bad, and the other good : this
is another system in betting, by which they deceive and
rob the spectators; for they are then safe in betting any
odds, and the long odds are generally taken. There
are various tricks practised by such vagabonds ; but
keen observation and second thoughts will avert them.
11th. A person will show a cock with particular
marks and colour, in full bather, which he matches
against another equal in weight: he than retires to trim
him for the fight, but re'urns with another, marked and
Colour. d hke the first, but much larger, gaining by


this manoeuvre a decided advantage :—this is called,
“Ringing the changes .”
12th. Sometimes they will rub the face of a sound,
healthy cock, with flour and grease, or chalk and grease*
to make him look stale, or with gnase and blacking, to
make him look rotten: at the same time he may be as
good as any between “ earth and sky.”
IN WEIGHING COCKS.
Ist. If the opposite party wishes to gain an ad-
vantage in weight, they will first see your bird weighed ;
then one of them will take a penny-piece, or a two or
four ounce brass weight, the hollow of which is billed
with tallow-grease, and stick it close to the bottom of
the scale in which the proper weights are, unseen, if
possible ; and by these means make their cock, which is
two or four ounces heavier than the other, appear the
same weight. The scales therefore should be narrowly
examined, and even if you do not also look up at th e
beam, the slightest touch of a small stick, or the brim
of a hat on some one’s head, will make all the dif-
ference .
2nd. The fowl or fowls of both parties should be
weighed by the very same weights ; for if the least
chance is alf >rded, false ones will be suhstitued. I have
seen a weight ol four pounds four ounces put in the plac e
of one of four pounds weight—such are actually made fur
the purpose.
N.B. Cocks that are intended for battle should
never be seen or touched by any one but the master or


the feeder, otherwise you are never safe; for they
might mix your cock’s food with the victuals taken out
of the crop of another almost dead with the roop.
Cocks that are meant to fight by candle-light should
receive the last meals by candle-light each day, about
the hour appointed for the contest.
3rd. Take great care who you allow' to tie nth e
spurs, as they may be too tight, and cramp the cock —
or loose, and come off. lam inclined to prefer shorter
spurs for the size of cocks then are generally used :
for turn-outs, not longer than two inches and a half;
for lesser ones, from two inches to two and a quarter ; for
cocks of four pounds four ounces, not more than two
inches only; and if under four pounds, one inch and
three quarter, or shorter for when they come to grap-
pling in close quarters or in distress, a long spur is almost
useless ; it may do for a dash or two at the first onset,
but not afterwards.
It is always a sign of a hen being in good health,
and clean fed, if the yolk of her egg, when boiled, is of
a pale yellow ; when of a dark red, the reverse. Chickens
are composed of the tread and white of the egg, as the
yolk comes to the world wdth them in their inside, on
which they chiefly subsist, till they gain sufficient
gtrength to follow their mother; for the first thing a
hen gives her chickens is the small chips of broken she’l
out of which they came, which cut the yolk in their inside*
and thereby promote digestion.
Fowls that have once had the roop can never he
entirely relied on as being either sound enough to breed


from, or to fight; and there are so many opinions with
regard to the most effectual remedy for their diseases,
that I consider it useless for me to enter minutely int*
the subject; for, were I consulted on this point, I would
recommend as the most decisive cure —to cut their headt
°ff


’•■ ’v; --vf/-.*; • r ' -• { - 1 - . ft: ..■ .. ■•.’■ ■'■ ' SS3& .. V*: cr*


