

The Dardanelles
Walker's Ridge, Anzac.
An Epic told in Pictures.




THE DARDANELLES
“ The Finest Feat e~i>er performed hy
'British Air ms ”
SIR IAN HAMILTON
FOREWORD
HE finest feat ever performed by
British Arms ” was the description
applied by Sir lan Hamilton, in his
historic despatch, to the perform-
ances of our soldiers in Gallipoli.
Of that great feat the heroic
troops of Australia and New Zealand
can claim the lion’s share. In those
stupendous struggles which they fought side by side
with their brothers in arms from the Motherland they
achieved something far greater than unsurpassed acts
of military valour ; they forged strong links to bind
together yet more closely the peoples of Greater Britain.
The Anzac heroes who bled and died in Gallipoli, their
English comrades, and the men of the Fleet who went
to their death aboard the sinking battleships in the
Dardanelles, have left a legacy to the British Empire
which will have even more lasting effects than will
the victory which is coming to us.
The Dardanelles campaign has showed Great
Britain and her Dominions beyond the seas united
in one common bond of brotherhood. The heroes of
Anzac, of Suvla Bay, and the Beaches have made
history by their surpassing bravery, their indomitable
courage, their coolness, their cheerfulness in circum-
stances of appalling hardships and danger. Their
story will live for ever.
This book can add no lustre to their imperishable
fame, but it can make their history the more real. It
shows in photographs the actual conditions in which
they fought and died, it forms a pictorial record of
the scenes of which so much has been written, and
makes real places and incidents that have previously
been only names.
Many of the photographs in this book were taken
under hre. They constitute a unique souvenir of a
phase in a campaign that ranks above the greatest
military feats the world has hitherto known and
that forms a standard by which all deeds of soldier
valour will be measured in the future.


Tublished by
The Alfieri Picture Service
4., 5, 6 (Sf 7, Red Lion Court
Fleet Street, London, E.C








Australians embarking on H.M. Ship London for the Great Adventure
6






Turkish Barbed Wire at Seddul Bahr








The Landing at Anzac




Building Dug=Outs at Anzac






























Captured Turkish Trenches
30






Turkish Prisoners in the Anzac Trenches






Quinn’s Post, Anzac
36












Shorts in the Anzac Trenches
Using the Periscope


Trenches at Quinn’s Post, Anzac




































































The Armistice






















Australian Transport in Mudros Bay




Troops waiting to go Ashore at Anzac














Description of the Operations
from GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON’S DESPATCH




DESCRIPTION of the OPERATIONS
from SIR lAN HAMILTON'S DESPATCH
full story of what has been called the
“ or * ous failure ” at Suvla Bay has been
* n an intensel y y f and graphic despatch
by Sir Ian Hamilton, who was in command
}’-■ ( of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force. It
is not possible, within the scope of this book,
to print this despatch in full, but the following extracts
will serve to indicate the nature of the operations associated
with the places illustrated in the preceding pages.
THE DATE OF THE GREAT ADVENTURE.
Only one other action need be mentioned before coming
to the big operations of August. On the extreme right of
Anzac the flank of a work called Tasmania Post was
threatened by the extension of a Turkish trench. The
task of capturing this trench was entrusted to the 3rd
Australian Brigade. After an artillery bombardment,
mines were to be fired, whereupon four columns of 50 men
each were to assault and occupy specified lengths of the
trench. The regiment supplying the assaulting columns
was the nth Australian Infantry Battalion.
At 10.15 P*m. on July 31st the bombardment was opened.
Ten minutes later and the mines were duly fired. The
four assaulting parties dashed forward at once, crossed
our own barbed wire on planks, and were into the craters
before the whole of the debris had fallen. Total casualties :
11 killed and 74 wounded ; Turkish killed, 100.
By the time this action was fought a large proportion of
my reinforcements had arrived, and, on the same principle
which induced me to put General Stopford in temporary
command at Helles, I relieved the war-worn 29th Division
at the same place by the 13th Division under Major-
General Shaw. The experiences here gained, in looking
after themselves, in forgetting the thousand and one
details of peace soldiering and in grasping the two or three
elementary rules of conduct in war soldiering, were, it
turned out, to be of priceless advantage to the 13th Division
throughout the heavy fighting of the following month.


And now it was time to determine a date for the great
venture. The moon would rise on the morning of the yth
at about 2 a.m. A day or two previously the last reinforce-
ments, the 53rd and 54th Divisions, were due to arrive.
The first day of the attack was fixed for August 6th.
THE ANZACS AT CHUNUK BAIR.
I will now proceed to tell of the assault on Chunuk Bair
by the forces under General Birdwood, and of the landing
of the 9th Corps in the neighbourhood of Suvla Bay. The
entire details of the operations allotted to the troops to be
employed in the Anzac area were formulated by Lieutenant-
General Birdwood, subject only to my final approval. So
excellently was this vital business worked out on the lines
of the instructions issued that I had no modifications to
suggest, and all these local preparations were completed by
August 6th in a way which reflects the greatest credit, not
only on the Corps Commander and his staff, but also upon
the troops themselves, who had to toil like slaves to
accumulate food, drink, and munitions of war. Alone the
accommodation for the extra troops to be landed neces-
sitated an immense amount of work in preparing new
concealed bivouacs, in making interior communications,
and in storing water and supplies, for I was determine to
put on shore as many fighting men as our modest holding
at Anzac could possibly accommodate or provision. All
the work was done by Australian and New Zealand soldiers
almost entirely by night, and the uncomplaining efforts of
these much-tried troops in preparation are in a sense as
much to their credit as their heroism in the battles that
followed. Above all, the water problem caused anxiety to
the Admiral, to Lieutenant-General Birdwood, and to myself.
The troops to advance from Suvla Bay across the
Anafarta valley might reckon on finding some wells —it
was certain, at least, that no water was waiting for us on
the crests of the ridges of Sari Bair ! Therefore, first,
several days’ supply had to be stocked into tanks along the
beach and thence pumped up into other tanks half-way up
the mountains ; secondly, a system of mule transport had
to be worked out, so that, in so far as was humanly possible,
thirst should not be allowed to overcome the troops after
they had overcome the difficulties of the country and the
resistance of the enemy.
Once the capture of Old No. 3 Post was fairly under
way, the remainder of the right covering column carried
on with their attack upon Bauchop’s Hill and the Chailak
Dere. By 10 p.m. the northernmost point, with its machine-
gun, was captured, and by 1 o’clock in the morning the
whole of Bauchop’s Hill, a maze of ridge and ravine, every-
where entrenched, was fairly in our hands.


The attack along the Chailak Dere was not so cleanly
carried out —made, indeed, just about as ugly a start as
any enemy could wish. Pressing eagerly forward through
the night, the little column of stormers found themselves
held up by a barbed wire erection of unexampled height,
depth, and solidity, which completely closed the river bed
—that is to say, the only practicable entrance to the ravine.
The entanglement was flanked by a strongly-held enemy
trench running right across the opening of the Chailak
Dere. Here that splendid body of men, the Otago Mounted
Rifles, lost some of their bravest and their best, but in the
end, when things were beginning to seem desperate, a
passage was forced through the stubborn obstacle with
most conspicuous and cool courage by Captain Shera and
a party of New Zealand Engineers, supported by the
Maoris, who showed themselves worthy descendants of the
warriors of the Gate Pah. Thus was the mouth of the
Chailak Dere opened in time to admit of the unopposed
entry of the right assaulting column.
THE ATTACK ON THE LONE PINE TRENCHES.
The most simple method of developing this complicated
series of operations will be first to take the frontal attacks
from the existing Anzac position, and afterwards to go on
to the assault on the more distant ridges. During the 4th, sth
and 6th of August the works on the enemy’s left and centre
were subjected to a slow bombardment, and on the after-
noon of August 6th an assault was made upon the formid-
able Lone Pine entrenchment. Although, in its essence,
a diversion to draw the enemy’s attention and reserves
from the grand attack impending upon his right, yet, in
itself, Lone Pine was a distinct step on the way across to
Maidos. It commanded one of the main sources of the
Turkish water supply, and was a work, or, rather, a series
of works, for the safety of which the enemy had always
evinced a certain nervousness. The attack was designed
to heighten this impression.
The work consisted of a strong point d’appui on the
south-western end of a plateau, where it confronted, at
distances varying from 60 to 120 yards, the salient in the
line of our trenches named by us the Pimple. The en-
trenchment was evidently very strong ; it was entangled
with wire and provided with overhead cover, and it was
connected by numerous communication trenches with
another point d’appui known as Johnston’s Jolly on the
north, as well as with two other works on the east and
south. The frontage for attack amounted at most to some
220 yards, and the approaches lay open to heavy enfilade
fire, both from the north and from the south.


The detailed scheme of attack was worked out with care
and forethought by Major-General H. B. Walker, com-
manding ist Australian Division, and his thoroughness
contributed, I consider, largely to the success of the enter-
prise.
The action commenced at 4.30 p.m. with a continuous
and heavy bombardment of the Lone Pine and adjacent
trenches, H.M.S. Bacchante assisting by searching the
valleys to the north-east and east, and the Monitors by
shelling the enemy’s batteries south of Gaba Tepe. The
assault had been entrusted to the ist Australian Brigade
(Brigadier-General N. M. Smyth), and punctually at
5.30 p.m. it was carried out by the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Aus-
tralian Battalions, the ist Battalion forming the Brigade
reserve.
THE INVINCIBILITY OF THE AUSTRALIANS.
Two lines left their trenches simultaneously, and were
closely followed up by a third. The rush across the open
was a regular race against death, which came in the shape
of a hail of shell and rifle bullets from front and from either
flank. But the Australians had firmly resolved to reach
the enemy’s trenches, and in this determination they became
for the moment invincible. The barbed wire entanglement
was reached and was surmounted. Then came a terrible
moment, when it seemed as though it would be physically
impossible to penetrate into the trenches. The overhead
cover of stout pine beams resisted all individual efforts to
move it, and the loopholes continued to spit fire. Groups
of our men then bodily lifted up the beams and individual
soldiers leaped down into the semi-darkened galleries
amongst the Turks. By 5.47 p.m. the 3rd and 4th Bat-
talions were well into the enemy’s vitals, and a few minutes
later the reserves of the 2nd Battalion advanced over their
Parados , and driving out, killing, or capturing the occu-
pants, made good the whole of the trenches. The reserve
companies of the 3rd and 4th Battalions followed, and at
6.20 p.m. the ist Battalion (in reserve) was launched to
consolidate the position.
At once the Turks made it plain, as they have never
ceased to do since, that they had no intention of acquiescing
in the capture of this capital work. At 7 p.m. a determined
and violent counter-attack began, both from the north and
from the south. Wave upon wave the enemy swept forward
with the bayonet. Here and there a well-directed salvo of
bombs emptied a section of a trench, but whenever this
occurred the gap was quickly filled by the initiative of the
officers and the gallantry of the men.


CONTINUOUS FIGHTING BY DAY AND NIGHT.
The enemy allowed small respite. At 1.30 that night
the battle broke out afresh. Strong parties of Turks swarmed
out of the communication trenches, preceded by showers
of bombs. For seven hours these counter-attacks con-
tinued. All this time consolidation was being attempted,
although the presence of so many Turkish prisoners
hampered movement and constituted an actual danger.
In beating off these desperate counter-attacks very heavy
casualties were suffered by the Australians. Part of the
12th Battalion, the reserve of the 3rd Brigade, had there-
fore to be thrown into the mdse.
Twelve hours later, at 1.30 p.m. on the 7th, another
effort was made by the enemy, lasting uninterruptedly at
closest quarters till 5 p.m., then being resumed at midnight
and proceeding intermittently till dawn. At an early
period of this last counter-attack the 4th Battalion were
forced by bombs to relinquish portion of a trench, but later
on, led by their commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel
McNaghten, they killed every Turk who had got in.
During August 8th advantage was taken of every
cessation in the enemy’s bombing to consolidate. The
2nd Battalion, which had lost its commanding officer and
suffered especially severely, was withdrawn and replaced
by the 7th Battalion, the reserve to the 2nd Infantry
Brigade.
At 5 a.m. on August 9th the enemy made a sudden
attempt to storm from the east and south-east after a feint
of fire attack from the north. The 7th Battalion bore the
brunt of the shock, and handled the attack so vigorously
that by 7.45 a.m. there were clear signs of demoralisation
in the enemy’s ranks. But, although this marked the end
of counter-attacks on the large scale, the bombing and
sniping continued, though in less volume, throughout this
day and night, and lasted till August 12th, when it at last
became manifest that we had gained complete ascendency.
During the final grand assault our losses from artillery fire
were large, and ever since the work has passed into our
hands it has been a favourite daily and nightly mark for
heavy shells and bombs.
MEN WHO WERE A GLORY TO AUSTRALIA.
Thus was Lone Pine taken and held. The Turks were in
great force and very full of fight, yet one weak Australian
Brigade, numbering at the outset but 2,000 rifles, and
supported only by two weak battalions, carried the work
under the eyes of a whole enemy division, and maintained
their grip upon it like a vice during six days’ successive
counter-attacks. High praise is due to Brigadier-General


N. M. Smyth and to his battalion commanders. The irre-
sistible dash and daring of officers and men in the initial
charge were a glory to Australia. The stout-heartedness
with which they clung to the captured ground in spite of
fatigue, severe losses, and the continual strain of shell fire
and bomb attacks, may seem less striking to the civilian ;
it is even more admirable to the soldier. From start to
finish the artillery support was untiring and vigilant.
Owing to the rapid, accurate fire of the 2nd New Zealand
Battery, under Major Sykes, several of the Turkish on-
slaughts were altogether defeated in their attempts to get
to grips with the Australians. Not a chance was lost by
these gunners, although time and again the enemy’s
artillery made direct hits on their shields. The hand-to-
hand fighting in the semi-obscurity of the trenches was
prolonged and very bitterly contested.
In one corner eight Turks and six Australians were found
lying as they had bayonetted one another. To make room
for the fighting men the dead were ranged in rows on
either side of the gangway. After the first violence of the
counter-attacks had abated, 1,000 corpses—our own and
Turkish —were dragged out from the trenches.
For the severity of our own casualties some partial
consolation may be found in the facts, first, that those of
the enemy were much heavier, our guns and machine-guns
having taken toll of them as they advanced in mass for-
mation along the reverse slopes ; secondly, that the Lone
Pine attack drew all the local enemy reserves towards it,
and may be held, more than any other cause, to have been
the reason that the Suvla Bay landing was so lightly
opposed, and that comparatively few of the enemy were
available at first to reinforce against our attack on Sari
Bair. Our captures in this feat of arms amounted to 134
prisoners, seven machine-guns, and a large quantity of
ammunition and equipment.
THE FRONTAL ATTACKS FROM ANZAC.
Other frontal attacks from the existing Anzac positions
were not so fortunate. They fulfilled their object in so
far as they prevented the enemy from reinforcing against
the attack upon the high ridges, but they failed to make
good any ground. Taken in sequence of time, they included
an attack upon the work known as German Officers’
Trench, on the extreme right of our line, at midnight on
August bth-yth, also assaults on the Nek and Baby 700
trenches opposite the centre of our line, delivered at 4.30
a.m. on the 7th. The 2nd Australian Brigade did all that
men could do ; the 8th Light Horse only accepted their
repulse after losing three-fourths of that devoted band who
so bravely sallied forth from Russell’s Top. Some of the
works were carried, but in these cases the enemy’s con


cealed machine-guns made it impossible to hold on. But
ail that day, as the result of these most gallant attacks,
Turkish reserves on Battleship Hill were being held back to
meet any dangerous development along the front of the old
Anzac line, and so were not available to meet our main
enterprise, which I will now endeavour to describe.
The first step in the real push—the step which above all
others was to count —was the night attack on the summits
of the Sari Bair ridge. The crest line of this lofty mountain
range runs parallel to the sea, dominating the underfeatures
contained within the Anzac position, although these,
fortunately, defilade the actual landing-place. From the
main ridge a series of spurs run down towards the level
beach, and are separated from one another by deep, jagged
gullies choked up with dense jungle. Two of these leading
up to Chunuk Bair are called Chailak Dere and Sazli Beit
Dere ; another deep ravine runs up to Koja Chemen Tepe
(Hill 305), the topmost peak of the whole ridge, and is called
the Aghyl Dere.
RUSSELL’S NEW ZEALANDERS AT TABLE TOP.
Simultaneously the attack on Table Top had been launched
under cover of a heavy bombardment from H.M.S. Colne.
No General on peace manoeuvres would ask troops to
attempt so break-neck an enterprise. The flanks of Table
Top are so steep that the height gives an impression of a
mushroom shape—of the summit bulging out over its stem.
But just as faith moves mountains, so valour can carry
them. The Turks fought bravely. The angle of Table
Top’s ascent is recognised in our regulations as “im-
practicable for infantry.” But neither Turks nor angles
of ascent were destined to stop Russell or his New Zealanders
that night. There are moments during battle when life
becomes intensified, when men become supermen, when
the impossible becomes simple —and this was one of those
moments. The scarped heights were scaled, the plateau
was carried by midnight. With this brilliant feat the task
of the right covering force was at an end. Its attacks had
been made with the bayonet and bomb only ; magazines
were empty by order ; hardly a rifle shot had been fired.
Some 150 prisoners were captured as well as many rifles
and much equipment, ammunition, and stores. No words
can do justice to the achievement of Brigadier-General
Russell and his men. There are exploits which must be
seen to be realised.
The right assaulting column had entered the two southerly
ravines—Sazli Beit Dere and Chailak Dere—by midnight.
At 1.30 a.m. began a hotly-contested fight for the trenches
on the lower part of Rhododendron Spur, whilst the Chailak
Dere column pressed steadily up the valley against the enemy.


A QUARTER OF A MILE FROM VICTORY.
Dawn broke and the crest line was not yet in our hands,
although, considering all things, the left assaulting column
had made a marvellous advance. The 4th Australian
Infantry Brigade was on the line of the Asma Dere (the
next ravine north of the Aghyl Dere) and the 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade held the ridge west of the Farm below
Chunuk Bair and along the spurs to the north-east. The
enemy had been flung back from ridge to ridge ; an excellent
line for the renewal of the attack had been secured, and
(except for the exhaustion of the troops) the auspices were
propitious.
Turning to the right assaulting column, one battalion,
the Canterbury Infantry Battalion, clambered slowly up the
Sazli Beit Dere. The remainder of the force, led by the
Otago Battalion, wound their way amongst the pitfalls and
forced their passage through the scrub of the Chailak Dere,
where fierce opposition forced them ere long to deploy.
Here, too, the hopeless country was the main hindrance,
and it was not until 5.45 a.m. that the bulk of the column
joined the Canterbury Battalion on the lower slopes of
Rhododendron Spur. The whole force then moved up the
Spur, gaining touch with the left assaulting column by
means of the 10th Gurkhas, in face of very heavy fire and
frequent bayonet charges. Eventually they entrenched on
the top of Rhododendron Spur, a quarter of a mile short
of Chunuk Bair —i.e., of victory.
At 7 a.m. the 5th and 6th Gurkhas, belonging to the
left assaulting column, had approached the main ridge
north-east of Chunuk Bair, whilst, on their left, the 14th
Sikhs had got into touch with the 4th Australian Brigade
on the southern watershed of the Asma Dere. The 4th
Australian Brigade now received orders to leave half a
battalion to hold the spur, and, with the rest of its strength,
plus the 14th Sikhs, to assault Hill 305 (Koja Chemen
Tepe). But by this time the enemy’s opposition had
hardened, and his reserves were moving up from the
direction of Battleship Hill. Artillery support was asked
for and given, yet by 9 a.m. the attack of the right assaulting
column on Chunuk Bair was checked, and any idea of a
further advance on Koja Chemen Tepe had to be, for the
moment, suspended. The most that could be done was to
hold fast to the Asmak Dere watershed whilst attacking
the ridge north-east of Chunuk Bair, an attack: to be
supported by a fresh assault launched against Chunuk Bair
itself.
NEW ARMY’S STAND ON THE SUMMIT.
The New Army troops attacked with a fine audacity,
but they were flung back from the height and then pressed
still further down the slope, until General Baldwin had to


withdraw his command to the vicinity of the Farm, whilst
the enemy, much encouraged, turned their attention to
the New Zealand troops and the two New Army battalions
of No. 1 Column still holding the south-west half of the
main knoll of Chunuk Bair. Constant attacks, urged with
fanatical persistence, were met here with a sterner reso-
lution, and although, at the end of the day, our troops
were greatly exhausted, they still kept their footing on the
summit. And if that summit meant much to us, it meant
even more to the Turks. For the ridge covered our landing
places, it is true, but it covered not only the Turkish beaches
at Kilia Leman and Maidos, but also the Narrows them-
selves and the roads leading northward to Bulair and
Constantinople.
That evening our line ran along Rhododendron Spur up
to the crest of Chunuk Bair, where about 200 yards were
occupied and held by some 800 men. Slight trenches had
hastily been dug, but the fatigue of the New Zealanders
and the fire of the enemy had prevented solid work being
done. The trenches in many places were not more than
a few inches deep. They were not protected by wire.
Also many officers are of opinion that they had
not been well sited in the first instance. On the South
African system, the main line was withdrawn some
25 yards from the crest instead of being actually on the
Crestline itself, and there were not even look-out posts
along the summit. Boer skirmishers would thus have had
to show themselves against the skyline before they could
annoy. But here we were faced by regulars taught to
attack in mass with bayonet or bomb. And the power of
collecting overwhelming numbers at very close quarters
rested with whichever side held the true skyline in force.
From Chunuk Bair the line ran down to the Farm and
almost due north to the Asma Dere southern watershed,
whence it continued westward to the sea near Asmak
Kuyu. On the right the Australian Division was still
holding its line and Lone Pine was still being furiously
attacked. The ist Australian Brigade was now reduced
from 2,900 to 1,000, and the total casualties up to 8 p.m.
on the 9th amounted to about 8,500. But the troops were
still in extraordinarily good heart, and nothing could damp
their keenness. The only discontent shown was by men
who were kept in reserve.
THEY DIED IN THE RANKS WHERE THEY STOOD.
Now it was our turn. The warships and the New Zealand
and Australian Artillery, the Indian Mounted Artillery
Brigade, and the 69th Brigade Royal Field Artillery were
getting the chance of a lifetime. As the successive solid
lines of Turks topped the crest of the ridge gaps were torn


through their formation and an iron rain fell on them as
they tried to re-form in the gullies.
Not here only did the Turks pay dearly for their recapture
of the vital crest. Enemy reinforcements continued to
move up Battleship Hill under heavy and accurate fire
from our guns, and still they kept topping the ridges and
pouring down the western slopes of the Chunuk Bair as if
determined to regain everything they had lost. But once
they were over the crest they became exposed not only to
the full blast of the guns, naval and military, but also to a
battery of ten machine-guns belonging to the New Zealand
Infantry Brigade, which played upon their serried ranks
at close range until the barrels were red-hot. Enormous
losses were inflicted, especially by these ten machine-guns ;
and of the swarms which had once fairly crossed the Crest-
line only the merest handful ever straggled back to their
own side of Chunuk Bair.
HEROISM THAT DID NOT ACHIEVE SUCCESS.
The grand coup had not come off. The Narrows were
still out of sight and beyond field gun range. But this was
not the fault of Lieutenant-General Birdwood or any of
the officers and men under his command. No mortal can
command success ; Lieutenant-General Birdwood had done
all that mortal man can do to deserve it. The way in which
he worked out his instructions into practical arrangements
and dispositions upon the terrain reflect high credit upon
his military capacity. I also wish to bring to your Lord-
ship’s notice the valuable services of Major-General Godley,
commanding the New Zealand and Australian Division.
He had under him at one time a force amounting to two
divisions, which he handled with conspicuous ability.
Major-General F. C. Shaw, commanding 13th Division,
also rose superior to all the trials and tests of these trying
days. His calm and sound judgment proved to be of the
greatest value throughout the arduous fighting I have
recorded.
As for the troops, the joyous alacrity with which they
faced danger, wounds and death, as if they were some new
form of exciting recreation, has astonished me —old cam-
paigner as I am. I will say no more, leaving Major-General
Godley to speak for what happened under his eyes : “I
cannot close my report,” he says, “without placing on
record my unbounded admiration of the work performed,
and the gallantry displayed, by the troops and their leaders
during the severe fighting involved in these operations.
Though the Australian, New Zealand, and Indian units had
been confined to trench duty in a cramped space for some
four months, and though the troops of the New Armies
had only just landed from a sea voyage, and many of them


had not been previously under fire, I do not believe that
any troops in the world could have accomplished more.
All ranks vied with one another in the performance of
gallant deeds, and more than worthily upheld the best
traditions of the British Army.”
OVERSEA TROOPS CAPTURE A NEW LINE.
General Cox divided his force into three sections ; the
left section to press forward and establish a permanent
hold on the existing lightly-held outpost line covering the
junction of the nth Division with the Anzac front ; the
centre section to seize the well at Kabak Kuyu, an asset of
utmost value, whether to ourselves or the enemy ; the
right section to attack and capture the Turkish trenches
on the north-east side of the Kaiajik Aghala.
The advance of the left section was a success ; after a
brisk engagement the well at Kabak Kuyu was seized by
the Indian Brigade, and, by 4.30, the right column, under
Brigadier-General Russell, under heavy fire, effected a
lodgment on the Kaiajik Aghala, where our men entrenched,
and began to dig communications across the Kaiajik Dere
towards the lines of the 4th Australian Brigade south of
the Dere. A pretty stiff bomb fight ensued, in which
General Russell’s troops held their own through the night
against superior force. At 6 a.m. on the morning of
August 22nd General Russell, reinforced by the newly-
arrived 18th Australian Battalion, attacked the summit of
the Kaiajik Aghala. The Australians carried 150 yards
of the trenches, losing heavily in so doing, and were then
forced to fall back again owing to enfilade fire, though in
the meantime the New Zealand Mounted Rifles managed,
in spite of constant counter-attacks, to make good another
80 yards.
A counter-attack in strength launched by the Turks at
10 a.m. was repulsed ; the new line from the Kaiajik
Aghala to Susuk Kuyu was gradually strengthened, and
eventually joined on to the right of the pfb Army Corps,
thereby materially improving the whole situation. During
this action the 4th Australian Brigade, which remained
facing the Turks on the upper part of the Kaiajik Aghala,
was able to inflict several hundred casualties on the enemy
as they retreated or endeavoured to reinforce.
On August 21st we had carried the Turkish entrench-
ments at several points, but had been unable to hold what
we had gained except along the section where Major-General
Cox had made a good advance with Anzac and Indian troops.
To be repulsed is not to be defeated, as long as the com-
mander and his troops are game to renew the attack. All
were eager for such a renewal of the offensive ; but clearly
we would have for some time to possess our souls in patience,


seeing that reinforcements and munitions were short, that
we were already outnumbered by the enemy, and that a
serious outbreak of sickness showed how it had become
imperative to give a spell of rest to the men who had been
fighting so magnificently and so continuously. To calcu-
late on rest, it may be suggested, was to calculate without
the enemy. Such an idea has no true bearing on the
feelings of the garrison of the peninsula. That the Turks
should attack had always been the earnest prayer of all
of us, just as much after August 21st as before it. And
now that we had to suspend progress for a bit, work was
put in hand upon the line from Suvla to Anzac, a minor
offensive routine of sniping and bombing was organised,
and, in a word, trench warfare set in on both sides.
FAREWELL TRIBUTE TO “ DEAR COMRADES.”
I have many other names to bring to notice for dis-
tinguished and gallant service during the operations under
review, and these will form the subject of a separate
communication.
And now, before affixing to this despatch my final
signature as Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force, let me first pay tribute to the ever-
lasting memory of my dear comrades who will return no
more. Next, let me thank each and all —Generals, Staff,
Regimental Leaders, and rank and file —for their wonderful
loyalty, patience, and self-sacrifice. Our progress was
constant, and if it was painfully slow —they know the
truth.
So I bid them all farewell with a special God-speed to
the campaigners who have served with me right through
from the terrible yet most glorious earlier days—the incom-
parable 29th Division ; the young veterans of the Naval
Division ; the ever-victorious Australians and New Zea-
landers ; the stout East Lancs, and my own brave fellow-
countrymen of the Lowland Division of Scotland.
I have the honour to be,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
lAN HAMILTON,
General, Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.


Printed by Polsue Limited, The Cornish Press
15 16, Gough Sq., Fleet St., London, E.C


