

THE
VISITORS' GUIDE
TO
WARRNAMBOOL
AND DISTRICT,
TO WHICH IS ADDE A
DIRECTORY
FOR THE
TOWN OF WARRNAMBOOL.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




To the Travelling Public.
LIVERY & LETTING STABLES,
WARRNAMBOOL.
STANSMORE BROS.,
(Recently of Camperdo-wn),
Desire to inform their numerous friends and the travelling public
of Victoria generally, that they have commenced business at
Warrnambool, and in addition to a staff of civil and competent
attendants, are determined that one of the firm will always be on
the spot, and personally supervise the yard. Very special atten-
tion will be given to the despatch of Commercial Travellers, and
from their great resources in the way of horse flesh,.the danger of
delay will be reduced to a minimum. Every possible description
of vehicle will be available for hire, and prices will be clipped as
low as consistent with a creditable turn out. The Livery
Department, as heretofore, will be efficiently and conscientiously
conducted.
Constituents at a distance can rely upon their Postal or
Telegraphic Despatches receiving prompt attention and reply.
On the arrival of steamers from Melbourne, Belfast
passengers—not less than four—can be driven to Belfast, at 5s
each; and to Portland as per agreement.
STANSMORE BROS.,
WARRNAMBOOL.


The Western Steam Navigation Company
(LIMHE D.)
Regular steam communication between
Melbourne, Warrnambool, Belfast, $ Portland.
The favourite and full powered screw steamers
“NELSON” and “JULIA PEROT”
Are intended to trade Twice Weekly between the above ports,
LEAVING MELBOURNE
Every TUESDAY and FRIDAY afternoons
(if practicable) ;
SAILING FROM PORTLAND
Every TUESDA Y and FRIDA Y mornings
(when practicable).
Proceeding to Melbourne via Belfast and Warrnambool.
/ AG E N t 7:
Melbourne ... ... * JOHN THOMPSON, 13 Market
I Buildings, William-street.
Belfast LEWIS GRANT
Portland SAMUEL P. HAWKINS.
Head Office—Warrnambool.
WM. R. EVANS, Manager.
YOUNG MEN’S CLUtf
AND
TEMPERANCE HOTEL,
KEPLER-STREET, WARRNAMBOOL..
o
The above Institution fills a want long felt in this district by-
providing for Visitors Superior Accommodation on the most
reasonable terms free from the objection that most
persons have to staying in Licensed Houses.
First-class Ordinary from twelve to tiro, Is.
Vacancies for a few Permanent Boarders. Terms, £1 per week.
Shower and Plunge Baths.
Good Stabling, free.
-A.. S. BROWIT,
Manager ,


T. L. CAMPBELL,
FAMILY GROCER, DRAPER,
AND
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
FAIRY-STREET, WARRN AMBOOL.
(Opposite Wilson’s Carriage Factory).
DAIRY PRODUCE Purchased at highest market rates.
R. S. HARRIS,
Seed grower $ Importer, Nurseryman $ Fruiterer,
LIEBIG STREET, WARRNAMBOOL,.
Sends with despatch Farm, Kitchen Garden and Flower Seeds, by
post or otherwise if desired, to any part of Australasia.
Garden requisites always in stock.
T BMP Tn IE OIF 1 P ASHIOIT,
FAIRY STREET, WARRNAMBOOL,
J. C L E A R Y.
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s garments splendidly made to order ; suits
from £3 10s to £7, full dress. ,
J. C. has procured all the appliances for a cutting class. Terms,
Ten guineas.
Oh ! all who labour, all who strive,
Ye wield a lofty power.
Do with your strength, do with your might.
And All every golden hour.
For that is the most glorious privilege,
And man’s most noble dower.
To your birthright and to your own soul be-true,
• Weary and wretched are those poor souls who have no work to do.
COMMERCIA L HOUSE,
AUANSFOED.
ROBERT SMART,
GENERAL STOREKEEPER*PRODUCE MERCHANT.
DAIRY PRODUCE purchased at the highest current rates.


COM MERC I A L HOUSE,
ECONOMIC DRAPERY WAREHOUSE.
R. TWIN EM
BLACK AND COLOURED SILKS, SATINS, SC., BLACK AND COLOIIRFn PASHMfpcq
VELVETEENS, 4C„ DRESS MATERIALS
Trimmings and Buttons to match
LADIES- and CHILDREN’S MISERY, in various makes.
GLOVES in Kid, Taffeta, Jersey, and Thread.
MILLINERY in profusion, in Ladies’ and Children’s BONNETS and HATS
heathers, Flowers, Ornaments, &c. 1
LADIES’ MANTLES and JACKETS, in latest styles
Ladies’ Stays in great variety, including Dr. Warner’s self-fitting Corset. ’
Ladies and Children’s Underclothing
in all the various makes and qualities. ’
Splendid value always in stock in Blankets, Sheetings. Flannels Tickings Conner
pimes, also, Carpets in Brussels, Tapestry and Felt g with Hearthft Sh
. MEN’S AND BOYS’ CLOTHING
andsizeT. ’ e '° nS and Bharat Tweeds, in full assortment of patterns
. T •. BOOTS AND SHOES
Rnnre d ‘ es n nd Chlld ren’s Kid and Prunella; also, Wainwright’s local made Leather
TYBP-'ccf S i Z w * w’ ln . Men ’ s > Women’s and Children’s.
*L nd MAN TLEMAKING undermost efficient management and satis-
faction can be guaranteed, combined with moderate charge! agement ’ and satls
Lie big-Street R ' TWINEM,
__ __ Commercial House.
WEST END STORE,
Corner of Fairy and Lava Streets.
R. R. BENSON
Returns his sincere, thanks to the public for patronage received and
trusts by attention to business, and keeping none but the best
articles to merit a continuance of the same.
groceries, drapery,
Crockery, Earthenware, Ironmongery, &c.
*I BACON™ 6 B ' iVGn f ° r first ‘ class CHEESE, BUTTER, EGGS
E. W. SHADDOCK,
Saddle and / Harness Maker,
ELIZABETH STREET, KOROIT.
Saddlery and Harness of every description in stock. Orders
punctually attended to. Repairs executed with prompitude.


Important to Visitors.
Where can we get the best and cheapest BOOTS, SHOES, and
SLIPPERS in Ladies’, Gent’s, and Children’s ? The reply is
at the WARRNAMBOOL BOOT FACTORY, kept by
J. W. CHILD,
The Champion of Cheapness.
J. W. C. makes it his study to keep the best gootls in various
makes suitable for the seasons of the year, in imported and his own
make. My own make are equal to measure, a large stock always on
hand.
Men’s Heavy Lace Ups, 10s and 11s ; Heavy Watertights, 12s, 13s
and 15s. Women’s strong Lace Ups, 7s and Bs. Children’s copper
toes, 10 to 13, 4s fid ; 7 to 9,3 s fid ; 4 to 6,2 s 6d; and all other makes
equally low in price.
All kinds of BOOTS made to order.
%* Orders by post attended to from any part of the colony.
BLUE S ZEE O 3? ,
Li ebig-street, Warrnambool.
STEPHENS B R OS.,
COACHBUILDERS,
LIEBIG STREET.
Awarded 51 FIRST-CLASS PRIZES.
Also, First Prize Melbourne International Exhibition, 1821.
PRINCESS ALEXANDRA HOTEL,
Liebig Street, Warrnambool.
First-class accommodation for visitors and private families.
The choicest brands in Wines and Spirits.
Good Stabling.
T. PEARCE, Proprietor.
GEORGE JOBBINS,
ARCHITECT and SURVEYOR.
Offices —LIEBIG STREET, Warrnambool, and at 10 Market
Buildings, William-street, Melbourne.
Levels taken for Drainage of Land, (he.


THOMAS KING,
PRODUCE & COAL MERCHANT,
TRAMWAY STORES,
W AY IR, JR, FAMBOOL.
HEN R YHA RRIES,
TRAMWAY STORES.
Agent for Gillespie Bros.
'Cash Buyer of Grain and Potatoes.
JOHN WILSON, JUN., & Co.
PRODUCE MERCHANTS,
TRAMWAY,
W AY RRITAMBOOL.
TURF CLUB HOTEL,
Liebig Street, W'arrnambool.
Wines and Spirits of the best brands and quality.
the of the
West, containing two of Alcock’s best tables.
W. H. SCOWN, Proprietor.
KO R 0 1 T HOTEL,
K 0 E O I T.
The above hotel is the only one. in Koroit where you can get thorough
accommodation, having spacious Commercial Rooms,
Dining Room, Sitting Rooms, several Bedrooms,
and Billiard Room. Good Stabling.
Nothing but the best brands in Wines and Spirits kept.
Moderate Charges.
R. BRUCE, Proprietor.


W. M‘K I N N EY,
C - K, O O B It
AND
GENERAL MERCHANT,
LIEBIG STREET,
W ARRN AMBOOL.
ALL KINDS OF
HOUSEHOLD REQUISITES
IN STOCK.
All Farm and Dairy PRODUCE pur-
chased in any quantity
WARRNAMBOOL CLUB LIVERY AND
LETTING STABLES,
lEC EPL E HR STREET,
(Opposite the CRITERION HOTEL.)
Horses and Buggies on hire. Wedding parties supplied.
Passengers conveyed to any part of the Western District.
Orders promptly attended to. Commodious Loose Boxes.
Charges Moderate.
H. C. VITOtT,
PROPRIETOR.


W. J. HARRIS,
l:H[ja(csitlt ami Retail Cobiitrmibt,
HAIR CUTTING AND SHAVING SALOON,
Next Commercial Hotel,
TIMOR STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
X
Perfumery by Piesse and Lubin, Gosnell, Rimmell, and all the
best makers.
Choice Tobacco, Snuffs, and Cigars, Meerschaum, G-.8.D.,
And other Pipes, in great variety,
Cigar Cases and Holders. Hair Oils, Pomades.
And all Toilet requisites.
#3* £lOO,OOO. dN
JOHN FLAXMAN & CO,
Having the command of ENGLISH CAPITAL are prepared to
negotiate Mortgage Land Loans, at the
Very Lowest Bates of Interest ,
with economy, privacy, and despatch.
OFFICES : TIMOR STREET, next Bank of Australasia,
Warrnambool.
Farms for Sale. Advances made on Wool.
W. H.
Timber Merchant, Builder, and
Contractor,
Comer of Fairy & Lava Streets, Warrnambool.
Tongued and grooved flooring and lining.
American lumber and shelving.
Colonial hardwood, all sizes. Deals, solid and cut.
Doors & windows. Galvanised corrugated iron ridging and spouting.
Lime and Cement. Glass, all. sizes.
Building Materials. Builders’ Ironmongery.


COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
■WABE-IsTAMBOOL.
THOMAS HOUSSON SEARS,
Proprietor
(Late of the M'Jvor Hotel, Maryborough),
Excellent accommodation for Commercial Gentlemen.
Large and Convenient Sample Rooms.
Try our richly-blended “Invicta” Whisky,
Which, like the Kentish Hops from which our Ales are made,
challenges the world. The finest Brandies, the choicest of Wines.
BILLIARDS— Two Alcock’s Tables always in
grand order.
J. C. A. KRUG E R,
and (Spirit Merchant.
o
J. C. A. Kruger begs to intimate that he has added the above branch
to his present business.
The Wines, Spirits, Ale and Porter,
Have been specially selected for
TRADE ORLY,
And will be found of the best quality.
TO HIS
GUTHRIE BLEND WHISKEY
He begs to draw the attention of
His Friends and Patrons.
THE CHEAPEST SHOP IN TOWN.
£• ( S t
LIEBIG-STREET (opposite Bank of Victoria.)
Tobacconist and Dealer in Fancy Goods.
Fishing tackle, Cricketing Material and Toys.
JACKSON GIBLETT.
TANNER AND CURRIER,
MERRI RIVER, WARRNAMBOOL.
Grindery, &c., Imported.
HIDES, SKINS, BARK, &c., PURCHASED FOR CASH.


THE VISITORS’ GUIDE
TO
WARRNAMBOOL,
TO WHICH IS ADDED
A
DIRECTORY
FOR THE
TOWN OF WARRNAMBOOL.
Wakenambool :
I RIXTED BY IHOS. SMITH, KePLER-STREET,
1882.




CONTENTS.
Page.
The Port ... ... 1
The Town ... ... 2
The Reserve ... ... 5
Albert Park ... ... 5
Racecourse ... ... 5
Friendly Societies Park ... 6
Victoria Park ... ... 6
Agricultural Show Ground.. 6
Flagstaff Hill 7
The Saltwater Baths ... 7
The Mechanics’ Institute ... 8
The Shelly Beach ... 9
The Botanical Gardens ... 10
The Cricket Ground ... 10
The Hopkins River ... 10
The Merri River ... ... 12
Hopkins Falls ... ... 13
Lake Wangoom ... ... 13
Emu Creek ... ... 13
Allansford ... ... 14
Tooram ... ... 14
The Bay of Islands ... 14 \
_ _ Page.
Ihe Barren Plains ... 14
The Black’s Station ... 14
Greasy Jack’s Ford- ... 15
Tower Hill ... ... 15
Koroit ... ... 17
Yangery ... 47
Woodford ... ... 47
Value of Land ... ... 17
Educational ... 18
Churches ... ...
Public Halls ... ... 19
Court of Petty Sessions ... 19
Hotels in Warrnambool ... 19
Steamers ... ... 19
Coaches ... ..20
Cabs ••• 20
Boats ... ... ... 21
Friendly Societies ... 21
Shire of Warrnambool ... 21
Borough of Warrnambool... 22
Directory ... ... 23


PREFACE.
Ist publishing this “Guide to Warrnambool" an attempt' has
been made to show the unequalled excellence of the town as a
sanatorium for the invalid and’ as a place of resort for the visitor.
Conscious that full justice has not been done to the beauties of
of the town and environments, nor to the many extremely pic-
turesque points of interest in the district, enough will have been
said to show the visitor and tourist what natural beauties abound,
and the rest may be safely left to their intelligence ■ and observa-
tion.
The Publisher hopes that the Directory will supply a desidera-
tum long required, and that in this respect the book may fulfil’
what is expected of it.
In a first work of this kind' inaccuracies may present them- 1
selves, and omissions may be noticed, but should the little brochure
meet with public approval it will be re-issued at some future time
upon a more extended and complete scale,
Warrnambool, August 14, 1882.


GUIDE TO WARRNAMBOOL.
THE PORT.
seaport of Warrnambool stands next in importance to
iM/li Melbourne among the ports of the colony of Victoria. It
is situated on the western seaboard and is about 160 miles
from the metropolis, to which it is the nearest port. Its
I trade and commerce are also the most extensive of any sea-
I port outside Port Phillip, and its inhabitants refer
+with pardonable pride to the rapidly increasing trade in
T making, as they are now doing, demands for facilities to
carry on the vast business of the port in an adequately effective
manner. That these facilities have been so long denied is
notoriously unjust. Successive ministries and Parliaments have
promised that the port shall have, what appears to be the only
substantial protection for it—a breakwater. Large sums of
money have been spent by the Borough Council in obtaining the
most reliable data for the construction of a work of the kind
referred to, since the year 1867, it being felt even at that period
that the mode of shipping and transhipping cargo was altogether
too costly, protracted and inconvenient. No alteration has since
been effected in that method, though the trade of the port has more
than doubled itself. In point of fact the same facilities existed
for shipping when Warrnambool was given its first jetty, in the
primitive days, as exist now. A jetty spanning the surf, along-
side which no vessel can come is all the means that are provided
for carrying on the trade of this most important seaport. A glance
at the statistics of the port will show not only how business has
increased, but will give to the practical mind an idea how
deserving of recognition are the claims for harbour improvements,
and of the injustice committed at their being so long withheld.
The figures here given show the tonnage of exports from Warr-
nambool and their value, as also the tonnage of merchandise
imported for consumption in the district.
Year. j
Tonnage.
Value.
Tonnage
of
Imports.
1869 1
14,776
£191,124 7
0
8,328
1877
27,274
305,500 7
0
13,190
1878
24,503
331,783 17
2
11,852
1879
26,687
284,193 4
10
11,818
1880
33,452
278,379 1.3
0
10,789
1881 |
32,805
331,487 11
0
11,089


These figures are convincing enough that this is no decaying port,
seeking for the expenditure of Government money to give a
stimulus to its failing trade ; but a growing seaport, whose busi-
ness and influence have so widened as to render it of national
importance that no check shall be given to its commerce ; that its
claims shall not be looked upon as the little Peddlington demands
of other localities may be, but granted freely, in the utilitarian
sense that the whole colony, and not Warrnambool alone, will
benefit by relieving the commerce of the port of Warrnambool of
its primeval and cumbersome mode of treatment. That the steady
prosperity and growth of trade will not fail, it is only necessary to
view the surroundings of the port to be assured. To the west, and
the north, and the east, in whichever direction the traveller pro-
gresses, his eyes are gladdened with the “ peace, progress, and
prosperity” which no government, however paternal, can give,
but which are the outcome of solid industry and perseverance,
and the frugality of individuals.
A sum of money for harbour improvements at Warrnambool is
included in the Loan which the Government will shortly place on
the London money market. Various schemes had been made
public from time to time for the improvement of the port, but
the general consensus of opinion, strengthened by the advice of
such eminent engineers as Sir William Jervois and Sir John Coode,
gave preference to the construction of a breakwater. Prior to the
received opinions of these high-class authorities, a breakwater had
actually been commenced, but delayed by political differences.
Sir William Jervois, who first reported upon the work, was in
favour of prosecuting the principle adopted—raising a sea wall by
depositing concrete blocks pell-mell. The opinion of Sir John
Coode favoured the construction of a solid structure of concrete
blocks, which also is to be used as a wharf for ships to come along-
side. Communication with the breakwater wharf is to be
obtained from shore by means of an open viaduct from Merri
Point. This scheme is calculated to give all the protection and
shipping accommodation necessary, and its early carrying out is
anxiously looked forward to and fervently desired.
THE TOWN.
Warrnambool attained to the position of a municipality in
1855, and it was declared a borough in 1863. Its present
population numbers 5,000, there being 908 ratepayers on
the list. The net annual value of property is ,£28,737, the
the revenue for the year ending 30th September, 1881, being
£7,645. The borough is situated in latitude 38° 24' 17" south,
longitude 142° 28' 26" east. Its area is 3,262 acres 2 roods 10


perches, and is bounded as follows :—Commencing at a point on
the river Hopkins, being the south-western angle of section 1,
parish of Wangoom; thence by a line bearing north eighty
chains ; thence by a line bearing west to the Merri river ; thence
by the Merri river to its mouth ; thence on the south by the sea
coast of Warrnambool Bay from the mouth of the said Merri
river to the mouth of the river Hopkins ; and thence by the
west bank of that river to the point of commencement.
During the past few years the town of Warrnambool has
received much attention from visitors, especially in the summer
months. Those who have made it an abiding place for a brief
period cannot fail to have been impressed with the beauty and
cleanliness of the town and suburbs, its salubrious, health-giving,
and exhilarating climate, the substantial appearance of its build-
ings and institutions, and the bustling, business-like aspect of the
place generally, which clearly betokens inward prosperity and
commercial activity.
The intending visitor from the metropolis may take his passage
by one of the splendid steamers which trade to the port—to which
the enterprise of Warrnambool citizens have given existence—and
leaving the Queen’s Wharf at a reasonable hour in the afternoon
he will arrive in Lady Bay shortly after daybreak. Or, if it be so
desired, the train may be availed of as far as Colac—and soon as
far as Camperdown—and from thence the traveller may come on by
coach. The sea route has its advantages in its cheapness, the
novelty of a short marine journey, and if the traveller is im-
pervious to the mal-de-mer usually attendant upon sea voyages, he
may enjoy his customary nocturnal rest in one of the fine cabins
which the local boats provide. There are two modes of voyaging
to Warrnambool by land—by day coach or night coach. In the
former case, Melbourne is left at six o’clock in the morning and
Warrnambool is reached at nine the same night. To proceed by
the night coach, train is taken at Melbourne shortly after four
o’clock in the afternoon, the coach from Colac arriving in
Warrnambool the next morning at eight o’clock. The day coach
is more popular with visitors, as daylight enables them to see and
admire the many points of interest en route and the picturesque
scenery to be met with.
The town of Warrnambool is situated at some altitude from the
sea line, the height giving a commanding view of the Southern
ocean and the inland scenery in proximity. Its undulating con-
tour, though adding to its picturesque appearance, adds materially
also to the cost of its street formation. The streets, however, are
models of construction, ample in width and most cleanly, during the


wettest weather. The names attached to the earlier-formed streets
are strikingly peculiar-Banyan, Henna, Kepler, Kelp, Japan, Liebig,
Lava, Ryot, and Timor, will serve to show that those who had the
naming of the streets went into unbeaten tracks of thoroughfare
nomenclature. The town is not rich in Government buildings.
The Post Office in Timor-street is a creditable structure, but the
Court House is a sombre, ugly-looking edifice, not nearly large
enough for the business transacted within its walls. Now that
Warrnambool has become an assize tow r n, this building may be so
improved as to become both ornamental and suitable to the
requirements of the district. The State School is a handsome
building, providing for the average attendance of eight hundred
scholars, but the other buildings under the control of the Govern-
ment are blots upon the architecture of the locality. It is pro-
posed to remove the unsightly gaol buildings, police quarters,
stables and barracks, and re-erect them in Gilles-street, selling
the valuable street frontages which they now occupy. The
Government would be considerably the gainer by this process, and
the aspect of the town would be much improved thereby. Of the
churches, the most handsome exterior is presented by the
Presbyterian, which occupies a commanding eminence to the north
of the town, its tower being a conspicuous land-mark from
whichever side the town is approached. The Church of England
does not possess so favourable a site for the display of its architec-
ture and proportions. It is a commodious edifice of early English
design, its whereabouts being now well marked, by the recent con-
struction of its fine tower, which stands “ four-square to all the
winds that blow,” and looms with solid prominence the most
striking object from the seaward. Three fine-toned bells, the gift
of a member of the church, have been hung in the tower.
Interiorly the church presents two spacious aisles, a noble
chancel, with a beautiful reredos and stained windows, there being
also a splendid stained window in the north aisle and other
smaller ones about the church. The Roman Catholic Church is a
bluestone building, handsome, and enduring, but as yet incomplete
in design. The Wesleyans, Baptists, and Congregational bodies
have their churches, and other worshipping sects have separate
meeting places. The other principal buildings are the Mechanics’
Institute, Orderly Room, Odd Fellows’ Hall, Masonic Lodge, Club
House, the many fine Hotels, the Banks, and the Hospital and
Benevolent Asylum. The numerous places of business are
generally spacious and well-built shops, and a great number of
residences are spread over the extensive area of the borough, some
of them being handsomer, better appointed, and of larger
dimensions than usually obtain in colonial provincial towns. The
compact, substantial, and solid appearance in the construction of


the town is due to the facilities given for building. A splendid
freestone is obtainable in abundance in the heart of the borough,
its chief deposits being to the north-west. Bluestone quarries
exist on the outskirts of the town, and from these is obtained metal
for the streets, the stone being rarely chosen for building purposes.
Another stone, of a peculiar nature, which on account of its fire-
resisting qualities is used as a fire-stone, is found principally on
the banks of the Merri. It is of volcanic origin, but in cases
where it has been used tor building purposes it has yielded to
pressure and exposure to the atmosphere, crumbling to decay in a
comparatively few years. Warrnambool is well lighted with gas.
Tree-planting is yet in its infancy, but the Borough Council are
alive to its importance. It is intended soon to adopt a thorough
system of aboriculture for beautifying the town and for providing
a grateful shade in summer. In Timor-street, Kepler-street and
Liebig-street tree-growing has been successfully accomplished, the
hardier species of conifera flourishing apace, and furnishing
argument in their beauty and shade for prosecuting the work of
tree-planting vigorously and systematically.
THE RESERVE
is the park of Warrnambool. It encloses the Borough from the
sea line to the Shire boundary. A splendid domain used for com-
monage purposes. An inheritance of woodland beauty which is
fast being alienated from the Borough, owing to the demands of
population on the one hand and a failing Government treasury on
the other. A spacious area yet remains, however, and the
Borough Council have been alive to the importance of retaining
some of its sylvan solitude for future generations. This is to be
seen in that delightful pleasure ground
ALBERT PARK,
A reserve of some 163 acres of land to the north-east of the
town. A fairer piece of wooded beauty could scarcely be found.
Snugly sequestered in the sheltering foliage of its many trees, the
visitor is at once in the solitude and serenity of the bush when
this urban loveliness is attained. Its charming undulations, its
clumps and knolls, and hills and hollows, and park-like vistas of
green sward and sturdy trees render it a “ thing of beauty,” for
which generations will be grateful. The Borough Council has
gone to great expense in providing a water supply for the Park for
the present use of cattle agisting there, and for future irrigating
purposes. A lodge for the Borough Ranger has also been erected
in the Park.
THE RACECOURSE
is also situated north-west from the Borough, at the side of Albert


Park, from which it is divided by a road on its more northern
aspect. The only place from which it can be seen on entering the.
town is on the Allansford road. It consists of an oval-shaped flat
surrounded by hills over-looking its every part. The steeplechase
course is considered to be the finest in the colony. It is two miles
in extent, having sixteen jumps, including post and rail, paling
and log fences, stone and sod walls, the paddocks through which
the horses have to travel being usually ploughed or stubble.
Twice round this course is deemed to be a severe test for a horse.
A very handsome grand stand is erected on the course, and the
Hill at the side of the Stand has been enclosed by a fence, the
shilling charged for admission herein producing a very handsome
revenue to the Club. The Warrnambool Racing Club hold races
in March, but the principal meeting is now the Midwinter Steeple-
chase Meeting, which has merged into quite an important
institution, attracting large numbers of visitors to the town, and
causing a great deal of stir. Liberal prizes are given by the Club,
but none have approached those of the year 1878, which is known
as the “ Grand National Year,” when the chief events were the
Grand National Steeplechase of 400 sovs., and the Hurdle Race of
200 sovs. Now that the Club have got through financial troubles,
their programmes are likely to be once more largely attractive.
THE FRIENDLY SOCIETIES’ PARK.
This is a piece of ground twelve acres in extent on the western
side of the town. It is vested in trustees representing the various
Friendly Societies in Warrnambool. An annual f§te is held here,
the proceeds of which are expended towards improving the Park. A
great deal of money has been spent upon it by the United
Societies in forming a running track for pedestrian sports, in the
erection of a pavilion and keeper’s lodge, and in tree planting.
The Park is accessible to the public at all hours of the day, and is
easily reached by the road leading past the Hospital.
VICTORIA PARK.
This is another fine portion of the Common, of 103 acres,
which has been set apart as a Park. It is close to the Friendly
Societies’ Park on the west, but as yet its bounds are not defined
by fencing, and it remains in all its natural beauty. The Borough
Council will probably give it attention, and permanently enclose
it in case the avarice of future Governments should seek its
alienation.
AGRICULTURAL SHOW GROUND.
This is a splendid site for the purpose to which it is prtt, and is
situated immediately opposite the Friendly Societies’ Park. It


occupies an area of some twenty-three acres in extent, being as well
adapted for its purpose as any Show Ground in the colony. Much
money has been expended in the erection of sheds for the display
of exhibits and providing all the conveniences for the large and
important show of horse stock, cattle, sheep, pigs, dairy produce,
and all the yieldings of our teeming western lands, together with
implements of husbandry and the products of local industries.
Large sums of money being paid away in prizes yearly. The
Society is financially sound and healthy, though its members’ list
should be considerably augmented to make it as thoroughly repre-
sentative of this grand district as it ought to be. The Committee
intend to plant trees all round the ground, and on the high land
which over-looks it, for the purpose of affording shelter and shade,
and adding to its beauty.
FLAG-STAFF HILL.
This is the boulevard of the town, for here are the defences in the
shape of a two gun battery, and it is also a favourite place of
public resort. It affords by day a magnificent view of the
Southern ocean, calm and blue in its serenity, or turbulent and
foam-crested when lashed by contending gales. On summer
evenings, after the enervating influence of hot winds, the languid
citizen and his family stroll thither to enjoy the gentle zephyr
stealing over the sea, for it is characteristic of Warrnambool that
be the north wind ever so scorching in his blast through the day,
a mild breeze, when the sun has done his westering, comes from
the direction of his last rays, as he sinks beneath the horizon.
From Flag-Staff Hill the grandest sunsets that ever tempted the
pencil of a Turner or a Claude, may be perceived, and the purest
air that ever wafted over the garden of Fden, or stirred the
meadow in springtime, may be here inhaled. Operations are now
in progress for laying out the Hill in walks, forming lawns, and
tree planting, in accordance with a plan furnished by Mr.
Guilfoyle, of the Melbourne Botanic Gardens. At the foot of the
Hill is Lake Pertobe, a broad expanse of shallow water which the
Council intend at some time to make ornamental. It is fed from
the Merri River, which stream was diverted into it in order to
arrest its unpleasant exhalations in summer time. That object has
been admirably attained. The Lake now emits no effluvium, and
the hope is indulged that at no distant date the Lake may be en-
circled by trees and its surface dotted with pleasure boats.
Adjoining the Hill enclosure, and nestling under the slope, are
THE SALT WATER BATHS.
One of the most important institutions of the town, and proving
a great source of attraction to visitors. In these baths has been


accomplished, what is so ardently yearned for in the metropolis,
the bringing to the very centre of the Borough, the privilege of
sea water bathing. There is a large swimming bath 100 feet long
by 50 feet in width, of varying depths, to suit both swimmers and
those desirous of acquiring the art of natation. During hot
weather, the swimming bath is very much in request. Water
is supplied by means of a windmill and force pump situated on the
verge of the breakers on the eastern beach, pipes being laid from
the mill to the bath. It is calculated that the water of the
swimming bath is entirely renewed every twenty-four hours by
the constant stream which is kept up. The hot salt-water baths
are in use all the year round, and have become very popular since
their establishment for their singular curative powers in cases of
rheumatism, sciatica, and all affections of the nerves and ailments
of the human frame. Many who have been afforded relief, have
borne testimony to their hygienic and prophylactic properties, and
hot sea-water baths are strongly recommended by the medical
faculty for their tonic and invigorating influence upon shattered
systems. The baths are fitted up on the latest principles, having
a fresh water shower above each plunge, and all other con-
veniences have been provided with studied care. At present the
bath-rooms number six, but it is intended to carry out the im-
provements contemplated at first, and have an extra number of
baths on the opposite side of the building which will be devoted
exclusively to ladies’ use. Another swimming bath may enter into
the calculations of future improvements. At present ladies are
restricted to the use of the swimming bath during the middle
portion of the day. The plunge baths may also be used for cold
salt or fresh water, and on Sunday mornings hot fresh water is
supplied to them. These baths have attained considerable pro-
minence all over the colony, and visitors never fail to frequent
them during their stay, numbers indeed being induced to visit the
town in order to participate in their health-dispensing pro-
perties.
THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
is within a short distance of Flag-Staff Hill, and forms a nice
lounging place after a bath. It is a commodious building of seven
apartments. A spacious tesselated corridor leads to the Circulating
Library on the one hand and the Free Library on the other,
whilst a large and handsome Reading Room extending the width
of the building, is entered at the end. In the Circulating Library
there are about 3,000 volumes, including many valuable books of
reference, history, and travel. It is contemplated to enlarge the
Library by taking in an adjoining apartment, in order to meet the
demands for light reading. The Free Library contains a fair


number of volumes, and the table is supplied with newspapers
and periodicals. The fine well-lighted, well-ventilated reading-
room contains four reading tables, covered with the most im-
portant Colonial and English newspapers and periodical literature.
Pictures, statuettes, curios, and minerals are disposed about the
room, adding to the general appearance and comfort. The
educational advantages of this most excellent institution are
placed within the reach of all, by its marvellously low subscrip-
tion fee, 2s 6d per quarter being all that is demanded for
participation in the amusement and instruction it affords. The
visitor on entering will at once perceive how carefully and
efficiently the institution is managed and supervised.
THE SHELLY BEACH
is one of the glories of Warrnambool, forming as it does one of
the most picturesque bits of sea scenery. It is situated to the
west of the Bay, being part of the coast line from Point
Pickering, near the site of the viaduct which is to give access to
the proposed breakwater. “Shelly Beach” has always been a
place of resort for visitors and those on pic-nicking bent. Its
rocks and pools and caves have their nomenclature—the “ Blow
Hole,” the “ Tubs,” “ Diana’s Bath,” and “ Cupid’s Car,” being
some of the designations of this romantic locality. Some of the
outlying rocks have not only lost their names but their existence,
having been quarried to make blocks for the breakwater. Though
some of its glory has departed, it retains much of its native love-
liness. Plateaux of rock run some distance out into the ocean, and
when the tide is out circular pools of various dimensions appear—
natural aquariums, in which whole worlds of life and beauty may
be discovered. Star-fish, sea urchins, the blood-red and the green-
fringed anemone may be observed in the clear limpid depths.
Small fish shoot hither and thither for concealment among the
many-hued sea-weed, the colours of which are heightened by the
refracted rays of the sun. Periwinkles, cray-fish, mutton-fish, and
many specimens of mollusc may be gathered, and the conchologist
may, with searching, add to his collection. In its quietude, when
the sea is on its best behaviour, flowing mild, majestic and free,
and the ocean splendours further heightened by being “ steeped
in the rainbow’s glowing grace,” the “Shelly Beach” affords a
charm which dispels gloom from the troubled mind, and furnishes
abundant food for the contemplative, who might, as he gazes, dis-
cover fresh beauties each moment. This favoured spot presents
quite another aspect when tempests rave, and its surf-beaten rocks
respond to the roar of the storm. The mighty southern seas roll
in, dashing into foam and spray against the cave-hollowed crags,
forming cascades white and seething, as the angry billows retreat


to gather fresh strength for a renewal of the attack. And so
the breakers bound and rebound, lashing and writhing till their
strength is spent, and they murmur into repose and stilly love-
liness once more.
THE BOTANICAL G A EDENS
are situated to the north of the town, the entrance being from
Cockman-street, and the best approach by way of the Presbyterian
Church and Woodford Koad. The gardens occupy an area of
twenty acres, strangely composed of a variety of soils, so that
almost anything might be grown here. They are laid out upon a
well-conceived plan furnished by Mr. Guilfoyle. A good deal of
money has been spent upon them, which will in due season bear
fruit, but at present only those who are acquainted with their
history can appreciate the progress made. A wind-mill is in course
of erection for raising water from a well to irrigate the ground,
whilst the waste water will go to feed a lake, which is to be
formed in the lower portion of the ground. Next year will
probably see this accomplished.
THE CRICKET GROUND
provides another pleasant lounging place. It is situated near the
Gas Works, being formed out of a portion of the swampy land
which surrounds Lake Pertobe. It has a fine pavilion, croquet
ground and lawn tennis; and the beautiful order in which the
ground is kept would seem to indicate that cricket is a flourish-
ing pastime with us. There is some good material in the club, but
it is not made the most of, and therefore the club does not occupy
the prominent position it should amongst kindred institutions in
the country. The Cricket ground lies in a marshy valley, its
beautiful green sward being refreshing to the eyes in the dry heat
of summer.
THE HOPKINS RIVER.
The “ Hopkins” is the common-place designation of one of the
noblest streams in the colony. Broad, deep and beautiful, it is the
principal attraction of Warrnambool. Its embouches upon the
sea about a mile to the east of the town. Its mouth, unfortunately
for the trade of the district, is closed by a sand bar, whilst rocky
reefs, of picturesque aspect, guard the entrance. The breakers
dash wildly upon the rocks and obstructions at the mouth, pre-
venting the ingress or egress of boats, except in the finest of
weather, and even then the experiment of navigating the mouth
has been a hazardous one. Once past the bar, and the river is
navigable for six or seven miles. A bridge crosses the Hopkins
near the mouth, giving access to the coast lands. On the west
bank reposes the Cemetery, the “ city of the silent dead,” calm and


peaceful in its arboreous solitude. The river is tidal as far as the
the Allansford shallows, varying in width from 300 yards to about
150 between the banks. Boats may be obtained from boat-houses
near the mouth, and the visitor may sail or row and enjoy the
most entrancing and ever-varying scenery. Now appears a high
wooded clifT on the one hand and sloping upland on the other,
verdure-covered to the water’s edge. Curves and reaches succeed
each other, always bringing to view a fresh and enchanting
scene, rich meadow land, cultivation paddocks, steep banks
covered with redolent bushes, ferns, and wild flowers, and here and
there may be caught a glimpse of summer residences and the
habitations of original settlers back from the banks. The Islands,
about five miles up, are a source of attraction in themselves. The
holiday-keeper could scarcely find more pleasurable occupation
than exploring the course of this beautiful stream. To the disciple
of Isaac W alton, it also has the strongest of claims for attention.
lor a while it lost its attraction for anglers. Many reasons were
given for its failing to furnish sport to the gentle craftsman.
Netting was said to be practised, creating a scarcity of the finny
denizens, abundance of food, the want of the recurring floods, and
the closing of the river’s mouth were urged as reasons for the
absence of fish. Whatever was the cause, it is now removed,
allowing fishing to be practised with something like the old
modicum of success. The following information respecting the
fish to be obtained in its broad depths, and the method to be
adopted in beguiling them from their lairs, may be relied upon
“ Perhaps the best part of the river for fishing is about the Islands,
but, for that matter, once the boat-sheds are left good fishing may be
dropped upon anywhere on the way up. The Hopkins has several
traits peculiar to itself. Gut bottoms are hardly of any value in
this river. None of the regular frequenters have used gut for
years. Only in one place it is good, and this is in the vicinity of
the mouth, where the bottom is sandy. The best line is the brown
Sydney hemp. No other color answers so well. If any other line
is used it will be of the greatest advantage to put a bottom
of the hemp to it. The bottom of the river is always of
a dark color, against which the hemp does not contrast like
gut. On weedy or rocky feeding grounds the hemp will beat
the gut, and a better class of fish will fall to its share. Give ‘both
a fair trial and the result will not be long in doubt. The best
fishing, as a rule, is got in shallow water —just over the margin of
a weed bed for preference. This applies more particularly when
the summer is fairly in—say, from December to March inclusive.
Before and after this date, there is generally a good deal of fresh
in, and consequently the bream prefer deeper water. Of course,
there are times when fish are got anywhere ; but this is the rule.


Off any of the reefs good work ean often be done. That at
“Picnic Point” notably. This is immediately above the “Islands.”
Here one must discard the sinker, and be prepared to lose plenty
hooks and hemp bottoms on the rocks. Gut is simply useless at
this place. The rocks are covered with barnacles and other shell-
fish, and are therefore the best of feeding ground.
“ The varieties of fish in the Hopkins are bream, mullet, salmon
trout, trevallia, and sometimes perch. This last is but seldom
caught, and generally requires night work to catch them. The
main fish is, of course, bream, and these remarks, unless otherwise
specified, are solely directed to this fish. Garfish have been caught
near the mouth, but this is very exceptional. Now as regards
bait. Up to November and after March any fish bait is good.
Shrimp, mullet, salmon trout, whitebait, and the small trout out of
the fresh water (yclept “toorcuts” locally) all make first-class
bait; but in summer the small bream become such a nuisance to
any soft bait, that one cannot do better than go in entirely for the
small river crab, which' frequent the stones and weeds along the
margin. The hard shell of the crab forces the small fry to respect
it and leave it for their larger brethren. After March the bream
cease to take crab, preferring soft bait. It is best always to take
a good variety of bait, as what is meat one day often appears as
poison the next. When the rainy season is fairly in, good mullet
fishing can be had about the mouth of the river, coupled with, at
times, some lively fly fishing when a school of trout appears. So
far as mullet are concerned, scalded shrimps and sand-fleas are all
that are required. The latter can be easily obtained under the
kelp on the sea beach.
“ Epitome.—No gat, but Sydney hemp bottom. Stick to the
weed banks and reefs. Bait—From November to March, crabs ;
before and after fish bait. Best places—Off Sherwood, Kowan’s
Point, anywhere off Allandale, Picnic Point, and opposite Tooram.
Boat sheds—Mrs. Nelson, west bank; J. Adams, Anglers’ Hotel,
east bank. Bait is supplied with boats, at the sheds.”
T HEM ERII I RIVER
is a small stream which embouches into Lady Bay on the west, at
the base of Point Pickering. Some good fishing is sometimes
obtained in this river. Its course to the sea is much impeded by
sand, which has silted up its bed at Levi’s Point throwing the
water back over the waste Government land under the western
hummocks. The Borough Council propose to obtain the opening
of a fresh course for the free passage of the Merri waters to the
Bay, where it has a good influence in preventing the silting up of
the anchorage ground.


DRIVES.
THE HOPKINS FALLS,
which are situated above the Tooram and Allansford shallows,
have many points of interest and afford a pleasant drive in
attaining their locality. Summer-time, when the roads are dry, is
the most favourable period to reach them, though they are not
then seen in all their grandeur. Still there is a sufficiency of
water rolling over the rocky eminence to render it a picturesque
and interesting spectacle. The banks around are kept verdant by
the disseminated particles of falling water and the mist which it
throws up in its headlong career, whilst many varieties of ferns
and wild flowers may be gathered upon the mossy banks, The
route usually followed in reaching the Falls is by the Woodford
road, taking the turning on the right, about three miles out, by
what is known as the “ Old Telegraph Hotel.” Proceeding along
the Wangoom road, by Wangoom Park, the residence of Mr. F.
Tozer, the Schoolhouse, passing some pretty wayside seenery
en route, a turning is made again to the right along a beaten track.
The boom of the water as it rushes over is heard long before the
Falls are reached, as they do not merge into view until the visitor
is close upon them. The sight then repays any trouble which may
have been expended in reaching the locality. The broad expanse
of the Hopkins river here makes a headlong leap from a height of
about forty feet. The “ Fall of waters ! rapid as the light,” rise
again in clouds of spray, moistening the banks like a soft land
gentle rain, or rushes onwards, whirling and foaming towards the
Allansford shallows, and down its picturesque course to the sea.
LAKE WANGOOM,
a deep volcanic basin, may be visited on the way to the Falls.
The water in this lake is said to be very pure, and at one time its
ample storage was included in the calculation of a probable water
supply for the Borough of Warrnambool.
THE EMU CREEK,
a tributary of the Hopkins possesses Falls of a picturesque
character, the water being very much broken in its career over the
rocks, which are about thirty-five feet in height. They are better
known as the Black’s River Falls, and may be reached by way of
Allansford and the Cudgee Creek. By crossing the ford a little
above the Hopkins Falls, also, the Black’s River Falls may be
gained.


AL L AN S F 0 R D.
A thriving township about six miles from Warrnambool, on the
River Hopkins, above the tidal waters. Here and also in the
Cudgee Cheek about six miles distant, good sport is obtained in
angling for black fish and grayling. The latter, locally called the
herring, is plentiful, and rises readily to the fly or worm.
TOORAM.
The visitor may indulge in a short but pleasant drive by making
a detour from the township of Allansford and passing through
Tooram, of cheese and bacon renown, come back the coast-road,
past the Allandale pastures, over the Hopkins Bridge, and so to
Warrnambool. From the elevation of the Hopkins uplands many
excellent views of the surrounding country may be obtained and
also of the sea.
THE BAY OF ISLANDS.
Another pleasant excursion may be made, when the weather is
propitious, down the coast to the caves, about a mile from Lake
Gillear, or to the Bay of Islands. The Bay is about twenty-six
miles from Warrnambool, and is best approached through Allans-
ford. It furnishes a magnificent bit of marine scenery. The
coast along here is composed of sandstone cliffs of varying height.
The Bay of Islands represents in some degree the aspect of the
coast beyond the Sherbroke river, where the ill-fated Loch Ard
rushed to her doom. A perpendicular wall of sandstone marks
the coast line, and here and there, standing out from the mainland,
are detached pillars and galleries of sandstone rock, some of them
most grotesque in appearance. Should the wind be high, and the
sea lively, the outlook oceanward is most interesting and exciting.
THE BARREN PLAINS
is another spot of interest which may be reached through Allans-
ford. Here beautiful heath may be gathered, lycopods and many
specimens of interest to the botanist. Further on are the waters
of the Brucknell Creek, where wild flowers abound and the fern
hunter may assuage his desires.
THE BLACK’S STATION,
situated at Framlingham, is at any time worth a visit. Here
may be seen all that remains of the aboriginal and warlike tribes
of the west —a decaying race, whose “ footprints on the sands of
time” are fast being obliterated. Here the “ noble savage” is
kept under mild restraint, and every attention is paid to his com


fort and well-being. The worst of his failings appears now to be
the vice which his white brother implanted in his nature—drink.
Under the fostering care of the manager of the station, Mr. W.
Goodall, the declining days of the blackfellow are made easy and
peaceful, and he is kept in decency and order.
GvR EASY JACK’S FORD
is a highly romantic bit of natural scenery to be met with on the
way to the Black’s Station. The Hopkins river meanders at the
foot of precipitous banks, which are lined with wild flowers and
ferns. When the summer sun has embrowned the face of nature,
the delicate and varying tints of the fern fronds, as contrasted
with a wealth of vegetation, and the sedgy riverV track beneath,
make a charming picture. The Hopkins course through Framling-
ham abounds “with many a silver water-break” and coruscating
gleam as it ripples over and around huge waterworn boulders in its
sinuous journey towards the great deep. There is plenty here to
interest the tourist.
TOWER HILL.
A visit to Tower Hill and its natural scenic beauties would
scarcely be excluded from the programme of any but the most
hurried visitor. Leaving Warrnambool by the Dennington road,
the undulating meadows of the Farnham Survey soon merge to
view. These rich and rolling pastures occupy both sides of the road
after the Dennington bridge has been crossed. On the right is
Farnham Park, the property of Mr. W. R. Rutledge, and adjoining
isYangery Park, the property of Messrs. A. and R. Urquhart. The
Werronggurt portion of the celebrated “Survey” is now the
property of Mr. T. F. Rutledge. Passing along the high road
through this and other rich and fertile lands, the visitor’s attention
is arrested by a view of the far-famed Tower Hill and Lake. The
following remarks by one thoroughly acquainted with the locality
will give an idea of its appearance!—
“ The Lake is about six miles in circumference and is encom-
passed, excepting on the south-western side, by a high and steep
bank, which occasionally reaches an altitude of more than 300
feet. ‘ The Island’ is at an average distance, varying from 100
to 400 yards from the mainland, excepting on the western side,
where the previously swampy-looking channel expands into a
beautiful sheet of water nearly three-quarters of a mile in
diameter, and of considerable depth, the margin fringed with reeds
and the usual fresh water vegetation. It is in reality a group
consisting of two large islands and some smaller islets, having a
total area estimated at 1,200 acres. The principal peak on the


largest island is known as the ‘ Tower’ or ‘ Tower Hill,’ whence
the district derives its name. It is about 350 feet in height and is
therefore scarcely more elevated than the banks on the eastern
side. An excellent view of the surrounding country can be
obtained either from this bank or from the island hills. In the
distance, on a clear day, may be seen the long stretch of high sand
hills that mark the coast line towards Portland on the west; and
far beyond Warrnambool on the east; the harbour and town of
Belfast lies in full view on the south-west, with Warrnambool
partially hidden by intervening eminences on the south-east,
whilst inland may be discerned the dim hazy outlines of various
eminences, —Mounts Eccles, Napier, Rouse, Shadwell, &c., and
occasionally, the more distant range of hills where Mounts
Sturgeon and Abrupt appear like bluish clouds on the horizon.
The whole district bears distinct traces of volcanic action, but on
the islands this becomes especially apparent to the most super-
ficial observer. The surrounding banks are chiefly composed of
volcanic tufa or ash-stone, and cinder, beds of which underlie the
greater portion of the district and extend as far east as the Merri.
The islands are composed to a great extent of volcanic basalt,
occasionally compact, but principally light and porous and show-
ing everywhere unmistakable traces of not very distant volcanic
action. On the largest island are two well-defined craters, one on
the eastern side of the principal hill being very perfect, of a
circular form, and with steep, almost perpendicular, sides, while at
the bottom may be discerned the greenish, slimy vegetation cover-
ing the surface of the pool lying far from the influence of sun or
wind. The soil of the islands, wherever it has accumulated in the
valleys or low-lying portions, is very rich, and formerly all was
covered with a forest of trees, as well as a thick undergrowth
of scrub, ferns, grass, &c., reaching from the water’s edge to the
summits of the hills ; but year after year devastating fires have
destroyed the arboreous beauty they once possessed, until they are
now almost denuded of trees and shrubs, the peaks of the hills
rising bare and bald. The native name of the ‘ Island’ is Koroit,
which signifies ‘fire,’ and, possibly, some tradition of old volcanic
fires may have been current amongst the aborigines down to the
advent of the white man. To the geologist a visit to Tower Hill
would prove of the utmost interest from the variety and profusion
of volcanic matter which can be seen, while the ordinary lover of
nature will be repaid by a contemplation of the beauty of the
scenery, the richness and fertility of the surrounding country, and
the generally prosperous appearance of the district and its in-
habitants. The island is a permanent Government reserve, and
has been for some years vested in a committee of manage-
ment.”


KOE O I T
is the name of the thriving Borough which is associated with
Tower Hill, and which the visitor will no doubt include in his
visit. The locality is famed for the depth and incomparable rich-
ness of the chocolate soil in and surrounding the township, and
the immense quantities of produce which it yields. The Borough,
with its many stores, banks, churches, Post and Telegraph Office,
Mechanics’ Institute, and public gardens exhibits signs of a healthy
prosperity. It attained the dignity of a borough in 1870, since
which time its progress has been onward. Its success will be still
further assured by the construction of the
Koroit to Glenthompson Bailway.
This line will give access to the principal markets of the colony,
and its terminal branches at the ports of Warrnambool and Belfast
must render Koroit a highly favoured township indeed, and cause
it to occupy an exalted position amongst provincial towns in the
future.
YANGEEY
will most likely be the route which the visitor will take on leaving
Koroit for the return to Warrnambool. Much more of rich
country will be passed through. The chocolate soil region is
separated from the black soil by the Yangery Creek, after which
some heavily timbered though prolific country is met with.
WOODFORD,
a highly picturesque village, lies in the way, the high road winding
right through it. There is splendid soil in this neighborhood, and
of late the township has been giving signs of progress. The houses,
shops, and hotels of the township, run a long distance along the
sides of the road, and at intervals, as the visitor progresses, giant
trees may be seen on the slopes of the valleys, and at the bottom
glistening water marks the course of the Merri river. A pleasantly
sheltered drive of some six miles brings the visitor back to the
point of departure—Warrnambool.
VALUE OF LAND.
The value of land in the town varies according to situation.
Business sites in Timor-street, between Kepler and Liebig streets,
maintain their full value ; a recent sale of a small frontage
realising £SO per foot. In Liebig-street, near the Wesleyan
Church, an allotment has recently been sold at £2O per foot


frontage. In other streets business sites have been sold at £5 per
foot. Sites for residences may be obtained at about £IOO per
acre.
Land in the district is more valuable than in any other part of
Australia, Country lands situate at a distance of ten to twelve
miles from Warrnambool, having realised at auction as much as
£9O per acre. The potato lands in the neighbourhood of Tower
Hill have recently been sold at from £4O to £6O per acre. These
lands bring a rental, for one potato crop only, of from £5 to £7
per acre. Dairy lands realise at auction from £lO to £ls per
acre. In some instances improved lands have been sold at £2O
per acre. Ordinary bush station land brings from £4 10s to
£5 10s per acre.
E DUC ATI ONAL.
There are several high class private schools in Warrnambool.
The Grammar School, in Kepler-street, conducted by Mr. J. S.
Stanley, is justly celebrated for the progress of its pupils in the
higher branches of education. A considerable number of pupils
from this school have successfully passed matriculation examina-
tions, every term during the last three years. The Roman
Catholic body have an excellent school, St. Joseph’s, in Raglan
Parade. Head master, T. W. Corlett. Ladies’ schools, of superior
character, are well represented. In most of them music, drawing,
French, Latin, and mathematics are taught. Principals—Mrs.
Bateman, Henna-street; Miss Blamires, Koroit-street; Convent of
Mercy, Wyton, Botanic Road, Lady Superioress, Mrs. Maguire ;
Miss Newcombe, Koroit-street; Miss Parker, Mickle-street ;and
Miss Young, Liebig-st.reet. State Schools.—The principal State
School, Jamieson-street, has accommodation for about 1,200
scholars. W. Bryant, teacher. South Warrnambool State School,
J. Sloss, head teacher.
CHURCHES.
Church of England —Christ Church, Minister, the Rev. Archdeacon
P. T. Beamish, D.D., L.L.D. Divine Service on Sunday at 11 a.m.
and 7 p.im Sunday School at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Roman Catholic Church —St. Joseph’s, Minister, the Rev. Father
M. J. Shannahan. Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, Sundays at 11
a.m. Vespers at 7 p.m. Sunday School, 2.30. p.m.
Wesleyan Church —Minister, the Rev. W. L. Blamires. Divine
Service on Sunday at 11 a.m. and 7 p.m. Sunday School, 9.30
a.m. and 2.30 p.m.
Presbyterian Church —St. John’s, Minister, the Rev. George Tait,
M.A. Divine Service on Sunday at 11 a.m. and 7 p.m. Sunday
School, 9.30 a.m. and 2.30 p,m.


Congregational Church Minister, Rev. J. Thwaites. Divine
Service on Sunday at 11 a.m. and 7 p.m. Sunday School at
9.30 a.m. and 2.30 p.m.
Baptist Church Divine Service on Sunday at 11 a.m.
and 7 p.m. Sunday School at 9.30. a.m. and 2.30 p.m.
Christian Meeting House (Temperance Hall) —Divine Service every
Sunday at 11 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Gospel Hall —Service every Sunday evening at 7 p.m.
PUBLIC HALLS.
The Orderly Boom will seat about 700 persons It is provided
with an excellent stage, ante-rooms and capital conveniences for
travelling companies. Tariff £2 5s per night, balls and tea-
meetings as agreed upon.
The Odd Fellows’ Hall will seat over 500. It is a good room
for concert purposes, possessing a stage and retiring rooms. The
charge is 30s per night.
There are also the Temperance Hall and the Apollo Hall.
COURT OF PETTY SESSIONS.
Tuesday and Iriday at 11 o’clock. C. H. Nicholson, Stipendiary
Magistrate. R. Gibton, Clerk of Petty Sessions.
HOTELS IN WARRNAMBOOL.
There is extensive hotel accomodation in Warrnambool. The
tariff at the principal houses ranges from £3 per week down to
£2 2s, as arranged, and 2s (id beds and meals. The names of the '
hotels and their proprietors will be found in the Directory. There
are also well conducted first-class Temperance Hotels. Board per
week, 25s and 20s Table d’hote, Is. (See Directory.)
STEAMERS
The metropolis and neighbouring ports are within easy reach of
Warrnambool by the regular traffic of steamers which during the
busy season are arriving and departing daily, but under ordinary
circumstances arrive and depart as follows
From Melbourne to Warrnambool.
Julia Percy, Tuesday ... )
Nelson, Friday ... (
Saloon, 10s 6d; Return, 20s. ;
Steerage, 6s ; Return 10s.
Dawn, Thursday... j
Saloon, 8s; Return, 12s 6d ;
Steerage, 4s 6d ; Return, 6s 6d.
From Warrnambool to Melbourne.
Dawn, Monday ... )
Nelson Tuesday... >
Julia Percy Fbiday ... j
Fares as above.


COACHES
Melbourne to Warrnambool and back, rail and coach (first class)
through tickets £2. Colac to Warrnambool.—Single fare, 15s ;
return £1 ss. Coaches leave Colac daily (Sundays excepted) on
arrival of first train from Geelong. Night Mail leaves Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, at 10.15 p.m. reach-
ing Warrnambool at 7.45 a.m. On Sundays leave Colac at 6 a.m.,
due at Warrnambool at 5 p.m. Coaches for Colac leave Warr-
nambool, daily at 6 a.m. sharp (Sunday excepted), and Night
Coach on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, at
7.15 p.m., Sunday at 10.15 a.m. Passengers booking through are
allowed the option of breaking the coach portion of the journey
by staying on the road, and proceeding by next coach.
Warrnambool to Belfast —Single fare 4s ; return, 6s.
To and from Warrnambool and Mortlake. —Warrnambool to
Woodford, 2s. ; ditto Purnim, 6s 6d ; ditto Ballangeich, 4s 6d ;
ditto Ellerslie, 7s ; ditto Mortlake, 9s.
Warrnambool to Hamilton and Wickliffe Road Railway Station
(via Caramut). Coach leaves Warrnambool every Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, at 3 a.m., passing through Koroit at 5
a.m., Woolstthorpe, 6.15 a.m., Caramut, 8.30 a.m., Chatsworth, 10.30
a.m., Wickliffe, 12.45 p.m., arriving at Wickliffe road railway
station at 2.15 p.m., in time to catch train from Hamilton to
Ararat, Horsham, and Melbourne.
Booking Office—Western Hotel, Warrnambool.
CABS.
The following is the tariff as issued by the Borough Council :
Fares by Time —By the day, i.e., for any twelve consecutive
hours between 5 a.m. and 10 p.m., 30s ; by the hour, for the first
hour, 3s ; for every subsequent hour, 2s 6d.
Fares by Distance For any distance within and not ex-
ceeding one mile, one or two persons, Is ; ditto for three or
more, 2s ; for every half-mile, or fractional part of half a mile
exceeding one mile, an additional charge of one-half of the rate
per mile.
Any person calling or sending for a hackney carriage and not
further employing the same shall pay Is ; or at the option of the
driver, the fare from the stand, or place where the hackney
carriage may be engaged. Half fare to be allowed back when
ever the distance exceeds two miles from the stand or place where
the carriage was engaged, provided the fare is not taken by time.
Fares for Detention —For every fifteen minutes’ detention,
6d. An additional charge of one-half the above fares to be made
for &ny fare, or part of a fare, performed between the hours of 10


o’clock at night, and 5 o’clock in the morning. Where the distance
exceeds two miles the fares to be paid according either to distance
or time at the option of the hirer ; under two miles the fare to be
charged by distance. No extra charge to be made for luggage not
exceeding 501bs. weight. Cabs run to and from the Jetty on the
arrival and departure of the steamers.
The stands are in Timor-street and at the Jetty ; inspector,
Constable Heaver.
BOATS.
Boat fares, to and from Steamers lying in Warrnambool
Harbour, Is each person; to and from Sailing Vessels, 2s 6d each
person. Half fare for detention over 15 minutes. The passengers’
boats are licensed, and only allowed to carry the number specified
on the license, and painted on the boat. A licensed porter plies
for hire on the Jetty, the charges for his services being at the rate
of Bd per parcel.
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
Odd Fellows —Loyal Victoria Lodge. Meet every alternate
Thursday evening, at Odd Fellow's’ Hall.
Foresters Lodge. Meet in the Odd Fellows’ Hall alternate
Mondays.
Druids. Meet in the Odd Fellows’ Hall alternate Wednesdays.
Protestant Alliance Society. Meet in the Odd Fellows’ Hall
alternate Mondays.
Hibernian-Australian Catholic Benefit Society—Warrnambool
Branch —Meet in St. Joseph’s School Room every alternate
Tuesday.
Rechabites—Lady Bay Tent, No. 94. Meet in the Temperance
Hall every alternate Thursday.
Sons of Temperance —Warrnambool Division, No. 73. Meet
every alternate Tuesday in the Temperance Hall.
Guiding Star Lodge, No. 36 (Good Templars). Meet in the
Temperance Hall alternate Thursdays.
Masonic Lodge, St. John’s. Meet every Tuesday before full
moon, in the Masonic Hall, Kepler-street.
SHIRE OF WARRNAMBOOL.
Members of Council. —North Riding—Councillors J. Lindsay,
R. Hood, and J. Ware. East Riding—G. J. Wilson, John Lee,
jun., and W. O’Brien. South Riding—J. A. Bromfield, T. F.
Rutledge, and J. Glasgow. Officers Secretary and Treasurer,
Joseph Mack; Engineer, J. W. Crawley; Rate Collector and
Valuator, John M'Meekin ; Dog Inspector and Impounder of Stray
Stock, S. R. Sheedy. Rabbit Inspectors—J. Mack (North Riding) ;
John M'Meekin (South Riding); John Bristow (East Riding).
The Council meet first Wednesday in each month at 11 o’clock
a.m., at the Shire Hall, Artillery Cresent, Merri-street. Secretary
attends daily,


BOROUGH OF WARRNAMBOOL.-1882-3.
MEMBERS OF BOROUGH COUNCIL.
Retire August 1883.
Simpson, Wm.
King, Thomas
Stephens, C.
Retire August 1884.
Davis, E. J.
Wilson, G. J.
Ward, John
Retire August 1885.
Cramond, J. G., Mayor
Watson, S.
Harris, R. S.
OFFICERS:
Mayor—J. G. Cramond ; Town Clerk and Borough Treasurer
—C. A. Cramer ; Town Surveyor—A. Kerr; Manager of Cor-
poration Gas Works—R. Burall; Health Officer—Dr. Fleetwood ;
Auditor (Local) —John Cleverdon ; Rate Collector and Valuator
—William Helmore ; Manager of Tramway—TL A. C. Macdonald ;
Inspector of Nuisances, Dogs, Cabs, &c. —Constable Heaver ;
Inspector of Weights and Measures and Lessee of Weighbridge—
William Ross; Curator of Botanical Gardens—C. Scoborio;
Park Ranger and Crown Lands Bailiff William Stewart ;
Herdsman and Crown Lands Bailiff —John Beattie ; Poundkeeper
—J. Begley, sen. ; Solicitor —W. Ardlie ; Bankers —Bank of
Victoria.
Meetings of Council, half-past seven p.m., on alternate Tuesdays.
1882.
August ... 29
September ... 12
Ditto ... 26
October ... 10
Ditto ... 24
November ... 7
Annual Meeting (noon) 21
November ... 21
December ... 6
Ditto ... 19
1883.
January ... 2
Ditto ... 16
Ditto ... 30
February ... 13
Ditto ... 27
March ... 13
Ditto ... 27
April ... 11
Ditto ... 24
1883.
May 8
Ditto ... 22
June 5
Ditto ... 19
July 3
Ditto ... 17
Ditto ... 31
Annual Election,
Thursday, Aug. .. g
Election Mayor, io
a.m., Aug. .. 13
Members of Committees elected August 14, 1882.
Public Works—The whole Council
Standing Committee of Public Works —Councillors Harris, King,
Simpson, and Ward. Cr. King, chairman.
Finance—Councillors Ward, Davis, Watson, and Simpson. Cr.
Cramond (Mayor), chairman.
Tramroad—Councillors King, Harris, Watson, and Stephens.
Cr. King, chairman.
Botanic Gardens and Improvement Councillors Harris,
Stephens, Simpson, and Davis. Cr. Harris, chairman.
Gas Works—Cr. King, Harris, Simpson, and Stephens. Cr.
Stephens, chairman.
Fire Brigade—Councillors Harris, King, and Cramond to act
with the Fire Brigade Board.
Municipal Common Managers—The whole Council.
Committee for Harbour Improvements (standing)—Messrs. King,
Cramond, Cramer, Bromfield, T. F. Rutledge, H. Laurie, F. J.
Hickling, A. Kerr, H. C. Pigott, Mayor of Koroit, President Shire
of Mortlake, Spencer Smith, R. B. Paterson, Hugh Read, W.
Anderson, M.L.A., H. A. C. Macdonald, W. R. Evans, Geo, Nipper,
E. D. Evans, F. P. Stevens.


DIRECTORY.
TOWN OF WARRNAMBOOL.
Aberline, John, gardener,
Botanic Road
Accountants.
Alston George D., Raglan Parade
Oieverdon, J., Kepler street
Dunne, M. J., Lava street
Helmore, W., off Timor street
Macdonald, H. A. C., King street
Mack, Joseph, Lava street
Adams, John, Anglers’ Rest
Hotel, Hopkins
Alston, George D., clerk, Raglan
Parade
Alston, C., cabinetmaker, Kepler
street
Allan, Frank E., Crown Lands
Bailiff, Flaxman street
Allan, David H., Jamieson street
Anderson, George, engineer,
South Warrnambool
Anderson, Andrew, Prince of
Wales Hotel, South Warr-
nambool
Anderson, Jas., labourer, Merri
Cutting
Anderson, J. D., engineer, Merri
Cutting
Anderson, John, blacksmith,
Fairy street
Andrews, Mrs. C., music teacher,
King street
Anstey, Samuel, labourer, South
Warrnambool
Anton, J., grocer, Fairy street
Anthony, William H., salesman,
Liebig street
Archibald and Bateman, auc-
tioneers, Koroit street
Archibald, Joseph, sen., gentle-
man, Kepler street
Archibald, Joseph A., jun., auc-
tioneer, residence Timor street
Archibald, Miss S., Raglan
Parade
1 Architects.
Jobbins, G. J., Liebig street
Kerr, A., Town Hall, Timor street
Kelland. W. G., Kelp street
Paterson, W. Lava street
Ardlie, William, Solicitor, Kepler
street, residence Prince street
Armstrong, T. E., shoemaker,
Liebig street
Armstrong, Patrick, undertaker,
Lava street
Arnaud, Thomas, Timor street •
Arnoldt, John P., saddler, Timor
street
Ash, Mrs., off Timor street
Ashby, Mrs., off Timor street
Ashton, Mrs., dressmaker, Koroit
street
Ashton, William, compositor,
Koroit street
Atkinson, John Henry, chemist,
Timor street
Atkinson, Thomas, labourer,
South Warrnambool
Auctioneers.
Archibald and Bateman, Koroit
street
Hyland, John, Kepler street
Jellie and St, Quintin, Koroit
street
Baines, George, labourer, Fairy
street
Baker, William, labourer, Gibson
street
Baker, Walter, labourer, off
Timor street
Baker, John, labourer, Grafton
Road


Bakers.
Brown, Joseph, Fairy street
Davis Bros., Timor street
Davis, F. J., Fairy street
Kucks, W., Liebig street
Latter, A. J., Timor street
Munro, G., Koroit street
Younger, M., Fairy street
Ballis, Jno, cab proprietor, Timor
street
Ballis, Joseph, sen., fruiterer,
Fairy street
Ballis, Joseph, jun., cab proprie-
tor, Raglan Parade
Ballis, Robert, cab proprietor,
Lava street
Banks.
Bank of Australasia, Timor
street, H. B. Chomley, manager
Bank of Victoria, Liebig street,
L. Ogilby, manager
Colonial Bank of Australasia,
Liebig street, W. S. tielpman,
manager
National Bank of Australasia,
Timor street, F. J. Hickling,
manager
Post Office Savings’ Bank, Timor
street, H. F. O’Connell, ac-
tuary.
Savings’ Bank, Liebig street, El.
Margetts, actuary
Bannan, William, labourer, Kelp
street
Barber, R. W., coachbuilder,
Fairy street, residence Kelp
street
Barker, John, tanner, off Koroit
street
Barrett, J. N., schoolmaster,
Spence street
Barnett, Mrs. E., dressmaker,
Timor street east
Barry, Michael, blacksmith,
Fairy street
Barry, John, blacksmith, Aitkin’s
road
Barwood, Arthur, store manager,
Merri street
Bateman, Mrs. W., schoolmis-
tress, Henna street
Bateman, W. EL, auctioneer,
residence Henna street
Bateman, Mrs. J., Koroit street
Batterby, George Edwin, farmer,
Allansford road
Baylie, George Henry, engineer,
Timor street
Baylis, William, produce mer-
chant, Tramway, residence
Koroit street
Bayly, J., drover, M‘Gregor road
Bayly and Higgins, solicitors,
Kepler street
Beamish, Archdeacon P. Teulon,
D.D. L.L.D., Church of Eng-
land Minister, Koroit street
Beason, John, gardener, Japan
street
Beattie & Phillips, undertakers,
Koroit street
Beattie, Christopher, Lava street
Beattie, John, herdsman, Spence
street
Beattie, Michael, shoemaker,
Fairy street
Beattie, Mrs,, nurse, Lava street
Beeching, James, billiard lessee,
Lava street
Begley, John, Merri street
Begley, John, jun„ poundkeeper,
Merri River ,
Bell, J. and A., produce dealers,
Koroit street, flour mill, Stanley
stieet, South Warrnambool
Bell, Adam, Lava street
Bell, Mrs., Lava street
Bell, John, labourer, South Warr-
nambool
Benson, Thomas, butcher. Timor
street
Benson, R. R., grocer, Fairy and
LaVa streets, residence Koroit
street east
Beresford, Mrs., Timor street
Bertrand, W. J., labourer, Murray
street
Best, Mrs., Koroit street
Best, William, labourer, Tozer’s
road
Best, Thomas, labourer, Henna
street
Biggs, Thomas, labourer, Koroit
street


Blacksmiths.
Anderson, J., Fairy-street
Barry, J. and M., Fairy street
Cruikshanks, John, Fairy street
Drohan, T., Fairy street
Foote, W., Liebig street
Hanlin, Stewart and Co., Lava
street
Jewell, W. H., Lava street
Mackenzie, Robert, Fairy street
M'Cullough, Hugh, Fairy street
Moore, John, Raglan Parade
Morieson, J „ Liebig-street
Puryer and Baylie, Fairy street
Blair, Thomas, Custom’s clerk,
Canterbury road
Blamires, Rev. W. L., Wesleyan
Minister, Liebig street
Blevins, W. H , mason, Henna
street
Bolton, Thomas, labourer, Japan
street
Bonham, William, engine driver,
Lava street
Bostock, Mrs. E., Koroit street
Bostock, James, agent, Kepler
street, residence Hopkins
Bourne, W. Charles, plasterer,
off Timor street
Bottomley, Jos., eordial maker,
Timor street
Bowman, R. C., machinist, Kepler
street
Booksellers.
Davies, W., Timor street
Hider, Charles, Timor street
Philp, R. A., Timor street
Bootmakers.
Armstrong, T. E , Liebig street
Beattie, M., Fairy street
Chapman, A., Fairy street
Christian, D , Liebig street
Child, J. W., Liebig street
Dorney, Jas., Timor street
Elliott and Co„ Belfast road
Grace, J., Timor street
Johnson, R., Timor street
McCarthy, D., Fairy street
Mackenzie, James, Timor street
O’Shea, J., Fairy street
Salt, H., Koroit street
Bootmakers (continued)
Shortall, P., Raglan Paaade
Smith, J., Liebig street
Usher, T., Liebig street
Wainwright, S., Timor street
Brady, James, tinsmith, Liebig
street
Bradhurst, Mrs., Hotham road
Bradford, Nicholas, labourer,
Stanley street, South Warr-
nambool
Brass, John, lighterman, South
Warrnambool
Brebner, J. A., tailor, Timor
street
Breckon, Jas., labourer, Kelp
street
Breckon, Mrs. S., Latrobe street
Brett, Mrs., Latrobe street
Brewers.
Landmann, A., Western Brewery,
Timor street
Sheldrick and Co., New Brewery,
Timor street
Briggs, John, draper, Timor
street, residence Merri street
Briggs, William, labourer, Lava
street
Bromfleld, J. Astley, chemist,
Liebig street, residence Can-
terbury road
Brooks, Mrs. J., Koroit street
Brosnan, Thomas, police cons-
table, Gillies street
Brough, Mrs., Lava street
Brown, Alfred S., Manager Tem-
perance Hotel, Kepler street
Brown, Joseph, baker, Fairy
street
Brown, M. J., cab proprietor,
Henna street
Brown, James, labourer, Lava
street
Browne, John, gentleman, Spring
Gardens
Browne, R. W. H., cabinetmaker,
Fairy street, do. residence


Browne, Benjamin, telegraph
operator, Lava street
Browne, Miss, boarding house-
keeper, Lava street
Bruce, Mrs., Lava street
Bruce, John, carpenter, Lava
street
Bruce, James, labourer, Kerr
street
Bruce, John, labourer, Hider
street
Builders.
Dawkins, W., Fairy street
Hortle Bros., Kepler street
Newcombe and Morris, Koroit
street
Building Society, Kepler street
Bullock, Mrs. M., milliner, Liebig
street
Burnett, Mrs. T., Banyan street
Burns, Mrs., off Timor street
Burall, R. D., Manager Gas
Works, Merri street
Butchers.
Atkinson, M., South Warrnam-
bool
Benson, T., Timor street
Dinan, John, Fairy street
Glanfield, J., Fairy street
Harper. D., Liebig street
Lane, R,, Liebig street
M‘Cullough, T., Fairy street
Smith, P., Fairy street
Wiggs, G., Fairy street
Burt, T. J. bacon curer, Spring
gardens
Bryant, William, Head Master
Warrnambool State School,
Canterbury road
Byrne, John, labourer, Raglan
Parade
Cabinetmakers.
Alston, Chas., Kepler street
Browne, R. W. H., Fairy street
Kuehn, J., Gibson street
Spalding, J., Koroit street
Stelli ng, T., Liebig street
Cab Proprietors.
Ballis, John, Timor street
Ballis, J., jun, Raglan Parade
Ballis, R., Lava street
Brown, M., Henna street
Chiltern, 1., Ryot street
Dwyer, James, Lava street
Dwyer, John, Fairy street
Calder, James, labourer, Koroit
street
Callaghan, John, labourer, Rag-
lan Parade
Callaghan, Mrs. J., Kelp street
Callaghan, Martin, contractor,
Raglan Parade
Callaghan, Martin, labourer,
Koroit street
Caller, William, labourer, Rag-
lan Parade
Callick, William, labourer, Ban-
yan street
Camp, Jonathan, labourer, Ban-
yan street
Campbell, T. L., storekeeper,
Fairy street
Candy, Mrs., dressmaker, Banyan
street
Carew, Roady, Bryan Boiroimhe
Hotel, Raglan Parade
Carey, James, labourer, Grafton
Road
Carey, John, boatman, Edina
street, South Warrnambool
Carman, Mrs., Raglan Parade
Carmody, Patrick, labourer, Kerr
street
Carpenter, A. J., Tattersall’s
Hotel, Liebig street
Carolan, Mrs. H., Raglan Parade
Carter, Christopher, sweep,
Timor street
Carter, Edmumd, labourer, Japan
street
Carter, Joseph, plasterer, Raglan
Parade
Carter, Robert, labourer, Koroit
street
Carter, Samuel, bootmaker,
Koroit street
Carter, Samuel, saddler, Fairy
street
Carty, Jeremiah, wheelwright,
Raglan Parade


Carty, Morris, labourer, Elliott
street
Cathcart, Mrs. William, Henna
street
Chamberlain, Mrs. S., Tozer’s
road
Chambers, Mrs. A., Fairy street
Chapman, Alexander, bootmaker,
Fairy street
Oharlesworth, Wm., nightman,
Kelp street
Chemists.
Atkinson, J. H., Timor street
Bromfield, J. A., Liebig street
Kennedy, R. F., Timor street
Child, J. W., bootmaker, Liebig
street
Chiltern, Isaac, cab proprietor,
Ryot street
Chomley, H. 8., Manager Bank
of Australasia, Timor street
Christian, David, bootmaker,
Liebig street, residence Rag-
lan Parade
Christian, James, mason, Koroit
street
Christophers, Henry, toy dealer,
Timor street
Clarke, Daniel, photographer,
Liebig street
Clarke, Mrs., Timor street
Clarke, John, bootmaker, Henna
street
Clarke, Matthew, labourer, Japan
street
Cleary, John, tailor, Fairy street
Cleary, Thomas, tailor, Liebig
street
Clementson, Mrs., Jamieson
street
Cleverdon, John, registrar, Kepler
street, residence Ryot street
Cliff, W. E„ agent, Banyan street
Cloke, Peter, pilot, Stanley street,
South Warrnambool
Coachbuilders.
Barber, R. W., Fairy street
Stephens Bros., Liebig street
Wilson, R, J., Fairy street
Coakley, Joseph, saddler, Liebig
street
Cole, Jacob, farmer, Reserve
Coleston, Josiab, painter, Timor
street
Collins, Edward, labourer, Mac-
donald street
Conrick, Patrick, farmer, Botanic
road
Conway, Martin, Union Hotel,
Henna street
Commission Agents.
Archibald and Bateman, Koroit
street
Bostock, J., Kepler street
Craig, John H., Liebig street
Cliff, W. E., Banyan street
Flaxman, John, Timor street
Hyland, J., Kepler street
Jellie and St. Quintin, Koroit
street
Mackay, A. 8., Timor street
M'Meekin, J. P., Lava street
M'Meekin, John, jun.
Nettle ton, Sami., Raglan Parade
Cook, Joseph, tinsmith, Fairy
street
Coopers.
Martin, T., Lava street
M'Gfcnnan, P. J., Lava street
Corbett, Mrs., nurse, Lava street
Cordial Manufacturers.
Davis, J., Koroit street
Rowley, J. S., Timor street
Corn Dealers.
Bell, J. and A., Liebig street
Marfell, J., Raglan Parade
Phillips, H., Liebig street
Roberts, J., Fairy street
Tyers, W., Liebig street
Corlett, T., schoolmaster, Jamie-
son street
Corgan, Thomas, dealer, Raglan
Parade
Corkadale, Joseph H., drapers’
assistant, Liebig street
Cosgrove, William, South Warr-
nambool
Cotterell, John, groom, Kepler
street


Coulstock, Alfred, Timor street
Coulstock, Elizabeth, Raglan
Parade
Coulstock, Matthew, Raglan
Parade
Cowen, John, gentleman, Liebig
street
Cox, Wm, labourer, Alfred road
Craig, John H., agent, Liebig
street, residence Spring Gardens
Cramer, C. A., town clerk, Coun-
cil Chambers
Cramer C. A., draper, Timor
street
Cramond and Dickson, drapers,
Timor street
Cramond, J. G„ residence Henna
street
Cramond, J. 8., drapers’ assist-
ant, Henna street
Crawley, J. W., civil engineer,
Belfast road
Creighton, John, labourer, off
Koroit street
Crisp, C. J., upholsterer, off
Timor street
Croll, David, carpenter, Banyan
street
Cromie, John, trimmer. Lava
street
Cronin, Mrs. T., dressmaker,
Timor street
Cronin, T., constable, Timor
street
Cruikshanks, John, blacksmith,
Fairy stre.et
Cunningham, Michael, labourer,
near Racecourse
Curtain, Willliam, labourer, Rag-
lan Parade
Curtis, Patrick, labourer, Gibson
street
Curtis, Charles, off Timor street
Curtis, George, caretaker W.C.C.
ground
Cust, Robert, King street
Cust, Mrs. Kepler street
Cust, A., storekeeper, Lava street
Cutting, John, tanner, Merri
Cutting
Cuttriss, Charles, naturalist j
Koroit street
Daley Moses, labourer, Lava
strret
Daley, Richard, farmer, Skene
street
Dalton, W. G., gilder, Timor
street
Davey, John J., stonecutter
Lava street
Davies, Daniel, tanner, Timor
street
Davies, John, stonecutter, Lava
street
Davies, Henry, carpenter, Rag-
lan Parade
Davis, Edwin J., pastrycook,
Timor street
Davis, F. J., baker, Fairy street
Davis, Henry W., reporter, Fairy
street
Davis, John, grocer, Koroit street
Davis, Mrs , tailoress, off Koroit
street
Davis, Chas. Henry, Banyan
street
Dawkins, W., timber merchant.
Fairy street
Debi'ew, Emanuel, labourer,
Stanley street, South Warr-
nambool
Dentists.
Thwaites F. J., Koroit street
Marriott, J., Timor street
Derrick, Anthony, tailor, Raglan
Parade
Deverell, R., lighthouse-keeper,
Merri street
Deverell, Mrs., Lava street
Diggins, P., carter, Merri street
Dinan, John, butcher, Fairy
street
Dodds, Chas., saddler, Kepler
street
Dodds, M. J., off King street
Dodds, Wm., painter, King street
Doherty, Thomas, Royal Hotel,
Timor street
Dolan, Hugh, farmer, Gladstone
street
Dorialdson, William, storeman,
Fairy street
Donohough, Mrs. M., Murray
street


Donovan, Michael, labourer,
Murray street
Dooley, James, Dooley’s Hotel,
Liebig street
Dorney, James, bootmaker, Timor
street
Dorney, Mrs,, Royal Arcade,
Timor street
Dowley, Mrs. R., Kepler street
Drapers.
Briggs, J., Timor street
Cramer, C. A., Timor street
Cramond and Dickson, Timor
street
Lawson, T., Fairy street
Mose, E. H., Liebig street
Twinem, R., Liebig street
Wheeler, F., Liebig street
Drew, Mrs., off Timor street
Drohan, Thomas, blacksmith,
Fairy street
Drought, James, trooper, Liebig
street
Duirs, James, shopman, Banyan
street
Dumaresq, A. W., Custom’s clerk,
Ardlie street
Dunne, M. J., accountant, Lava
street
Dwyer, James, cab proprietor,
Lava street
Dwyer, John, cab proprietor,
Fairy street
Dwyer, Mrs. M., milk seller,
Lava street
Earle, James, drapers’s assist-
ant, Timor street
Earls, John, labourer, Foster
street
Earls, Michael, Koroit street
Earls, Mrs., Skene sti’eet
Eastwood, H. S., bailiff Lava
street
Edwards, J. M., storekeeper,
Raglan Parade
Edwards, T. M., painter, Timor
street
Edwards, Mrs. C., Raglan Parade
Elliget, Edmund, scab inspector,
Merri Cutting
Elliott, A., bootmaker, Raglan
Parade
Elliott, Thomas, draper’s assist-
ant, Ryot street
Ellis, E., journalist, Koroit street
Ellis, Frank, Royal Archer Hotel,
Koroit street
Endley, Joseph, Lava street.
Engineers and Millwrights.
Esam, John, engineer, Koroit
street
Esam, Samuel, engineer, Kelp
street
Evans, Daniel, mason, Banyan
street
Evans, David, gentleman, Ban-
yan street north
Evans, David, labourer, Kelp
street
Evans, E. D., saddler, Liebig
street, residence Lava street
Evans, John, South Warrnam-
bool
Evans, Mrs. R., Lava street
Evans, William, sawyer, Gibson
street
Evans, W. R., manager W.S.N,
Co., residence Raglan Parade
Evenett, James, fellmonger,
near Merri Cutting
Everard, John, carpenter, Japan
street
Everard, John, labourer, Lava
street
Everett, Charles, Glebe Hotel,
Koroit street
Farley, Edward, labourer,
Grafton road
Fairbrother, —, slaughterman
Henna street
Fawkner, Mrs. M., Stanley street
South Warrnambool
Fawsett, Mrs. E., Timor street
Farrer, John, undertaker, Raglan
Parade


Fearon, Henry O’H., labourer,
Lava street
Fellmongers.
Bennett, R., Dennington
Evenett, J„ Merri Cutting
Mawbey, Henry, Merri Cutting
Fennelley, Patrick, drapers’ as-
sistant, Kerr street
Fenton, John, whitesmith, Liebig
street
Fenton, John, accountant, Timor
street
Fergusson, Thomas, watchmaker,
Timor street
Ferrier, John R,,labourer, Edina
street, South Warrnambool
Ferrier, John, labourer, Stanley
street, South Warrnambool
Fisher, Edward, Timor street
Fisher, John, labourer, Mac-
donald street
Fisher, Thomas, labourer, Mac-
donald street
Fisher, Mrs. W., off Timor street
Fishmongers.
Ballis, J., Fairy street
Price, R., Timor street
Smith, Wm,, Fairy street
Fitzgerald, John, labourer,
Atkin’s road
Fitzpatrick, Mrs E., off Lava
street
Flaxman, John, agent, Timor
street, residence Henna street
Fleetwood, T. F., surgeon, Koroit
street
Fletcher, James, solicitor, Koroit
street, residence Merri street
Fletcher, James, labourer, Nic-
holson street
Fletcher, John, labourer, Hider
street
Fletcher, William, labourer,
Japan street
Flett, John, boatbuilder, Jamie-
son street
Flett, John, carpenter, Raglan
Parade
Flett, Peter, labourer, Koroit
street
Foote, Thomas, compositor,
Kepler street
Foote, Wiliam, blacksmith,
Liebig street
Forbes, R. M., painter, Liebig
street
Forrester, J. L., carpenter, How-
ard street
Fox, Joseph, Western Hotel,
Kepler street
Fox, Mrs. M., Lava street
Frazer, H., grocer’s assistant,
Fairy street
Freemasons Hall, Kepler street
Fruiterers.
Ballis, J., Fairy street
Cowdell, Mrs., Timor street
Dorney, Mrs. Timor street
Fussell, B, Timor street
Hare, Mrs., Liebig street
Harris, R. S. Liebig street
Moore, J. B , Timor street
Murray, W. J„ Fairy street
Price, R., Timor street
Smith, T., Odd Fellows’ Hall,
Koroit street
Smith, William, Fairy street
Fuller, Wm. Henna street
Fusseli, Benjamin, storekeeper,
Timor street
Gage, Walter, Kepler street
Gallagher, Hugh, horse trainer,
Liebig street
Gartlan, Patrick, carpenter,
Koroit street
Gauley, Mrs. Anne, Lava street
Gazzard, F. W., pork butcher,
Liebig street
Gee, Fredrick, labourer, Ryot
street
Geilhofer, R., accountant, Henna
street
General Storekeepers.
Benson, R. R., Fairy street
Campbell, T. L., Fairy street
Davis, J., Koroit street
Edwards, J. M., Raglan Parade
Granter, J., Lava street


General Storekeepers
(continued)
Hare, Mrs., Liebig street
Landmann, A., Henna street
M'Kinney, W., Liebig street
Paterson and Co., Timor street
Redford, and Co., corner of Fairy
and Timor streets
Russell and Powell, Fairy street
Simpson, W. Liebig street
Swinton, W., Timor street
Ward, J., North Wannambool
Williams, E„ South Warrnam-
bool
Young, Miss., Liebig street
Gerook, William, butcher, Ilenna
street
Giblett, Jackson, tanner, near
Merri Cutting, residence
Russell’s Creek
Gibton, Robert, Clerk Petty Ses-
sions, Henna street
Gilchrist, Thomas, labourer,
Lava street
Gilmour, A., labourer, Koroit
street
Glanfield, G., butcher, Fairy
street
Gleeson, John H., drapers’ as-
sistant, Jukes street
Gleeson, Michael, gentleman,
Timor street
Gleeson, Thomas, livery stable
keeper, Timor street
Gomez, Joseph, boatman, Stanley
. street, South Warrnambool
Goodall, Thomas, clerk, Mac-
gregor road
Goodall, William, farmer, Allans-
ford road
Gould, Mrs., Timor street
Grace, John, bootmaker, Timor
street
Graham, Hugh, plasterer, Henna
street
Granter, James, contractor, Lava
street
Granter, Mrs., Kelp street
Greening, Haines and Holmes,
drapers, Timor street
Greening, E., draper, Banyan
street
Da , niGl - Ra glan Parade
Griliiths, Andrew, mason, Rag-
lan Parade
Grocers.
Anton, J., Fairy street
Cronin, T. M., Liebig street
Cust, A., Lava street
Fussell, 8., Timor street
Howie, Mrs, Ann, Koroit street
Kruger, J. C. A., Liebig street
Long, W., Timor street
Sturley, Mrs, Fairy street
Smith, Bros., Kepler street
Wood, (L, Timor street
Gunsmiths.
Fenton, John, Liebig street
Sykes, A., Koroit street
•
Haberfield, James, hawker,
Lava street
Haig, John, labourer, Lava street
Haines, J. S., draper, Timor
street
Hairdressers.
Harris, Samuel, Liebig street
Harris, W. J., Timor street
Smith, J. W., Liebig street
Halfhide, A. C., jeweller, Liebig
street
Hallowell, John, quarryman,
Hider street
Hallowell, Mrs. R„ Murray street
Hammond, Joseph, painter, off
Timor street
Hang, Ah, hawker, Fairy street
Hanlin, A. P., machinist, off
Timor street
Hanlin, Stewart and Co., black-
smiths, Lava street
Hare, Mrs., storekeeper, Liebig
street
Harper, David, butcher, Liebig
street
Harries, Henry, agent, Merri
street, residence Liebig street
Harrington, E. H., surgeon,
Liebig street
Harris, James, labourer, Merri
street


Harris, R. S., seedsman, Liebig
street
Harris, Samuel, hairdresser,
Liebig street
Harris, W. J., hairdresser, Timor
street
Hart, George, porter, Botanic
road
Hassett, M., labourer, Raglan
Parade
Haw, John, labourer, Timor
street
Hayes, E., labourer, South Warr-
nambool
Hayes, T., labourer, Latrobe
street
Hayes, T., labourer, Lava street
Healey, D., livery stable keeper,
Koroit street
Heard, William, bootmaker,
Koroit street
Heckles, Mrs., Koroit street
Helmore, W. H., rate collector,
Kelp street
Helpman, W. S., manager, Co-
lonial Bank, Liebig street
Henderson, C., quarryman, Kerr
street
Henderson, Mrs.R., dressmaker,
Skene street
Hennessy, James, Raglan Parade
Hotel, Fairy street
Hennessy, James, labourer, Ryot
street
Hewett, J., butcher, Timor street
Heydecke, A., cooper, Timor
street
Hider, James, photographer,
Timor street
Hider, Charles, bookseller, Timor
street
Hickford, W. J., painter, Liebig
street
Hickling, F. J., manager National
Bank, Timor street
Hickling, J., drill instructor,
Merri street
Higgins, J., solicitor, Kepler
street, residence North Warr-
nambool
Higham, Thomas, jun , cabinet-
maker, Nelson street
Higham, Thomas, storeman,
Raglan Parade
Hinxman, Theodore, gardener,
Lava street
Holmes, J. S., draper, Timor
street
Holland, G., saddler, Cramer
street
Horan, Patrick, postman, Skene
street
Horne, Mrs., shopkeeper. Timor
street
Hortle Bros., builders, Kepler
street
Hortle, A. C., carpenter, Kepler
street
Hortle, H. W., carpenter, Princess
street
Hood, James, grazier, Wollaston
Hotelkeepers.
Anderson, A., Prince of Wales
Hotel, South Warrnambool
Bourke, —, Terminus Hotel,
Merri street
Carew, Roady, Bryan Boiroimhe
Hotel, Raglan Parade
Carpenter, A. J., Tattersall’s
Hotel, Liebig street
Conway, M., Union Hotel, Henna
street
Doherty, T., Royal Hotel, Fairy
street
Everett, C., Globe Hotel, Koroit
street
Ellis, F., Royal Archer Hotel,
Koroit street
Farrell, J., Pieter Both Hotel,
Belfast road
Fox, J., Western Hotel, Kepler
street
Hennessy, J., Raglan Parade
Hotel, Fairy street
Humphrays, Mrs. Johanna,
Farmers’ Rest Hotel, Raglan
Parade
Humm, G., Criterion Hotel,
Kepler street
Kuntze, H., Marine Hotel, Ban-
yan street
Lyons, —, Princess Royal Hotel 1
Liebig street
O’Shannessy, W., Olive Branch
Hotel, Fairy street
Pearce, T., Princess Alexandra
Hotel, Liebig street


Hotelkeepers (continued)
pleydell,F.W, Rising Sun Hotel,
Timor street
pocock, F., Steam Packet Hotel,
South Warrnambool
Scown, W. H., Turf Club Hotel,
Liebig street
Sears, T. H., Commercial Hotel,
Timor street
Stewart, A., Otway Hotel, Fairy
street
Wilson, J., Caledonian Hotel,
Fairy street
Yeoman, F., Victoria Hotel,
Liebig street
Howard, Mrs. M., Koroit street
Howard, Mrs. S., off Lava street
Howie, Mrs. Ann, storekeeper,
Banyan street
Hudson, Mrs., Timor street
Hughes, Thomas, carter, Banyan
street
Hunter, James, labourer, off
Koroit street
Humphrays, Mrs. Johanna,
Farmers’ Rest Hotel, Raglan
Parade
Hyland, John, auctioneer, Kepler
street, residence Belfast road
Hyde, John, storekeeper, Jamie-
son street
Ibbotson, Mrs. H., Koroit street
Isles, H. 8., clerk, Koroit street
Irvine, John, agent, Lava street
Irviue, W. T., cabinetmaker, off
Lava street
Jackson, John, painter, off Lava
street
Jamieson, Mrs. W. W., Timor
street
Jeffery, Oliver, agent, Tramway
stores
Jellie & St. Quintin, auctioneers,
Koroit street
Jellie, James, auctioneer, Koroit
street
Jellie, Mrs. W., Botanic road
Jenkins, 11., Skene street
Jenkins, N., labourer, Grafton
road
Jobbins, George, architect, Liebig
street
Johnson, R., bootmaker, Timor
street
Johnson, Wm., carpenter, Ban-
yan street
Johnston, Mrs. S., Temperance
Hotel, Koroit street
Jones, E., plasterer, Timor street
Jones, James, gardener, Lava
street
Jones, R., carpenter, Koroit
street
Joyce, Robert, Lava street
Jukes, Mrs., Hopkins
Kane, John, Stanley street
South Warrnambool
Kavenagh, Peter, labourer,
Jamieson street
Keilor, Peter, miller, Lava street
Kelland, Robert, carter, Kelp
street
Kelland, W. G., architect, Kelp
street
Kellas, William, mason, Raglan
Parade
Kelly, Michael, labourer, Henna
street
Keltern, Robert, bottler, Timor
street
Kenneally, Cornelius, labourer,
Koroit street
Kenneally, Patrick, labourer,
Lava street
Kennedy, R. Frank, chemist,
Timor street
Kenny, A., carpenter, Banyan
street
Kenny, H., labourer, Japan street
Kermond, Richard, blacksmith,
Allansford road
Kerr, Andrew, surveyor, Koroit
street •
Kerr, John, labourer, Ryot street
Kerr, Mrs. E., off Koroit street
Keogh, Mrs., Grafton road


King, Mrs. G., Nelson street
King, Thomas. produce merchant,
Merri street, residence Liebig
street north
Kirby, Patrick, labourer, Pair
street
Kirkpatrick, Joseph C., Japa
street
Knights, Mrs. Robert, Banya
street
Kruger, J. C. A., grocer, Liebig
street, residence Banyan stree ;
Kucks, W., baker, Liebig street
Kuehn, John Julius, cabinet
makei’, Gibson street
Laing, D., watchmaker, Koroi ;
street
Laing, Mrs. W., milliner, Timor
street
Laing, A., miller, South Warr-
nambool
Laird, James, labourer, Merri
street
Lancetter, W., Henna street
Lance, G., plumber, Liebig street.
Landmann, A., brewer, Timoi
street, residence Henna street
Lane, Joseph, labourer, Timoi
street
Lane, Richard, butcher, Liebig
street
Langwel, Mrs., laundress, Henna
street
Langwel, Samuel, compositor,
Koroit street
Lankesbury, Mrs. J., Osburne
street
Larkin, Augustus, wellsinker,
Raglan Parade
Latter, A. J., baker, Timor street
Lavery, Robert, Koroit street
Lawlor, Mrs., Koroit street
Law, Samuel, bacon curer, near
Merri Cutting
Lawson Thomas, draper, Fairy
street
Lawson, Thomas, South Warr-
■ambool
Lear, Thomas, saddler, Koroit
street
Loes, Lees, contractor, Mac-
Gregor road
Lennox, Thomas, labourer, Fairy
street
Levi, Edward, saddler, Fairv
street
Liee, Gip, hawker, Jamieson
street
Lillico, James, designer, Osburne
street
Lock, E., plumber, Liebig street,
residence Skene street
Lock, II „ porter, Elliott street
Lock, W. H., farmer, Henna
street
Long, W., grocer, Timor street
Looney, D., labourer, Lava street
Looney, Jeremiah, labourer, Lava
street
Looney, John, Kruger street
Lott, Henry, labourer, Koroit
street
Lord, E., Kaglan Parade
Lord, Joseph, stoker, Banyan
street
Louez, Antonio, labourer, South
Warrnambool
Lucas, John, labourer, Eaglan
Parade
Lynch, James, labourer, Timor
street
MacDonald, H. A. C., Tramway
Manager, King street
MacFarlane, Archibald, clerk,
Timor street
Machine (Sewing, &c.) Re-
pairer.
Bowman, K. C., Kepler street
Mack, Joseph, shire secretary,
Merri street, residence Banyan
street
Mack, Mrs., music teacher, Ban-
yan street
Mackay, A. 8., agent, Timor
street, residence Skene street
Mackay, Thomas, shipping agent,
&c., Kepler street, residence
Belfast road


Mackay, William, constable,
Timor street
Mackenzie, James, bootmaker,
Timor street
Macnamara, M., laborer, Grafton
road
Macnamara, M., labourer, Koroit
street
Macnamara, P. J., surgeon, Koroit
street
Madden, James, labourer, off
Koroit street
Madden, John J., Skene street
Mahon, Mrs., Banyan street
Main, Mrs., Japan street
Maloney, Thomas, labourer,
Koroit street
Maloney, Michael, butcher,
Henna street
Manning, John, Koroit street
Marfell, John, manager Co-opera-
tive Milling Co., residence
Nelson street
Margetts, E„ actuary, Timor
street
Marr, J. A., carpenter, Banyan
street
Marriott, J., dentist, Timor street,
residence North Warrnambool
Martin, Mrs., dressmaker, Liebig
street
Martin, Mrs. M., Merri street
Martin, Thomas, cooper, Lava
street
Marshall, F., wheelwright, Timor
street
Marshall, Miss, dressmaker,
Timor street
Mason, James, bootmaker, off
Kelp street
Matthews, John, carpenter, off
Koroit street
May, Mrs., Henna street
Mawbey, Henry, fellmonger,
Merri Cutting, residence Bel-
fast road
Medical Practitioners.
Fleetwood, T. F., Koroit street
Harrington, R. H., Liebig street
Macnamara, P. J., Koroit street
Owen, W. H., Koroit street
Mills, E., bootmaker, Timor street
Milsom, J. 8., clerk, Jamieson,
street
Mitchell, Andrew, labourer,
South Warrnambool
Mitchell, James, labourer, Koroit
street
Mitchell, John, labourer, South
Warrnambool
Mohnsen, J. C., tobacconist, Lie-
big street
Montgomery, James, tailor,
Merri street
Morieson, J., blacksmith, Liebig
street, residence Koroit street
Moore, J. 8., fruiterer, Timor
street
Moore, John, blacksmith, Kaglan
Parade
Morris, R. W., painter, Kelp
street
Mose, E, H., draper, Liebig street
Mudie, D., mason, Lava street
Mullane, M., labourer, Murray
street
Munday, Mrs., Lava street
Munro, George G., baker, Koroit
street
Murphy, M. J., drapers’ assist-
ant, Liebig street north
Murray, Hugh, attorney, Liebig
street, residence Canterbury
road
Murray, J. A., Kepler street
Murray, W. J., seedsman, Lava
street
Murrell, Thomas, Skene street
McCarthy, D., bootmaker, Fairy
street
McCarthy, D., labourer, Ryot
street
McCarthy, D., Stanley street
South Warrnambool
McCallum, Mrs., Liebig street
north
McCartney, W., carter, Timor
street
McConnell, John, labourer,
Jamieson street
McConnell, Joseph, labourer,
Grafton road
McConnell, Mrs., dressmaker,
Lava street
McConnell, R., Raglan Parade


McConnell, Thomas, mason, Kag-
lan Parade
McCormick, Thomas, Kyot street
McCready, D., miller, off Timor
street
McCrory, John, labourer, Kaglan
Parade
McCullough, H., farrier, Fairy
street
McCullough, T., butcher, Fairy
street
McDermid, J., saddler, Liebig
street, residence Botanic road
McDonald, A., tailor, Kelp street
McDonald, Donald, labourer,
Lava street
McDonald, Donald, labourer,
South Warrnambool
McDougall, C., blacksmith,
Cramer street
McDougall, carpenter, Koroit
street
McDougall, John, Bostock street
McDougall, J., coachbuilder,
Cramer street
McDowall, T., blacksmith, Lava
street
McGennan, P. J., cooper, Lava
street, residence Liebig street
north
McGloin, Gilbert, labourer,
Koroit street
McGowan, James, carpenter,
Koroit street
McGrath, M., carpenter, Koroit
street
McGuire, M., labourer, Latrobe
street
Mcllvanna, James, labourer,
Timor street
Mellwraith, Miss, dressmaker,
Liebig street
McJannet, W,, labourer, Raglan
Parade
McKnee, Robert, labourer, Koroit
street
McKellar, Mrs., boarding house,
Timor street
McK ellar, Wm., labourer, Henna
street
McKenzie, Robert, blacksmith,
Fairy street
McKinley, David, storeman,
Henna street
McKinney, William, storekeeper,
Liebig street, residence Lava
street
McLean, Mrs., dressmaker, King
street
McLeish, John, Lava street
McLellan, Duncan, South Warr-
nambool
McLellan, Kenneth, South Warr-
nambool
McMahon, W., Botanic road
McMeekin, J. P., agent, Skene
street
McNally, Jas., labourer, Hopkins
road * «-
M‘Sweeney, J., labourer, Rag-
lan Parade
McTaggart, M., labourer, South
Warrnambool
Neal, Mrs., Lava street
Neal, J. W., wheelwright, Lava
street, residence Kaglan Parade
Neason, K., bootmaker, off Liebig
street
Neave, Mrs., Lava street
Nelson, Hugh, carpenter. Koroit
street
Nelson, Mrs., boat owner, Jukes
street, Hopkins
Nettleton, S., stationer, Kaglan
Parade
Nettleton, W. F. G., druggist,
Liebig street
Newcombe and Morris, timber
merchants, Koroit street
Newcombe, E. P., Koroit street
Newman, John, labourer, Lome
street
Newman, Mrs., Bostock street
Newton, Miss F„ music teacher,
Henna street
Newspaper.
‘‘ Standard,” Koroit street
Nicholson, Mark, gentleman,
Jukes street
Noble, Wm., labourer, Koroit
street
Norris, Thomas, labourer, South
Warrnambool


Noonan, Michael, labourer, Ee-
serve
Nugent, John, quarry man, Kerr
street
Nugent, Michael, labourer, Lava
street
Nursery Gardens.
Beardsley, H., Bussell's Creek
Eagles, W., Spring Gardens
Fussell, 8., Spring Gardens
Harris, E. S., Spring Gardens
Murray, W. J., Spring Gardens
Oaklet, James, sen., gardener,
Hopkins
Oakley, James, jun., storeman,
Japan street
Oakley, Eobert, labourer, Eyot
street
Oakley, Samuel, quarryman,
Murray street
Oakley, Thomas, sen., Otway road
Oakley, Thomas, jun., printer,
Lava street
Odd Fellows’ Hall, Thos. Smith,
keeper, Koroit street
Opie, C. N. T., Standard office, re-
sidence Spence street
Owen, W. H., surgeon, Koroit
street
O’Brien, William, livery stable
keeper, Timor street, residence
Kepler street
O’Connell, H. F., postmaster,
Timor street
O’Connor, Charles, labourer,
Eyot street
O’Donnell, Francis, labourer,
Merri street
O’Donnell, James, labourer,
Otway road
O’Donnell, John, labourer, off
Lava street
O’Farrell, James, Pieter Both
Hotel, Belfast road
O’Grady, John, labourer, Kelp
street
O’Halloran, James, labourer, off
Lava street
O’Mullane, David, drapers’ as-
sistant, Henna street
O’ Mullane, Dennis, coachbuilder, J
Timor street
O’Mullane, John, cabinetmaker,
Banyan street
O’Mullane, Mrs., Banyan street
O’Shannessy, W., Olive Branch
Hotel, Fairy street
O’Shea. J., bootmaker, Fairy
street
O’Sullivan, Patrick, labourer,
Eaglan Parade
Painters.
Dalton, G., Timor street
Edwards, T. M.. Timor street
Forbes, B. M., Liebig street
Hickford, W. J., Liebig street
Eule, D., Fairy street
Villiers, J. J., Liebig street
Pabk, James, carder and spinner,
Lava street
Parker, W. S., bank clerk, Mickle
street
Parr, Mrs., dressmaker, Lava
street
Paterson and Co., merchants,
Timor street
Paterson, E. 8., Timor street
Pattison, Mrs., Timor street
Patten, Henry, labourer, South
Warrnambool
Patten, John, boatman, South
Warrnambool
Patten, Thomas, lighterman,
South Warrnambool
Pearce, James, labourer, Henna
street
Pearce, Thomas, Princess Alex-
andra Hotel, Liebig street
Pettard, Mrs., Kelp street
Pettard, W. H., booksellers’ as-
sistant, Eaglan Parade
Phillips, Henry, carpenter, Merri
street
Phillips, Henry, corndealer, Lie-
big street, residence Jamieson
street
Philp, E. A., bookseller, Timor
street, residenceJNelson street,
Sorth Warrnambool


Photographers.
Clarke, D., Liebig street
Hider, James, Timor street
Pilgrim, John, hawker, South
Warrnambool
Pleydell, F. W., Bising Sun
Hotel, Timor street
Pleydell, W. F., inspector, Bag-
lan Parade
Pocock, F., Steam Packet Hotel,
South Warrnambool
Pollock, H., carter, Henna street
Pollock, W., bootmaker, Merri
street
Pork Butcher.
Gazzard, F. W., Liebig street
Porter, George, mason, Banyan
street
Potts, David, drapers’ assistant,
off Koroit street
Powell, Andrew, fisherman,
Jamieson street
Powell, Benjamin, dealer, Jamie-
son street
Powell, George, storeman, Can-
terbury road
Price, John, labourer, Grafton
road
Price, Thomas, brewer, Timor
street, residence Canterbury
road
Price, K., fishmonger, Timor
street
Printers.
Smith, Thomas, Kepler street
Standard Company, Koroit street
Produce Merchants.
Archibald and Bateman, Koroit
street
Baylis, W., Tramway Stores,
Merri street
Glassford, M., Tramway Stores,
Merri street
Gillespie Bros., agent H. Harries,
Tramway Stores, Merri street
King, T., Tramway Stores, Merri
street
Milling Co., J. Marfell, manager,
Baglan Parade
Produce Merchants (con-
tinued.)
Nipper and See, Tramway Stores,
0. Jeffrey, agent, Merri street
Paterson and Co - , Timor street
Bedford and Co., Timor and
Fairy streets
Smith Bros., Kepler street
Wilson, J. jun. and Co., Tram-
way Stores, Merri street
Proudfoot, G. W., sexton, Hop-
kins road
Puryer and Bailie, blacksmiths,
Fairy street
Puryer, P. H., Fairy street
Purnell, Mrs., boarding house,
Spence street
Bead, Mrs., fancy dealer, Liebig
street
Bedford and Co., merchants,
Timor and Fairy streets
Bedford, Thomas, Cramer street
Bhodes, John, labourer, Stanley
street, South Warrnambool
Biches, William, sen., Botanic
road
Biches, W., jun., contractor,
Belfast road
Bichter, Edward, coachpainter.
Kelp street
Bichter, Henry, commercial
traveller, Timor street
Bichter, Wm. Henry, bottler, off
Timor street
Biley. Francis, labourer, Grafton
road
Eoberts, James, hay and corn
merchant, Fairy street
Bobinson, Thomas, labour er,
Liebig street
Bodgers, Edwin, labourer, Merri
street
Bodgers, John, labourer, Koroit
street
Bogers, Joseph, plumber, Koroit
street,
Bogers and Worland, plumbers,
Koroit street


Rolfe, George, gentleman, near
Hopkins
Rollo, James, labourer, Grafton
road
Rollo, John, labourer, near Race-
course
Rose, F. G., grocers’ assistant,
Merri street
Rose, Mrs., Patrick’s Lane
Ross, Mrs., boarding house,
Kepler street
Ross, W., inspector of weights,
Raglan Parade
Ross, W., tanner, Merri Cutting
Rowley, J. S., cordial manufac-
turer, Timor street
Rule, J. H., painter, Fairy street
Russell, Mrs., boarding house,
Timor street
Russell & Powell, grocers, Fairy
street
Russell, S. G., Fairy street
Rust, R., storeman, Henna street
Ryan, John, bootmaker, Kelp
street
Ryan, Mrs., Raglan Parade
Ryan, Patrick, labourer, Ryot
street
Ryan, Stephen, labourer, Henna
street
Saddlers.
Arnoldt, J. P., Timor street
Carter, S., Fairy street
Coalcley, J., Liebig street
Evans, E. D. and Co., Liebig
street
Levy, E., Fairy street
M‘Dermid, J., Liebig street
Saltatj, Henry, carter, Merri
street
Saltau, Marcus, storeman, Kepler
street
Salt, Henry, bootmaker, Koroit
street
Samuel, Mrs., Koroit street
Saul, Francis, fencer, Raglan
Parade
Savings’ Bank, Liebig street
Scarborough, Mrs., laundress, off
Kepler street
Scherell, Mrs. A., Timor street
Sheriff, A., Timor street
Scoborio, C., curator, Botanical
Gardens
Scown, W. H., Turf Club Hotel,
Liebig street
Scully, Patrick, constable, Timor
street
Sears, T. H., Commercial Hotel,
Timor street
Semple, Mrs., Merri street
Serong, Mrs., Kelp street
Serong, W., labourer, Grafton
road
Shaddock, Mrs. A., Kelp street
Shaddock, J. A., South Warr-
nambool
Shaddock, James, bootmaker,
Raglan Parade
Shaddock, Horatio, tailor, off
Timor street
Shannahan, Rev. M. J., residence
Roman Catholic Manse, Kepler
street
Sheldrick and Co., brewers,
Timor street
Shillinglaw, James, carpenter,
Raglan Parade
Shortall, P., bootmaker, Raglan
Parade
Silver, W„ cabinetmaker, Raglan
Parade
Simpson, Mrs., Merri street
Simpson, Thomas, labourer,
Kepler street
Simpson, W., storekeeper, Liebig
street, residence Lava street
Sloss, John, State School teacher,
South Warrnambool
Sludden, John, Henna street
Sludden, Michael, Henna street
Sludden, Mrs. M., laundress,
Lava street
Smart, W., labourer, off Koroit
street
Smiley, F., coaehdriver, Raglan
Parade
Smith, James, bootmaker, Liebig
street
Smith, Mrs. J., South Warrnam-
bool
Smith, H., baker, Liebig street
Smith, J. D., blacksmith, Lava
street


Smith, Patrick, butcher, Fairy
street
Smith Bros., merchants, Kepler
street
Smith, Spencer, residence North
Warrnambool
Smith, Sidney, residence Bussell’s
Creek
Smith, Thomas, labourer, Lava
street
Smith, Thomas, printer, Kepler
street, residence Henna street
Smith, W., fishmonger, Fairy
street
Smithers, George, coachpainter,
Baglan Parade
Smithers, James, mason, Koroit
street
Snell, Mrs., Japan street
Sorrell, Bichard, gardener, Koroit
street
Spain, James, labourer, Elliott
street
Spalding, James, cabinetmaker,
Koroit street
Spence, Charles, labourer, Kelp
street
Spillane, Mrs., off Lava street
Spring, John, overseer, Allans-
ford road
Stables (Livery & Letting.)
Gleeson, T.,‘Timor street
Healey, D., Koroit street
O’Brien, W., Timor street
Stansmore Bros., Liebig street
Vitou, H., Kepler sireet
Stainsby, T., bootmaker, Lava
street
Stanley, J. S., schoolmaster,
Liebig street
Stansmore Bros., livery stable
keepers, Liebig street
Stationers.
Davies, W., Timor street
Hider, C., Timor street
Lavery, —, Fairy street
Nettletou, S., Baglan Parade
Philp, B. A., Timor street
Steere, J., mason, Koroit street
Steere, T, mason, Fairy street
Stelling, Mrs. W., Timor street
Stelling, Miss, milliner, Timor
street
Stealing, Theodor, cabinetmaker,
Liebig street
Stephens Bros., coachbuilder s,
Liebig street
Stephens, A., Liebig street
Stephens, Charles, Skene street
Stevens, F. P., gentleman, Can-
terbury road
Stewart, A., Inspector State
Schools, Howard street
Stewart, A., Otway Hotel, Fairy
street •
Stewart, C. H., wheelwright, off
Fairy street
Stewart, W., park ranger, Albert
Park
Stodart, W., carpenter, Banyan
street
Stonehouse, Charles, farmer,
Allansford road
St. Quintin, H. W., auctioneer,
Henna street
Strang, G., drapers’ assistant,
Lava street
Sturley, Miss, milliner, Liebig
street
Sturley, Mrs., grocer, Fairy street
Sullivan, Mrs. Lava street
Surveyors.
Crawley, W. J,, Merri street
Kelland, W. G., Kelp street
Kerr, A., Town Hall, Timor street
Walker, H., Liebig 1 street
Sutton, D., Kelp street north
Sykes, A., gunsmith, Koroit street
Taggart, W., tailor, Fairy street
Tailors.
Brebner, J. A., Timor street
Cleary, J., Fairy street
Cleary, T., Liebig street
Cramond & Dickson, Timor street
Taggart, W., Fairy street
Williamson, E., Koroit street
Taib, Rev. Geo, M. A.,clergyman,
Manse, Lava street
Tallent, James, storeman, Pat-
rick’s Lane


Tanners.
Davies, D., Liebig street
Giblett, J., Merri Cutting
Nayler and Co„ South Warrnam-
bool
Tapfield, F., station manager,
Henna street
Taylor, T. G., Botanic road
Telfer, Eobert, agent, Timor
street
Temperance Hotel, Brown, A. S.,
manager, K epler street
Temperance Hotels.
Temperance Hotel, Brown, A. S.,
Kepler street
Temperance Hotel, Johnson,
Mrs. S., Koroit street
Terry, Samuel, watchmaker,
Banyan street
Thompson, James, upholsterer,
off Lava street
Thompson, John, Henna street
Thompson, Mrs., Lava street
Thomson, William S., sen., car-
penter, Botanic road
Thomson, William, jun., black-
smith, Henna street
Thurtell, W., finisher, Stanley
street, South Warrnambool
Thwaites, F. J., dentist, Koroit
street
Thwaites, Eev. E., clergyman,
Eaglan Parade
Timber Merchants.
Dawkins, W., Fairy street
Newcombe& Morris, Koroit street
Tinker, James, carter, Kelp street
Tinsmiths, Plumbers, &c.
Brady, J., Liebig street
Cook, J., Fairy street
Lance, G., Fairy street
Lock, E., Liebig street
Eiches, D., Fairy street
Eogers & Worland, Koroit street
Tomlinson, Mrs. A., Fairy street
Toole, T., dealer, Timor street
Townsend, George, wellsinker,
Eaglan Parade
Toy, 0., quarryman, Henna street
Toy Shops.
Christophers, H., Timor street
Dorney, Mrs., Timor street
Edwards, T. M., Timor street
Horne, Mrs., Timor street
Mohnsen, J. C., Liebig street
Eead, Mrs., Liebig street
Trangmar, Mrs., Jamieson street
Trew, Thos., nightman, Latrobe
street
Turland, Mrs., off Koroit street
Twinem, Eobert, draper, Liebig
street, residence Liebig street
north
Tyers, D., storeman, Eaglan
Paracte
Tyers, W., corndealer, Koroit
street
Tyler, J., tanner, South Warr-
nambool
Ulmer, F, compositor, Lava street
Undertakers.
Armstrong, P., Lava street
Beattie and Phillips, Koroit street
Farrer and Son, Eaglan Parade
Usher, T., bootmaker, Liebig
street
Veale, Miss, dressmaker, Kepler
street
Veale, Mrs., Skene street
Veale, T., labourer, Koroit street
Villiers, J. J., painter, Liebig
street
Viney, Frederick, dyer, Timor
street
Vitou, H. C., livery stable keeper,
Kepler street
Vitou, P., veterinary surgeon,
Lava street
Wainwright, S. J., boot factor,
Timor street, residence Hider
street


Walker, H., surveyor, Merri
street
Walsh, H., watchmaker, Timor
street
Ward, J., storekeeper, North
Warrnambool
Ward, R. F., telegraph operator,
Lava street
Warren, J., painter, Jamieson
street
Warrnambool Co-operative Mill-
ing Co., Marfell, J., manager,
Raglan Parade
Warrnambool Shire Council,
offices, Merri street
Watchmakers.
Fergusson, T., Timor street
Halfhide, A. C„ Liebig street
Laing, D„ Koroit street
Terry, S., Banyan street
Walsh, H., Timor street
Wilson Bros., Timor street
Watson, Sidney, tanner, South
Warrnambool
Watson, William, tanner, Elliott
street, South Warrnambool
Watts, R., carter Koroit street
"Webb, John, Kelp street
Western Steam Navigation Co.,
office, Liebig street
Western Stage Co., office, Kepler
street
W r estwood, Mrs., Princess street
Wheeler, Frank, draper, Liebig
street
White, Ernest, telegraph opera-
tor, Banyan street
White, J., sailmaker, Skene street
White, Thomas, teacher, Liebig
street north
White, Mrs., music teacher, Ban-
yan street
Whitehead, Thomas, contractor,
Merri street
Wigg, G. A., butcher, Fairy
street
Wiggins, James, Gibson street
Wilkins, Thomas, bootmaker,
Kepler street
Williams, Mrs. E., storekeeper,
South Warrnambool
Williams, George, Koroit street
Williams, William, labourer,
Banyan street
Williamson, E., tailor, Koroit
street
Willock, W. H., Collector of
Customs, residence Spence
street
Wilson, John junr., and Co., pro-
duce dealers, Tramway Stores
Wilson Bros., watchmakers,
Timor street
Wilson, E. H., Timor street
Wilson Edward, master Hospital,
Koroit street
Wilson, John, painter, Banyan
street
Wilson, R. J., coachbuilder,
Fairy street, residence Ryot
street
Winton, Robert, carpenter, Lie-
big street
Winzer, F., off Timor street
Wong, Ah, hawker, Raglan
Parade
Wood, A., grocer, Timor street
Wood, G., grocer, Timor street,
residence Allansford road
Wooles, F., stonecutter, Timor
street
Wolfe, P., labourer, Ryot street
Worland, J., currier, South
Warrnambool
Worland, R., plumber, Koroit
street, residence Skene street
Worth, J., mason, Murray street
Wright, George, tanner, Morri
Cutting
Wright, John, labourer, Koroit
street
Wright, Mrs., Koroit street
Wyatt, Clement, Gibson street
Yates, David, boarding house,
Skene street
Yeoman, Francis, Victoria Hotel,
Liebig street
Young, John, lighterman, Stanley
street, South Warrnambool
Young, Miss, draper, Liebig
street
Younger, Mrs. M., baker, Fairy
street


THE WESTERN
FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
WARRNAMBOOL.
Cobb and Co.’s Booking Office. Commercial Sample Booms.
Livery and Letting Stables.
Conveniently situated for parties taking a course of the now
celebrated medicinal Hot Sea Baths.
JIQX, PROPRIETOR.
WESTERN HORSE BAZAAR,
TIMOR-STKEET, WARRNAMBOOL.
W. O’BRIEN,
In thanking the inhabitants of the town and district for the sup-
port accorded to him hitherto, begs to state that the public may rest
assured of obtaining the best horseflesh and vehicular accommoda-
tion at the WESTERN HORSE BAZAAR.
Horses bought, sold, or exchanged. Persons having horses for
sale in the district are requested to communicate with the under-
signed.
N.B. —Orders executed with accuracy and despatch. Cabs can be
obtained at the usual cab fares.
WM. O’BRIEN.
GENERAL STOREKEEPER AND DRAPER,
LIEBIG-STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
W. SIMPSON
Begs to thank the public for past favours and hopes by selling all
goods at a moderate price to receive a fair share of patronage.
Groceries, Ironmongery, Crockery, Earthenware, &c., of good quality,
DAIRY PRODUCE PURCHASED FOR CASH.


J. & A. BELL,
MILLERS and CORNFACTORS,
WAEUNAMBOOL,
DETEOTTIR, & stores,
Corner of Liebig and Koroit Streets.
ALSO, .
Jetty Flour and Oatmeal Mills, South
Warrnambool.
Gristing at Cheap Kates. Flour, Bran Pollard, &c.
Wholesale and Retail.
W. H. JEWELL,
GENERAL BLACKSMITH,
AND
YETERIITABT FARFMER,
LAVA-STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
isaF W. H. JEWELL was awarded the two first prizes for heavy
and light shoeing at the Villi ers and Heytesbury Agricultural Show,
1879, and 1880, and also in 1881.
Diseased feet carefjelly attended ’ to.
ROYAL HORSE BAZAAR,
TIMOR-STREET EAST, WARRNAMBOOL.
THOMAS GLEESON, Proprietor.
Horses and Buggies always on hire. Telegrams and orders
promptly attended to.
TIMOR STR EE T, WES T.
Silk, Velvet, Satin, Merino, Satin Cloth, Poplin, Cashmere, Cloth,
and all other Dresses
Cleaned Dyed ' the Newest Fashionable Colours
GEN I LEMEN S CLOTHES Cleaned or Dyed and finished to ccpial
New. without taking to pieces, and returned in three days.


JOHN HYLAND,
Auctioneer and Valuator; Stock, Station
and Commission Agent,
KEPLER STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
Sales of Stock, (fcc., on Saturdays, at the West End Yards.
At Koroit, Mortlake, Ballangeieh, Terang, and other townships,
Sales are held periodically, as advertised in local paper.
WARRITAMBOOL
CO-OPERATIVE MILLING COMPANY,
LIMITED,
MILLERS and CORN FACTORS.
r L ’■
JOHN MARFELL,
Manager.
Flour Mill: Timor Street.
Stores: Raglan Parade.
MRS. A. NELSON’S
BOATING ESTABLISHMENT,
HOPKINS RIVER.
Rowing and Fishing Boats always on hire. Bait supplied.
Rods, Lines, and all Fishing Tackle on hand.
COLONIAL WINES, LEMONADE, &c.
Visitors from the metropolis and parties fishing on the Hopkins will
find every accommodation at the above establishment.
Comfortable Beds and Board at moderate charges.


A. C. HALFHIDE,'
WATCH AND CLOCKMAKER, JEWELLER, &c.,
LIEBIG STREET.
A large assortment of Watches, Clocks, Jewellery, &<*., at the
LOWEST POSSIBLE PRICES.
£55" Address —Next Twinem’s Commercial House.
davis Bros'
STEAM BXSCTJIT BAKERS,
Caterers and Pastry cooks,
TIMOR STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
ORDERLY ROOM,
KEPLER STREET,
”W"YLIL RISI AMBOOL,
can be hired for
Dramatic Performances, Concerts, Lectures, Balls,
Bazaars, Tea Meetings, &c.
Can seat 700. Contains well-fitted stage and scenery, and all
appliances ; is lit with gas.
Terms can be obtained from
CHARLES DODDS,
Caretaker.
Warrnambool Borough Council.
Council meet every alternate Tuesday at 7.80 p.m.
Town Clerk attends daily 10 to 1. Saturday, 10 to 12.
Rate Collector attends at office, Council Chambers, Monday and
Friday, from 11 to 1.
Herdsman attends at the Council Chambers on Monday and
Friday, from 11 to 1.
Accounts and wages paid on Thursday after Council meeting.
All accounts must be sent in not later than Monday before
Council meeting, ‘
C. A CRAMER,
Town Clerk


TEMPERANCE HOTEL,
Koroit Street East, Warrnambool,
Two doors below J. and A. Bell’s Store.)
MRS, sTTgh NS TON,
Excellent accommodation for Visitors and Boarders. Private rooms for families
Ordinary from Twelve to Two (daily).
Terms Moderate.
ROYAL ARCHER HOTEL,
Koroit Street, Warrnambool.
First-class accommodation for travellers.
Wines, Spirits, &c„ of the best brands.
Good Stabling.
FRANK ELLIS, Proprietor.
VICTO R I A HOTEL,
Corner of Liebig* and Lava Streets, Warrnambool.
Good accommodation for visitors and travellers.
Best brands of Wines, Spirits, Ale and Porter, &c.
Good Stabling.
F. YEOMAN, Proprietor.
E. C. BOWMAN,
Machine Repairer, Weights &■ Measures Adjusted, &c.
Agent for JONES’ celebrated prize SEWING- MACHINES.
Machines op every description repaired.
Needles, Ac., always kept in stock.
NAYLER AND Co..
TANNERS and CURRIERS.
GRINDERY IMPORTED. Hides, Skins, Bark, &c.,
purchased for cash.
Address— Liebig-street and South Warrnambool.


SIGN WRITING, GILDING, PAINTING,
PAPERHANGING, AND GENERAL
HOUSE J)E CORATING.
All the branches of the trade executed in a thorough tradesman like
and durable manner, at Melbourne prices, by
W. J. HICKFORD,
LIEBIG STREET (Opposite Bell’s Grain Stores.)
Paperhangings, Paints, and Window Glass.
Pictures and Frame Mouldings.
The best Stock, at lowest prices.
THE WARRNAMBOOL
BOOK AND MUSIC ARCADE,
(Right opposite City Court House),
CHA S . HID Til 11 .
To Theatrical Managers, Agents $ Others.
ODD FELLOWS’ HALL,
W A R R N A M 800 L,
is open for engagement for Theatrical Performances, Lectures, &c.
Thh Hall is centrally situated, possesses splendid acoustic properties,
and has sitting accommodation for 500.
Terms most reasonable. For particulars apply
CHAS. HIRER, Agent,
Bookseller and Stationer,
Timor-street, Warrnambool.


T. REDFORD AND Co.
(Late F. P. Stevens and Co.),
Corner of Fairy 8f Timor Streets, Warrnambool,
Are Cash Purchasers of
COLONIAL PRODUCE,
Including Wheat, Oats, Barley, Peas, &c.,
ALSO,
WOOL & TALLOW.
We PURCHASE or make ADVANCES on Wool, Tallow, Hides,
Sheepskins., Ac., either FOR SALE in Melbourne or
London Markets.
We have On Sale, as
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
Martell’s and Hennessy’s Pale and Dark Brandy, in bulk and bottle.
Whisky, Geneva, Old Tom, Rum,
Champagne, Sherry, Port, Hock, Claret,
And a variety of Colonial Wines.
Bottled Ale and Porter—various brands.
THE ABOVE CAN BE HAD EITHER IN BOND OR DUTY PAID.
COLONIAL W IHES.
FALLON’S ALBURY, consisting of—Reisling, Aucarot, Burgundy,
Brown Muscat, Chasselas, Tokay, Carbinet, Ac.
MURRAY WINES, a large variety.
ADELAIDE — Penfold’s Pedro Ximenes, Tokay, White and Red
Frontignac, Grenache, Mattai'o, Ac,
And MAPLESTONE’S lvanhoe Wines.
GENERAL AND PLAIN DRAPERY, BLANKETS, Ac.,
GEELONG AND WARRNAMBOOL TWEEDS.
GROCERY, HARDWARE, &c.
Teas in ration and for family use ; coffee, ground, whole, and roasted ;
Sugars Mauritius, crushed, and Company's : raisins, currants, and
candied peel and a general assortment of oilmen’s stores ; tobacco,
negrohead, Calcutta, and Cavendish ; sulphur, arsenic, and soft
soap • soda crystals, bluestone, and vinegar ; woolpacks, gunnies, and
corn ’sacks ; tar, pitch, raddle, and lamp black ; oils—raw, boiled,
Chinese, and kerosene : powder, blasting and canister ; patent safety
fuse and rope; hardware of every description; Ryland s drawn
fencing wire, Nos. 6,7, and 8 : and a variety of glass and earthen-
ware ; flour, bran, and pollard,
On Sale by T, REEEORD & Co.
Late F. P. Stevens a Co.


WILSON BROS.,
Htrlpinfim | JstufHtrs;
Manufacturers of every description of
PRESENTATION PLATE,
JEWELLERY, &c.
Spectacles to suit all sights.
TIMOB STREET
WaRRNAMBOO l.
Book & Stationery Emporium of the West.
R. A. PHILP,
BOOKSELLER, STATIONER, &c.
(Opposite, the Post Office)
WARTtNAMBOOL.
New Books by every mail. Account Books of every description.
Philp s Circulating Library, the best in the district 111 new
works of Fiction added as published. Country subscribers allowed
extra privileges. Subscription very low.
Agent fOl The Age, Leader, Illustrated Australian News, Advocate
Tederal Australasian, Punch, Bulletin, (Be.
Make a note of the ADDRESS-right opposite the Post Office
Warrnambool. ’
BAYLY AND HIGGINS,
ATTORNEYS and PROCTORS,
Kepler Street, Warrnambool.
J. II I G G I N S, Commissioner for taking Affidavits, Acknow-
ledgments, Ac.
HUGH MURRA Y,
Attorney, Solicitor, Proctor, & Conveyancer,
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE BUILDINGS,
. Liebig-street, Warrnambool.
Commissioner for taking Affidavits, and Acknowledgments of
Married Women, Ac.


ARCHIBALD & BATEMAN,
Auctioneers, and Commission Agents, and
Produce Buyers,
OFFICES, KOROIT STREET.
Auction Sales held every SATURDAY at the Warrnambool Sale
Yards, commencing at Twelve o’clock.
LOANS NEGOTIATED. VALUATIONS MADE.
Private Sales of Stock effected.
Agents for the Australian Mutual Provident Society (Life), and
Commercial Union (Fire).
Offices of the V. A H. Agricultural Association and Warrnambool
Racing Club.
J. P. M‘MEEKIN",
General Commission and Shipping Agent.
LAVA STREET.
Rents collected. Loans negotiated. Charges moderate.
ANDREW KERR,
Engineer, Architect, and Surveyor.
Offices: TOWN HA.LL, WARRNAMBOOL.
E D EVANS & Co.,
SADDLE AND HARNESS MAKERS
AND IMPORTERS OF SADDLERY,
LIEBIG-STREET (next Stephens Bros. Coachmakers.)
The largest and best assorted STOCK of SADDLERA in the
Western District to select from.
RISING SUN HOTEL,
TIMOR-STRE ET, WARRNAMBOOL.
PR ED. PLEYDELL.
Ample accommodation pok Visitors.
First-class brands of Spirits , tbc.


w Af?J993
PATERSON & Co.,
IMPORTERS
WINE, SPIRIT & GENERAL MERCHANTS,
TIMOR-STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
tion Supplies of all descriptions.
Agricultural Seeds.
'Wlpsrms anTTspirits
Tn Bond or Duty Paid.
STRALIAN WINES.
:ash purchasers of wool,
ns > Tallow, Hides, &c. ; Cash Advances made on same either
y for sale in Melbourne or London.
FARM AND DAIRY PRODUCE
Purchased at highest Market Rates.
MERRI MILLS, Merrri-street, Warrnambool. The finest silk-dressed
Flour ; Bran, Pollard, Sharps, &c. Gristing done at current rates.
Farina Works, Dennington.
PATERSON & Co
>S
T
Sheiks
\V
o
JEIaLIE & ST, QUINTXN,
Auctioneers and Valuators,
Stock, Station, and Commission Agents.
Special attention devoted to Landed Properties, and large
Stock Sales.
THE MART,
KOROIT STREET, WARRNAMBOOL.
Auction Sales of Furniture and Effects,
at The Mart regularly.
SALES OF WOOL, HIDES, AND SHEEPSKINS,
take place at The Mart during the season.


# he Jlttst Conipletc printiug (ttltitc
[(5) ®l© Us)
W.l W 1
j)| ' '
Hi
•^-*^^oooe=^>
frequent additions of New Type.
THOS. SMITH,
PRINTER,
MACHINE!.
k PAPER RULER.
111 BOOKBINDER,
CHEAPEST OFFICE
IN THE WEST. |
lit
KEPLER STREET
\ • v,^grw
111 Ifl Jffl
mmw\ w»


hew buildings. ,
“THE MART
Os As CRIIWIR
Departments :
LADIES’ HAT and BONNET,
Always a choice and Large Stock, personally selected.
MANTLES, JACKETS, and SHAWLS,
Newest shapes and designs.
SILK and DRESS MATERIAL,
A stock of Silks unsurpassed in value; choice style4n Fancy and
all obtainable Novelties in Dress Materials.
MANCHESTER GOODS.
Horrock’s Calicoes, Finlay’s Sheetings, Blankets, Flannel, Tick,
Hessians, Towelling, &c.', &c., our value cannot be excelled.
GLOVES, HOISERY, HABERDASHERY.
Cal vat’s 2 and 4' button Kid Gloves, Jersey and Silk Gloves. Ladies’
and Children’s Hosiery of all kinds. ,
FURNISHINGS,
Coir and Manilla Matting, Hearth Rugs, Door Mats, Cretonnes,
Lace and Muslin Curtains, &c., &c.
MILLINERY and DRESSMAKING,
Can be executed in first-class style. Only Dresses purchased at
the establishment can be made up.
MEN’S CLOTHING DEPARTMENT.
Gents’ Sac Suits, Geelong Trousers and Vests; a large Stock of
Black Paris and Drab Shell Hats, Soft Felts, and all fashion-
able shapes. A well selected stock of English and
Geelong Tweeds on hand.
BOOT and SHOE DEPARTMENT.
Gents’, Ladies’, and Children's, English and Colonial, a very
large variety.
Special Advantages.— One of the largest and most
recherche retail stocks in the 'District to select front , and a,
supply of latest novelties and specialties in the various
departments always coniimj forward. No better value
obtainable.
Agent for WHEELER. A WILSON’S hand and treadle
SEWING MACHINES. Can !>e had on time payment
system, by monthly instalments. Any trial given.
WARRNAMBOOL (Opposite Court House).
