

p£TH Pern
ast?
Y'-'f SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
-‘x&'SxH 0 *
RIVER MURRAY.
R. E, E, ROGERS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, ADELAIDE.
th' ,r




The William R. Randell Lock,
Blanchetown, River Murray.
ff= ¥ =B
STONE TO MARK THE SITE
LAID BY
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR
(Sir Henry Galway, K.C.M.G., D. 5.0.),
June sth, 1915.
SOUVENIR OF VISIT BY
PARLIAMENTARY PARTY.
ISSUED UNDER AUTHORITY OF THE PREMIER
(HON. CRAWFORD VAUGHAN, M.P.)
THE
INTELLIGENCE AND TOURIST BUREAU,
ADELAIDE.
VICTOR H. RYAN, Director




THE WILLIAM R. RANDELL LOCK
AN HISTORIC CEREMONY.
ON Saturday, June sth, 1915, at Blanchetown, His Excellency the
Governor of South Australia laid a stone marking the site
of the first lock and weir, which is to be constructed as part of
a general scheme to conserve the waters of the River Murray
for the purposes of irrigation and navigation.
This Lock will be known as “The William R. Randell,” after
one of the pioneer navigators of the Murray. The ceremony has
been justly termed an epoch-making event for Australia, and to
mark the importance with which it was regarded, a representative
and influential party, comprising members of the Federal and Inter-
state Parliaments, journeyed by rail and river from Adelaide to
the site at the invitation of the State Ministry.
In addition to His Excellency the Governor (Sir Henry Galway,
K.C.M.G., D. 5.0.), the members included the Prime Minister of
Australia (Right Hon. Andrew Fisher, P.C.), the Premier of South
Australia (Hon. Crawford Vaughan), the Federal Attorney-General
(Hon. W. M. Hughes), the Premier of New South Wales (Hon. W. A.
Flolman), the South Australian Commissioner of Public Works (Hon.
Harry Jackson), the Commissioner of Crown Lands (Lion. C. Goode),
and the Minister of Industry (Hon. R. P. Blundell).
This Souvenir is issued to commemorate the inauguration of
the work, and serve as an official record of the event.
The Adelaide daily press gave considerable prominence to the
proceedings, and the following extracts are from the published
reports of the speeches.




AT THE LOCK SITE.
On arrival at Elanchetown the Commissioner of Public Works asked
His Excellency to place the stone in position, and presented him with a
silver-mounted mallet, made of South Australian wood, similar to that
being used in connection with the lock.
Mr. Jackson said the occasion was, perhaps, the most memorable in
the history of South Australia. For many years something in the direc-
tion of what was now being done had been contemplated, but as often as
they had expected to accomplish something towards conserving and utiliz-
ing the water of the Murray for the purposes Nature had intended, just
as often had their hopes been blasted by fickle fortune.
Captain Sturt’s Discovery.
His Excellency said: —As Mr. Jackson remarked, this is a very notable
day in the history of South Australia, and I am proud indeed that it
should have fallen to my lot to be called upon to lay the first stone of
the first lock of the River Murray locking system. It is to me a tre-
mendous privilege, and I rather think that I have fluked into performing
the ceremony. 1 wish in one sense the honor could have fallen to the
lot of my illustrious predecessor, Sir Day Bosanquet, after the splendid
work he did in this State. From the Murray locking system a vast deal
is expected in connection with the future welfare of our State. The
William R. Randell Dock is one of six to be erected in South Australia,
and one of a system of 35 locks in all. The potential benefits
these locks are going to confer upon South Australia cannot
well be calculated at this stage, but they are without doubt
going to be very considerable. The success already obtained
in the reclaimed areas below Mannum is a practical and en-
couraging example of the wealth that lies ahead of us as repre-
sented by the Murray lands. If Charles Sturt could only be
with us to-day his cup of satisfaction would be brimming over. It is
85 years now since that intrepid explorer unlocked to the world the
largest river system in Australia. In that wonderful boat journey from
the mouth of the Murrumbidgee to the sea and back Sturt and his gallant
companions rowed no less than 1,700 miles —the longest boat journey on
record. That was not the only record in the explorer’s great achieve-
ment. It was the cheapest bit of exploring work ever done, and cost
the Government £266, less 7-jd., an example of rigid economy that I am
sure will appeal to Ministers! These locks, once constructed, will ensure
sufficient water both for navigation and irrigation purposes. The Mur-
ray settlers are a fine type of colonist wdio, given the chance, will make
things hum. The Murray lands are very fertile, provided sufficient
water is available for irrigation purposes. The possibilities are enormous.
It is estimated that over 600,000 acres can be reclaimed and irrigated on
the Murray banks within the South Australian boundary. During the
late drought, which, thank God, is a memory of the past, the reclaimed
areas between Mannum and Tailem Bend were veritable oases in the




desert, and yet they are only a beginning of what is confidently looked
for. As Mr. David Gordon stated in his excellent publication, “The
Nile of Australia,” the arid nature of Australia is caricatured by unin-
formed people. There are many rivers in this great continent whose
waters are waiting to be put into use in order that the producer, and
thereby trade, may benefit enormously. Ihe harnessing of this great
stream is about to be commenced by the erection of this lock, one of a
carefully-thought-out system. The Murray is, we hope, going to come
into its own by at last playing the part it was meant to in developing
the States through which it flows; and it is a matter of great gratification
to two of the three States concerned that the Governments of those
States have come to a determination to put, if possible, the waters of
this mighty river to their best uses, so that each State shall be benefited
therefrom to the utmost. The happy agreement come to by the States
referred to is greatly strengthened from the fact that the wise states-
manship which formulated the Murray waters scheme has the strong sup-
port of the Federal Government. The scheme may, therefore, be said to
be national, and in that happy fact you have the keystone of the future
success of the great undertaking we are putting into motion to-day. As
the locks are erected, and as this grand stream is bitted and bridled and
got under control, new provinces will spring up, and the now
waste lands of this vast Commonwealth will be converted, as
time goes on, into green pastures, wheat lands, and
orchards inhabited by a virile race of progressive and prosperous people.
The faith to do and dare which inspired Charles Sturt and the old
pioneers of Australia still animates the hearts of their descendants,
the men and women of to-day, and with that knowledge we
look with confidence to splendid successes resulting from the
efforts now being made to develop the great watershed of
the Murray River. To satisfy ourselves that the grit of the
makers and founders of this beautiful land has been handed
down to their sons and their sons’ sons to-day we have only to look
to the Dardanelles, where Australia’s manhood has covered itself with
glory and renown that will be imperishable and will form a glorious
and inspiring chapter in the history of the British Empire. And how
proud we are of our soldiers and sailors, whose gallantry and forti-
tude might well form the subject of an epic poem such as Homer’s
Ili a d —which Iliad, too, was written in connection with the siege of
Troy, an ancient town situated not very far from where our men are
•iow driving the Turkish host out of Europe. In conclusion, I would
express, if I may, my humble commendation that the Murray locking
system has been so arranged that every possible benefit shall be
secured, not only for irrigation, but also for navigation. By that
arrangement not only will waste lands be turned into fertile fields,
but also the natural waterway of a vast area will be used as the trade
route it was intended for. The Murray is South Australia’s greatest
asset, and we now rejoice in the hope that it is about to be fully
developed.




The Foundation Stone.
His Excellency then tapped the stone with the mallet and declared
it to be well and truly laid, to the accompaniment of ringing cheers.
The Premier’s Speech.
The Premier (Hon. Crawford Vaughan, M.P.), in moving a vote of
thanks to the Governor for having performed the ceremony, congratu-
lated His Excellency upon having taken a leading part in what would
by future generations be regarded as an historic event. Long years
of discussion and of procrastination on the great question of locking the
Murray lay behind them, and ahead was the happier time of definite
action. Throughout the ages the life-giving waters of this splendid
stream, after cutting their way down thousands of miles of channel
from Kosciusko to the coast, had emptied themselves uselessly into
the broad bosom of the Southern Ocean, there to be merged forever
with the rolling surges. Along the banks of the great waterway lay
the rich red sands, the box flats, and the shallow lagoons, that by the
magic touch of man’s productive genius might be turned into verdant
pastures, flourishing orchards, and happy settlements. The arbitrary
lines of State division had, however, bred interstate jealousy and mis-
understanding. As early as 1887 a Royal Commission was appointed
by the South Australian Government, with the Hon. J. H. Howe as
chairman, to consider the question of the allocation of the waters of
the Murray between New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.
This Commission was merged into an Interstate Commission in 1902
to make a full inquiry and report “concerning the conservation and
distribution of the waters of the Murray and its tributaries for the
purposes of irrigation, navigation, and water supply.” That Com-
mission recommended the construction of storage works at Cum-
beroona and Lake Victoria, and weirs at the Murray Mouth, the cost
of which should be borne in equal shares by the three States, and a
weir and headworks at Bungowannah, to be paid for by New South
Wales and Victoria in equal shares. The recommendations also in-
cluded a first instalment of a complete locking scheme, from Blanche-
town to Wentworth (which it was suggested the Federal Government
might be induced to carry out), and the appointment of a permanent
Commission to control the waters of the Murray and its tributaries.
Further agreements were drawn up in 1903, 1906, and 1907, but it
was not until 1908 that finality seemed to be reached, when the Pre-
miers of the three States signed an agreement that was to be sub-
mitted to the various Parliaments for approval. The measure passed
the second reading of the South Australian Parliament, but unfortu-
nately was not proceeded with in New South Wales and Victoria. The
1908 agreement provided for the appointment of a permanent River
Murray Commission to control everything concerning the Murray
waters, that the Lake Victoria storage works and two locks and weirs
in the Murray should be constructed and paid for in equal shares by




the three States, and that a total yearly volume of sixty thousand
million cubic feet of water should be delivered at the boundary of
South Australia, subject only to reduction in years of low discharge.
It was not until 1910 that authorisation was given to the Murray
Works Act, under which the William R. Randell Lock was now being
constructed. That measure also authorised the construction of the
Lake Victoria works, and two weirs and locks in the Murray, subject
to the consent of the States of New South Wales and Victoria, and
also the construction of a system of locks and weirs from Blanche-
town to the boundary. In order to carry out this great undertaking
South Australia engaged the services of Major Johnston, of the Corps
of Engineers, United States Army, and through the courtesy of the
United States Government, he was allowed to visit South Australia.
It was upon Major Johnston’s plans, reports, and estimates that this
work was being carried out. In 1911 an agreement was arrived at
between the three States, under which authority was given to South
Australia to proceed with the Lake Victoria scheme, subject to the
consent of the Parliaments of New South Wales and Victoria. The
fate of this agreement was like that of its predecessors. It perished
in early infancy, a cold and indifferent world permitting it to die of
neglect. Determined if possible to resist the blandishments of legal
proceedings, South Australia made one last desperate effort to reach
a final solution of this long, contentious trouble, and in 1913 the last
agreement was born. Three States and the Commonwealth adopted
the role of godfather of this lusty infant. The agreement, which
had passed ‘‘Scylla” of the New South Wales Parliament, was now
making a dangerous voyage past the ‘‘Charybdis” of the Victorian
Assembly. When that danger had been safely navigated it would
be all plain sailing, as he did not anticipate any difficulty in the
measure passing through the Commonwealth Parliament and the Legis-
lature of South Australia. Having explained the principal features
of the agreement, the Premier said he wished to make it quite clear
that the lock, the construction of which was now about to begin, w T as
not being built in anticipation of the agreement of 1913, but was a
work that had ‘‘been in hand for the past five years.” Its construc-
tion would not conflict in any way with the terms of the last settle-
ment, but it should go to prove that South Australia was in earnest
on this matter. It was felt that the last word of compromise had
been spoken. They had given all that they dared to give in justice
to the citizens and to posterity. It might be thought that South
Australia had been too insistent in its claims for the State’s share of
the waters of the Murray, and had laid too much emphasis upon the
subject of navigation. He candidly confessed that South Australian
representatives had too often allowed the greater question of irriga-
tion to be obscured by the cry for a navigable river. Irrigation and
navigation were not in conflict with each other. One could not be
secured without the other; but, in his humble opinion, if either had
to give way, it necessarily must be navigation that must take the


ki
. AIL i
.visa %
'#a^F i wSArzmA&tKSFs? j% '•*■
t,. -jt r r WtLm. Xt *ar ■ j» ; .- * Wf ;g*. % ;&j*F j ■ \ i
' ( , ' $BBgl ( MW# . ||| r |||||f/ Jj
ySL ’" «Sp ™ Af-rSEt i WKSSut f ‘ /' h**f ' is
fPP 1^ wSBur wWMjgbC^.'■MMTBfE/k *iv ' €, ‘JiV'S *,, jflH f 1 aa
Mgsy H MB r AK ►. arf / _ tmfm f an, ,,#. :.’. '• V* . at
■*■•;.• ' -Vii;
VjJr mtL 41P- #* : aK. Si
His Excellency the Governor (Sir Henry Galway, K.C.M.G., D.S.O.) laying the stone to mark the Site of the William R. Randell Lock.
G -£) c


secondary place. At the present time South Australia had no less
than 25,906 acres along the valley of the Murray under intense cul-
ture, and if the areas now being dealt with, and the schemes con-
templated between the boundary and the Murray Mouth were included,
they had a grand total of 359,554 acres. Last year, when the low
state of the river threatened the settlements with ruin, impro-
vised sand-bag embankments had to be built to store fresh water for
the pumping plants at Mildura, Eenmark, Waikerie, and Bern.
Lower down the river the people had to be content with watering
their lucerne with salt water, trusting to the leaching process of high
rivers to take the salt out of the soil. It would be seen then that
South Australia was making no empty boast when she preached the
gospel of irrigation, and earnestly requested the other States to come
into line with her in the development of this Nile of Australia. Lake
Victoria was a natural storage basin, which with the trifling expen-
diture of less than £200,000 could be made to store 22,000,000,000 cubic
feet of water, which was only one-third less than the capacity of
Burrinjuck itself. Lake Bonney offered itself as another storage
basin which the construction of locks would enable them to utilise,
and each lock would throw back the water to a height of 10ft.,
thus keeping the river fresh and full for many months longer than it
otherwise could be. At the same time, they must never forget that
a locked river, though of inestimable value for irrigation purposes,
could be made navigable to boats drawing 6ft. 6in. on considerably
less than one-seventh of the quantity of water that was now required.
The Government were considering also the advisability of following
the example shown by the Butch in the reclamation of the Zuyder
Zee by reclaiming Lakes Albert and Alexandrina as far as practicable.
It would be invidious to particularise the efforts of any particular
past Minister in the work of utilising the waters of the Murray.
Among those who had taken a leading part in the deliberations in this
matter were the Hon. J. H. Howe, Mr. Simpson Newland, the late
Tom Price, Mr. Justice Gordon, Sir Richard Butler, the Hon. A. H.
Peake, the Hon. J. Verran, and last but not least, the Hon. P. McM.
Glynn, and the Hon. David Gordon, whose labors in the cause of de-
velopment of the River Murray had been unceasing. Just as the turn-
ing of the sod on the East-West line bore witness to the future de-
velopment of the interior of Australia’s vast continent, the ceremony
that day at Blanchetown opened the door to the future utilisation of
the resources of the Murray. It ushered in a new era of activity
and enterprise. The imagination could scarcely conceive the future
that awaited Australia when these placid waters were harnessed to
man’s use. Then would the solitary places be made glad, and the
desert blossom as the rose. For what the Tiber wms to old Rome,
what the Mississippi was to America, what the Nile was to Egypt,
this and more he believed the Murray was destined to be to genera- I j
tions of Australians yet unborn. \\\lj
o- • - ' o


The Ministerial Party at Blanchetown.


Support from the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister (Eight Hon. Andrew Fisher, P.C.) said he was
glad to have the opportunity to second the vote of thanks so ably
submitted by the Premier. He had been made happy by the references
in the speeches to the abundance of water the heavens sent to that
portion of Australia, but it had almost made him sad to think that
these bounties had for so long been allowed to run to waste. He did
not belong to their State, but he felt just as warmly for the people
as he did for the people of his own State. That should be the spirit
of every Australian. He hoped no available opportunity would be
lost by the State or Federal Parliaments to prevent the waste they
had heard so much about, whether there were differences of opinion
between sections of the Australian people or not. It was an economic
waste that could not be justified either to themselves or to any other
part of the world. Without entering into any political controversy, he
might say that 25 years ago he was one of a number who had tried
to draft a political platform, and the second plank of that platform
was ‘ ‘ Conservation of water and irrigation. ’’ That plank and idea
had been allowed to lie dormant too long. He hoped the people would
awaken to their opportunities and interests. The time might soon
arrive when a great mass of people might be seeking a new home, and
why should they not have that home by their beautiful river, and in
such a healthy climate. If Australians exercised their wills and
intentions in a practical and sound way there should be abundant
opportunities offered to citizens of the Commonwealth. He would use
all his influence, and would even abet those who were desirous of
utilising the bounteous rains that fell either in South Australia or any
other State if it would increase the prosperity of the people. It
was with the greatest of pleasure that he thanked His Excellency for
laying in position the foundation-stone of the first Murray lock.
Interstate Co-operation.
After expressing pleasure at being able to support the vote of thanks
to the Governor, the Premier of New South Wales (Hon. W. A. Holman)
said it was with a great amount of personal interest that ho found him-
self there to take some part in a most memorable ceremony. The actual
scheme under which it was hoped the task of conserving the waters of
the river would ultimately be carried out throughout its whole length
bore his signature, and in this regard a striking thought had occurred to
him at that moment. It was perhaps an evidence of the rapidity of
changes in the political life of Australia that of the four heads of Govern-
ments which had signed the agreement last year he was the only one re-
maining in office. Mr. Cook had been replaced by Mr. Fisher, Mr. Watt
by Sir Alexander Peacock, and Mr. Peake by Mr. Yaughan. He could
only regard that as a further indication of the gentle spirit and gene-
rally pacific nature of politics as they were carried on in the mother
State. Their less fortunate neighbors used up all their energies in rows.
In New South Wales the Parliamentarians concentrated the whole of


ns
I
r
3
0
CO
c
a
!c
U)
1
h
<u
£
nS
E
3
C
C
(IS


their energies in furthering the good of the people. An occasion such
as they were taking part in was a striking indication of South Austra
lia’s determination to succeed. New South Wales stood to benefit as
much by the Murray locking scheme as did South Australia. Already
New South Wales had embarked on a gigantic irrigation scheme, based
on the waters of the Murrumbidgee, but the fraternal settlement of the
long-standing legal differences about the waters of the Murray would
permit his State to join with Victoria in carrying out an irrigation
scheme that would be twice as large in results as Burrinjuck. At Curn-
beroona they would, after having settled their differences in regard to
navigation on the lower reaches of the Murray, be able to construct a
reservoir which would permit two areas each the size of the Burrinjuck
scheme to be irrigated. One was on the north, and one on the south side
of the river, and it was estimated that at least from 15,000 to 20,000
people could be settled on each of these. Necessarily estimates of that
kind were vague, but the figures he had quoted had been prepared by
those who were in a position to judge of the success of the scheme. It
was a great work on which South Australia had now embarked, but he
felt that he could echo the sentiment of His Excellency the Governor in
regard to being in at the finish of things, for he was merely following
where his predecessors had paved the way. However, he rejoiced that in
history his name would be associated with the scheme as one of the
signatories to the agreement which made it possible for the great work
to be carried out. He congratulated His Excellency and South Aus-
tralia on the day’s great event. It was an event that would be looked
upon by His Excellency in years to come, and by himself also as some-
thing with which they were pleased to have their names connected. It
was without a doubt a step in the greatest and most beneficent of public
undertakings that had ever been carried out in Australia. Those pioneers
who had made it possible, and who had worked so hard to bring it about,
deserved the warmest congratulations on their unflagging industry and
spirit. Looking back over the whole period of her history he could see
no single moment when Australia was confronted with so gigantic a step
forward in material development as that which they had witnessed.
Utilising Nature’s Forces.
Mr. J. W. Billson, M.L.A. (Victoria), said he hoped the agreement
would be carried, but he was not quite sure whether he should say in its
present form. Mr. Holman had told them that he was over-reached in
the matter by Mr. Glynn, but the Victorian representative affirmed that
he was over-reached by the representative of New South Wales. Vic-
toria was now considering the agreement, but South Australia had not
considered or determined it. So, although the Parliament in his State
was a bit late, it was nevertheless before the Parliament of South Aus-
tralia. No disagreement, however graye, could justify the folly of allow-
ing facilities for navigation and irrigation to go to waste, thus leaving
people destitute of those opportunities which they could have were the
forces of Nature harnessed for the use of man. He trusted that the
-0




results of the agreement would be all that was anticipated by the framers.
Personally he regretted that men in the past had not been sufficiently
statesmanlike to recognise their duty, and had not permitted lands and
water to be ultilised in the natural and most beneficial way. He added
his tribute to His Excellency for the work performed that day. He
hoped to see hundreds of acres of the land now useless placed under irri-
gation, and cut up into small blocks in the future, and their own people,
who were languishing for want of lands to cultivate, settled on them,
adding to their own happiness and the prosperity of Australia.
Of Interstate Importance.
The Hon. E. B. Rees, M.L.C. (Victoria), said it gave him pleasure to
be present and join in celebrating that great event, but he regretted that
members of the Victorian Ministry were apparently too busy attending to
important duties in Melbourne to make the journey. South Australia
was inaugurating a work that was of the greatest importance to Vic-
toria. He, however, as a resident on the Murray in Victoria, anti a
user for irrigation of that great stream, was present to express the hope
that the work now being inaugurated to conserve the water might be
carried right through, and that it would tend —as he knew it would —to
the development of the great Murray Valley, adding to the wealth of
the whole district in that reach of the river between Mildura and Echuca.
It would do probably more for the people of Victoria than any other
work now in progress or in sight. To deal with the question of the
agreement would, of course, be controversial, and they were not there for
controversy, but to declare that that great necessity was forced upon
them by the unprecedented drought, during which the Murray ceased to
flow around Swan Hill, the water right along the stream became undrink
able, and so heavily charged with mineral in the South Australian reaches,
that it had been responsible for a breakdown of the locomotive engine
which brought him over. The position was so serious when rain held
off that they ought to have the great river harnessed and the water
stored. By conservation they should seek to accomplish what Nature did
not do for them, and have in the upper reaches of the rivers reserves
that could be allowed to flow down in periods of stress and deficiency, and
which would create a sufficient amount of water so that there would be
no failure in the irrigation schemes.
New Chapter in Australian History.
The Federal Attorney-General (Hon. W. M. Hughes) remarked that he
felt like a superfluous supernumerary on that platform, as he came, at
best, but to echo the sentiments of those gentlemen who had preceded
him. Any man who had had the privilege of coming up the river and
seeing it for the first time as he had that day could but rejoice from the
bottom of his heart to think that the natural possibilities that had been
passing the doors of the people for ages were at length to be made use A c
of. They were at the beginning of a new chapter of Australian history, [o;
a chapter that was to introduce quite a new era. The Murray would do Kn
c<- . ■■■■ ■ -O




LOCK & WEIR , BLANCHETOWN
SKETCH SHOWING STEAMBOAT PASSING THROUGH THE LOCK
The vreir is' shown by lelters A. A.
The navigable pass by lelters d.d.


for Australia what the Nile had done for Egypt. When the Nile was
low-the land around was a desert, but when the river ran high the same
land was a Garden of Eden. All that water had done for Colorado,
Arizona, and California, it would do in South Australia. His Excellency
had accomplished his great work in a way exquisitely worthy of the
action, and he was privileged to support the vote of thanks in his favor.
Confidence in the Scheme.
Sir Richard Butler said he was pleased to join the other speakers in
thanking His Excellency for placing in position the stone that would fix
the site of the William R. Randell Lock, named after one of the honored
pioneers and one of the earliest traders on the river. The Governor’s
name henceforth would be closely associated with the work, which was
one of supreme magnitude, of the greatest importance, and of far-
reaching and ever-increasing advantage to the people of the Common-
wealth —the controlling and utilising to the fullest degree the waters of
this great river and its tributaries, the one great water highway of Aus-
tralia, penetrating into the interior for over 3,000 miles. Though His
Excellency would not be in South Australia long enough to see the whole
work on the river completed, he would be able to watch its progress, and
rejoice with the people of the State if in the next few weeks the agree-
ment arrived at last year was ratified by Victoria, South Australia, and
the Commonwealth Parliament. Nothing in his public career of nearly a
quarter of a century would give him (Sir Richard Butler) greater plea-
sure than the acceptance and ratification of an agreement arrived at after
over 50 years of discussion. The conference he attended in Melbourne
last year was the second at which he had been present as a representative
of South Australia. The first was with Mr. J. G. Jenkins, and the
last with Mr. Peake. As probably was the ease with the other repre-
sentatives, they did not get all they would have liked. He thought, how-
ever, that after last year’s conference there was a unanimous opinion
that the lines agreed on should be accepted. He thought Mr. Holman,
who had been present at that conference, would agree with that. In
fact, he had given evidence of it by passing the Bill embodying the
agreement through the New South Wales Parliament without amendment,
and he wished to say how much he appreciated the attitude adopted by
Mr. Griffith, then Minister for Public Works in New South Wales, at the
conference. This was the attitude South Australia had always taken,
and what better evidence could be had in justification of that statement
than the fact that per capita this State would spend £4 to every £1 spent
by the two other States. In addition, South Australia would also have
to face the difficult problems confronting it between Blanehetown and the
Murray mouth. They were not navigationists only, but what they
did contend was that navigation and irrigation were one and indissoluble,
and that by assisting one both were assisted. He was glad Mr. Fisher
was with them, especially as he had assured them that his party would
honor the promise made by Mr. Cook at the last conference, and that the
Federal Parliament would share with the States the cost of the work.


This cost was put down at four and a quarter millions, but this sum
was only problematical. He was hopeful that the w r ork could be carried
out at well within that amount. The estimate of the cost of the 17
locks in Victoria had been increased by about one million, and the South
Australian estimate, carefully prepared with the assistance of two ex-
perienced American engineers, remained about the same as before. As
the locks should prove much more costly in this State, where the river
was much wider, he thought they could only assume that the amount put
down in the agreement would not be required, and in any savings made
all the States would participate. Before concluding, he wished to apolo-
gise for the absence of Mr. Simpson Newland, the Chairman of the River
Murray League. Mr. Newland appreciated the courtesy of the Govern-
ment in inviting him to be present, but his medical adviser would not
consent to his making the journey.
His Excellency Thanked.
The Commissioner of Public Works conveyed the thanks of the gather-
ing to the Governor, and in response His Excellency said he would watch
the progress of the work with the greatest interest and sympathy. In
connection with the Murray lands, which would be parcelled out by
degrees, he only hoped that the Government would have some scheme by
which the splendid men now fighting for King and Empire would be able
to get land on easy terms.
At tne conclusion of the ceremony the assemblage gave renewed
cheers for the Governor, the Prime Minister, the Premier, and the
Australian heroes on Gallipoli.




VISITORS’ IMPRESSIONS OF THE RIVER.
PRAISE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER.
"This is the first time,” said the Prime Minister (Mr. Fisher),
"that I have sailed up and down this great river. It has been a
beautiful and an exhilarating trip, and my surprise is that people who
want rest and quiet and change about this season of the year do not
avail themselves of it to a greater extent. It was a lucky coincidence
that enabled me to be in South Australia staying over the week-end
when the journey was being arranged, and I am grateful to the
Government of this State for having afforded me the opportunity to
visit a part of Australia I have often wanted to see. The upper
reaches of the rivers down to the junction of the Darling and the
Murray I know well. The only thing I have to say to the people of
Australia at this time concerning the conservation and utilisation of
the Murray waters is that if they know a thing is right to do they
should not stop talking about it. My attitude towards any project
that is useful, permanent, and Australian in character is that quibbles
between sections and parties do not affect the principle of the thing
at all.”
Impressions of Mr. Hughes
The Federal Attorney-General (Mr. Hughes) said:—"l am very
much impressed with your great waterway. I have seen most of the
big rivers of the world, and, though in volume and size many are
superior to the Murray, yet in the length of its course, and particu-
larly in the fertility of the lands through which it passed, it may well
challenge comparison with any. And it must be remembered, too,
that from the standpoint of irrigation regard must be had to the
general rainfall and the climatic conditions generally. A great river
flowing through country with an ample rainfall is of less value
than is a river of less volume in a country where the rainfall is more
or less irregular. Then, again, in many countries the fertility of the
soil depends upon the number of hours of sunshine, and often they
are fewer than is the case in South Australia. Summed up, therefore,
and taking into account all the various factors and problems, it may
well be said that the Murray is one of the great rivers of the world,
not from the standpoint of navigation, but that of irrigation. The
■ 0


RIVER MURRAY SETTLEMENTS. \nVy
Concrete Channel. Orchard and Vineyard, Renmark. Fruit Cases for Renmark. /A
0 - -- -


soil on the banks is among the most fertile in the world, and requires
nothing more than water to make the Murray areas a veritable Garden
of Eden. One can only deplore the criminal neglect on the part of the
past and present generations of statesmen in not paying more atten-
tion to its development, and rejoice that the present Government are
attacking the problem with such determination and in such a scientific
way.
“Two things are certain. One is that this country cannot success-
fully cope with the work that lies ahead of it without a larger popula-
tion, and the other that to maintain a larger population the fertile
lands of the country must be placed beyond the risk of drought, and
this can only be done by irrigation. Modern-day civilisation has a
great task in carrying the many superstructures that modern methods
involve, and to do this successfully it must rise, as civilisation
throughout the ages has risen, on the solid and enduring foundation of
agriculture. It is to this task that Australia has now girded up its
loins, tardily perhaps, but with a wholehearted determination as to its
final and speedy achievement.”
The Tourist Aspect.
“I am intensely surprised at the nature of the scenery on the
river,” the Premier of New South Wales (Mr. Holman) remarked, in
stating his impression of the Murray. “The trip was my first, and I
had no idea the river presented pictures so fine. The weather, too,
was splendid. Certainly, I think the attractiveness of the trip should
be more widely made known in the eastern States. It had been one
of the unfulfilled purposes of my life for the last 20 years to make
the acquaintance of the Murray, and now that I have done so I am
very anxious to travel upon the river again. The possibilities of the
valley from the point of view of settlement seem unlimited, and the
work being done to improve the conditions is of the utmost value. 1
am quite sure that South Australia will benefit as much from the im-
proved facilities for irrigation which will be given by the carrying out
of the locking scheme as from the preservation of the stream for navi-
gation purposes. The trip has entirely confirmed the strong opinion
1 previously held with regard to the proposed improvements. I think
all the New South Wales visitors are equally indebted to the Govern-
ment for the opportunity afforded them of making a journey for which
no parallel can be found in Australia. lam sure it would be a highly
popular trip if the attractions of it were better known.’’
Ocean Outlet Advocated.
The Speaker of the New South Wales House of Assembly (Mr. R. D.
Meagher) said the Murray had hitherto been about the only river
of any importance in Australia with which he was unacquainted. He
had been upon the Darling and the Murrumbidgee, and now to see


L.
3
DC
d
E
oS
*
CO
■a
0)
E
Vs
o
0)
L.


the country in the valley of the Murray, with soil of such a character
that men could get a living on small holdings of about 20 acres, was
a revelation. Those from New South Wales were impressed with its
illimitable future. An integral part of the South Australian locking
problem appeared to him an engineering feat which would send a flush
through Lake Alexandrina, and provide a navigable outlet to the
sea. The lock scheme would be incomplete without a navigable mouth
to the Murray. It ought not to be insuperably difficult for engineers
to devise training walls to make a scour at the mouth to prevent the
bar silting up. It would be a pity to undergo the expense of making
the Murray navigable merely for riparian traffic and not accessible
from the ocean. Water carriage for produce was always cheaper than
haulage and handling on the railways. The Northern Rivers District
of New South Wales, on which the best of their settlement had taken
place, would be practically valueless had not the mouths of the rivers
been kept open, enabling the produce to go by water to Sydney. On
the training walls requisite for the purpose about three-quarters of
a million pounds had been spent, but the results had fully justified it.
A Victorian Opinion.
Mr. J. W. Billson, M.L.A., of Victoria, said he knew the Murray well
in that State and in New South Wales, but was travelling below
Morgan for the first time, and was surprised to find so much irrigable
land and so much of a valuable nature that could be reclaimed. He
was pleased to see South Australia doing this work. Under intense
culture and properly drained the soil was probably as rich as any in
the world, but while it remained sticky and sour it would grow little
except rushes. All it required was to be drained and sweetened, and
the cattle put to pasture upon it would get as fat as butter. From a
tourist standpoint the trip had been splendid. It was the best he
had ever had upon the river. The width of the river in South Aus-
tralian territory made it particularly attractive for holiday folk. The
trip had demonstrated to him the possibilities of the State if the
water were properly utilised for the benefit of the people, and no
agreement should prevent its proper utilisation.
Weirs and Locks
The Hon. IL B. Rees, M.L.C., of Victoria, who was a member of the
Royal Commission on Murray Waters in 1910, when an inspection was
made of the river from Eehuca to Goolwa, said: —“So far as this trip
is concerned, it has been extremely pleasurable, and an enlightenment
to me as to the possibilities of the river here under irrigation. The
drainage area is very much greater in extent than I had anticipated,
and the possibilities are undoubtedly very great. The system adopted
for drainage and irrigation is, in my opinion, better than we have in
Victoria, because of the provision for taking the surplus water o(T the
land and not allowing the soil to become waterlogged, which will
0- -■ ■ =9 C^C


Gr^
0
9
•p
Pi
'j * ‘ ’ *■ * > >' ' • -Lm
*:. •’ • * 1 v . t 'Vm
■
■ * • , *»
I., . ’. V';* " V ■ : -/r‘. 1.
, ■ %: >...
■';;' v v . t /■ '
■• >"' ' Vv ***.- l ' ' » *- •
, * - » '* . < *
* f •' t • , ,-* - .—./ «t . .. . . ■ '■■...: ■ **>,
. • • f <'•**»-■ ■ , ' - ■ , ' ■’ , , r ■'
- ■■ * . ■ -o -'•■• 4 V • ' - r t - ;.:.s
; ; ■ -.
' ' - - ' - • - V i ' - ' *
- ■ ■ . -
v*!V »?■;
11#^
■■ . . - * *
?4M&> 'J* ■■"**••*>: x.' i ♦ .
'■ *?>*• ■
>■•■• * 4 ■ ■
: . - ;
/ ;h *
v v ••>•; .-■
■ ; ' - > , ■
* . *'%
' * * t *■
4 » • ■
• V:
t
• , v ■ ? v V : •
,, v ■ ■" ’ : ' ■ --i .
..... ■ • ' ■ , , . >. • - ■ , '• * ■ ■ ' •.
* ~ \ . , ~ ? * ' *£*. ■ t ,,",
' ■ ' ; . . '•',»■• t■■: •
■ ;. -;v'; \
; % v." *■
'
’
•«- >:■ - f • • >
.«*■ ' : ' , , >
V I
-
v n
" 1 A*! >• t ’ C-"-
■'-'«■•/ - - ' • w 5 : ■
' • -
* *. ■' »
■ *r
A ., ' ? «
■
•>■■ • . ’. i’ "."■■■
_ f /■
S„ « • \ '“
4;
■ , i’M ' \
•si . ,v y . ■.>:
a
»V : » .,
r\ • _ 1 • •
.-4-.
ci
Lucerne on Reclaimed Land, River Murray.
o-
— -o c


occur, I think, in a good deal of the Victorian irrigation lands. The
greatest surprise to me on the journey has been the varying con-
ceptions held as to what the locking system is and its effects. Many
opinions are expressed among members that to lock the river would
be to hold up to practical uses the flow, and there is confusion regard-
ing the duties of the lock and the weir. The great expenditure of
money contemplated for the construction of locks seems in the minds
of members to be primarily for the purposes of irrigation, whereas
weirs are for that object. The locks are simply for navigation, and
it remains to be seen whether the constantly diminishing volume of
navigation will justify the construction of these locks, the weirs, of
course, being thoroughly justified from the irrigation standpoint.”
A Disinterested Viewpoint.
Mr. R. J. Burchell, M.H.R., of Western Australia, said he thought
there was no question that the agreement entered into by the riparian
States and the Commonwealth would be ratified.. The opening up of
the river for trade between one portion of Australia and another must
be productive of the best results for Australia generally. Until one
had spent some days in travelling upon the broad waters of the
Murray it was hard to realise that such a great national asset had
been allowed to remain undeveloped so long. Although he came from
a State not directly interested, the people of the West were already
famous in Australian history for their acceptance of the national
ideals. All who studied the problem of the River Murray, while
agreeing that from the purely irrigation standpoint much was to be
said, could not overlook the fact that side by side with irrigation work
navigation must be rendered possible at the earliest opportunity.
Realising that, it was to be hoped that the Victorian Parliament would
not delay in ratifying the agreement. He felt that the use of the
term, “the Nile of Australia,” as applied to the Murray, was pecu-
liarly apt, and witli the experience of the Nile in Egypt to guide
them, the people of Australia could look forward to spaces now some-
what barren and desolate blossoming in the full productivity of the
rich soil. “The thanks of all who have participated in the trip,”
concluded Mr. Burchell, “are due to the South Australian Government
for their hospitality, and from expressions of opinion heard I am con-
vinced that a national feeling has been developed towards this great
project.’ ’
A Tasmanian Minister.
Tbe Tasmanian Minister of Lands and Works (Hon. J. Belton) was
also surprised with the wonderful possibilities of the Murray, par
ticularly from the standpoint of irrigation. He made the trip think-
ing that it might afford some guide in connection with schemes
afoot in Tasmania, but he found that the conditions were altogether
different.
o- ■ ■ --- ■ ■ 5 J G


tm
3
O
CO
c
U)
~o
>
o
3
3
O
O
o
CN
E
3
c= £
O X
M.
g 8-
X <u
111 T 3
D
< £
(1)
o_ •
4)
a
H E 1
w o
? ?
h .Q
w
D «
<1 <+-
UJ 10
5
t- o
c
o
4)
•a
<D
<D
CO
”
<u !
c
c
5 I
o
cs
0)
■5
>
n
o
X
4)
= dj


LOCKS AND WEIRS.
(Particulars Supplied by the Engineer-in-CMef, Mr. Graham
Stewart, M. Inst. C.E.).
The inauguration of the system of weirs and locks by the construc-
tion of the first of the series at Blanchetown, to be known as the
William R. Randell Weir and Lock, will prove of immense benefit not
only to the settlers and traders on the river, but to the State and
Commonwealth as a whole.
An agreement has been drawn up and signed by the Premiers of
the riparian States of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Aus-
tralia, and the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth, which authorises
the construction of large storage works for the regulation of the flow
of the Murray River and tributaries for the purposes of irrigation and
navigation, and also of a system of navigation weirs and locks in the
Murray as far as Echuca, and in the Murrumbidgee as far as Hay,
or, alternatively to the latter, in the Darling River as far as an
equivalent expenditure will allow. This agreement has been ratified
by the Parliament of New South Wales, and is now before the Parlia-
ments of the other two States, and after being ratified by them will
be submitted to the Commonwealth Parliament for the same purpose.
There is a very good reason to believe that the agreement will be
favorably considered by all the Parliaments. Prior to the agree-
ment having been drawn up, South Australia had decided to proceed
on her own account with the construction of the lock system within
her own boundaries, to provide a minimum depth of 6ft. Gin. of water,
and, subject to an agreement with New South Wales and Victoria,
to extend the system as far as Wentworth, in New South Wales, and
to construct the Lake Victoria storage works.
South Australia has spent a large sum of money in making the
necessary surveys and doing exploratory work, which are most im-
portant preliminaries to undertakings of this description, and the
investigations have been completed and a design prepared to give
permanent navigation by the building of locks and weirs to control
the river as far as Wentworth, in New South Wales.
The weirs designed for South Australia on the advice of Major
E. N. Johnston, Corps of Engineers, U.S.A., whose services were ob-
tained through the courtesy of the Government of the United States
of America, will have a lift of from 10ft. to lift., so that practically
none of the flats adjacent to the river will be submerged, but the
raised water level will reduce the lift of water to be pumped for irri-
gation purposes, and in some cases the weirs will act as diversion
works for filling storages and channels.


G■ ■ o
The portion of the lock system to be carried out by South Australia
comprises nine locks and weirs, six of which will be situated between
Blanchetown and the State boundary and three between the State
boundary and Wentworth. No. 9 lock will act as a diverting weir
to direct the water into Lake Victoria, which will be converted into
a large storage, containing 22,000,000,000 cubic feet, for the regula-
tion of the flow of the river. This will insure a supply of water for
irrigation, as well as water for the lock system, and it may be well
to state here that the water required to maintain a locked and per-
manently navigable river is a mere fraction of that necessary to pro-
vide for navigation in an open river, thus rendering a much larger
volume of water available for irrigation purposes than would other-
wise be the case, without injury to navigation.
The weir will consist of two parts, viz., the “navigable pass” and
the “sluices.” The former, which is 199 ft. in width, will be entirely
removed during high river periods, and remain open for navigation.
The stop logs, which in low periods are placed between the sluice
piers to form the weir, will also be removed, the only obstruction left
in the river being the piers themselves and the lock walls. In low
river periods the navigable pass and sluices will be closed, and navi-
gation will be carried on through the locks.
Very careful consideration has been given to the matter of deter-
mining the size of the lock chamber, with a view to meeting present
and future requirements, and a size, 56ft. wide and 275 ft. long between
the gates, has been adopted. It-is anticipated that when the rivet
is made permanently navigable boats of the most modern design for
both passenger and freight traffic will replace many of the older
vessels now in use.
The question of carrying out works on the lower portion of the river,
with a view of prolonging the period of freshness of Lakes Alexan-
dria and Albert, and also to provide a harbor as a means of com-
munication between river vessels and ocean-going vessels, is now
recei\ing the very careful consideration of the Government.
The whole of the work connected with South Australia’s portion of
the scheme is being carried out by the Engineer-in-Chief’s Depart-
ment, and the construction of the William R. Randell Lock is under
the immedia.te supervision of Mr. R. C. Cutting, 5.8., A.M.A.S.C.E.,
who was engaged in America for this purpose on account of his large
experience on similar works.


RIVER MURRAY.
NOTES ON PLACES OF INTEREST,
The River Murray was discovered in November, 1829, by Captain
Charles Sturt, who started down the River Murrumbidgee in a whale-
boat, and. striking the Murray at its junction with the latter river,
he followed its course to Lake Alexandria, which he reached on
February 9th, 1830. After crossing the lakes and proceeding to the
sea mouth of the river, the intrepid explorer and party rowed up
stream again to their starting place.
The total navigable length of the Murray and tributaries is 3,212
miles, and the tract of country which forms the watershed of these
rivers comprises 414,253 square miles, or 265,121,920 acres.
The River Murray is usually at its highest level in South Australia
during the months of August, September, October, and November, and
a navigable depth has often been maintained throughout the whole
year. The average fall of the stream is about 2in. per mile.
GOOLWA. —A large portion of the river trade finds an outlet at this
port, which is situated on Lake Alexandria, about eight miles
from the Murray Mouth.
Goolwa is the starting point of a suggested canal to Victor
Harbor.
LAKE ALEXANURINA. —Considerable areas of this lake, which is
224 square miles in extent, are capable of profitable reclamation.
LAKE ALBERT covers about 41,000 acres, and averages 4ft. 6in. in
depth. Practically the whole of this lake could be reclaimed at
a comparatively small cost. The area could be served by irriga-
tion if desired.
The following notes regarding settlements have been compiled from
information supplied by the Director of Irrigation (Mr. S,
Mclntosh): —
JERVOIS, which is now in course of reclamation by the Government,
contains 9894 acres of swamp land, and 557 acres of adjoining
highland.
= 5 C:


WOOD ’B POINT, the property of Messrs. H. W. Morphett & Co., has
an area of approximately 2,000 acres of reclaimed land, a con-
siderable area of which is planted with lucerne, and the balance
used for grazing purposes. Besides carrying a large number of
sheep, this estate possesses some of the finest dairies in the State.
MONTEITH contains 1,138 acres of reclaimed land (of which 980
acres have been allotted) and 753 acres of highland, the length
of the levee being 3 miles 03 chains. On June 30th, 1914, this
area was carrying 135 horses, 927 cows, in addition to sheep, pigs,
and poultry, of a total value of £7,927. Dairy produce and crops
produced during the year were valued at £10,732.
SWAN POET AREA contains 110 acres of land already reclaimed, and
a similar acreage of highland, which is now in progress of pre-
paration for irrigation purposes.
MURRAY BRIDGE is one of the chief river ports in South Australia.
In the vicinity, the reclamation of the Murray overflow lands has
been undertaken with considerable success.
At Mobilong an area of 509 acres has been reclaimed by the
construction of a two-mile embankment. Long Plat contains an
area of 356 acres of leased swamp and 320 acres of highland, and
has an annual production of approximately £4,000. The stock
carried on this area on June 30th, 1914, was estimated at 263,
with pigs, sheep, and poultry, valued at £2,620. Burdett has an
area of 107 acres of reclaimed land and 18J acres of highland, all
of which has been allotted. The stock on this area was valued
at £764, and the production estimated at £1,200.
GLEN LOSBIE, the property of the Hon. J. Cowan, M.L.C., includes
about 800 acres of reclaimed swamp land, part of which is used
for intense culture, but the bulk of the area is devoted to stock-
raising.
MYPOLONGA. —This area consists of 1,833 acres of reclaimed land,
1,270 acres of highland served with channels for irrigation, and
3,086 acres of dry land. Thirty-five blocks of reclaimed land
containing 700 acres, 21 blocks comprising 218 acres of irrigable
land, and 26 blocks of 1,136 acres of dry land have already been
allotted. The pumping plant installed consists of a combined
high and loav lift plant of 2 (tvco) suction gas plants, each of
330 8.H.P., with 4-200 B.H.P. Cambridge producer plants, and
2-16 in. 3-stage centrifugal pumps, with a total capacity of
6,400ga115. per minute against a total pressure head of 127 ft., and
2-65 B.H.P. suction gas engines, 2-100 B.H.P. Cambridge producer
plants, and 2-18 in. centrifugal pumps, with a capacity of
14,000 galls. per minute against a total pressure head- of 12ft.
S)


: u> 6
The high lift plant is erected so that it may be used as an
auxiliary to the low lift in case of emergency, and the latter has
been so arranged that it can serve as an irrigating plant for any
part of the reclaimed area which is too high to water by gravi-
tation.
The construction work on this area is practically completed.
POMPOOTA. —This area contains 560 acres of swamp laud in course
of reclamation, 250 acres of highland to be allotted for irrigation
purposes, and 3,277 acres of dry land.
WALL SWAMP, the reclamation of which is now nearing completion,
comprises 466 acres of swamp land and 550 acres of dry land.
NEETA, now in course of reclamation, contains 1,403 acres of swamp
and 1,820 acres of high land suitable for irrigation.
COWIREA.—The area of this swamp is 704 acres, and the dry land,
which is common to both Neeta and Cowirra, 2,348 acres.
MANNUM. —This town has a population of about 2,000, and its prin-
cipal industries are the manufacture of agricultural implements
and boat building.
GRANITE QUARRY, MANNUM, from which stone is to be supplied
for the Murray locks.
WONGULLA has an area of 1,222 acres, about 520 of which is swamp
land.
MORGAN. —The railway from Adelaide terminates at this point.
NEW ERA. —This area joins the property of the New Era Fruit-
growing Company, Limited, and comprises 2,259 acres. The irri-
gable area consists of 1,208 acres, which can be irrigated from a
lift of 70ft.
WAIKERIE. —This area includes the district of Ramco, which, with
Waikerie, was, until recently, a Village Settlement; but both are
now settlements under the ” Irrigation and Reclaimed Lands
Act.” The area, which comprises 7,710 acres, has been sub-
divided into blocks, with the exception of 500 acres at present
reserved for timber, and allotted to about 100 settlers. The
irrigable area is 2,515 acres, of which about 1,750 acres are
planted, principally with oranges, peaches, sultanas, and other
fruits, and about 80 acres with lucerne. The total value of the
planted area and improvements is, at a low estimate, £175,820.


KINGSTON is another of the original Village Settlements, the control
of which was taken over by the Irrigation Department in 1914.
Its total area is 3,900 acres, 163 of which are irrigated by 19
settlers. By extension of channelling the irrigable area has been
increased to 415 J acres. Of this, 155 f acres are now being offered
in 11 blocks, and the balance of the area will be distributed in
increasing the areas of the present holdings.
MOOROOK. —This was originally one of the Village Setttlements, but
was abandoned as such in 1905, since when several of the original
settlers have continued to irrigate about 50 acres. The irrigable
area is now being extended to 1,200 acres, which will be allotted
with 1,750 acres of dry land, as soon as the construction work
now in progress is completed.
OOBDOGLA is the largest area which the Department has up to the pre-
sent operated upon. The total acreage is 141,000, of which surveys
to date have revealed 30,000 acres as first-class irrigable land. Lake
Bonney, of 4,000 acres in extent, is situated within this area, and it
is proposed to establish pumping stations, one at either end of the
lake, in addition to one at the Oobdogla Homestead and one at the
Cobdogla Woolshed, to water the areas to be allotted for irrigation.
About 3,000 acres adjoining the lake can be watered at a lift ot
40ft., and is specially suited for fodder-growing for dairying, &c.
Channelling to serve this land is practically completed, and as soon
as the erection of the pumping plant is finished, this land will be
offered for allotment.
PYAP. —About 1,000 acres of land, well adapted to artificial watering,
are held by the Pyap Proprietary Company, and a considerable por-
tion of the area is under trees, vines, and fodders.
LOXTON is a thriving Government township, and serves as a centre
for the surrounding agricultural areas.
BEERI. —This settlement has an irrigable area of about 9,000 acres, on
which 3,043 acres in 160 blocks have already been allotted, in addi-
tion to 2,364 acres of dry land in 47 blocks. A further area of over
8,000 acres of dry land will be available for allotment. The pump-
ing plant consists of 1-290 B.H.P. “Premier” gas engine, with
340 B.H.P. gas producer plant, l-12in. “Robison” pump, with a
capacity of 180,000 galls. per hour, and a pair of high speed direct
action steam engines with pumps, each to deliver 200,000 galls. per
hour. Tenders are now being called for an additional plant of a
capacity of l,ooo,ooogalls. per hour. These plants will serve the full
irrigable area in this settlement.
LYRUP. —This was one of the first and most successful of the Village
Settlements, of which it is the only one now remaining. It possesses
an area of 4,919 acres, 556 being irrigable.


Peaches
Apricots
. . .. 146 “
Currants
. . . . 663 ‘ ‘
Sultanas
. . .. 787 “
Raisins
. .. 416 “
Pears, &c
. . . . 23 ‘ ‘
Oranges
Distillery grapes ....
. . . . 1,350 tons
EENMAEK. —Tliis irrigation settlement was established in 1887 by the
Messrs. Chaftey Bros., who had previously carried out successfully
similar enterprises in California. They obtained Crown grants for
13,348 acres of land, most of which was sold to the settlers; but
after a few years of working the scheme was abandoned by the
originators. The settlers, however, remained on, and in 1893, by
Act of Parliament, the local government was vested in an irrigation
trust. Eenmark is now the most important South Australian settle-
ment on the Murray.
The rate levied by the trust for water supplied is 30s. per acre,
and the annual revenue amounts to £7,500. The area under cultiva-
tion for the season 1912-13 was 5,237 acres, and the approximate
quantities of dried fruits, &c., produced were:
In addition to the above, considerable quantities of pears and
lessor quantities of apricots and peaches are sent from Eenmark
as fresh fruit. Some 2,000 gallons of olive oil are also made
annually.
The total value of this produce is about £135,000.
CHOWILLA (Eal Eal). —A scheme for the creation of an irrigation
settlement in this locality is now being carried into effect, and ap-
proximately 20,000 to 25,000 acres will be irrigable.


Mileages from the
Mouth
of the River Murray.
Goolwa
Entrance to Lake
Alexandrina
Point McLeay
End of Lake .
Wellington ..
Tailem Bend.
Swan port ...
Murray Bridge
Mootiueracka .
Caloote
Mannum
Cowirra
Schuetz’s Landing
Teal Flat
Bowhill
Purnong Station.
Walker’s Flat.. .
Forster
Nildottie ...
Big Bond ..
Punyerloo..
Swan Reach
Portee
Blanchetown
Glenforslan Station
Wood’s Flat
Murbko Station
Brenda Station
Morgan
Bryant’s Creek.
New Era
North-West Bend
Dutton’s
Weston’s Flat
Markaranka Station
Boggy Flat...
Murray View.
Ramco
Miles.
202
2021
203*
210
21 If
216*
Miles.
Wigley’s Flat ..
Parcoola Station
Overland Corner
Bull Island
Kingston
Thurk Island.
Cobdogla
Moo rook Island
284 f
290
Nyne’s Island
Pyap Hut
Cobdogla Woolshed ..
Pyap Station (01d)...
Sugarloaf Hill
Gragg’s Creek Exit . .
Kapunda Island ....
Loxton
Media Island
Rilli Island
Gragg’s Creek Ent.
Bookpurnong ....
Berri
Spring Cart Gully
Ly ru P
Calperum Station .
Muckle Muk Island
Tin tree Bend.
Paringa Station
Renmark.
Ral Ral Creek Exit
Ral Ral Creek Ent,..
\Ml\
38t;|
395|
398
Murfcho Station.
Chowilla
Isle of Man
S.A. Border
N.S.W Border 405|
Rufus Creek 436£
Ned’s Corner Station..
Kulnine Station
Moorua


A.VAUGHaN, GOVERNMENT PHOTOVITHO6RAPHER , ADELAIDE.
LAID BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, ON JUNE 6th, 1915.
ISSUED BY THE INTELLIGENCE AND TOURIST BUREAU,






