





THE THURRAWAL LANGUAGE.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc.,
Washington, U.S.A.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, November 6, 1901.]
The Thurrawal speaking people were formerly spread over the
south-east coast of New South Wales from Port Hacking to Jervis
Bay, and extended inland for a considerable distance. For some
years past I have studied the Thurrawal tongue, and now submit
the grammatical outlines of its structure. Considerations of space
render it necessary to touch only upon the fundamental elements
of the language.
I have discovered that many of the nouns, adjectives, prepo-
sitions and adverbs—in addition to the verbs and pronouns—are
inflected for number and person. This fact has not hitherto been
reported, to my knowledge, in any part of Australia, although to
some extent observed in certain islands of the Pacific Ocean.
In verbs, pronouns, and other parts of speech subject to con-
jugation and inflection, there is a double form of the first person
of the dual and plural, which has also been observed in Polynesia,
and among the Amarinds of North America. Two forms of the
dual were noticed by Rev. L. E. Threlkeld among the aborigines
of Lake Macquarie, New South Wales, but he says this did not
extend to the plural. 1
This paper claims to enlarge, in some degree, the circle of
Australian ethnology. Exhibiting the general structure of any
native tongue must be valuable to philologists, in enabling them
to compare our aboriginal languages with each other, and also
with those of the people of Polynesia and the East Indian Archi-
pelago, whence the primitive inhabitants of this Continent are
1 An Australian Language (Sydney), pp. 17 and 91.


supposed by several writers to have come—an opinion which has
also been promulgated by myself. 1
In the tables of declensions and conjugations I have given the
root words and their suffixes in full, believing that this course
will place the whole matter more clearly before the reader than
by giving the suffixes separately. I agree with Mr. Sidney H.
Ray, when he says, “The practice of writing the modifying
particles apart from the root in many languages tends to obscure
the fact of inflection, and makes the particle appear as a separate
word.”
A short vocabulary of the leading nouns, verbs, adjectives and
other parts of speech in the Thurrawal language, is now in pre-
paration, and will be completed as soon as the pressure of other
duties permit.
It may be as well to mention that Rev, Wm. Ridley refers 2 to
a language called Turuwul, which he says was spoken at Port
Jackson and Botany Bay, of which he published a brief list of
words. A short vocabulary is also given by him of the “Language
spoken at George’s River, Campbelltown and Appin.” He like-
wise gives a brief vocabulary of what he calls the Wodi-Wodi
language. Mr. Ridley does not, however, give any rules of the
grammatical structure of the dialects under notice.
Vocabularies of the language spoken by the aborigines in the
neighbourhood of Sydney are given by Mr. D. Collinsand by
Capt. John Hunter. 4 A perusal of my vocabulary at the end of
this article will show that many of the words reported by Mr.
Collins and by Capt. Hunter, respectively, more than a century
ago are still in use, and recognisable, among the Dharruk natives.
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., Yol. xxxix., pp. 556-578. (Map).
“Kamilaroi and Other Australian Languages, (Sydney, 1875), pp. 99
-114.
3 Account of the English Colony in New South Wales, (London, 1798),
pp. 610-615.
4 Historical Journal of Discovery in New South Wales, (London, 1793),
pp. 407 - 411.


Mr. E. M. Curr 1 gives abridgements of the vocabularies of
Hunter, Collins and Ridley.
Orthography.
Nineteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded, comprising
fourteen consonants and five vowels, namely, a, b, d, e, g, h, i, j>
k, l, m, n, o, p, r, t, u, w, and y. The system of orthoepy adopted
is that of the circular issued by the Royal Geographical Society,
London.
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short sound
of a and that of u. A thick sound of iis occasionally met with,
which closely approaches the short sound of uor a. Gis hard in
all cases. R has a rough trilled sound, as in hurrah !
Ng at the beginning of a word, as ngu in ngu'ra, a camp, has a
peculiar sound, which can be got very closely by putting u before
it, as ungu' and articulating it quickly like one syllable. At the
end of a syllable it has substantially the sound of ng in the word
sing. W always commences a syllable or word, and has its
ordinary consonant sound in all cases.
The sound of the Spanish n is frequent, both at the beginning
or end of a syllable. Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to
several consonants, as dya, lyi, tyu, &c., and is pronounced in one
syllable, the initial sound of thee?, I, t, or as the case may require,
being retained. Yat the beginning of a word or syllable has its
ordinary consonant value.
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “that,” with a slight sound
of d preceding it. Nh has nearly the sound of th in “that,” with
an initial sound of the n. The final li is gutteral, resembling ch
in the German word joch.
T is interchangeable with d; p with b; and g with k in most
words where these letters are employed. An approach to the
sound of j is frequently given by the natives, which may be
rendered by dy or ty— thus, dya or tya has very nearly the same
1 The Australian Race, (Melbourne 1886) Vol. in. pp. 410-419.
I—Nov. 6,1901.


sound as ja. At the end of a syllable or word, dy or ty is sounded
as one letter; thus, in bir-rity, sick, the last syllable can be pro-
nounced exactly by adding eto the y, making it rit-ye. Then
commence articulating the word, including the y, but stopping
short without sounding the final, or added e. Dy at the end of a
syllable can be pronounced in the same way, the sound of d being
substituted for that of t. In all cases where there is a double
consonant, each letter is distinctly enunciated.
Articles.
There are no articles corresponding to our “a ” or “the” in any
Australian tongue with which I am acquainted.
Nouns.
Number —Nouns have three numbers, the singular, dual, and
plural. There are euphonic variations and elisions in the suffixes,
according to the termination of the word used :
(a) Singular An eaglehawk, mulyan
Dual A couple of eaglehawks, mulyanbulali
Plural Several eaglehawks, mulyanbuloala
( b ) Singular A bandicoot, mundu
Dual A couple of bandicoots, mundulali
Plural Several bandicoots, munduloala
Gender —Words for “male” and “female” denote the gender of
animals in most cases: Guraura kaualgang, a male opossum;
guraura nunganung, a female opossum. 1 The male of birds is
bianhung, asjaula bianhung, a cock pheasant, and jaula nunganung
a hen. Different words are used to distinguish sex in the human
family, as, yuin, a man ; mega or ngurrungal, a woman ; bunbari,
a boy; yirrauiang, a girl.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, possessive and
objective, the latter including the accusative, dative and ablative
forms.
1. There is a double form of the nominative case. When
it is only necessary to name the object under attention, as yuin, a
1 These words are inflected for number, as stated in dealing with the
adjectives.


•man—or when an intransitive verb is used, as yuin ngulli, the
man sits—the noun is unchanged. But when the noun is connected
with a transitive verb, it takes a suffix, as yuiii-dyu bulmaia, the
man struck; moreover, the form of this suffix varies according to
the termination of the noun, or the vowel sounds contained in it.
This has been designated the nominative agent, and will be under-
stood from the following examples :—ln the simple nominative
we have juggarnaii, a boy; mirrigang, a dog; ngurrungal, a
woman; bunbari, a youth; wuragal, a young man who has been
initiated. When the subject is performing some act, certain
suffixes are employed, as, juggarnandya dhufi manda, the boy a
fish caught. Mirrigangga guraura bubbugaia, a dog an opossum
bit. Ngurrungalla mundha gulanya, a woman a snake killed.
Bunbari-i gunungwir yurinya,' the youth a porcupine hit. Wura-
galgangga bundaia, the man chopped.
It will be observed that the agent suffix in the above examples
has euphonic changes according to the sound of the word it is
attached to; thus, it is dyu after the uin yum; dya after jug-
garnan; ga following the gang in mirrigang, la after the gal in
ngurrungal; and i following the final iin bunbari.
2. The possessive case takes a suffix to the name of the thing
possessed, as well as to that of the possessor:—Yuifiguli nguran-
hung, a man’s ngura or camp. Bunbariwuli warranganhung, a
boy’s boomerang. Mirriganguli wurranyung, a dog’s puppy.
Mirriganguli wurranhumbuloala, a dog’s puppies (several).
Megawuli gujaganhung, a woman’s child. Megawuli gujagan-
gulanhung, a woman’s children (several). Megawulal gujagan-
gulandhunnung, the children of several women. Gujagawuli-
ngubbamurranhung, a child’s mother. Yuifibulaliwuli warrangan-
bulanhung, a boomerang belonging to two men.
The name of every object in the universe over which any kind
of ownership exists, can be conjugated by means of possessive
suffixes for person and number :
f Ist Person My head, Wollardyen
Singular < 2nd ~ Thy head, Wollarngun
( 3rd „ His head, Wollarnhung


/ , p J Our heads, incl. Wollarngullung
P , j S erson | Our heads, excl. Wollarngullin
ua j 2nd „ Your heads, Wollarawulung
' 3rd „ Their heads, Wollarwulanu
, p J Our heads, incl. Wollarnyinnung
f Ist Jrerson j Qur headS) exd Wo i larnyinnin
Ura 1 2nd „ Your heads, Wollarnhurung
3rd „ Their heads, Wollardhunnang
A boomerang, warrangan, can be inflected in the same way-
An example in the singular will be sufficient:
( Ist Person My boomerang, Warrangandyen
Singular 2nd ~ Thy boomerang, Warranganngun
( 3rd ~ His boomerang, Warranganhung
In these examples the pronominal suffix follows the noun, the
words reading, head my, boomerang my, and so on. In the dual
and plural, first person, there are two forms of the word—one
marked “inch,” including the person spoken to; and the other,
“excl.,” in which the person addressed is excluded. If a couple,
or several, articles are claimed, an infix is inserted between the
noun root and the possessive termination, as follows:
Warranganbulalidyen, boomerangs two mine
Warranganbuloaladyen, boomerangs several mine.
3. The accusative is the same as the simple nominative in direct
statements such as —Yuindyu gujaga bulmaia, the man the child
struck. There are exceptions to this rule, however, when an
instrument is the direct object of the verb, as, Warrangandya
wawarnang yerriangai, a boomerang at a crow threw I. Here
the accusive, “boomerang,” takes a similar suffix to the nominative-
Again, Ngurrungalla ngadyungo ngaimilai, the woman water
brings; and Wuragalgangga mundubangga bundaia, the man with
a tomahawk chopped.
Again, in expressions where the instrument is the remote object,
the accusative is unchanged, and the suffix is added to the instru-
mental case, thus, Yuifidyu warrangandya gujaga bulmaia, the
man with a boomerang a child struck. In such instances tho
nominative suffix is often omitted, and the instrumental only
employed.


4. Examples of the dative case are: Juggarnail Bunnabiu
•dhundya ngaimaia, the boy Bunnabi to fish carried. Ngurawulaliu
yendingulling, camps two to go we (dual excl.) or, we two go to
different camps. Warrangan babamurrawulingun, a boomerang
to thy father belongs. Mundubang yuingunhung, a tomahawk
for the man. Babamurrungun nyilli binding, to thy father this
give.
Frequently the dative case is contained in the verb, as, man-
madhan, caught for me; bindadhan, gave to me. In other
instances the dative is expressed in the pronoun, as Ngaiagan-
gunhung, for me. (See Pronouns).
5. The following are a few specimens of the ablative case:—
Ngurrungalla buddaiin nadyungo ngaimilai, the woman from the
hole water carries. Jaulaidhangu ngurain, he runs from the camp-
Yuindyu Bunnabi-in dhundya ngaimilai, a man from Bunnabi fish
carries. Yuin nyilli warrangandya gungalendin jindama, man
this a boomerang from myrtle makes.—Gungalen is the myrtle tree.
The ablative is sometimes expressed by a form of the verb, as,
bundaiadhan, took from me. The sense of the ablative is often
obtained by means of the accusative case, thus, instead of saying,
“The man was bitten by a snake,” a native says, a snake bit the
man. The ablative can also be indicated by a pronoun, as,
Ngaiagandin, from me; ngaiagandi, with me.
The following are a few miscellaneous examples in different
cases, which are placed together because they are all of one
character : —Gujagadyen, child my. Babandyang, father my.
Gujagangunandyen, for my child. Babanduggunhung, for my
father. Gujagandidyen, with my child. Babandindidyen, with
my father.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify, and take the same
inflexions for number and case:
A large squirrel, Bunggu gaian (squirrel large)
A couple of large squirrels, Bunggulali gaianbulali
Several large squirrels, Bungguloala gaianbuloala.


Gaianburnung is a stronger way of expressing “large,” and has
the dual and plural suffixes as before. Sometimes burnung is used
by itself, as yuifi burnung, a man large. A man of unusual
stature is spoken of as yuiii burndal, a man very large.
Equality is expressed by Gulagang nhai—gulagang nham, short
this—short that; or Bundauariwulali, long both. Inferiority by
Gurnung nhai—nuggung nham, bad this—good that. There is a
sort of superlative, Gulagangang, very small; gumbuludhung, very
strong.
Words used to distinguish the sex of animals are treated as
adjectives, and inflected for number, as follows:
A kangaroo, male, Buru kaualgang
A couple of male kangaroos, Burulali kaualgangbulali
Several male kangaroos, Buruloala kaualgangbuloala
When used predicatively, as, you are stupid, adjectives can be
conjugated the same as an intransitive verb. Nuggung, means
good, and also well in health.
Present.
( Ist Person lam good, Nuggungai
j 2nd ~ Thou art good, Nuggumbi
( 3rd ~ He is good, Nuggung
(Ist Person JWe are good, inch Nuggungul
J ( W e are good, excl. Nuggungulling
| 2nd „ Ye are good, Nuggumbul
1 3rd „ They are good, Nuggumbula
( Ist Person <f are § OO( J’ incl ;
J | We are good, excl. Nuggunyilling
| 2nd „ Ye are good, Nuggunhur
3rd „ They are good, Nuggumba
Singular
Dual
Plural
Past.
| Ist Person I was good, Nuggungabambeh
Singular - 2nd ~ Thou wast good, Nuggumbibarabeh
( 3rd „ He was good, Nuggungbambeh
Future.
| Ist Person I will be good, Nuggungabarnbeng
Singular «. 2nd ~ Thou wilt be good, Huggumbibambeng
(3rd ~ He will be good, Nuggumbambeng


Another form of the future is as follows :
( Ist Person I will be good, Nuggungabambinaiungai
Singular 2nd „ Thou wilt be good, Nuggungabambinaiin
( 3rd ~ He will be good, Nuggungabambinaiang
It is thought unnecessary to give the duals and plurals of the
three last examples, which are formed in a similar way.
Imperative Mood—Present Tense.
Singular Ist Person IBe thou good, Nuggungung
Dual 2nd ~ Be ye good, Nuggungumbul
Plural 2nd „ Be ye good, Nuggungunhur
Future Tense.
Singular 3rd Person Let him be good, Nuggungwianda
Dual 3rd ~ Let them be good, Nuggungwiumbulaia
Plural 3rd ~ Let them be good, Nuggungwiunhaia
Conditional Mood—Present Tense.
| Ist Person I may be good, Nuggungamurra
Singular - 2nd „ Thou mayst be good, Nuggumbimurra
( 3rd ~ He may be good, Nuggumurra
Past Tense.
i Ist Per. Perhaps I was good, Nuggungamurra-bambeh
Sing. 2nd ~ Perhaps thou wast good, Nuggumbimurra-bambeh
( 3rd ~ Perhaps he was good, Nuggumurra-bambeh
It will be seen that in these two examples the words are the
same as in the present and past tenses respectively of the indicative
mood, with the addition of murra. The reader can easily prepare
a table showing the duals and plurals for himself. Dyua could
be used instead of murra. The negative is expressed by placing
the word ngambana before the adjective, as, Ngambana nuggungai,
not good am I.
The following is a set of suffixes which are often used with
adjectives and some intransitive verbs when referring to personal
qualities or attributes. They appear to add the meaning of
“really,” or “quite,” as, Nuggung-gaiingai, good I really am, or I
am quite well. Gumbul-gaiingul, we (dual incl.) are quite strong.
Nungaiangai, I slept very well, and so on. The attached table
contains the suffixes only.


Present.
Past.
| lst Person -gaiingai
- 2nd „ -gaiiii
(3rd „ -gaii
Singular
-gaiangai
-gaiabi
-gaia
(-Ist Person 1 -gaimgul, incl. -gaiangul incl.
3 | -gaimgulling, excl. -gaiangulling, excl
) 2nd „ -gaiimbul -gaiauul
3rd ~ gaiimbula -gaiauula
( l s t Person ( g a jj n y an g> incl - -gaianyang, incl.
J , ( -gaiinyilling, excl. -gaianyilling, excl.
j 2nd „ -gaiinhur -gaianhur
1 3rd „ -gaiinha -gaiaua
Dual
Plural
Future.
{lst Person -gaiinaiangai
2nd „ -gaiinaiah
3rd ~ -gaiinaiang
Singular
(Ist Person / -gaiinaiangul incl.
J ( -gannaiangulling, excl.
| 2nd ~ -gaiinaiambul
' 3rd ~ -gaiinaiambula
Dual
( Ist Person S' -gM™>ianyang, incl.
Plural J t -gannaianyilling, excl
| 2nd ~ -gaiinaianhur
3rd ~ -gaiinaianha
There is another set of suffixes, which qualify the word they
are attached to. Nuggung-wingai, conveys the meaning, “I am
fairly well, or getting better.”
Present.
Past.
/ Ist Person -wingai
< 2nd „ -win
(. 3rd „ -wi
Singular
-wiangai
-wiabi
-wia
( Ist Person / incl. -wiangul incl.
) ( -wmgulung, excl. -wiangulhng, excl
I 2nd ~ -wimbul -wiauul
3rd ~ -wimbula -wiauula
Dual
( let Person S - win y an ffi incL -wianyang, incl.
) ( -winyilling, excl. -wianyilling, excl.
) 2nd „ -winhur -wianhur
3rd ~ -winha -wiaua
Plural
„ -winha -wiaua


Future.
C lst Person -wunaiungai
■Singular } 2nd „ -wunaiail
(_ 3rd „ -wunaiang
/Ut Person S -wunaiangul, md.
_ . 1 l -wunaiangulling, excl
ua j 2nd ~ -wunaiambul
' 3rd „ -wunaiambula
(Ist Person I -wunaianyang, inel.
) | -wunaianyilhng, excl.
| 2nd ~ -wunaianhur
3rd „ -wunaianha
Pronouns.
Pronouns follow the verb or adjective which they qualify, and
are inflected for number and person. They comprise the nomin-
ative, possessive and objective cases, a few examples in each of
which will be given.
The following table exhibits the personal pronouns—the nomin-
ative being given in one column, and the nominative-agent in
another, on the same line to the right.
ilst Person I
2nd ~ Thou
3rd „ He
f lst Person { We,’ excl
Dual r> j xr
2nd ~ Ye
3rd ~ They
( Ist Person |^ e ' incl :
2nd „ I ?e e ’ eXC ‘
' 3rd „ They
Ngaiagang Ngaiagangga
Nyindigang Nyindigangga
Namarang Nyilligadangga
Ngulgang Ngulgangga
Ngunngulling Ngunngullingga
Bilgang Bilgangga
Nawulali Nyilliwulali
Nyulgang Nyulgangga
Nyunulling Nyunullingga
Nyirgang . Nyirgangga
Nawandalwali Nyillalla
An emphatic or reflexive variety of pronouns are as under:
11st Person Myself Ngaiagamirrang
2nd „ Thyself Nyindigamirran^
3rd ~ Himself Namirrang
N gaiagamirrang
Nyindigamirrang
Namirrang
, , p f Ourselves, inclusive Ngulgamirrang
„ . ) S erson i Ourselves, exclusive Ngungullamirrang
Ua | 2nd „ Yourselves Bilgamirrang
3rd „ Themselves Namirrambulali


( Ist Person ourselves > inclusive Nyulgamirrang
pj ura j J ) Ourselves, exclusive Nyunullimirrang
) 2nd „ Yourselves Nyirgamirrang
3rd ~ Themselves Nowandalmirrang
Relative Pronouns.—l have not observed any relative pronouns
—who, which, etc.—but their signification is obtained by such
expressions as the following : Yuin wurriin yengulaia—guggaiiri,
the man far walked—he is hungry (the man walked a long way
whichmakeshimhungry). Yuindhallugayendadha—warrangandya
gurrangamadadhan, the man yesterday went [away] a boomerang
stole he from me, that is, the man who went away yesterday stole
my boomerang.
Indefinite Pronouns.—Middhungal, another. Middhungalwulali
a couple of others. Middhungalwilligang, several others. Mid-
dhungalmirriung, some others. Mirruandalwali, no one.
The possessive pronouns, where only one object is referred to,
are as under:—
51st Person Mine Ygaiawooli
2nd „ Thine Nyinduwuli
3rd ~ His Indiwuii
Ist Person 1 ourS ’ inclusive Ngulganguli
( Ours, exclusive Ngunngullinguli
2nd ~ Yours Bilganguli
3rd ~ Theirs Indiwulaliwuli
Dual
t Ist Person i ourS ’ inclusive Nyulganguli
) I Ours, exclusive Nyunullinguli
j 2nd ~ Yours Nyirganguli
3rd „ Theirs Indalwuli
Plural
There are modifications of these possessives where two or more
articles are spoken of; thus, if a native desire to convey that a
couple of boomerangs, for example, are his property, he can say,
Ngaiawuliwulali. If he claim several, he says, Ngaiawulal; and
so on through all the persons and numbers. In other words, the
pronoun takes the same inflection for number as the noun to
which it refers. Another way of expressing ownership of two or
more objects, is to annex the dual or plural suffix to the name of
the thing possessed, as, Warranganbulali ngaiawuli, or, Warran-


ganbuloala ngaiawuli; that is, boomerangs-two mine, or, boomer-
angs-several mine, and so on. The reader is also referred to an
earlier page for the possessive suffixes to nouns, as, warrangandyen,
my boomerang.
pronouns,
“for me,” etc., in the dative case, are as follows:
Singular i
Ist Person For me
2nd „ For the
Ngaiagangunthung
Nyindigangunthung
Indiwunthung
For thee
3rd „ For him
( Ist Person / For us > incl - Ngulgangunthung
-p. i J ( For us, excl. Ngunngullingunthung
j 2nd ~ For ye Bilgangunthung
3rd „ For them Indiwulaliwunthung
, , p f For us, inch Nyulgangunthung
Plural > S erson 1 f o r us, excl. Nyunullingunthung
) 2nd ~ For ye Nyirgangunthung
■ 3rd ~ For them Indalwunthung
In the ablative case there are the following inflexions in the
pronoun signifying “from me,” etc.
| Ist Person From me Ngaiagandin
Singular ' 2nd ~ From thee Nyindigandin
( 3rd „ From him ISamarandin
ISamarandin
1 . p j From us, inclusive Ngulgandin
-p. , J S erson j jp rom us> exclusive ISgunngullingdin
Ua | 2nd „ From ye Bilgandin
3rd ~ From thou Nawulalin
, . p j From us, inclusive Nyulgandin
Plural ) S erson 1 From us, exclusive Nyunullindin
j 2nd ~ For ye Nyirgandin
3rd „ For them Nawandalwalin
There is another form, meaning “with me,” etc.
i Ist Person With me Ngaiagandi
Singular- 2nd „ With thee Nyindigandi
( 3rd ~ With him Namarandi
and so on through the dual and plural.
Demonstratives.—These are very numerous, and are inflected
for number, case and tense. They usually follow the word qualified.
We will commence with the nominative:—


Singular. Dual. Plural.
Nhai, this Nhaiwulali Nhaial
Nham, that Nhawulali Nhawulal
Narria, yon Narriawulali Narrial
These three terms have each several variations according to the
relative position of the object referred to in regard to the speaker.
Nom. Agent—lf the individual represented by the pronoun is
doing some act, nyilli is used, as nyilli bulmandhan, this (fellow)
strikes me. The dual is nyilliwulali, and plural nyillal. Nyilla,
instead of nyillee, is used in the singular in the past and future
tenses. If the person referred to is in the rear of the speaker,
nyillundyimung is used; if he is in front, nyillundya. There are
also several other modifications of the word to convey different
shades of meaning.
Possessive.—The possessive case takes the following suffixes, for
which one example will be sufficient:
Singular, Nhawuli, belonging to that (fellow).
Dual Is hawulaliwuli, belonging to those two.
Plural Nhalwuli, belonging to those all.
Dative Nhaialwunung, for all these (plural).
Ablative Nhaialdeen, from all these (plural).
Tense is shown in the following examples :—Present —Yuih
nyinyi, the man is here; Yuin nhameng, the man is there. Past
—Yuih nyinyawaia, the man was here; Yuin nhawaia, the man
was there. Future—Yuih nyinyawawang, the man will be here;
Yuih nhawawang, the man will be there. Nyiniwuli, belonging
to here (this place). Yawali, that one also. Yawalingai, I also.
Nyilligarangga, that fellow also (did it). Ngai, to here; ngundyin,
from here. Mungandin, from this place.
Interrogatives.—The interrogative, Ngunnung nyinyim ? “who
there 1 ?” varies with the number of persons referred to:—Singular,
ngunnung ; dual, ngunnumbulali; plural ngunnumbuloala.
If “who” refer to an act described in a transitive verb, it
becomes ngunnungga, and changes with the number of persons


acted upon in the objective case:—singular, Ngunnungga nham,
who him (struck, threw at, etc.); dual, Ngunnunggawulung
nawulali, who those, etc.; plural, Ngunnunggadhunnung nawulali-
wuli, who those, etc.
It also varies in the nominative case if the performers be one
or more:—singular, Ngunnungga, who (struck, threw at, etc.);
dual, Ngunnunggawul who two (struck, threw at, etc.); plural,
Ngunnungganhur, who several (struck, threw at, etc.).
There is a possessive form in each number : —singular, Ngun-
nunguli, whose is this ? dual, Ngunnunguliwulali, whose are these
(two)? plural, Ngunnungulal, whose are these (several)?
The word can also be conjugated for number and person. An
example in the singular will be sufficient :
C Ngunnungadhan, who me (struck, spoke to, etc.)
Singular l Ngunnunganyin, who thee (struck, spoke to, ect.)
yNgunnunga, who him (struck, spoke to, etc.)
Ngunnungamurra, who might it be ? Dative, Ngunnunggun-
hung, who for? Ablative, Ngunnundin, who from. Ngunnung
warrangandhurra, who has the boomerang? Ngunnunganyin gaia,
who thee told? Nominative, Mingang, what is that? Mingangga,
what did that? Possessive, Minganguli, what belonging to.
Dative, Mingangunhung, what for? Mingarang, how many?
Mingang bumbadi, what wantest thou? Winggala, which one?
Waianha nuggung, which is good?
This word can also be conjugated :—Mingangudyen, what for
me (struck thou); Mingangubi, what for him (struck thou); Min-
gangudbungalin, what for us two (struck thou); Mingangudben-
yinnin, what for us several (struck thou); and so on.
Verbs
Verbs have three numbers, three persons in each number, and
three tenses. The moods are the indicative, imperative, and
conditional. The verb stem and a pronominal suffix are embodied
in one word, which is inflected for number and person. This is-
done with each of the tenses, as in the following conjugation of
the verb, “to strike or beat.”


Active Voice—lndicative Mood.
Present Tense.
C Ist Person I strike Bulmaingai
Singular ' 2nd „ Thou strikest Bulmaih
(3rd „ He strikes Bulmai
Bulmai
{ Ist Person \ strike ’ inc ! us ! ve Bulmaingul _
j) ua j ) (We strike, exclusive Bulmaingulling
i 2nd ~ Ye strike Bulmainbool
3rd ~ They strike Bulmainboola
They strike Bulmainboola
f Ist Person | strike > inclusi . ve Bulmainyang
Plural ' (We strike, exclusive Bulmainyilling
1 2nd ~ Ye strike Bulmainhoor
' 3rd ~ They strike Bulmainha
Past Tense.
| Ist Person I struck Bulmaiangai
Singular- 2nd ~ Thou struckest Bulmaiabbi
( 3rd „ He struck Bulmaia
i Person struck > inclusive Bulmaiangul
j) ua l ! | We struck, exclusive Bulmaiangulling
I 2nd ~ Ye struck Bulmaiaual
3rd ~ They struck Bulmaiauala
( Ist Person 1 struck, inclusive Bulmaianyang
Plural <( (We struck, exclusive Bulmaianyilling
J 2nd ~ Ye struck Bulmaianhoor
3rd ~ They struck Bulmaiaua
They struck Bulmaiaua
If two or more persons were struck, we could say:—Bulmaian
gumbula, I struck two; Bulmaiangandhunnang, I struck several
Future Tense.
f Ist Person. I will strike Bulmangai
Singular j 2nd „ Thou wilt strike Bulman
( 3rd „ He will strike Bulmang
( Ist Person <f strike ’ inck Bulmangul
j) ua l J (We will strike, excl. Bulmangulling
| 2nd „ Ye will strike Bulmanbul
3rd ~ They will strike Bulmanbula
j Ist Person ! lf T e w }]} strike > inck Bulmanyang
Plural ' (We will strike, excl. Bulmanyilling
| 2nd „ Ye will strike Bulmanhur
3rd » They will strike Bulmanha


If the intention were to beat more than one, we could say:
Bulmangambulaia, I will beat those two; Bulmangandhunnang, I
will beat all those.
Imperative Mood—Present Tense.
Singular 2nd Person Strike thou Bulmara
Dual 2nd „ Strike ye Bulmaraual
Plural 2nd „ Strike ye Bulmaranhur
The negative form of this tense is as follows:
Singular Strike thou not, Bulmambin
Dual Strike you not, Bulmambimbul
Plural Strike you not, Bulmambinhur
Future Tense.
Singular 3rd Person Let him strike Bulmaianda
Dual 3rd ~ Let them strike Bulmambulai
Plural 3rd „ Let them strike Bulmanhaia
Another form of the verb is :
Let me strike him, Bulmurrungandha
Let us two strike him, Bulmulngul
Let us all strike him, Bulmulnyang
Conditional Mood—Present Tense.
( Ist Person I may strike Bulmaingamurra
- 2nd „ Thou mayest strike Bulmaingmurra
( 3rd „ He may strike Bulmaimurra
Singular
Past Tense.
/ Ist Person I may have struck Bulmaiangamurra
Singular j 2nd „ Thou mayest have struck, Bulmaiabbimurra
( 3rd ~ He may have struck Bulmaiamurra
The last two examples are the same as the present and past
tenses respectively of the indicative mood, with the addition of
murra, The dual and plural numbers are formed in the same
manner. Dyua is also used as a suffix, instead of murra, in all
the above examples.
Passive Voice.
Transitive verbs have no passive voice, but its place is supplied
by changing the sentence from the passive to the active form, —


the object in the passive becoming the subject in the active voice.
The meaning of the sentence : a fish was caught by the woman,
is rendered : the woman caught a fish—ngurrunggalla dhun.
mandha.
Middle Voice—lndicative Mood.
Present Tense.
Singular Ist Person I beat myself, Bulmaiilingai
Dual Ist „ We, inch, beat ourselves, Bulmaiilingulling
Plural Ist „ We, inch, beat ourselves, Bulmaiilinyang
Past Tense.
Sing. Ist Per. I have beaten myself Bulmaiilyangai
Dual Ist „ We, inch, have beaten ourselves, Bulmaiilyangul
Plural Ist „ We, inch, have beaten ourselves, Bulmaiilyanyang
Future Tense.
Sing. Ist Per. I will beat myself Bulmaiilungai
Dual Ist ~ We, inch, will beat ourselves, Bulmaiilungul
Plural Ist „ We, inch, will beat ourselves, Bulmaiilunyang
There are forms of the verb for the other persons, but it is
thought the foregoing are sufficient to illustrate the rules.
Imperative Mood.
Singular Beat thyself Bulmaiiling
Dual Beat yourselves, Bulmaiilingbul
Plural Beat yourselves, Bulmaiilinhur
The negative is, Strike not thyself, Bulmaiilingbing.
Reciprocal.—There is a reciprocal form of the verb which is of
course restricted to the dual and plural, as follows:
We two, inch, beat each other, Bulmullangul
We all, inch, beat each other, Bulmullanyang
You two beat each other,
You all beat each other
They two beat each other,
They all beat each other,
Bulmullumbul
Bulmullanhur
Bulmullainbula
Bulmullainha
Modifications of the verb to convey different shades of meaning
are very numerous, as will be apparent from the following few


examples, which are in the past tense, the present and future
being omitted.
C Ist Person He struck me, Bulmaiadhan
Singular ) 2nd „ He struck thee Bulmaianying
(3rd ~ He struck him Bulmaianyilla
!lst Person s^ us > Bulmaiangullung
\ He struck us, excl. Bulmaiangulleen
2nd „ He struck ye Bulmaiaualung
3rd „ He struck them Bulmaiaulung
' Ist Person <f us > Bulmaianyannung
pj ura j ) ( He struck us, excl. Bulmaianyannin
) 2nd „ He struck ye Bulmaianthurung
1 3rd „ He struck them Bulmaiadhunnung
When the striking is done by two persons, the pronominal
suffix is varied :
C Ist Person They two struck me, Bulmaiaulaian
Singular < 2nd „ They two struck thee, Bulmaiaulanying
(. 3rd ~ They two struck him, Bulmaiaula
When several persons join in doing the beating another variation
in the verb takes place :
( Ist Person They all struck me, Bulmaiauaian
Singular ' 2nd ~ They all struck thee, Bulmaiauanying
( 3rd „ They all struck him, Bulmaiaua
The two last examples can also be conjugated for dual and plural.
When two or more are the recipients of the beating, the form
is as follows, one example only being given in each number:
Singular I struck two Bulmaiangambula
Dual We, inclusive, struck two, Bulmillangul
Plural We, inclusive, struck several, Bulmillanyilling
The dative case is thus indicated by the verbal suffix:—
, C 2nd Person I gave to thee, Bindaguii
in & u ar | 3 r( j I gave to them, Bindyangai
Dual 1 2nd -^ erson I gave to ye, Bindyangambulung
( 3rd „ I gave to them, Bindyangambula
Plural i 2nd P erson T gave to ye, Bindyanganthurung
( 3rd ~ I gave to them, Bindyangandhunnung
( Ist Person He gave to me, Bindadhan
Singular 2nd ~ He gave to thee, Bindanying
( 3rd „ He gave to him, Bindaia
J—Nov. 6,1901.


and so on through the dual and plural numbers. Bindich bingalin,
do not give to us.
Other verbs contain an ablative meaning:
, J 2nd Person I took from thee, Bundaiagun
m & u ar g r( j „ j f rom him, Bundaiangai
Dual I*^ P erson I took from ye, Bundaiangambulung
( 3rd ~ I took from them, Bundaiangambula
Plural i P erson I took from ye, Bundaianganthurung
) 3rd ~ I took from them, Bundaiangandhunnung
| Ist Person He took from me, Bundaiadhan
Singular-' 2nd ~ Hetook from thee, Bundaianying
( 3rd ~ He took from him, Bundaia
the conjugation being continued for the dual and plural.
The verb takes an inflection for the same number as the object
noun in the following phrases :
A squirrel saw I, Bunggu nandangai
A pair of squirrels saw I, Bunggulali nandangambula
Several squirrels saw I, Bungguloala nandangandhunnung
The number of the verb agrees with the nominative in such
expressions as, We (dual inclusive) saw a squirrel, Bunggu nan-
dangul; we (plural inclusive) saw a squirrel, Bunggu nandanyang.
Verbs are also modified to express a negative meaning:
Strike not thou me Bulmumbindyen
Strike not us (dual exclusive) Bulmumbinbungullin
Strike not us (plural exclusive) Bulmumbinbenyunnin
Come not thou to me Yendabindyen
Come not you (dual) to me Yendabinbuldyen
Come not you (plural) to me, Yendabinhurdyen
Go not thou away Yenbin
Go not you (dual) away Yenbimbul
Go not you (plural) away Yenbinhur
Another negative form is as follows:
I struck not Bulmullanganangai
Thou struckest not, Bulmullanganabi
He struck not, Bulmullangana,
and ttMs inflection continues through the dual and plural.


Prepositions.
Expressions containing the equivalents of our prepositions are
sometimes independent words, but consist chiefly of the incorpor-
ation of verbs or pronouns with nouns and adjectives, which give
a prepositional meaning. This can be better illustrated by a few
short sentences:
Burumbadindhan, it is facing, or in front of me. Bulgadyanda,
at my back. Nguraidyen, at my camp. Nunganandyi, round
this way. Nunganandyimung, around (behind me). Narrimung,
over yonder.
Gundulali burrumunbula, two trees between ; that is, between
two trees.
Warrungalwundu dhurragangga, on the other side of the creek;
Nowundubulla dhurragangga, on this side of the creek. Bulla-
wundu, more this way.
Mudyeri warrungaldin bungaiilaiangai, the canoe from the other
side I paddled, or, I paddled across in the canoe.
Nunganandyi wurrijanthung gundu, around at the farther side
of the tree.
Mudjewuru nhari dharratbaiangai, brush yonder through went
I, or, I went through yonder brush (dense scrub).
Buru ntha bullawarri-mirriri ngullai, kangaroo that on the hill-
top sits. Bullawarriu dhullibaingai, the hill up go I. Bullawar-
•riin wurwaingai, the hill down go I. Bullawarree warrungalee
wowlngi, the hill along the side of go I, or, I am going along the
side of the hill.
Nunganandyi burrima yalwaingai, around the ironbark tree go I.
Gundu llilli bowaiiingai, tree this up I climb, or, I am climbing
up this tree. Yarrawangga narri irribaingai, cave that Igo into.
The names of the points of the compass are: gurru, north;
kwia, south; bulu, east; wugga, west. Gurruwundu is northerly
from any specified spot; kwiawundu is southerly; bulu wundu is
•easterly; and wuggawundu westerly. There are also names for


the intermediate points. Frequently a native will state the loca-
tion of anything by its compass direction from a known tree or
other determinate point.
Some prepositions can be conjugated for number and person, as
in the following example:
Ist Person Behind me
Yellungadyen
Yellungangun
Yellunganthung
Singular j 2nd ~ Behind thee
( 3rd ~ Behind him
1 p j Behind us inclusive Yellungangulling
j s erson j |3 e hi n d us exclusive Yellungangalin
j 2nd ~ Behind ye Yellungawulung
' 3rd ~ Behind them Yellungawulanhu
p j Behind us inclusive Yellunganyunnung^
J s erson -j us exclusive Yellunganyunnin
) 2nd ~ Behind ye Yellunganhurung
3rd ~ Behind them Yellungadhunnung
Dual
Plural
Adverbs.
Like the prepositions, adverbs consist of separate words as well
as being expressed by means of verbs which are modified in their
terminations so as to convey an adverbial meaning.
Of time.—Dyedyungalla, a month or moon. Dyedyungbulali,
two months or moons. Dyedyung, the moon. Nyillamung, now..
Burrenhung, soon. Burriwalganga, some time. Dhalluga,
yesterday. Dhadyilam or dhallugawal, day before yesterday.
Nhauwai, to-day. Dhadyawarri, long ago. Dhadyam, by and
bye. Burriwurri, this forenoon. Burriu, to-morrow. Burrinhung,.
day after to-morrow. Dhurrandhurung, always.
Affirmation and negation.—Ngai, yes ; ngargudhung, certain
ngaiang or mirra, no; murrungai, none I have; mirruguyung,.
nothing; ngamurra, perhaps.
Interrogation.—llling, how 1 ? Illingjaiabi, how didst thou do it?
This word can be inflected for number and person: Illingbi
mandha, how didst thou catch (a fish, etc.?) Illingbul mandha,
how did you two catch (a fish, etc.?) Illinhur mandha, how did
you several catch (a fish, etc.)? Yununggubi yenda, when didst


thou go? Yunnunggu yenbang, when will he go? Waddha,
where? Waddhawia, wliere is he? Waddhainbi mandha, where
didst thou catch it? * Waddhana ngura, where is the camp ?
Waddhian baulaiabi, whence earnest thou ?
This word can also be inflected for person and number
11st Person Waddhungai, where am I ?
2nd ~ Waddhubi where art thou ?
3rd ~ Waddhu where is he ?
and so on through the dual and plural.
Another
form of the word is as under :
Ist Person Wagungai, where go I ?
Singular
2nd ~ Wagubi,
3rd ~ Wagu
where goest thou?
where goes he?
Yet another form is “Which way shall I go?
| Ist Person Waddhawauwangai, which way shall I go?
•Singular < 2nd ~ Waddhawauwain, which way shalt thou go 1 ?
( 3rd ~ Waddhawai, which way shall he go?
Another form still is as follows:
j Ist Person Waddhawaiangai, where have I been?
2nd ~ Waddhawaiabi, where hast thou been 1 ?
(_3rd ~ Waddhawaia, where has he been 1
These examples can all be conjugated for the dual and plural.
Of number: Middhunga, once. Bullaru, twice. Mingarang,
'how many times ?
Of order: Mirramirrang, first. Burru, between or in the
midst. Nguddhunbulali, one on each side. Yellungali, last.
Nyadyerri, back.
Of quantity : Burramurrung, much or plenty. Mirragangang,
a little. Nauwallung, enough. Burramurrandhurrabi—mirra-
guyungai, thou hast plenty—l have none. Mirraguyumbi —bur-
rumurrundhurrangai, thou hast nothing—l have plenty. Mirra-
gang yundingai, some left I have, or, I have a little left. Burra-
murrung yundingai, plenty I have left. Yukun, like.
Quality: Janboi, slowly. Gurnumbungai, badly. Nuggum-
bungai, well. Idhanyi, quickly.


Adverbs are compared in a similar way to that used in the-
comparison of adjectives:—Yuiii nhai jiiftbai—ngurrunggal nhai
jimbowuddhumbai, man this thirsty—woman this very thirsty,,
or, the woman is more thirsty than the man. Bunbari nhai
jauaierra, ma yuiii nhai irrandaia. Boy this very swift, because
man this he overtook, or, this boy is faster than the man, because
he overtook him.
Conjunctions.
There are very few conjunctions in the language. \Ve often
find an erratic syllable, ba, with its euphonic variants ma, ya, etc.,
interposed between two words to prevent hiatus, and which
also serves at times as a conjunction equivalent to “and” or
“because.”
Interjections and Exclamations.
The use of these is limited. Gwak ! is equivalent to “look
out.” Ngatkaiang means “take care.” Yukkai is an exclamation
of surprise. Ngang ngang is about equivalent to “is that so.”
Yai! is calling attention. Ngaiaruin! you fellows! Ngaiung,
calling to one person. Any vocative can be inflected for number,
according as one, a pair, or several, are called.
Numerals,
Middhung, one; bullar, two. The ordinals are, Middhunga,.
once; bullaru, twice. Wawulli, a few.
After the fourth line on page 134, add the following :
The adjective takes the agent or possessive suffix belonging to
the qualified noun; thus: Bunggu gaiandyu guraura gulanya, a
squirrel large an opossum killed. Yuiiiburnungguli mirriganhung,.
the big man’s dog.
The dative and ablative cases are expressed in a similar manner,
by their respective suffixes to the adjective. These remarks apply,
mutatis mutandis , to the adjectives in the Gundungurra and
Dharruk languages.


APPENDIX.
The Gundungurra Language.
The Gundungurra tribes occupied the country to the west of
the Thurrawal and Dharruk, as far as Goulburn, where they
adjoined the Ngunawal tribes. An abstract of the grammar of
the language is now supplied, to show its affinity to the Thurrawal,
being the result of my own investigations among the Gundungurra
blacks.
Nouns. —The dual and plural of nouns are shown by suffix, 1
particles: Singular, Wille, an opossum. Dual, Willewulali, a pair
of opossums. Plural, Willedyargang, several opossums.
In the human family different words are used for the masculine
and feminine, as, Murrin, a man; bullan, a woman. Bubal, a
boy; mullangan, a girl. Another name for a man is, baual.
Among animals gender is distinguished by placing gaual or
gumbaii after the name of the male, and dhuruk after that of the
female, thus: Gula gumbaii, a buck bear; gula dhuruk, a female
bear. Gumbaii and dhuruk take the same inflection for number
as the noun with which they are used.
This language has the same cases as the Thurrawal, some only
of which will be exemplified: There are two forms of the nomin-
ative case, one merely naming the object at rest, as, Murrin
ngamburamaii, the man sleeps. When the man is doing some act,
a suffix is applied, as, Murrindya gula wobburah, the man a bear
struck. The example last given also serves to show the accusative,
because in that expression no change takes place in the word gula.
In some phrases, however, there is an inflection, as, Berraga
yerrimangga, lam throwing a boomerang; Bubal ft in berraga
yellimunnin, boy this a boomerang will carry. Again, Baualla
berra bubalngura yerririn, a man a boomerang at a boy threw.
In this example the remote object, bubal, the boy, takes a suffix.
In the possessive case the name of the possessor and that of the
object possessed each take a suffix: Bubalngu ngauangung, a boy’s
mother. Baualngu berrawung, a man’s boomerang. Mirrigangu


gudhawung, a bitch’s puppy. In the possessive case, and in the
nominative too, the suffixed particle varies with the termination
of, and the vowel sounds contained in, the word to which it is
attached. Moreover, these suffixes are applied to the simple
nominative form of the noun, not the agent nominative.
The name of any object over which possession can be exercised
by a native is subject to inflection for number and person by
means of possessive suffixes: Berradya, my boomerang (berra).
Berranyi, thy boomerang. Berrung, his boomerang; and so on
through the dual and plural. In the dative case they say, Ngurane
yerrabi, to the camp go thou. The ablative form is, Ngurajea
yerrabi, from the camp go thou.
Adjectives. —Adjectives are declined for the dual and plural,
and are placed after the nouns they qualify:—Wirria buggarabang,
an iguana large; Wirriawulali buggarabangbulali, a pair of iguanas
large; Wirriadyargangbuggarabandyargang, several iguanas large.
Comparison is effected in a manner similar to that employed in
the Thurrawal; and certain adjectives, when used as predicates,
can be conjugated like intransitive verbs, the same as in that
language.
Pronouns. —Pronouns have person, number, and case, but are
without gender. Some of the nominative and possessive pronouns
are as under:—
i I Gulangga Mine Gulangguya
Bing. } Thou Gulanjee Thine Gulangunyi
( He, she Dhanuladhu His, her Dhanulangu
( We, incl. Gulanga Ours, incl. Gulangalung
Dual We, Gulangalung Ours excl. Gulangalangun
\ You Gulambu Yours Gulambulung
V They Dhanudyula Theirs Dhanudyulangu
/ We, incl. Gulambanyan Ours, inch Gulanyanung
Plural J e ’ Gulambanyilla Ours, excl. Gulanyanungun
j You Gulambanhu Yours Gulanhurung
(They Dhanujimalang Theirs Dhanujimalangu
The following are examples in the ablative case :
(With me Gulanguria From me Gulangarajia
With thee Gulangurunyi From thee Gulangaranyi
With him Dhanulangura From him Dhanulangaraji


Emphatic personal pronouns are:
(Ist Person Myself Mittimbaldya
Singular } 2nd „ Thyself Mittimbalnyi
(_ 3rd ~ Himself Mittimbalgung
The three last examples can be continued through the dual and
plural.
Some of the interrogatives are:—Nominative—Unnaga, who!
TJnnagawula, who (two)! Unnagamulan, who (several)? Possessive
—Unnagangu, whose (is this)! Ablative—Unnagangureji, who
from! The word can be inflected for number and person:—
Unnagajiba, who art thou! Unnagaiau, who are you (two)! Unna-
gamillanhu, who are those (several)! Nominative —Minya, what!
Minyamanja, what’s the matter! Dative—Minyanniba, what for?
Ablative—Minyangura, what with ?
The following are a few of the demonstratives: —Nominative —
Nyin, this ; Dhanu, that; Nidyula, those two. Possessive —
Nyingulangul, belonging to this ; Dhanugulangu, belonging to
that; Waranalangu, belonging to you; Nidyulangu, belonging to
those two. Ablative—Nyingulangura, with this ; Nguna, here ;
Ngununggula, belonging to here.
There are no well defined relative pronouns—the sense of the
relative being obtained as already illustrated in the Thurrawal.
Verbs. —Verbs have the same numbers, persons, tenses and
moods as those of the Thurrawal language, and although the
suffixed particles differ, they are dealt with in a similar manner,
as represented in the following table of the conjugation of the
verb “to sit.”
The verbal terminations vary to show that the act has only just
Teen done, that it happened some little time ago, that there was
a continuance in its performance, and so on. If a native say, “ I
threw (a boomerang, for example), he may use any of the follow-
ing forms of the verb, according to what he wishes to express :
Yerrimuingga, yerribalimuingga, yerriringga, yerribaliringga, etc.,
all meaning “I threw.”


Indicative Mood.
Present, X sit, etc. Past, I sat, etc. Future, I will sit, etc,
do j Ist Per. Ngullamanya Ngullamuringga Ngullamuningga
•S 2nd „ Ngullamanji Ngullamurinji Ngullamuninji
( 3rd ~ Ngullaman Ngullamurifi Ngullamunin
Present, We sit, etc. Past, We sat, etc.
( Ist Per I Ngullamanga, inch Ngullamuringa, inch
g J I Ngullamangalung, excl. Ngullamuringalung, excl
ft ) 2nd ~ Ngullamanbu Ngullamurinbu
v 3rd „ Ngullamanbula Ngullamurinbula
Future, We will sit, etc.
( Ist Person j inclusive.
p ua l ' ( JNgullamuningalung, excl.
) 2nd „ Ngullamuninhu
V 3rd ~ Ngnllamuninbula
Present, We sit, etc. Past, We sat, etc.
,-h ( l s t Per i Ngullamanyan, inch Ngullamurinyan, inch
2 j ( Ngullamanyilla, excl. Ngullamurinyilla, excl.
g ) 2nd ~ Ngullamanhu Ngullamurarinhu
' 3rd ~ Ngullamandyulung Ngullamurindyulung
Future, We will sit, etc.
l Ist Person / Ngullamuninyan, inclusive
pi nr „i J } Ngullamuninyilla, exclusive
\ 2nd ~ Ngullamuninhu
l 3rd „ Ngullamunindyulung
The negative is formed by infixing the word muga between the
verb stem and the suffix, thus:—
( Ngullamugamanya, I sit not;
Singular j Ngullamugamanji, Thou sittest not;
( Ngullamugaman He or she sits not;
and so on through all the persons, numbers, and tenses.
Imperative Mood—Present Tense.
Singular, 2nd Person Sit thou, Ngullai
Dual ~ Sit you, Ngullaiul
Plural ~ Sit you, Ngullaianhur
The conditional mood, and also the middle and passive voices
are omitted, being similar in structure to those of the Thurrawal.
The numerous modifications of verbs to convey different shades of
meaning are also analogous to those of the language mentioned.


Prepositions. —As in the Thurrawal dialect, prepositions may
be either separate words, or consist of modifications of verbs to
give them a prepositional meaning. Several prepositions can be
inflected for number and person, thus:—
{Willingaia, behind me (in the rear)
Willinganyi, behind thee
Willingawung, behind him.
Adverbs. —These consist of independent words and modifications
of adjectives and verbs. A few interrogatives are: Wanjan, how?
Wannambalang, how many? Ngundani, where art thou ? Ngundaba
where is it? Some adverbs can be inflected, as follows:
INgundinia, where go I
Ngundininyi, where goest thou
Ngundiniung, where goes he
The dual and plural numbers are omitted in this and the pre-
ceding example for want of space.
Conjunctions and interjections have their places in the language.
Numerals. —Meddung, one ; Bulla, two ; Irran, a large number.
The Dharruk Language.
The Dharruk speaking people adjoined the Thurrawal on the
north, extending along the coast to the Hawkesbury River, and
inland to what are now Windsor, Penrith, Campbelltown, and
intervening towns. A cursory outline of the Dharruk grammar,
together with a short vobabulary of some of the most important
words in general use, may be of some value to comparative phil-
ology. This grammar and vocabulary have been compiled by me
from the lips of old natives acquainted with the language.
Nouns. —Number —Nouns have the singular, dual, and plural
numbers : —Wirriga, an iguana; Wirrigabula, a couple of iguanas;
Wirrigadyarralang, several iguanas.
Gender.—Dhullai, a man; Dyin, a woman; Wungar, a boy ;
Durungaling, a girl. The gender of animals is denoted by an
additional word, kaual for the male, and wiring for the female, as
Walaru kaual, a buck wallaroo; Walaru wiring, a doe wallaroo.


Case.—The nominative case has two forms, one of which simply
names the person or thing, as Wungar, a boy. The other form
represents the subject, or the instrument, in action, e g., Wungara
■bumarangga kerraiba, the boy a boomerang threw. Here the
name of the boy and that of the instrument each take a suffix.
Again, when the instrument is in the accusative case, a suffix is
•employed, as, Boomerangga kerraibadya, a boomerang threw I.
Moreover, these suffixes fluctuate according to the termination of
the word to which they are attached.
The possessive case has two suffixes, like the Thurrawal, as,
Dyingu kurungbi, a woman’s child (kurung). Any article over
which possession can be asserted is subject to inflection for number
and person by means of suffixes, analogously to the Thurrawal
and Gundungurra, examples of which are not considered necessary.
Adjectives. —An adjective takes the same inflection as the
•qualified noun, and follows it:—Ngunufi kaual, a flying-fox, male;
Ngununbula kaualbula, a couple of male flying-foxes; Ngunun-
dyarralang kaualdyarralang, several male flying-foxes. The suffix
is often omitted in one of the words, the last one generally taking
the inflection.
The comparison of adjectives, and their conjugation like intran-
sitive verbs in certain cases, is analogous to the Thurrawal.
Pronouns. —The following are some of the nominative pronouns
in the singular—the dual and plural being passed over for want
of space, in this and undermentioned examples. The simple
nominative is given in the first column, and the nominative-agent
in the second.
( Ist Person JSTgaia Ngaiadya
Singular- 2nd ~ Nyindi Nyindidya
( 3rd ~ Nanu Nanudya
Examples of the possessive pronouns are as under:
f Ist Person Mine Jannunggai
Singular ' 2nd ~ Thine Nyinnunggai
( 3rd ~ His Nannunggai
Dative—Jannawigu, for me, and so on. Ablative—Jannawi,
•with me, and so on.


The following are some interrogative pronouns:—Nominative,
Nyan, who? Nyanda, who (did it)? Possessive, Nyannungai,
whose is this? Dative, Nyangu, who for? Nominative, Ming,
what? Dative, Mingangun, what for.
Verbs. —The verb has three numbers, with the usual persons,
tenses and moods. There are also two- forms in the first person
of the dual and plural to express the inclusion or exclusion of the
individual addressed. As the manner of conjugating these verbs
is substantially the same as in the Thurrawal, exigencies of space
compel me to omit them.
Adverbs. —Yellun, how? Wattungga, where? Wilguja, whither?'
Kabu, by and bye; Yuin, yes; Beal, no; Murraga, perhaps;
Burrapur, to morrow.
Prepositions, Conjunctions and Interjections. —Space will not
admit of examples of these.
Numerals. —One, wagulwai; two, buler ; three, buriwai ; four,,
wagulwurri, apparently a derivation from “one-three.”
Every part of speech which can be inflected for person and
number in the Thurrawal language can be treated in a similar
manner in the Dharruk.
Vocabulary of
Dharruk Words.
The Family.
The Human Body.
A man, dhulli
Head, kobbara
An old man, kaianyung
Forehead, ngurran
Husband, mullaming
Hair of head, gittan
Clever man, kuraji
Beard, yarring
Child, kurung
Eye, mibberai
Small boy, wungar
Nose, nuga
Boy carried in bag (on mother’s
Neck, kungga
back), wungara juguma
Ear, kuri
A woman, dyin
Mouth, mundu
Old woman, wiring
Lips, willin
Wife, dyinmang
Teeth, Yira
Girl, durungaling
Breast (female), ngubbung
Father, bianya
Navel, mumbirri
Mother, waianya
Belly, bindhi
Decrepit old person, harabundi
Rump, kurpa


Anus, bungading
Flank, binning
Back, buyu
Penis, winji
Erection, wathuk
Testicles, karau
Vulva, mundura
Hair on pudendse, nguruguri
Urine, yillabil
Excrement, kuni
Sexual desire, kuthaling
Copulation, nguttatha
Masturbation, ganmillutthi
Venereal, midjung
Arm, nurung
Hand, dhummar
Thigh, dhurra
Knee, kuruk
Foot, dunna
Paunch, kurrema
Blood, mula
Fat, kurai
Bone, jara
Inanimate Natural Objects.
Sun, kuu
Moon, jillak
Stars, kimperwali
Orion’s Belt, dhungagil
Pleiades, dhinburri
Sunshine, bunnal
Thunder, murungal
Lightning,jerraral
Rain, muruku
Dew, gillabin
Fog, kurpun
Frost, dalara
Hail, kuruwillang
Fresh water, bado
The ground, dubbar
Mud, millun
A stone, kiber
Sand, marang
Light, killi
Darkness, minnek
Heat, yuroka
Coldness, duggara
Camp, ngurra
Fire, kwiang
Hut, gunji
Smoke, kudjal
Food, ngunnuii
Day, burriang
Night, minnek
Morning, burpigal
Evening, waragal
A splinter, dhuraga
Hill, bulga
Grass, durawai
Bark shed by gum and other
trees, kurrung-durrung
Hole in a tree, kumir
Leaves of trees, jirang
Bird’s nest, ngurra
Eggs, kubbin
Honey, kudyung
Edible grub, burradhun
Pathway, muru
Shadow of a tree, bulu
Tail of animal, dun
Mammals.
Native bear, kulamafi
Dog, mirri
Opossum, wali
Kangaroo-rat, kanaming
Native-cat (black and white)
bulungga
Native-cat (black and yellow),
mu raging
Reck wallaby, wollabi
Flying fox, ngunuh
Bandicoot, burraga
Flying squirrel, bangu
Sugar squirrel, chubbi
Ringtail opossum, bukari
Kangaroo, buru
Wallaroo, bitthang or wolara
Birds.
Birds collectively, bujan
Crow, wagun
Laughing jackass, kukundi
Curlew, warebun


Quail, moumbi
Eaglehawk, burumurring
Emu, mariang
•Common magpie, karuk
Black magpie, wibbung
Black duck, yurungai
Mopoke, binnit
Night owl, budhawa
Bronze wing pigeon, kutging
Lark, murrajulbi
Rosella parrot, bunduluk
Blue Mountain parrot, warin
• Greenleek parrot, kuma
Parrakeet, jirrang
Common hawk, kutthawai
King-fisher, jirramba
Pee-wee, birrerik
Plover, burranjarung
Crane, durali
White cockatoo, kirrawe
Fishes.
Perch, wuggara
Sprat, kumbara
Eel, burra
Gudgeon, duru
Turtle, kutukulung
Muscle, juggung
Reptiles.
Iguana, wirriga
Water lizard, bidjiwong
Sleepy lizard, muggadung
Small lizard, bunburra
Black snake, jirrabity
Frog, kung-gung
Brown snake, murragauan
Insects.
Large locust, bulla
Small locust, jirrabirrin
Blow fly, marang
Louse, bundyu
Nit of louse, jagara
. Jumper ant, juljul
Bull-dog ant (red), kut-mut
Bull-dog ant (black), wuggajin
. Centipede, jingring
Mosquito, dyura
Scorpion, dundi
Green-head ant, kunuma
Trees and Plants.
Any leaning tree, bulbi
Any dead tree, kwibul
Any hollow tree, birreko
Ti-tree, (soft bark), budjor
Ti-tree (prickly), bunya
Apple-tree, bunda
Stringybark, buran
Wattle, wattungulle
Ironbark (broad leaf), dirrabari
„ (narrow leaf), muggargru
Cherry tree, kwigan
Gum-tree, yarra
Jeebung, mambara
Corkwood, kulgargru
Bullrushes, baraba
Yam, midin
Weapons , etc.
Tomahawk, mogo
Koolamin, kungun
Yamstick, kunni
Spear, of wood, kummai
Spear, reed, wari
Spear-thrower, womra
Spear-shield, hilamong
Waddy-shield, millathunth
Club with knob, kuburra
Club, plain, bundi
Boomerang, bumaran
Net bag, juguma
Adjectives.
Alive, muthung
Dead, baletti
Large, mari
Small, ngurrang
Tall or long, kurare
Low or short, munal
Good, ngubaty
Bad, kuraji
Thirsty, durral
Red, jarri
White, burrakutti


Black, butu
Full, buruck
Quick, baro
Slow, wurral
Blind, muilming
Deaf, kumbarobalong
Strong, bulbwul
Valiant, muttong
Afraid, jerrun
Right, budyer
Wrong, kuraji
Tired, wunal
Blunt, as an edge, mundhagud
Fat, kurai
Lean, jarra jarra
Cold, tuggara
Angry, kular
Sleepy, nungga
Glad, mujar
Sorry, ngandu
Greedy, jirra
Grey-headed, warunggat
Sick, budjil
Stinking, kuja
Bald-headed, ngurranbulba
[lit. forehead bare]
Pregnant, bindhiwurra
Hollow, as a tree, etc., birreko
Verbs.
Die, boi
Eat, patama
Drink, wittama
Sleep, nungare
Stand, dharage
Sit, ngulluwa
Talk, paialla
Tell, goanyi
Walk, yanna
Run, wumerra
Bring, yalingeii
Take, maniau
Make, bunggawurra
Break, kidjikbane
Strike, dutbara
Wound, baiwurra
Arise, boraga
Fall down, bululbali
Observe, nea
Hear, ngarra
Give, nguyangun
Love, ngubaty
Sing, burria
Weep, dunga
Cook, as food, kunnama
Steal, karama
Request, kullea
Blow, with breath, bumbi
Climb, kalua
Conceal, dutba
Jump, karuka
Laugh, jandiga
Scratch, jirranga
Forget, bulala
Stare at, mutbi
Send, yenna
Shine, killi
Suck, wittama ngubbung, lit. y
to drink from the breast
Swim, waringa
Search for, pittuma
Spit, juki
Smell, kunda
Throw, kurraibi
Roast, kunnaraa
Whistle, woinga
Pretend, wangit
Kiss, bonge
Vomit, muli
Dance, dungara
Dive, mulbari
Sting, windhurrame
1508
00247551




