

i I
; THE S OLDIE lIS .MINISTRY. I
i
♦ ♦
t l
♦ ♦
♦ *
♦ «-
1 A SERMON I
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
i l
X PR LACKED AT A SPECIAL PARADE t
; t
0? TEE VOLUNTEER FORCES OF SYDNEY, jl*
i
t at t
I . t
I CHRIST CHURCH, SYDNEY, j
s SUNDAY, APRIL 6, 1862, J
? t
! ■ |
I BY t
i, |
: JOHN WOOLLEY, D.C.L., i
♦ J ♦
• I
* I
• LATE rhLLuw OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD : I
« J
I PRINCIPAL AND PROFESSOR OF I.OGIC AND CLASSICS IN THE ' X
| UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY |
• I
♦ I
« I
: :
j ♦
j PUBLISHED 13 Y REQUEST. |
j 1 j
I SYDNEY: |
I J. 11. CLARKE, 356, GEORGE STREET. |
m _n_ _jg


THE SOLDIER’S MINISTRY.
A SERMON
PREACHED AT A SPECIAL PARADE
OF THE VOLUNTEER FORCES OF SYDNEY,
CHRIST CHURCH, SYDNEY,
SUNDAY, APRIL 6, 1862,
JOHN WOOLLEY, D.C.L.,
LATE PELLOW OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD ;
PRINCIPAL AND PROFESSOR OE LOGIC ADD CLASSICS IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
J. E. CLARKE, 356, GEORGE STREET.


A SERMON.
Judges, xiv. 14.
“ Out of the eater came forth moat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness.”
The grout body of Christian patriots will rejoice in such a
service as ours, —the dedication to our Heavenly Fattier of the
arms which we believe are taken up at His command, and which
we hope and pray may never be used but in accordance with His
holy will. Yet amidst the general consent there are two classes
who must refuse to join in this solemnity, borne there are wdio
sincerely believe that force is, under all circumstances, forbidden
by the religion of Christ; that the Gospel has for over sheathed
the sword not only of oppression but of defence ; that in all
relations of life, public and private, social, political, and inter-
national, literal obedience is claimed by the precept to “ resist
no evil.” Again, amongst those who most warmly and freely
sympathize with the patriotic enthusiasm which, like the beat of
a single heart, has stirred our Empire from end to end, too many
are ready to admit the doctrine of the Peace Society, —to confess
that an impulse, the most sacred of all but one, has no sanction
in the Bible ; that Christ disparaged all manly qualities, and at
least laid no stress upon loyalty and the love of Fatherland. Even
thoughtful writers lend a seeming countenance to this opinion.
In his admirable tract on “Liberty,” Mr. John Stuart Mill
denies to the Christian Hero all claim to generous and political
virtues. “ Whatever little recognition,” he says, “the idea of
obligation to the public obtains in modern morality, is derived
from Greek and Roman sources, not from Christian ; as, even
in the morality of private life, whatever exists of magnanimity,
high-mindedness, personal dignity, even the sense of honour, is
derived from the purely human, not the religious part of our
education, and never could have grown out of a standard of


ethics in which the only worth, professedly recognised, is that
of obedience.” If this he true, then is our attendance here
mere mockery : it is only blasphemy to lay our banners upon the
steps of the altar, and to pray for the presence and the blessing
of the “ God of Battles.” Holy and upright men do not shun
to say as much. And though the extravagance is most unlikely
to prevail in our days ; though history and reason, our purest
instincts and piety, bear joint witness to the lawfulness and holi-
ness of the soldier’s work ; it may not be without profit briefly to
indicate some sources of the delusion, and to set forth the office
of war and warriors in the economy of grace, —“ what the soldiers
shall do ” to advance the glory of God, the peace and brother-
hood of mankind.
And, first, it may be said that to expect in the Bible a system
of morality is utterly to misconceive the purport and aim of the
heavenly message. Scripture is not more a treatise of ethics
than of geology or astronomy. God teaches now, as He taught
in the streets of Jerusalem, like “ one having authority, and not
as the Scribes.” He has drawn a sharp and decisive line between
the natural and supernatural manifestations of Himself. Where
philosophy is possible revelation is silent. Man by science,
slowly and painfully, with many errors and shortcomings, seeks
the traces of Deity in the works of Nature and in his own heart.
God corrects, reproves, confirms, extends our knowledge by living
words, not devised by man’s wisdom, not elaborated by argument
or adorned by eloquence, but “ quick and powerful to divide the
joints and the marrow,” entering at once into our inmost spirits,
and bowing them in unquestioning awe before His majesty and
truth. It might easily be shewn, were this the place, that scien-
tific exactness in the sacred word would be inconsistent with the
whole analogy of Providence, and unworthy of the Divine wisdom
and mercy. Condescension to our frailty in things indifferent
or “ too hard ” for our actual condition, is but a part of that
humiliation which clothed Christ with our infirmities, which
speaks to us “as a man speaks to his friend,” which leads us
gradually and gently out of the thick darkness into the “ perfect
day.” Doubtless, He who wrote the Scripture made also the
heart of man. Both bear the same image and superscription.
Not only the mysterious doctrines of redemption, but the funda-


mental principles of holiness and faith, are unchangeable and
eternal. But their practical application is not always the same.
It varies with every change of circumstance. It can only be
discovered by patient and earnest thought. To interpret rightly
“ the signs of the times to bring out of the heavenly treasury
“ things new and old ” adapted to the shifting needs of society
and the progress of spiritual life ; —this is the “ sore burden ”
laid freshly in every age and place upon the Church, and upon
the individual conscience. “ Whatever was written in old times
was written for our learning but the lesson is often the rever-
sal of the act. As the Christian soldier may not imitate the
massacres of Joshua, of Samuel, and of David ; so we are not
justified in condemning warfare by divine authority, unless we
are also prepared after St. Paul’s example to sanction slavery, or
to refuse the redress of violence and fraud by the courts of law,
because he forbade his Corinthian converts to plead before heathen
tribunals.
We may allow that the New Testament dwells almost exclu-
sively upon peace. And this for two reasons, (1.) The
profound harmony of the law and the gospel was less obvious
than their outward and superficial discord. The one was national
and exclusive ; the other utterly broke down the partition-wall:
the one executed God’s vengeance upon His enemies ; the other
proclaimed the message of reconciliation. And the time of our
Lord’s appearing might have seemed of all others the least
favourable to an extension of the popular charities. The spirit-
ually outcast Gentiles were now secular tyrants. The brutal
oppression of Rome had provoked that unquenchable hatred in
which the Apostles themselves had been trained, and with which
at this day it is impossible not to sympathize. And yet, the
more they had felt its power, the more the Apostles must dread
a patriotism which was the most formidable obstacle to their
mission. Peace was as necessary to the gospel of humanity as
war had been to the covenant of Israel, This was a time, not
for David and Macoabaeus, but for Christ and Stephen; not for
warriors with “ their feet dipped in the blood of their enemies,”
but for martyrs bathed in their own ; not for the sword of the
aveno-er, but for the agony of the Redeemer. Not the bodies but
the souls of men were to lie conquered: not outward wrong to be


redressed, lout tire “ restoration of all tilings” to be prepared by
turning tbe hearts of the children to their common Father, and
of the spiritual fathers of the world to their disinherited and
estranged children. And so the champions of the cross went
forth to that blessed conquest, their preparation for which was
not the least of His miracles whom they preached. Slowly and
reluctantly they renounced the gallant confederacy of those
heroic peasants whose blood the remorseless Pilate had mingled
with their sacrifices. Slowly they abandoned the dream of vic-
torious rebellion, and at last the promise of a supernatural De-
liverer. They went out, like Abraham, not knowing at first
whither. One by one the scales fell from their eyes. No merely
human motive could or ought to have wrenched from their grasp
the banner of the tribe of Judah. Only when they realized what
He had done for them, could they “ forsake all” to follow Him.
They parted from the Holy City for His sake who left the glory
of the Father for them : they forgave to their Pagan rulers in-
juries incalculably less than God has freely forgiven to all man-
kind : they accepted a nobler revenge than the independence of
Jerusalem or the humiliation of Rome. They requited the chains
of slavery by making their conquerors willing bondsmen of Him,
who alone has brought out of captivity the prisoners of Death
and Hell.
(2.) Nor must it be forgotten that the New Testament was
written in the first enthusiasm of a new cause. To the Apostles,
as to all special messengers of God, was granted that intense and
vivid apprehension of the end which takes no count of time,
but sees the distant future as clearly as to-day. Like all
prophets they confound the slmll be with the f-s, nay with the
has been. To them the kingdom of Heaven was indeed very
nigh. Like Stephen, they evermore beheld the Son of Man at
the right hand of Power, already risen to complete His work.
Nothing less than this gracious vision, which in many a sub-
sequent crisis has been the consolation of the fainting Church,
could have sustained her first founders in the “ great fight of
afflictions” which they had to endure. For them the new
Jerusalem was every moment ready to descend on earth ; the
Bride was every moment waiting her Lord’s coming. St. Paul
himself, during the earlier part of his ministry, clearly expected


the “ end of all things ” in his own day. None but he for whom
the book of prophecy was last unclasped, perhaps suspected the
many weary ages that must roll away before the seed sown at
Pentecost should be ripe for the heavenly garner. Men in
such a condition, —with their loins girded, their staves in their
hands, and their shoes on their feet, listening for the trumpet-
call of departure to ring through the night, —reck little of
practical difficulties. It matters nothing to them that “the
world still Heth in wickedness.” He who holds the hearts of
men in His hand knows best the “ fulness of time.” He alone
can tell whether after two thousand years He shall find more
faith on the earth than in the generation of those who nailed Him
on the accursed tree. Ho, who even whilst Ho hung there, could
change their murderous mocking into penitential smiting of
the breast, can, if he will, in a moment make the nations ready
to meet Him in the air. It -would have been no subject of
wonder if Peter and Paul and John had denounced, not warfare
only, but every secular pursuit, as unworthy of a Christian’s
attention ; if they had proclaimed one great vigil for the ever-
dawning Epiphany; if they had bidden all who “ loved His
appearing” to forsake their farms and them merchandize, their
marrying and giving in marriage, their daily avocations and
-worldly interests, —gazing with lighted torches and boating
hearts for the distant glimmer of His train. The great day
could seem no more distant to them than Canaan to Moses when
he looked on the dead Egyptian host floating in the Red Sea.
How could they forecast the anxious waiting until the whole lump
should be leavened, more than the Jewish Lawgiver amidst
the triumphant echoes of Miriam’s song, could anticipate the
forty years of faithless wandering until the people should indeed
learn to trust in Him, who, with a high hand had brought them
out of the house of bondage ?
Yet amongst all the examples of Scripture “ soberness” there
is none more remarkable than this —that in no one book of the
New Testament occurs a single passage, I will not say condemn-
ing the soldier, but placing him on a lower footing than the most
useful and beneficent members of society. There are many
notices of soldiers in the sacred volume : some are commended
for their faith and uprightness ; some arc held up as examples to


unbelieving Israel: but neither our Lord’s own converts, nor
even Cornelius when he was baptized with his whole house, was
blamed for his profession or required to renounce it. Nay
further, from the day that the Baptist answered the question of
the soldiers of Augustus to that when St. Paul hailed Timothy as
a “ good soldier of Jesus Christ,” the soldier and the physician
are selected as the special exemplars of the Christian life. We are
to “ put on the whole armour of Christto “ endure hardness”
as His soldiers ; to copy the soldier’s simplicity and disinterest-
edness of character, and his loyalty to his prince. And finally,
in that beautiful “ Nunc dimittis” which concludes the same
epistle, “ Paul the aged” thanks God that he has fought a good
fight and kept his allegiance to the Captain of his salvation.
What is there mean and selfish, —what other than high-minded
and generous in the teaching of the Gospel ? Doubtless the
foundation of all Christian morality is obedience; it is obedience
founded not in fear but in gratitude and love ; it is obedience not
to man or human law, but to that spirit which bears witness in
our inmost spirits of His own purity and justice. Doubtless we
are not our own but bought with a price,—body, soul, and spirit,
all His who gave and sustained them, who cannot will other than
their greatest good, who rejects enforced duty and loves only the
cheerful giver,—“ whose service is perfect freedom.” Did he
acknowledge no social or public obligation, who declares that
“ he who provides not for his own, and especially for those of
his own house, has denied the faith and is worse than an
infidel ?” who teaches that we are all “members one of another,”
so knit together that no one can suffer or rejoice but all the
rest must sympathize f who warns us that no act, however
trivial, may have respect to ourselves alone, all must be
“ for edificationno indulgence allowed ourselves, however
innocent, which is a cause of sin to others P that we must bear
one another’s burdens, lightening their sorrows and doubling their
joys by participation : above all, that the strong must support
and be patient with the weak ? Was he no patriot, who, even in
denouncing the blind unbelief of his countrymen, like another
Moses, wishes that he might be “ accursed from Christ, for his
brethren, his kinsmen after the flesh?” whose tender heart is
only kept from breaking at the sight of their apostacy by the


prospect of a more glorious restoration ? Did he not inculcate
manly independence, who, whilst he warns against censorious
judgment, reminds us that every man must bear his own bur-
den ; —no other can profit nor harm him ; —he must receive his
own wages straight from that Master who alone can judge his
work ? There is neither merit nor excuse in following blindly
the best examples even in truth and well-doing. “ Let every
man be persuaded in his own mind.” Better honest error than
careless orthodoxy. He that doubteth, though what he does be
righteous in itself, is guilty if he could have his doubt resolved:
for “ whatever is not of conviction is sin.” Was there nothing
high-minded in the prisoner who rebuked the High-priest upon
the judgment seat ? who, before king Agrippa, pleaded not his
own cause but Christ’s ? whose brave and faithful denunciations
alarmed the guilty conscience of the Roman governor P who
compelled the magistrates of Philippi to make public reparation
for their illegal persecution ? Who shall be called generous if
that teacher was not, who, conscious of greater gifts and more
abundant labours than any of the rest, was content to be postponed
to all: who refused for himself the reward which he asserted for
them, lest by any chance he should prejudice the gospel; who,
when even this was made an excuse of calumny, though wounded
to the quick, defends himself only for their sakes ; who amidst
ingratitude and obloquy went on spending and being spent for
them, though “ the more abundantly he loved the less he was
loved ” again ; who lastly, in the dungeon of his old age, when
some malignant wretches turned preachers out of spite, “ suppos-
ing to add affliction to his bonds,” could rejoice that “anyhow,
in pretence or in truth, Christ is preached ?” Surely we may
search in vain the annals of ancient and modern heroism for an
example of “ the sense of honour,” if we deny it to St. Paul.
And it is a strange reading of history to affirm that in this at
least the church has not been faithful to her exemplar. Of all
the debts which modern civilization owes to Christianity, none is
more remarkable than the consecration of the sword. It was not
in a vain pageant that the banners of our knightly orders were
hung in the quires of the holiest Cathedrals ; not idly is the cross
borne as the proudest charge in the shields of modem chivalry.
In whose name was the first protest made against lawless force,


and the oppression of the poor and helpless P Did Greece and
Rome teach us chivalry P the duty of knighthood to succour the
afflicted, to maintain right, and defend the friendless P that lofty
courtesy, that frank kindliness, that modesty of speech and de-
meanour, of which I would we had better cherished onr inherit-
ance, —that tender respect to women which could only flow from
the grateful memory of the mother of our Lord ? It is true that
the Christian soldier is bound, and scarcely less strictly, by the
same obligations as the Priest. His conscience also must be void
of offence towards God and towards men. His warfare, like
heavenly wisdom, must be “ pure, peaceable, gentle, and full of
mercy.” Woe be to him who asks God’s blessing upon a selfish
or unjust quarrel! who delights in violence, and lifts up hands
stained with the blood of the righteous ! But if we draw the
sword only when all other means are in vain, to support justice,
in the cause of the fatherless and the widow, in defence of those
whom our Heavenly Father has bid us to “ cherish as our own
flesh,” we need not fear to pray that He will “ cover our heads
in the day of battle or, if He see fit to call us hence, will
accept our work as done in His name, who took upon Him our
nature, “of our flesh and of our bones,” and died to give His
brethren life.
The prerogative which we have claimed for the Christian
w'arrior rests upon a universal axiom of the divine government.
“ The w r hole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together
until now, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God.”
The desire of all nations, consciously or not, is the second coming
of the Saviour. Restlessly surging to and fro, the tide of time
asks for those blessed feet whose first imprint will soothe it into
eternal rest. But with a full understanding of his meaning the
Christian “ lifts up his eyes to the hills whence cometh his help,”
watching for the day-spring from on high. Not less earnestly
than at the birth-tide of the Church do we look and long for that
millennial time, when “ the knowledge of the Lord shall cover
the earth as the waters cover the sea.” Then, indeed, shall be
perfect peace. “ Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn war any more.” The warrior and the
wmrrior’s trade shall have passed away for ever. But so also
shall the lawyer and the magistrate. “ The corruption that is


in the world through lust” will be cleansed: there will be no
fraud nor extortion; no violence nor rapine; no conflicting
claims to adjudicate ; no crime to punish : “ they shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy mountain—and “ against such thefe
is no law.” So again will the physician. With sin will have
fled death and disease, the daughters of sin ; pain and sickness
shall be no more. There shall be no distinction of rich and poor;
no need of philanthropic exertion ; but “ every man shall eat
bread to the full,” and “ rejoice in all his labour.” Lastly there
shall be no priesthood. “In that day they shall no more teach
every man his neighbour, saying, know the Lord: for they
shall all know God, from the least of them unto the greatest of
them.” To this blessed state the Church is ever pressing-
forward, praying her Lord “ shortly to accomplish the number of
His elect, and to hasten His kingdomto this, every pulsation
of our hearts ought to be bringing us nearer ; no occupation can
be useful or innocent which does not speed us in this course :
and none can speed us in it which does not tend to the glory of
God and good-will amongst our brethren. But here comes in
that providential law, the neglect of which, in one form or other,
is the source of all error and apostaoy. Whilst we strive earnestly
for the prize that is set before us, let us never “ count that we have
apprehended never imagine that the race is over and the goal
reached. This outer world of ours can never be other than
a place of exile. It is equally fatal whether we refuse to
see the thorns and briars, or wilfully mistake them for flowers
and fruits of Paradise. Mysticism and sensuality are equally
removed from the command to make ourselves friends by the
unrighteous mammon. The rich man who bade his soul take
her case in her barns and treasure-houses, and the apostle who
longed to remain on the mount of transfiguration, alike mistook
the meaning of our earthly discipline. There are some forms ot
mysticism from which reason and common sense preserve us.
We shall not banish our physicians nor our judges. We cannot
be ignorant of our bodily ailments : w r e must confess that God s
law and man’s safety demand the punishment of the murderer
and the thief. But wherever we can, we are always seeking
to forget our own corruption and the curse of the ground tor our
sakes. We are ever mistaking our own reason for the oracles of


God; setting up our graces as the standard of holiness ; striving
to enforce on ourselves and. others something which may hide
from our eyes the sword which yet flames before the gate of
Eden. Thus it is with the denouncers of war. For the soldier’s
office is no less remedial than that of the magistrate or the
surgeon. All are founded in the same two-fold law of loyalty to
God and charity to men, —the piety which foihids us to tolerate
sin when it is in our power to prevent it, the brotherly love
which obliges us to help others in all maladies of the body or the
soul. If we could see men dying around ns without risk of
contagion to our own dwellings, yet would their lives be required
at our hands. If we could leave the felon or drunkard unwarned
without endangering our social peace, yet must we give account
for the souls which we have passed by in the agonies of the
second death. And no less if the earth be spoiled by the
aggressor,—though we ourselves might seem secure from his
attack, —we are sometimes called as a nation “to the help of
the Lord against the mighty to deliver the oppressed, and let
the prisoner go free. How much more if the danger is theirs
whom God Himself has commanded us to love even as He loves
the Church for which He freely gave His own Son ! There is,
indeed, if we are faithfully following the path of duty, a
constant progress towards the haven of our desires, —
that state where our sins, their punishments, and remedies
shall be alike unknown. The criminal code of our fathers
seems barbarous to us; many a limb and life was lost in
old time which modern science would have saved : we may hope
never again to see wars of mere wantonness and conquest: and
we are far removed from the feeling of that awful prayer, still,
unhappily, the blot of our Service book, which identifies our
quarrel with the cause of heaven, and calls on their Father as
well as ours to curse our enemies. And herein lies the special
disadvantage of mysticism. Attempting too much at once it fails
of all. It does not follow the divine pattern, line upon line,
precept upon precept. It forgets Him who spoke in parables
even to His disciples, and left the interpretation of His words for
future occasions, and better chastened reason. Aping heaven
upon earth, it sinks below earth, either into materialistic reaction,
or into empty formulas and hypocritical pretence.


It may be urged that there is a fallacy in the comparison of
the soldier to the magistrate and physician. War creates
evil: medicine and law strive to mitigate or remove it. In
particular war does that which Abraham declared was
abhorrent to the “Judge of all the earth;” it slays the
righteous with the wicked, and often in his stead. How of the
only war which a Christian state may lawfully wage, it can-
not truly be said that it creates, still less that it does not repress
evil. War can only be justified when negotiations are fruitless,
and when indifference would entail danger and distress to the
innocent. In such cases, —to omit the higher consideration, the
duty of fulfilling the will and maintaining the honour of God, —
a thousand times more and worse evil is prevented than can be
produced. No immediate loss of life can be compared with the
utter dissolution of the tie which makes human brotherhood
possible, and with the injury even to those Peoples themselves
who are suffered unchecked to continue their career of rapine.
And if the righteous seem sometimes to suffer with or instead of
the guilty, this, we may reverently say, is but consistent with the
analogy of the divine government. “ Shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right P” We cannot doubt it. Tet we see every
day in the ordinary course of providence, the innocent perishing
for the sinner’s fault. Are not famine and pestilence His
angels f sent, we are sure in mercy, to rebuke our ignorance or
negligence of the laws of our bodily and social being, and to
bring us to the knowledge of the essential conditions of health
and prosperity. Beneficent our inmost hearts witness they are.
Tet, if we were hardy and mad enough to scrutinize the mys-
terious ways of His counsels, how partially and unequally the
burden appears to fall. How often might we take up David’s
cry, —Others have sinned and go unpunished ; “ but these sheep,
what have they done r” How often have whole nations been
decimated by causes out of their own cognizance, and beyond
their control. We ourselves are mourning the loss of our noblest
and best through a neglect of sanitary precautions, for which he
of all men was least responsible. No doubt He in whose hands
are the issues of life and death, without whom not a sparrow
falls to the ground, is justified in this as in all His doings.
No man is removed from the earth until his probation is


w . no soul passes away unsummoned by the angels.
accompbsbed, compreliension : only He
Y ® 1° weth the end from the beginning can tell why “one is
who no other ]eft .. We, in wisdom and piety alike, must
mouth and draw in our breath, because the Lord hath
, •, ,1 n( j the same answer applies to the far less gnevou.
havoc of war. Reason concurs with the inspired declaration that
rLord as well as famine and pestilence is “tim Lord s sore
iudement,” which He dispenses as it seems to Him best. In
J hlfe our part is meekly to take the lesson where it is clear ;
where it is obscure, to commit ourselves to the God who seeth
not as man seeth, but assuredly makes all things work together
for the good of those who love Him. Provided lam sure of His
approval who executes judgment and justice, and has charged m
after His own example “to deliver him that has no helper,
lat matters it whether I come forth from the conflict to renew
my earthly service, or whether I enter at once into my reward .
I think few deaths can be happier, few more pleasing in the eyes
of the Lord of Hosts, than that of a citizen-soldier, who may dare
to breathe from his failing lips the prayer of Germany s hero-
martyr, the brave and holy, truly God-given, Theodor Kornei.
Father! direct Thou me!
Guide me to victory, guide me to death!
Lord ! I acknowledge Thy command .
Lord '. as Thou wilt, so guide Thou me ;
God! I acknowledge Thee!
Father ! bless Thou me !
Into Thine hands I commit my spirit:
Thou canst take it, Thou didst give it ;
Living or dying, bless Thou me !
Father! I praise Thee'.
Father 1 X praise T heo I
This is no strife for worldly treasures :
All that is holiest our sword is guarding ;
Therefore, falling or conquering, I praise Thee 1
Father ! I yield me to Thee!
Father! I yield me to Thee!
When death’s thunders rattle round mo;
When from my pierc’d veins the life-blood is flowing ,
To Thee, my God ! to Thoo I give mo !
Father ! 1 call on Then !


Yes, iny brothers, your warfare is not necessary alone and
honourable; it is, if you use it aright, a specia l means of grace to
yourselves and to the People whom you defend. There is an old
law:—it went forth at the fall: it shall continue to the judg-
ment ;—“ He that ascendeth, what is it but that he descended
first into the lower parts of the earth F” To this law the Captain
of our salvation also became subject when he came down from
the Majesty on high, and dwelt among us, —not with the scribes
and doctors, the wise and holy, the noble and the pure ; but
with publicans and sinners, with wine-bibbers and gluttons, with
the leper and the Samaritan, with Zaccheus and the Magdalene.
And we in this as in all other things “ must follow the example of
our Saviour Christ, and be made like unto Him.” When Dante
had strayed from the right path to the Holy City, the special
grace of God led him down into the nethermost Hell, that he
mioht rise from it through the mount of Purification to the
O °
glories of Paradise. The allegory of the Italian Poet is a picture
of your life and mine. We have all gone astray : we bear within
our hearts the canker of error and sin : we too, must probe the
wound to the uttermost, that the balm of His grace may distil
upon it. Hot gazing upon inaccessible heights, not dreaming
amidst shadows and symbols; but entering the lurking-places
of Demons, confronting in his own citadel the enemy of man,
may we hope one day to stand before the White Throne, and
to see “the King in His beauty.” If thou wouldst meet the
Saviour in the way, and have His blessing on thy table and His
fire in thy heart, seek Him not only among the good and wise,
not even only in the sanctuary: go also into the haunts and dens of
infamy, to the prison and the hospital, to the miserable and the
profane. So shalt thou learn the plague of thy own heart, the
exceeding sinfulness of sin ; so shalt thou taste and know the
mercy of the Lord, and love him with a pure spirit and under-
standing mind. They who have not passed through the furnace
of temptation cannot succour those who are tempted. Hot they
who fled, but he who staid, though he fell, had the blessing. He
whom Satan sifted like wheat, being converted strengthened his
brethren : he who denied his Lord with curses, was bidden to
“feed His lambs.” Who are they whom their brethren praise ?
for whom the pray T er of the poor oftenest reaches the throne of


Grace ?to whom the Angels most delight in Clustering f the
kind Physician, whose skill soothes the agony of disease, whose
patient hand through the long mid-night watches wipes the
dews of death. The upright Judge, truly venerable in e.ery
well-ordered community, whose heart is sick with tales of ignorance
and crime, whose eyes are sleepless with anxious thought for the
wretches who cry, alas ! too often in vain, to be dispossessed of
the Devil which torments them, to be healed of the blindness in
which they were born and reared. The faithful Minister, whose
power to thrill the inmost conscience and to urge us forward on
our pilgrimage, is gained not alone by prayer and meditation,
not in the closet and at the altar, but in the lanes and by-ways,
amongst the sinful and sorrowful, in comforting the afflicted, in
strengthening and guiding the penitent, in rebuking the bold,
and warning the hardened. These men choose their habitation
amon- the desolate places of the earth, that both they and those
for whom they labour may sit at last in heavenly places with
Christ Jesus. And amongst them there is a throne prepared also
for the Christian soldier. He also has a talent to trade with and
to multiply, he has a gift to secure for himself and impart to
others. And if you repeat the question of the Soldiers to the
Baptist, and ask what you shall do for the edification of this
society; how you shall further the cause of truth and holiness;
you will find the answer in my text. It was the custom of
chivalry, that the booty of the vanquished became the spoil of
the conqueror. It is the law of a higher than chivalry, that he
who overcomes any Devil in God’s name receives for his reward
the grace of which that Devil had robbed men. Thus He says
to the Son “ I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession:” the
captives ransomed from tlie law sliall be prisoners of grace , t ej
whom Thou hast freed from Sin shall be servants of Thy
righteousness. And the Son, in like manner, bestows upon His
servants that portion of the vineyard which they make ready
against His return. The physician has for his the
healthful bodies of mankind, the Priest their sanctified spirits,
the Magistrate and the Philanthropist political and social happi-
ness. To the man of science is given the treasury of nature, to
the philosopher the secret of the human mind, to the poet the


beauty which lurks in this world’s desert like the fountain in the
rook of Horeb. The soldier fights against discord and confusion:
the blessing which he wrests from the grasp of Hell is harmony
and -peace. “ Out of the eater he brings forth meat, and out of
the strong he brings forth sweetness.”
How is the soldier a peace-maker? Thus. Wars and fight-
ings come by reason of three Devils, Covetousness, Coldness of
heart, Contentiousness. To these the Christian soldier opposes
three Angels, The Spirit of Truth, Patriotism, Forbearance.
(1.) “Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment?” Brothers, you shall teach us that there is something
more precious still than the body and the life, —the sense of duty
and faith in right. Covetousness is either cowardice or sensuality.
There are some who will not believe the promise that to him who
walketh uprightly, “ his bread shall be given, and his water shall
be sure.” There are others who can understand no good for a
man but “to eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labour.”
The one says to his soul, “ Take thine ease and be merry ; thou
hast much goods laid up for many years.” The other goes forth
to his toil from the morning unto the evening. With an eager,
unsatisfied, ever-growing craving, he heaps up treasures which he
dare not use himself, and which he knows not 'who shall gather.
But both agree in one point. They provoke strife and contention
by fraud and over-reaching. Neither has known the only gift
which God has bestowed without stint or measure, His own
ineffable love. Both have made their God of that whose highest
use is to minister to the body. And so they know no higher
than bodily life. Of them spake the Tempter truly, “ all that a
man hath he will give for his life.” Alas! my brothers,
that even amongst us some should be found to echo, not
in mockery but in earnestness, this Devil s sneer. When
the first alarm of invasion reached our shores, were there not
some who seriously deliberated between the cost of ransom and
the danger of defence ? Some too, who confessing the meanness
of submission, repeated this lying calumny against their own
kinsmen, and treated the belief in your earnestness and stead-
fastness as silly enthusiasm ? Yet both are right, if indeed there
is nothing better than bodily life ; and there is nothing better
unless there is a. God, and at His right hand are the only


t Wh can satisfy ns evermore. This is the faith tor
p l e „„ e ,"teto y blood, — that duty is hctter «»‘
«“ > al “ T “
'T ito n«to of your liberty, oof bec«,e you
refused to ma not even because the bargain would
grudge your si forbidden to give your soul
be unavaihng but to rcsist tlie
m BX ° H t h a t you may preserve your goods ; but because the
invader, not 3 own hearts equally command you to
law of God an 5 & not less for his sake than your
The iu* » . pootest ugshist the mean-
the Eteina. • makes even physical courage so
j 6SS e this which, despite of all sophistry, will still keep
ShlTst ii^the^calendar ’rf national saints. He guards the
the hero pver i as tmg life. He is the outward symbol of
IhfvictoTy of the spirit over the flesh Brothers may God lend
von Brace to keep this deposit pure and undefiled .
' tl t You shall conquer lust by faith. The second enemy,
hy tta spirit of Puirirti-. M, “ • I ™‘
,, \ q +iqic vour noblest, so i know it- is yo^.
Wttt a s" te sk which nothing can enable you to perform
hut unconquerable resolution and unwearied patience, klt is n
here as in England. Let the Pibroch wake the echoes ot ie
Highland glens ; the harp sound through the valleys of Wa e ,
g t the Ltherino- cry of their Bathers in any part of the happy
S“d South, East aud West, o.thoyoo.™., tie
ancient banners kissing the well-known breezes that from age to
age have wafted them on to victory. Every step is on e giar c
of heroes : every glance rests upon scenes Mowed bj^«
and familiar memories. It is not so in this
have no traditions. We tread upon no history. We look upo
„o monuments. The homes of our childhood were far apart:
our training and associations various arid incongruous
summer evening tempts us forth into the green church- aid
where the patriarch of a thousand years sleeps by the hahe ot
yesterday: no winter fire-sidc renews the merry school-days, or
L legend of the olden time. All is new and strange and
heartless, as when the Lord confounded the I,udders of babel.


Even this was not enough. Men have g’one forth from our midst
—men who owed to this country all their wealth and title to
consideration, —and have uttered cruel calumnies against us in
the land of our Fathers. There where we most desired, and could
best expect sympathy with our straggles, encouragement and advice
in our difficulties, our name is everywhere evil spoken of, our
character and institutions misrepresented, our errors exaggerated,
our efforts for improvement discredited or scorned. '-'Alas ! my
brethren, wherefore have ye dealt so treacherously with us ?
were not your own flocks and herds abundant, that you should
envy our little ewe-lamb P do the comforts and refinements of
the glorious land to which you have returned, make you
jealous of the feeble remnant in the eastern wilds ? But enough
of this. Anger becomes not this occasion, nor this holy house.
And it is not by anger that we shall turn the hearts of our
fathers back again to us their well-nigh discarded children. Let
us try a more excellent way. Whore their censures are right, let
us gratefully accept the warning, though it be harshly and un-
graciously spoken ; where they are mistaken, let us resolve, not
by clamour and counter-denunciations, but by steady perseverance,
to justify our innocence, and to reconquer the confidence so
strangely and unhappily withdrawn. There is no better founda-
tion than that which you have laid. You have freely offered
your lives in maintenance of our newly-cemented citizenship.
You have declared that our wives and little ones are as dear and
precious to us as to the dwellers in ancestral lands. This is the
surest base of patriotism. He that has no country has no home :
he that has no home has no heart. But, blessed be God, the
converse is true also. He that has a heart can find a homo ; he
that has a home can never want a country. We will vindicate
through domestic love our worthiness of the fathers from whom
wo are sprung, and of the mighty Empire of which we are
members. The banner of Britain shall not be degraded by its
union with the bright symbol of our Southern heaven. We
swear it in the presence and at the altar of Him whose ineffable
gift that symbol represents. We mourn this day, not with
official badges, but with inward heart-pang the affliction of her
whose name in every Australian house is only less dear than that
of wife or mother. We lament not the Prince and Statesman :


for we know that his work was accomplished, and that
God will raise np others to complete the wise and liberal
things which he had devised. We sympathize not with the
Queen, for whom, whilst she walks in the fear of the Lord, coun-
sellors will never fail. We weep for the affectionate and careful
father, the loyal and constant husband: we think of the widowed
wife, who sits alone in her silent chamber, listening to every
footfall, starting and shivering when the door opens, and the
well-loved form does not enter in. God bless and comfort her,
sweet lady! not for her greatness and glory ; but because she
has set us an example how to make an abiding place for our-
selves in the wilderness. The best gift of our Queen to her
people has been the pattern of a pure and happy home. In this,
as in all things honest and high-minded, let us adopt and make
good the motto of our University. (1) “Our sky is changed : our
spirit is the same.” The holiest of our household gods, the richest
portion of our inheritance, —the frank sincerity, the unconquered
will, the calm courage of our race —we have brought safely with
us over the waste of waters. Australia’s sunny plains rear
daughters as lovely and helpful, sons as gallant and enterprising,
as the flowery lanes and green meadows of England. Every
one who has a heart manly and true, may easily build here for
himself a home like that of Victoria and Albert. For such a
home, —every real man, —every man in this assembly —“ would
even dare to die.”
(3.) Of the third soldierly grace — Forbearance —I have the
less need to speak particularly, because in our own time the con-
nection between strength and gentleness, tenderness and courage,
is familiar almost to triteness. We are not likely again to
sacrifice the body to the mind. Rather, perhaps, our danger is to
expect too much from mere bodily vigour; to demand from
health and activity that work which cannot be performed without
the discipline of self-control, and the motive power of sincere
religion. No doubt, the wholesome current of the blood is a
sovereign sweetener of the temper. The consciousness of power,
the exquisite and buoyant sense of life, are powerful helps to
friendliness and moderation. Jealousy and contentiousness most
(1) Sidere mens eadem mutate.


commonly arise from depressing avocations, from weakness, and
the irritability of disease. But, although reason and experience
attest the teaching of Scripture, that the body as well as the
spirit is the gift of God, and the temple of His Grace ; we must
not forget that the body without the spirit is dead to good
works; strength, unless guided by a pure will, chastened by a
loving heart, is like the mighty hunters of old who wasted earth
and defied heaven. There have been tyrannous giants as well
as malignant dwarfs. “He that ruleth his spirit is better than
he that taketh a city.” And to form this habit of self-govern-
ment the soldier enjoys peculiar opportunities. The need of
mutual confidence and co-operation, subordination, unquestioning
obedience, the open and friendly rivalries in strength and skill, —
necessary training and accomplishments of your profession,—
are admirably adapted to repress undue self-consciousness
and self-seeking; to foster that lovely flower of manhood, the
frank recognition of superior merit, the cheerful yielding of pre-
eminence to those whose prowess justifies their claim ; lastly, the
crown and jewel of all heroism, silence and submission, for the
sake of honour and loyalty, even under neglect, partiality, or
injustice. And here bear with me if I take the privilege of my
office to address a few words of caution to ourselves. In every
society of men offences must needs arise : and offence will
always be more lightly given, more angrily taken, more hardly
healed, in proportion to the looseness of the tie which binds our
fellowship. This constitutes a signal advantage of the regular
soldier over the Volunteer. Their warfare is their whole career.
They cannot unbuckle the sword and desert their comrades-in-
arms, without destroying the continuity of their lives, forfeiting
all that is precious in the past and hopeful in the future. Hence
the proverbial courtesy of the soldier ; his open and unassuming
demeanour, his avoidance of provocation, his “ noble credulity,”
his honourable simplicity : hence his best characteristic, consider-
ateness in dealing not with his equals and superiors only, but with
inferiors and with strangers. Ho man in his outward bearing
more nearly approaches the gospel rule, “in honour preferring
one another.” How valuable these endowments are we may
estimate by the tragic examples which, their absence has lately
caused even in the English army. For us the same virtues, not


less needful, are less easy of acquirement. It is difficult not to
confuse our civil and military characters, not to carry into the oc. u-
sional relation the habits and feelings cf the more familiar. It s
a matter of gratitude and of modest pride that we have been thus
far successful. The Volunteers of New South Wales have been,,
probably, as free from misunderstanding and dissension as the best
ordered corps in England. Let us not only take courage, but deter-
mine that every year shall witness our improvement in this as in all
soldierly qualities. “Let your moderation be known unto all men. ’
In business, in social intercourse, in politics, on parade, whatever
dealings you have with any from the, highest to the least, “be
pitiful, be courteous.” So shall you be worthy successors of
those gentle warriors who carried into the forefront of the battle,
blazoned on their armour, graven in their hearts, “ the dear
memorial of their dying Lord.” Like them, in the midst of
carnage and confusion, in the tumult of battle, in the excitement
of victory, you will “ seek peace and ensue it.” . Not that peace
which must be bought by cowardly compliance with sin and
wrong ; not earthly peace with the forfeiture of heavenly grace ;
not peace while Jezabel lords it over God’s heritage. But peace,
as soon as the cause of truth and charity is vindicated ; peace, as
soon as the “ hills of the robbers ” are cast down, and the “ prey
of the terrible is delivered ” out of their hands; jjeace for our-
selves. peace, if it be possible, for our enemies ; peace to Jezabel
herself, when she shall forsake her abominations, and “ execute
true judgment, and shew mercy.”
Whether the banners which we hallow to-day shall ever be
baptized in blood we cannot know. It is easier to pray than to
hope that the storm which is muttering around us may yet not
burst in fury upon our heads. If that day shall come, I know
that “ you will be strong and quit yourselves like men and
none the less because you too have bound the red cross upon
your breasts, and asked the counsel and blessing of Him who is
at once the “ Lord mighty in battle,” and the “ God of love.”
In the meantime, may the spirit of Faith, of GhoHty, of
Courtesy , bind with a “three-fold cord” the hearts of our citizen
soldiers to each other and to all this community. May your
Christian manhood shine bright and lovely amongst us to the
glory of God and the edification of your brethren ! May


‘•righteousness,” through the heavenly blessing upon you, and
those who are associated with you in the same holy cause, be
established in our colony, in our empire, in all the earth ! And
may “the work of righteousness be peace ; and.the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever!”
Printed by Reading and Wellbank, Bridge-street, Sydney.
