

THE
PSALMS OF DAVID,
The only inspired and authorized
Service of Praise,
BY
REV. S. P. STEWART,
TINONEE,
MANNING RIVER,
N.S.W.
PRICE - - - THREE PENCE.




THE
PSALMS OF DAVID,
The only inspired and authorized
Service of Praise,
BY
REV. S. P. STEWART,
TINONEE,
MANNING RIVER,
N.S.W.
PRICE - - - THREE PENCE.




“In that book, for well nigh three thousand years, the piety of
the Saints has found its most refined and choicest food, to such
a degree, that the rank and quality of the religious frame may
in general be tested, at least negatively, by the height of its
relish for them.”
GLADSTONE.




THE PSALMS OF DAVID,
The only inspired and authorized Service
of Praise.
(S|T is not easy to over-rate the importance of the duty of
(y rendering praise to God in connection with, and as part of,
c A the Service of the Sanctuary. Every one familiar with
the Psalms is aware of the frequency with which the command
or invitation to “praise God ”is repeated. And it must also be
of great importance to us to know what is the Divine-approved
material wherewith to render this praise. Bound up in the
Volume of Inspiration we have what are commonly called the
Psalms of David , though other inspired writers, Moses and
Asaph among the number, wrote for the collection.
Through ages past, in the Church of the Old Testament and
in the Church of the New Testament, the inspired Psalms have
been sung in the public worship of God, the worshippers
believing that God was best praised in language written under
His own guidance. In the various sections of the Christian
Church to-day, the Psalms of David, in some one or other
version, are still in use ; while, almost the world over, there
have been added to these Psalms numbers of uninspired hymns
by modern composers.
To this rule there are a few exceptions.
A few Christians still survive, who refuse to allow to these
modern hymns the place and the honour which they believe the
inspired Psalms are alone entitled to claim.
Now, majorities, strong majorities especially, are sometimes
intolerant, and hence it should not excite wonder that the
position of the minority—the rejection of hymns in public
worship—is regarded as evidence of want of culture, if not of
want of piety. In what follows it is proposed to state some of
the facts, and examine some of the reasons on either side.
One reason given for the use of hymns is that there is “ not
enough of Christ in the Psalms ” That the Book of Psalms
having been completed before the incarnation, ministry,
crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, we require
poetical compositions containing fuller references to these great
facts than, in the view of the hymn-singers, are to be found in


the Psalms of David. Before examining this position at length,
it may be well to assume that the friends of the modern hymns,
equally with the critics of those productions, admit the
Inspiration of the Bible and the Unity of Revelation as
contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments.
Such being the case, let us now proceed to look at the statement
that there is “ not enough of Christ in the Psalms ” —first, as it
casts light upon the mode of interpreting Scripture adopted by
those who make the statement.
And, next, as to whether it is or is not a statement of fact.
In theology there is a well-known school, whose disciples
make the Christian consciousness, not the Scriptures, the source
of certainty in matters of religious truth and conviction.
Their interpretation of Scripture is dominated by their idea of
what the Scriptures “ ought ”to teach. They are not careful to
explain whence this judicial Christian consciousness arose. The
question is therefore reasonable —“ Is it the result of contact with
those Scriptures which in its maturity it undertakes to judge,
and to which it is not ashamed to dictate 1 ” Whence did those
who want more of Christ than, as they allege, is to be found in
the Psalms, learn what they know of Him ? From the Bible.
But they believe in the inspiration of the Bible, and in the
unity of revelation as contained in the Old and New Testaments.
Having then, as disciples, “ sat at the feet ” of Scripture, in
order to learn of Christ, they now, become, “ wiser than their
teacher,” demand additions to be made to these Scriptures, as
they imply a defect in them.
This is a most unsatisfactory position to occupy. It is one
that ought to be to every intelligent Christian not only
unsatisfactory, but untenable. It is a striking, if not repulsive
example of what a writer of note in the present day calls
“ regenerate individualism.” This is the poetic Christian
consciousness making rules for the Scriptures—after the fact.
So much for the statement as indicating a mode of interpretation,
next comes the enquiry whether it is or is not true.
There is no other book of the Old Testament so often quoted
in the New Testament as the Book of Psalms. On turning to the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Chapter 1., we find the writer quotes
from at least seven of the Psalms. These seven Psalms are not
very close together—The lowest number is 2, the highest 110.—
Six out of the seven refer to Christ. The quotations are made
to exhibit the superiority of Christ over the Angels —to exhibit
indeed His Divinity. The Ist Chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews is a short one, comparatively. Yet there is room in it
for quotations from six Psalms in which the writer “found
Christ.” Other instances might be given. They will be easily
found by the seeker after truth. In order rightly to understand


the subject, there is one thing which it is most important for us
to keep in mind. It is this : —we are not to conclude that only
those Psalms contain allusions to Christ which Hew Testament
writers have quoted. This would be a great mistake on our
part. The writers in the Hew Testament whose quotations from
the older record we have, quoted with an immediate purpose in
view. That purpose certainly was not to make the searching of
the Scriptures unnecessary. It is worthy of notice in this
connection that we have the bare fact recorded that on a certain
occasion Christ delivered a discourse to an audience of two; a
discourse in which, beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
Himself. Yet we have not one word of that discourse. We
have simply the record of its delivery, and the record of the
effect produced upon those who heard it—“ Their hearts burned
within them.”
Christ in the Psalms! Yes, verily He is there. He is
there in His offices as Prophet, Pi’iest and King. He is there in
His Divinity and in His humanity. He is there in His power
and in His love—in His humiliation and exaltation. The
Divine Spirit, the Author of truth, is the best judge of the
manner in which the person and work of Christ should be
referred to in His word, and He has decided. And, not only is
Christ in the Psalms, He has been found of them who have
sought for Him there. And, if these Psalms were used by Old
Testament Saints, and were by them found to be all-sufficient for
purposes of praise, what is the difference between their position
and ours ? Is it not a difference of circumstance in which the
advantage is on our side? We have a completed revelation.
We ought to be able clearly to see much that to the ancients
appeared as “in a glass, darkly.” From before our eyes the
veil is taken away. But if this be so, and if it proves anything,
it proves that we should be better able to appreciate the ancient
Psalmody, and not that we require to have additions made to it.
If Christ was visibly in the Psalms to the ancient worshipper, is
He less visibly there to us, from whose view so many obstruc-
tions have been removed ? And we have the same reasons
for rendering praise. Salvation—the soul’s deliverance from sin
and regeneration in holiness—is not this the grand theme of
praise to God ? If so, “ Abraham rejoiced to see My day and he
saw it and was glad,” said Christ to the Jews ; and Abraham
lived before the Psalms were written. Are the friends and
apologists of modern hymns possessed of a finer or a more
durable type of piety than their fathers, that they should need
a “ new and improved ” Psalmody to give it voice? But further:
The God who is praised to-day is the same God for whom, of old,
praise “ waited in Zion.” He is unchangeable. He is the same


“ yestei’day, to-day and for ever.” Those who write new hymns
have not discovered a new attribute in the Diety which requires
glorifying. The relations between man and his Saviour are
essentially the same as in times past.
And man, the being who is to offer praise, is the same.
This is true from the psychological point of view.
The force of true religion in the human soul is a force
which acts centrifugally. It lays hold upon the “inner man,”
and thence affects the “ outer man.” So far as man has power
to think, to feel and to resolve, so far will religion influence and
control him, that he may think, feel and resolve aright. That
the “ words of his mouth and the meditations of his heart ” may
be acceptable in God’s sight. Now the Psalms of David contain
a complete psychology. We realise that the men who lived in
the days when the Psalms were written were men of like
passions (nature) with us. In these Psalms we find the
mournful notes of the penitent and the triumphant tones of the
victor, and we feel that the penitent and the victor are our
brothers. The Psalms give full and beautiful expressions to the
aspirations of him who is longing after a holy life, and in them
is language suited to the man who sings on the heights, or, on
the other hand, who “ cries from the depths.” Within the whole
range of possible Christian experience, the Psalms of David
leave no soul-state dumb. This was true, and we have yet to
learn that any new department has been lately added to the
human spirit, or any “ innovation ” introduced among its
powers. The startling announcement has not yet been made,
that man has recently come into possession of a new faculty,
which would suffer atrophy if deprived of the stimulus of
contact with the sentiments and music of. the modern hymn-
book !
Bearing on the arguments already adduced is a consideration
to which deserved prominence has been given by different
writers on this important subject. It is this: that the writers who,
under Divine guidance, produced the New Testament did not
recognise the necessity for composing hymns to be sung in the
Christian Church. If the reasonings of hymn-writers were
worth anything it is astonishing that the alleged facts upon
which such reasonings are based did not occur to the mind of
any one of the Apostles or Evangelists. We have not a hymn-
writer among the inspired New Testament penmen. If the
ancient Psalms were not sufficient for purposes of praise in the
Church for all time, it is just to infer that the task of writing
supplementary spiritual songs would have been entrusted to the
men best able to perform it. If deficiencies existed or wants
were likely to be felt by the Church because of incompleteness
in its Psalmody, would not the duty of completing that


Psalmody have been assigned to some such writer as Paul
or John? These men loved the Saviour supremely. They
lived and wrote after Christ’s ascension. They were guided to
write on the noblest themes. They deal largely with such
heavenly subjects as grace, love, faith and hope. They were
zealous for the glory of God and the salvation of men. One of
them, notably, founded many Churches, and laid down rules for
congregational procedure. Did these men, far-seeing and large-
hearted as they were, fail to perceive that the Church of the
future must be furnished with an enlarged and completed (and
expurgated ?) Psalmody 1
One can fancy what beautiful poetry the author of the
Apocalypse could have written. One can easily imagine that
the man who wrote the 13th and loth Chapters of Ist
Corinthians, might have contributed some poetic gem not
unworthy to be set in one of our modern hymn-books. It
might have been equal to anything from the pen of a Heber, a
Watts, or a Sankey ! Yet neither Paul nor John wrote hymns.
Why did they and their brethren refrain from this pious
exercise ? Perhaps the answer is that they lived in an age prior
to the rise of “ regenerate individualism.” Or, if that answer be
not correct—and, as a matter of history, it is not correct —then
we must conclude that the Apostles and Evangelists were
enabled to escape from the taint of this individualism, and that
they believed in having Divine authority for what they wrote as
well as for what they taught. The (poetic) silence of New
Testament writers is significant. Modern hymn-writers,
however, perversely shut their eyes to the truth implied by
this silence.
To proceed with our enquiry it must be pointed out that
sins of omission are not the only sins laid to the charge of the
Psalms. They have been assailed on the ground of what they
contain as well as on the ground of what they lack. Want of
space forbids any lengthy refutation of this chax’ge. It may be
dealt with in a sentence. To exhibit its almost blasphemous
absurdity, we have only to refer once again to the admission
respecting the Inspiration of the Bible—Are we to have a
proposal made to publish an expurgated edition of an inspired
Psalm-book ? Between Scylla and Charybdis neat steering is
needed.
An examination of the facts on either side requires
that we should take a look at some of these famous and popular
hymns. The following objections to their use in congregations
engaged in the exercises of public worship are presented for the
considerations of Christians :
(1) They are not authorised in the Buie of Faith and
Judge of Controversies—the Bible.


(2) Whereas on their introduction into the services of the
Church the programme was Psalms and hymns, that state of
things did not last. It has been said of the Jesuits that
they are never satisfied to be merely tolerated. Wherever
they secure toleration—they will aim at ascendancy. This is
exactly applicable to the hymn-singing practice in public wor-
ship. These hymns secured a place after the Psalms and were
tolerated. But their claims soon advanced a stage. Precedence
must now be given to hymns ; and, if, as Luke did to Theophilus,
we are to state things “ in order,” —the order of to-day is hymns
and Psalms, and as few of the latter as possible. But hymn-
singers are aspiring ! They have yearnings after an ideal state.
In it the modern shall be unfettered by association with the
ancient, and we shall soon have hymns without Psalms. This is
no exaggeration,—in many places at the present time the Psalms
are threatened with a fate similar to that which overtook the
bond woman and her son ; we read that they were “ cast out.”
In the more modern contention hymns seem likely to occupy the
place of successful Isaac over defeated Ishmael; for the hymns are
to be found nearly everywhere. At matins and at vespers we must
sing hymns. At weddings they help forward the merriment,
and at funerals they contribute to the solemnity. Even at
meetings held to promote the circulation of the Scriptures in
connection with Bible Society work, some hymn-book—one of
the many hymn-books—must be in use in the “ service of praise.”
And this is permitted by men who seem hopelessly unconscious
of the irony of the situation. To enlarge, in the course of a
vigorous speech, on the Inspiration of the Bible; on the nature of
the blessings it has brought to man; on its triumphant emergence
from the fires of hostile criticism ; on the beatitudes of those
who accept and obey its teachings, and immediately afterwards
to offer an oblique or direct insult to this same Bible by
practically refusing to praise God in the language of a Bible
Psalm—all this is possible and actually takes place in our day.
(3) The number of these hymns is very great. This ought
to be powerfully suggestive to those who believe in and use them.
There is no doubt about the vast number of hymns now in use.
They are like the stars of heaven for multitude,* and as the
sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.
Nor is there any prospect of the supply failing, so far as
one can judge from current events. The fertility of “ regenerate
individualism ” is simply alarming when so-called sacred poetry
is the form of its manifestation. Yet, in the large number of
these hymns is found the judgment of the theory on which they
were introduced.
*The only point of resemblance between the hymns and the stars.


If there was not “enough of Christ” in the Psalms, the
discovery should soon have been followed by the remedy. A
few dozen of hymns might well have sufficed to supply omissions
made by inspired men in one age and ignored by inspired men in
a subsequent age ! But, if the continued production of hymns
is necessary, each hymn writer in his turn says, to all intents
and purposes, that his predecessors have not supplied the
omissions noted. Each composer says in effect that the hymns of
former composers have not “ enough of Christ ” in them. There
is no doubt that each composer in such a case speaks the literal
and unvarnished truth.
(4) Hymn singing in public worship is opposed to the
unity of the church. It is well-known that the visible union of
the various branches of the Church of Christ is the dream of
enthusiasts. In Reviews and the religious press generally many
plans are discussed for promoting greater unity amongst Christians.
So far there seems to be something of the nature of tne ignis fatuus
about the schemes for securing this visible unity. If, however,
the discussions have done nothing else, they have rendered many
people familiar with some good Scriptural phrases. “ One
Faith, One Baptism.” How would One Psalmody act? It is
possible that it might act in the direction of greater unity
among Christians, in minor matters at any rate. There were
those in Ephesus of old who used curious arts. The interests of
the Christian Church demanded from them a little book-burning.
The example of the Ephesian magicians is at this point a noble
one, and worthy of our imitation.
Suffer, brethren, the word of exhortation, Have you ever
seen a large congregation sitting silent, while a few here and
there in the Church were singing ? Why was it so ? The
minister announced the number of the hymn. Immediately the
hymn-books of the hearers were opened the melancholy truth
became apparent. Hymn No. 220 in one book was Hymn 63 in
another book, or it was not there at all! Conference after
Service amongst the singers and the silent brought the
fact to light. One had a compilation authorised (?) by this
or that Church or Committee of a Church. Another had a
collection authorised by no one in particular. A very few were
found to be in so utterly primitive a state as to go to Church
carrying with them a Psalm-book only !
(5) Hymn-singing has been and is attended by the
introduction of false doctrine into Churches whose confessions
are orthodox. This is not a doctrinal age if we attach the old
meaning to the word doctrinal. It is not rare for us to hear that
truths once believed to be of vital importance are now regarded
as “open questions.” Still, however, even among the compara-
tively lax, fundamental doctrines are respected. But these are


in danger, or, rather, man is in danger of occupying a wrong
relation to them. And if we study the genesis of more than
one heresy now bulking largely in the Churches, we shall find
that in the beginning a hymn had a great deal to do with the
matter. Churches, whose members believe in the Trinity,
notwithstanding such belief, permit the use of hymns savouring
more or less of Unitarian error. Churches, whose members
profess the most shai’ply defined Protestantism, use spiritual
songs full of Popery and the glories of Mary. (It is perhaps
worth enquiring into whether the “ Kindly Light ” of Newman
is the “dim, religious light” of Milton.) Churches, stoutly
asserting, in prose, the necessity for spiritual worship to be
offered to the God who is a Spirit, play with Ritualism in
poetry.
The enemy of all righteousness thus shows his wisdom. A
false doctrine wrapped up in poetry, even though it be, as it
often is, very poor poetry, is harder to assail than if it were
stated in prose. One cannot fail to admire the ingenuity of
this plau, while deploring the result of its adoption. The
ordinai’y druggist advertises sugar- coated pills. The ecclesiastical
druggist sugar- coats or rhyme-coats, some subtle and dangerous
heresy, and the soul-sick patient swallows the heresy because of
the wrapping.
(6) The purposes which hymn-singing is made to serve,
constitute a serious objection against the practice. It is alleged
that it makes the services of the church “ attractive.” This is
a kind of spiritual homoeopathy. By virtue of their divine
origin the Psalms are unsuited to any such illegitimate purpose
as this is. Cold waters are, without any additions, attractive to
a thirsty soul. Salvation is, in itself, attractive to the sinner
who is convinced of his sin. “But,” says some hymn-singing
brother, “we use hymns to convince and convert. We sing the
Gospel.” Poetic conviction ! Poetic conversion ! Not much depth
of earth ! Prosaic backsliding : It must be admitted that, as a
general rule, a fair measure of success attends the efforts to
make the services of the Church attractive by the introduction
of hymns. More especially, is this true, where the instruction
from the pulpit is of an inferior kind, and where the occupant
of the pulpit is indolent or incapable. The people are expected
to forgive the pastor and to ignore both his indolence and
incapacity, provided that their attention can be centred upon a
musical display. If the choir is efficient, and visiting soloists
not too rare, the preacher may be saved a vast amount of trouble.
Cases have been known where this rendering of the services
attractive has succeeded so admirably, that in a short time it
has become all attraction and no service.


It will be a good day for the services of the various
churches when those connected with them return to some of the
“ old simplicities ; ” when regenerate individualism disappears :
and when the question is asked and answered in its bearing upon
the conduct of public worship, “ By what authority doest thou
these things ? ”
Then, may we expect to see, as part of the future Reforma-
tion, the inspired Psalms restored to the place of honor in the
Church which of right belongs to them.
The words of God are words most pure ;
They he like silver tried
In earthen furnace, seven times
That hath been purified.






